AY say, whats thou?
Thy friend Bohan▪
What wot I, or reck
I that, whey guide man, I reck
no friend, nor ay reck no foe, else
en to me, git the ganging, and
trouble not may whayet, or ay•
ga• the reckon me nene of thay friend by the mary mass sall I.
Why angry Scot, I visit thee for love: then what
moos thee to wroath?
The deele awhit reck I thy love. For I know
too well, that true love took her flight twenty winter sense to
heaven, whither till ay can, weal I wot, ay sal ne'er find love:
an thou love me, leave me to my self. But what were those
Puppets that hopt and skipped about me year whayle?
My subjects.
Thay subjects, whey art thou a King?
I am.
The deele thou art, whey thou look not so big as
the king of Clubs, nor so sharpe as the king of Spades, nor so
fine as the king Adaymonds, be the mass ay take thee to bee
the king of false harts: therefore I rid thee away, or eyes so curry
your Kingdom, that yous be glad to run to save your life.
Why stoical Scot, do what thou dare to me, hear is
my breast strike.
Thou wilt not threap me, this whiniard has guard many
better mē to lope thē thou: but how now? Gos said what wilt
not out? whey thou which, thou deele, gads fut may whiniard.
Why pull man: but what 〈◊〉 it were out how then?
This then, thou weart best begone first: for aylso lop
thy limbs, that thouse go with half a knaves carkasseto the deele
Draw it out, now strike fool, can thou not?
Bread ay gad, what deele is in me, whey tell me thou
skipiack what art thou?
Nay first tell me what thou wast from thy birth, what
thou hast past hitherto, why thou duellist in a Tomb, &amp; lea∣uest
the world? and then I will release thee of these bonds, be∣fore
not.
And not before, then needs must needs sal: I was borne
a gentleman of the best blood in all Scotland, except the king,
when time brought me to age, and death took my parents, I
became a Courtier, where though ay list not praise my self, ay
engraved the memory of Boughon on the skin-coate of some of
them, and reveled with the proudest.
But why living in such reputation, did thou leave to
be a Courtier?
Because my pride was vanity, my expense loss, my re∣ward
fair words and large promises, &amp; my hopes spilt, for that
after many years service, one outran me, and what the deele
should I then do there. No no, flattering knaves that can cog
and prate fastest, speed best in the Court.
To what life did thou then betake thee?
I then changed the Court for the country, and the wars
for a wife: but I found the craft of swains more vile, then the
knavery of courtiers: the charge of children more heavy then
servants, and wives tongues worse then the wars it self: and
therefore I gave ore that, &amp; went to the City to dwell, &amp; there
I kept a great house with small cheer, but all was ne'er the near.
And why?
because in seeking friends, I found table guests to eat
me, &amp; my meat, my wives gossops to bewray the secrets of my
heart, kindred to betray the effect of my life, which when I no∣ted,
the court ill, the country worse, and the city worst of all, in
good time my wife died: ay wood she had died twenty winter
sooner by the mass, leaving my two sons to the world, and
shutting my self into this Tomb, where if I dye, I am sure I
am safe from wilde beasts, but whilst I live, cannot be free frō
ill company. Besides, now I am sure gif all my friends fail me,
I sall have a grave of mine own providing: this is all. Now
what art thou?
Oberon King of Fairies, that loves thee because thou
hottest the world, and to gratulate thee, I brought those An∣tiques
to show thee some sport in dancing, which thou haste
loved well.
Ha, ha, ha, think thou those puppets can please
me? whey I have two sons, that with one scottish gigge shall
break the neck of thy Antiques.
That would I fine see.
Why thou shalt, howe boys.
Haud your clacks lads, trattle not for thy life, but gather up
your legs and dance me forthwith a gigge worth the sight.
Why I must talk on Eddy fort, wherefore was my tongue
made.
Prattle an thou dare en word more, and ais dab this
whiniard in thy womb.
Be quiet Bohan, Isle strike him dumb, and his brother
too, their talk shall not hinder our gig, fall to it, dance I say mā.
Dance Humour, dance, ay rid thee.
Now get you to the wide world with more thē my father gave
me, thats learning enough, both kinds, knavery &amp; honesty:
and that I gave you, spend at pleasure.
Nay for their sport I will give them this gift, to the
Dwarf I give a quick wit, pretty of body, and awarrant his
preferment to a Princes service, where by his wisdom he shall
gain more love then cōmon. And to loggerhead your son,
I give a wandering life, and promise he shall never lack: and
avow that if in all distresses he call upon me to help him: now
let them go.
Now King, if thou bee a King, I will show thee whey I
hate the world by demonstration, in the year 1520. was in
Scotland, a king overruled with parasites, misled by lust, &amp; ma∣ny
circumstances, too long to trattle on now, much like our
court of Scotland this day, that story have I set down, gang with
me to the gallery, &amp; Isle show thee the same in Action, by guide
fellows of our country men, and then when thou see that,
judge if any wise man would not leave the world if he could.
That will I see, lead and isle follow thee.
BRother of England, since our neighboring land,
And near alliance doth inuit our loves,
The more I think upon our last accord,
The more I grieve your sudden parting hence:
First laws of friendship did confirm our peace,
Now both the seal of faith and marriage bed,
The name of father, and the style of friend,
These force in me affection full confirmed,
So that I grieve, and this my hearty grief
The heavens record, the world may witness well
To loose your presence, who are now to me
A father, brother, and a vowed friend.
Link all these lovely stiles good king in one,
And since thy grief exceeds in my depart,
I leave my Dorithea to enjoy, thy whole compact
Loves, and plighted vows.
Brother of Scotland, this is my joy, my life,
Her fathers honour, and her Countries hope,
Her mothers comfort, and her husbands bliss:
I tell thee king, in loving of my Doll,
Thou bindst her fathers heart and all his friends
In bands of love that death cannot dissolve.
Nor can her father love her like to me,
My lives light, and the comfort of my soul:
Fair Dorithea, that wast Englands pride,
Welcome to Scotland, and in sign of love,
Lo I invest thee with the Scottish Crown.
Nobles and Ladies, stoup unto your Queen.
And Trumpets sound, that Heralds may proclaim,
Fair Dorithea peerless Queen of Scots.
Long live and prosper our fair Q. of Scots.
Thanks to the king of kings for my dignity,
Thanks to my father, that provides so carefully,
Thanks to my Lord and husband for this honour,
And thanks to all that love their King and me.
Long live fair Dorithea our true Queen.
Long shine the sun of Scotland in her pride,
Her fathers comfort, and fair Scotlands Bride.
But Dorithea, since I must depart,
And leave thee from thy tender mothers charge.
Let me advise my lovely daughter first,
What best befits her in a foreign land,
Live Doll, for many eyes shall look on thee,
Have care of honour and the present state:
For she that steps to height of Majesty,
Is even the mark whereat the enemy aims.
Thy virtues shall be construed to vice,
Thine affable discourse to abject mind.
If coy, detracting tongues will call thee proud:
Be therefore wary in this slippery state,
Honour thy husband, love him as thy life:
Make choice of friends, as Eagles of their young▪
Who sooth no vice, who flatter not for gain:
But love such friends as do the truth maintain.
Think on these lessons when thou art alone,
And thou shalt live in health when I am gone.
I will engrave these preceps in my heart,
And as the wind with calmness woes you hence,
Even so I wish the heavens in all mishaps,
May bless my father with continual grace.
Then son farewell, the favouring winds invites vs to
Long circumstance in taking princely leaves,
Is more officious then convenient.
Brother of Scotland, love me in my child,
You greet me well, if so you will her good.
Then lovely Doll, and all that favour me,
Attend to see our English friends at sea,
Let all their charge depend upon my purse:
They are our neighbours, by whose kind accord,
We dare attempt the proudest Potentate.
Only fair Countess, and your daughter stay,
With you I have some other thing to say.
So let them triumph that have cause to joy,
But wretched King, thy nuptial knot is death:
Thy Bride the breeder of thy Countries ill,
For thy false heart dissenting from thy hand,
Misled by love, hast made another choice,
Another choice, even when thou vowdst thy soul
To Dorithea, Englands choicest pride,
O then thy wandering eyes bewitched thy heart▪
Even in the Chapel did thy fancy change,
When perjured man, though fair Doll had thy hand,
The Scottish Idaes beauty stale thy heart:
Yet fear and love hath tide thy ready tongue
From blabbing forth the passions of thy mind,
Lest fearful silence have in subtle looks
Betrayed the treason of my new vowed love,
Be fair and lovely Doll, but here's the prize
That lodges here, and entered through mine eyes,
Yet how so ere I love, I must be wise.
Now lovely Countess, what reward or grace,
May I employ on you for this your zeal,
And humble honours done vs in our Court,
In entertainment of the English King.
It was of duty Prince that I have done:
And what in favour may content me most,
Is, that it please your grace to give me leave,
For to return unto my Country home.
But lovely Ida is your mind the same?
I count of Court my Lord, as wise men do,
Tic fit for those that knows what longs thereto:
Each person to his place, the wise to Art,
The Cobbler to his clout, the Swain to Cart.
But Ida you are fair, and beauty shines,
And seems best, where pomp her pride refines.
If beauty (as I know there's none in me)
Were sworn my love, and I his life should be:
The farther from the Court I were removed,
The more I think of heaven I were beloved.
And why?
Because the Court is counted Venus net,
Where gifts and vows for stales are often set,
None, be she chaste as Vesta, but shall meet
A curious tongue to charm her ears with sweet.
Why Ida then I see you set at nought,
The force of love.
In sooth this is my thought most gracious king,
That they that little prove
Are mickle blessed, from bitter sweets of love:
And weal I wot, I heard a shepherd sing,
That like a Bee, Love hath a little sting:
He lurks in flowers, he perches on the trees,
He on Kings pillows, bends his pretty knees:
The Boy is blind, but when he will not spy,
He hath a leaden foot, and wings to fly:
Beshrow me yet, for all these strange effects,
If I would like the Lad, that so infects.
Rare wit, fair face, what hart could more desire!
But Doll is fair, and doth concern thee near.
Let Doll be fair, she is won, but I must woe,
And win fair Ida, theres some choice in two.
But Ida thou art coy.
And why dread King?
In that you will dispraise so sweet
A thing, as love, had I my wish.
What then?
Then would I place his arrow here,
His beauty in that face.
And were Apollo moved and ruled by me,
His wisdom should be yours, and mine his tree.
But here returns our train.
Welcome fair Doll: how fares our father, is he shipped and gone.
My royal father is both shipped and gone,
God and fair winds direct him to his home.
Amen say I, wold thou were with him too:
Then might I have a fitter time to woo.
But Countess you would be gone, therefore farewell
Yet Ida if thou wilt, stay thou behind,
To accompany my Queen.
But if thou like the pleasures of the Court,
Or if she likte me tho she left the Court,
What should I say? I know not what to say,
You may depart, and you my courteous Queen▪
Leave me a space, I have a weighty cause to think up••▪
Ida, it nips me near:
It came from thence, I feel it burning here.
Now am I free from sight of commō•i•,
Where to my self I may disclose the grief
That hath too great a part in mine affects.
And now is my time, by wiles &amp; words to rise,
Greater then those, that thinks themselves more wise.
And first fond King, thy honour doth engrave,
Upon thy brows, the drift of thy disgrace:
Thy new vowed love in sight of God and men,
Link thee to Dorithea, during life.
For who more fair and virtuous then thy wi•e,
Deceitful murderer of a quiet mind,
Fond love, vile lust, that thus misleads vs men,
To vow our faiths, and fall to sin again.
But Kings stoup not to every common thought,
Ida is fair and wise, fit for a King:
And for fair Ida will I hazard life,
Venture my Kingdom, Country, and my Crown:
Such fire hath love, to burn a kingdom down.
Say Doll dislikes, that I estrange my love,
Am I obedient to a women's look?
Nay say her father frown when he shall hear
That I do hold fair Idaes love so dear:
Let father frown and fret, and fret and die,
Nor earth, nor heaven shall part my love and I.
Yea they shall part vs, but we first must meet,
And wo, and win, and yet the world not feet.
Yea ther's the wound, &amp; wounded with that thought
So let me die: for all my drift is nought.
Most gracious and imperial Majesty,
A little flattery more were but too much,
Villain what art thou that thus dare interrupt a Princes se∣crets.
Dread King, thy vassal is a man of Art,
Who knows by constellation of the stars,
By oppositions and by dry aspects,
The things are past, and those that are to come.
But whore's thy warrant to approach my presence?
My zeal and ruth to see your graces wrong,
Makes me lament, I did detract so long.
If thou know thoughts, tell me what mean I now▪
Isle calculate the cause of those your highness smiles,
And tell your thoughts.
But least thou spend thy time in idleness,
And miss the matter that my mind aims at,
Tell me what star was opposite when that was thought?
Tic inconvenient mighty Potentate,
Whose looks resembles Jove in Majesty,
To scorn the sooth of science with contempt,
I see in those imperial looks of yours,
The whole discourse of love, Saturn combust,
With direful looks at your nativity:
Beheld fair Venus in her silver orb,
I know by certain exiomies I have read,
Your graces griefs, &amp; further can express her name,
That holds you thus in fancies bands.
Thou talk wonders.
Nought but truth O King,
Tic Ida is the mistress of your heart,
Whose youth must take impression of affects,
For tend• twigs will bow, and milder minds
Will yield to fancy be they followed well.
What god art thou composde in humane shape,
Or bold Trophonius to decide our doubts,
How know thou this?
Even as I know the means,
To work your graces freedom and your love:
Had I the mind as many Courtiers have,
To creep into your bosom for your coin,
And beg rewards for every cap and knee,
I then would say, if that your grace would give
This lease, this manor, or this pa•tent sealed,
For this or that I would effect your love:
But Ateukin is no Parasite O Prince,
I know your grace knows scholars are but poor,
And therefore as I blush to beg a fee,
Your mightiness is so magnificent
You cannot choose but cast some gift apart,
To ease my bashful need that cannot beg,
As for your love, oh might I be employed,
How faithfully would Ateukin compass it:
But Princes rather trust a smoothing tongue,
Then men of Art that can accept the time.
Ateu. If so thy name, for so thou say,
Thine Art appears in entrance of my love:
And since I deem thy wisdom matched with truth,
I will exalt thee, and thy self alone
Shalt be the Agent to dissolve my grief.
Sooth is, I love, and Ida is my love,
But my new mar•jig nips me near, Ateukin:
For Dorithea may not brooke th'abuse.
These lets are but as moods against the sun,
Yet not so great, like dust before the wind:
Yet not so light. Tut. pacify your grace,
You have the sword and sceptre in your hand,
You are are the King, the state depends on you:
Your will is law, say that the case were mine,
Were she my sister whom your highness loves,
She should consent, for that our lives, our goods,
Depend on you, and if your Queen rapine,
Although my nature cannot brooke of blood,
And Scholars grieve to hear of murderous deeds,
But if the Lamb should let the Lyons way,
By my advise the Lamb should lose her life.
Thus am I bold to speak unto your grace,
Who am too base to kiss your royal feet,
For I am poor, nor ha•e I land nor rent,
Nor countenance here in Court, but for my love,
Your Grace shall find none such within the realm.
Wilt thou effect my love, shall she be mine?
Isle gather Moly-rocus, and the earbes,
That heales the wounds of body and the mind,
Isle set out charms and spells, nought else shall be left,
To tame the wanton if she shall rebel,
Give me but tokens of your highness trust.
Thou shalt have gold, honour and wealth enough,
Win my Love, and I will make thee great.
These words do make me rich most noble Prince,
I am more proud of them then any wealth,
Did not your grace suppose I flatter you,
Believe me I would boldly publish this:
Was never eye that saw a sweeter face,
Nor never ear that heard a deeper wit,
Oh God how I am ravished in your worth.
Ateu. Follow me, love must have •as.
Isle kiss your highness feet, march when you please.
Stand back sir, mine shall stand highest.
Come under mine arm sir, or get a footstool,
Or else by the light of the Moon, I must come to it.
Agree my masters, every man to his height,
Though I stand lowest, I hope to get the best moister.
Ere I will stoup to a thistle, I will change turns,
As good luck comes on the right hand, as the left:
Here's for me, and me, and mine.
But tell me fellows till better occasion come,
Do you seek masters?
We doo.
But what can you do worthy preferment?
Marry I can smell a knave from a Rat.
And I can like a dish before a Cat.
And I can find two fools unsought,
How like you that?
But in earnest, now tell me of what trades are you two?
How mean you that sir, of what trade?
Marry Isle tell you, I have many trades,
The honest trade when I needs must,
The filching trade when time serves,
The Cozening trade as I find occasion.
And I have more qualities, I cannot abide a full cup unkissed,
A fat Capon vncaru'd,
A full purse vnpickt,
Nor a fool to prove a Justice as you do.
Why sot why call thou me fool?
For examining wiser then thy self.
So doth many more then I in Scotland.
Yea those are such, as have more authority then wit,
And more wealth then honesty.
This is my little brother with the great wit, ware him,
But what can thou do, tel me, that art so inquisitive of vs?
Any thing that concerns a gentleman to do, that can I do.
So you are of the gentle trade?
True.
Then gentle sir, leave vs to our selves,
For hear comes one as if he would lack a servant ere he went.
Ateu. Why so Ateukin? this becomes thee best,
Wealth, honour, ease, and angles in thy chest:
Now may I say, as many often sing,
No fishing to the sea, nor service to a king.
Unto this high promotions doth belong,
Means to be talked of in the thickest throng:
And first to fit the humours of my Lo•d,
Sweet lays and lines of love I must record.
And such sweet lines and louelayes isle endite:
As men may wish for, and my leech delight,
And next a train of gallants at my heals,
That men may say, the world doth run on wheels.
For men of art, that rise by indirection,
To honour and the favour of their King,
Must use all means to save what they have got,
And win their favours whom he never knew.
If any frown to see my fortunes such,
A man must bear a little, not too much:
But in good time these bills partend, I think,
That some good fellows do for service seek.
If any gentleman, spiritual or temporal, will entertain
out of his service, a young stripling of the age of 30. years, that can
sleep with the soundest, eat with the hungriest, work with the sickest,
lye with the loudest, face with the proudest, &amp;c. that can wait in a
Gentleman's chamber, when his moister is a mile of, keep his sty∣ble
when tic empty, and his purse when tic full, and hath many qua∣lites
worse then all these, let him write his name and go his way,
and attendance shall be given.
By my faith a good servant, which is he?
Truly sir that am I?
And why doest thou write such a bill,
Are all these qualities in thee?
O Lord I sir, and a great many more,
Some better, some worse, some richer some porer,
Why sir do you look so, do they not please you?
Truly no, for they are nought and so art thou,
If thou hast no better qualities, stand by.
O sir, I tell the worst first, but and you lack a man▪
I am for you, isle tell you the best qualities I have.
Be brief then.
If you need me in your chamber,
I can keep the door at a whistle, in your kitchen▪
Turn the spit, and like the pan, and make the fire burn.
But if in the stable.
Yea there would I use thee.
Why there you kill me, there am I,
And turn me to a horse &amp; a wench, and I have no peer.
Art thou so good in keeping a horse,
I pray thee tell me how many good qualities hath a horse?
Why so sir, a horse hath two properties of a man,
That is a proud heart, and a hardy stomach,
Four properties of a Lyon, a broad breast, a stiff docket,
Hold your nose master. A wild countenance, and 4. good legs.
Nine properties of a Fox, nine of a Hare, nine of an Ass,
And ten of a woman.
A woman, why what properties of a woman hath a Horse?
O moister, know you not that?
Draw your tables, and write what wise I speak.
First a merry countenance.
Second, a soft pace.
Third, a broad forehead.
Fourth, broad buttocks.
Fifth, hard of ward.
Sixth, easy to leap upon.
Seventh, good at long journey.
Eight, moving under a man.
Ninth, always busy with the mouth.
Tenth. Ever chewing on the bridle.
Thou art a man for me, whats thy name?
An ancient name sir, belonging to the
Chamber and the night gown. Guess you that.
Whats that, Slipper?
By my faith well gest, and so tic indeed:
You'll be my moister?
I mean so.
Read this first.
Pleases it any Gentleman to entertain
A servant of more wit then stature,
Let them subscribe, and attendance shall be given.
What of this?
He is my brother sir, and we two were borne together,
Must serve together, and will die together,
Though we be both hanged.
Whats thy name?
Nano.
The etimologie of which word, is a dwarf:
Art not thou the old stoykes son that dwells in his Tomb?
We are.
Thou art welcome to me,
Wilt thou give thy self wholly to be at my disposition?
In all humility I submit my self.
Then will I deck thee Princely, instruct thee courtly,
And present thee to the Queen as my gift.
Art thou content?
Yes, and thank your honour too.
Then welcome brother, and fellow now.
May it please your honour to abase your eye so lowe,
As to look either on my bill or my self.
What are you?
By birth a gentleman, in profession a scholar,
And one that knew your honour in Edenborough,
Before your worthiness called you to this reputation.
By me Andrew Snoord.
Andrew I remember thee, follow me,
And we will confer further, for my weighty affairs
For the king, commands me to be brief at this time.
Come on Nano, Slipper follow.
But tell me lovely Justs as thou love me,
Among the many pleasures we have past,
Which is the rifest in thy memory,
To draw thee over to thine ancient friend?
What makes Sir Bertram thus inquisitive?
Tell me good knight, am I welcome or no?
By sweet S. Andrew and may sale I swear,
As welcome is my honest Dick to me,
As mornings sun, or as the watery moon,
In merkist night, when we the borders track.
I tell thee Dick, thy sight hath cleared my thoughts,
Of many baneful troubles that there wound.
Welcome to sir Bertram as his life:
Tell me bonny Dicke, hast got a wife?
A wife God shield sir Bertram, that were ill
To leave my wife and wander thus astray:
But time and good advise ere many years,
May chance to make my fancy bend that way,
What news in Scotland? therefore came I hither:
To see your Country, and to chat together.
Why man our Countries blithe, our king is well,
Our Queen so, so, the Nobles well, and worse
And weal are they that were about the king,
But better are the Country Gentlemen.
And I may tell thee Justice, in our lives,
We old men never saw so wondrous change:
But leave this trattle, and tell me what news,
In lovely England with our honest friends?
The king, the Court, and all our noble friends
Are well, and God in mercy keep them so.
The Northern Lords and Ladies here abouts,
That knows I came to see your Queen and Court,
Commends them to my honest friend sir Bertram,
And many others that I have not seen:
Among the rest, the Countess Elinor from Carlisle
Where we merry oft have been,
Greets well my Lord, and hath directed me,
By message this fair Ladies face to see.
I tell thee Justice, lest mine old eyes daze,
This is our Scottish moon and evenings pride:
This is the blemish of your English Bride:
Who sails by her, are sure of wind at will.
Her face is dangerous, her sight is ill:
And yet in sooth sweet Dicke, it may be said,
The king hath folly, their's virtue in the maid.
But knows my friend this portrait, be advised?
Is it not Ida the Countess of Arains daughters?
So was I told by Elinor of Carlisle,
But tell me lovely Bertram, is the maid evil inclined,
Misled, or Concubine unto the King or any other Lord?
Should I be brief &amp; true, thē thus my Dicke,
All Englands grounds yields not a blither Lass.
Nor Europe can art her for her gifts,
Of virtue, honour, beauty, and the rest:
But our fōd king not knowing sin in lust,
Makes love by endless means and precious gifts,
And men that see it dare not said my friend,
But wee may wish that it were otherwise:
But I rid thee to view the picture still,
For by the persons sights there hangs some ill.
Oh good sir Bertram, you suspect I love,
Then were I mad, hee whom I never saw,
But how so ere, I fear not enticings,
Desire will give no place unto a king:
Isle see her whom the world admires so much,
That I may say with them, there lives none such.
Be Gad and sal, both see and talk with her,
And when th'hast done, what ere her beauty be,
Isle wartant thee her virtues may compare,
With the proudest she that wa•s upon your Queen.
My Lady entreats your Worship in to supper.
Guide bony Dick, my wife will tel thee more,
Was never no man in her book before:
Be Gad shees blithe, fair lewely, bony, &amp;c.
Be Gad gramersis little king for this,
This sport is better in my exile life,
Then ever the deceitfu•l world could yield.
I tell thee Bohan, Oberon is king,
Of quiet, pleasure, profit, and content,
Of wealth, of honour, and of all the world,
Tide to no place, yet all are tide to one,
Live thou in this life, exiled from world and men,
And I will show thee wonters ere we part,
Then mark my stay, and the strange doubts,
That follow flatterers, lust and lawless will,
And then say I have reason to forsake the world,
And all that are within the same.
You shroud vs in our harbour where we eel see,
The pride of folly, as it ought to be.
Here see I good fond actions in thy gig,
And means to paint the worlds in constant ways
But turn thine en, see which for I can command.
What ga•s this din of mink and baleful harm,
Where every wean is all betaint with blood?
This shows thee Bohan what is worldly pomp.
Simeranus, the proud Affirrian Queen,
When Ninus died, did ten in her wars,
Three millions of footmen to the fight,
Five hundredth thousand horse, of armed chars,
A hundredth thousand more yet in her pride
Was hurt and conquered by S. Tanrobates.
Then what is pomp?
I see thou art thine en.
Thou bonny King, if Princes fall from high,
My fall is past, until I fall to die.
Now mark my talk, and prosecute my gig.
How should these crafts withdraw thee from the world!
But look my Bohan, pomp allures.
Who so thou bee that possessed,
For I know one shall pass, know I
I am Cirrus of Persia,
And I prithee leave me not thus like a clod of clay
Wherewith my body is covered.
What means this?
Cirrus of Persia,
Mighty in life, within a marbell grave,
Was laid to rot, whom Alexander once
Beheld in tombde, and weeping did confess
Nothing in life could scope from wrethednesse:
Why then boast men?
What reck I then of life,
Who makes the grave my tomb, the earth my wife:
But mark me more.
I can no more, my patience will not warp.
To see these flatteries how they scorn and carpe.
Turn but thy head.
Seek is the world, but whelk is he I saw.
Sesustris who was conqueror of the world,
Slain at the last, and stamped on by his slaves.
How blessed are pour men then that know their grave,
Now mark the sequel of my Gig.
An he weal meet ends: the mirk and sable night
Doth leave the pering morn to pry abroad,
Thou nill me stay, hail then thou pride of kings,
I ken the world, and wot well worldly things,
Mark thou my gig, in mirkest terms that tells
The loathe of sins, and where corruption dwells
Hail me no mere with shows of gudlie sights:
My grave is mine, that rids me from dispights.
Accept my gig guide King, and let me rest,
The grave with guide men, is a gay built nest.
The rising sun doth call me hence away,
Thanks for thy gig, I may no longer stay:
But if my train, did wake thee from thy rest,
So shall they sing, thy lullaby to nest.
Fair Ida, might you choose the greatest good
Midst all the world, in blessings that abound:
Wherein my daughter should your liking be?
Not in delights, or pomp, or majesty.
And why?
Since these are means to draw the mind
From perfect good, and make true judgment blind.
Might you have wealth, and fortunes ritchest store?
Yet would I (might I choose) be honest poor.
For she that sits at fortunes feet allow
Is sure she shall not taste a further woe.
But those that prank one top of fortunes ball▪
Still fear a change: and fearing catch a fall.
Tut foolish maid, each one contemns need.
Good reasō why, they know not good indeed.
Many marry then, on whom distress doth lore,
Yes they that virtue deem an honest dowre.
Madame, by right this world I may compare,
Unto my work, wherein with heedful care,
The heavenly workman plants with curious hand,
As I with needle draw each thing one land,
Even as hee list, some men like to the Rose,
Are fashioned fresh, some in their stalks do close,
And borne do sudden die: some are but weeds,
And yet from them a secret good proceeds:
I with my needle if I please may blot,
The fairest rose within my cambric plot,
God with a beck can change each worldly thing,
The poor to earth, the beggar to the king.
What then hath man, wherein hee well may boast,
Since by a beck he lives, a lover is lost?
Peace Ida, here are strangers near at hand.
Madame God speed.
I thank you gentle squire.
The country Countess of Northumberland,
Doth greet you well, and hath requested me,
To bring these letters to your Ladyship.
I thank her honour, and your self my friend.
I see she means you good brave Gentleman,
Daughter, the Lady Elinor salutes
Your self as well as me, then for her sake
It were good you entertained that Courtier well.
As much salute as may become my sex,
And hee in virtue can vouchsafe to think,
I yield him for the courteous Countess sake.
Good sir sit down, my mother here and I,
Count time misspent, an endless vanity.
Beyond report, the wit, the fair, the shape,
What work you here, fair Mistress may I see it?
Good Sir look on, how like you this compact?
Me thinks in this I see true love in act:
The Woodbines with their leaves do sweetly spread,
The Roses blushing prank them in their red,
No flower but boasts the beauties of the spring,
This bird hath life indeed if it could sing:
What means fair Mistress had you in this work?
My needle sir.
In needles then there lurks,
Some hidden grace I deem beyond my reach.
Not grace in thē good sir, but those that teach.
Say that your needle now were Cupids sting,
But ah her eye must bee no less,
In which is heaven and heauenlinesse,
In which the food of God is shut,
Whose powers the purest minds do glut.
What if it were?
Then see a wondrous thing,
I fear me you would paint in Teneus heart,
Affection in his power and chiefest parts.
Good Lord sir no, for hearts but pricked soft,
Are wounded sore, for so I hear it oft.
what recks the second,
Where but your happy eye,
May make him live, whom Jove hath judged to die.
Should life &amp; death within this needl •urke,
Isle prick no hearts, Isle prick upon my work.
Peace Ida, I perceive the fox at hand.
The fox? why fetch your hounds &amp; chase him hence.
Oh sir these great men bark at small offence.
Come wi••t please you to enter gentle sir?
Stay courteous Ladies, favour me so much,
As to discourse a word or two apart.
Good sir, my daughter learns this rule of me,
To shun resort, and strangers company:
For some are shifting mates that carry letters,
Some such as you too good, because our betters.
Now I pray you sir what a kin are you to a pickrell?
Why knave?
By my troth sir, because I never knew a proper scitua∣tion
fellow of your pitch, fitter to swallow a gudgin.
What meanst thou by this?
Shifting fellow sir, these be thy words, shifting fellow:
This Gentlewoman I fear me, knew your bringing up.
How so?
Why sir your father was a Miller,
That could shift for a peck of grist in a bushel,
And you a fair spoken Gentleman, that can get more land by
a lye, then an honest man by his ready money.
Catiue what say thou?
I say sir, that if she call you shifting knave,
You shall not put her to the proof.
And why?
Because sir, living by your wit as you doo shifting, is
your letters patents, it were a hard matter for me to get my
dinner that day, wherein my Moister had not sold a dozen of
devices, a case of cogges, and a shute of shifts in the morning:
I speak this in your commendation sir, &amp; I pray you so take it.
If I live knave I will bee revenged, what Gentleman
would entertain a rascal, thus to derogate from his honour?
My Lord why are you thus impatient?
Not angry Ida, but I teach this knave,
How to behave himself among his betters:
Behold fair Countess to assure your stay,
I here present the signet of the king,
Who now by me fair Ida doth salute you:
And since in secret I have certain things,
In his behalf good Madame to impart,
I crave your daughter to discourse a part.
She shall in humble duty bee addressed,
To do his Highness will in what she may.
Now gentle sir what would his grace with me?
Fair comely Nymph, the beauty of your face,
Sufficient to bewitch the heavenly powers,
Hath wrought so much in him, that now of late
Hee finds himself made captive unto love,
And though his power and Majesty requires,
A straight command before an humble suit,
Yet hee his mightiness doth so abase,
As to entreat your favour honest maid.
Is hee not married sir unto our Queen?
Hee is.
And are not they by God accursed,
That sever them whom hee hath knit in one?
They bee: what then? wee seek not to displace
The Princess from her seat, but since by love
The king is made your own, she is resolude
In private to accept your dalliance,
In spite of war, watch, or worldly eye.
Oh how hee talks as if hee should not die,
As if that God in justice once could wink,
Upon that fault I am a shamed to think.
Tut Mistress, man at first was born to err,
Women are all not formed to bee Saints:
Tic impious for to kill our native king,
Whom by a little favour wee may save.
Better then live unchaste, to live in grave.
Hee shall erect your state &amp; wed you well.
But can his warrant keep my soul from hell?
He will enforce, if you resist his suit.
What tho, the world may shame to him account
To bee a king of men and worldly pelf.
Yet hath to power no rule and guide himself,
I know you gentle Lady and the care,
Both of your honour and his graces health,
Makes me confused in this dangerous state.
So counsel him, but sooth thou not his sin,
Tic vain alurement that doth make him love,
I shame to hear, bee you a shamde to move,
I see my daughter grows impatient,
I fear me hee pretends some bad intent.
Will you despise the king, &amp; scorn him so?
In all allegiance I will serve his grace,
But not in lust, oh how I blush to name it?
An endless work is this, how should I frame it?
Oh Mistress may I turn a word upon you.
Friend what wilt thou?
Oh what a happy Gentlewoman bee you truly, the
world reports this of you Mistress, that a man can no sooner
come to your house, but the Butler comes with a black Jack
and says welcome friend, he eres a cup of the best for you, ve∣rilie
Mistress you are said to have the best Ale in al Scotland.
Sirrha go fetch him drink, how likest thou this?
Like it Mistress? why this is quince quarie pepper
de watchet, single goby, of all that ever I tasted: Isle prove in
this Ale and tossed, the compass of the whole world. First this
is the earth, it ties in the middle a fair browne tossed, a goodly
country for hungry teeth to dwell upon: next this is the sea,
a fair poole for a dry tōgue to fish in: now come I, &amp; seeing the
world is nought, I divide it thus, &amp; because the sea cānot stand
without the earth, as Arrest. saith, I put thē both into their first
Chaos which is my belly, and so mistress you may see your ale
is become a miracle.
A merry mate Madame I promise you.
Why sigh you sirrah?
Truly Madam, to think upon the world, which since
I denoūced, it keeps such a rumbling in my stomach, that un∣less
your Cooke give it a counterbuffe with some of your to∣sted
Capons or beef, I fear me I shall become a loose body, so
dainty I think, I shall neither hold fast before nor behind.
Go take him in and feast this merry swain,
Sirrah, my cooke is your physician.
He hath a purge for to diciest the world.
Will you not, Ida, grant his highness this?
As I have said, in duty I am his:
For other lawless lusts, that ill beseem him,
I cannot like, and good I will not deem him.
Ida come in, and sir if so you please,
Come take a homely widows entertain.
If he have no great haste, he may come ny.
If haste, tho he be gone, I will not cry.
I see this labour lost, my hope in vain,
Yet will I try an other drift again.
Oh wrack of Cōmon-weale! Oh wretched state!
Oh haplesse flock whereas the guide is blind?
Oh heedless youth, where counsel is despised.
Come pretty knave, and prank it by my side.
Lets see your best attendance out of hand.
Madame although my limbs are very small,
My heart is good, isle serve you there withal.
How if I were assailed, what could thou do?
Madame call help, and boldly fight it to,
Although a Bee be but a little thing:
You know fair Queen, it hath a bitter sting.
How could thou do me good were I in grief?
Counsel dear Princes, is a choice relief.
Tho Nestor wanted force, great was his wit,
And tho I am but weak, my words are fit.
Like to a ship upon the Ocean seas,
Tossed in the doubtful stream without a helm,
Such is a Monarch without good advice,
I am ore heard, cast rain upon thy tongue,
Andrews beware, reproof will breed a scar.
Good day my Lord.
Lord Morton well ymet:
Whereon deems Lord Douglas all this while?
Of that which yours and my poor heart doth break▪
Although fear shuts our mouths we dare not speak.
What mean these Princes sadly to consult?
Somewhat I fear, betides them amiss,
They are so pale in looks, so vexed in mind:
In happy hour the Noble Scottish Peers
Have I encountered you, what makes you morn?
If we with patience may attentive gain,
Your Grace shall know the cause of all our grief.
Speak on good father, come and sit by me:
I know thy care is for the common good.
As fortune mighty Princes rears some,
To high estate, and place in Commonwealth,
So by divine bequest to them is lent,
A riper judgment and more searching eye:
Whereby they may discern the common harm,
For where importunes in the world are most,
Where all our profits rise and still increase,
There is our mind, thereon we meditate,
And what we do partake of good advice,
That we employ for to concern the same.)
To this intent these nobles and my self,
That are (or should bee) eyes of Commonwealth,
Seeing his highness reachlesse course of youth
His lawless and unbridled vain in love,
His to intent trust too flatterers,
His abject care of council and his friends,
Cannot but grieve, and since we cannot draw
His eye or Judgment to discern is faults
Since we have spake and counsel is not heard,
I for my part, (let others as they list)
Will leave the Court, and leave him to his will:
Least with a ruthful eye I should behold,
His over throw which sore I fear is ny.
Ah father are you so estranged from love,
From due allegiance to your Prince and land,
To leave your King when most he needs your help,
The thrifty husbandmen, are never wont
That see their lands unfruitful, to forsake them:
But when the mould is barren and unapt,
They toil, they plow, and make the fallow fat:
The pilot in the dangerous seas is known,
In calmer waives the silly sailor strives,
Are you not members Lords of Commonwealth,
And can your head, your dear anointed King,
Default ye Lords, except your selves do fail?
Oh stay your steps, return and counsel him.
Men seek not moss upon a rolling stone,
Or water from the sieve, or fire from ice:
Or comfort from a rechlesse monarchs hands.
Madame he sets vs light that served in Court,
In place of credit in his fathers days,
If we but enter presence of his grace,
Our payment is a frown, a scoff, a frump,
Whilst flattering Gnato pranks it by his side,
Soothing the careless King in his misdeeds,
And if your grace confider your estate,
His life should urge you too if all be true.
Why Douglas why?
As if you have not heard
His lawless love to Ida grown of late,
His careless estimate of your estate.
Ah Douglas thou misconstrest his intent,
He doth but tempt his wife, he tryees my love:
This injury pertains to me, not to you.
The King is young, and if he step awry,
He may amend, and I will love him still.
Should we disdain our vines becauso they sprout
Before their time? or young men if they strain
Beyōd their reach? no vines that bloom and spread
Do promise fruits, and young men that are wilde,
In age grow wise, my friends and Scottish Peers,
If that an English Princess may prevail,
Stay, stay with him, lo how my zealous prayer
Is plead with tears, fie Peers will you hence?
Madam tic virtue in your grace to plead,
But we that see his vain untoward course,
Cannot but fly the fire before it burn,
And shun the Court before we see his fall.
Will you not stay? they Lordings fare you well.
Tho you forsake your King, the heavens I hope
Will favour him through mine incessant prayer.
Content you Madam, thus old Ouid sings.
Tic foolish to bewail recurelesse things.
Peace Dwarf, these words my patience move.
All tho you charm my speech, charm not my love
Douglas how now? why change thou thy cheer?
My private troubles are so great my liege,
As I must crave your licence for a while:
For to intend mine own affairs at home.
You may depart, but why is Morton sad?
The like occasion doth import me too,
So I desire your grace to give me leave.
Well sir you may betake you to your ease,
When such grim sirs are gone, I see no let
To work my will.
What like the Eagle then,
With often flight wilt thou thy feathers loose?
O King can thou endure to see thy Court,
Of finest wits and Judgements dispossessed,
Whilst cloking craft with soothing climbs so high,
As each bewails ambition is so bad?
Thy father left thee with estate and Crown,
A learned council to direct thy Court,
These careless O King thou casts off,
To entertain a train of Sycophants:
Thou well mai'st see, although thou wilt not see,
That every eye and ear both sees and hears
The certain signs of thine inconstinence:
Thou art allied unto the English King,
By marriage a happy friend indeed,
If used well, if not a mighty foe.
Thinks your grace he can endure and brooke,
To have a partner in his daughters love?
Thinks your grace the grudge of privy wrongs
Will not procure him change his smiles to threats?
Oh be not blind to good, call home your Lords,
Displace these flattering Gnatoes, drive them hence:
Love and with kindness take your wedlock wife.
Or else (which God forbid) I fear a change,
Sin cannot thrive in courts without a plague.
Go pack thou too, unless thou mēd thy talk:
On pain of death proud Bishop get you gone,
Unless you headless mean to hop away.
Thou god of heauē prevent my countries fall.
These stays and lets to pleasure, plague my thoughts,
Forcing my grievous wounds a new to bleed:
But care that hath transported me so far,
Fair Ida is dispersed in thought of thee:
Whose answer yields me life, or breeds my death:
Yond comes the messenger of weal or woe.
Ateukin What news?
The adamant o King will not be filed,
But by it self, and beauty that exceeds,
By some exceeding favour must be wrought,
Ida is coy as yet, and doth rapine,
Objecting marriage, honour, fear, and death,
Shoe's holy, wise, and too precise for me.
Are these thy fruits of wits, thy sight in Art?
Thine eloquence? thy policy? thy drift?
To mock thy Prince, thē catiue pack thee hence, Art?
And let me die devoured in my love.
Good Lord how rage gainsaid reasons power,
My dear, my gracious, and beloved Prince,
The essence of my suit, my God on earth,
Sit down and rest your self, appease your wrath,
Least with a frown ye wound me to the death:
Oh that I were included in my grave,
That either now to save my Princes life,
Must counsel cruelty, or loose my King.
Why sirrha, is there means to move her mind?
Oh should I not offend my royal liege.
Tell all, spare nought, so I may gain my love.
Alas my soul why art thou torn in twain,
For fear thou talk a thing that should displease?
Tur, speak what so thou wilt I pardon thee.
How kind a word, how courteous is his grace:
Who would not die to succour such a king?
My liege, this lovely maid of modest mind,
Could well incline to love, but that she fears,
Fair Dorotheas power, your grace doth know,
Your wedlock is a mighty let to love:
Were Ida sure to bee your wedded wife,
That then the twig would bow, you might com∣mand.
Ladies love, presents pomp and high estate.
Ah Ateukin, how should we display this let?
Tut mighty Prince, oh that I might bee whist
Why dalliest thou?
I will not move my Prince,
I will prefer his safety before my life:
Hear me ô king, tic Dorotheas death,
Must do you good.
What, murder of my Queen?
Yet to enjoy my love, what is my Queen?
Oh but my vow and promise to my Queen:
I but my hope to gain a fairer Queen,
With how contrary thoughts am I with drawn?
Why linger I twixt hope and doubtful fear:
If Dorothe die, will Ida love?
She will my Lord.
Then let her die.
Devise, advise the means,
Al likes me well that lends me hope in love.
What will your grace consent, then let me work:
Theres here in Court a Frenchman Iaques called,
A fit performer of our enterprise,
Whom I by gifts and promise will corrupt,
To slay the Queen, so that your grace will seal
A warrant for the man to save his life.
Nought shall he want, write thou and I will sign
And gentle Gna•o, if my Ida yield,
Thou shalt have what thou wilt, Isle give the straight,
A Barony, an Earldom for reward.
Frolic young king, the Lass shall bee your own,
Isle make her blithe and wanton by my wit.
So Oberon, now it begins to work in kind,
The ancient Lords by leaving him alive,
Disliking of his humours and respight,
Lets him run headlong till his flatterers,
Sweating his thoughts of luckless lust,
With vile persuasions and alluring words,
Makes him make way by murder to his will,
Judge fai•e king, hast heard a greater ill?
Nor send more virtue in a country maid▪
I tell the Bohan it doth make me merry,
To think the deeds the king means to perform.
To change that humour stand and see the rest,
I trow my son Slipper will shows a jest.
Now after this beguiling of our thoughts,
And changing them from sad to better glee,
Lets to our s•ll, and sit and see thee rest,
For I believe this Jig will prcoue no jest.
Ho fellow, stay and let me speak with thee.
Fellow, friend thou doest disbuse me, I am a Gentlemā.
A Gentleman how so?
Why I rub horses sir.
And what of that?
Oh simple wetted, mark my reason, they that do good
service in the Commonwealth are Gentlemen, but such as rub
horses do good service in the Commonwealth, Ergo tarbox
Moister Courtier, a Horse-keeper is a Gentleman.
Here is overmuch wit in good earnest:
But sirrha where is thy Moister?
Neither aboue ground nor under ground,
Drawing out red into white,
Swallowing that down without chawing,
That was never made without treading.
Why where is hee then?
Why in his seller, drinking a cup of neat and brisk
claret, in a boule of silver: Oh sir the wine runs trillill down
his throat, which cost the poor vintnerd many a stamp be∣fore
it was made: but I must hence sir, I have haste.
Why whither now I prithee?
Faith sir, to Sir Siluester a Knight hard by, upon my
Masters arrand, whom I must certify this, that the lease of Est Spring shall bee confirmed, and therefore must I bid him
provide trash, for my Moister is no friend without money.
This is the thing for which I sued so long,
This is the lease which I by Guatoes means,
Sought to possess by patent from the King:
But hee injurious man, who lives by crafts,
And sells kings favours for who will give most,
Hath taken bribes of me, yet covertly
Will sell away the thing pertains to me:
But I have found a present help I hope,
For to prevent his purpose and deceit:
Stay gentle friend.
A good word, thou haste won me,
This word is like a warm candle to a cold stomach.
Sir wilt thou for money and reward,
Convey me certain letters out of hand,
From out thy masters pocket.
Will I sir, why, were it to rob my father, hang
my mother, or any such like trifles, I am at your
commandment sir, what will you give me sir?
A hundredth pounds.
I am your man, give me earnest, I am dead at a pocket
sir, why I am a lefter moister, by my occupation.
A lefter, what is that?
Why sir, I can lift a pot as well as any man, and pick a
purse as soon as any thief in my country.
Why fellow hold, here is earnest,
Ten pound to assure thee, go dispatch,
And bring it me to yonder Tavern thou see,
And assure thy self thou shalt both have
Thy skin full of wine, and the rest of thy money.
I will sir. Now room for a Gentleman, my masters,
who gives me money for a fair new Angel, a trim new
Angel?
Sirrha, I must needs have your masters horses,
The king cannot bee vnserued.
Sirrha you must needs go without them,
Because my Moister must be served.
Why I am the kings Purveyor,
And I tell thee I will have them.
I am Ateukins servant, Signior Andrew,
And I say thou shalt not have them.
Hears my ticket, deny it if thou dare.
There is the stable, fetch them out if thou dare.
Sirrha, sirrha, tame your tongue, least I make you.
Sirrha, sirrha, hold your hand, least I bum you.
I tell thee, thy Masters geldings are good,
And therefore fit for the king.
I tell thee, my Masters horses have gald backs,
And therefore cannot fit the King.
Purueyr, Purveyor, purvey thee of more wit, dare thou pre∣sum
to wrong my Lord Ateukins, being the chiefest man in
Court.
The more unhappy Commonwealth,
Where flatterers are chief in Court.
What say est thou?
I say thou art too presumptuous,
And the officers shall school thee.
A fig for them and thee Purveyor,
They seek a knot in a ring, that would wrong
My moister or his servants in this Court.
The world is at a wise pass,
When Nobility is a afraid of a flatterer.
Sirrha, what be you that parley, country Monsieur my Lord Ateukin, en bonne foy, prate you against sir Altesse, me
make your test to leap from your shoulders, per ma foy cy fe∣re
ie.
Oh signior Captain, you show your self a forward
and friendly Gentleman in my Masters behalf, I will cause
him to thank you.
Poul•ron speak me one parola against my bon Gen∣tilhome,
I shall estrampe your guts, and thumpe your backa,
that you no point manage this ten ours.
Sirrha come open me the stable,
And let me have the horses:
And fellow, for all your French brags I will doo my duty.
Isle make garters of thy guts,
Thou villain if thou enter this office.
Mort lieu, take me that cappa
Pour nostre labour, be gone villein in the mort.
What will you resist me then?
Well the Council fellow, Shall know of your insolence.
Tell them what thou wilt, and eat that I can best
spare from my back parts, and get you gone with a ven∣geance.
Andrew.
Sir.
Where be my writings I put in my pocket last night.
Which sir, your annoations upon Matchauell?
No sir, the letters patents for east spring.
Why sir you talk wonders to me, if you ask that questiō.
Yea sir, and will work wonders too, which you unless
you find them out, villain search me them out and bring thē
me, or thou art but dead.
A terrible word in the latter end of a sessions. Master
were you in your right wits yesternight?
Doest thou doubt it?
I and why not sir, for the greatest Clarks are not the
wisest, and a fool may dance in a hood, as well as a wise man in
a bare frock: besides such as give themselves to Plulantia, as you
do moister, are so choleric of complexion, that that which
they burn in fire over night, they seek for with fury the
next morning. Ah I take care of your worship, this commonwealth
should have a great loss of so good a member as you
are.
Thou flatter me.
Is it flattery in me sir to speak you fair?
What is it then in you to dally with the King?
Are you prating knave,
I will teach you better nurture?
Is this the care you have of my wardrobe?
Of my accounts, and matters of trust?
Why alas sir, in times past your garments have
been so well inhabited, as your Tenants would give no
place to a Moathe to mangle them, but since you
are grown greater and your Garments more fine and gay,
if your garments are not fit for hospitality, blame your pride,
and commend my cleanliness: as for your writings, I am not
for them, nor they for me.
Villain go, fly, find them out:
If thou loosest them, thou loosest my credit.
Alas sir? can I loose that you never had.
Say you so, then hold feel you that you never felt.
Oh Monsieur, eyes patient, pardon your pour valet,
Me bee at your commandment.
Signior Iaques well met, you shall command me, valet,
Sir go cause my writings be proclaimed in the Market place,
Promise a great reward to them that finds them,
Look where I supped and every where.
I will sir, now are two knaves well met, and three well
parted, if you conceive mine enigma, Gentlemen what shall I
bee then, faith a plain harp shilling.
Sieur Iaques, this our happy meeting hides,
Your friends and me, of care and grievous to yle,
For I that look into deserts of men,
And see among the soldiers in this court,
A noble forward mind, and judge thereof,
Cannot but seek the means to raise them up:
Who merit credit in the Commonwealth.
To this intent friend Iaque I have found
A means to make you great, and well esteemd'
Both with the king, and with the best in Court:
For I espy in you a valiant mind,
Which makes me love, admire, and honour you:
To this intent (if so your trust and faith,
Your secrecy be equal with your force)
I will impart a service to thy self,
Which if thou doest effect, the King, my self,
And what or hee, and I with him can work,
Shall be employed in what thou wilt desire.
Me sweara by my ten bones, my singniar, to be loyal to
your Lordships intents, affairs, ye my monsignieur, queen non
fera ic pour. Yea pleasure?
By my sword me be no baby Lords.
Then hoping one thy truth, I prithe see,
How kind Ateukin is to forward me,
Hold take this earnest penny of my love.
And mark my words, the King by me requires,
No slender service Iaques at thy hands.
Thou must by privy practise make a way,
The Queen fair Dorethea as she sleeps:
Or how thou wilt, so she be done to death:
Thou shalt not want promotion hear in Court.
Stab the woman▪ per ma foy, monsignieur, me thrust
my weapon into her belle, so me may be guard per le roy.
Me de your service.
But me no be hanged pur my labour.
Thou shalt have warrant Iaques from the King,
None shall outface, gainsay and wrong my friend.
Do not I love thee Iaques? fear not then,
I tell thee who so touches thee in ought,
Shall injure me, I love, I tender thee:
Thou art a subject fit to serve his grace,
Iaques, I had a written warrant once,
But that by great misfortune late is lost,
Come wend we to S. Andrews, where his grace
Is now in progress, where he shall assure
Thy safety, and confirm thee to the act.
We will attend your nobleness.
Thy credit Bertram in the Scottish Court,,
Thy reverend years, the stricknesse of thy vows,
All these are means sufficient to persuade,
But love the faithful lincke of loyal hearts,
That hath possession of my constant mind,
Exiles all dread, subdues vain supect,
Me thinks no craft should harbour in that breast,
Where Majesty and virtue is ••staled:
Me think my beauty should not cause my death.
How gladly sovereign Princess would I err,
And bind my shame to save your royal life:
Tic Princely in your self to think the best,
To hope his grace is guiltless of this crime,
But if in due prevent ionyou default,
How blind are you that were forwarnd before.
Suspicion without cause deserves blame.
Who sees, and shun not harms, deserve the same:
Behold the tenor of this traitorous plot.
What should I read? Perhaps he wrote it not.
Here is his warrant under seal and sign,
To Iaques borne in France to murder you.
Ah careless King, would God this were not thine
What tho I read? Ah should I think it true?
The hand and seal confirms the deed is his.
What know I tho, if now he thinks this?
Madame Lucretius saith, that to repent,
Is shildish wisdom to prevent.
What tho?
Then cease your tears, that have dismayed you,
And cross the foe before hee have betrayed you.
What needs this long suggestions in this cause?
When every circumstance confirms truth:
First let the hidden mercy from aboue,
Confirm your grace, since by a wondrous means,
The practise of your dangers came to light:
Next let the tokens of appooued truth,
Govern and stay your thoughts, too much seduced,
And mark the sooth, and listen the intent,
Your highness knows, and these my noble Lords,
Can witness this, that whilst your husbands sir
In happy peace possessed the Scottish Crown,
I was his sworn attendant here in Court,
In dangerous fight I never failed my Lord.
And since his death, and this your husbands reign,
No labour, duty, have I left undone,
To testify my zeal unto the Crown:
But now my limbs are weak, mine eyes are dim,
Mine age vnweldie and unmeet for toil:
I came to court in hope for service past,
To gain some lease to keep me being old,
There found I all was vpsie turuy turned,
My friends displac'ft, the Nobles loath to crave,
Then sought I to the minion of the King,
Auteukin, who allured by a bribe,
Assured me of the lease for which I sought:
But see the craft, when he had got the grant,
He wrought to sell it to Sir Siluester,
In hope of greater earnings from his hands:
In brief, I learnt his craft, and wrought the means,
By one his needy servants for reward,
To steal from out his pocket all the briefs,
Which hee performed, and with reward resignd
Them when I read now mark the power of God)
I found this warrant sealed among the rest,
To kill your grace, whom God long keep alive.
Thus in effect, by wonder are you saved,
Trifle not then, but seek a speak flight,
God will conduct your steppes, and shield the right.
What should I do, ah poor unhappy Queen?
Borne to endure what fortune can contain,
Ah lass the deed is too apparent now:
But oh mine eyes were you as bent to hide,
As my poor heart is forward to forgive.
Ah cruel king, my love would thee acquit,
Oh what avails to be allied and matched
With high estates that marry but in show?
Were I baser borne, my mean estate
Could warrant me from this impendent harm,
But to be great and happy these are twain.
Ah Rosse what shall I do, how shall I work?
With speedy letters to your father send,
Who will revenge you, and defend your right.
As if they kill not me, who with him fight?
As if his breast be touched, I am not wounded,
As if he wailed, my joys were not confounded:
We are one heart, tho rent by hate in twain:
One soul, one essence doth our weal contain:
What then can conquer him that kills not me?
If this advice displease, then Madame flee.
Where may I wend or travel without fear?
Where not, in changing this attire you wear?
What shall I clad me like a Country maid?
The policy is base I am afraid.
Why Nano?
Ask you why? what may a Queen
March forth in homely weed and be not seen?
The Rose although in thorny shrubs she spread:
Is still the Rose, her beauties wax not dead.
And noble minds although the coat be bare,
Are by their semblance known, how great they are
The Dwarf saith true.
What garments likste thou than?
Such as may make you seem a proper man.
He makes me blush and smile, tho I am sad.
The meanest coat for safety is not bad.
What shall I •et in breeches like a squire?
Alas poor dwarf, thy Mistresle is unmeet.
Tut, go me thus, your cloak before your face,
Your sword vpreard with quaint &amp; comely grace,
If any come and question what you bee,
Say you a man, and call for witness me.
What should I wear a sword, to what intent:
Madame for show, it is an ornament,
If any wrong you, draw a shining blade
Withdraws a coward thief that would invade.
But if I strike, and hee should strike again,
What should I do? I fear I should bee slain.
No, take it single on your dagger so,
Isle teach you Madame how to ward a blow.
How little shapes much substance may include?
Sir Bertram, Rosse, ye Ladies and my friends,
Since presence yields me death, and absence life,
Hence will I fly disguised like a squire,
As one that seeks to live in Irish wars,
You gentle Rosse, shall furnish my depart.
Yea Prince, &amp; die with you with all my hart,
Vouchsafe me then in all extremest states,
To weight on you and serve you with my best.
To me pertains the woe, live then in rest:
Friends fare you well, keep secret my depart,
Nano alone shall my attendant bee.
Then Madame are you mand, I warrant ye,
Give me a sword, and if there grow debate,
Isle come behind, and break your enemies pate.
How sore wee grieve to part so soon away.
Grieve not for those that perish if they stay.
The time in words misspent, is little worth,
Madam walk on, and let them bring vs forth.
So these sad motions makes the fair sleep,
And sleep hee shall in quiet and content,
For it would make a ma•bell melt and weep
To see these treasons against the innocent:
But since she scopes by flight to save her life,
The king may chance repent she was his wife:
The rest is ruthful, yet to beguiled the time,
Tic interlaced with merriment and rime.
Say Gentlemen, where may wee find the king?
Even here at hand on hunting.
And at this hour hee taken hath a stand,
To kill a Dear.
A pleasant work in hand,
Follow your sport, and we will seek his grace.
When such him seek, it is a woeful case.
Lord Justice, as your youth &amp; virtuous life,
Deserves a fair, more fair and richer wife,
So since I am a mother, and do wit
What wedlock is, and that which longs to it,
Before I mean my daughter to bestow,
It were meet that she and I your state did know.
Madame if I consider Ides worth,
I know my portions merit none so fair,
And yet I hold in farm and yearly rent,
A thousand pound, which may her state content.
But what estate my Lord shall she possess?
All that is mine, grave Countess &amp; no less.
But Ida will you love?
I cannot hate.
But will you wed?
Tic Greek to me my Lord,
Isle wish you well, and thereon take my word.
Shall I some sign of favour then receive?
I, if her Ladyship will give me leave.
Do what thou wilt.
Then noble English Peer,
Accept this ring, wherein my heart is set,
A constant heart, with burning flames befret:
But under written this: O morte dura:
Heereon when so you look with eyes Pura,
The maid you fancy most will favour you.
Isle try this heart, in hope to find it true.
Widow Countess well ymet,
Ever may thy joys bee many,
Gentle Ida fair beset,
Fair and wise, not fairer any:
Frolic Huntsmen of the game,
Wills you well, and gives you greeting.
Thanks good Woodman for the same,
And our sport and merry meeting.
Unto thee we do present,
Silver heart with arrow wounded.
This doth shadow my lament,
Both fear and love confounded.
To the mother of the maid,
Fair as the lilies, red as roses,
Even so many goods are said,
As her self in heart supposes.
What are you friends, that thus doth wish vs well?
Your neighbours nigh, that have on hunting been,
Who understanding of your walking forth,
Prepare this train to entertain you with,
This Lady Douglas, this Sir Egmond is.
Welcome ye Ladies, and thousand thanks for this,
Come enter you a homely widows house,
And if mine entertainment please you let vs feast.
A lovely lady never wants a guest.
Stay gentle Ida, tell me what you deem,
What doth this hast, this tender heart beseem?
Why not my Lord, since nature teaches art,
To senseless beasts to cure their grievous smart.
Dictanum serves to close the wound again.
What help for those that love?
Why love again.
Were I the Hart,
Then I the herb would bee.
You shall not die for help, come follow me.
Mon Deiu, what malheure be this, me come a the cham∣ber,
Signior Andrew, Mon Deiu, take my poinyard en mon my∣no,
to give the Estocade to the Mademoiselle, per ma foy, there was
no person, elle cest en alle.
The worse luck Iaques, but because I am thy friend
I will advise the somewhat towards the attainement of the
gallows.
Gallows, what be that?
Marry sir, a place of great promotion, where thou shalt
by one turn aboue ground, rid the world of a knave, &amp; make
a goodly ensample for all bloody villains of thy profession.
Que ditte vous, Monsieur Andrew?
I say Iaques, thou must keep this path, and high thee,
for the Q. as I am certified, is departed with her dwarf, appa∣relled
like a squire, overtake her Frenchman, stab her, Isle
promise thee this doublet shall be happy.
Purquoy?
It shall serve a jolly Gentleman,
Sir Dominus Monsignior Hangman.
Cest tout, un me will rama pour le mon•y.
Go, and the rot consume thee? Oh what a trim world
is this? My moister lives by cousoning the king, I by flattering
him: Slipper my fellow by stealing: and I by lying: is not this
a wily accord, Gentlemen. This last night our jolly horsekee∣per
being well stepped in licor, confessed to me the stealing of
my Masters writings, and his great reward: now dare I not
bewraye him, least he discover my knavery, but thus have I
wrought: I understand he will pass this way, to provide him
necessaries, but if I and my fellows fail not, wee will teach
him such a lesson, as shall cost him a chief place on penniless
bench for his labour: but yond he comes.
Taylor.
Sir.
Let my doublet bee white Northern, five groats the
yard, I tell thee I will bee brave.
It shall sir.
Now sir, cut it me like the battlements of a Custard,
full of round holes: edge me the sleeves with Couentry-blew,
and let the linings bee of tenpenny locorum.
Very good sir.
Make it the amorous cut, a flap before.
And why so? that fashion is stale.
Oh friend, thou art a simple fellow, I tell thee, a flap is
a great friend to a story, it stands him in stead of clean na∣pery,
and if a mans shirt bee torn, it is a present penthouse to
defend him from a clean huswifes scoff.
You say sooth sir.
Hold take thy money, there is seven shillings for the
doublet, and eight for the breeches, seven and eight, bi•lady•
thirty six is a fair deal of money.
Far well sir.
Nay but stay Taylor.
Why sir?
Forget not this special mate,
Let my back parts bee well lined,
For there come many winter storms from a windy belly,
I tell thee Shoo-maker.
Gentleman what shoo will it please you to have?
A fine neat calves leather my friend.
Oh sir, that is too thin, it will not last you.
I tell thee, it is my near kinsman, for I am Slipper, which
hath his best grace in summer to bee suited in lakus skins,
Guidwife Clarke was my Grandmother, and Goodman No∣therleather
mine Uncle, but my mother good woman. Alas,
she was a Spaniard, and being well tande and dressed by a good-fellow,
an Englishman, is grown to some wealth: as when I
have but my upper parts, clad in her husbands costly Span∣nish
leather, I may bee bold to kiss the fairest Ladies foot
in this country.
You are of high birth sir,
But have you all your mothers marks on you?
Why knave?
Because if thou come of the blood of the Slip∣pers,
you should have a Shoemakers Alle thrust through your
care.
Take your earnest friend and be packing,
And meddle not with my progenitors Cutler.
Hear sir.
I must have a Rapier and Dagger.
A Rapier and Dagger you mean sir?
Thou says true, but it must have a very fair edge,
Why so sir?
Because it may cut by himself, for truly my friend,
I am a man of peace, and wear weapons but for facion.
Well sir, give me earnest I will fit you.
Hold take it, I betrust thee friend, let me be welarmed.
You shall.
Now what remains? theres twenty Crowns for
house, three crowns for houshol stuff, six pence to buy a
Constables staff: nay I will be the chief of my parish, there
wants nothing but a wench, a cat, a dog, a wife and a servant, to
make an hole family, shall I marry with Alice, good mā Grim∣shaves
daughter, she is fair, but indeed her tongue is like
Clocks on Shrouetuesday, always out of temper? shall I wed
Sisley of the Whightē? Oh•, • she is like a frog in a parcely bed,
as scittish as an eel, if I seek to hāper her, she will ho•no me: but
a wench must be had moister Slip. Yea and shall be deer friend.
I now will drive him from his contemplations. Oh my
mates come forward, the lamb is vnpent, the fox shall prevail.
I will my friend, and I thank you heartily, pray keep
your courtesy, I am yours in the way of an hornepipe, they
are strangers, I see they understand not my language, wee
wee.
Nay but my friends, one hornpipe, further a refluence
back, and two doubles forward: what not one cross point a∣against
Sundays. What ho sirrha, you gone, you with the nose
like an Eagle, and you be a right greek, one turn more,
thieves thieves, I am robbed thieves. Is this the knavery of Fid∣lers?
Well, I will then bind the hole credit of their occupatiō
on a bagpiper, and he for my money, but I will after, and
teach them to caper in a halter, that have cozened me of my
money.
Ah Nano, I am weary of these weeds,
Weary to weeld this weapon that I bare:
Weary of love, from whom my woe proceeds.
Weary of toil, since I have lost my dear,
O weary life, where wanted no distress,
But every thought is paid with heaviness.
Too much of weary madame, if you please,
Sit down, let weary dye, and take your ease.
How look I Nano like a man or no?
If not a man, yet like a manly shrove.
If any come and meet vs on the way,
What should we do if they enforce vs stay.
Set cap a huff, and challenge him the field,
Suppose the worst, the weak may fight to yield.
The battle Nano in this troubled mind,
Is far more fierce then ever we may find.
The bodies wounds by medicines may be eased,
But griefs of minds, by salves are not appeased.
Say Madame, will you hear your Nano sing?
Of woe good boy, but of no other thing:
What if I sing of fancy will it please?
To such as hope success, such noats breed ease.
What if I sing like Demon to my sheep?
Like Phillis I will sit me down to weep.
Nay since my songs afford such pleasure small,
Isle sit me down, and sing you none at all.
Oh be not angry Nano.
Nay you loath,
To think on that, which doth content vs both.
And how?
You scorn disport when you are weary,
And loath my mirth, who live to make you merry.
Danger and fear withdraw me from delight.
Tic virtue to contemn false Fortunes spite.
What should I do to please thee friendly squire?
A smile a day, is all I will require:
And if you pay me well the smiles you owe me,
Isle kill this cursed care, or else beshrowe me.
We are descried, oh Mono we are dead.
Tut yet you walk, you are not dead indeed,
Draw me your sword, if he your way withstand.
And I will seek for rescue out of hand,
Run Nano run, prevent thy Princes death.
Fear not, isle run all danger out of breath.
Ah you calletta, you strumpet, ta Mattress Doretie este, vous
surprius come say your pater noster, car vous est mort par ma foy
Callet, me strumpet, Catiue as thou art
But even a Princess borne, who scorn thy threats.
Shall never French man say, an English maid,
Of threats of foreign force will be afraid.
You no dire vostre prieges, vrbleme merchants famine
guarda your breast, there me make you die on my morglay,
God shield me haplesse princes and a wife.
They fight, and she is sore wounded.
And save my soul, although I loose my life.
Ah I am slain, some piteous power repay,
This murderers cursed deed, that doth me slay.
Elle est tout mort, me will run pur a wager, for fear me
be surpryes and pendu for my labour. Be in Ie move alera au roy
auy cits me affairs, Ie serra un chevalier, for this days tra∣uaile.
Where is this poor distressed gentleman?
Here laid on ground, and wounded to the death.
Ah gentle heart, how are these beauteous looks,
Dimd by the tyrant cruelties of death:
Oh weary soul, break thou from forth my breast,
And join thee with the soul I honoured most.
Leave mourning friend, the man is yet alive,
Some help me to convey him to my house:
There will I see him carefully recurred,
And send privy search to catch the murderer.
The God of heaven reward the courteous knight.
And they bear out Dorothea.
Stay Iaques, fear not, sheath thy murdering blade:
Lo here thy King and friends are come abroad,
To save thee from the terrors of pursuit:
What is she dead?
Wee Monsieur, elle is bless per lake teste, ouesles e∣spanles,
I warrant she no trouble you.
Oh then my liege, how happy art thou grown,
How favoured of the heavens, and blessed by love:
Me thinks I see fair Ida in thine arms,
Craving remission for her late attempt,
Me think I see her blushing steal a kiss:
Uniting both your souls by such a sweet,
And you my King suck Nectar from her lips.
Why then delays your grace to gain the rest
You long desired? why loose we forward time?
Write, make me spokesman now, vow marriage,
If she deny your favour let me die.
Mighty and magnificent potentate, give credence to
mine honourable good Lord, for I heard the Midwife swear at
his nativity, that the Faieries gave him the property of the
Thracian stone, for who touches it, is exempted from grief,
and he that hears my Masters counsel, is already possessed
of happiness: nay which is more miraculous, as the Noble
man in his infancy lay in his Cradle, a swarm of Bees laid ho∣ney
on his lips, in token of his eloquence. For mell dulcier
fluit oration.
Your grace must bear with imperfections:
This is exceeding love that makes him speak.
Ateukin I am ravished in conceit,
And yet depressed again with earnest thoughts,
Me thinks this murder sounds in mine ear,
A threatening noise of dire and sharp revenge▪
I am incensed with grief, yet fine would joy,
What may I do to end me of these doubts?
Why Prince it is no murder in a King▪
To end an others life to save his own,
For you are not as common people bee.
Who die and perish with a few mans tears,
But if you fail, the state doth whole default
The Realm is rent in twain, in such alosse,
And Aristotle holds this for true,
Of evils needs we must choose the least,
Then better were it, that a woman died,
Then all the help of Scotland should be blent,
Tic policy my liege, in every state,
To cut off members that disturb the head.
And by corruption generation grows.
And contraries maintain the world and state.
Enough I am confirmed, Ateukin come,
Rid me of love, and rid me of my grief,
Drive thou the tyrant from this tainted breast▪
Then may I triumph in the height of joy,
Go to mine Ida, tell her that I vow,
To raise her head and make her honours great.
Go to mine Ida, tell her that her hairs,
Salbe embollished with orient pearls,
And Crowns of Saphyrs compassing her brows,
Shall wear with those sweet beauties of her eyes.
Go to mine Ida, tell her that my soul
Shall keep her semblance closed in my breast,
And I in touching of her milke-white mould,
Will think me deified in such a grace:
I like no stay, go write and I will sign.
Reward me Iaques, give him store of Crown.
And sirrha Andrew, scout thou here in Court:
And bring me tidings if thou can perceive
The least intent of muttering in my train,
For either those that wrong thy Lord or thee,
Shall suffer death.
How much ô mighty king,
Is thy Ateukin bound to honour thee:
Bow thee Andrew, bend thine sturdy knees,
See thou not here thine only God on earth?
Mes on est mon argent Signior.
Come follow me, his grave I see is made,
That thus on sudden he hath left vs here.
Come Iaques, we will have our packet soon dispatch▪
And you shall be my mate upon the way.
Come vous plera Monsieur.
Was never such a world I think before,
When sinners seem to dance within a net,
The flatterer and the murderer they grow big,
By hook of crook promotion now is sought,
In such a world where men are so missed,
What should I do? but as the Proverb saith,
Run with the Hare, and hunt with the Hound.
To have two means, beseems a witty man:
Now here in 〈◊〉 I may aspire and clime,
By subtlety for my masters death.
And if that fail, well fare an other drift:
I will in secret certain letters send
Unto the English King, and let him know
The order of his daughters over throw.
That if my moister crack his credit here,
As I am sure long flattery cannot hold,
I may have means within the English Court
To scope the scourge that waits on bad advice.
Believe me bonny Scot, these strange events,
Are passing pleasing, may they end as well.
Else say that Bohan hath a barren skull,
If better motions yet then any past,
Do not more glee to make the fairy greet,
But my small son made pretty handsome shift,
To save the Queen his Mistress by his speed.
Yea you Lady for his sport he made,
Shall see when least he hopes, Isle stand his friend,
Or else hee capers in a halters end.
What hang my son? I trow not Obiran:
Isle rather die, then see him woe begone.
Bohan be pleased, for do they what they will,
Here is my hand, Isle save thy son from ill.
My gentle friend beware in taking air,
Your walks grow not offensive to your wounds.
Madame I thank you of your courteous care,
My wounds are well nigh closed, tho sore they are.
Me thinks these closed wounds should breed more grief,
Since open wounds have cure, and find relief.
Madame, if undiscovered wounds you mean,
They are not curd, because they are not seen.
I mean the wounds which do the heart subdue.
Oh that is love, Madame speak I not true?
Say it were true, what salve for such a sore?
Be wise, and shut such neighbours out of door.
How if I cannot drive him from my breast?
Then chain him well, and let him do his best.
In ripping up their wounds, I see their wit,
But if these wounds be cured I sorrow it.
Why are you so intent to behold,
My pale and woeful looks, by care controlled?
Because in them a ready way is found,
To cure my care, and heal my hidden wound.
Good Moister shut your eyes, keep that conceit,
Surgeons give, Quoi•e, to get a good receipt.
Peace wanton son, this Lady did amend
My wounds: mine eyes her hidden grief shall end,
Look not too much, it is a weighty case.
Where as a man puts on a maidens face,
For many times if Ladies wear them not,
A nine months wound with little work is got.
Isle break off their dispute, least love proceed,
From covert smiles, to perfect love indeed.
The cats abroad, stir not, the mice bee still,
Tut, wee can she such cats when so we will.
How fares my guest, take cheer, nought shall de∣fault,
That either doth concern your health or joy,
Use me, my house, and what is mine is yours.
Thanks gentle knight, and if all hopes be true,
I hope ere long to do as much for you.
Your virtue doth acquit me of that doubt:
But courteous sit, since troubles calls me hence,
I must to Edenbourg unto the king,
There to take charge, and weight him in his wars:
Mean while good Madame take this squire in charge,
And use him so as if it were my self.
Sir Cutbert doubt not of my diligence:
Mean while, till your return God send you health.
God bless his grace, and if his cause be just,
Prosper his wars: if not he will mend I trust:
Good sir what moos the king to fall to arms?
The king of England forrageth his land,
And hath besieged Dambac with mighty force:
What other news are common in the Court,
Read you these letters Madame tell the squire,
The whole affairs of state, for I must hence.
God prosper you, and bring you back from thence:
Madame what news?
They say the Queen is slain.
Tut, such reports more false then truth contain.
but these reports have made his Nobles leave him.
Ah careless men, and would they so deceive him?
The land is spoiled, the commons fear the cross,
All cry against the king, their cause of loss:
The English king subdues and conquers all.
Ah lass, this war grows great, on causes small.
Our Court is desolate, our Prince alone,
Still dreading death.
Woes me, for him I moan,
Help, now help, a sudden qualm.
Assails my heart.
Good Madame stand her friend,
Give vs some licor to refresh her heart.
Daw thou her up, ande I will fetch thee forth
Potions of comfort to repress h•• pain.
Fie Princess, faint on every fond report,
How well nigh had you opened your estate:
Cover these sorrows with the veil of joy,
And hope the best, for why this war will cause,
A great repentance in your husbands mind.
Ah Nano, trees live not without their sap,
And Clitia cannot blush button the sun,
The thirsty earth is broke with many a gap,
And lands are lean, where rivers do not run,
Where soul is reft from that it loves best,
How can it thrive or boast of quiet rest?
Thou know the Princes loss must be my death,
His grief, my grief: his mischief must be mine:
Oh if thou love me, Nano high to court,
Tell Rosse, tell Bertram that I am alive,
Conceal thou yet, the place of my abode,
Will them even as they love their Queen,
As they are chary of my soul and joy,
To guard the King, to serve him as my Lord:
Haste thee good Nina, for my husbands care,
Consumes me and wounds me to the heart.
Madame I go, yet loath to leave you here.
Go thou with speed, even as thou holdst me dear,
Return in haste.
Now sir, what cheer? come taste this broth I bring.
My grief is past, I feel no further sting.
Where is your dwarf? Why hath hee left you sir?
For some affairs, hee is not travelled far.
If so you please, come in and take your rest.
Fear keeps awake a discontented breast.
What means this triumph friend? why are these feasts?
Fair Ida sir, was married yesterday,
Unto sir Justice, and for that intent,
Wee feast and sport it thus to honour them:
And if you please, come in and take your part,
My Lady is no niggard of her cheer.
Monsigneur, why be you so sadda, fette bon chere fontre
de ce monte.
What? was I borne to bee the scorn of kin?
To gather feathers like to a hopper crow,
And loose them in the height of all my pomp:
Accursed man now is my credit lost:
Where is my vows I made unto the king?
What shall become of me, if hee shall hear,
That I have caused him kill a virtuous Queen?
And hope in vain for that which now is lost:
Where shall I hide my head? I know the heavens
Are just, and will revenge: I know my sins
Exceed compare: should I proceed in this?
This Justice must a man be made away:
Oh were I dead, how happy should I bee?
Est ce donque a tell point vostre estate, faith then
adieu Scotland, adieu Signior Ateukin, me will home
to France, and no be hanged in a strange country.
Thou doest me good to leave me thus alone,
That galling grief and I may yoke in one:
Oh what are subtle means to clime on high?
When every fall swarms with exceeding shame?
I promised Idaes love unto the Prince,
But she is lost, and I am false forsworn:
I practised Dorotheas haplesse death,
And by this practise have commenced a war.
Oh cursed race of men that traficque guile,
And in the end, themselves and kings beguile:
A shamde to look upon my Prince again:
A shamde of my suggestions and advise:
A shamde of life: a shamde that I have erde:
Isle hide my self, expecting for my shame.
Thus God doth work with those, that purschase fame
By flattery, and make their Prince their gain.
Thus far the English Peers have we displayed,
Our waving Ensigns with a happy war,
Thus nearly hath our furious rage revenged,
My daughters death upon the traitorous Scot,
And now before Dambar our camp is pitched,
Which if it yield not to our compromise,
The place shall furrow where the palace stood,
And fury shall envy so high a power,
That mercy shall bee banished from our swords.
What seeks the English King?
Scot open those gates, and let me enter in,
Submit thy self and thine unto my grace,
Or I will put each mothers son to death,
And lay this City level with the ground.
For what offence? for what default of ours?
Art thou incensed so sore against our state?
Can generous hearts in nature bee so sterne
To pray on those that never did offend?
What tho the Lyon, (king of brutish race,
Through outrage sin, shall lambs be therefore slain?
Or is it lawful that the humble die,
Because the mighty do gainsay the right?
O English King, thou bear in thy breast,
The King of beasts, that harms not yielding ones,
The Ros•all cross is spread within thy field,
A sign of peace, not of revenging war:
Be gracious then unto this little town,
And tho we have withstood thee for a while,
To show allegiance to our liefest liege,
Yet since wee know no hope of any help,
Take vs to mercy, for wee yield our selves.
What shall I enter then and be your Lord?
We will submit vs to the English king.
They descend down, open the gates, and humble them.
Now life and death depends on my sword:
This hand now reared, my Douglas if I list,
Could part thy head and shoulders both in twain:
But since I see thee wise and old in years,
True to thy king, and faithful in his wars,
Live thou and thine, Dambar is too too small▪
To give an entrance to the English king,
I Eaglelike disdain these little fowls,
And look on none but those that dare resist,
Enter your town as those that live by me,
For others that resist, kill, forage, spoil:
Mine English soldiers, as you love your king,
Revenge his daughters death, and do me right.
My friends, what think you of this present state▪
Were ever seen such changes in a time?
The manners and the fashions of this age,
Are like the Ermine skin so full of spots,
As soon may the Moore bee washed white,
Then these corruptions banished from this Realm.
What sees mas Lawyer in this state amiss?
A wresting power that makes a nose of wax,
Of grounded law, a damde and subtle drift,
In all estates to clime by others loss,
An eager thrift of wealth, forgetting truth,
Might I ascend unto the highest states,
And by descent discover every crime,
My friends I should lament, and you would grieve
To see the haplesse ruins of this Realm.
O Lawyer, thou haste curious eyes to pry,
Into the secrets maims of their estate,
But if thy veil of error were unmasked,
Thy self should see your sect, do maim her most:
Are you not those that should maintain the peace,
Yet only are the patrones of our strife?
If your profession have his ground and spring,
First from the laws of God, then countries right,
Not any ways inuerting natures power,
Why thrive you by contentions? Why devise you
Clauses, and subtle reasons to except:
Our state was first before you grew so great,
A Lantern to the world for unity:
Now they that are befriended, and are rich,
Or press the poor, come Homer without quoine,
He is not heard: What shall we term this drift?
To say the poor mans cause is good and just,
And yet the rich man gains the best in law:
It is your guise, (the more the world laments)
To quoine Prouisoes to beguile your laws,
To make a gay pretext of due proceeding,
When you delay your common pleas for years:
Mark what these dealings lately here have wrought:
The crafty men have purchased greatmens lands
They powle, they pinch, their tenants are undone:
If these complain by you they are undone,
You flees them of their quoine, their children beg,
And many want, because you may bee rich,
This scarre is mighty moister Lawyer,
Now man hath gotten head within this land,
Mark but the guise, the poor man that is wronged,
Is ready to rebel: hee spoils, he pills,
We need no foes to forage that wee have,
The law (say they) in peace consumed vs,
And now in war wee will consume the law:
Look to this mischief, Lawyers conscience knows
You live amiss, amend it, least you end.
Good Lord, that their Divines should see so far
In others faults, without amending theirs?
Sir, sir, the general defaults in state,
(If you would read before you did correct)
Are by a hidden working from aboue,
By their successive changes still remained,
Were not the law by contraries maintained,
How could the truth from falsehood be discerned?
Did wee not taste the bitterness of war?
How could wee know the sweet effects of peace?
Did wee not feel the nipping winter frosts,
How should we know the sweetness of the spring?
Should all things still remain in one estate,
Should not in greatest arts some scars be found,
Were all upright and changed, what world were this?
A Chaos, made of quiet, yet no world,
Because the parts there of did still accord,
This matter craves a variance not a speech,
But sir Divine to you, look on your maims,
Divisions, sects, your summons and bribes:
Your cloaking with the great, for fear to fall,
You shall perceive you are the cause of all.
Did each man know there were a storm at hand,
Who would not cloth him well, to shun the wet?
Did Prince and Peer, the Lawyer and the least,
Know what were sin, without a partial gloss,
Wee need no long discovery then of crimes,
For each would mend, advised by holy men:
Thus but slightly shadow out your sins,
But if they were depainted out for life,
Alas wee both had wounds enough to heal.
None of you both I see but are in fault,
Thus simple men as I do swallow flies,
This grave Divine can tell vs what to do.
But wee may say: Physician mend thy self,
This Lawyer hath a pregnant wit to talk,
But all are words, I see no deeds of worth.
Good Merchant lay your fingers on your mouth,
Be not a blab, for fear you bite your self,
What should I term your state, but even the way
To every ruin in this Commonwealth,
Your bring vs in the means of all excess,
You rate it▪ and retold it as you please,
You swear, forswear, and all to compass wealth,
Your money is your God, your hoard your heaven,
You are the ground work of contention:
First heedless youth, by you is overreached,
Wee are corrupted by your many crowns:
The Gentlemen whose titles you have bought,
Loose all their fathers toil within a day,
Whilst Hob your son, and Sib your nutbrowne child,
Are Gentle folks, and Gentles are beguiled:
This makes so many Noble maids to stray,
And take sinister courses in the state.
My friends begone and if you love your lives,
The King of England marches here at hand,
Enter the camp for fear you bee surprised.
Thanks gentle scout, God mend that is amiss,
And place true, zeal whereas corruption is.
What news in Court, Nano let vs know it?
If so you please my Lord, I straight will show it:
The English king hath all the borders spoiled,
Hath taken Morton prisoner, and hath slain
Seven thousand Scottish Lords, not far from Tweards.
A woeful murder, and a bloody deed.
Thinking our liege hath sought by many means
For to appease his enemy by prayers,
Nought will prevail unless hee can restore,
Fair Dorothea long supposed dead:
To this intent he hath proclaimed late,
That who so ever return the Queen to Court,
Shall have a thousand Marks for his reward.
He loves her then I see although enforced,
That would bestow such gifts for to regain her:
Why sit you sad, good sir be not dismayed.
Isle lay my life this man would be a maid.
Fine would I show my self, and change my tire.
Whereon divine you sir?
Upon desire.
Madam mark but my skill, isle lay my life,
My moister here, will prove a married wife.
Wilt thou bewray me Nano?
Madam no▪
You are a man, and like a man you go.
But I that am in speculation seen,
Know you would change your state to be a Queen.
Thou art not dwarf to learn thy mistress▪ mind.
Fine would I with thy self disclose my king,
But yet I blush.
What blush you Madam than,
To be your self, who are a feigned man?
Let me alone.
Deceitful beauty hast thou scorned me so?
Nay muse not maiden, for she tells you true.
Beauty bred love, and love hath bred my shame.
And women's faces work more wrongs then these:
Take comfort Madam to cure our disease.
And yet he loves a man as well as you,
Only this difference, she cannot fancy too.
Blush, grieve, and die, in thine infaciat lust.
Nay live and joy that thou hast won a friend,
That loves thee as his life, by god desert.
I joy my Lord more then my tongue can tell:
Alhough not as I desired, I love you well:
But modesty, that never blushed before,
Discover my false heart. I say no more.
Let me alone.
Good Nano stay a while.
Were I not sad, how kindly could I smile,
To see how fine I am to leave this weed:
And yet I faint to show my self indeed.
But danger hates delay, I will be bold,
Fair Lady I am not, suppose
A man, but even that Queen, more haplesse I,
Whom Scottish King appointed hath to die:
I am the haplesse Princess, for whose right,
These kings in bloody wars revenge despite.
I am that Dorothea whom they seek,
Yours bounden for your kindness and relief:
And since you are the means that save my life,
Your self and I will to the Camp repair,
Whereas your husband shall enjoy reward,
And bring me to his highness once again.
Pardon most gracious Princess, if you please,
My rude discourse and homely entertain,
And if my words may savour any worth,
Vouchsafe my counsel in this weighty cause:
Since that our liege hath so unkindly dealt:
Give him no trust, return unto your sire,
There may you safely live in spite of him.
Ah Lady, so wold worldly counsel work,
But constancy, obedience, and my love,
In that my husband is my Lord and chief,
These call me to compassion of his estate,
Dissuade me not, for virtue will not change,
What woonderous constancy is this I hear?
If English dames their husbands love so deer,
I fear me in the world they have no peer.
Come Princes wend, and let vs change your weed,
I long to see you now a Queen indeed.
He would have parley Lords, Herald say he shall,
And get thee gone: go leave me to my self:
Twixt love and fear, continual is the wars:
The one assures me of my Idaes love,
The other moves me for my murdered Queen.
Thus find I grief of that whereon I joy,
And doubt, in greatest hope, and death in weal,
Ah lass what hell may be compared with mine,
Since in extremes my comforts do consist?
War then will cease, when dead ones are revived.
Some then will yield, when I am dead for hope.
Who doth disturb me? Andrew?
I my liege.
What news?
I think my mouth was made at first,
To tell these tragic tales my liefest Lord.
What is Ateukin dead, tell me the worst?
No but your Ida, shall I tell him all?
Is married late (ah shall I say to whom?)
My moister sad: (for why he shames the Court)
Is fled away? ah most unhappy flight.
Only my self, ah who can love you more?
To show my duty (duty past belief)
Am come unto your grace (oh graticus liege)
To let you know, oh would it wear not thus,
That love is vain, and maids soon lost and won.
How have the partial heavens thē dealt with me,
Boding my weal, for to abase my power?
Alas what thronging thoughts do me oppress?
Injurious love is partial in my right,
And flattering tongues by whom I was misled,
Have laid a snare to spoil my state and me.
Methinkes I hear my Dorotheas goast,
Howling revenge for my accursed hate,
The gifts of those my subjects that are slain,
Pursue me crying out, woe, woe, to lust,
The foe pursues me at my palace door:
He breaks my rest and spoils me in my Camp,
Ah flattering brood of Sycophants my foes,
First shall my dire revenge begin on you,
I will reward thee Andrew.
Nay sir if you be in your deeds of charity, remember me
I rubbed M. Ateukins horse heals, when he rid to the meadows.
And thou shalt have thy recompense for that.
Lords bear them to the prison, chain them fast,
Until we take some order for their deaths.
If so your grace in such sort give rewards,
Let me have nought, I am content to want.
Then I pray sir give me all, I am as ready for a reward as
an oyster for a fresh tide, spare not me sir.
Then hang them both as traitors to the King.
The case is altered, sir, isle none of your gifts, what I take
a reward at your hands? Moister, faith sir no: I am a man of a
better conscience.
Why dally you? go draw them hence away.
Why alas sir, I will go away I thank you gentle friends.
I pray you spare your pains, I will not trouble his honours my∣stership,
isle run away.
Why stay you? move me not, let search be made,
For vile Ateukin, who so finds him out,
Shall have five hundredth marks for his reward.
Away with the Lords troupes about my tent,
Let all our soldiers stand in battle ray,
For lo the English to their parley come.
What seeks the King of England in this land?
False traitorous Scot, I come for to revenge
My daughters death: I come to spoil thy wealth,
Since thou hast spoiled me of my marriage joy.
I come to heap thy land with Carcasses,
That this thy thrifty soil choked up with blood,
May thunder forth revenge upon thy head.
I come to quit thy loveless love with death,
In brief, no means of peace shall ere be found,
Except I have my daughter or thy head.
My head proud King• abase thy prancking plains,
So striving fondly, majesty thou catch thy grave.
But if true judgment do direct thy course,
These lawful reasons should divide the war,
Faith not by my consent thy daughter dyed.
Thou least false Scot, thy agēts have cōfest it.
These are but fond delays, thou can not think
A means for to reconcile me for thy friend,
I have thy parasites confession pend:
What then can thou allege in thy excuse?
I will repay the ransom for her blood.
What think thou catiue, I will sell my child,
No if thou be a Prince and man at arms,
In singule combat come and try thy right,
Else will I prove thee recreant to thy face.
I took no combat false injurious King,
But since thou needless art inclined to war,
Do what thou dare we are in open field.
Arming thy battles I will fight with thee.
Agreed, now trumpets sound a dreadful charge
Fight for your Princess, brave English men:
Now for your lands your children and your wives,
My Scottish Peers, and lastly for your King.
Stay Princes wage not war, a privy grudge
Twixt such as you (most high in Majesty)
Afflicts both nocent and the innocent,
How many swords dear Princes see I drawn?
The friend against his friend, a deadly friend:
A desperate division in those lands,
Which if they join in one, command the world.
Oh stay with reason mitigate your rage,
And let an old man humbled on his knees,
Entreat a boon good Princes of you both.
I condescend, for why thy reverend years
Import some news of truth and consequence,
I am content, for Anderson I know.
Thou art my subject and doest mean me good.
But by your gracious favours grant me this,
To swear upon your sword to do me right.
See by my sword, and by a Princes faith,
In every lawful sort I am thine own.
And by my Sceptre and the Scottish Crown,
I am resolved to grant thee thy request.
I see you trust me Princes who repose,
The weight of such a war upon my will.
Now mark my suit, a tender Lyons whelp,
This other day came straggling in the woods,
Attended by a young and tender hind,
In courage haughty, yet tyred like a lamb,
The Prince of beasts had left this young in keep,
To foster up as louemate and compeere,
Unto the Lyons mate a naibour friend,
This stately guide seduced by the fox,
Sent forth an eager Woolfe bred up in France,
That gript the tender whelp, and wounded it.
By chance as I was hunting in the woods,
I heard the moan the hind made for the whelp,
I took them both, and brought them to my house,
With chary care I have ••curd the one,
And since I know the lyons are at strife,
About the loss and damage of the young,
I bring her home, make claim to her who list.
I am the whelp, bred by this Lyon up,
This royal English king my happy sire,
Poor Nano is the hind that tended me:
My father Scottish king▪ gave me to thee:
A haplesse wife, thou quite misled by youth,
Haste sought sinister loves and foreign joys,
The fox Ateukin, cursed Parasite,
Incensed your grace to send the woolfe abroad,
The French borne Iaques, for to end my days,
Hee traitorous man, pursued me in the woods,
And left me wounded, where this noble knight,
Both rescued me and mine, and saved my life.
Now keep thy promise, Dorothea lives:
Give Anderson his due and just reward:
And since you kings, your wars began by me,
Since I am safe, return surcease your fight.
Durst I presume to look upon those eyes,
Which I have tired with a world of woes,
Or did I think submission were enough,
Or sighs might make an entrance to my soul:
You heavens, you know how willing I wold weep:
You heavens can tell, how glad I would submit:
You heavens can say, how firmly I would sigh.
Shame me not Prince, companion in thy bed,
Youth hath misled: tut but a little fault,
Tic kingly to amend what is amiss:
Might I with twice as many pains as these,
Unite our hearts, then should my wedded Lord,
See how incessant labours I would take.
My gracious father govern your affects,
Give me that hand, that oft hath blessed this head,
And clasp thine arms, that have embraced this,
About the shoulders of my wedded spouse:
Ah mighty Prince, this king and I am one,
Spoil thou his subjects, thou despoy lest me:
Touch thou his breast, thou doest attained this heart,
Oh bee my father then in loving him.
Thou provident kind mother of increase,
Thou must prevail, ah nature thou must rule:
Hold daughter, join my hand and his in one,
I will embrace him for to favour thee,
I call him friend, and take him for my son.
Ah royal husband, see what God hath wrought,
Thy foe is now thy friend: good men at arms,
Do you the like, these nations if they join,
What Monarch with his leigemen in this world,
Dare but encounter you in open fields?
Al wisdom ioynde with godly piety,
Thou English king, pardon my former youth,
And pardon courteous Queen my great misdeed:
And for assurance of mine after life,
I take religious vows before my God,
To honour thee for favour, her for wife.
But yet my boons good Princes are not past,
〈◊〉 English king I humbly do request,
That by your means our Princess may unite,
Her love unto mine alder truest love,
Now you will love, maintain and help them both.
Good Anderson, I grant thee thy request.
But you my Prince must yield me mickle more:
You know your Nobles are your chiefest stays,
And long time have been banished from your Court,
Embrace and reconcile them to your self:
They are your hands, whereby you ought to work.
As for Ateukin, and his lewd compeers,
That soothed you in your sins and youthly pomp,
Exile, torment, and punish such as they,
For greater vipers never may be found
Within a state, then such aspiring heads,
That reck not how they clime, so that they clime.
Guide Knight I grant thy suit, first I submit
And humble crave a pardon of your grace:
Next courteous Queen, I pray thee by thy loves,
Forgive mine errors past, and pardon me.
My Lords and Princes, if I have misdone,
(As I have wronged indeed both you and yours)
Hereafter trust me, you are dear to me:
As for Auteukin, who so finds the man,
Let him have Martial law, and straight be hanged,
As (all his vain arbiters now are divided)
And Anderson our Treasurer shall pay,
Three thousand Marks, for friendly recompense.
But Princes whilst you friend it thus in one,
Me thinks of friendship, Nano shall have none.
What would my Dwarf, that I will not bestow?
My boon fair Queen is this, that you would go,
Although my body is but small and neat,
My stomach after toil requires meat,
An easy suit, dread Princes will you wend?
Art thou a Pigmy borne my pretty friend?
Not so great King, but nature when she framed me,
Was scant of earth, and Nano therefore named me:
And when she saw my body was so small,
She gave me wit to make it big withal.
Till time when,
Eat then.
My friend it stands with wit,
To take repast when stomach serves it.
Thy policy my Nano shall prevail:
Come royal father, enter we my tent:
And soldiers feast it, frolic it like friends,
My Princes bid this kind and courteous train,
Partake some favours of our late accord.
Thus wars have end, and after dreadful hate,
Men learn at last to know their good estate.

NOw trust me, here's a goodly day toward.
Musco, call up my son Lorenzo: bid him
rise: tell him, I have some business to employ
him in.
I will, sir, presently.
But hear you, sirrah;
If he be at study, disturb him not.
Very good, sir.
How happy would I estimate my self,
Could I (by any mean) retire my son,
From one vain course of study he affects?
He is a scholar (if a man may trust
The liberal voice of double-toung'd report)
Of dear account, in all our Academies.
Yet this position must not breed in me
A fast opinion, that he cannot err.
My self was once a student, and indeed
Fed with the selfsame humour he is now,
Dreaming on nought but idle Poetry:
But since, Experience hath awaked my sprit's,
And reason taught them, how to comprehend
The sovereign use of study. What, cousin Stephano?
What news with you, that you are here so early?
Nothing: but •en come to see how you doe, uncle.
That's kindly done, you are welcome, cousin.
I, I know that sir, I would not have come else: how
doth my cousin, uncle?
Oh well, well, go in and see; I doubt hoe's scarce
stirring yet.
Uncle, before I go in, can you tell me, and he have
•'re a book of the sciences of hawking and hun•ing? I would
fain borrow it.
Why I hope you will not a hawking now, will you?
No wuss; but isle practise against next year: I have
bought me a hawk, and bells and all; I lack nothing but a
book to keep it by.
Oh most ridiculous.
Nay look you now, you are angry uncle, why you
know, and a man have not skill in hawking and hunting now
a days, isle not give a rush for him; hee is for no gentleman's
company, and (by Gods will) I scorn it I, so I doe, to bee a
consort for every hum-drum; hang them scroiles, ther's nothing
in them in the world, what doe you talk on it? a gentleman
must show himself like a gentleman, uncle I pray you be not
angry, I know what I have to do I trow, I am no novice.
Go to, you are a prodigal, and selfe-wild fool,
Nay never look at me, it's I that speak,
Take it as you will, isle not flatter you.
What? have you not means enough to wast
That which your friends have left you, but you must
Go cast away your money on a Buzzard,
And know not how to keep it when you have done?
Oh it's brave, this will make you a gentleman,
Well Cousin well, I see you are e'ene past hope
Of all reclaim; I so, now you are told on it, you look ano∣there
way.
What would you have me do trow?
What would I have you do? mary
Learn to be wise, and practise how to thrive,
That I would have you do, and not to spend
Your crowns on every one that humours you:
I would not have you to intrude your self
In every gentleman's society,
Till their affections or your own desert,
Do worthily inuit you to the place.
For he thats so respectless in his course,
Oft sells his reputation vile and cheap.
Let not your carriage, and behaviour taste
Of affectation, lest while you pretend
To make a blaze of gentry to the world
A little puff of scorn extinguish it,
And you be left like an unsavoury snuff,
Whose property is only to offend.
Cousin, lay by such superficial forms,
And entertain a perfect real substance,
Stand not so much on your gentility,
But moderate your expenses (now at first)
As you may keep the same proportion still.
Bear a low sail: soft who's this comes here.
Gentlemen, God save you.
Welcome good friend, we doe not stand much upon
our gentility; yet I can assure you mine uncle is a man of a
thousand pound land a year; hee hath but one son in the
world; I am his next heir, as simple as I stand here, if my co∣sen
die: I have a fair living of mine own too beside.
In good time sir.
In good time sir? you do not flout, do you?
Not I sir.
And you should, here be them can perceive it, and that
quickly too: Go too, and they can give it again soundly, and
need be.
Why sir let this satisfy you. Good faith I had no such
intent.
By God, and I thought you had sir, I would talk
with you.
So you may sir, and at your pleasure.
And so I would sir, and you were out of mine uncle•
ground, I can tell you.
Why how now cousin, will this ne'er be left?
Whoreson base fellow, by Gods lid, and't were not for
shame, I would.
What would you do? you peremptory Ass,
And yowle not be quiet, get you hence.
You see, the gentleman contains himself
In modest limits, giving no reply
To your unseasoned rude comparatiues;
Yet yowle demean your self, without respect
Either of duty, or humanity.
Go get you in: fore God I am ashamed
Thou hast a kinsmans interest in me.
I pray you, sir, is this Pass house?
Yes mary is it, sir.
I should enquire for a gentleman here, one Signior Lo∣renzo
di Pass; doe you know any such, sir, I pray you?
Yes, sir: or else I should forget my self▪
I cry you mercy, sir, I was requested by a gentleman
of Florence (having some occasion to ride this way) to deliver
you this letter.
To me, sir? What doe you mean•? I pray you
remember your curtsy.
To his dear and most elected friend, Signior Lorenzo di Pass.
What might the gentleman's name be, sir, that sent it? Nay,
pray you be covered.
Signior Prospero.
Signior Prospero? A young gentleman of the fa∣mily
of Strozzi, is he not?
I, sir, the same: Signior Thorello, the rich Florentine
merchant married his sister.
You say very true. Musco.
Sir.
Make this Gentleman drink, here.
I pray you go in, sir, and't please you.
Now (without doubt) this letter's to my son.
Well: all is one: Isle be so bold as read it,
Be it but for the styles sake, and the phrase;
Both which (I doe presume) are excellent,
And greatly varied from the vulgar form,
If Prospero's invention gave them life.
How now? what stuff is here?
Sirha Lorenzo, I muse we cannot see thee at Florence: S'blood,
I doubt, Apollo hath got thee to be his Ingle, that thou comes
not abroad, to v•s•t thine old friends: well, take heed of him; hee
may doe somewhat for his household servants, or so; But for his Re∣tayners,
I am sure, I have known some of them, that have followed
him, three, four, five year together, scorning the world with their
bare heals, &amp; at length been g•ad for a shift, (though no clean shift)
to lye a whole winter, in half a sheet, cursing Charles wayne, and
the rest •f the stars intolerably. But (quis country diuos?) well;
Sirha, sweet villain, come and see me; but spend one minute in my
comp•y, and it is enough: I think I have a world of good le•ts for
thee▪ oh sirha, I can show thee two of the most perfect, rare, &amp; ab∣solute
true Gulls, that ever thou saw, if thou will• come. S'blood,
invent some famous ••morable lye, or other, to flap thy father in the
mouth withal: thou hast been father of a thousand, in thy days,
〈◊〉 coldest be no Poet else: any sciruy roguish excuse will serve;
say thou com•st but to fetch wool for thine Inke-borne. And then too,
thy Father will say thy wits are a wooll-gathering. But it's no mat∣la;
the worse, the better. Any thing is good enough for the old man.
Sirha, how 〈◊〉 thy Father should see this now? what would he think•
of me? Well, (however I write to thee) • reverence him in my soul,
for the general good all Florence delivers of him. Lorenzo, I
conjure thee (by what, let me see) by the depth of our love, by all the
strange sights we have seen in our days, (I or nights either) to come
to me to Florence this day. Go to, you shall come, and let your
Muses go spin for once. If thou wilt not, s'hart, what's your gods
name? Apollo? I; Apollo If this melancholy rogue (Lorenzo
here) doe not come, grant, that he doe turn Fool presently, and
never hereafter, be able to make a good Jest, or a blank verse, but
live in more penury of wit and Invention, then either the Hall-Beadle,
or Poet Nuntius.
Well, •t is the strangest letter that ever I read.
Is this the man, my son (so oft) hath praised
To be the happiest, and most precious wit
That ever was familiar with Art?
Now (by our Ladies blessed son) I swear,
I rather think him most unfortunate,
In the possession of such holy gifts,
Being the master of so loose a spirit.
Why what unhallowed ruffian would have writ,
With so profane a pen, unto his friend?
The modest paper even looks pale for grief
To feel her virgin-cheeke defiled and stained
With such a black and criminal inscription.
Well, I had thought my son could not have strayed,
So far from judgment, as to mart himself
Thus cheaply, (in the open trade of scorn)
To gearing folly, and fantastic 〈◊〉
But now I see opinion is a fool,
And hath abused my senses. Musco.
Sir.
What is the fellow gone that brought this
letter?
Yes sir, a pretty while since.
And wher's Lorenz•?
In his chamber sir.
He spake not with the fellow, did he?
No sir, he saw him not.
Then Musco take this letter, and deliver it unto Lo∣renzo:
but sir, (on your life) take you no knowledge I have
opened it.
O Lord sir, that were a jest in deed.
I am resolved I will not cross his journey.
Nor will I practise any violent mean,
To stay the hot and lusty course of youth.
For youth restraind straight grows impatient,
And (in condition) like an eager dog,
Who (ne'er so little from his game withheld)
Turns head and leaps up at his masters throat.
Therefore isle study (by some milder drift)
To call my son unto a happier shrift.
Yes sir, (on my word) he opend it, &amp; read the contents▪
It scarce contents me that he did so. But Musco did
thou observe his countenance in the reading of it, whether hee
were angry or pleased?
Why sir I saw him not read it.
No? how know thou then that he opend it?
Marry sir because he charged me (on my life) to tell
no body that he opend it, which (unless he had done) he wold
never fear to have it reueald.
Thats true: well Musco hie thee in again,
Least thy protracted absence do lend light,
To dark suspicion: Musco be assured
Isle not forget this thy respective love.
Oh Musco, did thou not see a fellow here in a what∣sha-callum
doublet; he brought mine uncle a letter even now?
Yes sir, what of him?
Where is he, can thou tell?
Why he is gone.
Gone? which way? when went he? how long since?
Its almost half an hour ago since he rid hence.
Whoreson Scanderbag rogue, oh that I had a horse; by
Gods lid i'd fetch him back again, with heave and ho.
Why you may have my masters bay gelding, and
you will.
But I have no boots, thats the spite on it.
Then its no boot to follow him. Let him go and hang
sir.
I by my troth; Musco, I pray thee help to truss me a
li•tle; nothing angers me, but I have waited such a while for
him all unlaced and untrust yonder, and now to see hee is gone
the other way.
Nay I pray you stand still sir.
I will, I will: oh how it vexes me.
Tut, never vex your self with the thought of such
a ba•e fellow as he.
Nay to see, he stood upon points with me too.
Like enough so; that was, because he saw you had so
few at your hose.
What? Hast thou done? God a mercy, good Musco.
I marle, sir, you wear such ill-fauourd course stoc∣kings,
having so good a leg as you have.
Foe, the stockings be good enough for this time of the
year; but Isle have a pair of silk, ever it be long: I think, my
leg would show well in a silk hose.
I before God would it rarely well.
In sadness I think it would: I have a reasonable
good leg.
You have an excellent good leg, sir: I pray you
pardon me, I have a little haste in, sir.
A thousand thanks, good Musco.
What, I hope he laughs not at me; and he doe—
Here is a style indeed, for a mans senses to leap over,
ever they come at it: why, it is able to break the shins of
any old mans patience in the world. My father read this with
patience? Then will I be made an Eunuch, and learn to sing
Ballads. I doe not deny, but my father may have as much pa∣tience
as any other man; for hee uses to take physic, and oft
taking physic, makes a man a very patient creature. But,
Signior Prospero, had your swaggering Epistle here, arrived in
my fathers hands, at such an hour of his patience, (I mean,
when hee had tan physic) it is to bee doubted, whether I
should have read sweet villaynt here. But, what? My wise
cousin; Nay then, Isle furnish our feast with one Gull more to∣ward
a mess; hee writes to me of two, and here's one, that's
three, In faith. Oh for a fourth: now, Fortune, or never Fortune.
Oh, now I see who he laughed at: hee laughed at some
body in that letter. By this good light, and he had laughed at
me, I would have told mine uncle.
Cousin Stephano: good morrow, good cousin,
how fare you?
The better for your asking, I will assure you. I have
been all about to seek you; since I came I saw mine uncle; &amp;
in faith how have you done this great while? Good Lord, by my
troth I am glad you are well cousin.
And I am as glad of your coming, I protest to you,
for I am sent for by a private gentleman, my most special dear
friend, to come to him to Florence this morning, and you shall
go with me cousin, if it please you, not else, I will enjoin you
no further then stands with your own consent, and the condi∣tion
of a friend.
Why cousin you shall command me and't were twice
so far as Florence to do you good; what doe you think I will
not go with you? I protest.
Nay, nay, you shall not protest.
By God, but I will sir, by your leave isle protest more
to my friend then isle speak of at this time.
You speak very well sir.
Nay not so neither, but I speak to serve my turn.
Your turn? why cousin, a gentleman of so fair sort
as you are, of so true carriage, so special good parts; of so dear
and choice estimation; one whose lowest condition bears the
stamp of a great spirit; nay more, a man so graced, gilded, or
rather (to use a more fit Metaph•r) tinfoyld by nature, (not that
you have a leaden constitution, couze, although perhaps a little
inclining to that temper, &amp; so the more apt to melt with pity,
when you fall into the fire of rage) but for your lustre only,
which reflects as bright to the world as an old Ale-wives pew∣la
again a good time; and will you now (with nice modesty)
hide such real ornaments as these, and shadow their glory as
a Milliners wife doth her wrought stomacher, with a smokey
lawn or a black cyprus? Come, come, for shame doe not
wrong the quality of your desert in so poor a kind: but let the
Idea of what you are, be portrayed in your aspect, that men may
read in your looks; Here within this place is to be seen, the most
admirable rare &amp; accomplished work of nature; Cousin what think
you of this?
Marry I do think of it, and I will be more melancho∣lie,
and gentlemanlike then I have been, I doe ensure you.
Why this is well: now if I can but hold up this humour
in him, as it is begun, Ca•so for Florence, match him &amp; she can;
Come cousin.
Isle follow you. Le. in. Follow me? you must go before.
Must I? nay then I pray you show me good cousin.
I think this be the house: what howgh?
Who's there? oh Signior Matheo. God give you good
morrow sir.
What? Cob? how doest thou good Cob? doest thou
inhabit here Cob?
I sir, I and my lineage have kept a poor house in our
days.
Thy lineage monsieur Cob? what lineage, what lineage?
Why sir, an ancient lineage, and a princely: mine an∣cetri•
came from a kings loins, no worse man; and yet no
man neither, but Herring the king of fish, one of the monarchs
of the world I assure you. I doe fetch my pedigree and name
from the first red herring that was eaten in Adam, &amp; Eves
kitchen: his Cob was my great, great, mighty great grandfather.
Why mighty? why mighty?
Oh its a mighty while ago sir, and it was a mighty
great Cob.
How know thou that?
How know I? why his ghost comes to me every night.
Oh unsavoury jest: the ghost of a herring Cob.
I, why not the ghost of a herring Cob, as well as the
ghost of Rashero Baccono, they were both broild on the coals:
you are a scholar, vpsolue me that now.
Oh rude ignorance. Cob can thou show me, of a gē∣tleman,
one Signior Bobadilla, where his lodging is?
Oh my guest sir, you mean?
Thy guest, alas? ha, ha.
Why do you laugh sir? do you not mean signior Bob∣dell?
Cob I pray thee advise thy self well: do not wrong the
gentleman, and thy self too. I dare be sworn hee scorns thy
house hee. He lodge in such a base obscure place as thy house?
Tut, I know his disposition so well, he would not lie in thy bed
if •hold give it him.
I will not give it him. Mass I thought (somewhat was
in it) we could not get him to bed all night. Well sir, though he
lie not on my bed, he lies on my bench, and't please you to go
up sir, you shall find him with two cushions under his head, and
his cloak wrapped about him, as though he had neither won nor
lost, and yet I warrant hee ne'er cast better in his life then hee
hath done to night.
Why was he drunk?
Drunk sir? you hear not me say so; perhaps he swallowed
a tavern token, or some such devise sir; I have nothing to doe
withal: I deal with water and not with wine. Give me my tan∣kard
there, ho. God be with you sir, its six a clock: I should
have carried two turns by this, what ho? my stopple come.
Lie in a waterbearers house, a gentleman of his note?
well isle tell him my mind.
What Tib, show this gentleman up to Signior Bob∣dell:
oh and my house were the Brazen head now, faith it
would even cry more fools yet: you should have some now,
would take him to be a gentleman at the least; alas God help
the simple, his father's an honest man, a good fishmonger, and
so forth: and now doth he creep and wriggle into acquaintance
with all the brave gallants about the town, such as my guest is,
(oh my guest is a fine man) and they •lout him inuinciblie. He
uses every day to a Marchāts house (where I serve water) one
M. Thorellos; and here's the jest, he is in love with my masters
sister, and calls her mistress: and there he sits a whole afternoon
sometimes, reading of these same abominable, vile, (a pox
on them, I cannot abide them) rascally verses, Poetry, poetry,
and speaking of E•terludes, t'will make a man burst to hear
him: and the wenches, they doe so gear and ti•e at him; well,
should they do as much to me, Eld forswear them all, by the
life of Pharaoh, there's an oath: how many waterbearers shall
you hear swear such an oath? oh I have a guest (he teaches
me) he doth swear the best of any man christened: By Phoebus,
By the life of Pharaoh, By the body of me, As I am gentleman,
and a soldier: such dainty oaths; &amp; withal he doth take this
same filthy roaguish Tobacco the finest, and cleanliest; it
wold do a man good to see the fume come forth at his nostrils:
well, he owes me forty shillings (my wife lent him out of her
purse; by sixpence a time) besides his lodging; I would I had it:
I shall have it he saith next Action▪ Halter skelter, hang sorrow,
care will kill a cat, vptailes all, and a pox on the hangman.
Bobadilla discovers himself: on a bench; to him Tib.
Hostess, hostess.
What say you sir?
A cup of your small beer sweet hostess.
Sir, ther's a gentleman below would speak with you.
A gentleman, (Gods so) I am not within.
My husband told him you were sir.
What ha plague? what meant he?
Signior Bobadilla.
Who's there? (take away the basin good hostess)
come up sir.
He would desire you to come up sir; you come into a
cleanly house here.
God save you sir, God save you.
Signior Matheo, is it you sir? please you sit down.
I thank you good Signior, you may see, I am some∣what
audacious.
Not so Signior, I was requested to supper yesternight▪
by a sort of gallants where you were wished for, and drunk to
I assure you.
Vouchsafe me by whom good Signior.
Marry by Signior Prosper•, and others, why hostess, a
stool here for this gentleman.
No haste sir, it is very well.
Body of me, it was so late ere we parted last night, I
can scarce open mine eyes yet; I was but new risen as you
came: how passes the day abroad sir? you can tell.
Faith some half hour to seven: now trust me you
have an exceeding fine lodging here, very neat, and private.
I sir, sit down I pray you: Signior Matheo (in any case)
possess no gentlemen of your acquaintance with notice of my
lodging.
Who I sir? no.
Not that I need to care who know it, but in regard I
would not be so popular and general, as some be.
True Signior, I conceive you.
For do you see sir, by the hart of my self (except it be
to some peculiar and choice spirits, to whom I am extraordina∣rely
engaged, as your self, or so) I would not extend thus far.
O Lord sir I resolve so.
What new book have you there? what? Go by Hier•∣•imo.
I, did you ever see it acted? is it not well pend?
Well pend: I would fine see all the Poets of our time
pen such another play as that was; they I prate and swagger, and
keep a stir of a•te and devises, when (by Gods so) they are
the most shallow pitiful fellows that live upon the face of the
earth again.
Indeed, here are a number of fine speeches in this
book: Oh eyes, no eyes but fountains fraught with tears; there's
a conceit: Fountains fraught with tears. Oh life, no life, but
lively form of death: is it not excellent? Oh world, no world, but
mass of public wrongs; O Gods me: confused and filled with
murder and misdeeds.
Is it not simply the best that ever you heard?
Ha, how do you like it?
Tic good.
To thee the purest object to my senc•,
The most refined essence heaven covers,
Send I these lines, wherein I do commence
The happy state of true deserving lovers.
If they prove rough, vnpolish't, harsh and rude,
Haste made that waste; thus mildly I conclude.
Nay proceed, proceed, whore's this? whore's this?
This sir, a toy of mine own in my nonage: but when
will you come and see my study? good faith I can show you
some very good things I have done of late: that boot be∣comes
your leg passing well sir, me thinks.
So, so, it's a fashion gentlemen use.
Mass sir, and now you speak of the fashion, Signior
Prosperos elder brother and I are fallen out exceedingly: this o∣there
day I happened to enter into some discourse of a hanger,
which I assure you, both for fashion &amp; workmanship was most
beautiful and gentlemanlike; yet hee condemned it for the
most pied and ridiculous that ever he saw.
Signior Giuliano, was it not? the elder brother?
I sir, he.
Hang him Rooke he? why he has no more judgment
then a malt horse. By S. George, I hold him the most peremp∣tory
absurd clown (one a them) in Christendom: I protest
to you (as I am a gentleman and a soldier) I ne'er talked with the
like of him: he he's not so much as a good word in his belly,
all iron, iron, a good commodity for a smith to make hob∣nails
on.
I, and he thinks to carry it away with his manhood
still where he comes: he brags he will give me the bastinado,
as I hear.
How, the bastinado? how came he by that word trow?
Nay indeed he said cudgel me; I termed it so for the
more grace.
That may bee, for I was sure it was none of his word:
but when, when said he so?
Faith yesterday they say, a young gallant a friend of
mine told me so.
By the life of Pharaoh, and't were my case now, I
should send him a challenge presently: the bastinado? come
hither, you shall challenge him; isle show you a trick or two,
you shall kill him at pleasure, the first stockado if you will, by
this ayre.
Indeed you have absolute knowledge in the mystery,
I have heard sir.
Of whom? of whom I pray?
Faith I have heard it spoken of divers, that you have
very rare skill sir.
By heaven, no, not I, no skill in the earth: some small
science, know my time, distance, or so, I have professed it more
for noblemen and gentlemen's use, then mine own practise I
assure you. Hostess, lend vs another bedstaffe here quickly:
look you sir, exalt not your point aboue this state at any hand,
and let your poniard maintain your defence thus: give it
the gentleman. So sir, come on, oh twine your body more a∣bout,
that you may come to a more sweet comely gentleman∣like
guard; so indifferent. Hollow your body more sir, thus:
now stand fast on your left leg, note your distance, keep your
due proportion of time: oh you disorder your point most
vilely.
How is the bearing of it now sir?
Oh out of measure ill, a well experienced man would
pass upon you at pleasure.
How mean you pass upon me?
Why thus sir? make a thrust at me; come in upon my
time; control your point, and make a full career at the body:
the best practised gentlemen of the time term it the passado,
a most desperate thrust, believe it.
Well, come sir.
Why you do not manage your weapons with that fa∣cilitie
and grace that you should doe, I have no spirit to play
with you, your dearth of judgment makes you seem tedious.
But one ve•y sir.
Fie veney, most gross denomination, as ever I heard:
oh the stockado while you live Signior, note that. Come put on
your cloak, and weal go to some private place where you are
acquainted, some tavern or so, &amp; weal se•d for one of these
fencers, where he shall breath you at my direction, and then
isle teach you that trick, you shall kill him with it at the first if
you please: why isle learn you by the true judgment of the
eye, hand and foot, to control any mans point in the world;
Should your adversary confront you with a pistol, it were
nothing, you should (by the same rule) control the bullet, most
certain by Phoebus: unless it were haile-shot: what money have
you about you sir?
Faith I have not past two shillings, or so.
Tic somewhat with the least, but come, when we have
done, weal call up Signior Prospero; perhaps we shall meet with
Coridon his brother there.
Peso, come hither: there lies a note within upon my
desk; here take my key: it's no matter neither, whore's the
boy?
Within sir, in the warehouse.
Let him tell over that Spanish gold, and weigh it, and
do you see the delivery of those wares to Signior Bentiuol•: isle
be there my self at the receipt of the money anon.
Very good sir.
Brother, did you see that same fellow there?
I, what of him?
He is e'ene the honestest faithful servant, that is this
day in Florence; (I speak a proud word now) and one that I
durst trust my life into his hands, I have so strong opinion of
his love, if need were.
God send me never such need: but you said you had
somewhat to tell me, what is it?
Faith brother, I am loath to utter it,
As fearing to abuse your patience,
But that I know your judgment more direct,
Able to sway the nearest of affection.
Come, come, what needs this circumstance?
I will not say what honour I ascribe
Unto your friendship, nor in what dear state
I hold your love; let my continued zeal,
The constant and religious regard,
That I have ever carried to your name,
My carriage with your sister, all contest,
How much I stand affected to your house.
You are too tedious, come to the matter, come to the
matter.
Then (without further ceremony) thus.
My brother Prospero (I know not how)
Of late is much declined from what he was,
And greatly altered in his disposition.
When he came first to lodge here in my house,
Ne'er trust me, if I was not proud of him:
Me thought he bare himself with such observance,
So true election and so fair a form:
And (what was chief) it showed not borrowed in him,
But all he did became him as his own,
And seemed as perfect, proper, and innate,
Unto the mind, as collor to the blood,
But now▪ his course is so irregular,
So loose affected, and deprived of grace.
And he himself withal so far fallen off
From his first place, that scarce no note remains,
To tell men's judgements where he lately stood;
Hoe's grown a stranger to all due respect,
Forgetful of his friends, and not content
To stale himself in all societies,
He makes my house as common as a Mart,
A Theater, a public receptacle
For giddy humour, and diseased riot,
And there, (as in a Tavern, or a stews,)
He, and his wilde associates, spend their hours,
In repetition of lascivious •e•ts,
Swear, leap, and dance, and revel night by night,
Control my servants: a•d indeed what not?
Faith I know not what I should say to him: so God
save me, I am even at my wits end, I have told him enough,
one would think, if that would serve: well, he knows what to
trust to for me: let him spend, and spend, and domineer till
his hart ache: &amp; he get a penny more of me, Isle give him this •are.
Nay good Brother have patience.
S'blood, he mads me, I could eat my very flesh for anger:
I marle you will not tell him of it, how he disquiets your house▪
O there are diūers reasons to dissuade me,
But would your self vouchsafe to travail in it,
(Though but with plain, and easy circumstance,)
It would, both come much better to his sense,
And savor less of grief and discontent.
You are his elder brother, and that title
Confirms and warrants your authority:
Which (seconded by your aspect) will breed
A kind of duty in him, and regard.
Whereas, if I should intimate the least,
It would but add contempt, to his neglect,
Heap worse on ill, rear a huge pile of hate,
That in the building, would come tottring down,
And in her •vines, bury all our love.
Nay more then this brother; (if I should speak)
He would be ready in the heate of passion,
To fill the ears of his familiars,
With oft reporting to them, what disgrace
And gross disparagement, I had proposed him.
And then would they straight back him, in opinion,
Make some loose comment upon every word,
And out of their distracted fantasies;
Contrive some slander, that should dwell with me.
And what would that be think you? mary this,
They would give out, (because my wife is fair,
My self but lately married, and my sist•r
Here sojourning a virgin in my house)
That I were jealous: nay, as sure as death,
Thus they would say: and how that I had wronged
My brother purposely, thereby to find
An apt pretext to banish them my house.
Mass perhaps so.
Brother they would believe it: so should I
(Like one of these penurious quack-slaluers,)
But try experiments upon my self,
Open the gates unto mine own disgrace,
Lend bare-ribd envy, opportunity.
To stab my reputation, and good name.
I will speak to him.
Speak to him? away, by the life of Pharaoh you shall
not, you shall not do him that grace: the time of day to you
Gentleman: is Signior Prospero stirring?
How then? what should he doe?
Signior Thorello, is he within sir?
He came not to his lodging to night sir, I assure you.
Why do you hear? you.
This gentleman hath satisfied me, Isle talk to no Sca∣vinegar.
How Scauenger? stay sir stay.
Nay Brother Giuliano.
S'blood stand you away, and you love me.
You shall not follow him now I pray you,
Good faith you shall not.
Ha? Scauenger? well go to, I say little, but, by this
good day (God forgive me I should swear) if I put it up so,
say I am the rankest—that ever pissed. S'blood and I swell∣lowe
this, Isle near draw my sword in the sight of man
again while I live; Isle •it in a Barn with Madge-owlet
first, Scauenger? 'Hart and Isle go near to fill that hug•
timbrell slop of yours with somewhat and I have good luck,
your Garagantua breech cannot carry it away so.
Oh do not fret your self thus, never think o•'t.
These are my brothers consorts these, these are his
Cumrades, his walking mates, hes a gallant, a Caueliero too, right
hangman cut, God let me not live, and I could not find in my
hart to swinge the whole no•t of them, one after another, and
begin with him first, I am grieved it should be said he is my bro∣there,
and take these courses, well he shall hear on it, and that
tightly too, and I live In faith.
But brother, let your apprehension (then)
Run in an easy current, not transported
With heady rashness, or devouring choler,
And rather carry a persuading spirit,
Whose powers will pearce more gently; and allure,
The imperfect thoughts you labour to reclaim,
To a more sudden and resolved assent.
I, I, let me alone for that I warrant you.
How now? oh the bell rings to breakfast.
Brother Giuliano, I pray you go in and bear my wife company:
Isle but give order to my servants for the dispatch of some bu∣sins
and come to you presently.
What Cob? our maids will have you by the back (In faith)
For coming so late this morning.
Perhaps so sir, take heed some body have not the•▪
by the belly for walking so late in the evening.
Now (in good faith) my mind is somewhat easd,
Though not repo•d in that security,
As I could wish; well, I must be content,
How ever I set a face on it to the world,
Would I had lost this •inger at a vent,
So Prospero had ne'er lodged in my house,
Why't cannot be, where there is such resort
Of wanton gallants, and young revellers,
That any woman should be honest long.
I'st like, that factious beauty will preserve
The sovereign state of chastity vnscard,
When such strong motives muster, and make head
Against her single peace? no, no: beware
When mutual pleasure sways the appetite,
And spirits of one kind and quality,
Do meet to parley in the pride of blood.
Well (to be plain) if I but thought, the time
Had answered their affections: all the world
Should not persuade me, but I were a cuckold:
Mary I hope they have not got that start.
For opportunity hath balkt them yet,
And shall do still, while I have eyes and ears
To attend the imposition of my hart,
My presence shall be as an Iron Bar,
Twixt the conspiring motions of desire,
Yea every look or glance mine eye objects,
Shall check occasion, as one doth his slave,
When he forgets the limits of prescription.
Sister Hesperida, I pray you fetch down the Rose wa∣la
aboue in the closet: Sweet hart will you come in to break∣fast.
And she have ouer-heard me now?
I pray thee (good Musse) we stay for you.
By Christ I would not for a thousand crowns.
What aisle you sweet hart, are you not well, speak
good Musse.
Troth my head aches extremely on a sudden.
Oh Iesu!
How now? what?
Good Lord how it burns? Musse keep you warm,
good truth it is this new disease, there's a number are trow∣bled
withal: for Gods sake sweet heart, come in out of the
ayre.
How simple, and how subtle are her answers?
A new disease, and many troubled with it.
Why true, she heard me all the world to nothing.
I pray thee good sweet heart come in; the ayre will do
you harm in troth.
Isle come to you presently, it will away I hope.
Pray God it do.
A new disease? I know not, new or old.
But it may well be called poor mortals Plague;
For like a pestilence it doth infect
The houses of the brain: first it begins
Solely to work upon the fantasy,
Filling her seat with such pestiferous air,
As soon corrupts the judgment, and from thence,
Sends like contagion to the memory,
Still each of other catching the infection,
Which as a searching vapor spreads it self
Confusedly through every sensiue part,
Till not a thought or motion in the mind
Be free from the black poison of suspect.
Ah, but what error is it to know this,
And want the free election of the soul
In such extremes? well, I will once more strive,
(Even in despite of hell) my self to be,
And shake this fever off that thus shakes me.
S'blood, I cannot choose but laugh to see my self
translated thus, from a poor creature to a creator; for now
must I create an intolerable sort of lies, or else my profession
looses his grace, and yet the lie to a man of my coat, is as omi∣nous
as the 〈◊〉 oh sir, it holds for good policy to have that
outwardly in vilest estimation, that inwardly is most dear to
vs: So much for my borrowed shape. Well, the troth is, my
moister intends to follow his son drie-foot to Florence, this
morning: now I knowing of this conspiracy, and the rather
to insinuate with my young master, (•or so must wee that are
blew waiters, or men of service doe, or else perhaps wee may
wear motley at the years end, and who wears motley you
know:) I have got me before in this disguise, determining here
to lie in ambuscado, &amp; intercept him in the midway: If I can
but get his cloak, his purse, his hat, nay any thing so I can stay
his journey, Rex Regum, I am made for ever in faith: well, now
must I practise to get the true garb of one of these Launce-knights:
my arm here, and my: Gods so, young master and his
cousin.
So sir, and how then?
Gods foot, I have lost my purse, I think.
How? lost your purse? where? when had you it?
I cannot tell, stay.
S'lid I am afraid they will know me, would I could get
by them.
What? have you it?
No, I think I was bewitched, I.
Nay do not weep, a pox on it, hang it let it go.
Oh it's here, nay and it had been lost, I had not cared
but for a •et ring Marina •ent me.
A jet ring? oh the poesy, the poesy?
Fine in faith: Though fancy sleep, my love is deep: mea∣ning
that though I did not fancy her, yet she loved me
dearly.
Most excellent.
And then I sent her another, and my poesy was; The
deeper the sweeter, Isle be judged by Saint Peter.
How, by S. Peter? I do not conceive that.
Marry, S. Peter to make up the meeter.
Well, you are beholding to that Saint▪ 〈◊〉 helped you
at your need; thank him, thank him.
I will venture, come what will: Gentlemen, please
you change a few crowns for a very excellent good blade
here; I am a poor gentleman, a soldier, one that (in the better
state of my fortunes) scorned so mean a refuge, but now its the
humour of necessity to have it so: you seem to be gentlemen
well affected to martial men, else I should rather die with si∣lence,
then live with shame: how ever, vouchsafe to remember
it is my want speaks, not my self: this condition agrees not
with my spirit.
Where hast thou served?
May it please you Signior, in all the provinces of By∣hemia,
Hungry, Dalmatia, Poland, where not? I have been
a poor servitor by sea and land, any time this xiiij. years, and
followed the fortunes of the best Commanders in Christen∣dome.
I was twice shot at the taking of Aleppo, once at the re∣lief
of Vienna; I have been at America in the galleys thrice▪
where I was most dangerously shot in the head, through both
the thighs, and yet being thus maimed I am void of mainte∣nonce,
nothing left me but my scars, the noted marks of my
resolution.
How will you sell this Rapier friend?
Faith Signior, I refer it to your own judgment;
you are a gentleman, give me what you please.
True, I am a gentleman, I know that; but what though,
I pray you say, what would you ask?
I assure you the blade may become the side of the best
prince in Europe.
I, with a velvet scabbard.
Nay and't be mine it shall have a velvet scabbard, that
is flat, •'de not wear it as'tis and you would give me an angel.
At your pleasure Signior, nay it's a most pure Toledo.
I had rather it were a Spaniard: but tell me, what shall
I give you for it? and it had a silver hilt—
Come, come, you shall not buy it; hold there's a
shilling friend, take thy Rapier.
Why but I will buy it now, because you say so: what
shall I go without a rapier?
You may buy one in the city.
Tut, isle buy this, so I will; tell me your lowest price.
You shall not I say.
By Gods lid, but I will, though I give more then it is
worth.
Come away, you are a fool.
Friend, isle have it for that word: follow me.
At your service Signior.
My labouring spirit being late oppressed
With my sons folly, can embrace no rest,
Till it hath plotted by advise and skill,
How to reduce him from affected will
To reasons manage; which while I intend,
My troubled soul begins to apprehend
A farther secret, and to meditate
Upon the difference of mans estate:
Where is deciphered to true judgements eye
A deep, concealed, and precious mystery.
Yet can I not but worthily admire
At natures art: who (when she did inspire
This heat of life) placed Reason (as a king)
Here in the head, to have the marshaling
Of our affections: and with sovereignty
To sway the state of our weak empe•ie,
But as in divers commonwealths we see,
The form of government to disagree:
Even so in man who searches soon shall find
As much or more variety of mind.
Some men's affections like a fullen wife,
Is with her husband reason still at strife.
Others (like proud Arch-traitors that rebel
Against their sovereign) practise to expel
Their liege Lord Reason, and not shame to tread
Upon his holy and anointed head.
But as that land or nation best doth thrive,
Which to smooth-fronted peace is most procliue,
So doth that mind, whose fair affections ranged
By reasons rules, stand constant and unchanged,
Else, if the power of reason be not such,
Why do we attribute to him so much?
Or why are we obsequious to his law,
If he want spirit our affects to awe?
Oh no, I argue weakly, he is strong,
Albeit my son have done him too much wrong.
My master: nay faith have at you: I am fleshed now I
have sped so well: Gentleman, I beseech you respect the estate
of a poor soldier; I am ashamed of this base course of life (God's
my comfort) but extremity provokes me to it, what remedy?
I have not for you now.
By the faith I bear unto God, gentleman, it is no o••denariate
custom, but only to preserve manhood. I protest to
you, a man I have bin, a man I may be, by your sweet bounty.
I pray thee good friend be satisfied.
Good Signior: by Iesu you may do the part of a kind
gentleman, in lending a poor soldier the price of two cans of
beer, a matter of small value, the King of heaven shall pay
you, and I shall rest thankful: sweet Signior.
Nay and you be so importunate—
Oh Lord sir, need will have his course: I was not made
to this vile use; well, the edge of the enemy could not have a∣bated
me so much: it's hard when a man hath served in his
Princes cause and be thus. Signior, let me derive a small piece
of silver from you, it shall not be given in the course of time, by
this good ground, I was fine to pawn my rapier last night
for a poor supper, I am a Pagan else: sweet Signior.
Believe me I am rapt with admiration,
To think a man of thy exterior presence,
Should (in the constitution of the mind)
Be so degenerate, infirm, and base.
Art thou a man? and sham'st thou not to beg?
To practise such a servile kind of life?
Why were thy education ne'er so mean,
Having thy limbs: a thousand fairer courses
Offer themselves to thy election.
Nay there the wars might still supply thy wants,
Or service of some virtuous Gentleman,
Or honest labour; nay what can I name,
But would become thee better then to beg?
But men of your condition feed on sloth,
As doth the Scare•e on the dung she breeds in,
Not caring how the temper of your spirits
Is eaten with the rust of idleness.
Now before God, what ever he be, that should
Relieve a person of thy quality,
While you insist in this loose desperate course,
I would esteem the sin not th•no but his.
Faith signior, I would gladly find some other course if so▪
I, you'd gladly find it, but you will not seek it.
Alas•e sir, where should a man seek? in the wars,
there's no assent by desert in these days, but: and for service
would it were as soon purchased as wished for (Gods my com∣fort)
I know what I would say.
Whats thy name.
Please you: Portensi•.
Portensio?
Say that a man should entertain thee now,
Would thou be honest, humble, just and true.
Signior: by the place and honour of a soldier.
Nay, nay, I like not these affected oaths;
Speak plainly man: what think thou of my words?
Nothing signior, but wish my fortunes were as happy
as my service should be honest.
Well follow me, isle prove thee, if thy deeds
Will cary a proportion to thy words.
Yes sir straight, isle but g•rter m• •ose; oh that my
belly were hooped now, for I am ready to burst with laughing.
S•lid, was there ever seen a fox in years to betray himself
thus? now shall I be possessed of all his determinations, and con∣sequently
and my young master well hee is resolved to prove
my honesty: faith and I am resolved to prove his patience:
oh I shall abuse him intollerablie: this small piece of service
will bring him clean out of love with the soldier for ever. It's
no matter, let the world think me a bad counterfeit, if I can∣not
give him the slip at an instant: why this is better then to
have staid his journey by half, well isle follow him; oh how I
long to be employed.
Yes faith sir, we were at your lodging to seek you too.
Oh I came not there to night.
Your brother delivered vs as much.
Who Giuliano?
Ciuliano▪ Signior Prospero, I know not in what kind
you value me, but let me tell you this: as sure as God I do hold
it so much out of mine honour &amp; reputation, if I should but cast
the least regard upon such a dunghill of flesh; I protest to you
(as I have a soul to bee saved) I ne'er saw any gentlemanlike
part in him: and there were no more men living upon the face
of the earth, I should not fancy him by Phoebus.
Troth nor I, he is of a rustical cut, I know not how:
he doth not carry himself like a gentleman.
Oh Signior Matheo, that's a grace peculiar but to a
few; quos aequus amauit Iupiter.
I understand you sir.
No question you do sir: Lorenzo; now on my soul
welcome; how doest thou sweet rascal? my Genius? S'blood I
shall love Apollo, &amp; the m•d Thespian girls the better while I
•ue for this; my dear villain, now I see there's some spirit in
thee: Sir these be they two I writ to thee of, nay what a drow∣sie
humour is this now? why doest thou not speak?
Oh you are a fine gallant, you sent me a rare letter.
Why was it not rare?
Yes isle be sworn I was ne'er guilty of reading the
like, match it in all Ply•ies familiar Epistles, and isle have my
judgment burned in the •are for a rogue, make much of thy
vain, for it is inimitable. But I marle what Camel it was, that
had the carriage of it? for doubtless he was no ordinary beast
that brought it.
Why?
Why say thou? why doest thou think that any
reasonable creature, especially in the morning, (the sober time
of the day too) would have taine my father for me?
S'blood you jest I hope?
Indeed the best use we can turn it too, is to make a
jest on it now: but isle assure you, my father had the proving of
your copy, some hour before I saw it.
What a dull slave was this? But sirrah what said he
to it in faith?
Nay I know not what he said. But I have a shrewd
guess what he thought.
What? what?
Mary that thou are a damned dissolute villain,
And I some grain or two better, in keeping thee company.
Tut that thought is like the Moon in the last quar∣la,
twill change shortly: but sirrha, I pray thee be acquainted
with my two Zanies here, thou wilt take exceeding pleasure
in them if thou hearst them once, but what strange piece of
silence is this? the sign of the dumb man?
Oh sir a ki•sman of mine, one that may make our
Musique the fuller and he please, he hath his humour sir.
Oh what first? what first?
Nay: isle neither do thy judgment, nor his folly that
wrong, as to prepare thy apprehension: isle leave him to the
mercy of the time, if you can take him: so.
Well signior Bobadilla: signior Matheo: I pray you know
this Gentleman here, he is a friend of mine, &amp; one that will well
deserve your affection, I know not your name signior, but I
shall be glad of any good occasion, to be more familiar with you.
My name is signior Stephano, sir, I am this Gentleman's
cousin, sir his father is mine uncle; sir, I am somewhat melan∣cholie,
but you shall command me sir, in whatsoever is inci∣dent
to a Gentleman.
Signior, I must tell you this, I am no general man,
embrace it as a most high favour, for (by the host of Egypt) but
that I conceive you, to be a Gentleman of some parts, I love
few words: you have wit: imagine.
I truly sir, I am mightily given to melancholy.
Oh Lord sir, it's your only best humour sir, your true
melancholy, breeds your perfect fine wit sir: I am melancho∣lie
my self divers times sir, and then do I no more but take
your pen and paper presently, and write you your half score
or your dozen of sonnets at a sitting.
Mass then he utters them by the gross.
Truly sir and I love such things out of measure.
I faith, as well as in measure.
Why I pray you signior, make use of my study, it's at your service.
I thank you sir, I shall be bold I warrant you, have
you a close stool there?
Faith sir, I have some papers there, toys of mine own
doing at idle hours, that you'll say there's some sparks of wit
in them, when you shall see them.
Would they were kindled once, and a good fire
made, I might see self love burned for her heresy.
Cousin, is it well? am I melancholy enough?
Oh I, excellent.
Signior Bobadilla? why muse you so?
He is melancholy too.
Faith sir, I was thinking of a most honourable piece of ser∣vice
was performed to morrow; being S Marks day: shall be some tē years.
In what place was that service, I pray you sir?
Why at the beleagring of Ghibell•tto, where, in less then
two hours, seven hundred resolute gentlemen, as any were in
Europe, lost their lives upon the b•each: isle tell you gentlemen,
it was the first, but the best leaug•• that ever I beheld with these
eyes, except the taking in of 〈◊〉 last year by the Genowayes,
but that (of all other) was the most fatal &amp; dangerous exploit,
that ever I was ranged in, since I first bore arms before the fa•e
of the enemy, as I am a gentleman and a soldier.
So, I had as lief as an angel I could swear as well as
that gentleman.
Then you were a servitor at both it seems.
Oh Lord sir: by Phaeton I was the first man that entered
the breach, and had I not effected it with resolution, I had been
slain if I had had a million of lives.
Indeed sir?
Nay &amp; you heard him discourse you would say so: how like you him?
I assure you (upon my salvation) it is true, and your
self shall confess.
You must bring him to the rack first.
Observe me judicially sweet signior: they had planted
me a demi culuering, just in the mouth of the breach; now sir
(as we were to ascend) their master gunner (a man of no mean
skill and courage, you must think) confronts me with his Lin∣stock
ready to give fire; I spying his intendement, discharged
my Petrinell in his bosom, and with this instrument my poor
Rapier, ran violently upon the Moors that guarded the ordi∣nonce,
and put them pell-mell to the sword.
To the sword? to the Rapier signior.
Oh it was a good figure observed sir: but did you all
this signior without hurting your blade.
Without any impeach on the earth: you shall per∣ceiue
sir, it is the most fortunate weapon, that ever rid on a
poor gentleman's thigh: shall I tell you sir, you talk of More•
glay, Excaliber, Durindana, or so: tut, I lend no credit to that is
reported of them, I know the virtue of mine own, and there∣fore
I dare the boldlier maintain it.
I marle whether it be a Toledo or no?
A most perfect Toledo, I assure you signior.
I have a countryman of his here.
Pray you let's see 〈◊〉: yes faith it is.
This a Toledo▪ pis••.
Why do you pish signior?
A Fleming by Phoebus, isle buy them for a guilder a piece•
and isle have a thousand of them.
How say you cousin, I told you thus much.
Where bought you it sig•ior?
Of a scurvy rogue Soldier, a pox of God on him, he
swore it was a Toledo.
A provant Rapier, no better.
Mass I think it be indeed.
Tut now it's too late to look on it, put it up, put it up.
Well I will not put it up, but by Gods foot, and ere
I meet him—
Oh it is past remedy now sir, you must have patience.
Whoreson conny-catching Rascal; oh I could eat the
very hilts for anger.
A sign you have a good Ostrich stomach Cousin.
A stomach? would I had him here, you should see and
I had a stomach.
It's better as it is: come gentlemen shall we go?
A miracle cousin, look here, look here.
Oh, Gods lid, by your leave, do you know me sir.
I sir, I know you by sigh•.
You sold me a Rapier, did you not?
Yes marry did I sir.
You said it was a Toled• ha?
True I did so.
But it is none.
No sir, I confess it, it is none.
Gentlemen bear witness, he has con•est it. By Gods
lid, and you had not confessed it—
Oh cousin, forbear, forbear.
Nay I have done cousin.
Why you have done like a Gentleman, he he's confessed
it, what would you more?
Sir how dost thou like him.
Oh its a precious good fool, make much on him: I
can compare him to nothing more happily, then a Barbers fire∣ginals;
for every one may play upon him.
Gentleman, shall I entreat a word with you?
With all my heart sir, you have not another Toledo
to sell, have ye?
You are pleasant, your name is signior Lorenzo as I take it.
You are in the right: S'bloud he means to catechise
me I think.
No sir, I leave that to the Curate, I am none of that coat.
And yet of as bare a coat; well, say sir.
Faith signior, I am but servant to God Mars extraor∣denariate,
and indeed (this brass varnish being washed off, and
three or four other tricks sublated) I appear yours in reuer∣zion,
after the decease of your good father, Musco.
Musco, s'bloud what wind hath blown thee hither
in this shape.
Your Easterly wind sir, the same that blew your fa∣there
hither.
My father?
Nay never start, it's true, he is come to town of pur∣pose
to seek you.
Sir Prospero: what shall we do sir, my father is
come to the city.
Thy father: where is he?
At a Gentleman's house yonder by Saint A•thonies▪
where he but stays my return; and then—
Who's this? Musco?
The same sir.
Why how come thou transmuted thus?
Faith a devise, a devise, nay for the love of God, stand
not here Gentlemen, house your selves and isle tell you all.
But art thou sure he will stay thy return?
Do I live sir? what a question is that?
Well we'll prorogue his expectation a little: Muss•
thou •halt go with vs: Come on Gentlemen: nay I pray thee
(good rascal) droop not, s'hart and our wits be so gouty, that
one old plodding brain can out-strip vs all, Lord I beseech
thee, may they lie and starve in some miserable spittle, where
they may never see the face of any true spirit again, but bee
perpetually haunted with some church-yard Hobgoblin in s•cul• secul•rum.
Amen, Amen.
He will expect you sir within this half hour.
Why what's a clock?
New stricken ten.
Hath he the money ready, can you tell?
Yes sir, Baptist brought it yesternight.
Oh that's well: fetch me my cloak.
Stay, let me see; an hour to go and come,
I that will be the least: and then twill be
An hour, before I can dispatch with him;
Or very near: well, I will say two hours;
Two hours? ha? things never dreamed of yet
May be contrived, I and effected too,
In two hours absence: well I will not go.
Two hours; no flee•ing opportunity
I will not give your treachery that scope.
Who will not judge him worthy to be robbed,
That sets his doors wide open to a thief,
And shows the felon, where his treasure lies▪
Again, what earthy spirit but will attempt
To taste the fruit of beauties golden tree,
When leaden sleep seals up the dragons eyes?
Oh beauty is a Project of some power,
Chiefly when opportunity attends her:
She will infuse true motion in a stone,
Put glowing fire in an Icy soul,
Stuff peasants bosoms with proud Caesars spleen,
Power rich device into an empty brain:
Bring youth to follies gate: there train him in,
And after all, extenuate his sin.
Well, I will not go, I am resolved for that.
Go cary it again, yet stay: yet do too,
I will defer it till some other time.
Sir, signior Platano will meet you there with the by•d.
That's true: by Iesu I had clean forgot it.
I must go, what's a clock?
Past ten sir.
'Hart, then will Prospero presently be here too,
With one or other of his loose consorts.
I am a Jew, if I know what to say,
What course to take, or which way to resolve.
My brain (me thinks) is like an hower-glasse,
And my imaginations like the sands,
Run dribbling forth to fill the mouth of time,
Still changed with turning in the ventricle.
What were I best to doe? it shall be so.
Nay I dare build upon his secrecy? Peso.
Sir.
Yet now I have bethought me to, I will not.
Is Cob within?
I think he be sir.
But he will prate too, there's no talk of him.
No, there were no course upon the earth to this,
If I durst trust him; tut I were secure,
But there's the question now, if he should prove,
Rimarum plenus, then, s'blood I were Rook•.
The state that he hath stood in till this present▪
Doth promise no such change▪ what should I fear then?
Well, come what will, isle tempt my fortune once.
Peso, thou may deceive me, but I think thou love me Peso.
Sir, if a servants zeal and humble duty may bee
termed love, you are possessed of it.
I have a matter to impart to thee, but thou must be se∣cret, Peso.
Sir for that—
Nay hear me man; think I esteem thee well,
To let thee in thus to my private thoughts;
Peso, it is a thing, sits nearer to my crest,
Then thou art ware of: if thou should reveal it—
Reveal it sir?
Nay, I do not think thou would, but if thou should:
Sir, then I were a villain:
Disclaim in me for ever if I do.
He will not swear: he has some meaning su•e,
Else (being urged so much) how should he choose,
But lend an oath to all this protestation?
He is no puritan, that I am certain of.
What should I think of it? urge him again,
And in some other form: I will do so.
Well Peso, thou hast sworn not to disclose; I you did swear▪
Not yet sir, but I will, so please you.
Nay I dare take thy word.
But if thou wilt swear; do as you think good,
I am resolved without such circumstance.
By my souls safety sir I here protest,
My tongue shall ne'er take knowledge of a word
Delivered me in compass of your trust.
Enough, enough, these ceremonies need not,
I know thy faith to be as firm as brass.
Peso come hither: nay we must be close
In managing these actions: So it is,
(Now he he's sworn I dare the safelier speak;)
I have of late by divers observations—
But, whether his oath be lawful yea, or no, ha•
I will ask counsel ere I do proceed:
Peso, it will be now too long to stay,
We'll spy some fitter time soon, or to morrow.
At your pleasure sir.
I pray you search the books against I return
For the receipts twixt me and Platen•.
I will sir.
And hear you: if my brother Prospero
Chance to bring hither any gentlemen
Ere I come back: let one straight bring me word.
Very well sir.
Forget it not, nor be not you out of the way.
I will not sir.
Or whether he come or no, if any other,
Stranger or else? fail not to send me word.
Yes sir.
Have care I pray you and remember it.
I warrant you sir.
But Peso, this is not the secret I told thee of.
No sir, I suppose so.
Nay believe me it is not.
I do believe you sir.
By heaven it is not, that's enough.
Marry, I would not thou should utter it to any creature li∣uing.
Yet I care not.
Well, I must hence: Peso conceive thus much,
No ordinary person could have drawn
So deep a secret from me; I mean not this,
But that I have to tell thee: this is nothing, this.
Peso, remember, silence, buried here:
No greater hell then to be slave to fear.
Peso, remember, silence, buried here:
Whence should this flow of passion (trow) take head? ha?
Faith isle dream no longer of this running humour.
For fear I sink, the violence of the stream
Already hath transported me so far,
That I can feel no ground at all: but soft,
Oh it's our water bearer: somewhat he's crossed him now.
Fasting days: what tell you me of your fasting days▪
would they were all on a light fire for me: they say the world
shall be consumed with fire and brimstone in the latter day: but
I would we had these ember weeks, and these villainous fri∣days
burnt in the mean time, and then—
Why •ow now C•b, what moves thee to this choler?
ha?
Collar fir• swounds I scorn• your collar, I sir am no
colliers horse sir, never ride me with your collar, and you doe,
isle show you a jade trick.
Oh you'll slip your head out of the collar: why Cob you
mistake me.
Nay I have my room, and I be angry as well as ano∣there,
sir.
Thy room; thy humour man, thou mistake.
Humour? macke, I think it bee so indeed: what is this
humour? it's some rare •hinge I warrant.
Marry isle tell thee what it is (as tic generally received
in these days) it is a monster bred in a man by self love, and
affectation, and fed by folly.
How? must be 〈◊〉
Oh I▪ humour is nothing if it •e not •ed, why, did thou
〈◊〉 hear of that? it's a common phrase, Feed my 〈◊〉.
Isle none on it: humour, avaunt, I know you not, be gon.
Let who will make hungry meals for you, it shall not bee I:
Feed you quoth 〈◊〉 blood I have much ado to feed my self,
especially on these 〈…〉 days •oo, and't had been any
other day but a fasting day▪ 〈…〉 on them all for me: by
this light one might have done God good service and have
drowned them 〈◊〉 in the flood two or three hundred thousand
year•• ago, oh I do stomach them hugely: I have a maw now,
and't were for 〈◊〉 Be•isses horse.
Nay, but I pray thee Cob, what makes thee so out of
love with fasting days?
Marry that, that will make any man out of love with
them, I think: their bad conditions and you will needs know:
First, they are of a Flemmish breed I am sure on it, for they raūe
up more butter then all the days of the week beside: next,
they stink of fish miserably: Thirdly, they'll keep a man de∣uoutly
hungry all day, &amp; at night send him supperless to bed.
Indeed these are faults Cob.
Nay and this were all, it were something, but they are
the only known enemies to my generation. A fasting day
no sooner comes, but my lineage goes to rack, poor Cobs
they smoke for it, they melt in passion, and your maids too
know this, and yet would have me turn Hannibal, and eat my
own fish &amp; blood: my princely couze, fear nothing; I have
not the heart to devour you, and I might bee made as rich as
Golias: oh that I had room for my tears, I could weep salt
water enough now to preserve the lives of ten thousand of my
kin: but I may curse none but these filthy Almanacs; for and't
were not for them, these days of persecution would ne'er bee
known. Isle be hanged and some Fishmongers son doe not
make on'them, and puts in more fasting days then hee should
doe, because he would utter his fathers dried stockfish.
S'oule peace, thou'lt be beaten
like a stockfish else: here is Signior Ma∣th••.
Now must I look out for a mes∣senger
to my Master.
Beshrew me, but it was an absolute good jest, and ex∣ceedingly
well carried.
I and our ignorance maintained it as well, did it not?
Yes faith, but was it possible thou should not know
him?
Fore God not I, and I might have been joint patten
with one of the nine worthies for knowing him. S'blood man,
he had so writhe• himself into the habit of one of your poor
Despair•i•'s here, your decayed, ruinous, worme-eaten gentle∣m•n
of the round: such as have vowed to sit on the skirts of the
city, let your Provost &amp; his half dozen of halberders do what
they can; and have translated begging out of the old hackney
pace, to a fine easy amble, and made it run as smooth of the
tongue, as a shoue-groat shilling, into the likeness of one of these
lean Pirgo's, had hee moulded himself so perfectly, obser∣uing
every trick of their action, as varying the accent: sue∣ring
with an Emphasis. Indeed all with so special and exquisite
a grace, that (had thou seen him) thou would have sworn
he might have been the Tamberlaine, or the Agamemnon
on the rout.
Why Musco: who would have thought thou had
been such a gallant?
I cannot tell, but (unless a man had juggled begging
all his life time, and been a weaver of phrases from his infan∣cie,
for the apparelling of it) I think the world cannot pro∣duce
his Rival.
Where got thou this coat I marl'e.
Faith sir, I had it of one of the devils near kinsmen,
a Broker.
That cannot be, if the proverb hold, a crafty knave
needs no broker.
True sir, but I need a broker, Ergo no crafty knave.
Well pu• off, well put off.
Tut, he h•'s more of these shifts.
And yet where I have one, the broker he's ten sir.
Francisco: Martino: ne'er a one to bee found now,
what a spite's this?
How now Peso? is my brother within?
No sir, my master went forth e'ene now: but Signio•
Go•l•ano is within. Cob, what Cob: is he gone too?
Whither went thy master? Pis• can thou tell?
I know not, to Doctor Cle••n•s, I think sir. Cob.
Doctor Clement, what's he? I have heard much speech
of him.
Why, doest thou not know him? he is the Go••alioner•
of the state here, an ex•ellent rare civilian, and a great scholar,
but the only mad merry old fellow in Europe: I showed him
you the other day.
Oh I remember him now; Good faith, and he hath a
very strange presence me thinks, it shows as if he stood out
of the rank from other men. I have heard many of his jests in
Padua: they say he will commit a man for taking the wall of
his horse.
I or wearing his cloak of one shoulder, or any thing
indeed, if it come in the way of his humour.
Gasper, Martin•, Cob: S'hart, where should they be trow?
Signior Thorello's man, I pray thee vouchsafe vs the ligh∣ting
of this match.
A pox on your match, no time but now to vouchsafe?
Francisco, Cob.
Body of me: here's the remainder of seven pound, since
yesterday was seven night. It's your right Trinidad•: did you
never take any, signior?
No truly sir? but i'll learn to take it now, since you
commend it so.
Signior believe me, (upon my relation) for what I tel
you, the world shall not improve. I have been in the Indies
(where this herb grows) where neither my self, nor a dozen
Gentlemen more (of my knowledge) have received the taste of
any other nutriment, in the world, for the space of one and
twenty weeks, but Tobacco only. Therefore it cannot be but
it is most divine. Further, take it in the nature, in the true kind
so, it makes an Antidote, that (had you taken the most de•dly
poisonous simple in all Florence, it should expel it, and clarify
you, with as much ease, as I speak. And for your greene wound,
your Balls••um, and your—are all mere gull•ries, and trash
to it, especially your Trinidado: your 〈◊〉 is good too: I
could say what I know of the virtue of it, for the exposing of
rewmes, raw humours, crudities, obstructions, with a thousand
of this kind; but I profess my self no quacke-saluer: only thus
much: by H•rcul•s I doe hold it, and will affirm it (before
any Prince in Europe) to be the most sovereign, and precious
herb, that ever the earth tendered to the use of man.
Oh this speech would have done rare in a potheca∣•ies
mouth.
I▪ close by Saint A•thonies: Doctor Clements.
Oh, Oh.
Whore's the match I gave thee?
S'blood would his match, and he, and pipe, and all were
at Sancto Domingo.
By gods they•es: I marle what pleasure of felicity they
have in taking this roguish Tobacco: it's good for nothing but
to choke a man, and fill him full of smoke, and embers: there
were four died out of one house last week with taking of
it, and two more the bell went for yesternight, one of them
(they say) will ne'er scope it, he voided a bushel of •oote ye∣ster-day,
upward and downward. By the stocks; and there
were no wiser men then I, I'd have it present death, man or
woman, that should but deal with a Tobacco pipe; why, it will
sty•le them all in the'nd as many as use it; it's little better then
rats bane.
Oh good signior; hold, hold.
You base cullion, you.
Sir, here's your match; come, thou must needs be tal∣king
too.
Nay he will not meddle with his match I warrant you:
well it shall be a dear beating, and I live.
Doe you prate?
Nay good signior, will you regard the humour of a
fool? away knave.
Peso get him away.
A whoreson filthy slave, a turd, an excrement. Body of
Caesar, but that I scorn to let forth so mean a spirit, i'd have
stabbed him to the earth.
Mary God forbid sir.
By this fair heaven I would have done it.
Oh he swears admirably: (by this fair heaven:)
Body of Caesar: I shall never doe it, sure (upon my salvation)
no I have not the right grace.
Signior will you any? By this ayre the most divine
Tobacco as ever I drunk.
I thank you sir.
Oh this Gentleman doth it rarely too, but nothing
like the other. By this ayre, as I am a Gentleman: by Phoebus.
Master glance, glance: Signior Prospero.
As I have a soul to be saved, I doe protest;
That you are a fool.
Cousin will you any Tobacco?
I sir: upon my salvation.
How now cousin?
I protest, as I am a Gentleman, but no soldier in∣deed.
No signior, as I remember you served on a great
horse, last general muster.
I sir that's true: cousin may I swear as I am a soldier,
by that?
Oh yes, that you may.
Then as I am a Gentleman, and a soldier, it is divine
Tobacco.
But soft, whore's signior Matheo? gone?
No sir, they went in here.
Oh let's follow them: signior Matheo is gone to salute
his mistress, sir now thou shalt hear some of his verses, for
he never comes hither without some shreds of poetry: Come
signior Stephano, Musco.
Musco? where? is this Musco?
I, but peace cousin, no words of it at any hand.
Not I by this fair heaven, as I have a soul to be saved,
by Phoebus.
Oh rare! your cousins discourse is simply suited, all in
oaths.
I, he lacks nothing but a little light stuff, to draw
them out withal, and he were rarely fitted to the time.
Ha, how many are there, say thou?
Marry sir, your brother, Signior Prosp•r•.
Tut, beside him: what strangers are there man?
Strangers? let me see, one, two; mass I know not well
there's so many.
How? so many?
I, there's some five or six of them at the most.
A swarm, a swarm,
Spite of the Devil, how they sting my heart!
How long hast thou been coming hither Cob?
But a little while sir.
Did thou come running?
No sir.
Tut, then I am familiar with thy haste.
Ban• to my fortunes: what meant I to marry?
I that before was ranked in such content,
My mind attired in smooth silken peace,
Being free master of mine own free thoughts,
And now become a slave? what, never sigh,
Be of good cheer m•n: for thou art a cuckold,
It is done, it is done: nay when such flowing store,
Plenty it self false in my wives lap,
The Cor•u-copi• will be mine I know. But Cob,
What entertainment had they? I am sure
My sister and my wife would bid them welcome, ha?
Like enough: yet I heard not a word of welcome.
No, their lips were sealed with kisses, and the voice
Drowned in a flood of joy at their arrival,
Had lost her motion, state and faculty.
Cob, which of them was it that first kissed my wife?
(My sister I should say) my wife, alas,
I fear not her: ha? who was it say thou?
By my troth sir, will you have the truth of it?
Oh I good Cob: I pray thee.
God's my judge, I saw no body to be kissed, unless they
would have kissed the post, in the middle of the warehouse; for
there I left them all, at their Tobacco with a pox.
How? were they not gone in then ever thou came?
Oh no sir.
Spite of the Devil, what do I stay here then?
Cob, follow me.
Nay, soft and fair, I have eggs on the spit; I cannot
go yet sir: now am I for some divers reasons hammering, ham∣mering
revenge: oh for three or four gallons of vinegar, to
sharpen my wits: Revenge, vinegar revenge, russet revenge;
nay, and hee had not lyne in my house, t'would never have
grieved me; but being my guest, one that isle bee sworn, my
wife he's lent him her smock off her back, while his own
shirt ha been at washing: pound her neckerchers for clean
bands for him: sold almost all my platters to buy him Tabac∣co;
and yet to see an ingratitude wretch: strike his host; well I
hope to raise up an host of furies for it: here comes M. Doctor.
What's Signior Thorello gone?
I sir.
Hart of me, what made him l•aue vs so abruptly
How now sir; what make you here? what wold you have, ha?
And't please your worship, I am a poor neighbour of
your worships.
A neighbour of mine, knave?
I sir, at the sign of the water-tankerd, hard by the
greene lattice: I have p•id scot and lot• there any time this
eighteen years.
What, at the greene lattice?
No sir: to the parish: mary I have seldom escaped scot▪
free at the lattice.
So: but what business hath my neighbour?
And't like your worship, I am come to crave the
peace of your worship.
Of me, knave? peace of me, knave? did I ever hurt
thee? did I ever threaten thee? or wrong thee? ha?
No god's my comfort, I mean your worships warrant,
for one that hath wronged me sir: his arms are at too much li∣bertie,
I would fine have them bound to a treaty of peace, and
I could by any means compass it.
Why, doest thou go in danger of thy life for him?
No sir; but I go in danger of my death every hour•
by his means; and I die within a twelvemonth and a day,
I may swear, by the laws of the land, that he killed me.
How? how knave? swear he killed thee? what pre∣text?
what colour hast thou for that?
Mary sir: both black and blew, colour enough, I
warrant you I have it here to show your worship.
What is he, that gave you this sir?
A Gentleman in the city sir.
A Gentleman? what call you him?
Signior Bobadilla.
Good: But wherefore did he beat you sir? how
began the quarrel twixt you? ha: speak truly knave, I advise
you.
Marry sir, because I spake against their vagrant Ta∣basso,
as I came by them: for nothing else.
Ha, you speak against Tobacco? Peto, his name.
What's your name 〈◊〉?
Oliuer C•b, sir set Whole•er Cob, sir.
Tell Whole•er Cob he shall go to the jail.
〈◊〉 Cob, master Doctor says you shall go to the jail.
Oh I beseech your worship for gods love, dear ma∣ster
Doctor.
Nay gods precious: and such drunken knaves as
you are come to dispute of Tobacco once; I have done: away
with him.
Oh good master Doctor, sweet Gentleman.
Sweet Oliuer, would I could doe thee any good;
master Doctor let me entreat sir.
What? a tankard-bearer, a thread-bare rascal, a
beggar, a slave that never drunk out of better thē piss-pot met∣tle
in his life, and he to deprave, and abuse the virtue of an
herb, so generally received in the courts of princes, the cham∣bers
of nobles, the bowers of sweet Ladies, the cabins of
soldiers: Peto away with him, by gods passion, I say, go too.
Dear master Doctor.
Alas poor Oliuer.
Peto: I: and make him a warrant, he shall not go, I
but fear the knave.
O divine Doctor, thanks noble Doctor, most dainty
Doctor, delicious Doctor.
Signior Lorenzo: Gods pity man,
Be merry, be merry, leave these dumps.
Troth would I could sir: but enforced mirth
(In my weak judgment) he has no happy birth.
The mind, being once a prisoner unto cares,
The more it dreams on joy, the worse it fares.
A smiling look is to a heavy soul,
As a guilt bias, to a leaden bowl,
Which (in it self) appears most vile, being spent.
To no true use; but only for ostent.
Nay but good Signior: hear me a word, hear me
a word, your cares are nothing; they are like my cap, soon put
on, and as soon put off. What? your son is old enough, to
govern himself; let him run his course, it's the only way
to make him a stayed man: if he were an unthrift, a ruffian, a
drunkard or a licentious liver, then you had reason: you had
reason to take care: but being none of these, Gods passion,
and I had twice so many cares, as you have, I'd drown them
all in a cup of sack: come, come, I muse your parcel of a soul∣dier
returns not all this while.
Well sister, I tell you true: and you'll find it so in
the end.
Alas brother, what would you have me to doe? I
cannot help it; you see, my brother Pr•spero he brings them
in here, they are his friends.
His friends? his friends? s'blood they do nothing but
haunt him up and down like a sort of unlucky Sprites, and
tempt him to all manner of villainy, that can be thought of; well,
by this light, a little thing would make me play the devil with
some of them; and't were not more for your husbands sake,
then any thing else, I'd make the house too hot for them; they
should say and swear, Hell were broken loose, ever they went:
But by gods bread, it is no bodies fault but yours: for and you
had done as you might have done, they should have been
damned ever they should have come in, ever a one of them.
God's my life; did you ever hear the like? what a
strange man is this? could I keep out all them think you? I
should put my self against half a dozen men? should I?
Good faith you'd mad the patient'st body in the world, to
hear you talk so, without any sense or reason.
Servant (in troth) you are too prodigal of your wit•
treasure; thus to power it forth upon so mean a subject, as
my worth?
You say well, you say well.
Hoyday, hear is stuff.
Oh now stand close: pray God she can get him to read
it.
Tut, fear not: I warrant thee, he will do it of him∣self
with much impudence.
Servant, what is th•t same I pray you?
Mary an El•go•, an Elegy•, an oddetoy.
I to mock an Ape with all, Oh I•su.
Sister, I pray you lets hear it.
Mistress Isle re•de it if you please.
I pray you doe servant.
Oh hears no foppery. Sblood it frets me to the
gall to think on it.
Oh I, it is his condition▪ peace: we are fairly rid•
of him.
Faith I did it in an h•more: I know not how it is, b•t
please you come near signior: this gentleman hath i•dge∣meant,
he knows how to cens•re of a▪—I pray you •ir▪ you
can judge.
Not I sir: as I have a soul to b• saved, as I 〈…〉.
Nay its well; so long as he doth •ot forsw••••
himself.
Signior you abuse the excel•ncie of your mistress•,
and her fair sister. Fie while you live •uoyd this prolixity.
I shall sir: well, Incip•r• dulls.
How, Inciper• dulls? a sweet thing to be a Fool
indeed.
What, do you take Incipe•• in that sense?
You do not you? Sblood this was your villainy to
gull him with a mott•.
Oh the Benchers phrase: Pau•a ver••, 〈…〉.
Rare creature let me speak without offence,
Would God •y rude woo•ds •ad the influence:
To rule thy thoughts, as 〈◊〉 f•ire• looks do mine,
Then should thou be his prisoner, who is thine.
S'hart, this is in Hero and Lender?
Oh I: peace, we shall have more of this.
Be not unkind and fair mesh••en st•ffe▪
Is of bah••••ur boisterous and rough:
How like you that signior, 〈◊〉 he shakes his head like a
by•tle, to feel and there be any brain in it.
But observe the Catastrophe• now,
And I in duty will exceed all other.
As you in beauty do excel lo••s ••there.
W•ll 〈◊〉 have him free of the broke••s, for he utters no¦thing
but stolen remnant•.
Nay good Critique forbear.
A pox on him, hang him •ilching rogue, s•eale from
the dead? its vvorse then sacrilege.
Sister when•t have you hear? 〈◊〉 I pray you lets see.
Do you let them go so lightly sister.
•es •ayth when they come lightly.
I but if your servant should hear you, he would take
it heavily.
No matter he is able to bear.
So are Asses.
so is hee.
Signior Matheo, who made these verses? they are ex∣cellent
good.
Oh God sir, its your pleasure to say so sir.
Faith I mad• them 〈◊〉 this morning.
How ex•empo•e?
I would I might be damned else: ask signior By•idol•.
He saw me write them, 〈◊〉 the: (pox• on it) the Meter
yonder.
Well, and the Pope knew hee cursed the Meter it were
enough to have him excommunicated •ll the Ta•earns in the
town.
Cousin how do you like this gen•lem•ns verse••.
Oh admirable, the best that 〈◊〉 I heard.
By this fair• •evens, they are admirable,
The best that ever I heard.
I am vexed I can hold never a bone o• me s•ill,
Sblood I think they mean to build a Tabernacle •ear, well?
Sister you have a simple servant hear, that crowns
your beauty with such Encomions and Devises, you may see
what it is to be the mistress of a w•t, that can make your
perfections so transeparent, that every blear eye may look
thorough them, and see him drowned over head and ears, in
the deep well of desire. Sister Biancha I marvel you get
you not a servant that can •ime and do •rickes too.
Oh monster? •mpudence it self; tricks?
Tricks, brother? what tricks?
Nay, speak I pray you, what trick•s?
I, never spare any body hear: but say, what tricks?
Passion of my heart? do tricks?
Sblood hears a trick• vied, and reuied: why you
monkeys you? what a cat•er waling do you keep? has he not
given you rymes, and verses, and tricks.
Oh see the Devil?
N•y, you lamp of virginity, that take it in snuff so:
come and cherish this tame poetical •ury in your servant, you'll
be begged else shortly for a concealment: go to, reward his
muse, you cannot give him less then a shilling in conscience▪
for the book he had it out of cost him a te•ton at the least,
how now gallants, L•renzo, s••gnior Bobadill•? what all sons
of silence? no spirit.
Come you might practise your Ruff•an tricks some∣where
else, and not hear I wise: this is no Tavern, nor no
place for such exploits.
Shart how now.
Nay boy, never look askance at me for the matter;
isle tell you o• it by Gods bread? I, and you and your comp∣n•once
mend your selves when I have done.
My companions.
I your companions •ir, so I say? Sblood I am not af∣frayed
of you nor them no•there, you must have your Poets, &amp;
your cavaliers, &amp; your fools follow you up and down the
city, and hear they must come to dominee•e and swagger?
sirha, you Ballad singer, and Sl•ps your fellow there, get you
out; get you out: or (by the will of God) Isle cut of your ears,
go to.
Sblood stay, lets see what he dare do: cut of his ears
you are an ass, touch any man hear, and by the Lord isle run
my rapier to the hilts in thee.
Yea, that would I fain see, boy.
Oh 〈◊〉 Peso, Math•• murder.
Help, help, Peso.
Gentlemen, Prospero, for∣bear
I pray you.
Well sirrah, you Hollofernus: by my hand I will pink
thy flesh full of holes with my rapier for this, I will by this
good heaven: nay let him come, let him come, gentlemen by
the body of S. George isle not kill him.
Hold, hold forbear:
You whoreson bragging coys∣trill.
Why, how now? whats the matter? what stir is hear,
Whence springs this quarrel, P••o where is he?
Put up your weapons, and put of this rage.
My wife and sister they are cause of this,
What, Peso? where is this kna•e.
Hear sir.
Come, lets go: this is one of my brothers ancient
humours this?
I am glad no body was hurt by this ancient humour.
Why how now brother, who enforced this brawl.
A sort of lewd rakehelles, that care neither for God nor
the Devil, And they must come hear to read Ballads and To∣gery'
and Trash, Isle mar the knot of them ere I sleep perhaps:
especially signior Pit•agorus, he thats al manner of shapes: and
Songs and son•s, his fellow there.
Brother indeed you are to violent,
To sudden in your courses, and you know
My brother Prosperus temper will not bear
Any reproof, chiefly in such a presence,
Where every slight disgrace he should receive,
Would wound him in opinion and respect.
Respect? what talk you of respect amongst such
As had neither spark of manhood nor good manners,
By God I am ashamed to hear you• respect?
Yes there was one a civil• gentleman,
And very worthily demeand himself.
Oh that was some love of yours, sister.
A love of mine? infayth I would he were
No others love but mine.
Indeed he seemed to be a gentleman of an exceeding
fair disposition, and of very excellent good 〈◊〉.
Her love, by Iesu: my wises minion,
Fair disposition? excellent good parts?
S'hart, these phr•ses are intolerable,
Good parts? how should she know his parts? well▪ well▪
It is too plain, •oo clear: Pis•▪ come hither.
What are they gone?
I sir they went in.
Are any of the gallants within?
No •ir they are all gone.
Art thou sure o• it?
I sir I can assure you.
Peso what gentleman was that they praised so?
One they call him signior Lorenzo, a fair young gen∣tleman sir.
I, I thought so: my mind gave me as much:
Sblood isle be hanged if they h••e not hid him in the house,
Some where, isle go s•arch, Pis• go with me,
Be true to me and thou shalt find me by•ntifull.
What Tib, Tib, I say.
How now, wh•t cuckold is that knock•• so hard?
Oh husband first you, whats the n•was?
Nay you h•ue stoned me I faith? you hue given me a
knock on the forehead, will stick by me: cuckold? Swoundes
cuckold?
Away you fool did I know it was you that knocked,
Come, come, you may call me 〈◊〉 bad when you list.
May I? swoundes Tib you are a whore:
S'hart you lie in your throat.
How the lye? and in my throat too? do you long to be
stabbed, ha?
Why you are no soldier?
Mass thats true, when was Bobadilla hear? that
Rog•e, th•• 〈◊〉, that fencing▪ B•rgullian? isle tickle him I faith.
Why vvhat's the matter?
Oh he hath basted me rarely, sumptiously: but I have
it hear will s•use him, oh the doctor, the honestest old Trow∣ian
in all Italy, I do honour the very •lea of his dog: a plague
on him he 〈◊〉 me once in a villainous filthy fear: marry it
vanished away 〈…〉 smoke• of To••cco: but I was smookt
soundly first, I thank the Devil, and his good Angel my
guest: well wife: or Tib (which you will) get you in, and
locke the door I charge you, let no body into you: not Bob∣badilla
himself; nor the di•ell in his likeness; you are a woe∣man;
you have flesh and blood enough in you; therefore be
not tempted; keep the door shut upon all cummers.
I w•rrant you there shall no body enter hear with∣out
my consent.
Nor with your consent sweet Tib and so I leave you.
Its more then you know, whether you leave me so.
How?
Why sweet.
Tut 〈…〉 sour, thou art a flower,
Keep close thy door, I ask no more.
Well Musco perform this business happily,
And thou make a conquest of my love forever,
I faith now let thy spirits put on their best habit,
B•t at any hand remember thy message to my brother.
For theres no other means to start him?
I wa•rant you sir, ••are nothing I have a nimble soul
that hath waked all my imaginative forces by this time, and
put then▪ in true motion: what you have poss•st me with∣all?
•le discharge it amply sir. Make no question.
Thats well said Musco: faith sirha how dost thou,
approve my wit in this devise?
Troth well, howsoever? but excellent if it take.
Take man: why it cannot choose▪ but take▪ if the cir∣cumstances
miscarry not, but tell me zealo•sly: dost tho•
affect my sister Hesperida as thou pretend?
Prospero by Iesu.
Come do not pro•est I believe thee: I faith she is •
virgin of good •rnament, and much modesty, un esse I
conc•iud very w•rthely o• her, thou shouldest not have
her.
Nay I think it a question whether I shall ha•• her
for all that.
Sblood thou shall have her, by this light thou shall•?
Nay do not swear.
By S. Mark thou shalt have her: isle go fetch her pre∣sently,
point but where to meet, and by this hand isle bring
her?
Hold, hold, what all policy dead? no prevention of
mischiefs stirring.
Why, by what shall I swear by? thou shalt have her
by my soul.
I pray the have patience I am satisfied: Prosp•to o∣mit
no off•red occasion, that may make my desires complete
I beseech thee.
I warrant thee.
Was your man a soldier sir.
I a knave I took him up begging upon the way,
This morning as I was cumming to the city,
Oh? h•are he is; come on, you make fair speed:
Why? whereon Gods name have you been so long?
Mary (Gods my co••ort) where I thought I should
have had little comfort of your worships service:
How so?
Oh God sir? your cumming to the city, &amp; your enter∣taynement
of men, and your sending me to watch; indeed, all
the circumstances are as open to •our son as to your self.
How should that be? unless that villain M•s•o
Have told him of the letter, and discovered
All that I strictly charged him to conceal? tic so.
I faith you have hit it: tic so indeed.
But how should he know thee to be my man.
Nay, •ir, I cannot tell; unless it were by the black art?
is not your son a scholar sir?
Yes; but I hope his soul is not allied
To such a devilish practise: if it were,
I had just cause to weep my part in him,
And curse the time of his creation.
But where did thou find them Po•t•nsio?
N•y sir, rather you should ask where the found me?
for isle be sworn I was going along in the street, thinking
nothing, when• (of a sudden) one calls, Sig•ior Lorenzo• man:
another, he cries soldier: and thus half a dozen of them, till
they had go▪ me within doors, where I no sooner came▪ but
out flies their rapiers and all bent against my breast, they
swore some two or three hundredth oaths, and all to tell me I
was but a dead man, if I did not confess where you were, and
how I was employed, and about what, which when they
could not get out of me: (as Gods my judge, they should have
kilt me first) they locked me up into a room in the top of a
house, where by great miracle (having a light hart) I slit
down by a bottom of packthread into the street, and so
escaped: but ma•ster, thus much I can assure you, for I heard it
while I 〈◊〉 locked up: there were a great many merchants and
rich citizens wives with them at a banquet, and your son
Signior Lorenzo▪ has pointed one of them to meet anon at
one Cobs house, a waterbearers? that dwells by the wall: now
there you shall be sure to take him: for fail he will not.
Nor will I fail to break this match, I doubt not;
Well: go thou along with moister doctors man,
And stay there for me? at one C•bs house say thou.
I sir, there you shall have him: when can you tell?
much wench, or much son: sblood when he has stayed there
three or four hours, travelling with the expectation of
somewhat; and at the length be delivered of nothing: oh the
sport that I should thē take to look on him if I durst but now
I mean to appear no more before him in this shape: I have a∣another
trick to act yet? oh that I were so happy, as to light
upon an ounce now of this doctors clarke: God save you 〈◊〉,
I thank you good sir.
I have made you stay somewhat long sir.
Not a w•it sir, I pray you what sir do you mean: you
have been lately in the wars sir it seems.
I Marry have I sir.
Troth sir, I would be glad to bestow a pot•le of wine of
you if it please you to accept it.
Oh Lord sir.
But to hear the manner of you services, and your de∣uises
in the wars, they say they be very strange, and not like
those a man reads in the Roman histories.
Oh God no sir, why at any time when it please you, I
shall be ready to discourse to you what I know: and more to
somewhat.
No better time then now sir, weal go to the Mere•∣m•id
there we shall have a cup of neat wine, I pray you
sir let me request you.
Isle follow you sir, he is mine own I faith.
Mat Sign•r did you ever see the like clone of him, where we
were to day•: signior Prosperos brother? I think the when•le
•arth cannot show his like by Iesu.
We were now speaking of him, signior Bobadill• tells
me he is fallen foul of you two.
Oh I sir, he threatened me with the bastinado.
I but I think I taught you atrick this morning for that.
You shall kill him without a•l question: if you be so minded▪
Indeed it is a most excellent trick.
Oh you do not give spirit enough to your motion, you
are too dull, too tardy: oh it must be done like lightning, hay?
Oh rare.
Tut tic nothing and't be not done in a—
Signior did you never play with any of our my∣s•ers
here.
Oh good sir.
Nay for a more instance of their preposterous humour,
there came three or •our of them to me, at a ge•tlemans
house, where it was my chance to bee resident at that
time, to intre•te my presence at their school•, and withal so
much importund me, that (I protest to you as I am a gentle∣man)
I was ashamed of their rude demeanour out of all measure:
well, I told them that to come to a public school they
should pardon me, it was opposite to my humour but if so they
would attend me at my lodging, I protested to do them what
right or favour I could, as I was a gentleman▪ &amp;c.
So sir, then you tried th•ir skill.
Alas soon tried: you shall hear sir, •eden two or
three days after, they came, and by Iesu go•• signior believe
me, I graced them•exceedingly, showed them some •wo or three
trick•s of prevention, hath got them sinc• admirable credit,
they cannot deny this; and yet now they 〈…〉, and why?
because I am excellent, and for no other 〈…〉 earth.
This is strange and vile as 〈◊〉 I h•art.
I will tell you sir upon my first coming to the ci•ie,
they assaulted me some three, four, five, six, of them toge∣there
as I have walked alone, in divers places of the city; as upon
•he exchange, at my lodging▪ and at my ordinary: where I have
driven them before me the whole length of a street, in the o∣pen
view of all our gallon•s, pitying to hurt them believe me;
yet all this lenity will not depress their spleen: they will
be doing with the Pismier, ray•i•g a hi•l, a man may spurn a∣broad
with his foot at pleasure: by my soul I could have
sla•no them all, but I delight not in murder: I am loath to •ea•e
any other but a bastinado for them, and yet I ho•lt it good
policy not to go disarmed, for though I be skilful, • may be
suppressed with multitudes.
I by Iesu may you sir and (in my conceit) our whole•
nation should sustain the loss by it, if it were so.
Alas no: whats a peculiar man, to a nation? not seen.
I but your skill sir.
Indeed •hat might be some loss, but who respects
it? I will tel you Signior (in private) I am a gentleman, and live
here obscure, and to my self: but were I known to the Duke
(observe me) I would undertake (upon my head and life) for
the p•blique benefit of the state, not only to spare the entire
lives of his subjects ingenerall, but to save the one half: nay
there parts of his y•early charges, in holding wars gene∣rally
against all his enemies? and how will I do it think you?
Nay I know not, nor can I conceive.
Marry thus, I would select 19 more to my self, throughout
the land, gentlemē the• should be of good spirit; strong &amp; able
constitutiō, I would choose thē by an instinct, a trick that I have:
&amp; I would teach these 19. the special tricks, as your P•ned•, •our
Reuerso, your Stoccato, your Imbroccato, your Pass•do, your Mon∣taunto,
till they could all play very near or altogether as well as
my self▪ this done; say the enemy were forty thousand strong:
we twenty wold come into the field the tenth of March, or there
abouts; &amp; would challendge twenty of the enemy? they could
not in there honour refuse the combat: well, we would kill them:
challenge twenty more, kill then; twenty more, kill then;
twenty more, kill them too; and thus would we kill every
man, his twenty a day, thats twenty score; twenty score, thats
two hundredth; two hundredth a day, five days a thousand:
forty thousand; forty times five, five times forty, two hun∣dreth
days kills them all, by computation, and this will I ven∣ture
my life to perform: provided there be no treason prac∣tised
upon vs.
Why are you so sure of your hand at all times?
Tut, never mistrust upon my soul.
Mass I would not stand in signior G•uliano state, then;
And you meet him, for the wealth of Florence.
Why signior, by Iesu if hee were hear now: I would
not draw my w•upon on him, let this gentleman doe his
mind but I will bastin•do him (by heaven) &amp; ever I meet him.
Faith and isle have a fling 〈◊〉 him.
Look yo•der he goes I think.
Sblood what luck have I, I cannot meet with these•
br•gging rascals▪
It• not h•: is it?
Yes faith it is he?
Isle be hanged then if that were he.
Before• God it was he: you make me swear.
Upon my salvation it was h••.
Well had I thought it had been he: he could not have
gone so, but I cannot be induced to believe it was he yet.
Oh gallant have I found you? draw to your tools,
draw, or by Gods will isle thresh you.
Signior hear me?
Draw your vveapons then:
Signior, I n•for thought it till now: body of S. George,
I have a warrant of the peace served on me even now, as I
came along by a vvaterbearer, this gentleman saw it, signior
Mat•••.
The peace▪ Sblood, you will not draw?
Hold signior hold, under
thy favour forbear.
Prate again as you like this you vvhoreson cowardly
rascal, you'll control the point you? your consort hee is
gone? had he stayed he had shard with you infayth.
Well gentlemen bear witness I was bound to the
peace, by Iesu.
Why and though you were sir, the law alowes you
to defend your self; thats but a poor excuse.
I cannot t•ll; I never suss••yned the like disgrace (by
heaven) sure I was struck with a Planet then, for I had
no power to touch my we•pone.
I like enough I have heard of many that have been
beaten under a planet; go get you to the Surgeons, sblood
and these be your tricks, your passados, &amp; your Mountauntos
ilenone of them: oh God that this age should bring forth
s•ch creat•res? come cousin.
Mass isle have this cloak.
Gods will: its Giullianos.
Nay but tic mine now, another might have tan• it up
as well as I, isle w•••e it so I will.
How and he see it, heel •h•llen•e it ass•ur• your self.
I but he shall not have it▪ isle s•y I by•light it.
Advise you cousin, ta•e heed he give not you as
much.
Now trust me Pr•s••to you were much to blame,
T'incense your brother and disturb the peace,
Of my poor• house, for there be s•ntinelles,
That •very minute watch to give alarames,
Of civil war, without adiection,
Of your assistance and occasion.
No harm done brother I warrant you: since there is
no harm done, anger costs a man nothing: and a tall man
is never his own man till he be angry, to keep his valor in obe∣scuritie:
is to keep himself as it were in a cloke-bag: vvhats a
musician unless he play? whats a tall man unless he fight? for
indeed all this my brother stands upon absolutely, and that
made me fall in with him so resolutely.
I but what harm might have come of it?
Might? so might the good warm clothes your hus∣band
vveares be poisoned for any thing he knows, or the
wholesome wine he drunk even now at the table.
Now God forbid: O me? now I remember,
My wife drunk to me last; and changed the cup,
And bad me ware this cursed suit to day,
See, if God suffer murder undiscovered?
I feel me ill; give me some Mithredate,
Some Mithredate and oil; good sister fetch me,
O, I am sick at hart: I burn, I burn;
If you will save my life go fetch it me.
Oh strange humour my very breath hath poisoned him.
Good brother be content, what do you mean,
The strength of these extreme conceits will kill you?
Be•hrew your hart blood, brother Prospero,
For putting such a toy into his head.
Is a fit simile, a toy? will he be poisoned with a simile▪
Broth•• Thor•ll•, what a strange and vain imagination is this?
For shame be wiser, of my soul theres no such matter.
Am I not sick? how am I then not poisoned?
Am I not poisoned? how am I then so sick?
If you be sick, your own thoughts make you sick.
His jealousy is the poison he hath taken.
Signior Thorello my m••ster doctor Cleme•t salutes
you, and de•ires to speak with you, with all speed pos∣sible.
No time but now? well, isle waite upon his worship,
Peso, Cob, isle seek them out, and set them sentinel•• till I re∣turn.
Peso, Cob, Peso.
Musco, this is rare, but how gotst thou this apparel of
the doctors man.
Marry sir. My youth would needs bestow the wine
of me to hear some martial discourse; where I so marsha•d
him, that I made him monstrous drunk, &amp; because too much
heate was the cause of his distemper, I stripped him stark na∣ked
as he lay along a sleep, and borrowed his sewt to deliver
this counterfeit message in, leaving a rusty armour, and an
old browne bill to watch him; till my return: which shall
be when I have paund his apparel, and spent the moni•
perhaps.
Well thou art a mad knave Musco, his absence will
be a good subject for more mirth: I pray the return to thy
young moister Lorenzo, and will him to meet me and Hesperi∣da
at the Friery presently: for here tell him the house is so
sturde with jealousy, that there is no room for love to stand
upright in: but isle use such means she shall come thither, and
that I think will meet best with his desires: Hye thee good
Musco.
I go sir.
Ho Peso, Cob, where are these villains trow?
Oh, art thou there? Peso hark thee here:
Mark what I say to thee, I must go forth;
Be careful of thy promise, keep good watch,
Note every gallant and observe him well,
That enters in my absence to thy mistress;
If she would show him rooms, the jest is stale,
Follow them Peso or else hang on him,
And let him not go after, mark their looks?
Note if she offer but to see his band,
Or any other amorous toy about him,
But praise his leg, or foot, or if she say,
The day is hot, and bid him feel her hand,
How hot it is, oh thats a monstrous thing:
Note me all this, sweet Peso; mark their sighs,
And if they do but vvisper break them off,
Isle bear thee out in it: wilt thou do this?
Wilt thou be true sweet Peso?
Most true sir.
Thanks gentle Peso: where is Cob? now: Cob?
Hes ever calling for Cob, I wonder how hee im∣ploys Cob so.
Indeed sister to ask how he employs Cob, is a necessary question for you that are his wife, and a thing not very easy for you to be satisfied in: but this isle assure you Cobs wife is an excellent baud indeed: and oftentimes your husband haunts her house, marry to what end I cannot altogether ac∣cuse him, imagine you what you think convenient: but I have known fair hides have foul hearts ear now, I can tell you.
Never said you truer then that brother? Peso fetch your cloak, and go with me, isle after him presently: I would to Christ I could take there I faith.
So let them go: this may make sport anon, now my fey•e sister Hesperida: ah that you knew how happy a ting it w•re to be fair and beautiful?
That touches not me brother.
Thats true: thats even the fault of it, for indeed bew∣tie stands a woman in no stead, unless it procure her touching: but sister whether it touch you or no, it touches your bew∣ties, and I am sure they will abide the touch, and they doe not a plague of al ceruse say I, and it touches me to inpart, though not in thee. Well, theres a dear and respected friend of mine sister, stands very strongly affected towards you, and hath vowed to inflame whole bonfires of zeal in his hart, in ho∣nor of your perfections, I have already engaged my promise
to bring you where you shall hear him conferme much more then I am able to lay down for him: Signior Lorenzo is the man: what say you sister shall I entreat so much favour of you for my friend, is too direct and attend you to his meeting? upon my soul he loves you extremely, approve it sweet Hesperida will you?
Hayth I had very little confidence in mine own co∣stance if I durst not meet a man: but brother Prospero this motion of your savours of an old knight adventurers ser∣uant, me thinks.
Whats that sister.
Marry of the squire.
No matter Hesperida if it did, I would ve such an one for my friend, but say, will you go?
Brother I will, and bless my happy stars.
Why what villainy is this? my man gone on a false message, and run away when he has done, why what trick is there in it trow? 1.2.3.4. and 5.
How: is my wife gone forth, where is she sister?
Shees gone abroad with Peso.
Abroad with Peso? oh that villain dors me.
He hath discovered all unto my wife,
Beast that I was to trust him: whither went she?
I know not sir.
Isle tell you brother whither I suspect shees gone.
Whither for gods sake?
To Cobs house I believe: but keep my counsel.
I will, I will, to Cobs house? doth she haunt Cobs,
Shees gone a purpose now to cuckold me,
With that lewd rascal, who to vvinne her favour,
Hath told her all.
But did you mistress see my man bring him a mes∣sage.
That we did moister doctor.
And whither went the knave?
To the Tavern I think sir.
What did Thorello give him any thing to spend for
the message he brought him? if he did I should commend my
mans wit exceedingly if he would make himself drunk,
with the joy of it, farewell Lady, keep good rule you two:
I beseech you now: by Gods marry my man makes me
laugh.
What a mad Doctor is this? come sister lets away.
I wonder signior what they will say of my going a∣way: ha?
Why, what should they say? but as of a discreet gentle∣man.
Quick, wary, respectful of natures,
Fair lineaments, and thats all.
Why so, but what can they say of your beating?
A rude part, a touch with soft wood, a kind of gross
battery used, laid on strongly: borne most patiently, and
thats all.
I but would any man have offered it in Venice?
T•ut I assure you no: you shall have there your Nobilis,
your Gentelezza, come in bravely upon your reverse, stand you
close, stand you ferme, stand you fair, save your retricato with
his left leg, come to the assaulto with the right, thrust with
brave steel, defy your base wood. But wherefore do I awake
this remembrance? I was bewitched by Iesu: but I will be re∣uengd.
Do you hear first not best to get a warrant and have
him arrested, and brought before doctor Clement.
It were not amiss would we had it.
Why here comes his man, lets speak to him.
Agreed, do you speak.
God save you sir.
With all my hart sir?
Sir there is one Giulliano hath abused this gentleman
and me, and we determine to make our amends by law, now
if you would do vs the favour to procure vs a warrant for
his arest of your moister, you shall be well considered I
assure, I faith sir.
Sir you know my service is my living, such favours 〈◊〉
these gotten of my moister is his only preferment, and there∣fore
you must consider me, as I may make benefit of my
place.
How is that?
Faith sir, the thing is extraordinary, and the gentle∣man
may be o• great account: ye• be what he will, if you
will lay me down five crowns in my hand, you shall have it,
other•wise no•.
H•w shall we do signio•? you have no money.
N•t a cr•s•e by Iesu.
N•r I 〈◊〉 God but two pence: left of my tu•
shi•l•ngs in the mo•n•ng for wine and 〈◊〉 let's give him
some• p••no.
P•wn•? we have none to the value of his demand.
Oh Lo•d, •an, •le •awne this jewel in my •are, and you
may pawn your silk sto•kins, and pull up your boots, they
will near be mi•t.
Well and there be no remedy: isle step aside and put
them of.
Doe you hear sir, we have no store of money at this
time, but you shall have good pawns, look you sir, this Jew∣ell,
and this gentleman's silk stockings, because we would have
it di•patched ere we went to our chambers.
I am content sir, I will get you the warrant presently
whats his name say •ou (Giulliano.)
I, I, Giulliano.
What manner of man is he?
A tall big man sir, he goes in a cloak most com∣monly
of silk rus•et: laid about with russet lace.
Ti• very good sir.
Here sir, here is my jewel?
And hear are stockings.
Well gentlemen isle procure this vvaarrant presently▪
and appoint you a varlet of the city to s•rue it, if you'll be v∣pone
the Realto anon, the varlet shall meet you there.
Very good sir I wish no better.
This is rar•, now will I go pawn this cloak of the
doctors m•ns at the brokers for a varlets suit, and be the var∣let
my self, and get either more pawns, or more money of
Giulliano for my arrest.
Oh hear it is, I am glad I have found it now,
Ho? who is within hear•?
I am within sir, whats your pleasure?
To know who is within besides your self.
Why sir, you are no constable I hope?
O fear you the constable? then I doubt not▪
You have some guests within deserve that fear,
Isle fetch him straight.
A Gods name sir.
Go to, tell me is not the young Lorenzo here?
Young Lorenzo, I saw none such sir, of mine honesty.
Go to, your honesty flies too lightly from you:
Theres no way but fetch the constable.
The constable, the man is mad I think.
Ho, who keeps house here?
Oh, this is the female copese•mate of my son.
Now shall I meet him straight.
Knock Peso pray thee.
Ho good wife.
Why vvhats the matter with you.
Why woman, grieves it you to op your door•?
Belike you get something to keep it shut.
What mean these questions pray 〈◊〉
So strange you make it? is not Thorello my tried hus∣band
here.
Her husband?
I hope he needs not to be tried here.
No dame: he hoth it not •or need but pleasure.
Neither for need nor pleasure is he here.
This is but a devise to balke me with al; Soft, whose
this?
Oh sir, have I fore-stald your honest market?
Found your close walks? you stand amazed now, do you?
I faith (I am glad) I have smoked you yet at las•;
Whats your jewel trow? In: come lets see her;
Fetch forth your huswife, dame; if she be fairer
In any honest judgment then my self,
Isle be content with it: but she is change,
She feeds you fat; she soothes your appetite,
And you are well: your wife an honest woman,
Is meat twice sod to you sir; A you trecher.
She cannot counterfeit this palpably.
Out on thee more then strumpets impudence,
Stealst thou thus to thy haunts? and have I taken,
Thy baud, and thee, and thy companion?
This hoary headed lecher, this old goat
Close at your villainy, and would thou scuse it,
With this stale harlots jest, accusing me?
O old incontinent, dost thou not shame,
When all thy powers inchastitie is spent,
To have a mind so hot? and to entice
And feed the enticements of a lustful woman?
Out I defy thee I, dissembling wretch:
Defy me strumpet? ask thy pander here▪
Can he deny it? or that wicked elder.
Why hear you signior?
Tut, tut, never speak,
Thy guilty conscience will discover thee:
What l•nacie is this that haunts this man?
Oh sister did you see my cloak?
Not I, I see none.
Gods life I have lost it then, saw you Hesperida?
Hesperida? is she not at home
No she is gone abroad, and no body can tell me of it
at home.
Oh he•uen,? abroad? what light? a harlot too?
Why? why? hark you, hath she? hath she not a brother?
A brothers house to keep? to look un•o?
But she must fling abroad, my wife hath spoiled her,
She takes right after her, she does, she does,
Well you goody b•u• and—
That make your husband such a hoddy dod•;
And you young apple squire, and old cuckold m•kerr,
Isle have you every one before the Doctor,
Nay you shall answer it I chardge you go.
M•rry with •ll my h•rt, isle go •••lingly: how have
I wronged my self in co•ming here.
G• with thee? isle go with thee to thy sh•me▪ I warrant thee.
W•y vvhats the matter? vvhats here to doe?
What Cob art thou here? oh I am abused,
And in thy house, was never man so wronged.
Slid in my house? who wronged you in my house?
Marry young lu•t in old, and old in young here,
Thy wives their baud, here have I taken them.
Doe you here? did I not charge you
keep your do•es shut here, and do you let
them lieopen for all cōmers, do you scratch.
Friend ha•e patience if she have done wrong in this
let her answer it before the M•gistrate.
I, come, you sha•l go before the Do•t•r.
Nay, I will go, isle see and you may be aloud to beat
your poor wife thus at every cuckoo•dly knaves pleasure, the
Devil and the Pox t•ke you all for me: why doe you not
go now.
A bitter queen, come weal have you tamd.
Well of all my disguises yet now am I most like my
self being in this va•lets suit, a man of my presen• profess∣on
never counterfeits till he lay hold upon a debtor, and
says he rests him, for then he brings him to al manner of un∣rest;
A kind of little kings we are, bearing the diminutive of
a mace made like a young Hartechocke that always car•ies
Pepper and salt in it self, well I know not what danger I un∣der
go by this exploi•e, pray God I come well of.
See I think yonder is the varlet.
Lets go inquest of him.
God save you friend, are not you here by the appoint∣meant
of doctor Clements man.
Yes and please you sir, he told me two gentlemen had
wild him to procure an arest upon one signior Giulliano by a
warrant from his moister, which I have about me.
It is honestly done of you both, and see where hee
coms you must arest, upon him for Gods sake before hee
beware.
Bear back Matheo?
Signior Giulliano▪ I arest you sir in the Dukes name.
Signior Giulli••o? am I signior Giulliano? I am one sign∣or
Stephano I tell you, and you do not well by Gods slid to
arest me, I tell you truly; I am not in your masters books, I
would you should well know I: and a plague of God on you
for making me afraid thus.
Why, how are you deceived gentlemen?
He wears such a cloak, and that deceived vs,
But see here a coms, officer, this is he.
Why how now signior gull: are you a turned flincher of
late▪ come deliver my cloak.
Your cloak sir? I bought it even now in the market.
Sign•or Giulliano I must arest you sir▪
Arrest me sir, at whose suite?
At these two gentlemen's.
I obey thee varlet; but for these villains—
Keep the peace I charge you sir, in the Dukes name
Sir.
Whats the matter varlet?
You must go before moister doctor Clement sir, to
answer what these gentlemen will object against you, hark
you sir, I will use you kindly.
Weal be even with you sir, come signior Bobadilla▪
weal go before and prepare the doctor: varlet look to hi•.
The varlet is a tall man by Iesu.
Away you rascals,
Signior I shall have my cloak.
Your cloak: I say once again I bought it, and isle
keep it.
You will keep •t?
I, that I will.
Varlet stay, here is thy fee arrest him.
Signior Step•ano I arrest you.
Arrest me? there take your cloak: isle none of it.
Nay that shall• not serve your turn, varlet, bring him
away, isle go• with thee now to the doctors, and carry him
along.
Why is not here your cloak? what would you have?
I care not for th•t.
I pray yo• sir.
Never talk of it; I will have him answer it.
Well sir then isle leave you, isle take this gentleman's
word for his appearance, as I have done yours.
Tut isle have no words taken, bring him along to
answer it.
Good sir I pity the gentleman's case, here is your mo∣no
again.
Gods br•ad, tell not me of my money, bring him a∣way
I say.
I warrant you, he will go with you of himself.
Yet more ado?
I have made a fair mash of it.
Must I go?
Nay but stay, stay give me leave; my chair sirha?
you signior Lorenzo say you went thither to meet your
son.
I sir.
But who directed you thither?
That did my man sir?
Where is hee?
Nay I know not now, I left him with your clarke,
And appointed him to stay here for me.
About what time was this?
Marry between one and two as I take it.
So, what time came my man with the message to you
Signior Thorello?
After two sir.
Very good, but Lady how that you were at Cobs: ha?
And please you sir, isle tell you: my brother Pr•sper•
told me that Cobs house was a suspected place.
So it appears me thinks; but on,
And that my husband used thither daily;
No matter, so he use himself well.
True sir, but you know what grows by such haunts
oftentimes.
I, rank fruits of a jealous brain Lady: but did you
find your husband there in that case, as you suspected.
I found her there sir.
Did you so? that alters the case; who ga•e you know∣ledge
of your wi•es being there▪
Marry that did my brother Prospero.
How Prospero, first tell her, then tell you after? where
is Prospero.
Gone with my sister sir, I know not whither.
Why this is a mere trick, a devise; you are gulled in
this most grossly: alas poor wench vvert thou beaten for
this, how now •irha vvhats the matter? Enter one of the Do. men.
Sir theres a gentleman in the court without desires to
speak with your worship.
A gentleman? vvhats he?
A Soldier, sir, he says▪
A Soldier? fetch me my armour, my sword, quickly
a soldier speak with me, why when knaves,—come on,
come on, hold my cap there, so; give me my gorget, my sword
stand by • will end your matters anon; let the soldier en∣la,
now sir what have you to say to me?
By your vvorships favour.
Nay keep out sir, I know not your pretence, you send
me word •ir you are a soldier, why sir you shall bee ensue∣red
here, here be them have been amongst sold••rs. Sir
your pleasure.
Faith sir so it is: this gentleman and my self have been
most violently wronged by one signior Giullian•: a gallant of
the city here and for my own part I protest, being a man
in no sort given to this filthy humour of quarrelling, he hath
assaulted me in the way of my peace: dispoyld me of mine
honour, disarmed me of my vveapons, a•d beaten me in the
open streets: when I not so much as once offered to re∣sist
him.
Oh Gods precious is this the soldier? here take my are∣more
quickly, twill make him swoon I fear; he is not fit to
look on it, that will put up a blow.
Andt pleas• your worship he 〈◊〉 bound to the peace.
Why, and he were sir, his hands▪ were not bound, were
they?
There is one of the varlets of the city, has b•ought two
gentlemen here upon arest sir.
Bid him come in, set by the picture: now
sir, what? signior Giulliano? first you that are ares∣ted
at •ignior freshwaters suit here.
I faith moister Doctor, and here is another brought at my
suite.
What are yo sir.
A gentleman sir• oh uncle?
Uncle? who, Lore•so?
I Sir.
Gods my witness my un••e, I am wronged here mon∣strously,
he charge me with stealing of his cloak, &amp; would
I might never stir, if I did not find it in the street by chance.
Oh did you find it now? you said you bought it 〈◊〉
while?
And you said I stole it, nay now my uncle is here I
care not.
Well let this breath a while; you that have cause t•
complain there, stand forth; had you a warrant for thy•
arrest.
I andt please your worship.
Nay do not speak in passion so, where had you it?
Of your clarke sir.
Thats well and my clarke can make vvarrants, and
my hand not at them; where is the warrant? varlet ha••
you it?
No sir your vvorshippes man bid me doe it; for these
gentlemen and he would be my discharge.
Why signior Giullian•, are you such a novice to be are∣rested
and never see the warrant?
Why sir, he did not arrest me.
No? how then?
Marry sir he came to me and said he must arrest me, 〈◊〉
he would use me kindly, and so forth.
Oh Gods pity, was it so sir, he must arrest you: go•e
me my long sword there: help me of; so, come on sir varlet,
I must cut of your legs si•ha; nay stand up isle use you kind∣lie;
I mu•• cut of your legs I say.
Oh good sir I beseech you, nay good moister doctor,
Oh▪ good sir.
I must do it• there is no remedy;
I must cut of you• legs sirha.
I must cut of your ears, you rascal I must do it;
I must cut of your nose, I must cut of your head.
Oh for God sake good Moister Doctor.
Well rise how doest thou now? doest thou feel thy
s•lfe well? hast thou no harm?
No I thank God sir and your good worship.
Why so I said I must cut of thy legs, and I must
•ut of thy arms, and I must cut of thy head: but I did not
do it: so you said you must arrest this gentleman, but you
did not arrest him you knave, you sl•ue, you rogue, do you say
you must arrest sirha: away with him to the jail, isle teach
yo• a •r••ke for your must.
Goo• M. Doctor I beseech you be good to me.
Marry a God: away with him I say.
Nay sblood before I go to prison, isle put on my old
brazen face, and disclaim in my vocation▪ Isle discover thats
flat, and I be committed, it shall be for the committing of
more 〈◊〉 then this, hang 〈…〉 I loos• the least grain
of my fam•.
Why? when knave? by Gods marry, isle clap thee
by the heel•s 〈◊〉.
Hold, hold I pray you.
What the 〈◊〉? stay there.
Faith sir before I go to this house of bondage, I have
a case to unfold to your worship: which (that it may ap∣pear
more plain unto your worships view) I do thus first
of all uncase, &amp; appear in mine own proper nature, servant
to this gentleman: and known• by the name of Musco.
Ha? Musco.
Oh uncle, Musco has been with my cousin and I
all this day.
Did not I tell you there was some devise.
Nay good M. Doctor since I ha•e laid my self thus
open to your worship: now stand strong for me, till the pro∣gresse
of my tale be ended, and then if my wit do not deserve
your countenance: Slight throw it on a dog, and let me go
hang my self.
Body of me a merry knave, give me a boule of Sack, sig∣nior
Lorenzo, I bespeak your patience in particular, marry your
ears ingenerall, here knave, Doctor Clement drinks to thee.
• pledge M. Doctor and 't were a sea to the bottom.
Fill his boule for that, fill his boule: so, now speak freely.
Indeed this is it will make a man speak freely. But
to the point, know then that I Muss• (being somewhat more
t•usted of my moister then reason required a•d knowing his
intent to Fl•rinse) did assume the habit of a poor soldier in
wants, and minding by some means to intercept his journey in
the mid way, tu•xt the grandg and the city, I encountered him,
where begging of him in the most accomplished and true garb
(as they term it) contrary to al expectation, he reclaimed me
from that bad course of life; entertained me into 〈◊〉 se••ice,
employed me in his business possessed me with his secrets, which
I no sooner had received▪ but (seeking my young moister, and
finding him at this gentleman's house) I revealed all moss•am∣ply:
this done, by the d•uise of signior Pros•ero, and him to∣gether,
I returned (•s the Raven did to the Arc) to mine old
moist•r again, told him he should find his son in what ma∣ner
he knows, at one Cobs house, where indeed he never meant
to come, now my moister lie to maintain the jest, went the∣there,
and ieft me with your vvorships clarke: who being of a
most fine supple disposition (as most of your clarks are) prof∣fers
me the wine, which I h•d the grace to accept very easily,
and to the tavern we went: there after much ceremony, I
made him drunk in kindness, stripped him to his shirt, and
leaving him in that cool vain, departed, frolic, courtier
like, having obtained a suit: which suit fitting me exceedingly
well, I put on, and usurping your m•ns phrase &amp; action, carried
a message to Signior Thorello in your name: which message
was merely devised but to procure his absence, while signior
Prospero might make a conveyance of Hesperida to my moister.
Stay, fill me the boule again, here; it were pity of his
life would not cherish such a spirit: I drink to thee, fill him
wine, why now do you perceive the trick of it.
I, I, percei•e well we were all ab•sed▪
Well what remedy?
Where is Lorenz•, and Prospero can thou tell?
I sir, they are at supper 〈◊〉 the M••r•maid, where I left
your man.
Sirha go war•e them ••there presently before me:
and if the hour of your fellow• resurrection become bring
him to. But forward, forward, when thou had been at
Thorre•••s.
M•rry sir (coming along the street) these two g••∣tlemen
meet me, •nd very strongly supposing me to be yo••
worship• scribe, 〈◊〉 me to pro•ur th•m a vvarr••t, for
the arrest of signior 〈◊〉, I promised them upon some pair
•f silk stockings or a jewel, or so, to do it, and to get a varlet of
the city to serve it, which varlet I appointed should meet
them upon the Realto 〈◊〉 such an hour, th•y no sooner gone,
b•t I in a mere hope of more g•in by signior Go•lli•n•, went
to one of S••ans old Ingles • broker, &amp; there pa•nd your man•
livery, for a varlets suite, which here with my self, I offer
unto your vvorships consideration.
Well give me thy hand: Proh. superi ing•nium 〈◊〉
quis n•site Ho•erum. Il•i•s 〈◊〉 si l•tuisset op••? I admire thee
I honour thee, and if thy moister, or •ny man here be angry with
thee, I shall suspect his wit while I know him for it, do• you
hear Signior Thorell•, Signior Lorenz•, and the rest of my
good friends, I pray you let me have peace when they come,
I h••e sent for the two gallants and Hesperida, Gods marry I
muse have yo• friends, how now? what noyseis there?
Sir it is Pet• is come home•.
Peto bring him hither, bring him hither, what how now
signior drunckard, in arms against me, ha? your reason your reason for this.
I beseech your worship to pardon me.
Well, sirha tell him I do pardon him.
Truly sir I did happen into bad company by chance and
they cast me in a sleep and stripped me of all my clothes.
Tut this is not to the purpose touching your armour,
what might your armour signify.
Marry 〈◊〉 hung in the room where they stripped me, and
I borrowed it of on of the drawers, now in the evening to come
home in, because I was loath to come through the street in my shirt.
Well disarm him, but its no matter let him stand by,
who be these? oh young gal•ants; welcome, welcome, and you
Lady, nay never scatter such amazed looks amongst vs, Queen
nil potest la desperet nihil.
Faith M. Doctor thats even I, my hopes are small, and my
despair shall be as little. Brother, sister, brother what cloudy,
cloudy? and will 〈◊〉 sunshine on these looks appear, well since
there is such a tempest toward, isle be the porpuis, isle dance:
wench be of good cheer, thou hast a cloak for the rain yet,
where is he? S'hart how now, the picture of the prodigal, go to
isle have the calfe dressed for you at my charges.
Well son L•renzo, this days work of yours hath
much deceived my hopes, troubled my peace, and stretched my
patience further then became •he spirit of duty.
Nay Gods pity signior Lorenzo you shall urge it no more
come since you are here, isle have the disposing o• all, but first
signior Giulliano at my request take your cloak again•.
Well sir I am content.
Stay now let me see, oh signior Snow•liver I had almost
forgotten him, and your Genius there, what doth he suffer for
a good conscience to? doth he bear his cross with patience.
Nay they have scarce one c•os between thē both to bear.
Why doest thou know him, what is he? what is he?
Marry search his pocket sir, and the•e show you he is an
Author Sir.
Dic mihi muse virum: are you an Author sir, give me leave
a little, come on sir, isle make verses with you now in honour of
the Gods, and the Goddesses for what you dare extempore; and
now I begin.
Mount the my P•legon muse, and testify,
How Saturn sitting in an Ebon cloud,
Disro•d his podex, white as ivory,
And through the welkin thundered all aloud. theres for you sir.
Oh he writes not in that height of stile.
No: weal come a steppe or two lower then.
From Catadupa and the banks of Nile,
Where only breeds your monstrous Crocodile:
Now are• we purposd for to fetch our stile.
Oh too far fetched for him still moister Doctor:
I, say you so, lets entreat a sight of his vain then?
Signior, moister Doctor desires to see a sight of your
vain, nay you must not deny him.
What; al this verse, body of me he carries a whole realm;
a common wealth of paper in his hose, lets see some of his
sub•acts.
Unto the boundless ocean of thy beauty,
R•nnes this poor river, charged with streams of zeal,
Returning thee the tribute of my duty:
Which here my youth, my plaints, my love reave•le.
Good? is this your own invention▪
No sir▪ I translated that o•t of a book, called Delia.
Oh but I wold see some of your own, some of your own.
Sir; here is the beginning of a sonnet I made to my
mistress.
That that: who? to Mad••a Hesperida is she your
mistress.
It pleases him to call her so, sir.
In Summer time when Phoebus golden rays.
You translated this too? did you not?
No this is invention; he found it in a ballad.
Faith sir▪ I had most of the conceit of it 〈◊〉 of a bal∣lad
i•deed.
Conceit, fetch me a couple of torches, sirha,
I may see the conceit: quickly? its very dark?
Call you this poetry?
Poetry? nay then call blasphemy, religion;
Call Devils, Angels; and Sin, piety:
Let all things be preposterously transchangd.
Why how now son? what? are you startled now?
Hath the brize pricked you? ha? go to; you see,
How abjectly your Poetry is ranked, in general opinion.
Opinion, O God let gross opiniō sink &amp; be damned
As deep as Barathrum,
If it may stand with your most wished content,
I can refill opinion and approve,
The state of poe•ie, such as it is,
Blessed, aeternall, and most true divine:
Indeed if you will locke on Po••ie,
As she appears in many, poor and lame,
Patched up in remnants •nd old worn rags,
Half starved for want of her peculi•r food:
Sacred invention, then I must conferme,
Both your conceit and censure of her merrite,
But view her in her glorious ornaments,
Attired in the majesty of art,
Set high in spirit with the precious taste,
Of sweet philosophy, and which is most,
Crowned with the rich traditions of a soul,
That hates to have her dignity prophand,
With any relish of an earthly thought:
Oh them how proud a presence doth she bear.
Then is she like her self fit to be seen,
Of none but grave and consecrated eyes:
Nor is it any blemish to her fame.
That such lean▪ ignorant, and blasted wits,
Such brainless gulls, should utter their stolen wares
With such aplauses in our vulgar ears:
Or that their slubberd lines have currant pass,
From the fat judgements of the multitude,
But that this barren and infected age,
Should set no difference twixt these empty spirits,
And a true Poet: then which reverend name,
Nothing can more adorn humanity.
I Lorenzo, but election is now governed altogether
by the influence of humour, which instead of those holy flames
that should direct and light the soul to eternity, hurls forth
nothing bu• smoke and congested vapours, that stifle her up,
&amp; berea•e her of al sight &amp; motion. But she must have store of
Ell•bore•, given her to purge these gross obstructions: oh thats
well said, give me thy torch, come lay this stuff together. So,
give fire? there, see, see, how our Poets glory shines brighter,
and brighter, still, still it incr••seth, oh now its at the highest,
and now it declines as fast: you may see gallants, Sic transit glo∣ria
mundi. Well now my two Signior out sides, stand forth,
and l•nd me your large 〈◊〉, to • sentence, to a sentence: first
you signior shall this night to the cage, and so shall you sir,
from thence to morrow more•ing, you signior shall be carried
to the market cross, and be there bound: and so shall yo• sir,
in a large motley coat, with • rod at yo•r girdle; and you in
an old suite of sa•kcloth, ••d the ashes of your papers (save
the ashes sirha) shall morn all day, and at night both toge∣there
sing some ballad of repentance very piteously, which
you shall make to the t••e of Wh• list t• lead• and a soldiers life,
Sirha bil man, embrace you this torch, and light the gentlemen
to their lodgings, and because we tender their safety, you shall
watch them to night, you are provided for the purpose▪ away
and look to your charge with an open eye sirha.
Well I am are•d in soul against the worst of fortune.
Faith so should I be, and I had slept on it.
I am armed too, but I am not like to sleep on it.
Oh how this pleases me.
Now Signior Th••ello, Giulliano, Prospero, Bi•ncha.
And not me sir.
Yes and you sir: I had lost a sheep and he h•d no•
bleated, I must have you all friends: but first a word wit•
you young gallant, and you Lady.
Well brother Prospero by this good light that shines here
I am loath to kindle fresh coals, but and you had come in my
walk within these two hours I had given you that you
should not have clown of again in hast, by Iesus I had done
it, I am the arrenst rogue that ever bre•that else, but now be∣shrew
my hart if I bear you any malice in the earth.
Faith I did it but to hold up a jest: and help my sis∣la
to a husband, but brother Thor•llo, and sister, you have a
spice of the yealous yet both of you, (in your hose I mean,)
come do not dwell upon your anger so much, lets all be smooth
fore headed once again.
He plays upon my fore head, brother Giulliano, I pray
you tell me one thing I shall ask you: is my forehead any
thing rougher then it was wont to be.
Rougher? your forehead is smooth enough man.
Why should he then say? be smooth foreheaded,
Unless he jested at the smothnesse of it?
And that may be; for horn is very smooth;
So are my brows▪ by Iesu, smooth as horn?
Brother had he no haunt thither in good faith?
No upon my soul.
Nay then sweet hart: nay I pray the be not angry, good
faith isle never suspect thee •ny more, nay kiss me sweet musse.
Tell me Bi••cha, do not you play the woman with me.
Whats that sweet hart.
Dissemble?
Dissemble?
Nay doe not turn away: but say I faith was it not a
match appointed twixt this old gentleman and you?
A match.
Nay if it were not, I do not care: do not weep I pray
thee sweet Biancha, nay so now? by Iesus I am not jealous, but
resolved I have the faythfulst wife in Italy.
For this I find where jealousy is fed,
Horns in the mind•, are worse then on the head.
See what a drove of horns fly in the ayre,
Winged with my cle••sed, and my credulous breath:
Watch them suspicious eyes, watch where they fall,
See see, on heads that think they have none at all.
Oh what a ple••uous world of this will come,
When ayre raynes horns, all men besure of some.
Why thats well, come then: what say you are all a∣greed?
doth none•stand out.
None but this gentleman: to whom in my own per∣son
I owe all duty and affection: but most seriously entreat
pardon, for whatsoever hath past in these occurrants, that
might be contrary to his most desired content.
Faith sir it is a virtue that pursues,
Any •aue rude and vncomposed spirits,
To make a fair construction and indeed
Not to stand of, when such respective means,
Inuit a general content in all.
Well then I conjure you all here to put of all discon∣tentment,
first you Signior L•renz• your cares; you, and you,
your jealousy: you your anger, and you your wit sir: and for a
peace offering, here is one willing to be sacrificed upon this
alter: say d• you approve my motion?
We doe isle be mouth for all.
Why then I wish them all joy, and now to make our
evening happiness more full: this night you shall be all my
guests: where weal enjoy the very spirit of mirth, and ca∣rouse
to the health of this Heroic spirit, whom to honour the
more I do invest in my own robes, desiring you two Giulli∣ano,
and Pr•spero, to be his supporters, the train to follow, my
self will lead•, ushered by my page here with this honourable•
verse. Claudite jam riuos pueri sat pr•ta biberunt.

WHy so? thus doe I hope to please:
Music revives, and mirth is tolerable.
Comedy play thy part, and please,
Make merry them that coms to joy with thee:
Joy then good gentilles, I hope to make you laugh.
Sound forth Bellonas silver tuned strings.
Time fits vs well, the day and place is ours.
Nay stay minion, there lies a block.
What al on mirth; Isle interrupt your tale.
And mix your music with a tragic end•
What monstrous ugly hag is this,
That dares comtrowle the pleasures of our will?
Vaunt churlish cur, besmeared with gorie blood,
That seem to check 〈…〉
And stifle the 〈…〉
Blush, monster blush, and post away with shame,
That seek disturbance of a goddess deeds.
Post hence thy self, thou counterchecking trul,
I will possess this habit• spite of thee
And gain the glory of thy wished port,
Isle thunder music shall appal the nymphs,
And make them sheuer their clattering strings:
Flying for succour to their danes caves.
Hearken, thou shalt hear a noise
Shall fill the air with a shrilling sound,
And thunder music to the gods aboue:
Mars shall himsel•e breathe down
A peerless crowene upon brave envies head,
And raise his cheval with a lasting fame
In this brave music Envy takes delight,
Where I may see them wallow in there blood,
To spurn at arms• and legs quite shivered off,
And hear the cries of many thousand slain,
How likst thou this my •r•ll, this sport alone for me•
Vaunt bloody cur•e, nur•t up with tigers sap,
That so dost seek to quail a women's mind,
Comedy is mild gentle, willing for to please,
And seeks to gain the love of all estates•
Delighting in mi•th• mixed all with lovely •ales•
And brings things with •rabble joy to pas•e,
Thou bloody, Envious, disdainer of men's joy,
Whose name is fraught with bloody stratagems,
D•lights in nothing but in spoil•e and dea•h,
Where 〈…〉 blood,
And 〈…〉
Yet veil thy mind, revenge thou not on me,
A silly woman begs it at thy hands,
Give me the leave to utter out my play,
Forbear this place, I humbly crave thee hence,
And mix not death amongst pleasing comedies,
That treats nought else but pleasure and delight.
If any spark of human rests in thee,
Forbear, be gon, tender the suite of me.
Why so I will, forbearance shall be such
As tree•ble death shall cross thee with despite,
And make thee morn where most thou ioiest,
Turning thy mirth into a deadly dole:
Whirling thy pleasures with a peal of death,
And drench thy methods in a sea of blood:
This will I doe, thus shall I bear with thee
And more to vex thee with a deeper spite,
I will with th•eats of blood begin thy play:
Favouring thee with envy and with hate.
Then ugly monster doe thy worst,
I will defend them in despite of thee:
And thought thou think with tragic fumes
To brave my play unto my deep disgrace.
I force it not, I scorn what thou can doe
Isle grace it so, thy self shall it confess:
From tragic stuff to be a pleasant comedy
Why then 〈◊〉 send thy actors forth
And I will cross the first steps of their tread:
Making them fear the very dart of death.
And Isle defend them mangre all thy spite
So ugly fiend frewell, tell time shall serve,
That we may meet to parley forth best
Conten• C•medie, isle go spread my branch,
And scattered blossoms from mine envious tree.
Oh fly Madam, fly or else we art but dead.
Help Segasto help, help sweat Segasto or eel I die.
Alas madam, there is no way but flight,
Then hast and save your self.
Why then I die, ah help me in distress,
Stay Lady stay, and be no more dismayed,
That cruel beast most merciless and fell,
Which have bereaved thousands of their lives,
Affrighted many with his hard pursues,
Prying from place to place to find his pray,
Prolonging thus his life by others death,
His carcass now lies headless void of breath.
That foul deformed monster is he dead?
Assure your self thereof, behold his head•
Which if it please you Lady to accept,
With willing heart I yield it to your majesty.
Thanks worthy shepherd, thanks a thousand times
This gift assure thy self contents me more,
Then greatest bounty of a mighty prince:
Although he were the monarch of the world.
Most gracious goddess, more then mortal wight,
Your heavenly hew of right imports no less,
Most glad am I in that it was my chance,
To undertake this enterprise in hand.
Which doth so greatly glad your princely mind•
No goddess shepherd, but a mortal wight
A mortal wight distressed as thou see:
My father here is king of Arragon.
I Amadine his only daughter am:
And after him sole heir unto the crown.
Now where as it is my fathers will,
To mary me unto Segasto,
On whose wealth through fathers former usury
Is known to be no less then wonderful,
We both of custom oftentimes did use,
Leaving the court to walk within the fields,
For recreation esecially the spring,
In that it yields great store of rare delights:
And passing further then our wonted walks,
Scarce were entered within these luckless woods,
But right before vs down a steep fall hill
A monstrous ugly bear did hie him fast,
To meet vs both, I faint to tell the rest,
Good shepherd, but suppose the ghastly looks,
The hiddious fears, the thousand hunderd woes,
Which at this instant Amadine sustained.
Yet worthy princes let thy sorrow cease,
And let this sight your former joys revive.
Believe me shepherd so it doth no less.
Long may they last unto your hearts content.
But tell me Lady what is become of him,
Segasto called, what is become of him?
I know not I, that know the powers dive•••
But God grant this that sweet Segasto live.
Yet heard hearted he in such a case,
So cowardly to save himself by flight:
And leave so brave a princess to the spoil
Well shepherd for thy worthy valour tried,
Endangering thy self to set me free:
Vnrecompensed sure thou shalt not be.
In court thy courage shall be plainly known:
Throughout the Kingdom will I spread thy name,
To thy renown and never dying fame:
And that thy courage may be better known.
Bear thou the head of this most monstrous beast
In open sight to every courtiers view
So will the king my father thee reward.
Come lets away, and guard me to the court.
With all my heart.
When heaps of harms do hover over head,
Tic time as then, some say to look about,
And so ensuing harms to choose the least:
But hard, yea haplesse is that wretches chance,
Luckless his lot and caitiff like acourste,
At whose proceedings fortune ever frowns.
My self I mean most subject unto thrall,
For I the more I seek to shun the worst:
The more by proof I find my self accursed:
Ere whiles assaulted with an ugly bear,
Fair Amadine in company all alone,
Forthwith by flight I thought to save my self,
Leaving my Amadine unto her shifts:
For death it was for to resist the bear.
And death no less of Amadines harms to hear.
Accursed I in lingering life thus long,
In leaving thus each minute of an hour
Doth pierce my hart with darts of thousand death•:
If she by flight her fury doe escape,
What will she think;
Will she not say; yea flatly to my face,
Accusing me of mere disloyalty,
A trusty friend is tried time of need:
But I when she in danger was of death
And needed me, and cried Segas•o help:
I turned my back and quickly ran away.
Unworthy I to bear this vital breath:
But what, what needs these plaints
If Amadine do live then happy I,
She will in time forgive and so forget,
Amadine is merciful, not Iuno like.
In harmful hart to harbour hatred long.
Clubs, prongs, pitchfo•ks, bills, O help, a bear, a bear, a bear.
Still bears, and nothing else but bears.
Tell me sir where she is;
O sir, she is run down the woods:
I see her wit head and her white belly.
Thou talk of wonders, to tell me of white bears.
But sir did thou ever see any such;
No faith I never saw any such,
But I remember my fathers words,
Hee bad me take he•de I was not caught with a white bear
A lamentable tale no dout.
I tell you what sir as I was going a field to serve my fathers great horse, &amp; carried a bottly of hay upon my head, now doe you see sir, I fast hudwinckt, that I could see nothing, perceiving the bear coming, I threw my hay into the hedge and ran away.
What from nothing;
I wa•rant you yes, I saw something, for there was tow load of thorns besides my bottle of hay, and that made three.
But tell me sir, the bear that thou did see,
Did she not bear a bucket on her arm;
Ha ha, ha, I never saw bear go a milking in all my life.
But ha•k you sir, I did not look so hie as her arm:
I saw nothing but her whit head, and her whit belly.
But tell me sir, where dost thou dwell;
Why, doe you not know me.
Why no, how should I know thee,
Why then you know no body, and you know not mee' I tell you sir I am the goodman •a•s son of the next parish over the hill.
Goodman rats son why whats thy name,
why I am very near kin unto him.
I think so, but whats thy name?
My name, I have very pretty name Isle tel you what my name is: my name is Mouse,
what plain Mons.
I, plain mouse with out either welt or guard•
But doe you hey•e sir I am but a very young mouse,
For my •ail is scarce grown out yet, look you here •ls.
But I pray thee, who g•ue thee that name?
Faith •ir I know not that, but if you would fine
know, ask my fathers g•eat horse, for he hath bin half a year longer with my father then I have.
This seems to be a merry fellow,
I care not if I take him home with me,
Mirth is a comfort to a troubled mind,
A merry man, a merry master makes.
How say thou sir, wilt thou dwell with me?
Nay soft sir, tow words to a bargain, pray you what occupation are you?
No occupation, I live upon my lands•
Your lands, a way, you are no moister for me, why doe you think that I am so m•d, to go s•ke my living in the lands amongst the stones, briers, and bushes, and tear my holy day appa•ell, not I by your leave.
Why, I do not mean th•u shalt.
How th•n?
Why thou shalt be my man, and waite upon me at the court.
Whats that?
Where the King lies.
Whats that same King a man or woman?
A man as thou art•
As I am, ha•ke you sir pray you what kin is he to good man king of our parish the church warden?
No kin to him, he is the King of the whole land.
king of the land, I never see him.
If thou wilt dwell with me, thou shallt see him e∣very day.
shall I go home again to be torn in pieces with bears, no not I, I will go home &amp; put on a clean shirt, and then go drown my self.
Thou shallt not need, if thou wilt dwell with me, thou shalt want nothing.
Shall I not? then hears my hand, isle dwell with you, And hark you sir, now you have entertained me, I will tell you what I can doe, I can keep my tongue from picking and stealing, and my hands from lying and slandering, I warrant you, as well as ever you had man• in all your life.
Now will I to court with sorrowful hart, rown∣ded with doubts, if Amadine doe live, then happy I: yea happy I if Amadine do• live.
Now brave Lords, our wars are brought to end,
Our foes the foil and we in safety rest,
It vs behooves to use such clemency in peace•
As valour in the war•
It is as great honour to be bountiful at home,
As to be conquerors in the field.
There•ore my Lords the more to my conte•t,
Your liking, and your countries safeguard,
We are disposed in marriage for to give
Our daughter to Lord Segasto hear,
Who shall succeed the diadem af•er me:
And raigue heereaft•r as I tofore have done
Your sole and lawful King of Arragon:
What say you Lordings, like you of my advise•
And please your Majesty, we doe not only a∣lowe of your highness pleasure, but also vow faithful∣lie in what we may to further it.
Thanks good my Lords, if long Adr•stus li•e
Me will at full requite your cur•easies.
Tremelio in recompense of thy late valour done,
Take unto thee the Catalone a prince,
Lately our prisoner taken in the wars
Be thou his keeper, his ransom shall be thine,
Weel• think of it when leisure shall afford:
Meanewhile doe use him well, his father is a King.
Thanks to your Majesty, his usage shall be such,
As he thereat shall think no cause to grutce.
Then march we on to court, and rest our weari∣ed limbs
But Collen, I have a tale in secret kept for thee:
When thou shalt hear a watch word from thy king,
Think then some weighty matter is at hand
That highly shall concern our state,
Then Collen look thou be not far from me•
And for thy service thou to fore hast done,
Thy truth and valour proud in every point,
I shall with bounties thee enlarge therefore:
So guard vs to the court.
What so my sovereign doth command me do•,
With willing mind I gladly yield consent
Tel me sir, how doe you like your weapons;
O very well, very well, they keep my sides warm.
They keep the dogs form your shins very well doe they not;
How, keep the dogs from my shins, I would scorn but my shins should keep the dogs from them.
Well •irra, leaving idle talk, tell me:
Dost thou know captain Tremelioes chamber;
I very well, it hath a door
I think so, for so hath every chamber•
But dost thou know the man.
I forsooth he hath a nose on his face.
Why so ha•h every on•
Tha•s more then I know.
But doest thou remember the captain, that was here with the king even now, that brought the young prince prisoner?
O very well.
Go unto him and bid him come to me,
Tell him I have a matter in secret to impart to him,
I will master, master whats his name?
Why captain Tremelio.
O the meal man, I know him very well,
He brings meal every saturday: but hark you master must I bid him come to you or must you come to him
No sir, he must come to me.
Hark you master, how if he be not at home.
What shall I doe then?
Why then leaust word with some of his folks.
Oh moister, if there be no body within,
I will leave word with his dog.
Why can his dog speak•
I cannot tell, wherefore doth he keep his cham∣ber else•
To keep out such knaves as thou art.
Nay be lady then go your self.
You will go sir, will ye not;
Yes marry will I, O tic come to my head,
And a be not within, Isle bring his chamber to you.
What wilt thou pluck down the Kings house?
Nay be lady Isle know the price of it first.
Master it is such a hard name, I have forgotten it a∣gain I pray you tell me his name,
I tell thee captain Tremelio.
Oh captain treble knave, captain treble knave
How now sir, dost thou call me?
You must come to my moister captain treble knave
My Lord Segasto. did you send for me.
I did Tremel•o, sir•a about you• business.
I marry, whats that can you te•le
No not well.
Marry then I can, straight to the kitchen dresser, to Iohn the cooke, and get me a good piece of beef and brewis, and then to the buttery •atch to Thomas the butler, for a ••c•e of bear, and there for an hour ileso be labour my self, therefore I pray you cal me not till you think I have done, I pray you good master.
Well• sir away•
Tremelio this it is, thou know the valour of Segasto
Spread through all the kingdom of Arragon,
And such as hath found triumph and favours,
Never daunted at any time, but now a shepherd,
Admired at in court for worthiness.
And Segastoes honour laid a side.
My will therefore is this, that thou dost find some means to work the shepherds death, I know thy streng•h sufficient to perform my desire, &amp; thy love no other wise then to revenge my injuries.
It is not the frowns of a shepherd that Tremelio fears.
Therefore account it accomplished, what I take in hane
Thanks good Tremelio, and assure thy self,
What I promise that will I perform.
Thanks my good Lord, and in good time
See where he comes, stand by a while.
And you shall see me put in practise your intended, drifts.
Have at thee swain, if that I hit thee right.
Wild coward, so without cause to strike a man.
Turn coward turn, now strike and doe thy worst.
Hold shepherd hold, spare him, kill him not,
ccursed villain, tell me what hast thou done.
Ah Tremelio, trusty Tremelio, I sorrow for thy death,
And since that thou living, did prove faithful to
Segasto, so Segasto now living shall honour the dead corpse of Tremlio with revenge.
Blood thristy villain, borne and bred to merciless murder,
Tell me how durst thou be so bold.
As once to lay thy hands upon the least of mine.
Assure thy self, thou shalt be used according to the law.
Segasto cease, these threats are needless
Accuse not me of murder, that have done nothing but in mine own defence.
Nay shepherd reason not with me.
Isle manifest thy fact unto the King:
Whose doom will be thy death as thou deserust,
What hoe, Mouse come away.
Why how now, vvhats the matter.
I thought you would be calling before I had done.
Come help away with my friend.
Why is he drunk, cannot he stand on his feet.
No, he is not drunk, he is slain.
Flaine, no by Lady he is not flaine.
Hes kilt I tell thee.
What, doe you use to kill your friends.
I will serve you no longer.
I tell thee the shepherd kilt him.
O did a so, but master, I will have al his appa•el• if I carry him away.
Why so thou shalt.
Come then I will help, mas master I think his mother song looby to him he is so heavy.
behold the fickle state of man, always mutable, never at one.
Sometimes we feed on fancies with the sweet of our desires.
Sometimes again we feel the heat of extreme mi∣serie.
Now am I infauour about the court and country.
To morrow those favours will turn to frovvnes,
To day I live revenged on my foe,
To morrow I die, my foe revenged on me,
No passengers this morning, what not one.
A chance that seldom doth befall.
What not one• then lie thou there,
And rest thyself till I have further need:
Now Bremo sith thy leisure so affords.
An endless th•ng, who knows not Bremoes strength
Who like a king commander within these woods,
The bear, the boar, da•es not abide my sight,
But hastes away to save themselves by flight:
The crystal waters in the bubbling brookes,
When I come by doth swiftly slide away,
And claps themselves in closets under banks,
Afraid to look bold Bremo in the face:
The aged oaks at Bremoes breath doe bow,
And all things else are still at my command,
Else What would I?
Rent them in pieces and pluck them from the earth,
And each way else I would revenge my self,
Why who comes here with whom I dare not fight,
Who fights with me &amp; doth not die the death; not on:
What favour shows this sturdy stick to those,
That here within these woods are combataines with me?
Why death and nothing else but present death,
With restless rage I wander through these woods,
No creature here but fe•reth Bremoes force,
Man, woman, child, beast and bird,
And every thing that doth approach my sight,
Are• foe•st to fall if Bremo once but frown,
Come cudgel come, my partner in my spoils,
For here I see this day it will not be,
But when it falls that I encounter any,
One pa• sufficed for to work my will.
What comes not one? then lets begone,
A time will serve when we shall better speed.
Shepherd, thou hast heard thine accusers,
Murder is laid to thy charge,
What can thou say, thou hast deserved death;
Dread sovereign, I must needs confess,
I slew this captain in mine own defence•
Not of any malice but by chance,
But mine accuser hath a further meaning.
words will not here prevail,
I seek for i•stice, &amp; justice craves his death.
Shepherd thine own confession hath condemn∣ned thee.
Sir take him away, &amp; doe him to execu•ion straight.
So hee shall I warrant him, but doe you hear moister King, he is kin to a monkey, his neck is bigger then is head.
Com sir away with him, and hang him about the middle.
Yes forsooth I warrant you, come on sir, a so like a sheep biter a looks.
Dread sovereign and well-beloved sire.
On bended kees I crave the life of this condemned shepherd, which heretofore preserved the life of thy sometime distressed daughter.
K. preserved the life of my sometime distressed daughter
How can that be; I never knew the time
Whrein thou wast did•est, I never knew the day
But that I have maintained thy state,
As best beseemd the daughter of a king
I never saw the shepherd until now,
How comes it then that he preserved thy life?
Once walking with Segasto in the woods,
Further then our accustomed manner was,
Right before vs down a steep fall hill,
A monstrous ugly bear doth hie him fast
To meet vs both, now whether this bee true,
I refer it to the cordite of Segasto.
Most true and like your majesty.
How then?
The bear being eager to obtain his pray;
Made forward to vs with an open mouth,
As if he meant to swallow vs both at once,
The sight whereof did make vs both to dread,
But specially your daughter Amadine,
W•o for I saw no succour incident
But in Segastoes valour, I grew desperate,
And he most cowardlike began to fly.
Left me distressed to be deuourd of him,
How say you Segasto is it not true?
His silence verifies it to be true, what then;
Then I amasded stressed all alone,
Did hie me fast to scope that ugly bear,
But all in vain, for why he reached after me,
And hardly I did oft escape his paws,
Till at the length this shepherd came,
And brought to me his head.
Come hither boy, lo here it is, which I present unto your majesty.
The sloughed•r o• this bear deserves great •am.
The slaughter of a man des•rues great blame.
Indeed occasion oftentimes so falls out.
Tremelio in the wars. O King preserved thee,
The shepherd in the woods o king preserved me.
Tremelio fought when many men did yield.
So would the shepherd had he bin in field
So would my moister, had he not r•n away•
Tremelioes force saved thousands from the •o•
The shepherds force have saved thousand, more.
Aye shipstickes, nothing else.
Segasto cease to accuse the shepherd,
His worthiness deserves a recompense,
All we are bound to doe the shepherd good:
Shepherd, whereas it was my sentence, thou should die•
So shall my sentence stand, for thou shalt die.
Thanks to your maistie.
But soft Segasto, not for this offence,
Long moist thou live, and when the sisters shall decree
To cut in twain the twisted thread of life,
Then let him die, for this I set thee free,
And for thy valour I will honour thee.
Thanks to your majesty•
Come daughter let vs now depart, to honour the worthy valour of the shepherd with our rewards.
O master hear you, you have made a fresh hand now you would be •lowe you, why what will you doe now? you have lost me a good occupation by the means, Faith moister now I cannot hang the shep∣he•rd, I pray you let me take• the pains to hang you, it is but half an hours exercise.
You are still in your knavery, but •ith I cannot have his life I will procure his banishment for ever. Come on •irra.
Yes forsooth I come laugh at him I pray you.
From Amadine and from her fathers court,
With gold and silver and with rich rewards,
Flowing from t•e banks of golden treasuries,
More may I boast and say but I,
Was never shepherd in such dignity,
All hail worthy shepherd.
All rain lousy shepherd.
Welcome my friends, from whence come you;
The King and Amadine greetes thee well,
And after greetings done, bids thee depart the court, shepherd begone.
Shepherd take law legs, fly away shepherd
Whose words are these? came these from Amadine?
Aye from Amadine.
Aye from Amladine.
Ah luckelesse fortune worse then Phaetons tale,
My former bless is now become my bale.
What w•lt thou poison thy self?
My former heaven is now become my hell.
The worst ale house that I ever came in, in al my life.
What shall I doe.
Even go hang thy self half an nower.
Can Amadine so churelishly command.
To banish the shepherd from her Fathers court?
What should shepherds doe in the court.
What should shepherrdes doe amongst vs, have we not Lords enough on vs in the court?
Why shepherds are men, and kings are no more.
Shephe•rdes are men and masters over their flock
Thats a lie who pays them their wages the•?
Well you are always interrupting of me,
But you are best look to him least you hang for him when he is gone.
And you shall hang for company,
For leaving me alone.
Shepherd stand forth and hear thy sentence,
Shepherd begone within three days in payne of,
My displeasure, shepherd begone, shepherd begone, begone, begone, begone, shepherd, shepherd, shepherd
And must I go, and must I needs depart?
Ye goodly groves partakers of my songs
In time tofore when fortune did not frown,
Power forth your plaints and wail a while with me
And thou bright sun my comfort in the cold,
Hide, hide thy face and leave me comfortless,
Ye wholesome herbs, and sweet smelling savours,
Ye each thing else prolonging life of man,
Change, change your wonted course,
That •anting your aide, in woeful sort may die,
Arinea if any body ask for me,
Make some excuse till I return.
What and Segasto call.
Do thou the like to him, I mean not to stay long•
This voice so sweet my pining spirits revives
Shepherd, well met tel me how thou doest.
I linger life yet wish for speedy death.
Shepherd, although thy banishment already be
decreed and all against thy will, yet Amadine.
Ah Amadine, to hear of banishment is death,
I double death to me, but since I must depart, one thing I crave.
Say on with all my heart.
That in absence either far or near.
You honoor me as servant with your name.
Not so.
And why?
I honour thee as sovereign with my heart.
A shepherd and a sovereign nothing like.
Yet like enough where there is no dislike.
Yet great dislike or else no banishment.
Shepherd, it is only Segasto that procures thy banishment.
Unworthy wights are most in jealousy.
Would God they would freed from banish∣meant, or likewise bamish me.
Amen say I, to have your company.
Well shepherd, sith thou suffer this for my sake, with thee in exile also let me live.
On this condition shepherd thou can love.
No longer love no longer let me live.
O flat I loved one indeed, now love I none but only thee.
Thanks worthy princes I borne likewise,
Yet smother up the blast,
I dare not promise what I may perform,
Well shepherd, hark what I shall say,
I will return unto my Fathers court.
Therefore to provide me of such nescessaries,
As for our journey I shall think most fit,
This being done I will return to thee,
Doe thou therefore appoint the place where we may meet.
Down in the valley where I slue the bear,
And there doth grow a •air broad branched beach,
That ouershades a well, so who comes first
Let them abid the happy meeting of vs both.
How like you this?
I like i• very well.
Now if you please you may appoint the time,
Full three hours hence God willing, I will return.
The thanks that paris gave the grecian queen the like doth Mucedorns yield.
Then Mucedorus forthreee hours farewell.
Your departure lady breeds a privy pain.
Tic well Segasto that thou h•st thy will,
Should such a shhephard, such a simple swain
As he, eclipse thy credit •amous through the court.
No ply Segasto ply; let it not in Arragon be said•
A shepherd hath Segatoes honour won.
When• hoe moister will you come away;
Will you come hither I pray you, whats the mat∣la?
Why, is it not past a leaven a clock.
How then sir.
I pray you com away to dinner:
I pray you come hither.
Here is such a doe with you, will you never come.
I pray you sir what news of the message I sent you about,
I tell you all the mess•s be on the table already,
There wants not so much as a mess of mustard half an novver ago.
Come sir, your mind is all upon your belly.
You have forgotten what I did bid you doe,
Faith I know nothing, but you bad me go to breakfast.
Was that all;
Faith I have forgotten it, the very sent of the meat made me hath forget it quite.
You have forgotten the arrant I bid you doe.
What arrant, an arrant knave, or arrant vvhore;
Why thou knave, did I not bid thee banish the shepherd.
O the shepherds bastard.
I tell thee the shepherds banishment.
I tel you the shepherds bastard shall be well kept isle look to it my •elf else, but I pray you come away to dinner.
Then you will not tell me whether you have ba∣nished him or no.
Why I cannot say banishment and you would give me a thousand pounds to say so,
Why you whoreson slave, have you forgotten, that
I sent you, and another to drive away the shepherd.
What an ass are you• heers a stir in dee•de hears message, arrant, banishment, and I cannot tell what.
I pray you sir, shall I know whether you have drove him away.
Faith I think I have, and you will not believe me ask my stiff.
Why can thy staff tell.
Why he was with me to.
Then happy I that have obtained my will.
And happier I, if you would go to dinner.
Come sir, follow me.
I warrant you I will not loose an inch of you now you are going to dinner, I promise you I thought sea∣uen year before I could get him away•
God grant my long delay procures no harm
Nor this my tarring frustrate my pretence,
My Mucedorus surely stays for me,
And thinks me over long, at length I come
My present promise to perform:
Ah what a thing is firm unfeigned love,
What is i• which t•ue love dares not tempt
My fat•er he may make bu• I must match,
Segasto l•ues b•t Amadine must like,
When•e likes he• best c•mpulsion is a thrall,
No, no, the hearty choice is all in all,
The shepherds virtue Amadine esteems.
But what me thinks my shepherd is not come?
I muse at that, the hour is sure at hand,
Well here isle rest till Mucedorus come.
A hapie pray, now Bremo feed on flesh,
Dainties Bremo dainties thy hungry paunch to fill,
Now glut thy greedy guts with luke warm blood,
Come fight with me, I long to see thee dead.
How can she fight that weapons cannot weeld?
What can not fight? then lie thou down and die.
What must I die?
W•at needs these words. I thirst to suck thy blood
Yet pity me and let me live a while.
No pity I, isle feed upon thy flesh,
Isle tear thy body piecemeal joint from joint.
Ah now I want my shepherds company.
isle crush thy bones betwixt tow oken trees.
Hast shepherd hast or else thou come to lat.
isle suck the sweetness from thy marie bones.
Ah spare ah spare to shed my guiltless blood
With this my bat will I beat out thy brains
Down, down I say, prostrate thy self upon the ground
Then Mucedorus farewell• my hopedioi•s farewell.
Yea farewell life, and welcome present death,
To thee O God I yield my dying ghost.
Now Bremo play thy part,
How now what sudden chance is this.
My limbs do tremble and my s•ewes shake
My vnvveakned arms have lost their former force:
Ah Bremo, Bremo, what a foil hast thou,
That yet at no time ever wast afraid
To dare the greatest gods to fi•light with thee,
And now vva•tstrength for one down driving blow
Ah how my courage fails when I should strike,
Some new come spirit abiding in my breast,
Shall I spare her Bremo, spare her, do not kill,
Saith spare her which never spar•dany?
To it Bremo to it, say again.
I cannot weeld my weapons in my hand,
Me thy•kes I should not str•k so fair a one,
I think her beauty hath bewitched my sorce
Or else with in me altered natures course,
ay woman, wilt thou live in woods with me;
Fine would I live, yet loath to live in woods,
Thou shalt not choose, it shall be as I say &amp; the•e¦fore follow me.
It was my will an hour a go and more,
As was my promise for to make return,
But other business hindered my pretence.
It is a world to s•e when man appoints,
And purposely one ce•taine thing decrees
How many things may hinder his intone•.
What once would wish the same is farthest off:
But yet thappoynted time cannot be past,
Nor hath her pres•nce yet prevented wee,
Well here isle s•ay, and expect her coming.
Some one or oath•r is pursued no doubt
Perhaps some search for me, tic good to doubt the worst, there•ore isle begone.
Hold him, hold him hold him, heers a stir in deed
Here came hew a•la the crier, and I was set close
At mother Nips house, and there I called for three
Pots of ale, as tic the manner o• vs courtiers, now sir,
I had taken the maiden head of tow of them.
Now as I was lifting up the third to my mouth, there came hold him, hold him, now I could not tell whom to catch hold on, but I am sure I caught one perchance a may be in this pot, well isle see, mas I can∣not see him yet, well isle look a little •urther, mas he is a little slave if a be here, why heers no body, al this goes well yet: but if the old trot should come for her pot, I marry theres the matter but I care not, isle face her out, and cal her old rusty dusty musty •ustie crustkie firebran, and worse then al that, and so face her
out of her pot: but soft here she comes.
Come on you knawe wheres my pot you knave?
Go look your pot, come not to me for your pot twe•e good for you.
Thou least thou knave thou hast my pot•
You lie and you say it, I your pot, I know what isle say
Why what wilt thou say.
But say I have him and thou dare,
Why thou knave. thou hast not only my pot but my drink unpaid for.
You lie like an old I will not say whore.
dost thou cal me whore, isle cap thee my for pot.
Cap me &amp; thou dare, scarce me whether I have it or no.
How now sir, whats the matter;
Oh flies moister flies.
Flies where are they?
Oh here moister, all about your face.
Why thou least I think thou art mad.
Why moister, I have kilt a duncart full at the least
Go to sir, leaving this idel talk give ear to me.
How, give you one of my ears? not &amp; you were ten masters.
Why sir I bid you give ear to my words,
I tell you I will no be made a curtal for no mans pleasure
I tell thee attend what I say go thy ways straight and rear the whole town.
How rear the town even go your self, it is more then I can doe, why doe you think I can rear a town, that can scarce rear a pot of ale to my head? I should rear a town should I not;
Go to the cunstable and make a privy search, for the shepherd is run away with the Kings daughter.
How? is the shepherd run away with the kin•s daughter. or is the kings daughter run away with the shepherd.
I cannot tell, but they are both gon together
What a fool is she to run away with the shep∣heard, why I think I am a little hansomer man then the shepherd my self, but tel me moister, must I make a privy search, or search in the privy;
why dost thou think they will be there;
I cannot tell.
Well then search every where. leave no place unsearched for them.
Oh now am I in office, vow will I to that old firbrāds house &amp; will not leave one place unsearched, nay isle to her ale stand &amp; drink as long as I can stand, &amp; when I have done isle let out al the rest, to se if he be not hid in the barrel, &amp; I find him not there, isle to the cubord, isle not leave one corner of her house unsearched, ye faith ye old crust I will be with you now.
Now Mucedorns whither wilt thou go,
Home to thy father to thy native soil,
Or try some long abode within these woods;
Well I will hence depart and hie me home,
What hie me home said I? that may not be.
In Amadine rests my felicity
Then Mucedorus do as thou did decree,
Attire thee hermit like, within these groves,
Walk often to the be•ch and view the well.
Make settles th•re and seat thy s•lfe thereon,
And when thou feel thy self to be a thrist,
Then drink a hearty draught to Amadine,
No doubt she thinks on thee,
And will one day com• pleg thee at this we•l•
Come habit thou art fit foe• me,
No shepherd now, a hermit I must be:
Me thinks this fits me very well•,
Now must I learn to bear a walking staff,
And exercise some gravity with•ll.
Heers throw the woods, and throw the woods, to look out a shepherd &amp; a stray kings daugter, but •o•te who have we here, what art thou?
I am an hermit.
An•emmet, I never saw such big emmet in all my life before.
I tel you sir I am an hermit, one that leads a soli∣tarry life within these woods.
O I know the now, thou art her that eats up al the hips and hawes, we could not have one piece of fat bacon for thee al this year.
Thou dost mistake me, but I pray thee tell me what dost thou seek in these wood?
What doe I seek, for a stray Kings daughter run away with a shepherd:
A stray Kings daught•r run away with a sh•p∣heaarde. Wherefore can thou tell?
Yes that I can, tic this, my moister and Amadins walking one day abroad, nearer to these woods then they wet used, about what I can not tell, but toward
them comes running a great bear, now my moister he plaide the man and run away, &amp; Amadine crying after him: now sir comes me a shepherd &amp; strikes off the b•ares head, now whether the bear where dead be∣fore or no I cannot tell for bring twenty b•ars before me and bind their hands &amp; feet and isle kill them al: now ever•ince Amadine hath bin in love with the shep∣h•art, and for good will shees even run away with the shepherd.
What manner of man was a, can describe him unto me;
Scribe h•m aye I war•ant you that I can, a was a litt•l, low, broad, tall, narrow, big well favoured fe•low, a ie•kin of whit cloth, and buttons of the same cloth
Thou discr•b•st him well, but if I chance to se any such pray you where sh•l I find you, or whats your name
My name is called moister mouse,
Oh m•ester mouse, I pray you what of•ice might you •e•r• in the •ort?
M•rry sir I am a •usher of the stable.
O usher of the table-
Nay I say rusher and isle prove mine office good, •or look sir when any coms f•om under •he s•a or so, and a dog chance to blow his nose backward, then with a whip I give him the good time of the day, and straw rushes presently, therefore I am a rusher, a hie off•ce I promise ye.
But where shall I find you in the Court•?
Why where it is best being, ei•her in he •itch∣ing a eating or in the buttery drinking: but i• you come I will provide for th•e a pe•ce of beef &amp; brew is knockle d•epe in •at, pray you take pains remember moister mouse.
Ay sir, I warrant I will not forget you.
Ah Amadine, what should become of the.
whither should thou go so long unknown.
with watch and ward eche passage is beset,
So that she cannot long escape unknown:
Doubtless she hath lost her •elf within these woods out
And wandering too and fro she seeks the well,
Which yet she cannot find, therefore will I seck he•s,
Amadine, how like you Br•mo &amp; his woods?
As like the woods of Bremoes cruelty,
Though I were dombe and could not answer him,
The beasts themselves would with relenting tears
Bewail thy savage and unhumane deeds.
My love, why dost thou murmur to thy self?
Speak louder, for thy Bremo hears thee not.
My Bremo, no the shepherd is my love.
Have I not saved thee from sudden death,
Giving thee leave to live that thou might love?
And dost thou whet me on to cruelty;
Come kiss me swe•e for all my favours past.
I may not Bremo and therefore pardon me.
See how she flings away from me;
I will follow and give a rend to her,
Deny my love, ah worm of beauty
I will chastise the• com, com, prepare thy head upon the block
Oh spare me Bremo love should limit life,
Not to be made a murderer of him self
If thou wilt glut thy loving heart with blood,
Encounter with the lion or the bear,
And a like wolf pray not upon a lamb.
Why then dost thou rapine at me?
If thou wilt love me thou shalt be my que•no,
I will crown thee with a complete made of Ivory,
And make the rose and lily wait on thee,
Isle •end the burly branches from the ok,
To shadow thee from burring sun.
The trees shall spread themselves where thou dost go,
And as they spread, isle trace along with thee,
You may, for who but you?
Thou shalt bee •ed with quails and partridges
With black birds, larks, thrushes and nightingales.
Thy d•ink shall bee goats milk and crystal water,
Distilled from the fountains &amp; the clearest springs.
And all the dainties that the woods afford.
Isle fre•lie give thee to obtain thy love.
You may, for who but you?
The day isle spend to recreate my love,
With all the plea•u•es that I can devise,
An• 〈…〉hy bedfellow,
An 〈…〉 thee in mine arms.
〈…〉, •o may not you.
The satyrs &amp; the woodnimphs shall attend on the
And lull thee a sleep with musickes sound,
And in the morning when thou dost awake
The lark shall sing good morn to my queen,
And whilst he singes isle kiss my Amadine.
You may, for who but you.
When thou art up, the wood lanes shall be strawed
With violets, cowslips and sweet marigolds.
For thee to trampel and to trace upon,
And I will teach thee how to kill the dear,
To chase the hart and how to rouse the roe•
If thou wilt live to love and honour me.
You may for who but you?
Welcomed sir, an hour ago I looked for such a gest
Be merry wench, weal have a frolic feast,
Hears flesh enough for to suffice vs both,
Stay sir, wilt thou fight or dost thou yeel to die?
I want a weapon, how can I fight?
Thou wants a weapon, why then thou yeelst to die.
I say not so, I doe not yield to die.
Thou shalt not choose, I long to see thee dead
Yet •pare him Bremo spare him
A way, I say, I will not spare him.
Yet give me leave to speak.
Thou shalt not speak.
Yet give him leave to speak for my sake.
Speak on, but be not over long.
In time of yore when men like brutish beasts•
Did lead their lives in loathsome c•lles and woods
And wholly gave them selves to wi•less will,
A rude unruly rout, then man to man became
A present pray, then might prevailed,
The weakst went to walls,
Right was unknown, for wrong was all in all•
As men thus lived in his great outrage,
Behold one Orpheus came as poets tell,
And them `from rudeness unto reason brought,
Who led by reasonson some forsook the woods,
Instead of ca•es •hey built them castles strong,
Cities and towns were founded by •hem then,
Glad wrethey, they found such ease,
And in the end they grew to perfect amity
Weighing their former wickedness,
They termed the time wherein they lived then
A golden age, a goodly golden age.
Now Bremo, for so I hear thee called.
If men which lived tofo•e as thou dost now,
Wily in wood, addicted al• to spoil,
Returned were by worthy Orpheus means,
Let me like Orpheus cause thee to return
From murder, bloodshed and like crew•ltie,
What should we fight be•or we have a cause
No, lets live and love together faithfully.
Isle fight for thee.
Fight form or die, or fight or else thou die.
hold Bremo hold,
Away I say, thou trouble me,
You promised me to make me your queen.
I did, I mean no less.
You promised that I should have my will,
I did I mean no less.
Then save this hermits life, for he may save vs both:
A thy request isle spare him, but never any after him
Say hermit what can thou doe?
Isle waite on thee, sometime upon the queen, such sreuice shalt thou shortly have as Bremo never had.
Come sirs what shall I never have you find out Amadine and the shepherd)
And I have bin through the woods, and through the woods, and could see nothing but an emet.
Why I see thousand emits, thou meanest a little one,
Nay that emet that I saw was bigger then thou art
Bigger then I what a fool have you to your man, I pray you moister turn him away?
But dost thou hey•e, was he •ot a man.
think he was, for he said he did lead a salt∣seller life about the woods.
Th•n would say a solitary li•e about the woods
I think it was so indeed•
I thought what a fool thou art.
Thou art a wise man, why he did nothing but sleep since he went
But tell me Mouse, how did he go;
In a whit gown and a whit hat on his head, and a staff in his hand.
I thought so, it was a he•mit that walked a soli∣ta•ie life in the woods.
Well, get you to dinner, and after never leave seeking till you bring some news of them, or isle hang you both.
How now Rombelo, what shall we do now;
Faith isle home to dinner, and afterword to sleep•
Why then thou wilt be hanged.
Faith • care not, for I know I shall never f•nd them well isle once more abroad, &amp; if I cannot find them, isle never come home again.
I tel thee what Rombelo, thou shall• go in at one end of the wood and I at the other, and wee will meet both together at the midst.
Content, lets away to dinner•
Unknown to any here within these woods
With bloody Bremo do I lead my life,
The monster he doth murder all he meets,
He spares none and none doth him escape,
Who would continue, who but only I
In such a cruel cutthroats company.
Yet Amadine is there how can I choose:
Ah silly soul how often times she sits
And sighs, and calls come shepherd come,
Sweet Mucedorus, come and set me free,
When Mucedorus pesent stands hereby:
But here she comes, what news fair Lady as you vvalke. these woods.
Ah hermit, none but bad &amp; such as thou know∣west.
How doe you like your Bremo and his woods;
Not my Bremo nor his Bremo woods;
And why, not yours, me thinks he loves you well
I like him not, his love to me is nothing vvroth
Lady, in this methinkes you offer wrong,
To hate the man that ever loves you best.
Ah hermit, I take no, pleasure in his love.
Neither yet doth Bremo like me best.
pardon my boldness fai•e lady, sith we both
May safely talk now out of Bremos sight,
Unfold to me if so you please, the full discourse
How, when and why you came into these woods,
And fell into this blodie burchers hands.
Hermit I will, of late a worthy shepherd I did love you.
A shepherd lady, sure a man unfit to match with
Hermit this is true, and when we had.
Stay there, the wild men comes
Refer the rest until another time.
What secret tale is this, what vvhispering have vvee here;
Villain I charge the tell thy tale again,
I needs I must, lo here it is again,
When as we both had lost the sight of thee
It greeud vs both, but specially thy queen,
Who in thy absence ever fears the worst,
Least some misehance befall your royrll grace.
Shall my sweet • Bremo wander through the woods.
To•le to and fro for to redress my want,
Hazard his life and all to cherish me,
I like not this quoth she
And thereupon craude to know of me
If I could teach her handle weapons well.
My aunswe•h was I had small skill therein,
But gladmost mighty king to learn of thee.
And this was all.
Whist so, none can dislike of this•
Isle teach you both to fight, but first my queen begin,
Here take this weapon, se• how thou can use it.
This is to big, I cannot weeld it in my arm.
First so, weal have a knotty crabtree st•ffe for thee:
But sir tell me, what say thou•
With all my heart I willing am to learn.
Then take my stiff &amp; see how can weeld it.
First teach me how to hold it in my hand.
Thou hold it well, look how he doth thou moist the sooner learn.
Next tell me how and when tic best to strike.
Tic best to strike when time doth •erue, tic best to loose no time.
Then now or never is my time to st•eke.
And when thou strike, be sure thou hit the head
The head;
The very head.
Then have at thine, so lie there and die,
A death no dout acording to desert.
Or else a vvorse as thou deserve a woe•se.
It glads my heart this tyrants death to see.
Now lady it remains in you to end the tale you lately had begun, being interrupted by this wicked wight.
You said you loved a shepherd.
I so I do•, and none but only him.
And will do still as long as life shall last
But tell me lady, si•h I set you free,
What course of life do you intend to take?
I will disguised wander through the world
Till I have found h•m out,
How i• you find your shepha•d in these woods•
Ah none so happy then as Amadine•
In tract of time a man may alter much,
Say Lady doe you know your shepherd well?
My Mucedorus hath he set me fre•?
he hath set thee free.
And lived so long unknown to Amadine.
Ay thats a question where of you may not be resolved,
You know that I am banished from the court,
I know likewise each pas•age is be•et,
So that we cannot long escape unknown,
Therefore my will is this, that we return
Right throught the thickets to the wild mans cave:
And there a while live on his provision,
Until the search and n•rrow watch be past.
This is my counsel, and I think it best.
I think the very same.
Come lets begone.
Nay soft sir are you here• abots on you,
I was like to be hang•d for not finding you,
We would borrow a certain stray kings daughter of you, a wench, a wence sir we wo•lt have.
A wench o• me isle make the eat my sword.
Oh Lord, nay and you are so lusty Isle cal a coo∣ling card for you, ho moister, moister come away quick¦lie.
Whats the matter;
Look moister, Amadine &amp; the shepherd, oh brave
What minion, have I found you out;
Nay thats ally, I found her out my slfe.
Thou gadding huswife, what cause had thou to gad abroad,
When as thou know our wedding day so no?
Not so Segasto, no such thing in hand, show your assurance, then isle answer you.
Thy fathers promise my assurance is.
But what he promised he hath not performed•
It rests in thee for to perform the same:
No• I.
And why;
So is my will and therefore even so.
Moister with anon, none no.
A wicked villant art thou here?
What needs these words we way them not?
We way them not proud shepherd, I scorn thy company.
Weal not have a corner of thy company.
I scorn not thee, nor yet the least of thine.
Thats a lie, a would have kilt me with his pugs nondo.
This stoutness Amadine contents me not.
Then seek an other that may you better please
Well Amadine, it only rests in thee
Without delay to make thy choice of three,
There stands Segasto, here a shepherd stands,
There stands the third, now make thy choice,
A Lord at th• least I am.
My choice is made, for I will none but thee.
A worthy mate no doubt for such a wife.
And Am•dine, why wilt thou none but m•?
I cannot keep thee as thy father did,
I have no lands foe• to maintain thy state.
More•over if thou mean to be my wife,
Commonly this must be thy use,
To bed at midnight, up at four,
Drudge all day and •rudge from place to place,
Whereby our da•li• vital for to win:
And last of all which is the worst of all,
No princes then but plain a shepherds wife.
Then god ge you god morrow goo•y shepherd
It shall not need if Amadine do live,
Thou shalt be crowned king of Arragon,
Oh moister laugh, when hes King then isle be a queen.
Then know that which ne'er tofore was known
I am no shepherd, no Arragonian I,
But borne of Royal blood, my fathers of Valentia
King, my mother q•even, who for thy secret sake
Took this hard •ask in hand.
Ah how I joy my fortune is so good,
Well now I see, Segasto shall not •peede
But Mucedorus, I as much do joy
To see thee here within our Court of Arragon,
As if a kingdom had befallen me this time,
I with my heart surrender it to thee.
And look what right to Amadine I have.
What barnes door and borne where my father
Was cunstable• abots on thee, how dost thee.
Thanks Segasto, but yet you leveled at the crown•
M•ester bear this and bear all.
Why so sir.
He sees sees you take a goose by the crown.
Go to sir, away, post you to the king,
Whose har• is fraught with careful doubts,
Glad him up and tell him these good news,
And we will follow as fast as we may.
I go moister, I run moister.
Break heart and end my paled woes,
My amadine the comfort of my life,
How can I joy except she were in sight.
Her absence breeds sorrow to my soul
And with a thunder breaks my heart in twain.
Forbear those• passions gentle King,
And you shall see twill turn unto the best,
And bring your soul to quiet and to joy.
Such joy as death, I do assure me that,
And nought but death, unless of her I hear,
And that with speed, I cannot sigh thus long
But what a tumult doe I hear within.
I hear a noise of overpassing joy
Within the court, my Lord be of good comfort.
And here comes one in hast,
A King, a King, a King.
Why how now sir, whats the matter?
O tic news for a king'tis worth money.
Why sir, thou shalt have silver and gold if it bee good.
O tic good, tic good, Amadine.
Oh what of her, tell me? &amp; I well make thee a knight
How a spirit? no by lady, I will not be aspirit•
Masters get ye away, if I be aspire•it, I shall be so lean
I shall make you all afraid.
Thou so•, the King means to make thee a ge•∣tleman.
Why I shall want parrell.
Thou shalt want for nothing.
Then stand away, trick up thy self, here they come.
My gracious father pardon thy disloyal daughter
What do mine eyes be hold my daughter Amadine
Rise up dere daughter &amp; let these my embracing arms
Show some token of thy father joy,
Which ever since thy departure hath la•guished in sorrow:
Dear father, never were your sorrows
Greater then my griefs,
Never you so deloate as I comfortless,
Yet nevertheless acknowledging my self
To be the cause of both, on bended knees
I humbly c•aue your pardon.
isle pardon thee dear daughter• but as for him.
Ah father what of him,
Assure as I am a king, and wear the crown,
I will revenge on that accursed wretch.
Ye• worthy prince work not thy will in wrath show favour.
I, such favour as thou deserve.
I do deserve the daughter of a king.
Oh impudent, a shepherd and so insolent.
No shepherd I, but a worthy prince.
In far conceit, not princely borne.
Yes princely borne my father is a king.
My mother Queen, and of Valentia both.
What Mucedorns, welcome to our court,
What cause had thou to come to me disguised?
No cause to fear, I caused no offence,
But this desiring thy daughters virtues for to see
Disguised my self from out my fathers court,
Unknown to any in secret I did rest,
And passed many troubles near to death,
So hath your daughter my partaker bin,
As you shall know hereafter more at large,
Desiring you, you will give her to me,
Even as mine own and sovereign of my life
Then shall I think my travels are well spent.
With all my heart: but this.
Segasto claims my promise made to fore,
That he should have her as his only wife,
Before my counsel when we came from war
Segasto, may I crave thee let it pass.
And give Amadine as wife to Mucedorus;
With all my heart, were it far a greater thing,
And what • may to furnish up there rites,
With pleasing sports and pastimes you shall see.
Thanks good Segasto, I will think of this.
Thanks good my Lord, &amp; while I live
Account of me in what I can or may.
And good Segasto these great cur•easies
Shall not be forgot.
Why ha•ke you moister, bones what have you done?
What given away the wench you made me take such pains for, you are wise indeed, mas and I had known of that I would have had her my self. faith master now wee may go to breakfast with a woodcoke pie.
Go sir you were best leave this knavery•
Come on my Lords, lets now to court
Where we may finish up the joyfullest day
That ever hoped to a distressed King,
With mirth and joy and great solemnity,
Weal finish up these hymens rights most pleasant lie,
Hoe Lords at the first, I am one to, but hear moister King by your leave a cast, now you have done with them, I pray you begin with me.
Why what would thou •aue;
O •ou forgot, now, a little apparel to makes
handsome what should Lo•des go so beggarly as I do•?
What I did promise thee, I will perform, attend• on me, come le•s depart.
Weal waite on you with all our hearts.
And with a piece of my liver to.
How now Envy, what blush thou all ready,
Peep forth, hide not thy head with shame,
But with a courage praise a women's deeds,
Thy threats were vain, thou could doe me no hurt
Although thou seem to cross me with despite,
•ouerwhel•de, and turned upside down thy block
And made thy self to stumble at the same.
Though stumbled yet not overthrown,
Thou can not draw my heart to mi•denise,
Yet must I needs confess thou hast don well,
And plaide thy part with merth and pleasant glee:
Say all this, yet can thou not conquer me,
Although this time thou hast got yet not the conquest neither.
A double revenge another time isle have:
Then cai•ife cu•sed, stoop upon thy knee,
Yield to a woman, though not to me,
And pray we both together with our hearts,
That she thrice Nestors years may with vs rest,
And from her foes high God defend her sty•l.
That they against her m•y never wooke thy• will.
En••e were he never so stout
Would beck and bow unto her majesty,
•ndeede Comedy thou hast overrun me now.
And foe•st me stoop unto a women's sway.
God grant her grace amongst vs long may reign,
And those that would not h•ue it so,
Would that by envy soon their hey•tes they migh• forgo.
The Counsel, Noble, and this Realm,
Lord guide it still with thy most holy hand,
The Commons and the subjects grant them grace•
Their prince to serve, her to obey, &amp; •reason to deface:
Long may she rain, in joy and great felicity,
Each Christian heart do say amen with me,

HOlla, holla, holla•follow, follow, foal∣lowe.
Like noise within.
Now benedicite, what foul absur∣ditty,
folly &amp; foolery had like to foal∣lowed
me! I &amp; my mates, like addle
pates, inviting great States, to see
our last play, are hunting the hay,
with ho, that way, the goodly Heart ran, with follow
little Iohn, Much play the man; and I, like a sot, have
wholly forgot the course of our plot: but crosse-bowe
lye down, come on Friars gown, hood cover my
crown, and with a lowe beck, prevent a sharpe
check.
Blithe sit ye all, and wink at our rude cry,
Mind where wee left, in Sheerewod merrily,
The king, his train, Robin, his yeomen tall
Gone to the wot to see the fat dear fall▪
Wee left maid Marian busy in the bower,
And pretty li•ny looking, every hour,
For their returning from the hunting game,
And therefore seek to set each thing in frame▪
Warman all woeful for his sin we left.
Sir Doncaster, whose villainies and theft,
You never heard of, but too soon ye shall,
Hurt with the Prior; shame them both befall,
They two will make our mirth be short and small.
But least I bring ye sorrow ere the time,
Pardon I beg of your well judging eyne,
And take in part bad prologue, and rude play:
The hunters hello, Tucke must needs away.
Therefore down weed, bow doe the deed, to make
the Stag bleed, and if my hand speed, hey for a cry,
 with a throat strained hie, &amp; a load yall, at the beasts
fall.
Where is our mother?
Mounted in a stand.
Six fallow dear have dyed by her hand.
Three Stags I slew.
Two Bucks by me fell down.
As many dyed by me.
But I had three.
Scathlocke, wheres Much
When last I saw him, may it please your Grace,
He and the Frierfooted it apace.
Scathlocke, no Grace, your fellow &amp; plain Iohn.
I warrant you, Much will be here anon.
Think• thou little Io•n, that he must Iinny wed'•
No doubt •e must.
Then to adorn he• h•ad, we shall have horns
good slore.
God, for thy grace,
How could I miss the Stag I had in chase!
Twice did I hit him in the very neck,
When back my arrows flew, as they had smite
On some sure armour. Where is Robin Hood,
And y• wight Scarlet? Seek them little Iohn,
Isle have that Stag before I dine to day.
O the friar, the friar, the friar.
Why, how now Much?
Cry ye mercy, master king. Marry this is the matter;
Scarlet is following the Stag you hit, and has al∣most
lodged him: now the Friar has the best bow, but
yours, in all the field: which and Scarlet had, he would
have him straight.
Where is thy master?
Nay, I cannot tell, nor the Friar neither.
I hear them hello, far off in the wot.
Come Much, can lead vs where as Scarlet is?
Never fear you; follow me,
You were resolved to have him poisoned,
Or kilt, or made away, you cared not how.
What devil makes you doubtful now to do it?
Why Doncaster? his kindness in our needs.
Apla•ue upon his kindness, let him die.
I never tempered poison in my life, but I employed it.
By th'masse and I loose this,
For ever look to loose my company.
But will you give it him?
That can•ot bee.
The Queen. Earl Chester, and Earl Salsbury,
If they once see me, I am a dead man:
Or did they hear my name, Isle lay my life,
They all would hunt me, for my life.
What hast thou done to them?
Faith, some odd toys,
That made me fly the south: but pass wee them:
Here is the poison: will you give it Robin?
Now by this gold I will.
Or as I said, for ever I defy your company.
Well, he shall die, and in his jollity:
And in my head I have a policy
To make him die disgrac't.
O tell it Prior.
I will, but not as now: Call the Friar within.
Weal seek a place, the woods have many ears,
And some me thinks are calling for the Friar.
The Friar, the Friar?
Why, whore's this Friar?
Here sir. what is your desire?
Why Friar, what a murren dost thou mean?
The King calls for thee. For, a mighty stag,
(That hath a copper ring about his neck,
With letters on it, which hee would have read)
Hath Scarlet kilt. I pray thee go thy way.
Master I will, no longer will I stay.
Good uncle be more careful of your health,
And you sir Doncaster, your wounds are greene.
Through your great kindness, we are cōforted.
And Warman, I advise you to more mirth.
Shun solitary walks, keep company,
Forget your fault: I have forgiven the fault.
Good Warman be more blithe, and at this time,
A little help my Marian and her maid:
shall come to you straight: a little now,
We must al strive to doe the best we may.
On you and her Isle waite, until my dying day.
Warman a word, My good Lord Prior and I
Are full of grief, to see thy misery.
My misery, sir Doncaster? why? I thank God,
I never was in better state than now.
Why, what a servile slavish mind hast thou?
Art thou a man, and can be such a beast,
Asse-like to bear the burden of thy wrong?
What wrong have I? First wrong to be relieved?
Relieved say thou?
Why, shallow wetted fool,
Dost thou not see Robins ambitious pride?
And how he climes by pitying, and aspires,
By humble looks, good deeds, and such fond toys,
To be a monarch, reigning over vs,
As if wee were the vassals to his will?
I am his vassal, and I will be still.
Warman, thou art a fool. I doe confess,
Were these good deeds done in sincerity,
Pity of mind, thine or this knights distress,
Without vain brags, it were true charity:
But to relieve our fainting bodies wants,
And grieve our souls with quips, and bitter braids,
Is good turns ouerturnd: no thanks wee owe
To any, whatsoever helps vs so.
Neither himself, nor any that hee keeps,
Ever upbraided me, since I came last.
O God have mercy on thee, silly ass.
Doth he not say to every guest that comes;
This same is Warman, that was once my steward?
And what of that?
First not as much to say;
Why, here he stands that once did me betray.
Did hee not bring a troop to grace himself,
Like Captives waiting on a conquerors chair,
And calling of them out, by one and one,
Presented them, like fairings, to the king?
O, I: there was a rare invention:
A plague upon the fool.
I hate him worse for that than all the rest.
Why should you hate him? why should you or you
Envy this noble Lord, thus as you doe?
Nay rather, why dost thou not join in hate
With vs, that lately liu'dst like vs, in wealthy state?
Remember this, remember foolish man,
How thou hast been the Shrive of Nottingham.
Cry to thy thoughts, let this thought never cease,
I have been Justice of my Sovereigns peace,
Lord of fair livings: men with cap and knee,
In liveries waited hourly on me.
And when thou think, thou hast been such &amp; such,
Think then what tic to be a mate to Much,
To run when Robin bids, come at his call,
Be mistress Marians man.
Nay think withal
What shall I think? but think upon my need,
When men fed dogs, and me they would not feed:
When I despaird through want, and sought to die,
My piteous master, of his charity,
Forgave my fault, relieved and saved me:
This doe I think upon, and you should think
(If you had hope of souls salvation)
First Prior, that he is of thy flesh and blood,
That thou art uncle unto Robin Hood:
That by extortion thou did get his lands:
God, and I know how it came to thy hands:
Now thou pursu'dst him in his misery,
And how heaven plagued thy hearts extremity:
Think Doncaster, when, hired by this Prior,
Thou came to take my master with the Friar,
And were thy self tan, how he set thee free,
Gave thee an hundred pound to comfort thee,
And both bethink ye how but yesterday,
Wounded and naked in the field you lay,
How with his own hand he did raise your heads,
Poured balm into your wounds, your bodies fed,
Watched when ye slept, wept when he saw your woe,
Stay Warman, stay: I grant that he did so,
And you, turned honest, have forsworn the villain?
Even from my soul, I villainy defy.
A blessed hour: a fit time now to die:
And you shall, Conscience.
O forgive me, God,
And save my master from their bloody hands.
What, hast thou made him sure?
Its dead sure: he is dead, if that be sure.
Then let vs thrust the dagger in his hand,
And when the next comes, cry he kilt himself.
That must be now: yonder comes Robin Hood.
No life in him.
No, no, not any life.
Three mortal wounds have let in piercing ayre,
And at their gaps, his life is clean let out.
Who is it uncle that you so bemoan?
Warman, good nephew, whom sir Doncaster &amp; I
Found freshly bleeding, as he now doth lye.
You were scarce gone, when he did stab himself.
O God, he in his own hand holds his own harts hurt,
I dreaded too much his distressed look:
Belike the wretch despaird, and slew himself.
Nay, thats most sure, yet he had little reason,
Considering how well you used him.
Well, I am sorry; but must not be sad,
Because the King is coming to my bower.
Help me, I pray thee, to remove his body,
Least he should come and see him murdered.
Sometime anon he shall be buried.
Good, all is good: this is as I desire.
Now for a face of pure hypocrisy:
Sweet murder, cloth thee in religious weeds,
Reign in my bosom, that with help of thee,
I may effect this Robins Tragedy.
Nay, nay, you must not take this thing so heavily.
A bodies loss, sir Doncaster, is much:
But a souls too, is more to be bemoaned.
Truly I wonder at your virtuous mind:
O God to one so kind, who'ud be unkind?
Let go this grief, now must you put on joy,
And for the many favours I have found,
So much exceeding all conceit of mine,
Unto your cheer, Isle add a precious drink,
Of colour rich, and red, sent me from Rome▪
There's in it Moly, Syrian Balsamum,
Golds rich Elixir: O tic precious!
Where is it uncle?
As yesterday,
Sir Doncaster and I rid on our way,
Thieves did beset vs, bound vs as you saw:
And among other things, did take from me,
This rich confection: but regardlesly,
As common drink, they cast, into a bush,
The bottle, which this day sir Doncaster
Fetched, and hath left it in the inner lodging:
I tell you cousin (I doe love you well)
A pint of this ransomde the Sophies son,
When he was taken in Natolia.
I meant indeed to give it my liege Lord,
In hope to have his favour: but to you
I put my self, be my good friend,
And, in your own restoring, me restore.
Uncle I will, you need urge that no more.
But whats the virtues of this precious drink?
It keeps fresh youth, restores diseased sight,
Helps natures weakness, smothes the scars of woūds,
And cools the entrails with a balmy breath,
When they by thirst or travel boyle with heate.
Uncle I thank you, pray you let me have
A cup prepared, against the king comes in,
To cool his heate: my self will give it him.
And when he drinks, be bold to say he drinks
A richer draught than that dissolved pearl,
Which Cleopatra drank to Antonie.
I have much business; let it be your charge,
To make this rich draught ready for the King,
And I will quit it, pray ye doe not fail.
I warrant you, good Nephew.
Better, and better still.
We thought before but to have poisoned him,
And now shall Robin Hood destroy the king.
Even when the King, y• Queen, the Prince, the Lords
Joy in his virtues, this supposed vice
Will turn, to sharpe hate, their exceeding love.
Ha, ha, ha, I cannot choose but laugh,
To see my cousin consent in this sort.
Fail him quoth you? nay hang me if I doe.
But Doncaster art sure the poisons are well mixed?
Iut, tut, let me alone for poisoning:
I have already turned ore four, or five,
That angerd me. But tell me Prior,
Wherefore so deadly dost thou hate thy cousin?
Shall I be plain? Because if he were dead,
I should be made the Earl of Huntington.
A pretty cause: But thou a church-man art.
Cut man, if that would fall,
Isle have a dispensation, and turn temporal.
But tell me Doncaster, why dost thou hate him?
By the Mass, I cannot tel. O yes, now I have it▪
I hate thy cousin, Earl of Huntington,
Because so many love him as there doe,
And I my self am loved of so few.
Nay, I have other reasons for my hate;
Hee is a fool, and will be reconcilde,
To any foe hee hath: he is too mild,
Too honest for this world, fitter for heaven:
Hee will not kill these greedy cormorants,
Nor strip base peasants of the wealth they have:
He does abuse a thieves name and an outlaws,
And is indeed no outlawe, nor no thief,
He is unworthy of such reverent names.
Besides, he keeps a paltry whinling girl,
And will not bed, forsooth, before he bride:
Isle stand too•t, he abuses maidenhead,
That will not take it, being offered:
Hinders the common wealth of able men.
Another thing I hate him for again:
He says his prayers, fasts eves, gives alms, does good:
For these and such like crimes, swears Doncaster,
To work the speedy death of Robin Hood.
Well said in faith. Hark, hark, the king returns:
To doe this deed, my heart like fuel burns.
Gramercy Friar for thy glee,
Thou greatly hast contented me,
What with thy sporting and thy game,
I swear I highly pleased am.
It was my masters whole desire
That maiden, yeoman, swain and friar
Their arts and wits should all apply,
For pleasure of your Majesty.
Some Richard, look I pray you on the ring,
That was about the neck of the last stag.
Was his name Scarlet, that shot off his neck?
Chester, it was this honest fellow Scarlet:
This is the fellow, and a yeoman bold,
As ever coursed the swift Hart on the mould.
Friar, here is somewhat graved upon the Ring,
I pray thee read it. Mean while list to me;
This while, most compassing the Friar about the Ring.
Scarlet a•d Scathlock, you bold brethren,
Twelve pence a day I give each for his fee,
And hence forth see ye live like honest men.
We will my Liege, else-let vs dye the death.
A boon, a boon, upon my knee,
Good king Richard, I beg of thee.
For indeed sir, the troth is, Much is my father, and hee
is one of your tenants in Kings Mill at Wakefield all on
a greene: O there dwells a jolly pinder, at Wake∣field
all on a greene: Now I would have you, if you will
doe so much for me, to set me forward in the way of
marriage to Iinny: the mill would not be cast away v∣pone
vs.
Much, be thou ever master of that mill,
I give it thee for thine in heritance.
Thanks precious Prince of courtesy.
Isle to Inny, and tell her of my lands in faith.
Here Friar, here, here it begins,
 When Harold hare-foote reigned king,
About my neck he put this ring.
In Harolds time, more than a hundred year,
Hath this ring been about this new slain Dear!
I am sorry now it died: but let the same
Head, ring and all be sent to Nottingham,
And in the Castle kept for monuments.
My Liege, I heard an old tale long ago,
That Harold being Goodwins son of Kent,
When he had got fair Englands government,
Hunted for pleasure once within this wood,
And singled out a fair and stately Stag,
Which foot to foot, the king in running caught:
And sure this was the Stag.
It was no doubt.
But some my Lord affirm,
That Iulius Caesar many years before,
Took such a Stag, and such a Poesy writ.
It should not be in Iulius Caesars time:
There was no English used in this Land,
Until the Saxons came, and this is writ
In Saxon characters.
Well, it was a goodly beast.
How now earl Robert?
A forfet, a forfet, my liege Lord.
My masters laws are on record,
The Court-roll here your Grace may see.
I pray thee Friar, read them me.
One shall suffice, and this is hee.
No man that comes in this wot,
To feast, or dwell with Robin Hood,
Shall call him Earl, Lord, Knight, or Squire,
He no such titles doth desire,
But Robin Hood, plain Robin Hood,
That honest yeoman stout and good,
O• pain of forfetting a mark,
That must be paid to me his Clarke.
My liege, my liege, this law you broke,
Almost in the last word you spoke.
That crime may not acquitted bee,
Till Friar Tuck receive his fee.
Theres more than twenty marks, mad Friar.
If thus you pay y• Clarke his hire,
Oft may you forfet, I desire.
You are a perfect penitent,
And well you doe your wrong repent:
For this your Highness liberal gift,
I here absolve you without shrift.
Gramercies Friar. Now Robin Hood,
Sith Robin Hood it needs must bee,
I was about to ask before,
If thou did see the great Stags fall.
I did my Lord, I saw it all.
But missing this same prating Friar,
And hearing you so much desire
To have the lozels company,
I went to seek Small honesty.
But you found much, when you found me.
I, Much my man: but not a jot
Of honesty in thee, God wot.
Robin, you doe abuse the Friar.
Madam, I dare not call him liar,
He may be bold with me, he knows.
How now Prince Iohn, how goes, how goes
This wod-mans life with you to day?
My fellow Wodnet you would bee.
I am thy fellow, thou dost see:
And to be plain, as God me save,
So well I like thee, merry knave,
That I thy company must have:
Nay, and I will.
Nay, and you shall.
My Lord, you need not fear at all,
But you shall have his company,
He will be bold I warrant you.
Know you where ere a spring is no?
Fine would I drink, I am right dry.
I have a drink within my bower,
Of pleasing taste, and sovereign power:
My reverend uncle gives it me,
To give unto your Majesty.
I would be loath indeed, being in heate,
To drink cold water. Let vs to thy bower.
Run Friar before, &amp; bid my uncle be in readiness.
Gon with a trice, on such good vnsinesse.
What Much? What Iinny? Much? I say.
Whats the matter mistress?
I pray thee see, the fueller
Suffer the cooke to want no wot.
Good Lord, where is this idle girl?
Why Iinny?
Within. I come forsooth.
I pray thee bring the flowers forth.
Isle go send her mistress, and help the cooks, if
they have any need.
Dispatch good Much. What Even I say?
Hie ye, hie ye: she calls for life.
Indeed, indeed, you doe me wrong,
To let me cry, and call so long.
Forsooth, I strawed the dining bowers.
And smoth'd the walks with herbs &amp; flowers,
The yeomens tables I have spread,
Dressed salts, laid trenchers, set on bread:
Nay all is well, I warrant you.
You are not well I promise you,
Your foresleeues are not pind (fie, fie)
And all your hed-geere stands awry.
Give me the flowers: Go in for shame,
And quickly see you mend the same.
How busy mistress Marian is?
She thinks this is her day of bliss.
But it shall be the woefullest day
That ever chanced her, if I may.
Why are you two thus in the ayre?
Your wounds are greene,
Good cousin have care.
Thanks for your kindness, gentle maid.
My cousin Robert vs hath pried,
To help him in this business.
Sir Doncaster, sir Doncaster?
Holla.
I pray you, did you see the Prior?
Why, here I am. What would thou Friar.
The king is heated in the chase,
And posts hitherward apace.
He told my master he was dry,
And hee desires ye, presently
To send the drink whereof ye spake. Horns blow.
Come, it is here; haste let vs make
Most gracious Sovereign, welcome once again:
Welcome to you, and all your princely train.
Thanks lovely hostess: we are homely guests.
Wheres Robin Hood? He promised me some drink.
Your hand maid. Robin will not then be long.
The Friar indeed came running to his uncle,
Who with sir Doncaster were here with me,
And altogether went for such a drink.
Well, in a better time it could not come,
For I am very hot and passing dry.
Traitor, Isle draw thee out before the king.
Come murderous Prior.
Come ye dogs face.
Why how now Robin? wheres y• drink you bring?
Lay hold on these.
Far be it, I should bring your Majesty,
The drink these two prepared for your taste.
Why Robin Hood, be brief and answer me:
I am amazed at thy troubled looks.
Long will not my ill looks amaze your Grace.
I shortly look never to look again.
Never to look? What will it still be night?
If thou look never, day can never be.
What ails my Robin? Wherefore dost thou faint?
Because I cannot stand: yet now I can.
Thans to my king, and thanks to Marian.
Robin be brief, and tell vs what hath chanced?
I must be brief, for I am sure of death,
Before a long tale can be half way told.
Of death, my son: bright sun of all my joy?
Death cannot have the power of virtuous life.
Not of the virtues, but the life it can.
What dost thou speak of death? how should thou die?
By poison, and the Priors treachery.
Why, take this sovereign powder at my hāds,
Take it and live in spite of poisons power.
I, set him forward Powders quoth ye! nah,
I am a fool then, if a little dust,
The shaving of a horn, a Bezars stone,
Or any Antidote have power to stay
The execution of my hearts resolve.
Tut, tut, you labour lovely Qneene, in vain,
And on a thankless groom your toil bestow.
Now hath your foe revenged you of your foe:
Robin shall die, if all the world said no.
How the Wolf howls! Fly like a tender Rid
Into thy shepherds bosom. Shield me love.
Can thou not Robin? Where shall I be hid?
O God, these Ravens will seize upon thy Dove.
They cannot hurt thee, pray thee doe not fear,
Base cures will couch, the Lyon being near.
How works my powder?
Very well, fair Q•even.
Dost thou feel any ease?
I shall, I trust, anon:
Sleep false upon mine eyes.
O I must sleep, &amp; they that love me, do not waken me.
Sleep in my lap, and I will sing to thee.
He should not sleep.
I must, for I must die:
While I live therefore let me have some rest.
I, let him rest, the poison urges sleep.
When he awakes, there is no hope of life.
Of life? now by the little time I have to live,
He cannot live one hour for your lives.
Villain what art thou?
Why, I am a knight.
Thou were indeed.
If it so please your Grace.
I will describe my knowledge of this wretch.
Doe Chester.
This Doncaster, for so the felon hight,
Was, by the king your father, made a knight,
And well in arms he did himself behave.
Many a bitter storm, the wind of rage
Blasted this Realm with, in those woeful days,
When the unnatural fights continued,
Between your kingly father and his sons.
This cut-throat, knighted in that time of woe,
Seized on a beauteous Nun, at Barkhamsted,
As wee were marching toward Winchester,
After proud Lincoln was compelled to yield,
Hee took this virgin straying in the field:
For all the Nuns and every Covent fled
The dangers that attended on our troops.
For those sad times too oft did testify,
Wars rage hath no regard of piety.
She humbly pried him, for the love of heaven,
To guide her to her fathers, two miles thence.
He swore he would, and very well he might:
For to the camp he was a Forager.
Upon the way they came into a wood.
Wherein, in brief, he stripped this tender maid:
Whose lust, when she in vain had long withstood,
Being by strength and torments overlaid,
He did a sacrilegious deed of rape,
And left her bathed in her own tears and blood.
When she revived, she to her fathers got,
And got her father to make just complaint,
Unto your mother, being then in camp.
Is this the villain Chester, that defiled
Sir Justice Stutuiles chaste and beauteous child?
I Madam, this is hee,
That made a wench dance naked in a wood:
And for she did deny what I desired,
I scourged her for her pride, till her fair skin
With stripes was checkred like a vinters grate.
And what was this? A mighty matter sure.
I have a thousand more than she defiled,
And cut the squeaking throats of some of them:
I grieve I did not hers,
Punish him Richard.
A fairer virgin never saw the sun.
A chaster maid was never sworn a Nun.
How escaped the villain punishment, that time?
I rent his spurs off, and disgraded him.
And then he raild upon the Queen and me.
Being committed, he his keeper slue,
And to your father fled, who pardond him.
God give his soul a pardon for that sin.
O had I heard his name, or seen his face,
I had defended Robin from this chance.
Ah villain, shut those gloomy lights of thine.
Remember thou a little son of mine,
Whose nurse at Wilton first thou rauishedst,
And slew two maids that did attend on them?
I grant, I dashed the brains out of a brat,
Thine if he were, I care not: had he bin
The first borne comfort of a royal king,
And should have yield when Doncaster cried peace,
I would have done by him as then I did.
Soon shall the world be rid of such a wretch,
Let him be hanged alive, in the high way, that joins to
the power.
Alive or dead, I reck not how I die.
You, them, and these, I desperately defy.
Repent, or never look to be absolved,
But die accursed as thou deserve well.
Then give me my desert; curse one by one.
First I occurs thee, and, if thou persist,
Unto damnation leave thee wretched man.
What doe I care for your damnation?
Am I not doomed to death? what more damnation
Can there ensue your loud and yelling cries?
Yes devil: hear thy fellow spirit speak,
Who would repent; O fine he would repent.
After this bodies bitter punishment,
There is an euer-during endless woe,
A quenchless fire, an vnconsuming pain,
Which desperate souls and bodies must endure.
Can you preach this, yet set me on sir Prior,
To run into this endless, quenchless fire?
High heavens show mercy to my many else.
Never had this been done, but like a fiend,
Thou temptedst me with ceaseless devilish thoughts.
Therefore I curse, with bitterness of soul,
The hour wherein I saw thy baleful eyes.
My eyes I curse, for looking on those eyes.
My ears I curse, for harkening to thy tongue.
I curse thy tongue for tempting of mine ears.
Each part I curse, that wee call thine or mine:
Thine for enticing mine, mine following thine.
A holy prayer. what Collect have we next?
My Marian wants words, such is her woe:
But old Fitzwater for his girl and him
Begs nothing, but worlds plague for such a foe.
Which causeless harmed a virtuous noble man,
A pettier of his griefs, when he felt grief:
Therefore be think thee of thy hateful deed,
Thou faithless Prior, and thou this ruthless thief.
Will no man curse me, giving so much cause?
Then Doncaster, our selves our selves occurs,
And let no good betide to thee or me.
Amen, amen: accursed may ye bee,
For murdering Robin, flower of courtesy.
O ring not such a peal for Robins death,
Let sweet forgiveness be my passing bell.
Art thou there Marian? then fly forth my breath:
To die with in thy arms contents me well.
Keep in, keep in a little while thy soul,
Till I have powered my soul forth at thy feet.
I slept not uncle, I your grief did hear,
Let him forgive your soul that bought it dear:
Your bodies deed, I in my death forgive,
And humbly beg the king that you may live.
Stand to your Clergy uncle, save your life,
And lead a better life than you have done.
O gentle Nephew, ah my brothers son,
Thou dying glory of old Huntington,
Wish thou life to such a murdrous foe?
I will not live, sith thou must life for go.
Oh happy Warman, blessed in thy end,
Now too too late thy truth I doe commend.
O Nephew, Nephew, Doncaster and I
Murdered poor Warman, for he did deny
To join with vs in this black tragedy.
Alas poor Warman. Friar, little Iohn,
I told ye both where Warmans body lay:
And of his burial Isle dispose anon.
Is there no law, Lord Ely, to convict,
This Prior, that confesses murders thus?
He is a hallowed man, and must be tried,
And punished by the censure of the Church.
The Church therein doth err: God doth allow
No Canon to preserve a murderers life.
Richard, king Richard,, in thy Grandsires days,
A law was made, the Clergy sworn thereto,
That whatsoever Church-man did commit
Treason, or murder, or false felony,
Should like a secular be punished.
Treason we did, for sure we did intend
King Richards poisoning, Sovereign of this land.
Murder we did in working Warmans end,
And my dear Nephews, by this fatal hand.
And theft we did, for we have robbed the king,
The State, the Nobles, Commons, and his men,
Of a true Peer, firm Pillar, liberal Lord.
Fitzwater we have robbed of a kind son,
And Marians loue-ioyes we have quite undone.
Whoppe, what a coil is here with your confession?
I ask but judgment for my foul transgression.
Thy own mouth hath condemned thee.
Hence with him.
Hang this man dead, then see him buried:
But let the other hang alive in chains.
I thank you sir.
My self will go, my Lord,
And see sharpe Justice done upon these slaves.
O go not hence Prince Iohn: a word or two
Before I die, I fine would say to you.
Robin, wee see what we are sad to see,
Death like a champion treading down thy life:
Yet in thy end somewhat to comfort thee,
Wee freely give to thy betrothed wife,
Beauteous and chaste Matilda, all those lands,
Fallen by thy folly, to the Priors hands,
And by his fault now forfetted to me:
Earl Huntington, she shall thy Countess bee,
And thy wight yeomen, they shall wend with me,
Against the faithless enemies of Christ.
Bring forth a Beer, and cover if with greene;
That on my death-bed I may here sit down.
At Robins burial let no black be seen,
Let no hand give for him a mourning gown:
For in his death, his king hath given him life,
By this large gift, given to his maiden wife.
Chaist maid Marilda, Countess of account,
Chase, with thy bright eyes, all these clouds of woe,
From these fair cheeks, I pray thee sweet do so.
Think it is bootless folly, to complain,
For that which never can be had again.
Queen Eleanor, you once were Matilds foe:
Prince Iohn, you long sought her unlawful love:
Let dying Robin Hood entreat you both,
To change those passions Madame turn your hate,
To princely love; Prince Iohn, convert your love
To virtuous passions, chaste and moderate.
O that your gracious right hands would enfold,
Matildas right hand, prisoned in my palm,
And swear to doe what Robin Hood desires.
I swear I will, I will a mother be.
To fair Matildas life and chastit•e.
When Iohn solicits chaste Matildaes ears,
With lawless suits, as he hath often done:
Or offers to the altars of her eyes,
Lascivious Poems, stuffed with vanities,
He craves to see but short and sower days,
His death be like to Robins he desires,
His perjured body prove a poisoned prey,
For cowled Monks, and barefoot begging Friars.
Enough, enough, Fitzwater, take your child:
My dying frost which no suns heat can thaw,
Closes the powers of all my outward parts,
My freezing blood runs back unto my heart,
Where it assists death, which it would resist:
Only my love a little hinders death.
For he beholds her eyes, and cannot smite:
Then go not yet Matilda, stay a while.
Friar, make speed, and lift my latest will.
O let me look, for ever in thy eyes,
And lay my warm breath to thy bloodless lips,
If my sight can restrain deaths tyrannies,
Or keep lives breath within thy bosom locked.
Away, away,
Forbear, my love: all this is but delay.
Come maiden daughter, from my maiden son,
And give him leave to doe what must be done.
First I bequeath my soul to all souls saver,
And will my body to be buried,
At Wakefield, underneath the Abbey wall:
And in this order make my funeral;
When I am dead, stretch me upon this Beer,
My beads and Primer shall my pillow bee:
On this side lay my bow, my good shafts here,
Upon my breast the cross, and underneath,
My trusty sword, thus fastened in the sheath.
Let Warmans body at my feet be laid,
Poor Warman, that in my defence did die,
For holy dirges, sing me wodmens songs,
As ye to Wakefield walk, with voices shrill:
This for my self: my goods and plate I give
Among my yeomen: them I doe bestow,
Upon my Sovereign, Richard. This is all.
My liege farewell, my love farewell, farewell.
Farewell fair Queen, Prince Iohn and noble Lords.
Father Fitzwater heartily adieu,
Adieu my yeomen tall.
Matilda close mine eyes.
Friar farewell, farewell to all.
O must my hands with envious death conspire,
To shut the morning gates of my lives light?
It is a duty, and thy loves desire,
Isle help thee girl to close up Robins sight.
Laments are bootless, tears cannot restore
Lost life: Matilda, therefore weep no more.
And since our mirth is turned into moan,
Our merry sport, to tragic funeral,
Wee will prepare our power for Austria,
After earl Roberts timeless burial.
Fall to your w•d-songs therefore yeomen bole•,
And deck his hearse with flowers, that loved you dear,
Dispose his goods, as hee hath them disposed.
Fitzwater and Matilda, bide you here,
See you the body unto Wakefield borne,
A little wee will bear ye company,
But all of vs at London point to meet:
Thither Fitzwater, bring earl Robins men:
And Friar, see you come along with them.
Ah my liege Lord, the Friar faints,
And hath no words to make complaints:
But since he must forsake this place,
He will await, and thanks your Grace.
Weep, weep, ye wod-men wail,
Your hands with sorrow wring:
Your master Robin Hood lies dead,
Therefore sigh as you sing.
Here lies his Primer and his beads,
His bent bow and his arrows keen,
His good sword and his holy cross,
Now cast on flowers fresh and greene:
And as they fall, shed tears and say,
Wella, wella day, wella, wella day:
Thus cast ye flowers and sing,
And on to Wakefield take your way.
Here doth the Friar leave with grievance:
Robin is dead, that graced his entrance:
And being dead he craves his audience,
With this short play, they would have patience.
Nay Fryer, at request of thy kind friend,
Let not thy Play so soon be at an end.
Though Robin Hood be dead, his yeomen gone,
And that thou think there now remains not one,
To act an other Scene or two for thee:
Yet know full well, to please this company,
We mean to end Matildaes Tragedy.
Off then, I wish you, with your Kendall greene:
Let not sad grief, in fresh array be seen.
Matildaes story is replete with tears,
Wrongs, desolations, rue•ns, deadly fears.
In, and attire ye: though I tired be,
Yet will I tell my mistress Tragedy.
Apolloes master done I invoke:
To whom henceforth my deeds I dedicate:
That of his Godhood, above all Gods divine,
With his rich spirit he would lighten mine:
That I may sing true lays of trothlesse deeds,
Which to conceive, my heart through sorrow bleeds.
Cheer thee, sad soul, and in a lofty line,
Thunder out wrong, compassed in cloudy tears.
Show to the eyes, fill the beholders ears,
With all the lively acts of lustful rage,
Restraind by modest tears, and chastities entreats,
And let king Iohn that ill part personage,
By suits, devices, practices and threats:
And when he sees all serves to no end,
Of chaste Matilda let him make an end.
We are all fitted, Friar, shall we begin?
Well art thou suited: would my order would
Permit me habit equal to my heart.
If you remember, Iohn did take an oath,
Never again to seek Matildaes love.
O what is he, thats sworn affections slave,
That will not violate all laws, all oaths?
And being mighty, what will he omit,
To compass his intents, though ne'er so ill?
You must suppose king Richard now is dead,
And Iohn (resistless) is fair Englands Lord:
Who striving to forget Matildaes love,
Takes to his wife the beauteous Isabel,
Betrothed to Hugh de Briu, Earl of North March:
And picking quarrels under show of kin,
Wholly diuorces his first Queen away:
But yet Matilda, still, still trobles him,
And being in the Court, so oft he courts her,
That by her noble father, old Fitzwater,
She is removed from his lust-tempting eye.
But tides restraind, oreswell their bounds with rage:
Her absence adds more fuel to his fire.
In sleep he sees her, and his waking thoughts,
Study by day to compass his desire.
Friar, since now you speak of visions,
It was received by tradition,
From those that were right near unto king Iohn,
Of three strange visions, that to him appeared:
And as I guess, I told you what they were.
With them I will begin: draw but that veil,
And there king Iohn sits sleeping in his chair.
Ambition, that had ever waited on king Iohn,
Now brings him Austria, easy to be tan,
Being wholly tamed by Richards warlike hand,
And bids him add that Dukedom to his crown:
But he puts by Ambition, and contemns
All other kingdoms, but the English crown,
Which he holds fast, as if hee would not loose.
The Lady and the child that did ascend,
Striving in vain to take the crown from Iohn,
Were Constance, and her son the Duke of Britain,
Heir to the elder brother of the king.
Yet hee sleeps on, and with a little spurn,
The mother and the Prince doth overturn,
Again when Insurrection them assists,
Stirred by the French king, and the wronged Earl,
Whose troth-plight wife, king Iohn had tan to wife,
He only claps his hand upon his sword▪
Mocks their threatenings, and in their attempts,
The harmless Prince receives recurelesse death▪
Whom they too late with bootless tears lament.
Matilda, stay Matilda, doe but speak:
Whose there? Entreat Matilda to come back.
Who would you have, my Lord?
Why, my Lord Bonuill: I would have Matilda:
That but even now, past by toward the door.
I saw her not my Lord.
Had thou a lovers eye,
A gnat, a moat, a shadow thou would spy:
Come follow me, she cannot be so far,
But I shall overtake her: come away.
The last appearance shadowed the fair Queen,
And her two children, at whose sight king Iohn
Showed neither sign nor show of passion:
But when the sun came masked in a cloud,
And veiled beauty, ioynde with chastity,
Appeared in Matildaes lovely shape,
He starts, he clasps, he wakes, he calls, he seeks
The shadow of that substance he affects:
To her he sewes, but she his suit reiects:
To him she sewes, but he her suit neglects:
He sues to be her love, she doth despise:
She sues to live a maid, which he denies.
What follows of this wilful will, and shall,
This no and nay, this quenchless, bootless fire,
This cold affection, and this hot desire,
The act it self shall tell, and the poor Friar,
Your partial favours humbly doth require.
Now I perceive, this only was a dream:
Divine Matildaes Angel did appear,
Decked like a Uestall, ready for heavens quire,
And to this earthly trunk will not come near.
Well, let her go: I must in faith, I must,
And so I will: kings thoughts should be divine:
So are Matildaes, so henceforth shall mine.
So doing, peace shall wait upon your crown,
And blessing upon blessing shall befall.
Its true my Lord, I know full well there shall.
Your people will wax proud of such a king,
That of himself is king, Lord of his thoughts:
Which by assertion of Philosophers,
Is held to be the greatest Empery.
And they said wisely, noble Anbery.
Then will Fitzwater with his gallant troops,
Again keep triumphs in the English Court.
Then will Matilda
Matilda, what of her?
Like a bright star, adorn the lovely train
Of beauteous Ladies, which attend the Queen,
Whose only beauty equalleth them all.
Like an old fool, whose dim eyes wanting sight,
Compar'st the sun, to common candle light.
Pardon my liege: I doe comfesse, her fair
Exceeds all these, as far as day doth night.
Grossly allude•: night by moon, by stars.
By wandering fires, exhaled meteors,
By artificial lights, by eyes of beasts,
And little glow-wormes, glimpsing in the dark,
Hath some where brightness, lightness, and sometime
Under each Horizon in all parts clear:
But they at no time, no where can be said
To be less dark, then dungeon darkness is.
Pitch coloured, Eban faced, blacker than black,
While her fair eyes gives beauty to bright day.
To hear the Queen thus praised works my contēt.
The Queen? O, had I such a thought I would
repent.
Further my Lord.
What shall we further wade?
I fear I shall be tyred with this jade.
The common-wealth will flourish &amp; increase.
Good Oxford of those things now hold your peace:
And take the pains to fetchin Isabel.
I have strange tidings sent me out of France,
Which she will take, I know, in as good part,
As I accept her praise: fetch her I say.
What is the old fool gone? now go thy way.
What think thou of him Hubert? tell me man.
As of a good old gentleman my Lord,
That speaks but what he thinks, &amp; thinks you think
As he doth: and I warrant you
Will not canceale those praises from the Queen,
Which as hee deems you uttered in her praise.
I would have them believe it so indeed:
But I protest, is no part of my Creed.
I faith your Grace did Oxfords years great wrōg,
To curtal his good work, that seemed so long:
He peradventure would have brought in more,
After his Preface, to rich plenties store.
Perchance he would have showed dame vanity,
That in your Court is suffered hourly:
And bad you punish ruffians with long hair,
New fashions, and such toys: a special care
Has that good man: he turns the statute book:
About his hall and chambers if you look,
The moral virtues in fair effigy,
Are lively painted: moral Philosophy
Has not a sencence, be it great or small,
But it is painted on his Honours wall.
Peace, peace, he comes, now lets be silent all.
I tell you I was proud of his good words.
God hold them Oxford: for its often seen,
A reconciled foe small good affords.
O forbear: trust me, I gage my Honour he doth hold you dear.
How cheer you Isabel? The earl, your spouse
Hath sent defiance to the king your husband,
And like a tried tall soldier, fled his holds
In Marchland; Where he knows, despite of him,
And all the men that he therein can raise,
King Iohn could have sent dogs enough to tear
Their ill armed bodies peece-meale, ere his bands
Should with base blood ha•e stained their noble hāds.
And whether is this worshipful good Earl
(This first love, old love, new love if you will)
Gone thinks your Ladyship? Forsooth, good man,
To Normandy; and there he stirs up coals,
And urges strong aid for confederates,
Who, as he says, are treacherously disposed.
If he doe so, the greater is his sin:
Poor man, I have no interest in him.
But he hath had in you, as it should seem,
Else would he not make sonnets of your brow,
Your eye, your lip, your hand, your thigh,
A plague upon him: how came he so nigh?
Nay, now you have the cursed queens counterfeit:
Through rage you shake, because you cannot rave.
But answer me; Why should the Bedlam slave
Entitle a whole Poem to your kiss,
Calling it cheri, ruby, this and this?
I tell you, I am jealous of your love,
Which makes me break into this passion.
Here's the kind noble Anbery de Vere,
Knows what I speak is true:
My Lord, my Lord, I doe appeal to you:
Are these things to be borne?
No by the Rood,
These loue-rimes are the tokens of small good.
Why my good Lord, was never Poetry,
Offred unto a Ladies patronage?
Yes, but not taken.
Yes, and taken too.
Though muddy slaves, whose ballatizing rimes,
With words unpolished, show their brutish thoughts,
Naming their Maukins in each lustful line:
Let no celestial beauty look awry,
When well writ poems, couching her rich praise,
Are offered to her unstained virtues eye.
For Poetries high sprighted sons will raise,
True beauty to all wished eternity:
Therefore my Lord, your age is much to blame,
To think a taken Poem Ladies shame.
You see the King, thats better read than you,
And far more wronged than I, takes it not well.
Yes but I doe: I think not Isabel, Lord,
The worse for any writing of Brunes.
Will you ha the troth my Lord: I think so too:
And though I be an old man, by my sword,
My arm shall justify my constant word.
After a long storm in a troublous sea,
The Pilot is no gladder of a calm,
Than Isabel to see the vexed looks
Of her loved Lord, changed into sweet aspects.
I will not tell thee what a world of foes,
For thy love (dear love) rise against my life.
(Matildaes love: few swords will fight for thee)
I will not number up the many woes
That shall be multiplied, strife upon strife
Will follow! But to shun ensuing else,
Isle take shush pledges as shall please me ask.
Of each proud Baron, dwelling in the Realm.
Bruise kinsman, and the deputy to March,
Hath a high-minded Lady to his wife,
An able son for arms, and a less by•y,
That is the comfort of his fathers life:
Madame, I know you love the Lady well,
And of her wealth you may be bold to build,
By sending you four hundred white milch ki•e,
And ten like coloured bulls, to serve that heard:
So fair, that every cow did Iö seem,
And every bull Europaes ravisher.
To friend my self with such a subjects truth,
Thus I command; You, and Earl Salsbury
Shall, with what speed conveniently ye may.
Hye ye to Gilford, there the Lady lies,
And her sons too, as I am told by spies:
All that she hath, I know she calls yours,
All that she hath, I gladly wo•lt call mine,
If she abuse ye: if she use ye well,
For ever be, what she retains, her own:
Only go by as Queens in progress doe,
And send me word how she receives you.
Well, I avouch she will, before I go,
Far be it, Iohn should prove Lord Bruses foe.
Come noble Oxford, I long to be at Gilford.
In such a business, Madam, so doe I.
Go on, good stales, now Gilford is mine own.
Hubert, I charge you take an hundred horse,
And follow unto Gilford Castle gates,
The Queen, pretend, you come to tend upon,
Sent carefully from vs: when you are in,
Boldly demand the Lady for her sons,
For pledges of her husbands faith and hers:
Whom when ye have, upon the Castle seize,
And keep it to our use until we come:
Mean while let me alone with Hugh your son,
To work a wonder, if no prodigy:
But, whatsoere, it shall attempted be.
Even that which to your Majesty
May seem contentfull, thereto I agree.
Go then to Gilford, and a victor be.
Moubray, our mask? are you and Chester ready?
We will before your Grace, I warrant you.
How think of it, Mowbray?
As on a mask; but for our torch-bearers,
Hell cannot rake so mad a crewe as I.
Faith, who is chief?
Will Brand, my Lord.
But then your Grace must curb his cruelty:
The reign once got, he's apt for villainy.
I know the villain is both rough and grim:
But as a ty-dogge I will muzzle him.
Isle bring him up to fawn upon my friends,
And worry dead my foes. But to our mask.
I mean this night to revel at the feast,
Where fair Matilda graces every guest:
And if my hidden courtesy she grace,
Old Bainards Castle good Fitzwaters place,
Iohn will make rich, with royal Englands wealth:
But if she do vote: not those scattred bands,
Dropping from Austria, and the Holy land,
That boast so much of glorious victories,
Shall stop the inundations of those woes,
That like a deluge I will bring on them:
I know the crew is there, banish all fears:
If wronged, they shall be ours, if welcome, theirs.
Why how now votary? still at your book?
Ever in mourning weeds? For shame, for shame,
With better entertainment cheer our friends.
Now by the blessed cross you are much too blame,
To cross our mirth thus; you are much too blame Essay.
Good Lord, hath never woe enough of well ada!
Indeed, indeed,
Some sorrow fits: but this is more than need.
Good father pardon me,
You saw I sate the supper and the banquet,
You know I cannot dance, discourse I shun:
By reason that my wit, but small before,
Comes far behind the ripe wits of our age.
You'll be too ripe for marriage,
If you delay, by day, and day, thus long,
There is the noble Wigmore, lord of the March,
That lies on Wye, Lug, and the Seuerne streams,
His son is like the suns syres Ganimede,
And for your love, hath sent a Lord to plead:
His absence, I did purpose to excuse:
But Lester to the man for him that sues.
My cousin Bruise hath been your Broker, Lester,
At least hath broke the matter to my girl.
O for a barber at the time of need,
Or one of these that dresses periwigs,
To deck my gray head with a youthful hair:
But I must too't. Matilda, thus it is;
Say, can ye love me? I am Wigmors son.
My cousin said, he looked like Ganimede:
But you, but you.
But I, but I, you say,
Am rather like old Chromes in a play.
But thats a nice objection: I am hee,
But by attorney ship made deputy.
He's never like to speed well, all his life,
That by attorney sues to win a wife:
But grant you are, whom you seem nothing like,
Young Wigmore, the heir to this noble Lord:
He for his son hath yet sent vs ne'er a word.
If you grant love, when his son doth woo,
Then in your jointure heel send, say, and doe.
And for a dooer, cousin take my word,
Look for a good egg, he was a good bird:
Cock a the game in faith, never fear.
I, but I fear the match will fall out ill,
Because he says his son is named Will.
And why good daughter: Hath some Palmister,
Some Augur, or some dreaming Calculator
(For such I know you often hearken to)
Been prating against the name? Go too, go too,
Doe not believe them. Lester, fall to woo.
I must believe my father, and tic you,
That if I ought misdid, reproved me still,
And chiding said, you're wedded to your will,
God for thy mercy, have ye caught me there?
Wigmore is William, woman. Lester, speak,
Thou art the simplest wooer in the world.
You have put me out, &amp; she hath took me down:
You with your talk, she with her ready tongue.
You told me I should find her mild and still,
And scarce a word come from her in an hour,
Then did I think, I should have all the talk,
Unhindred by your willingness to help,
Unanswerd till I had no more to say: And then
What then? she with a courtly curtsy saying nay.
Your friends attorney might have gone his way,
With as great credit, as did that Orator,
Which handling an Oration, some three hours,
Ill for the matter, worse than bad for phrase:
Having said Dixie; looked, and found not one,
To praise or dispraise his Oration:
For, wearied with his talk, they all were gone.
Now by my troth, if any troth I have,
I amas merry at Matildaes mirth,
As I was glad to see her first days birth.
For till this hour, so help me holidam,
Since the too timely death of Huntington,
Not a blithe word had passage through her lips.
See what a pleasing humour wooers bring.
O but ye leave too soon.
Yet she auerers
I stand too long, shall I choose yours or hers?
Either forbear, I pray ye, for a while.
Welcome Lord Richmond.
What, doth Matilda smile?
That still like sadness solitary sat:
Then off with widows weeds, and teach your feet,
(That have forgot for want of exercise,
And by the means your sorrow had no mean)
To tread a measure: for a gallant crew,
Of courtly mockers landed at the stairs,
Before whom vnintreated, I am come,
And have prevented, I believe, their page,
Who with his torch is entered.
Richmond, thanks:
If you have ought to say about the mockers,
Beseech the Gentlemen to enter in:
For they are welcome guests to old Fitzwater.
Son, son, I pray you fetch the Ladies in:
We have been talking here about a match,
And left our noble friends in discontent.
Nay by my faith, we had much merriment;
Yet thought it long, you neither came, nor sent.
How now Matilda? pray thee cheer thee girl.
I thought it was a lightning before death:
Too sudden to be certain: good pleasure stay.
Wilt thou not wanton? churl then go thy way.
What? changed so soon: so soon fallen to your dūps?
Cheerly: the mask comes in. O God, this veil &amp; look
Fit not this sport.
Isle leave it.
Nay: for your love, Williams sake, fair maiden stay.
This is no courtship daughter, be not nice,
You both abuse him and disparage vs:
His fellows had the Ladies they did choose,
And well you know, here is no more maids than Maud:
Your self are all our store: I pray you rise,
Or by my faith, I say you doe vs wrong.
I will do what you will: lead, lead your dance.
You know me by my speech.
I my Liege, I: O! that temptations tongue
Had no where to be placed but in your head.
Well, say I have her tongue, had I not need,
When you have both her eyes: nay all her shape:
Able to tempt even Jove himself to rape.
Good my Lord leave; or I will leave the place.
Dance out your Galliard: Gods dear holibread,
You're too forgetful: dance, or by my troth,
You'll move my patience more than I will speak.
Nay soft vnmannerd sir, you are too rough:
Her joints are weak, your arms are strong &amp; tough:
If ye come here for sport you welcome be,
If not, better your room than such bad company.
Dost threaten me? thou will I see thy face.
And so thou shalt, look on me rebel Lord;
Thou that were late a factious ring-leader,
And in the open field gau'st me fierce fight,
Art thou again gathering another head,
That with such rudeness thou dost entertain
The gentle coming of thy Sovereign?
My dread Lord, hear me, and forgive this fault:
What I have erst done, long since you forgave:
If I did lead the Barons in the field,
The Barons chose me, when they could not choose
But make some leader, you were so missed.
When better thoughts entered your royal breast,
We then obeyed you, as our Sovereign head.
You did even what you list, and so doe still.
I am the king, but you must have your will:
The plain troth is, we are not come in sport,
Though for our coming, this was our best cloak:
For if we never come, till you doe send,
We must not be your guests while banquets last,
Contentious brauls you hourly send to vs:
But we may send and send, and you return,
This Lord is sick, that pained with the gout,
He rid from home. You think I find not out
Your close confederacies: yes I doe, no doubt.
If there be here a close confederate,
Gods vengeance light upon him with my hate.
No, you are open Lester, that I know.
I by the Lord, my Lord, your open foe.
By thy Lords Lord, and mine, proud Raf of Chester,
Thou dare not say so, were thou from the king.
Yes, but he dares and shall.
Mowbray, if you stand by,
He dares perchance, else will the dastard fly.
My own sword shall maintain my tongues true speech:
For it is not frequented to such lies,
As wrangling Lester, and proud Richmond use:
It cannot set out like a thundering drum,
Or roaring Canon, stuffed with nought but brags,
The multitudes of seas died red with blood,
And famous cities into cinders turned,
By their two armed arms.
I Chester.
And then they show vs rags, torn off belike,
From poor decayed Ladies petticotes:
For neither bill, nor feathered shot, nor pike
Made half or any of those rents they have:
These patched together, fastened unto staves,
They will not stick to swear, have been advanced
Against the Sophie Sultan, and the Turk,
Do not maintain proud Chester, my lives Liege.
Your words I must put up: his if I bear
Yes you shall bear them, Bear, and yet not bite:
We have you muzzeld now: remember once
You braved vs with your Bombard boasting words:
Come briefly, Lester, Richmōd, both Fitzwaters, Bruise,
Deliver up your swords immediately:
And either yield your bodies to our hands,
Or give such pledges as we shall accept,
Unto our Steward Winchester, with speed.
I will not leave my arms, nor break my word
Except I be provoked: your liege-man I am sworn:
That oath is pledge enough. If you mislike
Thou hear me say, I doe.
And I reply, that pledge refused, I have no more
for you.
And Richmond says as noble Lester saith;
Already have we plighted fame and faith:
Which being scorned, returns to vs again,
And by the kings own mouth, we are discharged,
Fitzwater, what say you?
What pledge desires my Liege?
I ask your stubborn daughter.
That were a gage to be engaged.
Peace thou head-strong boy.
Pardon me sovereign: all my power is yours:
My goods you may command, my life you may:
My children too I know with both their lives,
Will readily adventure deaths worst wrongs,
To doe such service as true subjects should:
But honourable fame, true chastity
Make no exceptions, yield her up to me,
Or look for ever for my enmity.
Nay then Fitzwater tells your Majesty,
You doe him wrong; and well will let you wit,
He will defend his honour to the death.
And Bruise, you are no otherwise disposed,
You will not give your sons to me for pledge.
I have but one, being my lesserboy,
Who is at Gilford: for my other son,
He braves me with the rest.
Well it is night, and theres no sun to swear by,
But by Gods son: and by him I here protest,
A miserable storm this night to raise,
That shall not cease, while England gives rest,
To such vile traitors: Bruise Isle begin with you:
I will in faith, as true as God is true.
Then shall a storm be raised against a storm,
And tempest be with tempest beaten back.
But this firm Island like the sea will •os,
And many goodly buildings go to wrack,
Many a widow weep her dying son,
And many a mother to her helpless babes
Cry out vncomfortably; children peace,
Your crying unto me is all in vain,
Dead is my husband, your poor father slain.
We can not help it uncle.
No, you see entreats &amp; humble suits have now no power:
But lust and wrath the kingdom doth devour.
Me he did menace first, and much I fear
He will to Gilford, and besiege my wife.
O, hye to save her. Richmond ride with him.
Let vs away Bruise, least we come to late,
And with vs take some score of men well armed.
Doe: Lester, and my self will keep the city,
Till we are furnished with an able army.
Your Nephew, Bruise, shall take an hundred armed men,
And post to Hartford Castle with your sister:
Sith wrong will wake vs, we will keep such watch,
As for his life, he shall not hurt vs bring.
Be comforted good Madame, doe not fear,
But give your son as pledge unto the king:
Your self at Court may keep him company.
I am betrayed, alas I am betrayed,
And little thought your Highness had been bent,
So much against me, for my many loves,
As to prepare an entrance for my foe.
As I shall live in heaven, I did not know
Of Huberts coming: but lament not this:
Your son you say is gone; what fear you then?
O madame, murder, mischief, wrongs of men
I fear, I fear: what first I doe not fear?
Sith hope is so far of, despair so near.
Answer me good Hubert, I pray the Hubert doe.
What think you of this matter, may I on your word
Persuade the woman that all things are well?
You may persuade her, if you can my Lord:
For I protest I know no other thing,
But that the king would have him for a pledge of the
Lord Bruses faith.
And reason too. Now by my Honour, Hubert, I
protest it is good reason.
Bruise, I tell you plain,
Is no sound cloak, to keep Iohn from the rain.
I will go to her.
Doe good simple Earl.
If not by threats, nor my entreats she yield,
Thy brain is barren of invention,
Dried up with care: &amp; never will she yield her son to
thee, that having power, want wit.
Wife, I overhear thee Hubert.
So do I dame Bruise:
But stir no coals: the man is well beloved,
And merits more than so.
But I will answer.
Hubert, thou fatal keeper of poor babes,
That are appointed hostages for Iohn,
Had I a son here, as I have not one
(For yesterday I sent him into Wales)
Think thou I would be so degenerate,
So far from kind, to give him unto thee?
I would not I protest: thou know my mind.
Lady, you fear more than you need to doe,
Indeed you doe, in very deed you doe:
Hubert is wronged about the thing you mean,
About young Arthus: O, I thought it was so:
Indeed the honest, good, kind gentleman
Did all he might for safeguard of the child.
Believe me Madame Bruise, the man is wronged.
But he wrongs me, to keep my Castle thus,
Disarming my true servants, arming his.
Now more of outrage comes, what shall I doe?
O this is well. Hubert, wheres Bruses son?
Where thou shalt never see him, Iohn.
Lady, we shall have talk with you anon.
Where is he Hubert?
Hid, or fled my Lord: we can by no means get her to confess.
Welcome to Gilford, Oxfords liefest Lord.
You scarce give welcome, ere I bid you go:
For you my Lord, the Queen and Winchester,
Shall march to Harford. Sweet Isabel,
And if thou love me, play the Amazon.
Matilda that hath long bewitched mine eye,
Is as I hear by spiels, now in Harford Castle;
Besiege her there: for now her haughty father
Ruffians it up and down, and all the brood
Of viperous traitors whet their poisoned teeth,
That they may feed on vs that foster them.
Go forward, and go with you victory:
Which to assure, my powers shall follow you.
Did I not tell you this: then trust me next:
Nay he is changed, and cares no more for her,
Than I doe Madame.
Be gone I say, be gone:
Your speed, rich victory attends on:
But your delay
May give your foes the happy glorious day.
One boon my Liege, and part.
Be brief.
Show that poor Lady pity, I beseech.
I will indeed. Come Lady, let vs in.
You have a son, go in and bring him me,
And for the Queens sake I will favour ye.
I have no son: come, come: come in and search,
And if you find him, wretched may I bee.
Chester and Hubert, see you keep good watch.
Not far of doe I hear a warlike sound:
Bruise on my life: look too't while I go in
To seek this boy; for needs we must have him.
Come with vs Mowbray.
The Castle gates are shut. what ho? what ho?
You that are servants to the Lady Bruise,
Arise, make entrance for your Lord and friends.
We will make issue ere ye enter here.
Who have we there, Richmond and Bruise? First you?
What, up so soon, are ye so early here?
In you in faith the Prouerb's verified:
You're early up, and yet are ne'er the near.
The worse our fortune, Bruise let vs go hence,
We have no power to fight, nor make defence.
What Richmond, will you prove a Runaway?
From thee good Winchester: Now y• Lord defen•.
we will stay and fight.
Tic to no end: we have but twenty men, &amp; they
be tired.
But ere we doe retire, tell me Lord Hubert,
Where are my wife and son?
Your wife is here, your son we cannot find.
Let son &amp; wife, high heavens, your comfort find.
Bruise hath been here, my Lord.
I, let him go: we have good pledges: though wee
see but one,
The other we are sure will come anon.
I doe advise you, for your own discharge,
Deliver up your son unto the king.
Nay let her choose. Come hither Mowbray.
The king is angry; Lady Bruise advise you.
What? be advised by thee, to have my loving,
kind and pretty boy, given to an unkind killer of
sweet boys?
Madame go too, take counsel of your friends,
I warrant you the king will use him well.
I, as he used his Nephew, Arthur Chester:
God bless my child from being used so.
Sir Hubert, what are all the people voided,
The horses and the cattle turned forth?
Mowbray, they be.
Then will I doe the kings commandment.
What will he doe! good lord, what will he doe!
I pray you what first you will doe.
Why? fire the Castle.
The Castle Mowbray? tarry, tarry man,
Hold me not Chester, gentle Mowbray stay:
Good Hubert let me go.
To lead a many able men to fight.
And modest looking maid, I see you too:
And unfit sight, to view virginity
Guarded with other soldiers, than good prayers:
But you will say the king occasions it.
Say what you will, no king but would take cause?
Of just offence: yield you young Bruise: your mother is
in hold.
Yield you young maid: your father is in hold.
Will the Queen keep me from the lustful king?
Then will I yield.
A plague upon this counterfeiting queen,
Gods blessed mercy, will you still be mad,
And wrong a noble virgin with vile speech?
Let me alone: Matilda, maiden fair,
Thou virgin spouse, true Huntingtons just heir,
Wilt thou come hither? and I doe protest,
The Queen and I, to mitigate this war,
Will doe what thou would have.
I come.
You shall not go: sound drums to war.
Alack, alack for woe: well God for vs, sith it
will needs be so,
What stay you for?
Matildaes cries doe stay vs.
Oxford, I come in hope of thy defence.
First will I die, ere you shall yield your self,
To any coward Lord that serves the King.
Coward proud boy? thou find me no such beast,
And thou shalt rue in earnest this rude jest.
Rude hands, how hale you virtuous honour forth?
You doe not well: away: now by my faith,
Ye doe not well I say.
Take her, fair Queen, use her as she deserves:
Shees fair, shees noble, chaste, and debonair.
I must, according to due course of war,
See that our soldiers scatter not too fare,
Least what care won, our negligence mray loose.
Is this the Helen, this the Paragon,
That makes the English Ilinnus flame so fast?
I am not she, you see I am not she:
I am not ravished yet, as Helen was,
I know not what will come of Iohns desire,
That rages like the sea, that burns like fire.
Plain Iohn, proud Ione? Isle tear your painted.
face: thus, thus Isle use you.
Doe, doe. what you will.
How goes this gear? ha? foul fall so foul a deed,
Poor chaste child of Fitzwater dost thou bleed.
By Gods blessed mother this is more than need:
And more I tell you true than I would bear,
Were not the danger of the camp so near.
My Lord, the foes have gathered head:
Lord Bruise the father, joins with the son.
Why here is the matter, we must spend our time,
To keep your nails from scratching innocence,
Which should have been bestowed for our defence.
What shall we now doe! help me holy God,
The foe is come, and we are out of rank.
Is the field ours:
I, thanks to noble Lester.
Give God thanks, son, be careful to thy mother:
Commend me to Fitzwater, love thy brother,
If either arms, or prayers may him recover.
How cheers old Bruise?
His soul to joy is fled:
His gre•fe is in my bosom buried.
His life was dearly bought. For my eyes saw
A shambles of dead men about his feet,
Sent by his sword unto eternal shade:
With honour bury him: cease tears good Bruise.
Tears help not I confess: yet must I weep.
Soldiers, your help to bear him to my tent.
Be comforted great Queen: forget my wrongs.
It was my fortune and no fault of yours.
Is she thus mild? or doth she mock my chance?
Queen Eleanor, are you a prisoner?
See what it is to be a soldier.
But what foul hand hath harmed Matildaes fair?
Speak honourable maid: who tore thy hair?
Did Oxford or the Queen this violence?
Ungentle grooms first took and sore me thus:
From whom old Oxford, chastising their wrong,
Mest kindly brought me to this gentle Queen:
Who laid her soft hand on my bleeding cheeks,
Gave kisses to my lips, wept for my woe:
And was devising how to send me back,
Even when your last alarm frighted vs:
And by her kindness, fell into your hands.
Which kindness we return. Madame, be free.
Soldiers, conduct the Queen whether she please.
Farewell Matilda: if I live, believe,
I will remember this. O how I grieve,
That I should wrong so innocent a maid.
Come Lady, old Fitzwater is not far:
Heal weep to see these scars, full well I know.
Would I were from this woeful world of war:
Sure I will scope, and to some Nunnery go.
Had you her then? had you her in your power?
I marry had we; we had taken her.
O had she been in mine,
Not all earths power, from my power, should have freed her.
You are a king: and high are Princes thoughts:
It may be with your sight you could have chac't
An host of armed men: it may be so:
But we your subjects did the best we could:
Yet Bruise the father, backing Bruise the son,
Scattred our troops: brought rescue to Matilda,
And took your peerless Queen, their prisoner.
On all the race of Bruses, for this wrong,
I will have vengeance. Hubert, call in Brand.
My Lord of Oxford, give vs leave a while to be alone.
I will my liege: but be you comforted,
The Queen will be recovered, doe not fear.
As well as ere she was;
Oxford, for bear I pray.
Yet for the wrong she did unto Matilda, I fear, I fear,
The father and the son did rescue her:
The mother and the son shall rue the deed:
So it shall be: I am resolved thereon.
Matilda, my souls food, those have bereft:
And these of bodies food I will bereave.
Will Brand?
Your Majesty.
Less of your curtsy. Hubert, stand aside.
Post speedily to Windsor: take this ring:
Bid Blunt deliver Bruses wife and child,
Into your hands: and ask him for the key
Of the dark tower, ore the dungeon vault▪
In that, see you shut up the dam and brat.
Pretend to Blunt that you have left them meat,
Will serve some seven-night: and unto him say,
It is my will you bring the key away.
And here you sir, I charge you on your life,
You doe not leave a bit of bread with them.
I warrant you, let me alone.
Come back again with all the speed you may.
Some cruel task is pointed for that slave,
Which he will execute as cruelly.
No ruth, no pity shall have harbour here,
Till fair Matilda be within these arms,
Comfort my Lord, comfort my gracious Lord.
Your love is come again.
Ah Oxford, where?
Here my dread Sovereign.
Thou lie she is not there.
Under correction you wrong my age.
Say I beseech you, is not this the Queen?
I cry you mercy Oxford, tic indeed.
Where is Matilda?
Where virtue, chastity, and innocence remain,
there is Matilda.
How comes she, pray, to be so chaste, so fair, so
virtuous in your eye?
She freed me from my foes, and never urged
My great abuse, when she was prisoner.
What did you to her?
Raild upon her first,
Then tare her hair, and rent her tender cheeks.
O heaven! was not the day dark at that foul deed?
Could the sun see, without a red eclipse,
The purple tears fall from those tyrant wounds!
Out A•thiope, Gypsy, thick leapt Blackamoore:
Wolf, Tigress, worse than either of them both.
Are you advised my Lord?
Out doting Earl.
Could thou endure to see such violence?
I tell you plain▪ my Lord, I brooked it not,
But staid the tempest.
Rend my loves cheeks? that matchless Effigy,
Of wonder-working, natures chiefest work.
Tear her rich hair? to which, gold wires,
Suns rays, and best of best compares
(In their most pride) have no comparison.
Abuse her name? Matildaes sacred name?
O barbarous outrage, rudeness merciless.
I told you Oxford, you mistook the king.
I did indeed: my liege Lord give me leave,
To leave the Camp.
Away old fool: and take with thee that trull:
For if she stay,
Come Lady, come away.
Tempt not his rage• ruin wrath always brings:
Lust being lord, there is no trust in kings.
To arms king Iohn: Fitzwaters field is pitched,
About some mile hence, on a champagne plain.
Chester hath drawn our soldiers in array:
The wings already have begun the fight.
Thither we will with wings of vengeance fly,
And win Matilda, or loose victory.
Why did my keeper put vs in thy hands?
Wherein have we offended Blunt or thee?
You need not make these words:
You must remove your Iodging: this is all.
Be not afraid: come come, here is the door.
O God how dark it is!
Go in go in: its higher up the stairs.
My trembling heart forbids me to go in.
O if thou have compassion, tell me true,
What my poor boy and I must trust unto?
I tell thee true, compassion is my foe:
Yet have I bad of thee compassion.
Take in thy child: as I have faith or troth,
Thou and thy boy shall be but prisoners:
And I must daily bring you meat and drink.
Well, thou hast sworn: and God so give thee light,
As in this dark place thou remember vs.
Poor heart, thou laughst, and h•st not wit to think,
Upon the many fears that me afflict.
I will not in• help vs, assist vs Blunt.
We shall be murdered in a dungeon.
Cry without cause? Isle have ye in •faith.
O let my boy and I but dine with Blunt,
And then I will with patience go in.
Will ye, or nill ye, zounds, ye must go in,
And never dine.
What sai•st thou? never dine?
No not with Blunt, I mean. Go in I say▪
Or by this hand, ye get no meat to day.
My child is hungry, When shall he have meat?
Why, and ye would go in, immediately.
I will go in: but very much I doubt,
Nor I, nor my poor bay shall ere come out.
Ne'er while ye live, in faith: now are they sure.
Cry till their h•arts ache, no man can them hear.
A mis•rabble death is famishment:
But what care •? the king commanded me.
Now doth fair fortune offer hope of speed:
But howsoever we speed: good cousin Bruise,
March with three hundred bows &amp; pikes to Windsor,
Spreading a rumour that the day is ours:
As ours it shall be, with the help of heaven.
Blunt loves our part far better than the king's:
And will, I gage my life, upon the news,
Surrender up the Castle to our use.
By this means shall you help vs to a hold,
How ere it chance, set free your Lady mother
That lives in prison there, with your young brother.
Away good uncle, to the battle go:
But that a certain good ensues I know,
For all the world, I would not leave you so.
Away, away.
God send thee Win•sor: vs this happy day.
You cannot hide your self Matilda: no disguise
Will serve the turn: now must you to the king:
And all these wars will with your presence cease.
Yield you to him, hee soon will yield to peace.
They say thou took some pity of a child,
The king appointing thee to sear his eyes.
Men doe report thee to be just of word,
And a dear lover of my Lord the king.
If thou did that, if thou be one of these:
Pity Matilda, prostrate at thy feet.
I saved young A•thurs eyes, and pity thee:
My word is just, which I have given the king.
The king I love: and thee I know he loves.
Compare these: then how can I pleasure thee?
By letting me escape to Dunmow Abbey,
Where I will end my life a votary.
And the king die with doting on thy love.
No, no: this fire of lust would be soon laid,
If once he knew me sworn a holy maid.
Thy tears and love of virtue have the power
To make me, at an instant, true and false:
True to distressed beauty and rare chastity:
False to king Iohn, that holds the sight of thee
Dearer than England, or earths Empery.
Go happy soul, that in so ill an age,
Hast such fair beauty for thy heritage:
Yet go not so alone. Dost hear tall soldier?
I know thee honest▪ guide this gentle maid,
To Dunmow Abbey: she is one I know.
I will excuse thee and content thee well.
My signet take, that ye may pass vnsearch•.
Kind Hubert, many prayers, for this good deed,
Shall on my beads be daily numbered.
O treble heat of honour, toil and rage!
How cheers earl Richmond?
Fitzwater, speak old man.
We are now near together; answer me.
Lester, the more our woe,
The likelier to be taken by the foe.
O let not such a thought abuse thy age:
Weal never yield vs to the tyrants rage.
But if my girl be yielded,
If she be.
I, I: theres no man but shall have his time to die.
Now is our hour: which they shall dearly buy.
Lester, weal stand like three Battalions:
What says our noble General thereto?
Why, I say doe: while I can, Isle keep my place
with you.
How now my bug-beare, will ye now submit?
To death, but not to thee▪
Richmond, nor you?
Earl Richmond will not yield.
Me thinks Fitzwater, you should have more wit.
If it be wit to live, I have no will:
And so in this, my will orerules my wit.
Alarm then, with weapons will
We scourge your desperate will, and teach ye to have wit.
Of high heroic spirits be they all:
We will withdraw a little and confer:
For they are circled round, and cannot scope.
O that we three, who in the suns arise,
Were (like the three Triumuirates of Rome)
Guids of an host, able to vanquish Rome,
Are n•• alone, enclosed with enemies!
The glory of the world hath no more stay:
But as it comes, it fleets, and fades away.
Courage, and let vs die; they come again:
Its Lord Hugh Burgh alone, Hughberr, what news?
This days fierce slaughter, Iohn, our King, lamēts:
And to you three, great leaders of an host,
That now have not a man at all to lead:
You worthy captains without companies
Fitzwarer, Richmond; by the blessed Sun,
Lord Hubert mocks vs.
By the Moon I doe not, and put the blessed too't▪
It is as good an oath as you have sworn.
My heart grieves, that so great hearts, as yours be,
Should put your fortunes on a sort of slaves,
That bring base fear within them to •he field:
But to the matter. Sith your state is such,
That without mercy you are sure of death
(Which I am sure, and well his Highness knows,
You doe not fear at all) yet he gives grant,
On just conditions you shall save your lives.
On no condition will I save my life,
Except Matilda be returned again,
Unblemished, vnabus'd; and then I yield.
She now is where she never will return.
Never? O God! is my Matilda dead?
Dead to the world: dead to this woe she is.
She lives at Dunmow, and is vowed a Nun.
Doe not delude me Hubert, gentle son.
By all the faith and honour of my kin:
By my unstained allegiance to the king:
By my own worcester•, that hath reproouelesse bin,
She is at Dunmow.
O, how came she there?
When all these fields were walks for rage &amp; fear
(This, howling like a head of hungry wolves▪
That, scudding as a heard of frighted dear)
When dust arising like a cole black fog,
From friend divided friend, joined foe to foe:
Yet neither those, nor these could either know,
Till here and there through large wide mouthed woūds
Proud life, even in the glory of his heat,
Losing possession, belched forth streams of blood:
Whose spouts in falling, made ten thousand drops,
And with that purple shower the dust allied:
At such a time met I the trembling maid,
Seeming a dove, from all her fellows parted.
Seen, known, and taken: unseen &amp; unknown,
To any other that did know v• both,
At her entreats I sent her safely guided,
To Dunmow Abbey: and the guide returned,
Assures me she was gladfully received,
Pitied: and in his sight did take her oath.
Hubert, for this thy honourable deed,
I and my house will reverence thy name.
Yet, I beseech you, hide it from the king:
At least that I conveyed her to the place.
Hubert, I will.
What, stand they st•ll on terms?
On honourable terms, o• terms of right.
Our lives without our liberty we scorn.
You shall have life and liberty, I swear.
Then Lester bows his knee to his liege Lord,
And humbly begs his Highness to beware
Of wronging innocence, as he hath done.
The like Richmond desires; &amp; yields his sword.
I doe embrace ye both, and hold my self
Richer by a whole Realm, in having you.
Much is my wrong: yet I submit with these,
Begging free leave, to live a private life.
Old brands of malice in thy bosom rest.
Thou shalt have leave to leave me, never doubt.
Fitzwater, see thou ship thee straight for France,
And never set thy foore on English shore,
Till I repeal thee. Go▪ go hence in peace.
Why doth your Highness wrong Fitzwater thus?
I right his wrong; he's weary of the land.
Not of the land, but of a public life.
Content ye Lords: in such quick times as these,
We must not keep a drone among our bees.
I am as glad to go, as you to send:
Yet I beseech this favour of your Grace,
That I may see Matilda ere I part.
Matilda? See Matilda, if thou can
Before Sun set; stay not another day.
The Abbey walls, that shroud my happy child,
Appear within her haplesse fathers sight.
Farewell my Sovereign. Lester, Richmond, Lords▪
Farewell to all: grief gives no way to words.
Fitzwater stay! Lords, give vs leave a while.
Hubert, go you before unto the Abbess,
And signify our coming; let her bring
Matilda to her father. Come old man;
Be not too froward, and we shall be friends.
About this girl our mortal •arres began:
And if thou wilt, here all our quarrel ends.
Reserve my honour, and my daughters fame,
And no poor subject that your Grace commands,
Shall willinger submit, obey, and serve.
Do then but this; Persuade thy beauteous child,
To leave the Nunnery and return to Court:
And I protest from hence forth to for swear
All such conceits of lust as I have borne.
I will, my Lord, doe all that I may doe:
But give me leave, in this, to doubt of you.
This small thing grant, and ask me any thing:
Or else die in exile, loathed of the King.
You shall perceive I will doe what I may.
Matilda is afraid to leave the h, ouse:
But lo, on yonder battlement she stands:
But in no case will come within your hands.
What? will my Lady Abbess wars with vs:
Speak Lady: wherefore shut you up your gates?
Have we not reason, when an host of men,
Hunt and pursue religious chastity?
King Iohn, bethink thee what thou take in hand,
On pain of interdiction of thy Land.
Murdrers and felons may have sanctuary:
And shall not honourable maids distressed,
Religious virgins, holy Nuns professed,
Have that small privilege▪ Now out upon she, out?
Holy Saint Catherine shield my virginity:
I never stood in such extremity.
My Lord, the Abbess lies, I warrant you:
For I have heard, there is a Monk of Bury,
That once a weak comes thither to make merry.
Content thee Hubert, that same monk and she,
And the worst come, my instruments shall be.
Good Lady Abbess, fear no violence:
There's not one here shall offer you offence.
Daughter, all this while tears my speech have staid.
My Lord the King: Lords all draw near I pray:
And hear a poor mans parting from his child.
Matilda, still my unstained honours joy,
Fair Ornament of old Fitzwaters coat,
Borne to rich fortunes, did not this ill age
Bereave thee of thy birth-rights heritage▪
Thou see our Sovereign, Lord of both our lives,
A long besieger of thy chastity,
Hath scattred all our forces, slain our friends,
Raced our Castles, left vs ne'er a house
Wherein to hide vs from his wrathful eye▪
Yet God provides; France is appointed me:
And thou find house-roome in this Nunnery.
Here if the king should dote, as he hath done,
Its sacrilege to tempt a holy Nun:
But I have hope he will not: yet my fear
So drowns my hope, as I am forced to stay,
And leave abruptly, what I more would say.
O go not yet, my grieved hearts comforter,
I am as valiant to resist desire,
As ever thou were worthy in the field.
Iohn may attempt▪ but if Matilda yield,
O then.
I then Matilda, thou dost loose
The former glory of thy chaste resolves.
These seven years hast thou bid a Martyrs pains,
Resisting in thy self lust-growing fire:
For being mortal, sure thou had desire.
And five sad winters have their full course run,
Since thou did bury noble Huntington.
In these years, many months, and many days,
Have been consumed, thy virtues to consume:
Gifts have been heralds▪ Panders did presume
To tempt thy chaste ears, with their unchaste tongues.
All in effect, working to no effect.
For I was still the watchman of thy tower,
The keeper of foul worms, from my fair flower:
But now, no more, no more Fitzwater may
Defend his poor Lamb, from the Lyons prey:
Thy order and thy holy prayers may.
To help thee, thou hast privilege by law:
Therefore be resolute, and nobly die,
Abhor base lust, defend thy chastity.
Dispat•h Fitzwater, hinder not thy child:
Many preferments doe on her await.
I girl, I know thou shalt be offered wealth
(Which is a shrewd enticement in sad want)
Great honours to lift up thy lowe estate,
And glorious titles to eternize thee.
Al these doe but gild over ugly shame:
Such wealth, my child, foreruns releaselesse need:
Such honour ever proves dishonourate.
For titles, none comes near a virtuous name:
O keep it ever, as thou hast done yet.
And though these dark times should forget thy praise,
An age will come, that shall eternize it.
Bid me farewell, and speak it in a word.
Farewell dear father.
Oh farewell sweet child.
My Liege farewell: Lester, Richmond, Hughbert,
Chester, and Mowbray: friends and foes farewell.
Matilda, see thou keep thy spotless fame,
And live eternized; else die soon with shame.
Amen, amen father, adieu, adieu:
Grief dwells with me, sweet comfort follow you.
Come daughter come: this is a woeful sight,
When good endeavours are oppressed by might.
•h Hubert, see thou not the sun go down,
Cloudy and dark? Matilda, stay one word.
She shakes her head, and scornfully says nay.
How cheer thou Lester?
Mad man, at my state:
That cannot raise true honour ruinate.
I will not be disdeignd: I •owe to see
Quick vengeance on this girl, for scorning me.
Yoūg Bruise, my Lord, hath gotten Windsor castle,
Slain Blunt your Constable, and those that kept it:
And finding in a tower his mother dead,
With his young brother starved and famished:
That every one may see the rueful sight,
In the thick wall he a wide window makes:
And as he found them, so he lets them be
A spectacle to every commer by,
That heaven and earth, your tyrant shame may see.
All people cursing, crying fie upon
The tyrant merciless, inhumane Iohn.
Chester, and Mowbray, march away to Windsor:
Suppress that traitor Bruise. What if his dam,
In wilful fury, would receive no meat,
Nor suffer her young child any to eat,
Is it our fault▪ Haste ye with speed away,
And we will follow: go, be gon I pray.
O black and woeful deed! O pittous thing,
When slaves attend the fierce thoughts of a king.
My Lord, shall we go too?
Lester and Richmond, I: I pray ye doe.
Get I my Bear &amp; ragged staff once more
Raised in the field, for these wrongs some shall roar.
Fetch in the Monk of Bury, that I talked off,
And bid Will Brand, my instrument of death,
Come likewise in. Convert, to raging hate,
My long resisted love. Welcome good Monk.
Thanks to my Liege.
Thou hast been long in suit,
To be installed Abbot of your house:
And in your favour many friends have stirred.
Now is the hour that you shall be preferred,
Upon condition, and the matter small.
Short shrift to make, good honest Confessor,
I love a fair Nun, now in Dunmow Abbey,
The Abbess loves you, and you pleasure her.
Now if, between you two, this pretty Lady
Could be persuaded to affect a king,
Your suit is granted; and on Dunmowe Abbey,
I will bestow a hundred marks a year.
A holy Nun, a young Nun, and a Lady▪
Dear ware my Lord; yet bid you well as may be:
Strike hands; a bargain, she shall be your own:
Or if she will not
Nay, if she doe refuse,
Isle send a deaths-man with you, this is hee:
If she be wilful, leave her to his hands:
And on her own head be her hasted end▪
The matter shall be done.
Sir, what poisons have you ready?
Store, store.
Await on the monk then, and ere we take horse,
Isle give you such instructions as you need.
Hughbert, prepare to Windsor with our host.
Your tyrannies have lost my love almost:
And yet I cannot choose but love eternally
This wanton king, replete with cruelty▪
O how are all his princely virtues stained,
With lust abhorred, and lascivious heate!
Which kindling first to fire, now in a flame,
Shows to the whole world clearly his foul shame.
To quench this flame, full many a tide of tears,
Like overflowing full seas, have been spent:
And many a dry land drunk with humane blood,
Yet nothing helps his passions violent:
Rather they add oil to his raging fire,
Heate to his heate, desire to his desire,
Somewhat I fear, is now a managing.
For that prodigious bloody stigmatique,
Is never called unto his kingly sight,
But like a Comet he portended still
Some innovation, or some monstrons act,
Cruel, unkindly, horrid, full of hate:
As that vile deed at Windsor, done of late▪
Gentle Matilda somewhat I mistrust:
Yet thee I need not fear, such is his love;
Again, the place doth give thee warrantise:
Yet I remember when his Highness said,
The lustful monk of Bury should him aid:
I so it is; if she have any ill,
Through y• lewd shaueling will her shame be wrought.
If it so chance, Matildaes guiltless wrong
Will with the loss of many a life be bought.
But Hubert will be still his dread Lords friend,
However he deserves, his master serve:
Though he neglect, him will not I neglect:
Whoever fails him, I will Iohn affect.
For though kings fault in many a foul offence,
Subjects must sue, not mend with violence.
Now by my faith, you are too blame Madame:
Ever tormenting ever vexing you?
Cease off these fretting humours, pray ye doe.
Gre•fe will not mend it, nought can pleasure you,
But patient suffering: nor by your Graces leave,
Have you such cause to make this hue and cry
After a husband; you have not in good sooth.
Yearly a child? this payment is not bad.
Content fair Queen, and do not think it strange,
That kings doe sometimes seek delight in change:
For now and then, I tell you, poor men range.
Sit down a little, I will make you smile.
Though I be now like to the snowy Alps,
I was as hot as Aetna in my youth:
All fire in faith, true heart of oak, right steel,
A ruffian Lady: often for my sport,
I to a lodge of mine did make resort,
To view my dear I said; dear God can tell,
It was my keepers wife, whom I loved well.
My Countess (God be with her) was a shrove,
As women be, your Majesty doth know:
And some odd pickth ink put it in her head,
All was not well: but such a life I led,
And the poor keeper, and his smoothed faced wife,
That will I, nil I, there she might not bide▪
But for the people I did well provide:
And by gods mother, for my Ladies spite,
I tricked her in her kind, I served her right.
Were she at London, I the country kept;
Come thither, I at London would solourne:
Came she to court, from court I straight way stepped:
Return, I to the court would back return.
So this way, that way, every way she went,
I still was retrograde, seld opposite▪
Till at the last, by mildness and submission,
We met, kissed, joined, and here left all suspicion.
Now out upon you Vere, I would have thought,
The world had not contained a chaster man.
Now, by my fey, I will be sworn, I am.
In all I tell you, I confess no ill,
But that I curbed a froward women's will:
Yet had my keepers wife been of my mind,
There had been cause some fault with vs to find:
But I protest, her noes and nays were such,
That for my life she ever kept go much.
You would take nay: but our king Iohn says no:
No nay, no answer will suffice his turn:
He, for he cannot tempt true chastuie,
Filles all the Land with hostile trueltie.
Is it not shame, he that should punish sin,
Defend the righteous, help the innocent,
Carves with his sword, the purpose of his will,
Upon the guarders of the virtuous,
And hunts admired spotless maiden-head,
With all the darts of desolation,
Because she scorns to be dissolute.
Me, that he leaves, I doe not murmur at:
That he loves her, doth no whit me perplex,
If she did love him, or my self did hate:
But this alone is it that me doth vex.
He leaves me that loves him, and her pursues,
That loath him and loves me: how can I choose,
But sadly grieve, and morn in my greene youth?
When nor of her, nor me he takes ruth.
Ha dove, good Queen, for gods good love, ha don.
This raging humour will no doubt be staid.
Virtuous Matilda is professed a Nun:
Within a mile, at Dunmow lives the maid:
God will not suffer any thing so vile:
Hee will not sure, that he should her defile.
Nor Church, nor chapel, Abbey, Nunnery,
Are privileged from his intemperance.
But leave we him, and let vs, I e•treat,
Go visit fair Matilda: much I am
In debt unto the maid
You are indeed.
You wronged her, when with blows you made her bleed.
B•t if you please to visit her, fair dame,
Our coach is ready: we will soon be there.
Thanks Oxford; and with vs I mean to bear
The beauteous garland, sent me out of Spain:
Which I will offer in the Abbey chapel:
As witness of Matildaes chastity:
Whom while I live, I ever vow to love,
In recompense of rash and causeless wrong.
Good, by this hand: exceeding, passing good.
The dog no sooner drank it, but, yugh, yugh quoth he:
So grins me with his teeth: lies down, and dies.
Yughst quoth I? by gogs blood go thy ways:
Of all thy line and generation,
Was never dog so worshipped as thou art,
For ere thou di'dst, thou were an officer:
I lie not, by these nails, a squires place:
For the vile cur became a countess taster.
So dyed the dog. Now in our next account
The Countess comes, lets see a Countess &amp; a Nun▪
Why so? why so?
What would she have the whole world quite undone?
Weal meet her for that trick. What, not a king?
Hanging's too good for her; I am but a plain knave,
And yet should any of these no forsooths,
These pray aways, these trip and goes, these tits.
Deny me: now by these:
A plague upon this bottle and this cup:
I cannot act mine oath: but too't again.
By these ten ends of flesh and blood, I swear:
First with this hand, wound thus about her hair,
And with this dagger lustily lambackt:
I would in faith, I, by my villainy,
I would: but here, but here she comes,
Led by two doctors in sweet lechery:
If they speed, with my poison I go by;
If not, have at you maid: then steppe in I.
And as I said, fair maid, you have done well,
In your distress, to seek this holy place:
But tell me truly, how doe you expel
The rage of lust-arising heat in you?
By prayer, by fasting, by considering
The shame of ill, and mead of doing well.
But daughter, daughter, tell me in my eat,
Have you no fleshly fightings now and then? whisper,
Fleshly quoth you? a maid of threescore years,
And fleshly fightings sticking in her teeth?
Well wench, you are matched in faith.
You doe confess the king hath tempted you,
And thinking now and then on gifts and state,
A glowing heat hath proudly puffed you up:
But thanks to God, his Grace hath done you good.
Who, the kings Grace?
No: Gods Grace, holy monk.
The kings Grace fine would do you good, fair maid.
Ill good: he means my fame to violate.
Well▪ let that be.
Good baud, good mother B.
How fine you would that that good deed should he!
I was about to say somewhat upon a thing. O thus it is.
We maids that all the day are occupied,
In labour and chaste hallowed exercise,
Are nothing so much tempted while day lasts,
As we are tried and proved in the night.
Tell me Matilda, had you since you came,
No dreams, no visions, nothing worth the note?
No, I thank God.
Truly you will▪ you will;
Except you take good heed and bless your self.
For if • lie but on my back a while,
I am past recovery, sure of a bad dream.
You see yon reverend Monk: now God he knows,
I love him dearer for his holiness:
And I believe the devil knows it too:
For the foul f•end comes to me many a night,
As like the monk, as if he were the man.
Many a hundred nights, the Nuns have seen:
Pray, cry, make crosses, doe they what they can.
Once gotten in, then doe I fall to work,
My holy water bucket being near hand,
I whisper secret spells, and conjure him,
That the foul fiend hath no more power to stand▪
He down, as I can quickly get him laid,
I bless my self▪ and like a holy maid,
Turn on my right side: where I sleep all night,
Without more dreams, or troubling of the spright,
An Abbess by the cross of my good blade,
An excellent mother to bring up a maid,
For me I mean, and my good master,
But never any for an honest man.
Now fie upon that word of honesty▪
Passing my throat, 'thad almost choked me:
Sblood Isle for swear it for this trick.
We trifle time. Fair maid, its thus in brief;
This Abbey by your means may have relief▪
An hundred marks a year: answer I pray,
What will you doe herein?
Even all I may.
Its charitably spoken, my fair child:
A lit•le thing of yours, a little help
Will serve th• turn, learn but to bear, to bear
The burden of this world, and it will doe.
Well go thy ways: Is this no baud think you?
Madam, the heavy burden of the world
Hath long oppressed me.
But not pressed you right!
Now shall you bear a burden far more light.
What burden bearing? where tends this talk?
To •ou, to vs▪ this Abbey and King Iohn,
O God forefend he should be thought upon.
Lady make short, the king must lie with you.
With me, with me?
Sweet never look so strange:
He shall come closely, no body shall see.
How can he come but one hath eyes to see?
Your chamber windows shall be shadowed.
But no veil from my conscience shadows me.
And all the Nuns sent quietly to bed.
But they will rise, and, by my blushing red,
Quickly give guess of my lost maidenhead.
She goes in faith, by God she is their own.
Be not so nice, the sin is venial:
Considering you yield for charity,
And by your fall, the Nunnery shall rise.
Regard good counsel daughter, pray be wise.
Come, here's a stir: wilt doe wench? will it do?
Say I, say I, forget the sound of no:
Or else say no and take it: wilt thou so?
Doe you intend thus lewdely as you speak?
I by gogs blood do they: &amp; moppet, you were best
To take their proffers, least if they forsake you,
I play the devils part, step in and take you.
Some holy water, help me blessed Nuns.
Two damned spirits, in religious weeds,
Attempt to tempt my spotless chastity:
And a third devil gaping for my soul,
With horrid stirrings, ghastly frighteth me.
You may call while you will: but maid list what we say,
Or be assured this is your dying day.
In his name that did suffer for my sin,
And by this blessed sign, I conjure you:
Depart foul f•ends, return from whence ye came:
Avoid ye fiends, and cease to trouble me.
Zounds, she thinks vs devils. Hear you coniu∣rer?
Except you use that trick, to conjure down
The standing spirit of my Lord the King,
That your good mother there, the Abbess uses,
To conjure down the spirit of the Monk,
Not all your crosses have the power to bless
Your body from a sharpe and speedy death.
Are ye not fiends, but mortal bodies then?
Maid, maid: catch lower, when you feel yoūg men▪
S•loot, I was never taken for the devil till now?
O where shall cha••itie have true defence,
When Churchmen lay this siege to innocence?
Where shall a maid have certain sanctuary,
When Lady Lust rules all the Nunnery?
Now fie upon ye both, false seeming Saints,
In carnate devils, devilish hypocrites.
A cowled Monk, an aged veiled Nun,
Become base Panders! and with lustful• speech,
Assay the chaste ears of true maidenhead!
Now fie upon this age, would I were dead.
Come leave her Lady; she shall have her wish.
Speed her I pray thee; should the baggage live,
Sheele slander all the chaste Nuns in the Land.
Well, well, go get you two unto your conjuring:
Let me alone to lay her on gods ground.
Why dost thou stay?
Why maid, because I must:
I have a message to you from the king.
And thou art welcome to his humble maid.
I thought thee to be grim and fierce at first:
But now thou hast asweete aspect, mild looks.
Art thou not come to kill me from the king?
Yes.
And thou art welcome, even the welcome•st man,
That ever came unto a woeful maid.
Be brief goodfellow: I have in the world,
No goods to give, no will at all to make:
But Gods will and the kings on me be done.
A little money kept to give in alms,
I have about me? deaths-man take it all?
Thou art the last poor alms-man I shall see.
Come, come, dispatch: what weapon will death wear,
When he assails me: Is it knife, or sword:
A strangling cord, or sudden flaming fire?
Neither, thou manly maid: look here, look here:
A cup of poison. Wherefore dost thou smile?
O God, in this the king is merciful.
My dear loved Huntington by poison dyed.
Good fellow, tell the king I thank his Grace,
And doe forgive his causeless cruel•ie.
I doe forgive thee to; but doe advise
Thou leave this bloody course, and seek to save
Thy soul immortal, closed in thy breast:
Be brief I pray thee: now to King Iohns health
A full carouse▪ and god remember not
The curse he gave himself at Robins death,
Wishing by poison he might end his life,
If ever he solicited my love.
Farewell goodfellowe, now thy medicine works,
And with the labour, I am for•'t to rest.
Zounds she cares not, she makes death a jest.
The guile•less fear not death. Farewell good friēd▪
I pray thee be no trouble in my end.
And say you Lady Abbess that there came
One from the King unto her: what was hee?
Yonder he stands, I know not what he is.
Iesus have mercy▪ Oxford, come not nigh him.
Not nigh him Madame? yes: keep you away.
Come in good Queen: I doe not mean to stay.
Nor I to stir, before I see the end.
Why starest thou thus? speak fellow, answer me,
Who art thou?
A bloody villain, and a murderer.
A hundred have I slain with mine ow•e hands.
It was I that starved the Lady Bruise to death,
And her young son, at Windsor Castle late.
Tic I have slain Matilda, blessed maid,
And now will hurry to damnations mouth,
Forced by the gnawing worm of conscience.
Hold him for gods sake: stay the desperate wretch.
O some good pitying man compassionate▪
That wretched man, so woeful desperate:
Save him for gods sake: he hath set me free,
From much worlds woe, much wrong, much misery.
I hear thy tongue, true perfect charity.
Chaste maid, fair maid look up and speak to me.
Whose here? my gr••ious sovereign Isabel?
I will take strength and kneel.
Matilda sit, Isle kneel to thee, Forgive me, gētle girl,
My most ungentle wrongs.
Fair beau•ious Queen,
I give god thanks, I doe not think on wrongs.
How now Fitzwaters child? how dost thou girl?
Well, my good Lord of Oxford: pretty well:
A little travel more, and I shall rest:
For I am almost at my iorneyes end.
O that my head were raised a little up:
My drowsy head, whose •im decaying lights,
Assure me it is almost time to sleep.
I thank your Highness, I have now some ease.
Be witness, I beseeth your Majesty,
That I forgive the King, with all my heart:
With all the little of my living heart,
That gives me leave to say, I can forgive:
And I beseech high heaven he long may live
A happy King, a king beloved and feared▪
Oxford, for gods sake, to my father write
The latest commendations of his child:
And say, Matilda kept his Honours charge,
Dying a spotless maiden vndefilde.
Bid him be glad, for I am gone to joy:
I that did turn his weal to bitter woe.
The king and he will quickly now grow friends,
And by their friendship much content will grow,
Sink earth to earth, fade flower, ordained to fade:
But pass forth soul unto the shrine of peace,
Beg there atonement may be quickly made.
Fair Queen, kind Oxford, all good you attend:
Fly forth my soul, heavens king be there thy friend.
O pity, mourning sight, age pitiless:
Are these the messages king Iohn doth send!
Keep in, my tears, for shame, your conduits keep,
Sad woe beholding eyes: no, will ye not?
Why, then a Gods name weep.
I cannot weep for wrath: here, here, take in
The blessed body of this noble maid:
In milk white clothing let the same be laid,
Upon an open bier, that all may see
King Iohns unkingly lust and cruel•ie.
I, be it so. Your self, if so you please,
Will I attend upon, and both vs waite
On chaste Matildaes body: which with speed,
To Windsor Castle we will hence convey:
There is another spectacle of ruth,
Old Bruses famished Lady and her son.
There is the king besieging of young Bruise,
His Lords are there▪ who when they see this sight,
I know will have small heart for Iohn to fight.
But whore's the murderer, ha? is not he staid?
Borne with a violent rage, he climbed a tree,
And none of vs could hinder his intent:
But getting to the top boughs, fast he tied
His garters to his neck, and a weak branch,
Which being unable to sustain his weight,
Down to the ground he fell, where bones and flesh
Lie poshed together, in a poole of blood.
Alas for woe: but this is just heavens doom
On those that live by blood: in blood they die.
May an example of it, honest friends,
Doe well, take pains, beware of cruelty.
Come Madam, come, to Windsor let vs go:
And there to Bruses grief, add greater woe.
Will not my bitter bannings and sad plaints,
My just and execrable execrations,
My tears, my prayers, my pittie-mouing mons
Prevail, thou glorious bright Lamp of the day,
To cause thee keep an •bit for their souls,
And dwell one month with the Antipodes?
Bright sun retire, gylde not this vault of death,
With thy illustrate rays: retire, retire,
And yield black night thy Empery a while:
A little while, till as my tears be spent,
My blood be likewise shed in raining drops,
By the tempestuous rage of tyrant Iohn.
Learn of thy love, the morning: she hath wept,
Shower upon shower, of silver dewy tears.
High trees, lowe plants, and pretty little flowers
Witness her woe: on them her grief appears:
And as she dre•pes on them, they doe not let,
By drop and drop, their mother earth to wet.
See these hard stones, how fast small rouelets
Issue from them, though they seem issuelesse:
And wet eyed woe on every thing is viewed:
Save in thy face that smile at my distress.
O doe not drink their tears thus greedily:
Yet let the mornings mourning garment dwell
Upon the sad earth. Wilt thou not, thou churl?
Then surfeit with thy exhalations speedily:
For all earths venomous infecting worms
Have belched their several poisons on the fields,
Mixing their simples in thy compound draught.
Well Phoebus well, drink on I say, drink on:
But when thou dost vngorge thee, grant me this,
Thou power those poisons on the head of Iohn.
How now my Lords: were ye last night so pleased
With the beholding of that property,
Which Iohn and other murderers have wrought,
Upon my starved mother and her son:
That you are come again? Shall I again
Set open shop, show my dead ware, dear bought,
Of a relentless merchant that doth trade
On the red sea, swollen mighty with the blood
Of noble, virtuous, harmless innocents?
Whose cole black vessel is of Ebony,
Their shrouds &amp; tackle (wrought &amp; wou'n by wrong)
Stretched with no other gale of wind, but grief:
Whose sighs with full blasts beats on her shrouds:
The Master murder is, the Pilot shame,
The Mariners rape, theft, and perjury:
The burden, tyrannous oppression,
Which hourly he in England doth unlade:
Say, shall I open shop, and show my wares?
No, good Lord Bruise, we have enough of that.
To Windsor welcome, Hubert• Soft: me thinks
Bruise and our Lords are at a parley now?
Chester and Mowbray, you are Iohns sworn friends▪
Will you see more? Speak, answer me my Lords:
I am no nig guard, you shall have your fill.
We have too much, and surfeit with the woe.
Are you all full? Here comes a ravening kite,
That both at quick, at dead, at all will smite.
He shall, he must, I, and bear Lady, may
Command me to give over holy day,
And set wide open, what you would not see.
Why stand ye Lords, and see this traitor perched,
Upon our Castles battlements so proud?
Come down young Bruise, set op the castle gates:
Unto thy sovereign, let thy knee be bowed,
And mercy shall be given to thee and thine,
O miserable thing:
Comes mercy from the mouth of Iohn our king?
Why then belike hell will be pitiful.
I will not op the gates, the gate I will:
The gate where thy shame, and my sorrow fits.
See my dead mother, and her famished son▪
Open thy tyrants eyes: for to the world,
I will lay open thy fell cruelties.
We heard indeed, thy mother and her son.
In prison dyed, by wilful famishment.
Sin doubled upon sin. Slaunderst thou the dead?
Unwilling willingness it shall appear,
By then I have produced, as I will doe,
The just presumptions against your unjust act,
Assail the castle Lords: Alarm drums:
And drown this scrietchowls cries with your deep sounds.
I tell thée drummer, if thy drum thou smite,
By heaven, Isle send thy soul to hells dark night,
Hence with thy drum: gods passion, get thee hence:
Be gone I say, move not my patience.
Are you advised Lester, what you doe?
I am advised: for my Sovereign know,
The•'s not a Lord here will lift up his arm,
Against the person of you noble youth,
Till you have heard the circumstantial truth,
By good presumptions, touching this foul deed.
Therefore go on young Bruise, proceed, re•ell
The allegation that puts in this doubt,
Whether thy mother through her wilfulness,
Famished her self and her sweet son, or no?
Unlikely supposition: nature first denies,
That any mother, when her young ling cries,
If she have means, is so unnatural
To let it faint and starve, But we will prove
She had no means▪ except this monefull mean,
This torture of her self. Come forth, come forth,
Sir William Blunt, whom slander says I slew:
Come tell the king and Lords what you know true.
Thou hast betrayed our Castle,
No: God can tell it was surprised by politic report,
And affirmation that your Grace was slain.
Goo•, sir William Blunt:
Pass briefly to the Ladies famishment.
About some ten days since, there came one Brand,
Bringing a signet from my Lord the king,
And this commission signed with his hand,
Commanding me (as the contents express)
That I should presently deliver up
The Lady Bruise and her young son to him.
What time a day was this?
It was, Lord Mowbray, somewhat past eleven:
For we were even then sitting down to dine.
But did ye dine?
The Lady and her son did not:
Brand would not stay.
No Lester, no: for here is no such sign
Of any meats digesture.
But by the way. Tell vs I pray you Blunt,
While she remained with you, was she distraught
With grief, or any other passions violent?
She now and then would weep, &amp; often pray,
For reconcilement twixt the king and Lords.
How to her son did she affected stand?
Affection could not any more affect:
Nor might a mother show more mothers love:
How to my Lord the king?
O my Lord God! I never knew a subject love king more:
She never would blin telling how his Grace
Saved her young son from soldiers, &amp; from fire▪
How fair he spake, gave her her son to keep:
And then, poor Lady, she would kiss her boy,
Pray for the king so hearty earnestly,
That in pure zeal, she wept most bitterly▪
I weep for her, and doe by heaven protest,
I honoured Bruses wife▪ How ere that slave
Rudely effected what I rashly wild:
Yet when he came again, and I bethought,
What bitter penance I had put them to,
For my conceived displeasure against old Bruise,
I had the villain post and bear them meat:
Which he excused, protesting pity moved him
To leave wine, bread, and other poudred meat,
More than they twain could in a fortnight eat.
Indeed, this can I witness with the king,
Which argues in that point his innocence:
Brand did bear in a months provision;
But locked it like a villain, far from them:
And locked them in a place where no mans ear
Might hear their lamentable woeful moves:
For all the issue both of vent and light,
Came from a loouer at the towers top,
Till now Lord Bruise made open this wide gap.
Had I not reason, think you, to make wide
The window that should let so much woe forth?
Where sits my mother martyrde by her self,
Hoping to save her child from martyrdom:
Where stands my brother martyrd by himself,
Because he would not taste his mothers blood.
For thus I gather this? my mothers teeth and chin
Are bloody with the savage cookery,
Which her soft heart, through pity of her son,
Respectless, made her practise on her self:
And her right hand, with offering it the child,
Is with her own pure blood stained and defiled,
My little brothers lips and chin, alone,
Are tainted with the blood: but his eauen teeth,
Like orient pearl, or snowe-white ivory,
Have not one touch of blood, one little spot:
Which is an argument the boy would not.
Once stir his lips, to taste that bloody food,
Our cruel gentle mother ministered:
But as it seemed (for see, his pretty
Palm is bloody too) he cast it on the ground:
For on this side these blessed relics lye,
By famines rage divided from this shrine,
Sad woeful mother in Jerusalem,
Who when thy son and thou did faint for food,
Buried his sweet flesh in thy hungry womb:
How merciless were thou, if we compare
Thy fact and this: For my poor Lady mother
Did kill her self, to save my dying brother.
And thou ungentle son of Miriam,
Why did thou beg life when thy mother lacked?
My little brother George did nobly act
A more courageous part; he would not eat,
Nor beg to live, it seemed he did not cry:
Few tears stand on his cheek, smooth is each eye:
But when he saw my mother bent to die,
He dyed with her: O childish valiancy!
Good Brufe have done: my heart can not contain
The grief it holds, my eyes must shower down rai••.
Which showers are even as good,
As rain in harvest, or a swelling flood
When neighbouring meadows lack the mowers sith.
List Lester, hearst thou not a mournful march?
Yes Richmond, and it seems old de Vere.
Lords, by your leave, is not our sovereign here?
Yes good old Awbury.
Ah my gracious Lord,
That you so much your high state should neglect!
Ah god in heaven forgive this bloody deed.
Young Bruise, young Bruise, I weep,
Thy mothers and thy brothers wrong.
Yet to afflict thee more, more grief I bring▪
O Houourable Awbery de Vere,
Let sorrow in a sable suit appear:
Doe not mishap her garments, like delight.
If it be grief, why cloth'st thou her in white?
I cannot tell thee yet. I must sit down.
Attend young Bruise, and listen to the Queen:
Sheele not be tongue tied, we shall have a stir
Anon, I fear, would make a man half sick.
Are you here lecher? O intemperate king,
Wilt thou not see me? come, come, show your face▪
Your Graces graceless, kings, unkingly face.
What? mute, hands folded, eyes fixed on the earth?
Whose turn is next now to be murdered?
The famished Bruses are on yonder side:
On this another, I will name anon:
One for whose head this garland I doe bear,
And this fair milke-white spotless pendant to•.
Look up king Iohn, see, yonder sits thy shame:
Yonder it lies: what, must I tell her name?
It is Matilda, poisoned by thee.
Matilda: O that foul swift foot• slave,
That kills ere one have time to hid him save.
Fair gentle girl, ungently made away.
My banished uncles daughter, art thou there?
Then I defy all hope, and swear
Stay Bruise, and listen well what oath to swear.
Lewys the Dolphin, pitying one estate,
Is by the Christian king his father, sent
With aid to help vs, and is landed too.
Lords that will fly the den of cruelty,
And fight to free your selves from tyranny,
Bruise, keep that Castle, to the only use
Of our elected king, Lewys of France.
Gods passion doe not so: king Iohn is here.
Lords, whisper not with Lester• Lester, fie:
Stir not again regardless •utinie:
Speak to them Hugh: I know thou loou'st the king.
Madame, go to them, nay doe, for gods sake doe:
Down with your stomach: for if he go down,
You must down too, and be no longer Queen:
Advise you, go entreat them speedily.
My sovereign wherefore sit you sighing there?
The Lords are all about to follow Lewys:
Up and entreat them, else they will away.
Good Oxford let them go. Why should they stay?
What? are you desperate? that must not be.
Hear me my Lords.
This pendant let me see.
She was indeed of London the honour once,
When she was loved of virtuous Huntington:
Of chastity the honour, all her life:
To impure thoughts she never could be won.
And she of Honour was the honour too,
By birth, in life, she honour honoured.
Bring in two tapers lighted, quick, dispatch.
Remēber Bruise, thy charge. Come Lords away.
Away, wee will away.
Hark Lester but one word, a little stay.
Help me good Hubert, help me gentle Queen.
How dim these Tapers burn! they give no light.
Here were two beauteous Lamps, y• could have taught
The Sun to shine by day, the Moon by night:
But they are dim too: clean extinguished.
Away with these, sith those fair lights be dead.
And as I say, hark Bruise unto our talk.
Think you it is for love of England, Lewis comes?
Nay: France is not so kind: I would it were.
Advise your selves, hark, dost thou hear me Bruise?
Oxford, I doe.
Can noble English hearts bear the French yoke?
No Lester▪ Richmond think on Lewys sire,
That le•t you, and your king, in Palestine.
And think beside, you know not Lewys nature,
Who may be as bad as Iohn, or rather worse than he.
And look my Lords upon his silent woe:
His soul is at the door of death I know.
See how he seeks to suck, if he could draw,
Poison from dead Matildaes ashy lips.
Isle be sworn his very heart strings nips.
A v•ng•ance on that slave, that cursed Brand,
Isle kill him if I live, with this right hand.
Thou can not Hubert, he hath kilt himself:
But to our matter. Lester, pray thee speak.
Young Bruise, for gods sake let vs know thy mind.
I would be loath to be a strangers slave:
For Englands love, I would no French king have.
Well Oxford, if I be deceived in Iohn again,
Its long of you, Lord Hubert, and the Queen.
Yield up the Castle Bruise, weal once more try
King Iohns proceedings. Oxford, tell him so.
I will come down: but first farewell dear mother,
Farewell poor little George, my pretty brother.
Now will I shut my shambles in again.
Farewell, farewell.
In everlasting bliss your sweet souls dwell.
But you must mendy faith, in faith you must.
My Lord, once more your subjects do submit,
Besceching you to think how things have past,
And let some comfort shine on vs your friends,
Through the bright splendour of your virtuous life.
I thank you all; and Lester I protest,
I will be better than I yet have been.
Of Windsor Castle here the keys I yield.
Thanks Bruise: forgive me, and I pray thee see
Thy mother and thy brother buried,
In Windsor Castle Church. Doe, kiss her cheek:
Weep thou on that, on this side I will weep.
Chaste virgin, thus I crown thee with these flowers.
Let vs go on to Dunmow with this maid:
Among the hallowed Nuns let her be laid:
Unto her tomb, a monthly pilgrimage
Doth king Iohn vow in penance for this wrong.
Go forward maids: on with Matildaes hearse,
And on her Tomb see you engrave this verse;
Within this Marble monument, doth lye
Matilda martyrde, for her chastity,
Thus is Matildaes story shown in act,
And rough heawen out by an vncunning hand▪
Being of the most material points compackt,
That with the certainst state of truth doe stand.

Isle pheeze you in faith.
A pair of stocks you rogue.
Y' are a baggage, the Slies are no Rogues. Look in the Chronicles, we came in with Richard Conqueror: therefore Pau∣cas pallabris, let the world slide: Sessa.
You will not pay for the glasses you have burst?
No, not a denier: go by S. Ieronimie, go to thy cold bed, and warm thee.
I know my remedy, I must go fetch the Head-borough.
Third, or fourth, or fifth Borough, Isle answer him by Law. Isle not budge an inch boy: Let him come, and kindly.
Hunt•man I charge thee, tender well my hounds,
Brach Meriman, the poor Cur is embossed,
And couple Clowder with the deepe-mouth'd brach,
Saw thou not boy how Silver made it good
At the hedge corner, in the coldest fault,
I would not loose the dog for twenty pound.
Why Belman is as good as he my Lord,
He cried upon it at the merest loss,
And twice to day picked out the dullest sent,
Trust me, I take him for the better dog.
Thou art a Fool, if Echo were as fleet,
I would esteem him worth a dozen such:
But sup them well, and look unto them all,
To morrow I intend to hunt again.
I will my Lord.
What's here? One dead, or drunk? See doth he breath?
He breath's my Lord. Were he not warmed with Ale, this were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly.
Oh monstrous beast, how like a swine he lies.
Grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image:
Sirs, I will practise on this drunken man.
What think you, if he were conveyed to bed,
Wrapped in sweet clothes: Rings put upon his fingers:
A most delicious banquet by his bed,
And brave attendants near him when he wakes,
Would not the beggar then forget himself?
Believe me Lord, I think he cannot choose.
It would seem strange unto him when he w•k'd
Even as a flattering dream, or worthless fanc•e.
Then take him up, and manage well the jest:
Carry him gently to my fairest Chamber,
And hang it round with all my wanton pictures:
Balm his foul head in warm distilled waters,
And burn sweet Wood to make the Lodging sweet:
Procure me Music ready when he vvakes,
To make a dulcet and a heavenly sound:
And if he chance to speak, be ready straight
(And with a lowe submissive reverence)
Say, what is it your Honour will command:
Let one attend him with a silver Basin
Full of Rose-water, and bestrewed with Flowers,
Another bear the Ewer: the third a Diaper,
And say wilt please your Lordship •oole your hands.
Some one be ready with a costly suite.
And ask him what apparel he will wear:
Another tell him of his Hounds and Horse,
And that his Lady mourns at his disease,
Persuade him that he hath bin Lunatic,
And when he says he is, say that he dreams,
For he is nothing but a mighty Lord:
This do, and do it kindly, gentle sirs,
It will be pastime passing excellent,
If it be husbanded with modesty.
My Lord I warrant you we will play our part
As he shall think by our true diligence
He is no less then what we say he is.
Take him up gently, and to bed with him,
And each one to his office when he wakes.
Sirrah, go see what Trumpet it is that sounds,
Belike some Noble Gentleman that means
(Travelling some journey) to repose him here.
How now? who is it?
An't please your Honour, Players
That offer service to your Lordship.
Bid them come near:
Now fellows, you are welcome.
We thank your Honour.
Do you intend to stay with me to night?
So please your Lordship to accept our duty.
With all my heart. This fellow I remember,
Since once he plaide a Farmers eldest son,
It was where you wooed the Gentlewoman so well:
I have forgot your name: but sure that part
Was aptly fitted, and naturally performed.
I think it was Soto that your honour means.
It is very true, thou did it excellent:
Well you are come to me in happy time,
The rather for I have some sport in hand,
Wherein your cunning can assist me much.
There is a Lord will hear you play to night;
But I am doubtful of your modesties,
Least (ouer-cying of his odd behaviour,
For yet his honour never heard a play)
You break into some merry passion,
And so offend him: for I tell you sirs,
If you should smile, he grows impatient.
Fear not my Lord, we can contain our selves,
Were he the veriest antique in the world.
Go sir, take them to the Buttery,
And give them friendly welcome every one,
Let them want nothing that my house affords.
Sir go you to Bartholomew my Page,
And see him dressed in all suites like a Lady:
That done, conduct him to the drunkards chamber,
And call him Madam, do him obeisance:
Tell him from me (as he will win my love)
He bear himself with honourable action,
Such as he hath observed in noble Ladies
Unto their Lords, by them accomplished,
Such duty to the drunkard let him do:
With soft lowe tongue, and lowly courtesy,
And say: What is it your Honour will command,
Wherein your Lady, and your humble wife,
May show her duty, and make known her love.
And then with kind embraces, tempting kisses,
And with declining head into his bosom
Bid him shed tears, as being overjoyed
To see her noble Lord restored to health,
Who for this seven years hath esteemed him
No better then a poor and loathsome beggar:
And if the boy have not a women's gift
To rain a shower of commanded tears,
An Onion will do well for such a shift,
Which in a Napkin (being close conveyed)
Shall in despite enforce a watery eye:
See this dispatched with all the hast thou can,
Anon Isle give thee more instructions.
I know the boy will well usurp the grace,
Voice, gate, and action of a Gentlewoman:
I long to hear him call the drunkard husband,
And how my men will stay themselves from laughter,
When they do homage to this simple peasant,
Isle in to counsel them: happily my presence
May well abate the ouer-merrie spleen,
Which otherwise would grow into extremes.
For Gods sake a pot of small Ale.
Wilt please your Lord drink a cup of sack?
Wilt please your Honour taste of these Con∣serves?
What raiment will your honour wear to day.
I am Christophero Sly, call not me Honour nor Lordship: I ne'er drank sack in my life: and if you give me any Conserves, give me conserves of Beef: ne'er ask me what raiment Isle wear, for I have no more doub∣lets then backs: no more stockings then legs: nor no more shoes then feet, nay sometime more feet then shoes, or such shoes as my toes look through the o∣uer-leather.
Heaven cease this idle humour in your Honour.
Oh that a mighty man of such descent,
Of such possessions, and so high esteem
Should be infused with so foul a spirit.
What would you make me mad? Am not I Chri∣stopher Sly, old Sies son of Burton-heath, by birth a Peddler, by education a Cardmaker, by transmutation a Beare-heard, and now by present profession a Tinker. Ask Marrian Hacket the fat Alewife of Wincot, if she know me not: if she say I am not xiiii.d. on the score for sheer Ale, score me up for the lyingst knave in Christen¦dome. What I am not bestraught: here's—
Oh this it is that makes your Lady morn.
Oh this is it that makes your servants droop.
Hence comes it, that your kindred shuns your house
As beaten hence by your strange Lunacy.
Oh Noble Lord, bethink thee of thy birth,
Call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment,
And banish hence these abject lowly dreams:
Look how thy servants do attend on thee,
Each in his office ready at thy beck.
Wilt thou have Music? Hark Apollo plays, Music
And twenty caged Nightingales do sing.
Or wilt thou sleep? We'll have thee to a Couch,
Softer and sweeter then the lustful bed
On purpose trimmed up for Semiramis.
Say thou wilt walk: we will bestrow the ground.
Or wilt thou ride? Thy horses shall be trap'd,
Their harness studded all with Gold and Pearl.
Dost thou love hawking? Thou hast hawks will soar
Aboue the morning Lark. Or wilt thou hunt,
Thy hounds shall make the Welkin answer them
And fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth.
Say thou wilt course, thy gray-hounds are as swift
As breathed Stags: I fleeter then the Roe.
Dost thou love pictures? we will fetch thee strait
Atones painted by a running brooke,
And Citherea all in sedges hid,
Which seem to move and wanton with her breath,
Even as the waving sedges play with wind.
We'll show thee Io, as she was a Maid,
And how she was beguiled and surprised,
As lively painted, as the deed was done.
Or Daphne roaming through a thorny wood,
Scratching her legs, that one shall swear she bleeds,
And at that sight shall sad Apollo weep,
So workmanlie the blood and tears are drawn.
Thou art a Lord, and nothing but a Lord:
Thou hast a Lady far more Beautiful,
Then any woman in this waining age.
And till the tears that she hath shed for thee,
Like envious floods ore-run her lovely face,
She was the fairest creature in the world,
And yet she is inferior to none.
Am I a Lord, and have I such a Lady?
Or do I dream? Or have I dreamed till now?
I do not sleep: I see, I hear, I speak:
I smell sweet savours, and I feel soft things:
Upon my life I am a Lord indeed,
And not a Tinker, nor Christopher Sly.
Well, bring our Lady hither to our sight,
And once again a pot of th smallest Ale.
Wilt please your mightiness to wash your hands:
Oh how we joy to see your wit restored,
Oh that once more you knew but what you are:
These fifteen years you have bin in a dream,
Or when you waked, so waked as if you slept.
These fifteen years, by my fey, a goodly nap,
But did I never speak of all that time.
Oh yes my Lord, but very idle words,
For though you lay here in this goodly chamber,
Yet would you say, ye were beaten out of door,
And rail upon the Hostess of the house,
And say you would prosent her at the Loot,
Because she brought stone-Iugs, and no sealed quarts:
Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Hacket.
I, the women's maid of the house.
Why sir you know no house, nor no such maid
Nor no such men as you have reckoned up,
As Stephen Sly, and old Iohn Naps of Greece,
And Peter Turph, and Henry Pimpernel,
And twenty more such names and men as these,
Which never were, nor no man ever saw.
Now Lord be thanked for my good amends.
Amen.
I thank thee, thou shalt not loose by it.
How fares my noble Lord?
Marry I fare well, for here is cheer enough.
Where is my wife?
Here noble Lord, what is thy will with her?
Are you my wife, and will not cal me husband?
My men should call me Lord, I am your good-man.
My husband and my Lord, my Lord and husband
I am your wife in all obedience.
I know it well, what must I call her?
Madam.
Alce Madam, or Ione Madam?
Madam, and nothing else, so Lords cal Ladies
Madame wife, they say that I have dreamed,
And slept aboue some fifteen year or more.
I, and the time seeme's thirty unto me,
Being all this time abandoned from your bed.
It is much, servants leave me and her alone:
Madam undress you, and come now to bed.
Thrice noble Lord, let me entreat of you
To pardon me yet for a night or two:
Or if not so, until the Sun be set.
For your Physicians have expressly charged,
In peril to incur your former malady,
That I should yet absent me from your bed:
I hope this reason stands for my excuse.
I, it stands so that I may hardly tarry so long: But I would be loath to fall into my dreams again: I will therefore tarry in despite of the flesh &amp; the blood
Your Honours Players hearing your amendment,
Are come to play a pleasant Comedy.
For so your doctors hold it very meet,
Seeing too much sadness hath congealed your blood,
And melancholy is the Nurse of frenzy,
Therefore they thought it good you hear a play,
And frame your mind to mirth and merriment,
Which bars a thousand harms, and lengthens life.
Marry I will let them play, it is not a Common∣tie, a Christmas gambold, or a tumbling trick?
No my good Lord, it is more pleasing stuff.
What, household stuff.
It is a a kind of history.
Well, we will see it:
Come Madam wife sit by my side,
And let the world slip, we shall ne'er be younger.
Tranio, since for the great desire I had
To see fair Padua, nursery of Arts,
I am arrived for fruitful Lumbardie,
The pleasant garden of great Italy,
And by my fathers love and leave am armed
With his good will, and thy good company.
My trusty servant well approved in all,
Here let vs breath, and happily institute
A course of Learning, and ingenious studies.
Pisa renowned for grave Citizens
Gave me my being, and my father first
A Merchant of great Traffic through the world:
Vincentio's come of the Bentinolij,
Vincentio's son, brough up in Florence,
It shall become to serve all hopes conceived
To deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds:
And therefore Tranio, for the time I study,
Virtue and that part of Philosophy
Will I apply, that treats of happiness,
By virtue specially to be achieved.
Tell me thy mind, for I have Pisa left,
And am to Padua come, as he that leaves
A shallow plash, to plunge him in the deep,
And with society seeks to quench his thirst.
Me Pardonato, gentle master mine:
I am in all affected as your self,
Glad that you thus continue your resolve,
To suck the sweets of sweet Philosophy.
Only (good master) while we do admire
This virtue, and this moral discipline,
Let's be no Stoickes, nor no stocks I pray,
Or so devote to Aristotles checks
As Ouid; be an out-cast quite abjured:
Balke Lodgicke with acquaintance that you have,
And practise Rhetoric in your common talk,
Music and Poesy use, to quicken you,
The Mathematickes, and the Metaphysickes
Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you:
No profit grows, where is no pleasure tan:
In brief sir, study what you most affect.
Gramercies Tranio, well dost thou advise,
If Biondello thou were come ashore,
We could at once put vs in readiness,
And take a Lodging fit to entertain
Such friends (as time) in Padua shall beget.
But stay a while, what company is this?
Master some show to welcome vs to Town.
Gentlemen, importune me no farther,
For how I firmly am resolve•d you know:
That is, not to bestow my youngest daughter,
Before I have a husband for the elder:
If either of you both love Katherine,
Because I know you well, and love you well,
Leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure.
To cart her rather. She's to rough for me,
There, there Hortensio, will you any Wife?
I pray you sir, is it your will
To make a stale of me amongst these mates?
Mates maid, how mean you that?
No mates for you,
Unless you were of gentler milder mould.
In faith sir, you shall never need to fear,
Ewes it is not half way to her heart:
But if it were, doubt not, her care should be,
To comb your noddle with a three-legg'd stool,
And paint your face, and use you like a fool.
From all such devils, good Lord deliver vs.
And me too, good Lord.
Hushed master, here is some good pastime toward;
That wench is stark mad, or wonderful froward.
But in the others silence do I see,
Maids mild behaviour and sobriety.
Peace Tranio.
Well said Mr, mum, and gaze your fill.
Gentlemen, that I may soon make good
What I have said, Bianca get you in,
And let it not displease thee good Bianca,
For I will love thee ne'er the less my girl.
A pretty peat, it is best put finger in the eye, and she knew why.
Sister content you, in my discontent.
Sir, to your pleasure humbly I subscribe:
My books and instruments shall be my company,
On them to look, and practise by my self.
Hark Tranio, thou moist hear Minerua speak.
Signior Baptist, will you be so strange,
Sorry am I that our good will effects
Bianca's grief.
Why will you mew her up
(Signior Baptist) for this fiend of hell,
And make her bear the penance of her tongue.
Gentlemen content ye: I am resold:
Go in Bianca.
And for I know she takes most delight
In Music, Instruments, and Poetry,
Schoolemasters will I keep within my house,
Fit to instruct her youth. If you Hortensio,
Or signior Gremio you know any such,
Prefer them hither: for to cunning men,
I will be very kind and liberal,
To mine own children, in good bringing up,
And so farewell: Katherine you may stay,
For I have more to commune with Bianca.
Why, and I trust I may go too, may I not?
What shall I be appointed hours, as though
(Belike) I knew not what to take,
And what to leave? Ha.
You may go to the devils dam: your gifts are so good heere's none will hold you: Their love is not so great Hortensio, but we may blow our nails together, and fast it fairly out. Our cakes dough on both sides. Farewell: yet for the love I bear my sweet Bianca, if I can by any means light on a fit man to teach her that wherein she delights, I will wish him to her father.
So will I seignior Gremio: but a word I pray: Though the nature of our quarrel yet never brooked parley, know now upon advice, it touches vs both: that we may yet again have access to our fair Mistress, and be happy rivals in Bianca's love, to labour and effect one thing specially.
What's that I pray?
Marry sir to get a husband for her Sister.
A husband: a devil.
I say a husband.
I say, a devil: Think thou Hortensio, though her father be very rich, any man is so very a fool to be married to hell?
Tush Gremio: though it pass your patience &amp; mine to endure her loud alarms, why man there bee good fellows in the world, and a man could light on them, would take her with all faults, and money enough.
I cannot tell: but I had as lief take her dowry with this condition; To be whipped at the hie cross every morning.
Faith (as you say) there's small choice in rotten apples: but come, since this bar in law makes vs friends, it shall be so far forth friendly maintained, till by hell∣ping Baptistas eldest daughter to a husband, wee set his youngest free for a husband, and then have too t afresh: Sweet Bianca, happy man be his dole: hee that runs fastest, gets the Ring: How say you signior Gremio?
I am agreed, and would I had given him the best horse in Padua to begin his wooing that would tho∣roughly woe her, wed her, and bed her, and rid the house of her. Come on.
I pray sir tel me, is it possible
That love should of a sudden take such hold.
Oh Tranio, till I found it to be true,
I never thought it possible or likely.
But see, while idly I stood looking on,
I found the effect of Love in idleness,
And now in plainness do confess to thee
That art to me as secret and as dear
As Anna to the Queen of Carthage was:
Tranio I burn, I pine, I perish Tranio,
If I achieve not this young modest girl:
Counsel me Tranio, for I know thou can:
Assist me Tranio, for I know thou wilt.
Master, it is no time to chide you now,
Affection is not rated from the heart:
If love have touched you, nought remains but so,
Redeem te captam quam guess minimo.
Gramercies Lad: Go forward, this contents,
The rest will comfort, for thy counsels sound.
Master, you looked so longly on the maid,
Perhaps you marked not what's the pith of all.
Oh yes, I saw sweet beauty in her face,
Such as the daughter of Agenor had,
That made great Jove to humble him to her hand,
When with his knees he kissed the Cretin strond.
Saw you no more? Marked you not how his sister
Began to scold, and raise up such a storm,
That mortal ears might hardly endure the din.
Tranio, I saw her corrall lips to move,
And with her breath she did perfume the ayre,
Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her.
Nay, then it is time to stir him frō his trance:
I pray awake sir: if you love the Maid,
Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her. Thus it stands:
Her elder sister is so cursed and shrewed,
That till the Father rid his hands of her,
Master, your Love must live a maid at home,
And therefore has he closely moved her up,
Because she will not be annoyed with suitors.
Ah Tranio, what a cruel Fathers he:
But art thou not advised, he took some care
To get her cunning Schoolemasters to instruct her.
I marry am I sir, and now it is plotted.
I have it Tranio.
Master, for my hand,
Both our inventions meet and jump in one.
Tell me thine first.
You will be schoolmaster,
And undertake the teaching of the maid:
That's your device.
It is: May it be done?
Not possible: for who shall bear your part,
And be in Padua here Vincentio's son,
Keep house, and ply his book, welcome his friends,
Visit his Countrymen, and banquet them?
Basta, content thee: for I have it full.
We have not yet bin seen in any house,
Nor can we be distinguished by our faces,
For man or master: then it follows thus;
Thou shalt be master, Tranio in my sted:
Keep house, and port, and servants, as I should,
I will some other be, some Florentine,
Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa.
It is hatched, and shall be so: Tranio at once
Uncase thee: take my Conlord hat and cloak,
When Biondello comes, he waits on thee,
But I will charm him first to keep his tongue.
So had you need:
In breeze Sir, sith it your pleasure is,
And I am tied to be obedient,
For so your father charged me at our parting:
Be serviceable to my son (quoth he)
Although I think it was in another sense,
I am content to bee Lucentio,
Because so well I love Lucentio.
Tranio be so, because Lucentio loves,
And let me be a slave, to achieve that maid.
Whose sudden sight hath thrilled my wounded eye.
Here comes the rogue. Sir, where have you bin?
Where have I been? Nay how now, where are you? Moister, he's my fellow Tranio stolen your clothes, or you stolen his, or both? Pray what's the news?
Sir come hither, it is no time to jest,
And therefore frame your manners to the time
Your fellow Tranio here to save my life,
Puts my apparel, and my countenance on,
And I for my escape have put on his:
For in a quarrel since I came a shore,
I killed a man, and fear I was descried:
Waite you on him, I charge you, as becomes:
While I make way from hence to save my life:
You understand me?
I sir, ne'er a whit.
And not a jot of Tranio in your mouth,
Tranio is changed into Lucentio.
The better for him, would I were so too.
So could I faith boy, to have the next wish af∣la, that Lucentio indeed had Baptistas youngest daugh∣la. But sir, not for my sake, but your masters, I ad∣uise you use your manners discreetly in all kind of com∣panies: When I am alone, why then I am Tranio: but in all places else, you master Lucentio.
Tranio let's go:
One thing more rests, that thy self execute,
To make one among these wooers: if thou ask me why,
Suffices my reasons are both good and weighty.
My Lord you nod, you do not mind the play.
Yes by Saint Anne do I, a good matter surely:
Comes there any more of it?
My Lord, it is but begun.
It is a very excellent piece of work, Madame Lady: would it were done.
Verona, for a while I take my leave,
To see my friends in Padua; but of all
My best beloved and approved friend
Hortensio: &amp; I trow this is his house:
Here sir Grumio, knock I say.
Knock sir? whom should I knock? Is there any man he's rebus'd your worship?
Villain I say, knock me here soundly.
Knock you here sir? Why sir, what am I sir, that I should knock you here sir.
Villain I say, knock me at this gate,
And rap me well, or Isle knock your knaves pate.
My Mr is grown quarrelsome:
I should knock you first,
And then I know after who comes by the worst.
Will it not be?
Faith sirrah, and you'll not knock, Isle ring it,
Isle try how you can Sol, Fa, and sing it.
Help mistress help, my master is mad.
Now knock when I bid you: sirrah villain.
How now, what's the matter? My old friend Grumio, and my good friend Petruchio? How do you all at Verona?
Signior Hortensio, come you to part the fray?
Contutti le core been trobatto, may I say.
Alla nostra case been venuto multo honorata sign∣or mio Petruchio.
Rise Grumio rise, we will compound this quarrel.
Nay it is no matter sir, what he leges in Latin. If this be not a lawful cause for me to leave his service, look you sir: He bid me knock him, &amp; rap him sound∣lie sir. Well, was it fit for a servant to use his master so, being perhaps (for ought I see) two and thirty, a peep out? Whom would to God I had well knocked at first, then had not Grumio come by the worst.
A senseless villain: good Hortensio,
I had the rascal knock upon your gate,
And could not get him for my heart to do it.
Knock at the gate? O heavens: spake you not these words plain? Sir, Knock me here: rap me here: knock me well, and knock me soundly? And come you now with knocking at the gate?
Sir be gone, or talk not I advise you
Petruchio patience, I am Grumio's pledge:
Why this a heavy chance twixt him and you,
Your ancient trusty pleasant servant Grumio:
And tell me now (sweet friend) what happy gale
Blows you to Padua here, from old Verona?
Such wind as scatters young man through ye world,
To seek their fortunes farther then at home,
Where small experience grows but in a few.
Signior Hortensio, thus it stands with me,
Antonio my father is deceased,
And I have thrust my self into this maze,
Happily to wive and thrive, as best I may:
Crowns in my purse I have, and goods at home,
And so am come abroad to see the world.
Petruchio, shall I then come roundly to thee,
And wish thee to a shrewed ill-favoured wife?
You would thank me but a little for my counsel:
And yet Isle promise thee she shall be rich,
And very rich: but the art too much my friend,
And Isle not wish thee to her.
Signior Hortensio, twixt such friends as wee,
Few words suffice: and therefore, if thou know
One rich enough to be Petruchio's wife:
(As wealth is burden of my wooing dance)
Be she as foul as was Florentius Love,
As old as Sibell, and as cursed and shrow'd
As Socrates Zentippe, or a worse:
She moves me not, or not removes at least
Affections edge in me. Were she is as rough
As are the swelling Adriatic seas.
I come to wive it wealthily in Padua:
If wealthily, then happily in Padua.
Nay look you sir, hee tells you flatly what his mind is: why give him Gold enough, and marry him to a Puppet or an Aglet baby, or an old trot with ne'er a tooth in her head, though she have as many diseases as two and fifty horses. Why nothing comes amiss, so money comes withal.
Petruchio, since we are stepped thus far in,
I will continue that I broached in jest,
I can Petruchio help thee to a wife
With wealth enough, and young and beauteous,
Brought up as best becomes a Gentlewoman.
Her only fault, and that is faults enough,
Is, that she is intolerable cursed,
And shrow'd, and froward, so beyond all measure,
That were my state far worser then it is,
I would not wed her for a mine of Gold.
Hortensio peace: thou know not golds effect,
Tell me her fathers name, and it is enough:
For I will board her, though she chide as loud
As thunder, when the clouds in Autumn crack.
Her father is Baptist Minola,
An affable and courteous Gentleman,
Her name is Katherine Minola,
Renowned in Padua for her scolding tongue.
I know her father, though I know not her,
And he knew my deceased father well:
I will not sleep Hortensio till I see her,
And therefore let me be thus bold with you,
To give you over at this first encounter,
Unless you will accompany me thither.
I pray you Sir let him go while the humour lasts. A my word, and she knew him as well as I do, she would think scolding would doe little good upon him. She may perhaps call him half a score Knaves, or so: Why that's nothing; and he begin once, he will rail in his rope tricks. Isle tell you what sir, and she stand him but a li∣tle, he will throw a figure in her face, and so disfigure his with it, that she shall have no more eyes to see withal then a Cat: you know him not sir.
Tarry Petruchio, I must go with thee,
For in Baptistas keep my treasure is:
He hath the Jewel of my life in hold,
His youngest daughter, beautiful Bianca,
And her with-holds from me. Other more
Suitors to her, and rivals in my Love:
Supposing it a thing impossible,
For those defects I have before rehearsed,
That ever Katherine will be wooed:
Therefore this order hath Baptist tan,
That none shall have access unto Bianca,
Till Katherine the Cursed, have got a husband.
Katherine the cursed,
A title for a maid, of all titles the worst.
Now shall my friend Petruchio do me grace,
And offer me disguised in sober robes,
To old Baptist as a schoolmaster
Well seen in Music, to instruct Bianca,
That so I may by this device at least
Have leave and leisure to make love to her,
And unsuspected court her by her self.
Heere's no knavery. See, to beguile the olde-folkes, how the young folks lay their heads together. Master, master, look about you: Who goes there? ha.
Peace Grumio, it is the rival of my Love.
Petruchio stand by a while.
A proper stripling, and an amorous.
O very well, I have perused the note:
Hark you sir, Isle have them very fairly bound,
All books of Love, see that at any hand,
And see you read no other Lectures to her:
You understand me. Over and beside
Signior Baptistas liberality,
Isle mend it with a Largess. Take your paper too,
And let me have them very well perfumed;
For she is sweeter then perfume it self
To whom they go to: what will you read to her.
What ere I read to her, Isle plead for you,
As for my patron, stand you so assured,
As firmly as your self were still in place,
Yea and perhaps with more successful words
Then you; unless you were a scholar sir.
Oh this learning, what a thing it is.
Oh this Woodcock, what an Ass it is.
Peace sir.
Grumio mum: God save you signior Gremio.
And you are well met, Signior Hortensio.
Trow you whither I am going? To Baptist Minola,
I promised to enquire carefully
About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca,
And by good fortune I have lighted well
On this young man: For learning and behaviour
Fit for her turn, well read in Poetry
And other books, good ones, I warrant ye.
It is well: and I have met a Gentleman
Hath promised me to help one to another,
A fine Musician to instruct our Mistress,
So shall I no whit be behind in duty
To fair Bianca, so beloved of me.
Beloved of me, and that my deeds shall prove.
And that his bags shall prove.
Gremio, it is now no time to vent our love,
Listen to me, and if you speak me fair,
Isle tel you news indifferent good for either.
Here is a Gentleman whom by chance I met
Upon agreement from vs to his liking,
Will undertake to woo cursed Katherine,
Yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.
So said, so done, is well:
Hortensio, have you told him all her faults?
I know she is an irksome brawling scold:
If that be all Masters, I hear no harm.
No, say me so, friend? What Countryman?
Borne in Verona, old Butonios son:
My father dead, my fortune lives for me,
And I do hope, good days and long, to see.
Oh sir, such a life with such a wife, were strange:
But if you have a stomach, too't a Gods name,
You shall have me assisting you in all.
But will you woo this Wilde-cat?
Will I live?
Will he woo her? I: or Isle hang her.
Why came I hither, but to that intent?
Think you, a little din can daunt mine ears?
Have I not in my time heard Lions roar?
Have I not heard the sea, puffed up with winds,
Rage like an angry Boar, chafed with sweat?
Have I not heard great Ordnance in the field?
And heavens Artillery thunder in the skies?
Have I not in a pitched battle heard
Loud larums, neighing steeds, &amp; trumpets clang▪
And do you tell me of a women's tongue?
That gives not half so great a blow to hear,
As will a Chesse-nut in a Farmers fire.
Tush, tush, fear boys with bugs.
For he fears none.
Hortensio hark:
This Gentleman is happily arrived,
My mind presumes for his own good, and yours.
I promised we would be Contributors,
And bear his charge of wooing whatsoere.
And so we will, provided that he win her.
I would I were as sure of a good dinner.
Gentlemen God save you. If I may be bold
Tell me I beseech you, which is the readiest way
To the house of Signior Baptist Minola?
He that he's the two fair daughters: first he you mean?
Even he Biondello.
Hark you sir, you mean not her to —
Perhaps him and her sir, what have you to do?
Not her that chides sir, at any hand I pray.
I love no chiders sir: Biondello, let's away.
Well begun Tranio.
Sir, a word ere you go:
Are you a suitor to the Maid you talk of, yea or no?
And if I be sir, is it any offence?
No: if without more words you will get you hence.
Why sir, I pray are not the streers as free
For me, as for you?
But so is not she.
For what reason I beseech you.
For this reason if you'll know,
That she's the choice love of Signior Gremio.
That she's the chosen of signior Hortensio.
Softly my Masters: If you be Gentlemen
Do me this right: hear me with patience,
Baptist is a noble Gentleman,
To whom my Father is not all unknown,
And were his daughter fairer then she is,
She may more suitors have, and me for one.
Fair Ladies daughter had a thousand wooers,
Then well one more may fair Bianca have;
And so she shall: Lucentio shall make one,
Though Paris came, in hope to speed alone.
What, this Gentleman will out-talke vs all.
Sir give him head, I know he will prove a Jade.
Hortensio, to what end are all these words?
Sir, let me be so bold as ask you,
Did you yet ever see Baptistas daughter?
No sir, but hear I do that he hath two:
The one, as famous for a scolding tongue,
As is the other, for beauteous modesty.
Sir, sir, the first's for me, let her go by.
Yea, leave that labour to great Hercules,
And let it be more then Alcides twelve.
Sir understand you this of me (insooth)
The youngest daughter whom you hearken for,
Her father keeps from all access of suitors,
And will not promise her to any man,
Until the elder sister first be wed.
The younger then is free, and nor before.
If it be so sir, that you are the man
Must steed vs all, and me amongst the rest:
And if you break the ice, and do this seek,
Achieve the elder: set the younger free,
For our access, whose hap shall be to have her,
Will not so graceless be, to be ingrate.
Sir you say well, and well you do conceive,
And since you do profess to be a suitor,
You must as we do, gratify this Gentleman,
To whom we all rest generally beholding.
Sir, I shall not be slack, in sign whereof,
Please ye we may contrive this afternoon,
And quaff carouses to our Mistress health,
And do as adversaries do in law,
Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.
Oh excellent motion: fellows let's be gon.
The motions good indeed, and be it so,
Petruchio, I shall be your Been venuto.
Good sister wrong me not, nor wrong your self,
To make a bondmaid and a slave of me,
That I disdain: but for these other goods,
Unbind my hands, Isle pull them off my self,
Yea all my raiment, to my petticoat,
Or what you will command me, will I do,
So well I know my duty to my elders.
Of all thy suitors here I charge tel
Whom thou love best: see thou dissemble not.
Believe me sister, of all the men alive,
I never yet beheld that special face,
Which I could fancy, more then any other.
Minion thou lie: Is it not Hortensio?
If you affect him sister, here I swear
Isle plead for you my self, but you shall have him.
Oh then belike you fancy riches more,
You will have Gremio to keep you fair.
Is it for him you do envy me so?
Nay then you jest, and now I well perceive
You have but jested with me all this while:
I prithee sister Kate, untie my hands.
If that be jest, then all the rest was so.
Why how now Dame, whence grows this in∣solence?
Bianca stand aside, poor girl she weeps:
Go ply thy Needle, meddle not with her.
For shame thou Hilding of a devilish spirit,
Why dost thou wrong her, that did ne'er wrong thee?
When did she cross thee with a bitter word?
Her silence flouts me, and Isle be revenged.
What in my sight? Bianca get thee in.
What will you not suffer me: Nay now I see
She is your treasure, she must have a husband,
I must dance bare-foot on her wedding day,
And for your love to her, lead Apes in hell.
Talk not to me, I will go sit and weep,
Till I can find occasion of revenge.
Was ever Gentleman thus grieved as I?
But who comes here.
Good morrow neighbour Baptist.
Good morrow neighbour Gremio: God save you Gentlemen.
And you good sir: pray have you not a daugh∣la, called Katerina, fair and virtuous.
I have a daughter sir, called Katerina.
You are too blunt, go to it orderly.
You wrong me signior Gremio, give me leave.
I am a Gentleman of Verona sir,
That hearing of her beauty, and her wit,
Her affability and bashful modesty:
Her wondrous qualities, and mild behaviour,
Am bold to show my self a forward guest
Within your house, to make mine eye the witness
Of that report, which I so oft have heard,
And for an entrance to my entertainment,
I do present you with a man of mine
Cunning in Music, and the Mathematickes,
To instruct her fully in those sciences,
Whereof I know she is not ignorant,
Accept of him, or else you do me wrong,
His name is Litio, borne in Mantua.
Y' are welcome sir, and he for your good sake.
But for my daughter Katerine, this I know,
She is not for your turn, the more my grief.
I see you do not mean to part with her,
Or else you like not of my company.
Mistake me not, I speak but as I find,
Whence are you sir? What may I call your name.
Petruchio is my name, Antonio's son,
A man well known throughout all Italy.
I know him well: you are welcome for his sake.
Saving your tale Petruchio, I pray let vs that are poor petitioners speak too? Bacare, you are meruay∣lous forward.
Oh, Pardon me signior Gremio, I would fine be doing.
I doubt it not sir. But you will curse
Your wooing neighbours: this is a gift
Very grateful, I am sure of it, to express
The like kindness my self, that have been
More kindly beholding to you then any:
Freely give unto this young Scholar, that hath
Been long studying at Rhemes, as cunning
In Greek, Latin, and other Languages,
As the other in Music and Mathematickes:
His name is Cambio: pray accept his service.
A thousand thanks signior Gremio:
Welcome good Cambio. But gentle sir,
Me thinks you walk like a stranger,
May I be so bold, to know the cause of your coming?
Pardon me sir, the boldness is mine own,
That being a stranger in this City here,
Do make my self a suitor to your daughter,
Unto Bianca, fair and virtuous:
Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me,
In the preferment of the eldest sister.
This liberty is all that I request,
That upon knowledge of my Parentage,
I may have welcome amongst the rest that woo,
And free access and favour as the rest.
And toward the education of your daughters:
I here bestow a simple instrument,
And this small packet of Greek and Latin books:
If you accept them, then their worth is great:
Lucentio is your name, of whence I pray.
Of Pisa sir, son to Vincentio.
A mighty man of Pisa by report,
I know him well: you are very welcome sir:
Take you the Lute, and you the set of books,
You shall go see your Pupils presently.
Holla, within.
Sirrah, lead these Gentlemen
To my daughters, and tell them both
These are their Tutors, bid them use them well,
We will go walk a little in the Orchard,
And then to dinner: you are passing welcome,
And so I pray you all to think your selves.
Signior Baptist, my business asks haste,
And every day I cannot come to woo,
You knew my father well, and in him me,
Left sole heir to all his Lands and goods,
Which I have bettered rather then decreased,
Then tell me, if I get your daughters love,
What dowry shall I have with her to wife.
After my death, the one half of my Lands,
And in possession twenty thousand Crowns.
And for that dowry, Isle assure her of
Her widowhood, be it that she survive me
In all my Lands and Leases whatsoever,
Let specialties be therefore drawn between vs,
That covenants may be kept on either hand.
I, when the special thing is well obtained,
That is her love: for that is all in all.
Why that is nothing: for I tell you father,
I am as peremptory as she proud minded:
And where two raging fires meet together,
They do consume the thing that feeds their fury.
Though little fire grows great with little wind,
yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all:
So I to her, and so she yields to me,
For I am rough, and woo not like a babe.
Well moist thou woo, and happy be thy speed:
But be thou armed for some unhappy words.
I to the proof, as Mountains are for winds,
That shakes not, though they blow perpetually.
How now my friend, why dost thou look so pale?
For fear I promise you, if I look pale.
What, will my daughter prove a good Musiti∣an?
I think she'll sooner prove a soldier,
Iron may hold with her, but never Lutes.
Why then thou can not break her to the Lute?
Why no, for she hath broke the Lute to me:
I did but tell her she mistook her frets,
And bowed her hand to teach her fingering,
When (with a most impatient devilish spirit)
Frets call you these? (quoth she) Isle fume with them:
And with that word she stroke me on the head,
And through the instrument my pate made way,
And there I stood amazed for a while,
As on a Pillory, looking through the Lute,
While she did call me Rascal, Fiddler,
And twangling lack, with twenty such wild terms,
As had she studied to misvse me so.
Now by the world, it is a lusty Wench,
I love her ten times more then ere I did,
Oh how I long to have some chat with her.
Well go with me, and be not so discomfited.
Proceed in practise with my younger daughter,
She's apt to learn, and thankful for good turns:
Signior Petruchio, will you go with vs,
Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you.
I pray you do. Isle attend her here,
And woo her with some spirit when she comes,
Say that she rail, why then Isle tell her plain,
She sings as sweetly as a Nightinghale:
Say that she frown, Isle say she looks as clear
As morning Roses newly washed with dew:
Say she be mute, and will not speak a word,
Then Isle commend her volubility,
And say she vtcereth piercing eloquence:
If she do bid me pack, Isle give her thanks,
As though she bid me stay by her a week:
If she deny to wed, Isle crave the day
When I shall ask the banes, and when be married.
But here she comes, and now Petruchio speak.
Good morrow Kate, for thats your name I hear.
Well have you heard, but something hard of hearing:
They call me Katerine, that do talk of me.
You lye infaith, for you are called plain Kate,
And bony Kate, and sometimes Kate the cursed:
But Kate, the prettiest Kate in Christendom,
Kate of Kate-hall, my super-daintie Kate,
For dainties are all Kates, and therefore Kate
Take this of me, Kate of my consolation,
Hearing thy mildness praised in every Town,
Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded,
Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs,
My self am moved to woo thee for my wife.
Moved, in good time, let him that moved you hither
Remove you hence: I knew you at the first
You were a movable.
Why, what's a movable?
A joined stool.
Thou hast hit it: come sit on me.
Asses are made to bear, and so are you.
Women are made to bear, and so are you.
No such Jade as you, if me you mean.
Alas good Kate, I will not burden thee,
For knowing thee to be but young and light.
Too light for such a swain as you to catch,
And yet as heavy as my weight should be.
Should be, should: buzz.
Well tan, and like a buzzard.
Oh slow-wing'd Turtle, shall a buzzard take thee?
I for a Turtle, as he takes a buzzard.
Come, come you Wasp, y' faith you are too angry.
If I be waspish, best beware my sting.
My remedy is then to pluck it out.
I, if the fool could find it where it lies.
Who knows not where a Wasp does, wear his sting? In his tail.
In his tongue?
Whose tongue.
Yours if you talk of tales, and so farewell.
What with my tongue in your tail.
Nay, come again, good Kate, I am a Gentleman,
That Isle try.
I swear Isle cuff you, if you strike again.
So may you loose your arms,
If you strike me, you are no Gentleman,
And if no Gentleman, why then no arms.
A Herald Kate? Oh put me in thy books.
What is your Crest, a Coxcomb?
A comblesse Cock, so Kate will be my Hen.
No Cock of mine, you crow too like a craven
Nay come Kate, come: you must not look so sour.
It is my fashion when I see a Crab.
Why heere's no crab, and therefore look not sour.
There is, there is.
Then show it me.
Had I a glass, I would.
What, you mean my face.
Well aimed of such a young one.
Now by S. George I am too young for you.
Yet you are withered.
It is with cares.
I care not.
Nay hear you Kate. Insooth you scope not so.
I chafe you if I tarry. Let me go.
No, not a whit, I find you passing gentle:
It was told me you were rough, and coy, and sullen,
And now I find report a very liar:
For thou art pleasant, g•mesome, passing courteous,
But slow in speech: yet sweet as spring-time flowers.
Thou can not frown, thou can not look a sconce,
Nor bite the lip, as angry wenches will,
Nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk:
But thou with mildness entertain thy wooers,
With gentle conference, soft, and affable.
Why does the world report that Kate doth limp?
Oh slanderous world: Kate like the hazel twig
Is straight, and slender, and as browne in hue
As hazel nuts, and sweeter then the kernels:
Oh let me see thee walk: thou dost not halt.
Go fool, and whom thou keep command.
Did ever Dian so become a Grove
As Kate this chamber with her princely gate:
O be thou Dian, and let her be Kate,
And then let Kate be chaste, and Dian sportful.
Where did you study all this goodly speech?
It is extempore, from my mother wit.
A witty mother, witless else her son.
Am I not wise?
Yes, keep you warm.
Marry so I mean sweet Katherine in thy bed:
And therefore setting all this chat aside,
Thus in plain terms: your father hath consented
That you shall be my wife; your dowry greed on,
And will you, •ill you, I will marry you.
Now Kate, I am a husband for your turn,
For by this light, whereby I see thy beauty,
Thy beauty that doth make me like thee well,
Thou must be married to no man but me,
For I am he am borne to tame you Kate,
And bring you from a wilde Kate to a Kate
Conformable as other household Kates:
Here comes your father, never make denial▪
I must, and will have Katherine to my wife.
Now Signior Petruchio, how speed you with my daughter?
How but well sir? how but well?
It were impossible I should speed amiss.
Why how now daughter Katherine, in your dumps?
Call you me daughter? now I promise you
You have showed a tender fatherly regard,
To wish me wed to one half Lunatic,
A mad-cap ruffian, and a swearing lack,
That thinks with oaths to face the matter out.
Father, it is thus, your self and all the world
That talked of her, have talked amiss of her:
If she be cursed, it is for policy,
For shoe's not froward, but modest as the Dove,
She is not hot, but temperate as the morn,
For patience she will prove a second Grissell,
And Roman Lucrece for her chastity:
And to conclude, we have greed so well together,
That upon sunday is the wedding day.
Isle see thee hanged on sunday first.
Hark Petruchio, she says she'll see thee hanged first.
Is this your speeding? nay thē godnight our part.
Be patient gentlemen, I choose her for my self,
If she and I be pleased, what's that to you?
It is bargained twixt vs twain being alone,
That she shall still be cursed in company.
I tell you it is incredible to believe
How much she loves me: oh the kindest Kate,
She hung about my neck, and kiss on kiss
She vied so fast, protesting oath on oath,
That in a twinke she won me to her love.
Oh you are novices, it is a world to see
How tame when men and women are alone.
A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew:
Give me thy hand Kate, I will unto Venice
To buy apparel against the wedding day;
Provide the feast father, and bid the guests,
I will be sure my Katherine shall be fine.
I know not what to say, but give me your hāds,
God send you joy, Petruchio, it is a match.
Tra. Amen say we, we will be witnesses.
Father, and wife, and gentlemen adieu,
I will to Venice, sunday comes apace,
We will have rings, and things, and fine array,
And kiss me Kate, we will be married a sunday.
Was ever match clapped up so suddenly?
Faith Gentlemen now I play a merchants part,
And venture madly on a desperate Mart.
It was a commodity lay fretting by you,
Twill bring you gain, or perish on the seas.
The gain I seek, is quiet me the match.
No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch:
But now Baptist, to your younger daughter,
Now is the day we long have looked for,
I am your neighbour, and was suitor first.
And I am one that love Bianca more
Then words can witness, or your thoughts can guess.
Yongling thou can not love so dear as I.
Gray-beard thy love doth freeze.
But thine doth fry,
Skipper stand back, it is age that nourishes.
But youth in Ladies eyes that flourished.
Content you gentlemen, I will cōpound this strife
It is deeds must win the prize, and he of both
That can assure my daughter greatest dower,
Shall have my Biancas love.
Say signior Gremio, what can you assure her?
First, as you know, my house within the City
Is richly furnished with plate and gold,
Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands:
My hangings all of tirian tapestry:
In Ivory confers I have stuffed my crowns:
In Cypros chests my arras counterpoints,
Costly apparel, tents, and Canopies,
Fine Linen, Turkey cushions bossed with pearl,
Valance of Venice gold, in needle work:
Pewter and brass, and all things that belongs
To house or house-keeping: then at my farm
I have a hundred milch-kine to the pale,
Sixe-score fat Oxen standing in my stalls,
And all things answerable to this portion.
My self am struck in years I must confess,
And if I die to morrow this is hers,
If whilst I live she will be only mine.
That only came well in: sir, list to me,
I am my fathers heir and only son,
If I may have your daughter to my wife,
Isle leave her houses three or four as good
Within rich Pisa walls, as any one
Old Signior Gremio has in Padua,
Besides, two thousand Ducats by the year
Of fruitful land, all which shall be her jointer.
What, have I pinched you Signior Gremio?
Two thousand Ducats by the year of land,
My Land amounts not to so much in all:
That she shall have, besides an Argosy
That now is lying in Marcellus road:
What, have I choked you with an Argosy?
Gremio, it is known my father hath no less
Then three great Argosies, besides two Galliasses
And twelve tight Galleys, these I will assure her,
And twice as much what ere thou offrest next.
Nay, I have offred all, I have no more,
And she can have no more then all I have,
If you like me, she shall have me and mine.
Why then the maid is mine from all the world
By your firm promise, Gremio is out-vied.
I must confess your offer is the best,
And let your father make her the assurance,
She is your own, else you must pardon me:
If you should die before him, whore's her dower?
That's but a cavil: he is old, I young.
And may not young men die as well as old?
Well gentlemen, I am thus resolved,
On sunday next, you know
My daughter Katherine is to be married:
Now on the sunday following, shall Bianca
Be Bride to you, if you make this assurance:
If not, to Signior Gremio:
And so I take my leave, and thank you both.
Adieu good neighbour: now I fear thee not:
Sir, young gamester, your father were a fool
To give thee all, and in his waning age
Set foot under thy table: tut, a toy,
An old Italian fox is not so kind my boy.
A vengeance on your crafty withered hide,
Yet I have faced it with a card of ten:
It is in my head to doe my master good:
I see no reason but supposed Lucentio
Must get a father, called supposed Ʋincentio,
And that's a wonder: fathers commonly
Doe get their children: but in this case of wooing,
A child shall get a sire, if I fail not of my cunning.
Fiddler forbear you grow too forward Sir,
Have you so soon forgot the entertainment
Her sister Katherine welcomed you withal.
But wrangling pedant, this is
The patronise of heavenly harmony:
Then give me leave to have prerogative,
And when in Music we have spent an hour,
Your Lecture shall have leisure for as much.
Preposterous Ass that never read so far,
To know the cause why music was ordained:
Was it not to refresh the mind of man
After his studies, or his usual pain?
Then give me leave to read Philosophy,
And while I pause, serve in your harmony.
Sir, I will not bear these braves of thine.
Why gentlemen, you doe me double wrong,
To strive for that which rests in my choice:
I am no breaching scholar in the schools,
Isle not be tied to hours, nor pointed times,
But learn my Lessons as I please my self,
And to cut off all strife: here sit we down,
Take you your instrument, play you the whiles,
His Lecture will be done ere you have tuned.
You'll leave his Lecture when I am in tune?
That will be never, tune your instrument.
Where left we last?
Here Madam: Hic Ibat Simois, hic est sigeria tellus, hic steterat Priamiregia Celsa senis.
Construe them.
Hic Ibat, as I told you before. Simois, I am Lu∣centio, hic est, son unto Vincentio of Pisa, Sigeriatel∣lus, disguised thus to get your love, hic steterat, and that Lucentio that comes a wooing, priami, is my man Tra∣nio, regia, bearing my port, celsa senis that we might be∣guile the old Pantalowne.
Madam, my Instrument's in tune.
Let's hear, oh fie, the treble jars.
Spit in the hole man, and tune again.
Now let me see if I can construe it. Hic ibat si∣mois, I know you not, hic est sigeria tellus, I trust you not, hic staterat priami, take heed he hear vs not, regia pre∣sum not, Celsa senis, despair not.
Madam, tic now in tune.
All but the base.
The base is right, it is the base knave that iars.
How fiery and forward our Pedant is,
Now for my life the knave doth court my love,
Pedascule, Isle watch you better yet:
In time I may believe, yet I mistrust.
Mistrust it not, for sure Aeacides
Was Atax called so from his grandfather.
I must believe my master, else I promise you,
I should be arguing still upon that doubt,
But let it rest, now Litio to you:
Good master take it not unkindly pray
That I have been thus pleasant with you both.
You may go walk, and give me leave a while,
My Lessons make no music in three parts.
Are you so formal sir, well I must waite
And watch withal, for but I be deceived,
Our fine Musician grows amorous.
Madam, before you touch the instrument,
To learn the order of my fingering,
I must begin with rudiments of Art,
To teach you gamoth in a briefer sort,
More pleasant, pithy, and effectual,
Then hath been taught by any of my trade,
And there it is in writing fairly drawn.
Why, I am past my gamouth long ago.
Yet read the gamouth of Hortentio.
Gamouth I am, the ground of all accord:
Are, to plead Hortensio's passion:
Beeme, Bianca take him for thy Lord
Cfavt, that loves with all affection:
D solre, one Cliff, two notes have I,
Elami, show pity or I die.
Call you this gamouth? tut I like it not,
Old fashions please me best, I am not so nice
To charge true rules for old inventions.
Mistress, your father prays you leave your books,
And help to dress your sisters chamber up,
You know to morrow is the wedding day.
Farewell sweet masters both, I must be gone.
Faith Mistress then I have no cause to stay.
But I have cause to pry into this pedant,
Methinkes he looks as though he were in love:
Yet if thy thoughts Bianca be so humble
To cast thy wandering eyes on every stale:
Seize thee that List, if once I find thee ranging,
Hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.
Signior Lucentio, this is the pointed day
That Katherine and Petruchio should be married,
And yet we hear not of our son in Law:
What will be said, what mockery will it be?
To want the Bridegroom when the Priest attends
To speak the ceremonial rites of marriage?
What says Lucentio to this shame of ours?
No shame but mine, I must forsooth be forced
To give my hand opposed against my heart
Unto a mad-braine ruts by, full of spleen,
Who wooed in haste, and means to wed at leisure:
I told you I, he was a frantic fool,
Hiding his bitter jests in blunt behaviour,
And to be noted for a merry man;
He will woo a thousand, point the day of marriage,
Make friends, inuit, and proclaim the banes,
Yet never means to wed where he hath wooed:
Now must the world point at poor Katherine,
And say, lo, there is man Petruchio's wife
If it would please him come and marry her.
Patience good Katherine and Baptist too,
Upon my life Petruchio means but well,
What ever fortune stays him from his word,
Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise,
Though he be merry, yet withal he's honest.
Would Katherine had never seen him though.
Go girl, I cannot blame thee now to weep,
For such an injury would vex a very saint,
Much more a shrew of impatient humour.
Master, master, news, and such news as you never heard of,
Is it new and old too? how may that be?
Why, is it not news to heard of Petruchio's coming?
Is he come?
Why no sir.
What then?
He is coming.
When will he be here?
When he stands where I am, and sees you there.
But say, what to thine old news?
Why Petruchio is coming, in a new hat and an old jerkin, a pair of old breeches thrice turned; a pair of boots that have been candle-cases, one buck∣led, another laced: an old rusty sword tan out of the Town Armoury, with a broken hilt, and chapelesse: with two broken points: his horse hipped with an old mo∣thy saddle, and stirrups of no kindred: besides possessed with the glanders, and like to moss in the chine, trow∣bled with the Lampasse, infected with the fashions, full of Windegalls, sped with Spauins, raied with the Yale∣lowes, past cure of the Fiues, stark spoiled with the Staggers, begnawn with the Bots, Waid in the back, and shoulder-shotten, near legged before, and with a halfe-chekt Bit, &amp; a headstall of sheep leather, which being restrained to keep him from stumbling, hath been often burst, and now repaired with knots: one girth six times pieced, and a women's Crupper of valor, which hath two letters for her name, fairly set down in studs, and here and there pieced with packthred.
Who comes with him?
Oh sir, his Lackey, for all the world Compare∣son'd like the horse: with a linen stock on one leg, and a kersey boot-hose on the other, gartred with a red and blew lift; an old hat, &amp; the humour of forty fancies pricked in it for a feather: a monster, a very monster in apparel, &amp; not like a Christian foot-boy, or a gentleman's Lackey.
It is some od humour pricks him to this fashion,
Yet oftentimes he goes but mean apparelled.
I am glad he's come, howsoever he comes.
Why sir, he comes not.
Did thou not say hee comes?
Who, that Petruchio came?
I, that Petruchio came.
No sir, I say his horse comes with him on his back.
Why that's all one.
Nay by S. Iamy, I hold you a penny, a horse and a man is more then one, and yet not many.
Come, where be these gallants? who's at home?
You are welcome sir.
And yet I come not well.
And yet you halt not.
Not so well apparelled as I wish you were.
Were it better I should rush in thus:
But where is Kate? where is my lovely Bride?
How does my father? gentles methinkes you frown,
And wherefore gaze this goodly company,
As if they saw some wondrous monument,
Some Commit, or unusual prodigy?
Why sir, you know this is your wedding day▪
First were we sad, fearing you would not come,
Now sadder that you come so unprovided:
Fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate,
An eye-sore to our solemn festival.
And tell vs what occasion of import
Hath all so long detained you from your wife,
And sent you hither so unlike your self?
Tedious it were to tell, and harsh to hear,
Suffices I am come to keep my word.
Though in some part enforced to digress,
Which at more leisure I will so excuse,
As you shall well be satisfied with all▪
But where is Kate? I stay too long from her,
The morning wears, it is time we were at Church.
See not your Bride in these irreverent robes,
Go to my chamber, put on clothes of mine.
Not I, believe me, thus Isle visit her.
But thus I trust you will not marry her.
Good sooth even thus: therefore ha done with words,
To me she's married, not unto my clothes:
Could I repair what she will wear in me,
As I can change these poor accoutrements,
It were well for Kate, and better for my self.
But what a fool am I to chat with you,
When I should bid good morrow to my Bride?
And seal the title with a lovely kiss.
He hath some meaning in his mad attire,
We will persuade him be it possible,
To put on better ere he go to Church.
Isle after him, and see the event of this.
But sir, Love concerns vs to add
Her fathers liking, which to bring to pass
As before imparted to your worship,
I am to get a man what ere he be,
It skills not much, weal fit him to our turn,
And he shall be Vincentio of Pisa,
And make assurance here in Padua
Of greater sums then I have promised,
So shall you quietly enjoy your hope,
And marry sweet Bianca with consent.
Were it not that my fellow schoolmaster
Doth watch Bianca's steps so narrowly:
It were good me-thinkes to steal our marriage,
Which once performed, let all the world say no,
Isle keep mine own despite of all the world.
That by degrees we mean to look into,
And watch our vantage in this business,
We'll ouer-reach the grey-beard Gremio,
The narrow prying father Minola,
The quaint Musician, amorous Litio,
All for my Masters sake Lucentio.
Signior Gremio, came you from the Church?
As willingly as ere I came from school.
And is the Bride &amp; Bridegroom coming home?
A bridegroom say you? it is a groom indeed,
A grumlling groom, and that the girl shall find.
Curster then she, why it is impossible.
Why hoe's a devil, a devil, a very fiend.
Why she's a devil, a devil, the devils damme.
Tut, she's a Lamb, a Dove, a fool to him:
Isle tell you sir Lucentio; when the Priest
Should ask if Katherine should be his wife,
I, by goggs woones quoth he, and swore so loud,
That all amazed the Priest let fall the book,
And as he stooped again to take it up,
This mad-brain'd bridegroom took him such a cuff,
That down sell Priest and book, and book and Priest,
Now take them up quoth he, if any list.
What said the wench when he rose again?
Trembled and shook: for why, he stamped and swore, as if the Vicar meant to cozen him: but after ma∣ny ceremonies done, hee calls for wine, a health quoth he, as if he had been aboard carousing to his Mates af∣la a storm, quaft off the Muscatel, and threw the sops all in the Sextons face: having no other reason, but that his beard grew thin and hungerly, and seemed to ask him sops as hee was drinking: This done, hee took the Bride about the neck, and kissed her lips with such a cla∣morose smack, that at the parting all the Church did echo: and I seeing this, came thence for very shame, and after me I know the rout is coming, such a mad mar∣ryage never was before: hark, hark, I hear the min∣strels play.
Gentlemen &amp; friends, I thank you for your pains,
I know you think to dine with me to day,
And have prepared great store of wedding cheer,
But so it is, my haste doth call me hence,
And therefore here I mean to take my leave.
Is it possible you will away to night?
I must away to day before night come,
Make it no wonder: if you knew my business,
You would entreat me rather go then stay:
And honest company, I thank you all,
That have beheld me give away my self
To this most patient, sweet, and virtuous wife,
Dine with my father, drink a health to me,
For I must hence, and farewell to you all.
Let vs entreat you stay till after dinner.
It may not be.
Let me entreat you.
It cannot be.
Let me entreat you.
I am content.
Are you content to stay?
I am content you shall entreat me stay,
But yet not stay, entreat me how you can.
Now if you love me stay.
Grumio, my horse.
I sir, they be ready, the Oats have eaten the horses.
Nay then,
Doe what thou can, I will not go to day,
No, nor to morrow, not till I please my self,
The door is open sir, there lies your way,
You may be jogging whiles your boots are greene:
For me, Isle not be gone till I please my self,
It is like you'll prove a jolly surly groom,
That take it on you at the first so roundly.
O Kate content thee, prithee be not angry.
I will be angry, what hast thou to doe?
Father, be quiet, he shall stay my leisure.
I marry sir, now it begins to work.
Gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner,
I see a woman may be made a fool
If she had not a spirit to resist.
They shall go forward Kate at thy command,
Obey the Bride you that attend on her.
Go to the feast, revel and domineer,
Carouse full measure to her maiden-head,
Be mad and merry, or go hang your selves:
But for my bonny Kate, she must with me:
Nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret,
I will be master of what is mine own,
She is my goods, my chattels, she is my house,
My household-stuff, my field, my barn,
My horse, my ox, my ass, my any thing,
And here she stands, touch her who ever dare,
Isle bring mine action on the proudest he
That stops my way in Padua: Grumio
Draw forth thy weapon, we are beset with thieves,
Rescue thy Mistress if thou be a man:
Fear not sweet wench, they shall not touch thee Kate,
Isle buckler thee against a Million.
Nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.
Went they not quickly, I should die with laugh∣ing.
Of all mad matches never was the like.
Mistress, what is your opinion of your sister?
That being mad her self, she's madly mated.
I warrant him Petruchio is Kited.
Neighbours and friends, though Bride &amp; Bride∣groom wants
For to supply the places at the table,
You know there wants no junkets at the feast:
Lucentio, you shall supply the Bridegrooms place,
And let Bianca take her sisters room.
Shall sweet Bianca practise how to bride it?
She shall Lucentio: come gentlemen lets go.
Fie, fie on all tired Jade, on all mad Masters, &amp; all foul ways: was ever man so beaten? was ever man so raide? was ever man so weary? I am sent before to make a fire, and they are coming after to warm them: now were not I a little pot, &amp; soon hot; my very lips might freeze to my teeth, my tongue to the roof of my mouth, my heart in my belly, ere I should come by a fire to thaw me, but I with blowing the fire shall warm my self: for considering the weather, a taller man then I will take cold: Holla, hoe Curtis.
Who is that calls so coldly?
A piece of Ice: if thou doubt it, thou moist slide from my shoulder to my heel, with no
greater a run but my head and my neck. A fire good Curtis.
Is my master and his wife coming Grumio?
Oh I Curtis I, and therefore fire, fire, cast on no water.
Is she so hot a shrew as she's reported.
She was good Curtis before this frost: but thou know winter tames man, woman, and beast: for it hath tamed my old master, and my new mistress, and my self fellow Curtis.
Away you three inch fool, I am no beast.
Am I but three inches? Why thy horn is a foot and so long am I at the least. But wilt thou make a fire, or shall I complain on thee to our mistress, whose hand (she being now at hand) thou shalt soon feel, to thy cold comfort, for being slow in thy hot office.
I prithee good Grumio, tell me, how goes the world?
A cold world Curtis in every office but thine, &amp; therefore fire: do thy duty, and have thy duty, for my Master and mistress are almost frozen to death.
There's fire ready, and therefore good Grumio the news.
Why Jack boy, ho boy, and as much news as wilt thou.
Come, you are so full of conicatching.
Why therefore fire, for I have caught extreme cold. Whore's the Cooke, is supper ready, the house trimmed, rushes strewed, cobwebs swept, the serving-men in their new fustian, the white stockings, and every off∣cer his wedding garment on? Be the Jacks fair with∣in, the Gels fai• without, the Carpets laid, and every thing in order?
All ready: and therefore I pray thee news.
First know my horse is tired, my master &amp; mi∣stress fallen out.
How?
Out of their saddles into the dirt, and thereby hangs a tale.
Let's have it good Grumio.
Lend thine ear.
Here.
There.
This it is to feel a tale, not to hear a tale.
And therefore it is called a sensible tale: and this Cuff was but to knock at your ear, and beseech list∣ning: now I begin, Inprimis wee came down a foul hill, my Master riding behind my Mistress.
Both of one horse?
What's that to thee?
Why a horse.
Tell thou the tale: but had thou not crossed me, thou should have heard how her horse fell, and she un∣der her horse: thou should have heard in how miery a place, how she was bemoil'd, how hee left her with the horse upon her, how he beat me because her horse stum∣bled, how she waded through the dirt to pluck him off me: how he swore, how she prayed, that never prayed be∣fore: how I cried, how the horses ran away, how her bridle was burst: how I lost my crupper, with many things of worthy memory, which now shall die in obli∣uion, and thou return unexperienced to thy grave.
By this reckoning he is more shrew than she.
I, and that thou and the proudest of you all shall find when he comes home. But what talk I of this? Call forth Nathaniel, Ioseph, Nicholas, Phillip, Walter, Su∣gersop and the rest: let their heads bee slickly combed, their blew coats brushed, and their garters of an indiffe∣rent knit, let them curtsy with their left legs, and not presume to touch a hair of my Masters horse-taile, till they kiss their hands. Are they all ready?
They are.
Call them forth.
Do you hear ho? you must meet my moister to countenance my mistress.
Why she hath a face of her own.
Who knows not that?
Thou it seems, that calls for company to coun∣tenance her.
I call them forth to credit her.
Why she comes to borrow nothing of them.
Welcome home Grumio.
How now Grumio.
What Grumio.
Fellow Grumio.
How now old lad.
Welcome you: how now you: what you: fell∣low you: and thus much for greeting. Now my spruce companions, is all ready, and all things neat?
All things is ready, how near is our master?
Even at hand, alighted by this: and therefore be not—Cocks passion, silence, I hear my master.
Where be these knaves? What no man at door
To hold my stirrup, nor to take my horse?
Where is Nathaniel, Gregory, Phillip.
Here, here sir, here sir.
Here sir, here sir, here sir, here sir.
You logger-headed and unpolished grooms:
What? no attendance? no regard? no duty?
Where is the foolish knave I sent before?
Here sir, as foolish as I was before.
You peasant, swain, you whoreson malt-horse drudge
Did I not bid thee meet me in the Park,
And bring along these rascal knaves with thee?
Nathaniels coat sir was not fully made,
And Gabrels pumps were all vnpinkt in th heel:
There was no Link to colour Peters hat,
And Walters dagger was not come from sheathing:
There were none fine, but Adam, Raf, and Gregory,
The rest were ragged, old, and beggarly,
Yet as they are, here are they come to meet you.
Go rascals, go, and fetch my supper in.
Where is the life that late I led?
Where are those? Sit down Kate,
And welcome. Soud, soud, soud, soud.
Why when I say? Nay good sweet Kate be merry.
Off with my boots, you rogues: you villains, when?
It was the Friar of Orders gray,
As he forth walked on his way.
Out you rogue, you pluck my foot awry,
Take that, and mend the plucking of the other.
Be merry Kate: Some water here: what hoe.
Whore's my Spaniel Troilus? Sir, get you hence,
And bid my cozen Ferdinand come hither:
One Kate that you must kiss, and be acquainted with.
Where are my Slippers? Shall I have some water?
Come Kate and wash, &amp; welcome heartily:
you whoreson villain, will you let it fall?
Patience I pray you, it was a fault unwilling.
A whoreson beetle-headed flap-ear'd knave:
Come Kate sit down, I know you have a stomach,
Will you give thanks, sweet Kate, or else shall I?
What's this, Mutton?
I.
Who brought it?
I.
It is burnt, and so is all the meat:
What dogs are these? Where is the rascal Cooke?
How durst you villains bring it from the dresser
And serve it thus to me that love it not?
There, take it to you, trenchers, cups, and all:
You heedless iolt-heads, and unmannered slaves.
What, do you grumble? Isle be with you straight.
I pray you husband be not so disquiet,
The meat was well, if you were so contented.
I tell thee Kate, it was burnt and dried away,
And I expressly am forbid to touch it:
For it engenders choler, plants anger,
And better it were that both of vs did fast,
Since of our selves, our selves are choleric,
Then feed it with such ouer-rosted flesh:
Be patient, to morrow't shall be mended,
And for this night we will fast for company.
Come I will bring thee to thy Bridal chamber.
Peter did ever see the like.
He kills her in her own humour.
Where is he?
In her chamber, making a sermon of continen∣cie to her, and rails, and swears, and rates, that she (poor soul) knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak, and sits as one new risen from a dream. A∣way, away, for he is coming hither.
Thus have I politickely begun my reign,
And it is my hope to end successfully:
My Falcon now is sharpe, and passing empty,
And till she stoop, she must not be full gorged,
For then she never looks upon her lure.
Another way I have to man my Haggard,
To make her come, and know her Keepers call:
That is, to watch her, as we watch these Kites,
That bait, and bear, and will not be obedient:
She eat no meat to day, nor none shall eat.
Last night she slept not, nor to night she shall not:
As with the meat, some undeserved fault
Isle find about the making of the bed,
And here Isle fling the pillow, there the bolster,
This way the Coverlet, another way the sheets:
I, and amid this hurly I intend,
That all is done in reverend care of her,
And in conclusion, she shall watch all night,
And if she chance to nod, Isle rail and brawl,
And with the clamour keep her still awake:
This is a way to kill a Wife with kindness,
And thus Isle curb her mad and headstrong humour:
He that knows better how to tame a shrew,
Now let him speak, it is charity to show.
Is it possible friend Lisio, that mistress Bianca
Doth fancy any other but Lucentio,
I tel you sir, she bears me fair in hand.
Sir, to satisfy you in what I have said,
Stand by, and mark the manner of his teaching.
Now Mistress, profit you in what you read?
What Master read you first, resolve me that?
I read, that I profess the Art to love.
And may you prove sir Master of your Art.
While you sweet dear ptoue Mistress of my heart.
Quick proceeders marry, now tel me I pray, you that durst swear that your mistress Bianca Loved me in the World so well as Lucentio.
Oh despiteful Love, inconstant womankind,
I tel thee Lisio this is wonderful.
Mistake no more, I am not Lisio,
Nor a Musician as I seem to bee,
But one that scorn to live in this disguise,
For such a one as leaves a Gentleman,
And makes a God of such a Cullion;
Know sir, that I am called Hortensio.
Signior Hortensio, I have often heard
Of your entire affection to Bianca,
And since mine eyes are witness of her lightness,
I will with you, if you be so contented,
Forswear Bianca, and her love for ever.
See how they kiss and court: Signior Lucentio,
Here is my hand, and here I firmly vow
Never to woo her more, but do forswear her
As one unworthy all the former favours
That I have fondly flattered them withal.
And here I take the like unfeigned oath,
Never to marry with her, though she would entreat,
Fie on her, see how beastly she doth court him.
Would all the world but he had quite forsworn
For me, that I may surely keep mine oath.
I will be married to a wealthy Widow,
Ere three days pass, which hath as long loved me,
As I have loved this proud disdainful Haggard,
And so farewell signior Lucentio,
Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks
Shall win my love, and so I take my leave,
In resolution, as I swore before.
Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace,
As longs to a Lovers blessed case:
Nay, I have tan you napping gentle Love,
And have forsworn you with Hortensio.
Tranio you jest, but have you both forsworn me?
Mistress we have.
Then we are rid of Lisio.
In faith he will have a lusty Widow now,
That shall be wooed, and wedded in a day.
God give him joy.
I, and he will tame her.
He says so Tranio.
Faith he is gone unto the taming school.
The taming school: what is there such a place?
I mistress, and Petruchio is the master,
That teaches tricks eleven and twenty long,
To tame a shrew, and charm her chattering tongue.
Oh Master, master I have watched so long,
That I am dogge-wearie, but at last I spied
An ancient Angel coming down the hill,
Will serve the turn.
What is he Biondello?
Master, a Marcantant, or a pedant,
I know not what, but formal in apparel,
In gate and countenance surely like a Father.
And what of him Tranio?
If he be credulous, and trust my tale,
Isle make him glad to seem Vincentio,
And give assurance to Baptist Minola.
As if he were the right Ʋincentio.
Take me your love, and then let me alone.
God save you sir.
And you sir, you are welcome,
Travail you far on, or are you at the farthest?
Sir at the farthest for a week or two,
But then up farther, and as far as Rome,
And so to Tripolie, if God lend me life.
What Countryman I pray?
Of Mantua.
Of Mantua Sir, marry God forbid,
And come to Padua careless of your life.
My life sir? how I pray? for that goes hard.
It is death for any one in Mantua
To come to Padua, know you not the cause?
Your ships are staid at Venice, and the Duke
For private quarrel twixt your Duke and him,
Hath published and proclaimed it openly:
It is marvel, but that you are but newly come,
you might have heard it else proclaimed about.
Alas sir, it is worse for me then so,
For I have bills for money by exchange
From Florence, and must here deliver them.
Well sir, to do you curtsy,
This will I do, and this I will advise you.
First tell me, have you ever been at Pisa?
I sir, in Pisa have I often bin,
Pisa renowned for grave Citizens.
Among them know you one Vincentio?
I know him not, but I have heard of him:
A Merchant of incomparable wealth.
He is my father sir, and sooth to say,
In countenance somewhat doth resemble you.
As much as an apple doth an oyster, &amp; all one.
To save your life in this extremity,
This favour will I do you for his sake,
And think it not the worst of all your fortunes,
That you are like to Sir Vincentio.
His name and credit shall you undertake,
And in my house you shall be friendly lodged,
Look that you take upon you as you should,
you understand me sir: so shall you stay
Till you have done your business in the City:
If this be curtsy sir, accept of it.
Oh sir I do, and will repute you ever
The patron of my life and liberty.
Then go with me, to make the matter good,
This by the way I let you understand,
My father is here looked for every day,
To pass assurance of a dowre in marriage
Twixt me, and one Baptistas daughter here:
In all these circumstances Isle instruct you,
Go with me to cloth you as becomes you.
No, no forsooth I dare not for my life.
The more my wrong, the more his spite appears,
What, did he marry me to famish me?
Beggars that come unto my fathers door,
Upon entreaty have a present alms,
If not, elsewhere they meet with charity:
But I, who never knew how to entreat,
Nor never needed that I should entreat,
Am starved for meat▪ giddy for lack of sleep:
With oaths kept waking, and with brawling fed,
And that which spights me more then all these wants,
He does it under name of perfect love:
As who should say▪ if I should sleep or eat▪
It were deadly sickness, or else present death.
I prithee go, and get me some repast,
I care not what, so it be wholesome soot.
What say you to a Nets foot?
It is passing good, I prithee let me have it.
I fear it is too choleric a meat.
How say you to a fat Tripe finely broiled?
I like it well, good Grumio fetch it me.
I cannot tell, I fear it is choleric.
What say you to a piece of Beef and Mustard?
A dish that I do love to feed upon.
I, but the Mustard is too hot a little.
Why then the Beef, and let the Mustard rest.
Nay then I will not, you shall have the Mustard
Or else you get no beef of Grumio.
Then both or one, or any thing thou wilt.
Why then the Mustard without the beef.
Go get thee gone, thou false deluding slave,
That feed me with the very name of meat.
Sorrow on thee, and all the pack of you
That triumph thus upon my misery:
Go get thee gone, I say.
How fares my Kate, what sweating all a-mort?
Mistress, what cheer?
Faith as cold as can be.
Pluck up thy spirits, look cheerfully upon me.
Here Love, thou see how diligent I am,
To dress thy meat my self, and bring it thee.
I am sure sweet Kate, this kindness merits thanks.
What, not a word? Nay then, thou love it not:
And all my pains is sorted to no proof.
Here take away this dish.
I pray you let it stand.
The poorest service is repaid with thanks,
And so shall mine before you touch the meat.
I thank you sir.
Signior Petruchio, fie you are too blame:
Come Mistress Kate, Isle bear you company.
Eat it up all Hortensio, if thou love me:
Much good do it unto thy gentle heart:
Kate eat apace; and now my honey Love,
Will we return unto thy Fathers house,
And revel it as bravely as the best,
With silken coats and caps, and golden Rings,
With Ruffs and Cuffs, and Fardingales, and things:
With Scarfs, and Fans, &amp; double change of bravery,
With Amber Bracelets, Beads, and all this knau'ry.
What hast thou dined? The Tailor stays thy leisure,
To deck thy body with his ruffling treasure.
Come Tailor, let vs see these ornaments.
Lay forth the gown. What news with you sir?
Here is the cap your Worship did bespeak.
Why this was moulded on a porringer,
A Velvet dish: Fie, fie, it is lewd and filthy,
Why it is a cockle or a walnut-shell,
A knack, a toy, a trick, a babies cap:
Away with it, come let me have a bigger.
Isle have no bigger, this doth fit the time,
And Gentlewomen wear such caps as these.
When you are gentle, you shall have one too,
And not till then.
That will not be in hast.
Why sir I trust I may have leave to speak,
And speak I will. I am no child, no babe,
Your betters have endured me say my mind,
And If you cannot, best you stop your ears.
My tongue will tell the anger of my heart,
Or else my heart concealing it will break,
And rather then it shall, I will be free,
Even to the uttermost as I please in words.
Why thou say true, it is paltry cap,
A custard coffin, a bauble, a silken pie,
I love thee well in that thou lik'st it not.
Love me, or love me not, I like the cap,
And it I will have, or I will have none.
Thy gown, why I: come Tailor let vs see it.
Oh mercy God, what masking stuff is here?
Whats this? a sleeve? it is like demi cannon,
What, up and down carved like an apple Tart?
Heers snip, and nip, and cut, and slish and slash,
Like to a Censor in a barbers shop:
Why what a devils name Tailor call thou this?
I see shees like to have neither cap nor gown.
You bid me make it orderly and well,
According to the fashion, and the time.
Marry and did: but if you be remembered,
I did not bid you mar it to the time▪
Go hop me over every kennel home,
For you shall hop without my custom sir:
Isle none of it; hence, make your best of it.
I never saw a better fashioned gown,
More quaint, more pleasing, nor more commendable:
Belike you mean to make a puppet of me.
Why true, he means to make a puppet of thee.
She says your Worship means to make a puppet of her.
Oh monstrous arrogance:
Thou lie, thou thread, thou thimble,
Thou yard three quarters, half yard, quarter, nail,
Thou Flea, thou Nit, thou winter cricket thou:
Braved in mine own house with a skein of thread:
Away thou Rag, thou quantity, thou remnant,
Or I shall so be-mete thee with thy yard,
As thou shalt think on prating whilst thou liu'st:
I tell thee I, that thou hast marred her gown.
Your worship is deceived, the gown is made
Just as my master had direction:
Grumio gave order how it should be done.
I gave him no order, I gave him the stuff.
But how did you desire it should be made?
Marry sir with needle and thread.
But did you not request to have it cut?
Thou hast faced many things.
I have.
Face not me: thou hast braved many men, brave not me; I will neither bee faced nor braved. I say unto thee, I bid thy Master cut out the gown, but I did not bid him cut it to pieces. Ergo thou least.
Why here is the note of the fashion to testify.
Read it.
The note lies in's throat if he say I said so.
Inprimis, a loose bodied gown.
Master, if ever I said loose-bodied gown, sow me in the skirts of it, and beat me to death with a boat∣tome of browne thread: I said a gown.
Proceed.
With a small compassed cape.
I confess the cape.
With a trunk sleeve.
I confess two sleeves.
The sleeves curiously cut.
I there's the villainy.
Error in th bill sir, error in th bill? I commanded the sleeves should be cut out, and sowed up again, and that Isle prove upon thee, though thy little finger be are∣med in a thimble.
This is true that I say, and I had thee in place where thou should know it.
I am for thee straight: take thou the bill, give me thy meat-yard, and spare not me.
God-a-mercie Grumio, then hee shall have no odds.
Well sir in brief the gown is not for me.
You are in th right sir, it is for my mistress.
Go take it up unto thy masters use.
Villain, not for thy life: Take up my Mistress gown for thy masters use.
Why sir, what's your conceit in that?
Oh sir, the conceit is deeper then you think for:
Take up my Mistress gown to his masters use.
Oh fie, fie, fie.
Hortensio, say thou wilt see the Tailor paid:
Go take it hence, be gone, and say no more.
Tailor, Isle pay thee for thy gown to morrow,
Take no unkindness of his hasty words:
Away I say, commend me to thy master.
Well, come my Kate, we will unto your fathers,
Even in these honest mean habiliments:
Our purses shall be proud, our garments poor:
For it is the mind that makes the body rich.
And as the Sun breaks through the darkest clouds,
So honour peers in the meanest habit.
What is the Iay more precious then the Lark?
Because his feathers are more beautiful.
Or is the Adder better then the Eel▪
Because his painted skin contents the eye.
Oh no good Kate: neither art thou the worse
For this poor furniture, and mean array.
If thou accounted it shame, lay it on me,
And therefore frolic, we will hence forthwith,
To feast and sport vs at thy fathers house,
Go call my men, and let vs straight to him,
And bring our horses unto Long-lane end,
There will we mount, and thither walk on foot,
Let's see, I think it is now some seven a clock,
And well we may come there by dinner time.
I dare assure you sir, it is almost two,
And twill be supper time ere you come there.
It shall be seven ere I go to horse:
Look what I speak, or do, or think to doe,
You are still crossing it, sirs let it alone,
I will not go to day, and ere I doe,
It shall be what a clock I say it is.
Why so this gallant will command the sun.
Sirs, this is the house, please it you that I call.
I what else, and but I be deceived,
Signior Baptist may remember me
Near twenty years a go in Genoa.
Where we were lodgers, at the Pegasus,
Tic well, and hold your own in any case
With such austerity as longs to a father.
I warrant you: but sir here comes your boy,
It were good he were schooled.
Fear you not him: sir Biondello,
Now doe your duty thoroughly I advise you:
Imagine it were the right Vincentio.
Tut, fear not me.
But hast thou done thy errand to Baptist.
I told him that your father was at Venice,
And that you looked for him this day in Padua.
The art a tall fellow, hold thee that to drink,
Here comes Baptist: set your countenance sir.
Signior Baptist you are happily met:
Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of,
I pray you stand good father to me now,
Give me Bianca for my patrimony.
Soft son: sir by your leave, having com to Padua
To gather in some debts, my son Lucentio
Made me acquainted with a weighty cause
Of love between your daughter and himself:
And for the good report I hear of you,
And for the love he bears to your daughter,
And she to him: to stay him not too long,
I am content in a good fathers care
To have him matched, and if you please to like
No worse then I, upon some agreement
Me shall you find ready and willing
With one consent to have her so bestowed:
For curious I cannot be with you
Signior Baptist, of whom I hear so well.
Sir, pardon me in what I have to say,
Your plainness and your shortness please me well:
Right true it is your son Lucentio here
Doth love my daughter, and she loves him,
Or both dissemble deeply their affections:
And therefore if you say no more then this,
That like a Father you will deal with him,
And pass my daughter a sufficient dower,
The match is made, and all is done,
Your son shall have my daughter with consent.
I thank you sir, where then doe you know best
We be affied and such assurance tan,
As shall with either parts agreement stand.
Not in my house Lucentio, for you know
Pitchers have ears, and I have many servants,
Besides old Gremio is harkening still,
And happily we might be interrupted.
Then at my lodging, and it like you,
There doth my father lie: and there this night
Weal pass the business privately and well:
Send for your daughter by your servant here,
My Boy shall fetch the Scrivener presently,
The worst is this that at so slender warning,
You are like to have a thin and slender pittance.
It likes me well:
Cambio hie you home, and bid Bianca make her ready straight:
And if you will tell what hath happened,
Lucentios Father is arrived in Padua,
And how she's like to be Lucentios wife.
I pray the gods she may withal my heart.
Dally not with the gods, but get thee gone.
Signior Baptist, shall I lead the way,
Welcome, one mess is like to be your cheer,
Come sir, we will better it in Pisa.
I follow you.
Cambio.
What say thou Biondello.
You saw my Master wink and laugh upon you?
Biondello, what of that?
Faith nothing: but has left me here behind to expound the meaning or moral of his signs and to∣kens.
I pray thee moralise them.
Then thus: Baptist is safe talking with the deceiving Father of a deceitful son.
And what of him?
His daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.
And then.
The old Priest at Saint Lukes Church is at your command at all hours.
And what of all this.
I cannot tell, expect they are busied about a counterfeit assurance: take you assurance of her, Cum preuilegio ad Impremendum solemn, to the Church take the Priest, Clarke, and some sufficient honest witnesses:
If this be not that you look for, I have no more to say,
But bid Bianca farewell for ever and a day.
Hear thou Biondello.
I cannot tarry: I knew a wench married in an afternoon as she went to the Garden for Parseley to stuff a Rabit, and so may you sir: and so adieu sir, my Master hath appointed me to go to Saint Lukes to bid the Priest be ready to come against you come with your appendix.
I may and will, if she be so contented:
She will be pleased, then wherefore should I doubt:
Hap what hap may, Isle roundly go about her:
It shall go hard if Cambio go without her.
Come on a Gods name, once more toward our fathers:
Good Lord how bright and goodly shines the Moon.
The Moon, the Sun: it is not Moonelight now.
I say it is the Moon that shines so bright.
I know it is the Sun that shines so bright.
Now by my mothers son, and that's my self,
It shall be moon, or star, or what I list,
Or ere I journey to your Fathers house:
Go on, and fetch our horses back again,
Evermore crossed and crossed, nothing but crossed.
Say as he says, or we shall never go.
Forward I pray, since we have come so far,
And be it moon, or sun, or what you please:
And if you please to call it a rush Candle,
Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me.
I say it is the Moon.
I know it is the Moon.
Nay then you lye: it is the blessed Sun.
Then God be blessed, it in the blessed sun,
But sun it is not, when you say it is not▪
And the Moon changes even as your mind:
What you will have it named, even that it is,
And so it shall be so for Katherine.
Petruchio, go thy ways, the field is won.
Well, forward, forward, thus the bowl should run,
And not unluckily against the Bias:
But soft, Company is coming here▪
Good morrow gentle Mistress, where away:
Tell me sweet Kate, and tell me truly too,
Hast thou beheld a fresher Gentlewoman:
Such war of white and red within her cheeks:
What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty,
As those two eyes become that heavenly face?
Fair lovely Maid, once more good day to thee:
Sweet Kate embrace her for her beauties sake.
A will make the man mad to make the woman of him.
Young budding Virgin, fair, and fresh, &amp; sweet,
Whether away, or whether is thy abode?
Happy the Parents of so fair a child;
Happier the man whom favourable stars
A lots thee for his lovely bedfellow.
Why how now Kate, I hope thou art not mad,
This is a man old, wrinkled, faded, withered,
And not a Maiden, as thou say he is.
Pardon old father my mistaking eyes,
That have bin so bedazzled with the sun,
That every thing I look on seems greene:
Now I perceive thou art a reverent Father:
Pardon I pray thee for my mad mistaking.
Do good old grandsire, &amp; withal make known
Which way thou trauellest, if along with vs,
We shall be joyful of thy company.
Fair Sir, and you my merry Mistress,
That with your strange encounter much amazed me:
My name is called Vincentio, my dwelling Pisa,
And bound I am to Padua, there to visit
A son of mine, which long I have not seen.
What is his name?
Lucentio gentle sir.
Happily met, the happier for thy son:
And now by Law, as well as reverent age,
I may entitle thee my loving Father,
The sister to my wife, this Gentlewoman,
Thy Son by this hath married: wonder not,
Nor be not grieved, she is of good esteem,
Her dowry wealthy, and of worthy birth;
Beside, so qualified, as may beseem
The Spouse of any noble Gentleman:
Let me embrace with old Vincentio,
And wander we to see thy honest son,
Who will of thy arrival be full joyous.
But is this true, or is it else your pleasure,
Like pleasant trauailors to break a left
Upon the company you overtake?
I doe assure thee father so it is.
Come go along and see the truth hereof,
For our first merriment hath made thee jealous.
Well Petruchio, this has put me in heart;
Have to my Widow, and if she froward,
Then hast thou taught Hortentio to be untoward.
Softly and swiftly sir, for the Priest is ready.
I fly Biondello; but they may chance to need thee at home, therefore leave vs.
Nay faith, Isle see the Church a your back, and then come back to my mistress as soon as I can.
I marvel Cambio comes not all this while.
Sir here is the door, this is Lucentios house,
My Fathers bears more toward the Market-place,
Thither must I, and here I leave you sir.
You shall not choose but drink before you go,
I think I shall command your welcome here;
And by all likelihood some cheer is toward.
They're busy within, you were best knock louder.
What's he that knocks as he would beat down the gate?
Is Signior Lucentio within sir?
He's within sir, but not to be spoken withal.
What if a man bring him a hundred pound or two to make merry withal.
Keep your hundred pounds to your self, hee shall need none so long as I live.
Nay, I told you your son was well beloved in Padua: doe you hear sir, to leave frivolous circumstan∣ces, I pray you tell signior Lucentio that his Father is come from Pisa, and is here at the door to speak with him.
Thou least his Father is come from Padua, and here looking out at the window.
Art thou his father?
I sir, so his mother says, if I may believe her.
Why how now gentleman: why this is flat kna∣very to take upon you another mans name.
Lay hands on the villain, I believe a means to cousin some body in this City under my countenance.
I have seen them in the Church together, God send'em good shipping: but who is here? mine old Ma∣ster Ʋincentio: now wee are undone and brough to no∣thing.
Come hither crackhempe.
I hope I may choose Sir.
Come hither you rogue, what have you forgot me?
Forgot you, no sir: I could not forget you, for I never saw you before in all my life.
What, you notorious villain, did thou never see thy Mistress father, Vincentio?
What my old worshipful old master? yes marie sir see where he looks out of the window.
First so indeed.
Help, help, help, here's a mad man will mur∣der me.
Help, son, help signior Baptist.
Pree the Kate let's stand aside and see the end of this controversy.
Sir, what are you that offer to beat my ser∣uant?
What am I sir: nay what are you sir: oh immor∣tall Gods: oh fine villain, a silken doubtlet, a vel∣uet hose, a scarlet cloak, and a copataine hat: oh I am undone, I am undone: while I play the good husband at home, my son and my servant spend all at the uni∣uersitie.
How now, what's the matter?
What is the man lunatic?
Sir, you seem a sober ancient Gentleman by your habit: but your words show you a mad man: why sir, what corns it you, if I wear Pearl and gold: I thank my good Father, I am able to maintain it.
Thy father: oh villain, he is a Saile-maker in Bergamo.
You mistake sir, you mistake sir, pray what do you think is his name?
His name, as if I knew not his name: I have brought him up ever since he was three years old, and his name is Tronio.
Away, away mad ass, his name is Lucentio, and he is mine only son and heir to the Lands of me sig∣nior Vincentio.
Lucentio: oh he hath murdered his Master; lay hold on him I charge you in the Dukes name: oh my son, my son: tell me thou villain, where is my son Lucentio?
Call forth an officer: Carry this mad knave to the Jail: father Baptist, I charge you see that hee be forth coming.
Carry me to the Jail?
Stay officer, he shall not go to prison.
Talk not signior Gremio: I say he shall go to prison.
Take heed signior Baptist, least you be coni∣caught in this business: I dare swear this is the right Vincentio.
Swear if thou dare.
Nay, I dare not swear it.
Then thou were best say that I am not Lu∣centio.
Yes, I know thee to be signior Lucentio.
Away with the dotard, to the Jail with him.
Thus strangers may be held and abused: oh mon∣strous villain.
Oh we are spoiled, and yonder he is, deny him, forswear him, or else we are all undone.
Pardon sweet father.
Lives my sweet son?
Pardon dear father.
How hast thou offended, where is Lucentio?
Here's Lucentio, right son to the right Ʋin∣centio,
That have by marriage made thy daughter mine,
While counterfeit supposes bleared thine eine.
Here's packing with a witness to deceive vs all.
Where is that damned villain Tranio,
That faced and braved me in this matter so?
Why, tell me is not this my Cambio?
Cambio is changed into Lucentio.
Love wrought these miracles. Biancas love
Made me exchange my state with Tranio,
While he did bear my countenance in the town,
And happily I have arrived at the last
Unto the wished haven of my bliss:
What Tranio did, my self enforced him to;
Then pardon him sweet Father for my sake.
Isle slit the villains nose that would have sent me to the Jail.
But doe you hear sir, have you married my daughter without asking my good will?
Fear not Baptist, we will content you, go to: but I will in to be revenged for this villainy.
And I to sound the depth of this knavery.
Look not pale Bianca, thy father will not frown.
My cake is doug•h but Isle in among the rest,
Out of hope of all, but my share of the feast.
Husband let's follow, to see the end of this ado.
First kiss me Kate, and we will.
What in the midst of the street?
What art thou ashamed of me?
Mo sir, God forbid, but ashamed to kiss.
Why then let's home again: Come Sir let's away.
Nay, I will give thee a kiss, now pray thee Love stay.
Is not this well? come my sweet Kate.
Better once then never, for never to late.
At last, though long, our earring notes agree,
And time it is when raging war is come,
To smile at scopes and perils overblown:
My fair Bianca bid my father welcome,
While I with selfsame kindness welcome thine:
Brother Petruchio, sister Katerina,
And thou Hortentio with thy loving Widow:
Feast with the best, and welcome to my house,
My Banquet is to close our stomachs up
After our great good cheer: pray you sit down,
For now we sit to chat as well as eat.
Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat.
Padua affords this kindness, son Petruchio.
Padua affords nothing but what is kind.
For both our sakes I would that word were true.
Now for my life Hortentio fears his Widow.
Then never trust me if I be afraid.
You are very sensible, and yet you miss my sense:
I mean Hortentio is afraid of you.
He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.
Roundly replied.
Mistress, how mean you that?
Thus I conceive by him.
Conceives by me, how likes Hortentio that?
My Widow says, thus she conceives her tale.
Very well mended: kiss him for that good Widow.
He that is giddy thinks the world turns round,
I pray you tell me what you meant by that.
Your husband being troubled with a shrew,
Measures my husbands sorrow by his woe:
And now you know my meaning.
A very mean meaning.
Right, I mean you.
And I am mean indeed, respecting you.
To her Kate.
To her Widow.
A hundred marks, my Kate does put her down.
That's my office
Spoke like an Officer: ha to the lad.
How likes Cremio these quick wetted folks?
Believe me sir, they But together well.
Head, and but an hasty wetted body,
Would say your Head and But were head and horn.
I Mistress Bride, hath that awakened you?
I, but not frighted me, therefore Isle sleep a∣gain.
Nay that you shall not since you have begun:
Have at you for a better jest or too.
Am I your Bird, I mean to shift my bush,
And then pursue me as you draw your Bow.
You are welcome all.
She hath prevented me, here signior Tranio,
This bird you aimed at, though you hit her not,
Therefore a health to all that shot and mist.
Oh sir, Lucentio slipped me like his Gray-hound,
Which runs himself, and catches for his Master.
A good swift simile, but something currish.
It is well sir that you hunted for your self:
It is thought your Dear does hold you at a bay.
Oh, oh Petruchio, Tranio hits you now.
I thank thee for that gird good Tranio.
Confess, confess, hath he not hit you here?
A has a little gald me I confess:
And as the Jest did glance away from me,
It is ten to one it maimed you too out right.
Now in good sadness son Petruchio,
I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.
Well, I say no: and therefore sir assurance,
Let's each one send unto his wife,
And he whose wife is most obedient,
To come at first when he doth send for her,
Shall win the wager which we will propose.
Content, what's the wager?
Twenty crowns.
Twenty crowns,
Isle venture so much of my Hawk or Hound,
But twenty times so much upon my Wife.
A hundred then.
Content.
A match, it is done.
Who shall begin?
That will I.
Go Biondello, bid your Mistress come to me.
Ego.
Son, Isle be your half, Bianca comes.
Isle have no halues: Isle bear it all my self.
How now, what news?
Sir, my Mistress sends you word
That she is busy, and she cannot come.
How? she's busy, and she cannot come: is that an answer?
I, and a kind one too:
Pray God sir your wife send you not a worse.
I hope better.
Sir Biondello, go and entreat my wife to come to me forthwith.
Oh ho, entreat her, nay then she must needs come.
I am afraid sir, doe what you can
Yours will not be entreated: Now, whore's my wife?
She says you have some goodly Jest in hand,
She will not come: she bids you come to her.
Worse and worse, she will not come:
Oh wild, intolerable, not to be endured:
Sir Grumio, go to your Mistress.
Say I command her come to me.
I know her answer.
What?
She will not.
The fouler fortune mine, and there an end.
Now by my hollidam here comes Katerina.
What is your will sir, that you send for me?
Where is your sister, and Hortensios wife?
They sit conferring by the Parlour fire.
Go fetch them hither, if they deny to come,
Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands.
Away I say, and bring them hither straight.
Here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder.
And so it is: I wonder what it boads.
Marry peace it boads, and love, and quiet life,
An awful rule, and right supremicie:
And to be short, what not, that's sweet and happy.
Now fair befall thee good Petruchio;
The wager thou hast won, and I will add
Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns,
Another dowry to another daughter,
For she is changed as she had never bin.
Nay, I will win my wager better yet,
And show more sign of her obedience,
Her new built virtue and obedience.
See where she comes, and brings your froward Wives
As prisoners to her womanly persuasion:
Katerine, that Cap of yours becomes you not,
Off with that babble, throw it vnderfoote.
Lord let me never have a cause to sigh,
Till I be brought to such a silly pass.
Fie what a foolish duty call you this?
I would your duty were as foolish too:
The wisdom of your duty fair Bianca,
Hath cost me five hundred crowns since supper time.
The more fool you for laying on my duty.
Katherine I charge thee tell these head-strong women, what duty they doe owe their Lords and hus∣bands.
Come, come, your mocking: we will have no telling.
Come on I say, and first begin with her.
She shall not.
I say she shall, and first begin with her.
Fie, fie, vnknit that threatening unkind brow,
And dart not scornful glances from those eyes,
To wound thy Lord, thy King, thy Governor.
It blots thy beauty, as frosts doe bite the Meads,
Confounds thy fame, as whirlewinds shake fair buds,
And in no sense is meet or amiable.
A woman moved, is like a fountain troubled,
Muddy, ill seeming, thick, hereft of beauty,
And while it is so, none so dry or thirsty
Will deign to sip, or touch one drop of it.
Thy husband is thy Lord, thy life, thy keeper,
Thy head, thy sovereign: One that cares for thee,
And for thy maintenance. Commits his body
To painful labour, both by sea and land:
To watch the night in storms, the day in cold,
Whilst thou lie warm at home, secure and safe,
And craves no other tribute at thy hands,
But love, fair looks, and true obedience;
Too little payment for so great a debt.
Such duty as the subject owes the Prince,
Even such a woman owes to her husband:
And when she is froward, peevish, sullen, sour,
And not obedient to his honest will,
What is she but a foul contending Rebel,
And graceless Traitor to her loving Lord?
I am ashamed that women are so simple,
To offer war, where they should kneel for peace:
Or seek for rule, supremacy, and sway,
When they are bound to serve, love, and obey.
Why are our bodies soft, and weak, and smooth,
Unapt to toil and trouble in the world,
But that our soft conditions, and our harts,
Should well agree with our external parts?
Come, come, you froward and unable worms,
My mind hath bin as big as one of yours,
My heart as great, my reason happily more,
To bandy word for word, and frown for frown;
But now I see our Lances are but straws:
Our strength as weak, our weakness past compare,
That seeming to be most, which we indeed least are.
Then vale your stomachs, for it is no boot,
And place your hands below your husbands foot:
In token of which duty, if he please,
My hand is ready, may it do him ease.
Why there's a wench: Come on, and kiss me Kate.
Well go thy ways old Lad for thou shalt have it.
Tic a good hearing, when children are toward.
But a harsh hearing, when women are froward,
Come Kate, weee'le to bed,
We three are married, but you two are sped.
It was I won the wager, though you hit the white,
And being a winner, God give you good night.
Now go thy ways, thou hast tamed a cursed Shrove.
Tic a wonder, by your leave, she will be tamed so.

I Thought the King had more affected the Duke of Albany, then Cornwall.
It did always seem so to vs: But now in the division of the Kingdom, it ap∣pears not which of the Dukes hee valewes most, for qualities are so weighed, that curiosity in nei∣there, can make choice of eiders moity.
Is not this your Son, my Lord?
His breeding Sir, hath bin at my charge. I have so often blushed to acknowledge him, that now I am braz'd too't.
I cannot conceive you.
Sir, this young Fellows mother could; where∣upon she grew round womb'd, and had indeed (Sir) a Son for her Cradle, ere she had a husband for her bed. Do you smell a fault?
I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it, being so proper.
But I have a Son, Sir, by order of Law, some year elder then this; who, yet is no dearer in my ac∣count, though this Knave came something saucily to the world before he was sent for: yet was his Mother fair, there was good sport at his making, and the whoreson must be acknowledged. Doe you know this Noble Gentle∣man, Edmond?
No, my Lord.
My Lord of Kent:
Remember him hereafter, as my Honourable Friend.
My services to your Lordship.
I must love you, and sue to know you better.
Sir, I shall study deserving.
He hath bin out nine years, and away he shall again. The King is coming.
Attend the Lords of France &amp; Burgundy, Gloster.
I shall, my Lord.
Mean time we shall express our darker purpose.
Give me the Map there. Know, that we have divided
In three our Kingdom: and it is our fast intent,
To shake all Cares and Business from our Age,
Conferring them on younger strengths, while we
Unburdened crawl toward death. Our son of Cornwall,
And you our no less loving Son of Albany,
We have this hour a constant will to publish
Our daughters several Dowers, that future strife
May be prevented now. The Princes, France &amp; Burgundy,
Great Rivals in our youngest daughters love,
Long in our Court, have made their amorous sojourn,
And here are to be answered. Tell me my daughters
(Since now we will divest vs both of Rule,
Interest of Territory, Cares of State)
Which of you shall we say doth love vs most,
That we, our largest bounty may extend
Where Nature doth with merit challenge.
Our eldest borne, speak first.
Sir, I love you more then word can wield ye matter,
Dearer then eye-sight, space, and liberty,
Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare,
No less then life, with grace, health, beauty, honour:
As much as Child ere loved, or Father found.
A love that makes breath poor, and speech unable,
Beyond all manner of so much I love you.
What shall Cordelia speak? Love, and be silent.
Of all these bounds even from this Line, to this,
With shadowy Forests, and with Champains rich'd
With plenteous Rivers, and wide-skirted Meads
We make thee Lady. To thine and Albanies issues
Be this perpetual. What says our second Daughter?
Our dearest Reagan, wife of Cornwall?
I am made of that selfe-mettle as my Sister,
And prize me at her worth. In my true heart,
I find she names my very deed of love:
Only she comes too short, that I profess
My self an enemy to all other joys,
Which the most precious square of sense professes,
And find I am alone felicitate
In your dear Highness love.
Then poor Cordelia,
And yet not so, since I am sure my loue's
More ponderous then my tongue.
To thee, and thine hereditary ever,
Remain this ample third of our fair Kingdom,
No less in space, validity, and pleasure
Then that confeir'd on Gonerill. Now our Joy,
Although our last and least; to whose young love▪
The Vines of France, and Milk of Burgundy,
Strive to be interest. What can you say, to draw
A third, more opilent then your Sisters? speak.
Nothing my Lord.
Nothing?
Nothing.
Nothing will come of nothing, speak again.
Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave
My heart into my mouth: I love your Majesty
According to my bond, no more nor less.
How, how Cordelia? Mend your speech a little,
Least you may mar your Fortunes.
Good my Lord,
You have begot me, bred me, loved me.
I return those duties back as are right fit,
Obey you, Love you, and most Honour you.
Why have my Sisters Husbands, if they say
They love you all? Happily when I shall wed,
That Lord, whose hand must take my plight, shall carry
Half my love with him, half my Care, and Duty,
Sure I shall never marry like my Sisters.
But goes thy heart with this?
I my good Lord.
So young, and so vntender?
So young my Lord, and true.
Let it be so, thy truth then be thy dowre:
For by the sacred radiance of the Sun,
The miseries of Heccat and the night:
By all the operation of the Orbs,
From whom we do exist, and cease to be,
Here I disclaim all my Paternal care,
Propinquity and property of blood,
And as a stranger to my heart and me,
Hold thee from this for ever. The barbarous Scythian,
Or he that makes his generation messes
To gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom
Be as well neighboured, pitied, and relieved,
As thou my sometime Daughter.
Good my Liege.
Peace Kent,
Come not between the Dragon and his wrath,
I loved her most, and thought to set my rest
On her kind nursery. Hence and avoid my sight:
So be my grave my peace, as here I give
Her Fathers heart from her; call France, who stirs?
Call Burgundy, Cornwall, and Albany,
With my two Daughters Dowres, digest the third,
Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her:
I doe invest you jointly with my power,
Pre-eminence, and all the large effects
That troop with Majesty. Our self by Monthly course,
With reservation of an hundred Knights.
By you to be sustained, shall our abode
Make with you by due turn, only we shall retain
The name, and all the addition to a King: the Sway,
Revenue Execution of the rest,
Beloved Sons be yours, which to confirm,
This Coronet part between you.
Royal Lear,
Whom I have ever honoured as my King▪
Loved as my Father, as my Master followed,
As my great Patron thought on in my prayers.
The bow is bent &amp; drawn, make from the shaft.
Let it fall rather, though the fork invade
The region of my heart, be Kent unmannerly,
When Lear is mad, what would thou do old man?
Think thou that duty shall have dread to speak,
When power to flattery bows?
To plainness honour's bound,
When Majesty falls to folly, reserve thy state,
And in thy best consideration check
This hideous rashness, answer my life, my judgment:
Thy youngest Daughter do's not love thee least,
Nor are those empty hearted, whose low founds
Reuerbe no hollowness.
Kent, on thy life no more.
My life I never held but as pawn
To wage against thine enemies, ne'er fear to loose it,
Thy safety being motive.
Out of my sight.
See better Lear, and let me still remain
The true blank of thine eye.
Now by Apollo,
Now by Apollo, King
Thou swear▪st thy Gods in vain.
O Vassal! Miscreant.
Cor. Dear Sir forbear.
Kill thy Physician, and thy see bestow
Upon the foul disease, revoke thy gift,
Or whilst I can vent clamour from my throat,
Isle tell thee thou dost evil.
Hear me recreant, on thine allegiance hear me;
That thou hast sought to make vs break our vows,
Which we durst never yet; and with strained pride,
To come betwixt our sentences, and our power.
Which, nor our nature, nor our place can bear;
Our potency made good, take thy reward.
Five days we do allot thee for provision,
To shield thee from disasters of the world,
And on the sixth to turn thy hated back
Upon our kingdom; if on the tenth day following,
Thy banished trunk be found in our Dominions,
The moment is thy death, away. By Iupiter,
This shall not be revoked,
Fare thee well King, sith thus thou wilt appear,
Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here;
The Gods to their dear shelter take thee Maid,
That justly think, and hast most rightly said:
And your large speeches, may your deeds approve,
That good effects may spring from words of love:
Thus Kent, O Princes, bids you all adieu,
He will shape his old course, in a Country new.
Heere's France and Burgundy, my Noble Lord.
My Lord of Bugundie,
We first address toward you, who with this King
Hath riuald for our Daughter; what in the least
Will you require in present Dower with her,
Or cease your quest of Love?
Most Royal Majesty,
I crave no more then hath your Highness offered,
Nor will you tender less?
Right Noble Burgundy,
When she was dear to vs, we did hold her so,
But now her price is fallen: Sir, there she stands,
If ought within that little seeming substance,
Or all of it with our displeasure pieced,
And nothing more may fitly like your Grace,
Shoe's there, and she is yours.
I know no answer.
Will you with those infirmities she owes,
Vnfriended, new adopted to our hate,
Dow'rd with our curse, and strangered with our oath,
Take her or, leave her.
Pardon me Royal Sir,
Election makes not up in such conditions.
Then leave her sir, for by the power that made me,
I tell you all her wealth. For you great King,
I would not from your love make such a stray,
To match you where I hate, therefore beseech you
To avert your liking a more worthier way,
Then on a wretch whom Nature is ashamed
Almost to acknowledge hers.
This is most strange,
That she whom even but now, was your object.
The argument of your praise▪ balm of your age,
The best, the dearest, should in this trice of time
Commit a thing so monstrous, to dismantle
So many folds of favour: sure her offence
Must be of such unnatural degree,
That monsters it: Or your fore-voucht affection
Fall into taint, which to believe of her
Must be a faith that reason without miracle
Should never plant in me.
I yet beseech your Majesty.
If for I want that glib and oily Art,
To speak and purpose not, since what I will intend,
Isle do it before I speak, that you make known
It is no vicious blot, murder, or foulness,
No unchaste action or dishonoured step
That hath deprived me of your Grace and favour,
But even for want of that, for which I am richer,
A still soliciting eye, and such a tongue,
That I am glad I have not, though not to have it,
Hath loft me in your liking.
Better thou had▪
Not been borne, then not t have pleased me better.
Is it but this? A tardiness in nature,
Which often leaves the history vnspoke
That it intends to do: my Lord of Burgundy,
What say you to the Lady? Loue's not love
When it is mingled with regards, that stands
Aloof from the entire point, will you have her?
She is herself a Dowry.
Royal King,
Give but that portion which your self proposed,
And here I take Cordelia by the hand,
Duchess of Burgundy.
Nothing, I have sworn, I am firm.
I am sorry then you have so lost a Father,
That you must loose a husband.
Peace be with Burgundy,
Since that respect and Fortunes are his love,
I shall not be his wife.
Fairest Cordelia, that art most rich being poor,
Most choice forsaken, and most loved despised,
Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon,
Be it lawful I take up what's cast away.
Gods, Gods! It is strange, that from their coldest neglect
My Love should kindle to inflamed respect.
Thy dowrelesse Daughter King, thrown to my chance,
Is Queen of vs, of ours, and our fair France:
Not all the Dukes of waterish Burgundy,
Can buy this vnpriz'd precious Maid of me.
Bid them farewell Cordelia, though unkind,
Thou loosest here a better where to find.
Thou hast her France, let her be thine, for we
Have no such Daughter, nor shall ever see
That face of hers again, therefore be gone,
Without our Grace, our Love, our Benizon:
Come Noble Burgundy.
Bid farewell to your Sisters.
The Jewels of our Father, with washed eyes
Cordelia leaves you, I know you what you are,
And like a Sister am most loath to call
Your faults as they are named. Love well our Father:
To your professed bosoms I commit him,
But yet alas, stood I within his Grace,
I would prefer him to a better place,
So farewell to you both.
Prescribe not vs our duty.
Let your study
Be to content your Lord, who hath received you
At Fortunes alms, you have obedience scanted,
And well are worth the want that you have wanted▪
Time shall unfold what plighted cunning hides,
Who covers faults, at last with shame derides:
Well may you prosper.
Come my fair Cordelia.
Sister, it is not little I have to say,
Of what most nearly appertains to vs both,
I think our Father will hence to night.
That's most certain, and with you: next month with vs.
You see how full of changes his age is, the obe∣seruation we have made of it hath been little: he always loved our Sister most, and with what poor judgment he hath now cast her off, appears too grossly.
It is the infirmity of his age, yet he hath ever but slenderly known himself.
The best and soundest of his time hath bin but rash, then must we look from his age, to receive not a∣lone the imperfections of long ingrafted condition, but therewithal the unruly way wardnesse, that infirm and choleric years bring with them.
Such inconstant starts are we like to have from him, as this of Kents banishment.
There is further complement of leaue-taking be∣tweene France and him, pray you let vs sit together, it our Father carry authority with such disposition as he bears, this last surrender of his will but offend vs.
We shall further think of it.
We must do something, and in the heate.
Thou Nature art my Goddess, to thy Law
My services are bound, wherefore should I
Stand in the plague of custom, and permit
The curiosity of Nations, to deprive me?
For that I am some twelve, or fourteen Moonshines
Lag of a Brother? Why Bastard? Wherefore base?
When my Dimensions are as well compact,
My mind as generous, and my shape as true
As honest Madams issue? Why brand they vs
With Base? With baseness Barstadie? Base, Base?
Who in the lusty stealth of Nature, take
More composition, and fierce quality,
Then doth within a dull stale tyred bed
Go to the creating a whole tribe of Fops
Got 'tweene a sleep, and wake? Well then,
Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land,
Our Fathers love, is to the Bastard Edmond,
As to the legitimate: fine word: Legitimate.
Well, my Legitimate, if this Letter speed,
And my invention thrive, Edmond the base
Shall to the Legitimate: I grow, I prosper:
Now Gods, stand up for Bastards.
Kent banished thus? and France in choler parted?
And the King gone to night? Prescribed his power,
Confined to exhibition? All this done
Upon the gad? Edmond, how now? What news?
So please your Lordship, none.
Why so earnestly seek you to put up yt Letter?
I know no news, my Lord.
What Paper were you reading?
Nothing my Lord.
No? what needed then that terrible dispatch of it into your Pocket? The quality of nothing, hath not such need to hide it self. Let's see: come, if it bee no∣thing, I shall not need Spectacles.
I beseech you Sir, pardon me; it is a Letter from my Brother, that I have not all ore-read; and for so much as I have perused, I find it not fit for your ore-loo∣king.
Give me the Letter, Sir.
I shall offend, either to detain, or give it:
The Contents, as in part I understand them.
Are too blame.
Let's see, let's see.
I hope for my Brothers justification, hee wrote this but as an essay, or taste of my Virtue.
This policy, and reverence of Age, makes the world bitter to the best of our times: keeps our Fortunes from vs, till our oldnesse cannot relish them. I begin to find an idle and fond bondage, in the oppression of aged tyranny, who sways not as it hath power, but as it is suffered. Come to me, that of this I may speak more. If our Father would sleep till I waked him, you should enjoy half his Revenue for ever, and live the beloved of your Brother.
Edgar.
Hum? Conspiracy? Sleep till I wake him, you should enjoy half his Revenue: my Son Edgar, had hee a hand to write this? A heart and brain to breed it in? When came you to this? Who brought it?
It was not brought me, my Lord; there's the cunning of it. I found it thrown in at the Casement of my Closet.
You know the character to be your Brothers?
If the matter were good my Lord, I durst swear it were his: but in respect of that, I would fine think it were not.
It is his.
It is his hand, my Lord: but I hope his heart is not in the Contents.
Has he never before sounded you in this business?
Never my Lord. But I have heard him oft main∣taine it to be fit, that Sons at perfect age, and Fathers declined, the Father should bee as Ward to the Son, and the Son manage his Revenue.
O Villain, villain: his very opinion in the Let∣la. Abhorred Villain, unnatural, detested, brutish Villain; worse then brutish: Go sirrah, seek him: Isle apprehend him. Abominable Villain, where is he?
I do not well know my L. If it shall please you to suspend your indignation against my Brother, till you can derive from him better testimony of his intent, you should run a certain course: where, if you violently proceed a∣against him, mistaking his purpose, it would make a great gap in your own Honour, and shake in pieces, the heart of his obedience. I dare pawn down my life for him, that he hath writ this to feel my affection to your Honour, &amp; to no other pretence of danger.
Think you so?
If your Honour judge it mere, I will place you where you shall hear vs confer of this, and by an Auri∣cular assurance have your satisfaction, and that without any further delay, then this very Evening.
He cannot bee such a Monster. Edmond seek him out: wind me into him, I pray you: frame the Bu∣sinesse after your own wisdom. I would vnstate my self, to be in a due resolution.
I will seek him Sir, presently: convey the bu∣sinesse as I shall find means, and acquaint you withal.
These late Eclipses in the Sun and Moon pore∣tend no good to vs: though the wisdom of Nature can reason it thus, and thus, yet Nature finds it self scourged by the sequent effects. Love cools, friendship falls off, Brothers divide. In Cities, mutinies; in Countries, dis∣cord; in Palaces, Treason; and the Bond cracked, twixt Son and Father. This villain of mine comes under the prediction; there's Son against Father, the King false from by as of Nature, there's Father against Child. We have seen the best of our time. Machinations, hollowness, treachery, and all ruinous disorders follow vs disquietly to our Graves. Find out this Villain▪ Edmond, it shall lose thee nothing, do it carefully: and the Noble &amp; true-har∣ted Kent banished; his offence, honesty. It is strange.
This is the excellent foppery of the world, that when we are sick in fortune, often the surfers of our own behaviour, we make guilty of our disasters, the Sun, the Moon, and Stars, as if we were villains on necessity, Fools by heavenly compulsion, Knaves, Thieves, and Treachers by Spherical predominance. Drunkards, Lie∣ars, and Adulterers by an enforced obedience of Planetary influence; and all that we are evil in, by a divine through∣st•ng on. An admirable evasion of Whore-master-man, to lay his Goatish disposition on the charge of a Star, My father compounded with my mother under the Dra∣gons tail, and my Nativity was under Vrsa Mayor, so that it follows, I am rough and Lecherous. I should have bin that I am, had the maidenlest Star in the Fir∣moment twinkled on my bastardising.
Pat: he comes like the Catastrophe of the old Comedy: my Cue is villainous Melancholy, with a sigh like Tom of Bedlam. — O these Eclipses do portend these dive∣sions. Fa, Sol, La, Me.
How now Brother Edmond, what serious con∣templation are you in?
I am thinking Brother of a prediction I read this other day, what should follow these Eclipses.
Do you busy your self with that?
I promise you, the effects he writes of, succeed unhappily.
When saw you my Father last?
The night gone by.
Spake you with him?
I, two hours together.
Parted you in good terms? Found you no dis∣pleasure in him, by word, nor countenance?
None at all,
Bethink your self wherein you may have offen∣ded him: and at my entreaty forbear his presence, until some little time hath qualified the heat of his displeasure, which at this instant so rages in him, that with the mis∣chief
of your person, it would scarcely allay.
Some Villain hath done me wrong.
That's my fear, I pray you have a continent forbearance till the speed of his rage goes slower: and as I say, retire with me to my lodging, from whence I will fitly bring you to hear my Lord speak: pray ye go, there's my key: if you do stir abroad, go armed.
Armed, Brother?
Brother, I advise you to the best, I am no honest man, if there be any good meaning toward you: I have told you what I have seen, and heard: But faintly, Nothing like the image, and horror of it, pray you away.
Shall I hear from you anon?
I do serve you in this business:
A Credulous Father, and a Brother Noble,
Whose nature is so far from doing harms,
That he suspects none: on whose foolish honesty
My practises ride easy: I see the business.
Let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit,
All with me's meet, that I can fashion fit.
Did my Father strike my Gentleman for chi∣ding of his Fool?
I Madam.
By day and night, he wrongs me, every hour
He flashes into one gross crime, or other,
That sets vs all at odds: Isle not endure it;
His Knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids vs
On every trifle. When he returns from hunting,
I will not speak with him, say I am sick,
If you come slack of former services,
You shall do well, the fault of it Isle answer.
He's coming Madam, I hear him.
Put on what weary negligence you please,
You and your Fellows: I'd have it come to question;
If he distaste it, let him to my Sister,
Whose mind and mine I know in that are one,
Remember what I have said.
Well Madam.
And let his Knights have colder looks among you: what grows of it no matter, advise your fellows so, Isle write straight to my Sister to hold my course; pre∣pare for dinner.
If but as will I other accents borrow,
That can my speech defuse, my good intent
May carry through it self to that full issue
For which I raised my likeness. Now banished Kent,
If thou can serve where thou dost stand condemned,
So may it come, thy Master whom thou Iou'st,
Shall find thee full of labours.
Let me not stay a jot for dinner, go get it rea∣die: how now, what art thou?
A man Sir.
What dost thou profess? What would thou with vs?
I do profess to be no less then I seem; to serve him truly that will put me in trust, to love him that is honest, to converse with him that is wise and says little, to fear judgment, to fight when I cannot choose, and to eat no fish.
What art thou?
A very honest hearted Fellow, and as poor as the King.
If thou be as poor for a subject, as hoe's for a King, thou art poor enough. What would thou?
Service.
Who would thou serve?
You.
Dost thou know me fellow?
No Sir, but you have that in your countenance, which I would fine call Master.
What's that?
Authority.
What services can thou do?
I can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a curious tale in telling it, and deliver a plain message bluntly: that which ordinary men are fit for, I am qual∣lified in, and the best of me, is Diligence.
How old art thou?
Not so young Sir to love a woman for singing, nor so old to dote on her for any thing. I have years on my back forty eight.
Follow me, thou shalt serve me, if I like thee no worse after dinner, I will not part from thee yet. Dinner ho, dinner, whore's my knave? my Fool? Go you and call my Fool hither. You you Sirrah, whore's my Daughter?
So please you —
What says the Fellow there? Call the Clot-pole back: wher's my Fool? Ho, I think the world's asleep, how now? Whore's that Mongrel?
He says my Lord, your Daughters is not well.
Why came not the slave back to me when I called him?
Sir, he answered me in the roundest manner, he would not.
He would not?
My Lord, I know not what the matter is, but to my judgment your Highness is not entertained with that Ceremonious affection as you were wont, theres a great abatement of kindness appears as well in the general dependants, as in the Duke himself also, and your Daughter.
Ha? Say thou so?
I beseech you pardon me my Lord, if I bee mistaken, for my duty cannot be silent, when I think your Highness wronged.
Thou but remember me of mine own Con∣caption, I have perceived a most faint neglect of late, which I have rather blamed as mine own jealous curio∣sitie, then as a very pretence and purpose of unkindness; I will look further intoo't•: but whore's my Fool? I have not seen him this two days.
Since my young Ladies going into France
Sir, the Fool hath much pined away.
No more of that, I have noted it well, go you and tell my Daughter, I would speak with her. Go you call hither my Fool; Oh you Sir, you, come you hither Sir, who am I Sir?
My Ladies Father.
My Ladies Father? my Lords knave, you whore∣son dog, you slave, you cur.
I am none of these my Lord,
I beseech your pardon.
Do you bandy looks with me, you Rascal?
Isle not be stricken my Lord.
Nor tripped neither, you base Foot-ball plaier.
I thank thee fellow.
Thou serve me, and Isle love thee.
Come sir, arise, away, Isle teach you differences: away, away, if you will measure your lubbers length a∣gain, tarry, but away, go too, have you wisdom, so.
Now my friendly knave I thank thee, there's earnest of thy service.
Let me hire him too, here's my Coxcomb.
How now my pretty knave, how dost thou?
Sirrah, you were best take my Coxcomb.
Why my Boy?
Why? for taking ones part that's out of favour, nay, &amp; thou can not smile as the wind sits, thou'lt catch cold shortly, there take my Coxcombs why this fellow he's banished two on's Daughters, and did the third a blessing against his will, if thou follow him, thou must needs wear my Coxcomb. How now Nunckle? would I had two Coxcombs and two Daughters.
Why my Boy?
If I gave them all my living, I'd keep my Cox∣combs my self, there's mine, beg another of thy Daughters.
Take heed Sirrah, the whip.
Truth's a dog must to kennel, hee must bee whipped out, when the Lady Brach may stand by' the fire and stink.
A pestilent gall to me.
Sirha, Isle teach thee a speech.
Do.
Mark it Nuncle;
Have more then thou show,
Speak less then thou know,
Lend less then thou owe,
Ride more then thou goosed,
Learn more then thou trow,
Set less then thou throw;
Leave thy drink and thy whore,
And keep in a door,
And thou shalt have more,
Then two tens to a score.
This is nothing Fool.
Then it is like the breath of an vnfeed Lawyer, you gave me nothing for it, can you make no use of no∣thing Nuncle?
Why no Boy,
Nothing can be made out of nothing.
Prithee tell him, so much the rent of his land comes to, he will not believe a Fool.
A bitter Fool.
Dost thou know the difference my Boy, be∣tweene a bitter Fool, and a sweet one.
No Lad, teach me.
Nunckle, give me an egg, and Isle give thee two Crowns.
What two Crowns shall they be?
Why after I have cut the egg in the middle and eat up the meat, the two Crowns of the egg: when thou clouest thy Crowns in the middle, and gau'st away both parts, thou boar thine Ass on thy back o'er the dirt, thou had little wit in thy bald crown, when thou gau'st thy golden one away; if I speak like my self in this, let him be whipped that first finds it so.
Fools had ne'er less grace in a year,
For wisemen are grown foppish,
And know not how their wits to wear,
Their manners are so apish.
When were you wont to be so full of Songs sirrah?
I have used it Nunckle, ere since thou made thy Daughters thy Mothers, for when thou gau'st them the rod, and put down thine own breeches, then they
For sudden joy did weep,
And I for sorrow sung,
That such a King should play bo-peepe,
And go the Fool among.
Pry' thy Nunckle keep a Schoolmaster that can teach
thy Fool to lie, I would fine learn to lie.
And you lie sirrah, we'll have you whipped.
I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are, they'll have me whipped for speaking true: thou'lt have me whipped for lying; and sometimes I am whipped for holding my peace. I had rather be any kind of thing then a fool, and yet I would not be thee Nunckle, thou hast pared thy wit of both sides, and left nothing in the middle; here comes one of the parings.
How now Daughter? what makes that Frontlet on? You are too much of late in the frown.
Thou wast a pretty fellow when thou had no need to care for her frowning, now thou art an O with∣out a figure, I am better then thou art now, I am a Fool, thou art nothing. Yes forsooth I will hold my tongue, so your face bids me, though you say nothing.
Mum, mum, he that keeps nor crust, not crum,
Weary of all, shall want some. That's a shoaled Pescod.
Not only Sir this, your all-lycenc'd Fool,
But other of your insolent retinue
Do hourly Carpe and Quarrel, breaking forth
In rank, and (not to be endured) riots Sir.
I had thought by making this well known unto you,
To have found a safe redress, but now grow fearful
By what your self too late have spoke and done,
That you protect this course, and put it on
By your allowance, which if you should, the fault
Would not scope censure, nor the redresses sleep,
Which in the tender of a wholesome weal,
Might in their working do you that offence,
Which else were shame, that then necessity
Will call discreet proceeding.
For you know Nunckle, the Hedge-Sparrow fed the Cuckoo so long, that it's had it head bit off by it young, so out went the Candle, and we were left dark∣ling.
Are you our Daughter?
I would you would make use of your good wise∣dome
(Whereof I know you are fraught) and put away
These dispositions, which of late transport you
From what you rightly are.
May not an Ass know, when the Cart draws the Horse?
Whoop Jug I love thee.
Do's any here know me?
This is not Lear:
Do's Lear walk thus? Speak thus? Where are his eyes?
Either his Notion weakens, his Discernings
Are Lethargied. Ha! Waking? It is not so?
Who is it that can tell me who I am?
Lears shadow.
Your name, fair Gentlewoman?
This admiration Sir, is much of the savour
Of other your new pranks. I do beseech you
To understand my purposes aright:
As you are Old, and Reverend, should be Wise.
Here do you keep a hundred Knights and Squires,
Men so disordered, so debauched, and bold,
That this our Court infected with their manners,
Shows like a riotous Inn; Epicurisme and Lust
Makes it more like a Tavern, or a Brothel,
Then a graced Palace. The shame it self doth speak
For instant remedy. Be then desired
By her, that else will take the thing she begs,
A little to disquantity your Train,
And the remainders that shall still depend,
To be such men as may besort your Age,
Which know themselves, and you.
Darkness, and Devils.
Saddle my horses: call my Train together.
Degenerate Bastard, Isle not trouble thee;
Yet have I left a daughter.
You strike my people, and your disordered rabble, make Servants of their Betters.
Woe, that too late repents:
Is it your will, speak Sir? Prepare my Horses.
Ingratitude! thou Marble-hearted Fiend,
More hideous when thou show thee in a Child,
Then the Sea-monster.
Pray Sir be patient.
Detested Kite, thou lie.
My Train are men of choice, and rarest parts,
That all particulars of duty know,
And in the most exact regard, support
The worships of their name. O most small fault,
How ugly did thou in Cordelia show?
Which like an Engine, wrenched my frame of Nature
From the fixed place: drew from my heart all love,
And added to the gall. O Lear, Lear, Lear!
Beat at this gate that let thy Folly in,
And thy dear Judgment out. Go, go, my people.
My Lord, I am guiltless, as I am ignorant
Of what hath moved you.
It may be so, my Lord.
Hear Nature, hear dear Goddess, hear:
Suspend thy purpose, if thou did intend
To make this Creature fruitful:
Into her Womb convey sterility,
Dry up in her the Organs of increase,
And from her derogate body, never spring
A Babe to honour her. If she must teem,
Create her child of Spleen, that it may live
And be a thwart disnatur'd torment to her.
Let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth,
With cadent Tears fret Channels in her cheeks,
Turn all her Mothers pains, and benefits
To laughter, and contempt: That she may feel,
How sharper then a Serpents tooth it is,
To have a thankless Child. Away, away.
Now Gods that we adore,
Whereof comes this?
Never afflict your self to know more of it:
But let his disposition have that scope
As dotage gives it.
What fifty of my Followers at a clap?
Within a fortnight?
What's the matter, Sir?
Isle tell thee:
Life and death, I am ashamed
That thou hast power to shake my manhood thus,
That these hot tears, which break from me perforce
Should make thee worth them.
Blasts and Fogs upon thee:
The vntented woundings of a Fathers curse
Pierce every sense about thee. Old fond eyes,
Beweep this cause again, Isle pluck ye out,
And cast you with the waters that you loose
To temper Clay. Ha? Let it be so.
I have another daughter,
Who I am sure is kind and comfortable:
When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails
She'll flea thy Wolfish visage. Thou shalt find,
That Isle resume the shape which thou dost think
I have cast off for ever.
Do you mark that?
I cannot be so partial Gonerill,
To the great love I bear you.
Pray you content. What Oswald, hoe?
You Sir, more Knave then Fool, after your Master.
Nunkle Lear, Nunkle Lear,
Tarry, take the Fool with thee:
A Fox, when one has caught her.
And such a Daughter,
Should sure to the Slaughter,
If my Cap would buy a Halter,
So the Fool follows after.
This man hath had good Counsel,
A hundred Knights?
It is politic, and safe to let him keep
At point a hundred Knights: yes, that on every dream,
Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike,
He may enguard his dotage with their powers,
And hold our lives in mercy. Oswald, I say.
Well, you may fear too far.
Safer then trust too far;
Let me still take away the harms I fear,
Not fear still to be taken. I know his heart,
What he hath uttered I have writ my Sister:
If she sustain him, and his hundred Knights
When I have showed the unfitness.
How now Oswald?
What have you writ that Letter to my Sister?
I Madam.
Take you some company, and away to horse,
Inform her full of my particular fear,
And thereto add such reasons of your own,
As may compact it more. Get you gone,
And hasten your return; no, no, my Lord,
This milky gentleness, and course of yours
Though I condemn not, yet under pardon
Your are much more at task for want of wisdom,
Then prai'sd for harmful mildness.
How far your eyes may pierce I cannot tell;
Striving to better, oft we mar what's well.
Nay then —
Well, well, the'uent.
Go you before to Gloster with these Letters; acquaint my Daughter no further with any thing you know, then comes from her demand out of the Letter, if your Diligence be not speedy, I shall be there before you.
I will not sleep my Lord, till I have delivered your Letter.
If a mans brains were in's heals, were not in danger of kybes?
I Boy.
Then I prithee be merry, thy wit shall not go slip-shod.
Ha, ha, ha.
Shalt see thy other Daughter will use thee kind∣lie, for though she's as like this, as a Crabbe's like an Apple, yet I can tell what I can tell.
What can tell Boy?
She will taste as like this as, a Crab do's to a Crab: thou can tell why ones nose stands in the middle on's face?
No.
Why to keep ones eyes of either side's nose, that what a man cannot smell out, he may spy into.
I did her wrong.
Can tell how an Oyster makes his shell?
No.
Nor I neither; but I can tell why a Snail he's a house.
Why?
Why to putt's head in, not to give it away to his daughters, and leave his horns without a case.
I will forget my Nature, so kind a Father? Be my Horses ready?
Thy Asses are gone about 'em; the reason why the seven Stars are no mo then seven, is a pretty reason.
Because they are not eight.
Yes indeed, thou would make a good Fool.
To tak't again perforce; Monster Ingratitude!
If thou were my Fool Nunckle, Il'd have thee beaten for being old before thy time.
How's that?
Thou should not have bin old, till thou had bin wise.
O let me not be mad, not mad sweet Heaven▪ keep me in temper, I would not be mad. How now are the Horses ready?
Ready my Lord.
Come Boy.
She that's a Maid now, &amp; laughs at my departure,
Shall not be a Maid long, unless things be cut shorter.
Save thee Curan.
And your Sir, I have bin
With your Father, and given him notice
That the Duke of Cornwall, and Reagan his Duchess
Will be here with him this night.
How comes that?
Nay I know not, you have heard of the news a∣broad, I mean the whispered ones, for they are yet but ear•kissing arguments.
Not I: pray you what are they?
Have you heard of no likely Wars toward,
Twixt the Dukes of Cornwall, and Albany?
Not a word.
You may do then in time,
Fare you well Sir.
The Duke be here to night? The better best,
This weaues it self perforce into my business,
My Father hath set guard to take my Brother,
And I have one thing of a queasy question
Which I must act, Briefness, and Fortune work.
Brother, a word, descend; Brother I say,
My Father watches: O Sir, fly this place,
Intelligence is given where you are hid;
You have now the good advantage of the night,
Have you not spoken against the Duke of Cornwall?
Hoe's coming hither, now in the night, in the haste,
And Reagan with him, have you nothing said
Upon his party against the Duke of Albany?
Advise your self.
I am sure on it, not a word.
I hear my Father coming, pardon me:
In cunning, I must draw my Sword upon you:
Draw, seem to defend your self,
Now quit you well.
Yield, come before my Father, light hoe, here,
Fly Brother, Torches, Torches, so farewell.
Some blood drawn on me, would beget opinion
Of my more fierce endeavour. I have seen drunkards
Do more then this in sport▪ Father, Father,
Stop, stop, no help?
Now Edmund, whore's the villain?
Here stood he in the dark, his sharpe Sword out,
Mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the Moon
To stand auspicious Mistress.
But where is he?
Look Sir, I bleed.
Where is the villain, Edmund?
Fled this way Sir, when by no means he could.
Pursue him, ho: go after. By no means, what?
Persuade me to the murder of your Lordship,
But that I told him the revenging Gods,
Against Paricides did all the thunder bend,
Spoke with how manifold, and strong a Bond
The Child was bound to the Father; Sir in fine,
Seeing how lothly opposite I stood
To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion
With his prepared Sword, he charges home
My unprovided body, latched mine arm;
And when he saw my best alarmed spirits
Bold in the quarrels right, roused to the encounter,
Or whether gasted by the noise I made,
Full suddenly he fled.
Let him fly far:
Not in this Land shall he remain unsought
And found; dispatch, the Noble Duke my Master,
My worthy Arch and Patron comes to night,
By his authority I will proclaim it,
That he which finds him shall deserve our thanks,
Bringing the murderous Coward to the stake:
He that conceals him death.
When I dissuaded him from his intent,
And found him pitch to doe it, with cursed speech
I threatened to discover him; he replied,
Thou vnpossessing Bastard, dost thou think,
If I would stand against thee, would the reposall
Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee
Make thy words faithed? No, what should I deny,
(As this I would, though thou did produce
My very Character) I'd turn it all
To thy suggestion, plot, and damned practise:
And thou must make a dullard of the world,
If they not thought the profits of my death
Were very pregnant and potential spirits
To make thee seek it.
O strange and fastened Villain,
Would he deny his Letter, said he?
Hark, the Dukes Trumpets, I know not where he comes;
All Ports Isle bar, the villain shall not scope,
The Duke must grant me that: besides, his picture
I will send far and near, that all the kingdom
May have due note of him, and of my land,
(Loyal and natural Boy) Isle work the means
To make thee capable.
How now my Noble friend, since I came hither
(Which I can call but now,) I have heard strangeness.
If it be true; all vengeance comes too short
Which can pursue the offender; how dost my Lord?
O Madam, my old heart is cracked, it's cracked.
What, did my Fathers Godson seek your life?
He whom my Father named, your Edgar?
O Lady, Lady, shame would have it hid.
Was he not companion with the riotous Knights
That tended upon my Father?
I know not Madam, it is too bad, too bad.
Yes Madam, he was of that consort.
No marvel then, though he were ill affected,
It is they have put him on the old mans death,
To have the expense and wast of his Revenues:
I have this present evening from my Sister
Been well informed of them, and with such cautions,
That if they come to sojourn at my house,
Isle not be there.
Nor I, assure thee Reagan;
Edmund, I hear that you have shown your Father
A Child-like Office.
It was my duty Sir.
He did bewray his practise, and received
This hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.
Is he pursued?
I my good Lord.
If he be taken, he shall never more
Be feared of doing harm, make your own purpose,
How in my strength you please: for you Edmund,
Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant
So much commend it self, you shall be ours,
Nature's of such deep trust, we shall much need:
You we first seize on.
I shall serve you Sir truly, how ever else.
For him I thank your Grace.
You know not why we came to visit you?
Thus out of season, thredding dark eyed night,
Occasions Noble Gloster of some prize,
Wherein we must have use of your advise.
Our Father he hath writ, so hath our Sister,
Of differences, which I best though it fit
To answer from our home: the several Messengers
From hence attend dispatch, our good old Friend,
Lay comforts to your bosom, and bestow
Your needful counsel to our businesses,
Which craves the instant use.
I serve you Madam,
Your Graces are right welcome.
Good dawning to thee Friend, art of this house?
I.
Where may we set our horses?
In the mire.
Prithee, if thou love me, tell me.
I love thee not.
Why then I care not for thee.
If I had thee in Lipsbury Pinfold, I would make thee care for me.
Why dost thou use me thus? I know thee not.
Fellow I know thee.
What dost thou know me for?
A Knave, a Rascal, an eater of broken meates, a base, proud, shallow, beggarly, three-suited-hundred pound, filthy woosted-stocking knave, a Lilly-liuered, action-taking, whoreson glasse-gazing super-seruiceable finical Rogue, one Trunke-inheriting slave, one that would be a Baud in way of good service, and art no∣thing but the composition of a Knave, Beggar, Coward, Pander, and the Son and Heir of a Mongrel Bitch, one whom I will beat into clamours whining, if thou deny the least syllable of thy addition.
Why, what a monstrous Fellow art thou, thus to rail on one, that is neither known of thee, nor knows thee?
What a brazen-faced Varlet art thou, to deny thou know me? Is it two days since I tripped up thy heals, and beat thee before the King? Draw you rogue,
for though it be night, yet the Moon shines, Isle make a sop of the Moonshine of you, you whoreson Cullyenly Barber-monger, draw.
Away, I have nothing to do with thee.
Draw you Rascal, you come with Letters a∣against the King, and take Vanity the puppets part, a∣against the Royalty of her Father: draw you Rogue, or Isle so carbonado your shanks, draw you Rascal, come your ways.
Help, ho, murder, help.
Strike you slave: stand rogue, stand you neat slave, strike.
Help hoe, murder, murder.
How now, what's the matter? Part.
With you goodman Boy, if you please, come,
Isle flesh ye, come on young Master.
Weapons? Arms? what's the matter here?
Keep peace upon your lives, he dies that strikes again, what is the matter?
The Messengers from our Sister, and the King?
What is your difference, speak?
I am scarce in breath my Lord.
No Marvel, you have so bestirred your valour, you cowardly Rascal, nature disclaims in thee: a Taylor made thee.
Thou art a strange fellow, a Taylor make a man?
A Taylor Sir, a Stone-cutter, or a Painter, could not have made him so ill, though they had bin but two years of the trade.
Speak yet, how grew your quarrel?
This ancient Ruffian Sir, whose life I have spared at suit of his gray-beard.
Thou whoreson Zed, thou unnecessary letter: my Lord, if you will give me leave, I will tread this un∣bolted villain into mortar, and daube the wall of a Iakes with him. Spare my gray-beard, you wagtail?
Peace sirrah,
You beastly knave, know you no reverence?
Yes Sir, but anger hath a privilege.
Why art thou angry?
That such a slave as this should wear a Sword,
Who wears no honesty: such smiling rogues as these,
Like Rats oft bite the holy cords a twain,
Which are to intrince, to unloose: smooth every passion
That in the natures of their Lords rebel,
Being oil to fire, snow to the colder moods,
Revenge, affirm, and turn their Halcion beaks
With every gall, and varry of their Masters,
Knowing nought (like dogs) but following:
A plague upon your Epilepticke visage,
Smoile you my speeches, as I were a Fool?
Goose, if I had you upon Serum Plain,
I'd drive ye cackling home to Camelot.
What art thou mad old Fellow?
How fell you out, say that?
No contraries hold more antipathy,
Then I, and such a knave.
Why dost thou call him Knave?
What is his fault?
His countenance likes me not.
No more perchance do's mine, not his, nor hers.
Sir, it is my occupation to be plain,
I have seen better faces in my time,
Then stands on any shoulder that I see
Before me, at this instant.
This is some Fellow,
Who having been praised for bluntness, doth affect
A saucy roughness, and constrains the garb
Quite from his Nature. He cannot flatter he,
An honest mind and plain, he must speak truth,
And they will take it so, if not, hoe's plain.
These kind of Knaves I know, which in this plainness
Harbour more craft, and more corrupter ends,
Then twenty silly-ducking observants,
That stretch their duties nicely.
Sir, in good faith, in sincere verity,
Under the allowance of your great aspect,
Whose influence like the wreath of radiant fire
On flicking Phoebus front.
What mean by this?
To go out of my dialect, which you discom∣mend so much; I know Sir, I am no flatterer, he that be∣guild you in a plain accent, was a plain Knave, which for my part I will not be, though I should win your displeasure to entreat me too't.
What was the offence you gave him?
I never gave him any:
It pleased the King his Master very late
To strike at me upon his misconstruction,
When he compact, and flattering his displeasure
Tripped me behind: being down, insulted, railed,
And put upon him such a deal of Man,
That worthied him, got praises of the King,
For him attempting, who was selfe-subdued,
And in the fleshment of this dead exploit,
Drew on me here again.
None of these Rogues, and Cowards
But Aiax is there Fool.
Fetch forth the Stocks?
You stubborn ancient Knave, you reverent Braggart,
We'll teach you.
Sir, I am too old to learn:
Call not your Stocks for me, I serve the King.
On whose employment I was sent to you,
You shall doe small respects, show too bold malice
Against the Grace, and Person of my Master,
Stocking his Messenger.
Fetch forth the Stocks;
As I have life and Honour, there shall he sit till Noon.
Till noon? till night my Lord, and all night too.
Why Madam, if I were your Fathers dog,
You should not use me so.
Sir, being his Knave, I will.
This is a Fellow of the self same colour,
Our Sister speaks of. Come, bring away the Stocks.
Let me beseech your Grace, not to do so,
The King his Master, needs must take it ill
That he so slightly valued in his Messenger,
Should have him thus restrained.
Isle answer that.
My Sister may receive it much more worse,
To have her Gentleman abused, assaulted.
Come my Lord, away.
I am sorry for thee friend, it is the Duke pleasure,
Whose disposition all the world well knows
Will not be rubbed nor stopped, Isle entreat for thee.
Pray do not Sir, I have watched and travailed hard,
Some time I shall sleep out, the rest Isle whistle:
A good mans fortune may grow out at heals:
Give you good morrow.
The Duke's too blame in this,
Twill be ill taken.
Good King, that must approve the common saw,
Thou out of Heavens benediction come
To the warm Sun.
Approach thou Beacon to this under Globe,
That by thy comfortable Beams I may
Peruse this Letter. Nothing almost sees miracles
But misery. I know it is from Cordelia,
Who hath most fortunately been informed
Of my obscured course. And shall find time
From this enormous State, seeking to give
Losses their remedies. All weary and o're-watch'd,
Take vantage heavy eyes, not to behold
This shameful lodging. Fortune goodnight,
Smile once more, turn thy wheel.
I heard my self proclaimed,
And by the happy hollow of a Tree,
Escaped the hunt. No Port is free, no place
That guard, and most unusual vigilance
Do's not attend my taking. Whiles I may scope
I will preserve myself: and am bethought
To take the basest, and most poorest shape
That ever penury in contempt of man,
Brought near to beast; my face Isle grime with filth,
Blanket my loins, else all my hairs in knots,
And with presented nakedness out-face
The Winds, and persecutions of the sky;
The Country gives me proof, and president
Of Bedlam beggars, who with roaring voices,
Strike in their num'd and mortified Arms,
Pins, Wodden-prickes, Nails, Sprigs of Rosemary:
And with this horrible object, from low Farms,
Poor pelting Villages, Sheeps-Coates, and Milles,
Sometimes with Lunatic bans, sometime with Prayers
Enforce their charity: poor Turlygod, poor Tom,
That's something yet: Edgar I nothing am.
It is strange that they should so depart from home,
And not send back my Messengers.
As I learned,
The night before, there was no purpose in them
Of this remove.
Hail to thee Noble Master.
Ha? Make thou this shame ahy pastime?
No my Lord.
Ho, ha, he wears Cruel Garters Horses are tide by the heads, Dogs and Bears by' the neck, Monkeys by' the loins, and Men by' the legs: when a man ouerlustie at legs, then he wears wooden nether-stocks.
What's he▪
That hath so much thy place mistook
To set thee here?
It is both he and she,
Your Son, and Daughter.
No.
Yes.
No I say.
I say yea.
By Iupiter I swear no.
By Iuno, I swear I.
They durst not do it:
They could not, would not do it: it is worse then murder,
To do upon respect such violent outrage:
Resolve me with all modest haste, which way
Thou might deserve, or they impose this usage,
Coming from vs.
My Lord, when at their home
I did commend your Highness Letters to them,
Ere I was risen from the place, that showed
My duty kneeling, came there a reeking Post,
Stewed in his haste, half breathless, painting forth
From Gonerill his Mistress, salutations;
Delivered Letters spite of intermission,
Which presently they read; on those contents
They summoned up their meiney, straight took Horse,
Commanded me to follow, and attend
The leisure of their answer, gave me cold looks,
And meeting here the other Messenger,
Whose welcome I perceived had poisoned mine,
Being the very fellow which of late
Displayed so saucily against your Highness,
Having more man then wit about me, drew;
He raised the house, with loud and coward cries,
Your Son and Daughter found this trespass worth
The shame which here it suffers.
Winters not gon yet, if the wild Geese fly that way,
Fathers that wear rags, do make their Children blind,
But Fathers that bear bags, shall see their children kind.
Fortune that arrant whore, ne'er turns the key to the poor.
But for all this thou shalt have as many Dolors for thy
Daughters, as thou can tell in a year.
Oh how this Mother swells up toward my heart!
Historica passio, down thou climbing sorrow,
Thy Elements below where is this Daughter?
With the Earl Sir, here within.
Follow me not, stay here.
Made you no more offence,
But what you speak of?
None:
How chance the the King comes with so small a number?
And thou had been set in the Stocks for that question, thoud'st well deserved it.
Why Fool?
We'll set thee to school to an Ant, to teach thee ther's no labouring in the winter. All that follow their noses, are led by their eyes, but blind men, and there's not a nose among twenty, but can smell him that's stink∣ing; let go thy hold, when a great wheel runs down a hill, least it break thy neck with following. But the great one that goes upward, let him draw thee after: when a wiseman gives thee better counsel give me mine again, I would house none but knaves follow it, since a Fool gives it.
That Sir, which serves and seeks for gain,
And follows but for form;
Will pack, when it begins to rain,
And leave thee in the storm,
But I will tarry, the Fool will stay,
And let the wiseman fly:
The knave turns Fool that runs away,
The Fool no knave party.
Where learned you this Fool?
Not in the Stocks Fool.
Deny to speak with me?
They are sick, they are weary,
They have travailed all the night? mere fetches,
The images of revolt and flying off.
Fetch me a better answer.
My dear Lord,
You know the fiery quality of the Duke,
How unremoveable and fixed he is
In his own course.
Vengeance, Plague, Death, Confusion:
Fiery? What quality? Why Gloster▪ Gloster,
I'd speak with the Duke of Cornwall, and his wife.
Well my good Lord, I have informed them so.
Informed them? Dost thou understand me man.
I my good Lord.
The King would speak with Cornwall,
The dear Father
Would with his Daughter speak, commands, tends, ser∣vice,
Are they informed of this? My breath and blood:
Fiery? The fiery Duke, tell the hot Duke that —
No, but not yet, may be he is not well,
Infirmity doth still neglect all office,
Whereto our health is bound, we are not our selves,
When Nature being oppressed, commands the mind
To suffer with the body; Isle forbear,
And am fallen out with my more headier will,
To take the indisposed and sickly fit,
For the sound man. Death on my state: wherefore
Should he sit here? This act persuades me,
That this emotion of the Duke and her
Is practise only. Give me my Servant forth;
Go tell the Duke, and's wife, Il'd speak with them:
Now, presently: bid them come forth and hear me,
Or at their Chamber door Isle beat the Drum,
Till it cry sleep to death.
I would have all well betwixt you.
Oh me my heart! My rising heart! But down.
Cry to it Nunckle, as the Cockney did to the Isles, when she put 'em in the Paste alive, she knapt 'em of the coxcombs with a stick, and cried down wantons, down; it was her Brother, that in pure kindness to his Horse buttered his Hay.
Good morrow to you both.
Hail to your Grace.
I am glad to see your Highness.
Reagan, I think your are. I know what reason
I have to think so, if thou should not be glad,
I would divorce me from thy Mother Tomb,
Sepulchring an Adulteress. O are you free?
Some other time for that. Beloved Reagan,
Thy Sisters nought: oh Reagan, she hath tied
Sharpe-tooth'd unkindness, like a vulture here,
I can scarce speak to thee, thou'lt not believe
With how deprau'd a quality. Oh Reagan.
I pray you Sir, take patience, I have hope
You less know how to value her desert,
Then she to scant her duty.
Say? How is that?
I cannot think my Sister in the least
Would fail her Obligation. If Sir perchance
She have restrained the Riots of your Followres,
It is on such ground, and to such wholesome end,
As clears her from all blame.
My curses on her.
O Sir, you are old,
Nature in you stands on the very Verge
Of his confine: you should be ruled, and led
By some discretion, that discerns your state
Better then you your self: therefore I pray you,
That to our Sister, you do make return,
Say you have wronged her.
Ask her forgiveness?
Do you but mark how this becomes the house?
Dear daughter, I confess that I am old;
Age is unnecessary: on my knees I beg,
That you'll vouchsafe me Raiment, Bed, and Food.
Good Sir, no more: these are unsightly tricks:
Return you to my Sister.
Never Reagan:
She hath abated me of half my Train;
Looked black upon me, struck me with her Tongue
Most Serpent-like, upon the very Heart.
All the stored Vengeances of Heaven, fall
On her ungrateful top: strike her young bones
You taking Airs, with Lameness.
Fie sir. fie.
You nimble Lightnings, dart your blinding flames
Into her scornful eyes: Infect her Beauty,
You Fen-suck'd Fogs, drawn by the powrfull Sun,
To fall, and blister.
O the blessed Gods!
So will you wish on me, when the rash mood is on.
No Reagan, thou shalt never have my curse:
Thy tender-hefted Nature shall not give
Thee o'er to harshness: Her eyes are fierce, but thine
Do comfort, and not burn. It is not in thee
To grudge my pleasures, to cut off my Train,
To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes,
And in conclusion, to oppose the bolt
Against my coming in. Thou better know
The Offices of Nature, bond of Childhood,
Effects of Courtesy, dues of Gratitude:
Thy half of the Kingdom hast thou not forgot,
Wherein I thee endowed.
Good Sir, to the purpose.
Who put my• an in the Stocks?
What Trumpet's that?
I know it, my Sisters: this approves her Letter,
That she would soon be here. Is your Lady come?
This is a Slave, whose easy borrowed pride
Dwells in the fickly grace of her he follows.
Out Varlet, from my sight.
What means your Grace?
Who stocked my Servant? Reagan, I have good hope
Thou did not know on it.
Who comes here? O Heavens!
If you do love old men; if your sweet sway
Allow Obedience; if you your selves are old,
Make it your cause: Send down, and take my part.
Art not ashamed to look upon this Beard?
O Reagan, will you take her by the hand?
Why not by' the hand Sir? How have I offended?
Ell's not offence that indiscretion finds,
And dotage terms so.
O sides, you are too tough!
Will you yet hold?
How came my man in the Stocks?
I set him there, Sir: but his own Disorders
Deserved much less advancement.
You? Did you?
I pray you Father being weak, seem so.
If till the expiration of your Month
You will return and sojourn with my Sister,
Dismissing half your train, come then to me,
I am now from home, and out of that provision
Which shall be needful for your entertainment.
Return to her? and fifty men dismissed?
No, rather I abjure all roofs, and choose
To wage against the enmity of the ayre,
To be a Comrade with the Wolf, and Owl,
Necessities sharpe pinch. Return with her?
Why the hot-bloodied France, that dowerlesse took
Our youngest borne, I could as well be brought
To knee his Throne, and Squire-like pension beg,
To keep base life a foot; return with her?
Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter
To this detested groom.
At your choice Sir.
I prithee Daughter do not make me mad,
I will not trouble thee my Child: farewell:
We'll no more meet, no more see one another.
But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my Daughter,
Or rather a disease that's in my flesh,
Which I must needs call mine. Thou art a Bile,
A plague sore, or embossed Carbuncle
In my corrupted blood. But Isle not chide thee,
Let shame come when it will, I do not call it,
I do not bid the Thunder-bearer sure,
Nor tell tales of thee to high-iudging Jove,
Mend when thou can, be better at thy leisure,
I can be patient, I can stay with Reagan,
I and my hundred Knights.
Not altogether so,
I looked not for you yet, nor am provided
For your fit welcome, give ear Sir to my Sister,
For those that mingle reason with your passion,
Must be content to think you old, and so,
But she knows what she doe's.
Is this well spoken?
I dare avouch it Sir, what fifty Followers?
Is it not well? What should you need of more?
Yea, or so many? Sith that both charge and danger,
Speak against so great a number? How in one house
Should many people, under two commands
Hold amity? It is hard, almost impossible.
Why might not you my Lord, receive attendance
From those that she calls Servants, or from mine?
Why not my Lord?
If then they chanced to slack ye,
We could control them; if you will come to me,
(For now I spy• danger) I entreat you
To bring but five and twenty, to no more
Will I give place or notice.
I gave you all.
And in good time you gave it.
Made you my Guardians, my Depositories,
But kept a reservation to be followed
With such a number? What, must I come to you
With five and twenty? Reagan, said you so?
And speak't again my Lord, no more with me.
Those wicked Creatures yet do look well fauor'd
When others are more wicked, not being the worst
Stands in some rank of praise, Isle go with thee,
Thy fifty yet doth double five and twenty,
And thou art twice her Love.
Hear me my Lord;
What need you five and twenty? Ten? Or five?
To follow in a house, where twice so many
Have a command to tend you?
What need one?
O reason not the need: our basest Beggars
Are in the poorest thing superfluous,
Allow not Nature, more then Nature needs:
Mans life is cheap as Beasts. Thou art a Lady;
If only to go warm were gorgeous,
Why Nature needs not what thou gorgeous wear,
Which scarcely keeps thee warm, but for true need:
You Heavens, give me that patience, patience I need,
You see me here (you Gods) a poor old man,
As full of grief as age, wretched in both,
If it be you that stirs these Daughters hearts
Against their Father, fool me not so much,
To bear it tamely: touch me with Noble anger,
And let not women's weapons, water drops,
Stain my mans cheeks. No you unnatural Hags,
I will have such revenges on you both,
That all the world shall — I will do such things,
What they are yet, I know not, but they shall be
The terrors of the earth? you think Isle weep,
No, Isle not weep, I have full cause of weeping.
But this heart shall break into a hundred thousand flaws
Or ere Isle weep: O Fool, I shall go mad.
Let vs withdraw, twill be a Storm.
This house is little, the old man an'ds people,
Cannot be well bestowed.
It is his own blame hath put himself from rest,
And must needs taste his folly.
For his particular, Isle receive him gladly,
But not one follower.
So am I purposed,
Where is my Lord of Gloster?
Followed the old man forth, he is returned.
The King is in high rage.
Whether is he going?
He calls to Horse, but will I know not whether.
It is best to give him way, he leads himself.
My Lord, entreat him by no means to stay.
Alack the night comes on, and the high winds
Do sorely ruffle, for many Miles about
There's scarce a Bush.
O Sir, to wilful men,
The injuries that they themselves procure,
Must be their Schoole-Masters: shut up your doors,
He is attended with a desperate train,
And what they may incense him too, being apt,
To have his ear abused, wisdom bids fear.
Shut up your •ores my Lord, it is a wild night,
My Reagan counsels well•: come out of the storm.
Who's there besides foul weather?
One minded like the weather, most unquietly.
I know you: Whore's the King?
Contending with the fretful Elements;
Bids the wind blow the Earth into the Sea,
Or swell the curled Waters above the Maine,
That things might change, or cease.
But who is with him?
None but the Fool, who labours to out-iest
His heart-strooke injuries.
Sir, I do know you,
And dare upon the warrant of my note
Commend a dear thing to you. There is division
(Although as yet the face of it is covered
With mutual cunning) twixt Albany, and Cornwall:
Who have, as who have not, that their great Stars
Throned and set high; Servants, who seem no less,
Which are to France the Spies and Speculations
Intelligent of our State. What hath bin seen,
Either in snuffs, and pickings of the Dukes,
Or the hard Reine which both of them hath borne
Against the old kind King; or something deeper,
Whereof (perchance) these are but furnishings.
I will talk further with you.
No, do not:
For confirmation that I am much more
Then my out-wall; open this Purse, and take
What it contains. If you shall see Cordel•a,
(As fear not but you shall) show her this Ring,
And she will tell you who that Fellow is
That yet you do not know. Fie on this Storm,
I will go seek the King.
Give me your hand,
Have you no more to say?
Few words, but to effect more then all yet;
That when we have found the King, in which your pain
That way, Isle this: He that first lights on him,
Holla the other.
Blow winds, &amp; crack your cheeks; Rage, blow
You Cataracts, and Hyrricano's spout,
Till you have drenched our Steeples, drown the Cocks.
You Sulph'rous and Thought-executing Fires,
Vaunt-curriors of Oake-cleauing Thunder-bolts,
Singe my white head. And thou all-shaking Thunder,
Strike flat the thick Rotundity of the world,
Crack Natures moulds, all germans spill at once
That makes ungrateful Man.
O Nunkle, Court holy-water in a dry house, is better then this Rain-water out of door. Good Nunkle, in, ask thy Daughters blessing, heere's a night pities neither Wisemen, nor Fools.
Rumble thy belly full: spit Fire, spout Rain:
Nor Rain, Wind, Thunder, Fire are my Daughters;
I tax not you, you Elements with unkindness.
I never gave you Kingdom, called you Children;
You owe me no subscription. Then let fall
Your horrible pleasure. Here I stand your Slave,
A poor, infirm, weak, and despised old man:
But yet I call you Servile Ministers,
That will with two pernicious Daughters join
Your high-engender'd Battles, against a head
So old, and white as this. O, ho! it is foul.
He that has a house to putt's head in, has a good Head-peece:
The Codpiece that will house, before the head has any;
The Head, and he shall Louse: so Beggars marry many.
The man yt makes his Toe, what he his Hart should make,
Shall of a Corn cry woe, and turn his sleep to wake.
For there was never yet fair woman, but she made mouths in a glass.
No, I will be the pattern of all patience,
I will say nothing.
Who's there?
Marry here's Grace, and a Codpiece, that's a Wiseman, and a Fool.
Alas Sir are you here? Things that love night,
Love not such nights as these: The wrathful Skies
Gallow the very wanderers of the dark
And make them keep their Caves: Since I was man,
Such sheets of Fire, such bursts of horrid Thunder,
Such groans of roaring Wind, and Rain, I never
Remember to have heard. Mans Nature cannot carry
The affliction, nor the fear.
Let the great Gods
That keep this dreadful putter o'er our heads,
Find out their enemies now. Tremble thou Wretch,
That hast within thee vndivulged Crimes
Vnwhipt of Justice. Hide thee, thou Bloody hand;
Thou Perjured, and thou Similar of Virtue
That art Incestuous. Caitiff, to pieces shake
That under covert, and convenient seeming
He's practised on mans life. Close pent-vp guilts,
Rive your concealing Continents, and cry
These dreadful Summoners grace. I am a man,
More sinned against, then sinning.
Alack, bare-headed?
Gracious my Lord, hard by here is a Houell,
Some friendship will it lend you against the Tempest:
Repose you there, while I to this hard house,
(More harder then the stones whereof it is raised,
Which even but now, demanding after you,
Denied me to come in) return, and force
Their scanted courtesy.
My wits begin to turn.
Come on my boy. How dost my boy? Art cold?
I am cold my self. Where is this straw, my Fellow?
The Art of our Necessities is strange,
And can make wild things precious. Come, your Houel;
Poor Fool, and Knave, I have one part in my heart
That's sorry yet for thee.
He that has and a little-tyne wit,
With heigh-ho, the Wind and the Rain,
Must make content with his Fort •es fit,
Though the Rain it rains every day.
True Boy: Come bring vs to this Houell.
This is a brave night to cool a Courtesan:
Isle speak a Prophecy ere I go:
When Priests are more in word, then matter;
When Brewers mar their Malt with water;
When Nobles are their Taylors Tutors,
No Heretics burned, but wenches Suitors;
When every Case in Law, is right;
No Squire in debt, nor no poor Knight;
When Slanders do not live in Tongues;
Nor Cut-purses come not to throngs;
When Usurers tell their Gold in the Field,
And Bawds, and whores, do Churches build,
Then shall the Realm of Albion, come to great confusion:
Then comes the time, who lives to see it,
That going shall be used with feet.
This prophecy Marlin shall make, for I live before his time.
Alack, alack Edmund, I like not this unnatural dealing; when I desired their leave that I might pity him, they took from me the use of mine own house, charged me on pain of perpetual displeasure, neither to spea•e of him entreat for him, or any way sustain him.
Most savage and unnatural.
Go too; say you nothing. There is division be∣tweene the Dukes, and a worse matter then that: I have received a Letter this night, it is dangerous to be spoken, I have locked the Letter in my Closet, these injuries the King now bears, will be revenged home; there is part of a Power already footed, we must incline to the King, I will look him, and privily relieve him; go you and maintain talk with the Duke, that my charity be not of him perceived; If he ask for me, I am ill, and gone to bed, if I die for it, (as no less is threatened me) the King my old Master must be relieved. There is strange things toward Edmund, pray you be careful.
This Courtesy forbid thee, shall the Duke
Instantly know, and of that Letter too;
This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me.
That which my Father looses: no less then all,
The younger rises, when the old doth fall.
Here is the place my Lord, good my Lord enter,
The tirrany of the open night's too rough
For Nature to endure.
Let me alone.
Good my Lord enter here.
Wilt break my heart?
I had rather break mine own,
Good my Lord enter.
Thou think it is much that this contentious storm
Invades vs to the skinso: it is to thee,
But where the greater malady is fixed,
The lesser is scarce felt. You would shun a Bear,
But if they flight lay toward the roaring Sea,
You would meet the Bear in the mouth, when the mind's free,
The bodies delicate: the tempest in my mind,
Doth from my senses take all feeling else,
Save what beats there, Filial ingratitude,
Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand
For lifting food too't? But I will punish home;
No, I will weep no more; in such a night,
To shut me out? Pour on, I will endure:
In such a night as this? O Reagan, Gonerill,
Your old kind Father, whose frank heart gave all,
O that way madness lies, let me shun that:
No more of that.
Good my Lord enter here.
Prithee go in thy self, seek thine own ease,
This tempest will not give me leave to ponder
On things would hurt me more, but Isle go in,
In Boy, go first. You houseless poverty,
Nay get thee in; Isle pray, and then Isle sleep.
Poor naked wretches, where so ere you are
That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,
How shall your House-lesse heads, and unfit sides,
Your lopped, and windowed raggedness defend you
From seasons such as these? O I have tan
Too little care of this: Take Physic, Pomp,
Expose thy self to feel what wretches feel,
That thou moist shake the superflux to them,
And show the Heavens more just.
Fathom, and half, Fathom and half; poor Tom.
Come not in here Nuncle, here's a spirit, help me, help me.
Give me thy hand, who's there?
A spirit, a spirit, he says his name's poor Tom.
What art thou that dost grumble there in the straw? Come forth.
Away, the foul Fiend follows me, through the sharpe Hauthorne blow the winds. Humh, go to thy bed and warm thee.
Did thou give all to thy Daughters? And art thou come to this?
Who gives any thing to poor Tom? Whom the foul fiend hath led though Fire, and through Flame, through Sword, and Whirle-Poole, o'er Bog, and Quag∣mire, that hath laid Knives under his Pillow, and Halters in his Pue, set Rats-bane by his Porridge, made him Proud of heart, to ride on a Bay trotting Horse, over four inched Bridges, to course his own shadow for a Traitor. Bliss thy five Wits, Toms a cold. O do, de, do, de, do de, bliss thee from Whirle-Windes, Starre-blasting, and ta∣king, do poor Tom some charity, whom the foul Fiend vexes. There could I have him now, and there, and there again, and there.
He's his Daughters brought him to this pass?
Coldest thou save nothing? Would thou give 'em all?
Nay, he reserved a Blanket, else we had bin all shamed.
Now all the plagues that in the pendulous ayre
Hang fated o'er men's faults, light on thy Daughters.
He hath no Daughters Sir.
Death Traitor, nothing could have subdued Nature
To such a lowness, but his unkind Daughters.
Is it the fashion, that discarded Fathers,
Should have thus little mercy on their flesh:
Judicious punishment, it was this flesh begot
Those Pelican Daughters.
Pillicock sat on Pillicock hill, allow: allow, loo, loo.
This cold night will turn vs all to Fools, and Madmen.
Take heed of the fool Fiend, obey thy Pa∣rents, keep thy words Justice, swear not, commit not,
with mans sworn Spouse: set not thy Sweet-heart on proud array. Tom•s a cold.
What hast thou bin?
A Serving-man? Proud in heart, and mind; that curled my hair, wore Gloves in my cap; served the Lust of my Mistress heart, and did the act of darkness with her. Swore as many Oaths as I spake words, &amp; broke them in the sweet face of Heaven. One, that slept in the contriving of Lust, and waked to doe it. Wine loved I dearly, Dice dearly; and in Woman, out-Paramour'd the Turk. False of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand; Hog in sloth, Fox in stealth, Wolf in greediness, Dog in madness, Lyon in prey. Let not the creaking of shoes, Nor the rustling of Silks, betray thy poor heart to wo∣man. Keep thy foot out of Brothels, thy hand out of Plackets, thy pen from Lenders Books, and defy the foul Fiend. Still through the Hauthorne blows the cold wind: Says suum, mun, nonny, Dolphin my Boy, Boy Sesey: let him trot by.
Thou were better in a Grave, then to answer with thy uncovered body, this extremity of the Skies. Is man no more then this? Consider him well. Thou ow'st the Worm no Silk; the Beast, no Hide; the Sheep, no Wool; the Cat, no perfume. Ha? Here's three on's are sophisticated. Thou art the thing it self; vnaccommo∣dated man▪ is no more but such a poor, bare, forked A∣nimall as thou art. Off, off you Landings: Come, un∣button here.
Prithee Nunckle be contented, it is a naughty night to swim in. Now a little fire in a wilde Field, were like an old Lechers heart, a small spark, all the rest on's body, cold: Look, here comes a walking fire.
This is the foul Flibbertigibbet; hee begins at Curfew, and walks at first Cock: Hee gives the Web and the Pin, squints the eye, and makes the Hare-lippe; Mildews the white Wheat, and hurts the poor Cry∣ture of earth.
Swithold footed thrice the old,
He met the Night-Mare, and her nine-fold;
Bid her alight, and her troth-plight,
And aroynt thee Witch, aroynt thee.
How fares your Grace?
What's he?
Who's there? What is it you seek?
What are you there? Your Names?
Poor Tom, that eats the swimming Frog, the Toad, the Tod-pole, the wall-Neut, and the water: that in the fury of his heart, when the foul Fiend rages, eats Cow-dung for Sallets; swallows the old Rat, and the ditch-Dogge; drinks the green Mantle of the standing Poole: who is whipped from Tything to Tything, and stocked, punished, and imprisoned: who hath three Suites to his back, six shirts to his body:
Horse to ride, and weapon to wear:
But Mice, and Rats, and such small Dear,
Have bin Toms food, for seven long year:
Beware my Follower. Peace Smulkin, peace thou Fiend.
What, hath your Grace no better company?
The Prince of Darkness is a Gentleman. Modo he's called, and Mahu.
Our flesh and blood, my Lord, is grown so wild, that it doth hate what gets it.
Poor Tom's a cold.
Go in with me; my duty cannot suffer
To obey in all your daughters hard commands:
Though their Injunction be to bar my doors,
And let this Tyrannous night take hold upon you,
Yet have I ventured to come seek you out,
And bring you where both fire, and food is ready.
First let me talk with this Philosopher,
What is the cause of Thunder?
Good my Lord take his offer,
Go into the house.
Isle talk a word with this same learned Theban:
What is your study?
How to prevent the Fiend, and to kill Vermin.
Let me ask you one word in private.
Importune him once more to go my Lord,
His wits begin to vnsettle.
Can thou blame him?
His Daughters seek his death: Ah, that good Kent,
He said it would be thus: poor banished man:
Thou say the King grows mad, Isle tell thee Friend
I am almost mad my self. I had a Son,
Now out-law'd from my blood: he sought my life
But lately: very late: I loved him (Friend)
No Father his Son dearer: true to tell thee,
The grief hath crazed my wits. What a night's this?
I do beseech your grace.
O cry you mercy, Sir:
Noble Philosopher, your company.
Tom's a cold.
In fellow there, into the Houel; keep thee warm.
Come, let's in all.
This way, my Lord.
With him;
I will keep still with my Philosopher.
Good my Lord, sooth him:
Let him take the Fellow.
Take him you on.
Sir, come on: go along with vs.
Come, good Athenian.
No words, no words, hush.
Child Rowland to the dark Tower came,
His word was still, fie, foh, and fumme,
I smell the blood of a British man.
I will have my revenge, ere I depart his house.
How my Lord, I may be censured, that Nature thus gives way to Loyalty, something fears me to think of.
I now perceive, it was not altogether your Brothers evil disposition made him seek his death: but a provoking merit set a-worke by a reprouable badness in himself.
How malicious is my fortune, that I must re∣pent to be just? This is the Letter which hee spoke of; which approves him an intelligent party to the aduanta∣ges of France. O Heavens! that this Treason were not; or not I the detector.
Go with me to the Duchess.
If the matter of this Paper be certain, you have mighty business in hand.
True or false, it hath made thee Earl of Glove∣cester: seek out where thy Father is, that hee may bee ready for our apprehension.
If I find him comforting the King, it will stuff his suspicion more fully. I will persevere in my course of Loyalty, though the conflict be sore between that, and my blood.
I will lay trust upon thee: and thou shalt find a dear Father in my love.
Here is better then the open ayre▪ take it thank∣fully: I will piece out the comfort with what addition I can: I will not be long from you.
All the power of his wits, have given way to his impatience: the Gods reward your kindness.
Fraterretto calls me, and tells me Narrow is an Ang∣ler in the Lake of Darkness: pray Innocent, and beware the foul Fiend.
Prithee Nunkle tell me, whether a madman be a Gentleman, or a Yeoman.
A King, a King.
No, he's a Yeoman, that he's a Gentleman to his Son: for hoe's a mad Yeoman that sees his Son a Gentleman before him.
To have a thousand with red burning spits
Come hissing in upon 'em.
Bless thy five wits.
O pity: Sir, where is the patience now
That you so oft have boasted to retain?
My tears begin to take his part so much,
They mar my counterfeiting.
The little dogs, and all;
Trey, Blanch, and Sweet-heart: see, they bark at me.
Tom, will throw his head at them: Avaunt you
Cures, be thy mouth or black or white:
Tooth that poisons if it bite:
Mastiff, Grey-hound, Mongrel, Grim,
Hound or Spaniel, Brache, or Him:
Or Bobtail tight, or Troudle tail,
Tom will make him weep and wail,
For with throwing thus my head;
Dogs leapt the hatch, and all are fled.
Do, de, de, de: sese: Come, march to Wakes and Fairs,
And Market Towns: poor Tom thy horn is dry,
Then let them Anatomize Reagan: See what breeds about her heart. Is there any cause in Nature that make these hard-hearts. You sir, I entertain for one of my hundred; only, I do not like the fashion of your gar∣mints. You will say they are Persian; but let them bee changed.
Now good my Lord, lye here, and rest awhile.
Make no noise, make no noise, draw the Cur∣taines: so, so, we'll go to Supper in the morning.
And Isle go to bed at noon.
Come hither Friend:
Where is the King my Master?
Here Sir, but trouble him not, his wits are gon.
Good friend, I prithee take him in thy arms;
I have ore-heard a plot of death upon him:
There is a Litter ready, lay him in it,
And drive toward Dover friend, where thou shalt meet
Both welcome, and protection. Take up thy Master,
If thou should dally half an hour, his life
With thine, and all that offer to defend him,
Stand in assured loss. Take up, take up,
And follow me, that will to some provision
Give thee quick conduct. Come, come, away.
Post speedily to my Lord your husband, show him this Letter, the Army of France is landed: seek out the Traitor Glouster.
Hang him instantly.
Pluck out his eyes.
Leave him to my displeasure. Edmond, keep you our Sister company: the revenges wee are bound to take upon your Traitorous Father, are not fit for your beholding. Advice the Duke where you are going, to a most festiuate preparation: we are bound to the like. Our Posts shall be swift, and intelligent betwixt vs. Fare∣well dear Sister, farewell my Lord of Glouster.
How now? Whore's the King?
My Lord of Glouster hath conveyed him hence
Some five or six and thirty of his Knights
Hot Questrists after him, met him at gate,
Who, with some other of the Lords, dependants,
Are gone with him toward Dover; where they boast
To have well armed Friends.
Get horses for your Mistress.
Farewell sweet Lord, and Sister.
Edmund farewell: go seek the Traitor Gloster,
Pinion him like a Thief, bring him before vs:
Though well we may not pass upon his life
Without the form of Justice: yet our power
Shall do a curtsy to our wrath, which men
May blame, but not control.
Who's there? the Traitor?
Ungrateful Fox, it is he.
Bind fast his corky arms.
What means your Graces?
Good my Friends consider you are my Ghosts:
Do me no foul play, Friends.
Bind him I say.
Hard, hard: O filthy Traitor.
Unmerciful Lady, as you are, I'm none.
To this Chair bind him,
Villain, thou shalt find.
By the kind Gods, it is most ignobly done
To pluck me by the Beard.
So white, and such a Traitor?
Naughty Lady,
These hairs which thou dost ravish from my chin
Will quicken and accuse thee. I am your Host,
With Robbers hands, my hospitable favours
You should not ruffle thus. What will you do?
Come Sir.
What Letters had you late from France?
Be simple answered, for we know the truth.
And what confederacy have you with the Trai∣tors, late footed in the Kingdom?
To whose hands
You have sent the Lunatic King: Speak.
I have a Letter guessingly set down
Which came from one that's of a neutral heart,
And not from one opposed.
Cunning.
And false.
Where hast thou sent the King?
To Dover.
Wherefore to Dover?
Was it thou not charged at peril.
Wherefore to Dover? Let him answer that.
I am tied to the Stake,
And I must stand the Course.
Wherefore to Dover?
Because I would not see thy cruel Nails
Pluck out his poor old eyes: nor thy fierce Sister,
In his Anointed flesh, stick boorish fangs.
The Sea, with such a storm as his bare head,
In Hell-blacke-night endured, would have buoyed up
And quenched the Stelled fires:
Yet poor old heart, he help the Heavens to rain.
If Wolves had at thy Gate howled that sterne time,
Thou should have said, good Porter turn the Key:
All Cruels else subscribe: but I shall see
The winged Vengeance overtake such Children.
See it shalt thou never. Fellows hold ye Chair,
Upon these eyes of thine, Isle set my foot.
He that will think to live, till he be old,
Give me some help. — O cruel! O you Gods.
One side will mock another: The other too.
If you see vengeance.
Hold your hand, my Lord:
I have served you ever since I was a Child:
But better service have I never done you,
Then now to bid you hold.
How now, you dog?
If you did wear a beard upon your chin,
I'd shake it on this quarrel. What do you mean?
My Villain?
Nay then come on, and take the chance of anger.
Give me thy Sword. A peasant stand up thus?
Oh I am slain: my Lord, you have one eye left
To see some mischief on him▪ Oh.
Lest it see more, prevent it; Out wild gelly:
Where is thy luster now?
All dark and comfortless?
Whore's my Son Edmund?
Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of Nature
To quit this horrid act.
Out treacherous Villain,
Thou call on him, that hates thee. It was be
That made the overture of thy Treasons to vs:
Who is too good to pity thee.
O my Follies! then Edgar was abused,
Kind Gods, forgive me that, and prosper him.
Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell
His way to Dover.
How is it my Lord? How look you?
I have received a hurt: Follow me Lady;
Turn out that eyeless Villain: throw this Slave
Upon the Dunghill: Reagan, I bleed apace,
Untimely comes this hurt. Give me your arm.
Yet better thus, and known to be contemned,
Then still contemned and flattered, to be worst:
The lowest, and most dejected thing of Fortune,
Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear:
The lamentable change is from the best,
The worst returns to laughter. Welcome then,
Thou vnsubstantiall ayre that I embrace:
The Wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst,
Owes nothing to thy blasts.
But who comes here? My Father poorly led?
World, World, O world!
But that thy strange mutations make vs hate thee,
Life would not yield to age.
O my good Lord, I have been your Tenant,
And your Fathers Tenant, these fourscore years.
Away, get thee away: good Friend be gone,
Thy comforts can do me no good at all,
Thee, they may hurt.
You cannot see your way.
I have no way, and therefore want no eyes:
I stumbled when I saw. Full oft it is seen,
Our means secure vs, and our mere defects
Prove our Commodities. Oh dear Son Edgar,
The food of thy abused Fathers wrath:
Might I but live to see thee in my touch,
I'd say I had eyes again.
How now? who's there?
O Gods! Who is it can say I am at the worst?
I am worse then ere I was.
It is poor mad Tom.
And worse I may be yet: the worst is not,
So long as we can say this is the worst.
Fellow, where goosed?
Is it a Beggar-man?
Madman, and beggar too.
He has some reason, else he could not beg.
In the last nights storm, I such a fellow saw;
Which made me think a Man, a Worm. My Son
Came then into my mind, and yet my mind
Was then scarce Friends with him.
I have heard more since:
As Flies to wanton Boys, are we to the Gods,
They kill vs for their sport.
How should this be?
Bad is the Trade that must play Fool to sorrow,
Angering it self, and others. Bless thee Master.
Is that the naked Fellow?
I, my Lord.
Get thee away: If for my sake
Thou wilt ore-take vs hence a mile or twain
In the way toward Dover, do it for ancient love,
And bring some covering for this naked Soul,
Which Isle entreat to lead me.
Alack sir, he is mad.
It is the times plague,
When Madmen lead the blind:
Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure:
Aboue the rest, be gone.
He bring him the best Parrell that I have
Come on it, what will.
Sirrah, naked fellow.
Poor Tom's a cold. I cannot daub it further.
Come hither fellow.
And yet I must:
Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.
Know thou the way to Dover?
Both style, and gate; Horseway, and foot-path: poor Tom hath bin scarred out of his good wits. Bless thee good mans son, from the foul Fiend.
Here take this purse, you whom the heavens plagues
Have humbled to all strokes: that I am wretched
Makes thee the happier: Heavens deal so still:
Let the superfluous, and Lust-dieted man,
That slaves your ordinance, that will not see
Because he do's not feel, feel your power quickly:
So distribution should undo excess,
And each man have enough. Dost thou know Dover?
I Master.
There is a Cliff, whose high and bending head
Looks fearfully in the confined Deep:
Bring me but to the very brim of it,
And Isle repair the misery thou dost bear
With something rich about me: from that place,
I shall no leading need.
Give me thy arm;
Poor Tom shall lead thee.
Welcome my Lord. I marvel our mild husband
Not met vs on the way. Now, whore's your Master?
Madam within, but never man so changed:
I told him of the Army that was Landed:
He smiled at it. I told him you were coming,
His answer was, the worse. Of Glosters Treachery,
And of the loyal Service of his Son
When I informed him, then he called me Sot,
And told me I had turned the wrong side out:
What most he should dislike, seems pleasant to him;
What like, offensive.
Then shall you go no further.
It is the Cowish terror of his spirit
That dares not undertake: He will not feel wrongs
Which tie him to an answer: our wishes on the way
May prove effects. Back Edmond to my Brother,
Hasten his Musters, and conduct his powers.
I must change names at home, and give the Distaff
Into my Husbands hands. This trusty Servant
Shall pass between vs: ere long you are like to hear
(If you dare venture in your own behalf)
A Mistresses command. Wear this; spare speech,
Decline your head. This kiss, if it durst speak
Would stretch thy Spirits up into the ayre:
Conceive, and fare thee well.
Yours in the ranks of death.
My most dear Gloster.
Oh, the difference of man, and man,
To thee a Women's services are due,
My Fool usurps my body.
Madam, here coma's my Lord.
I have been worth the whistle.
Oh Gonerill,
You are not worth the dust which the rude wind
Blows in your face.
Milke-Liuer'd man,
That bear a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs,
Who hast not in thy brows an eye-discerning
Thine Honour, from thy suffering.
See thy self devil:
Proper deformity seems not in the Fiend
So horrid as in woman.
Oh vain Fool.
Oh my good Lord, the Duke of Cornwals dead,
Slain by his Servant, going to put out
The other eye of Glouster.
Glousters eyes.
A Servant that he bred, thrilled with remorse,
Opposed against the act: bending his Sword
To his great Master, who, threat-enrag'd
Flew on him, and amongst them felled him dead,
But not without that harmful stroke, which since
Hath plucked him after.
This shows you are aboue
You Justices, that these our nether crimes
So speedily can avenge. But (O poor Glouster)
Lost he his other eye?
Both, both, my Lord.
This Letter Madam, craves a speedy answer:
It is from your Sister.
One way I like this well.
But being widow, and my Glouster with her,
May all the building in my fancy pluck
Upon my hateful life. Another way
The News is not so tart. Isle read, and answer.
Where was his Son,
When they did take his eyes?
Come with my Lady hither.
He is not here.
No my good Lord, I met him back again.
Knows he the wickedness?
I my good Lord: it was he informed against him
And quit the house on purpose, that their punishment
Might have the freer course.
Glouster, I live
To thank thee for the love thou should the King,
And to revenge thine eyes. Come hither Friend,
Tell me what more thou know.
Alack, it is he: why he was met even now
As mad as the vexed Sea, singing aloud,
Crowned with rank Fenitar, and furrow weeds,
With Hardokes, Hemlock, Nettles, Cuckoo flowers,
Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow
In our sustaining Corn. A Sanctuary send forth;
Search every Acre in the high-growne field,
And bring him to our eye. What can mans wisdom
In the restoring his bereaved Sense; he that helps him,
Take all my outward worth.
There is means Madam:
Our foster Nurse of Nature, is repose,
The which he lacks: that to provoke in him
Are many Simples operatiue, whose power
Will close the eye of Anguish.
All blessed Secrets,
All you vnpublish'd Virtues of the earth
Spring with my tears; be aydant, and remediate
In the Goodmans desires: seek, seek for him,
Least his ungoverned rage, dissolve the life
That wants the means to lead it.
News Madam,
The British Powers are marching hitherward.
It is known before. Our preparation stands
In expectation of them. O dear Father,
It is thy business that I go about: Therefore great France
My mourning, and importuned tears hath pitied:
No blown Ambition doth our Arms incite,
But love, dear love, and our aged Fathers Rite:
Soon may I hear, and see him.
But are my Brothers Powers set forth?
I Madam▪
Himself in person there?
Madam with much ado:
Your Sister is the better Soldier.
Lord Edmund spake not with your Lord at home?
No Madam.
What night import my Sisters Letter to him?
I know not, Lady.
Faith he is posted hence on serious matter:
It was great ignorance, Glousters eyes being out
To let him live. Where he arrives, he moves
All hearts against vs: Edmund, I think is gone
In pity of his misery, to dispatch
His nighted life: Moreover to descry
The strength of the Enemy.
I must needs after him, Madam, with my Letter.
Our troops set forth to morrow, stay with vs:
The ways are dangerous.
I may not Madam:
My Lady charged my duty in this business.
Why should she write to Edmund?
Might not you transport her purposes by word? Belike,
Some things, I know not what. Isle love thee much
Let me vnseale the Letter.
Madam, I had rather—
I know your Lady do's not love her Husband,
I am sure of that: and at her late being here,
She gave strange Eliads, and most speaking looks
To Noble Edmund. I know you are of her bosom.
I, Madam?
I speak in understanding: Y' are: I know it,
Therefore I do advise you take this note:
My Lord is dead: Edmond, and I have talked,
And more convenient is he for my hand
Then for your Ladies: You may gather more:
If you do find him, pray you give him this;
And when your Mistress hears thus much from you,
I pray desire her call her wisdom to her.
So fare you well:
If you do chance to hear of that blind Traitor,
Preferment false on him, that cuts him off.
Would I could meet Madam, I should show
What party I do follow.
Fare thee well.
When shall I come to the top of that same hill?
You do climb up it now. Look how we labour.
Me thinks the ground is even.
Horrible steep.
Hark, do you hear the Sea?
No truly.
Why then your other Senses grow imperfect
By your eyes anguish.
So may it be indeed.
Me thinks thy voice is altered, and thou speak
In better phrase, and matter then thou did.
Y' are much deceived: In nothing am I changed
But in my Garments.
Me thinks y' are better spoken.
Come on Sir,
Heere's the place: stand still: how fearful
And dizzy it is, to cast ones eyes so low,
The Crows and Choughs, that wing the midway ayre
Show scarce so gross as Beetles. Half way down
Hangs one that gathers Sampire: dreadful Trade:
Me thinks he seems no bigger then his head.
The Fishermen, that walked upon the beach
Appear like Mice: and yond tall Anchoring Bark,
Diminished to her Cock: her Cock, a Buoy
Almost too small for sight. The murmuring Surge,
That on the vnnumbred idle Pebble chafes
Cannot be heard so high. Isle look no more,
Least my brain turn, and the deficient sight
Topple down headlong.
Set me where you stand.
Give me your hand:
You are now within a foot of the extreme Verge:
For all beneath the Moon would I not leap upright.
Let go my hand:
Here Friend's another purse: in it, a Jewel
Well worth a poor mans taking. Fairies, and Gods
Prosper it with thee. Go thou further off,
Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.
Now fare ye well, good Sir.
With all my heart.
Why I do trifle thus with his despair,
Is done to cure it.
O you mighty Gods!
This world I do renounce, and in your sights
Shake patiently my great affliction off:
If I could bear it longer, and not fall
To quarrel with your great opposelesse wills,
My snuff, and loathed part of Nature should
Burn it self out. If Edgar live, O bless him:
Now Fellow, fare thee well.
Gone Sir, farewell:
And yet I know not how conceit may rob
The Treasury of life, when life it self
Yields to the Theft. Had he bin where he thought,
By this had thought bin past. Alive, or dead?
Hoe, you Sir: Friend, hear you Sir, speak:
Thus might he pass indeed: yet he revives.
What are you Sir?
Away, and let me dye.
Had thou been ought
But Gozemore, Feathers, Ayre,
(So many fathom down precipitating)
You would shivered like an Egg: but thou dost breath:
Hast heavy substance, bleed not, speak, art sound,
Ten Masts at each, make not the altitude
Which thou hast perpendicularly fell,
Thy life's a Miracle. Speak yet again.
But have I fallen, or no?
From the dread Somnet of this Chalky Bourne
Look up a height, the shrill-gorg'd Lark so far
Cannot be seen, or heard: Do but look up.
Alack, I have no eyes:
Is wretchedness deprived that benefit
To end it self by death? It was yet some comfort,
When misery could beguile the Tyrants rage,
And frustrate his proud will.
Give me your arm.
Up, so: How is it? Feel you your Legs? You stand.
Too well, too well.
This is aboue all strangeness,
Upon the crown of the Cliff. What thing was that
Which parted from you?
A poor unfortunate Beggar.
As I stood here below, me thought his eyes
Were two full Moons: he had a thousand Noses,
Horns wealk'd, and waued like the enraged Sea:
It was some Fiend: Therefore thou happy Father,
Think that the clearest Gods, who make them Honours
Of men's Impossibilities, have preserved thee.
I do remember now: henceforth Isle bear
Affliction, till it do cry out it self
Enough, enough, and dye. That thing you speak of,
I took it for a man: often it would say
The Fiend, the Fiend, he led me to that place.
Bear free and patient thoughts.
But who comes here?
The safer sense will ne'er accommodate
His Master thus.
No, they cannot touch me for crying. I am the King himself.
O thou side-piercing sight!
Nature's aboue Art, in that respect. Ther's your Presse-money. That fellow handles his bow, like a Crow-keeper: draw me a Cloathiers yard. Look, look, a Mouse: peace, peace, this piece of toasted Cheese will do it. There's my Gauntlet, Isle prove it on a Giant. Bring up the browne Bills. O well flown Bird: in the clout, in the clout: Hewgh. Give the word.
Sweet Mariorum.
Pass.
I know that voice.
Ha! Gonerill with a white beard? They flattered me like a Dog, and told me I had the white hairs in my Beard, ere the black ones were there. To say I, and no, to every thing that I said: I, and no too, was no good Divinity. When the rain came to wet me once, and the wind to make me chatter: when the Thunder would not peace at my bidding, there I found 'em, there I smelt 'em out. Go too, they are not men of their words; they told me, I was every thing: It is a Lye, I am not Agu-proofe.
The trick of that voice, I do well remember:
Is it not the King?
I, every inch a King.
When I do stare, see how the Subject quakes,
I pardon that mans life. What was thy cause?
Adultery? thou shalt not dye: dye for Adultery?
No, the Wren goes too't, and the small gilded Fly
Do's lecher in my sight. Let Copulation thrive:
For Glousters bastard Son was kinder to his Father,
Then my Daughters got 'tweene the lawful sheets.
Too't Luxury pell-mell, for I lack Soldiers.
Behold yond simpering Dame, whose face between her Forks presages Snow; that minces Virtue, &amp; do's shake the head to hear of pleasures name. The Fitchew, nor the soiled Horse goes too't with a more riotous appe∣tight▪ Down from the waste they are Centaurs, though Women all aboue: but to the Girdle do the Gods inhe∣rit, beneath is all the Fiends. There's hell, there's dark∣nes, there is the sulphurous pit; burning, scalding, stench, consumption: Fie, fie, fie; pah, pah: Give me an Ounce of Civet; good Apothecary sweeten my imagination: There's money for thee.
O let me kiss that hand.
Let me wipe it first,
It smells of Mortality.
O ruined piece of Nature, this great world
Shall so wear out to nought.
Dost thou know me?
I remember thine eyes well enough: dost thou squiny at me? No, doe thy worst blind Cupped, Isle not love. Read thou this challenge, mark but the penning of it.
Were all thy Letters Suns, I could not see.
I would not take this from report,
It is, and my heart breaks at it.
Read.
What with the Case of eyes?
Oh ho, are you there with me? No eyes in your head, nor no money in your purse? Your eyes are in a hey∣uy case, your purse in a light, yet you see how this world goes.
I see it feelingly.
What, art mad? A man may see how this world goes, with no eyes. Look with thine ears: See how yond Justice rails upon yond simple thief. Hark in thine ear: Change places, and handy-dandy, which is the Justice, which is the thief: Thou hast seen a Far∣mers dog bark at a Beggar?
I Sir.
And the Creature run from the Cur: there thou might behold the great image of Authority, a Dogg's obeyed in Office. Thou, Rascal Beadle, hold thy bloody hand: why dost thou lash that Whore? Strip thy own back, thou hotly lusts to use her in that kind, for which thou whip her. The Usurer hangs the Cozener. Tho∣rough
tattered clothes great Vices do appear: Robes, and Furred gowns hide all. Place sins with Gold, and the strong Lance of Justice, hurtles breaks: Arm it in rags, a Pigmies straw do's pierce it. None do's offend, none, I say none, Isle able 'em; take that of me my Friend, who have the power to seal the accusers lips. Get thee glasse-eyes, and like a scurvy Politician, seem to see the things thou dost not. Now, now, now, now. Pull off my Boots: harder, harder, so.
O matter, and impertinence mixed,
Reason in Madness.
If thou wilt weep my Fortunes, take my eyes.
I know thee well enough, thy name is Glouster:
Thou must be patient; we came crying hither:
Thou know, the first time that we smell the Ayre
We waul, and cry. I will preach to thee: Mark.
Alack, alack the day.
When we are borne, we cry that we are come
To this great stage of Fools. This a good block:
It were a delicate stratagem to shoo
A Troop of Horse with Felt: Isle put't in proof,
And when I have stolen upon these Son in Laws,
Then kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill.
Oh here he is: lay hand upon him, Sir▪
Your most dear Daughter —
No rescue? What, a Prisoner? I am even
The Natural Fool of Fortune. Use me well,
You shall have ransom. Let me have Surgeons,
I am cut to the Brains.
You shall have any thing.
No Seconds? All my self?
Why, this would make a man, a man of Salt
To use his eyes for Garden water-pots. I will die bravely,
Like a smug Bridegroom. What? I will be Jovial:
Come, come, I am a King, Masters, know you that?
You are a Royal one, and we obey you.
Then there's life in it. Come, and you get it,
You shall get it by running: Sa, sa, sa, sa.
A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch,
Past speaking of in a King. Thou hast a Daughter
Who redeems Nature from the general curse
Which twain have brought her to.
Hail gentle Sir.
Sir, speed you: what's your will?
Do you hear ought (Sir) of a Battle toward.
Most sure, and vulgar:
Every one hears that; which can distinguish sound.
But by your favour:
How neere's the other Army?
Near, and on speedy foot: the maine descry
Stands on the hourly thought.
I thank you Sir, that's all.
Though that the Queen on special cause is here
Her Army is moved on.
I thank you Sir.
You ever gentle Gods, take my breath from me,
Let not my worser Spirit tempt me again
To dye before you please.
Well pray you Father.
Now good sir, what are you?
A most poor man, made tame to Fortunes blows
Who, by the Art of known, and feeling sorrows,
Am pregnant to good pity. Give me your hand,
Isle lead you to some biding.
Hearty thanks:
The bounty, and the benizon of Heaven
To boot, and boot.
A proclaimed prize: most happy
That eyeless head of thine, was first framed flesh
To raise my fortunes. Thou old, unhappy Traitor,
Briefly thy self remember: the Sword is out
That must destroy thee.
Now let thy friendly hand
Put strength enough too't.
Wherefore, bold Peasant,
Dare thou support a published Traitor? Hence,
Least that the infection of his fortune take
Like hold on thee. Let go his arm.
Chill not let go Zir,
Without vurther occasion.
Let go Slave, or thou dy'st.
Good Gentleman go your gate, and let poor volke pass: and 'chud have bin zwaggerd out of my life, it would not ha'bin so long as it is, by a vortnight. Nay, come not near the old man: keep out che vor'ye, or ice try whither your Costard, or my Ballow be the harder; chill be plain with you.
Out Dunghill.
Chill pick your teeth Zir: come, no matter for your foins.
Slave thou hast slain me: Villain, take my purse;
If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body,
And give the Letters which thou find about me,
To Edmund Earl of Glouster: seek him out
Upon the English party. Oh untimely death, death.
I know thee well. A serviceable Villain,
As duteous to the vices of thy Mistress,
As badness would desire.
What, is he dead?
Sit you down Father: rest you.
Let's see these Pockets; the Letters that he speaks of
May be my Friends: hoe's dead; I am only sorry
He had no other Deathsman. Let vs see:
Leave gentle wax, and manners: blame vs not
To know our enemies minds, we rip their hearts,
Their Papers is more lawful.
LEt our reciprocal vows be remembered. You have many opportunities to cut him off: if your will want not, time and place will be fruitfully offered. There is nothing done. If hee return the Conqueror, then am I the Prisoner, and his bed, my Gaol, from the loathed warmth whereof, deliver me, and sup∣ply the place for your Labour.
Your (Wife, so I would say) affection∣nate Servant. Gonerill.
Oh indinguish'd space of Women's will,
A plot upon her virtuous Husbands life,
And the exchange my Brother: here, in the sands
Thee Isle rake up, the post vnsanctified
Of murderous Lechers: and in the mature time,
With this ungracious paper strike the sight
Of the death-practis'd Duke: for him it is well,
That of thy death, and business, I can tell.
The King is mad:
How stiff is my wild sense
That I stand up, and have ingenious feeling
Of my huge Sorrows? Better I were distract,
So should my thoughts be severed from my griefs,
And woes, by wrong imaginations loose
The knowledge of themselves.
Give me your hand:
Far off methinkes I hear the beaten Drum.
Come Father, Isle bestow you with a Friend.
O thou good Kent,
How shall I live and work
To match thy goodness?
My life will be too short,
And every measure fail me.
To be acknowledged Madam is ore-pai'd,
All my reports go with the modest truth,
Nor more, nor clipped, but so.
Be better suited,
These weeds are memories of those worser hours:
I prithee put them off.
Pardon dear Madam,
Yet to be known shortens my made intent,
My boon I make it, that you know me not,
Till time, and I, think meet.
Then be it so my good Lord:
How do's the King?
Madam sleeps still.
O you kind Gods!
Cure this great breach in his abused Nature,
The untuned and earring senses, O wind up,
Of this childe-changed Father.
So please your Majesty,
That we may wake the King, he hath slept long?
Be governed by your knowledge, and proceed
In the sway of your own will: is he arrayed?
I Madam: in the heaviness of sleep,
We put fresh garments on him.
Be by good Madam when we do awake him,
I doubt of his Temperance.
O my dear Father, restoration hang
Thy medicine on my lips, and let this kiss
Repair those violent harms, that my two Sisters
Have in thy Reverence made.
Kind and dear Princess.
Had you not bin their Father, these white fl•kes
Did challenge pity of them. Was this a face
To be opposed against the earring winds?
Mine Enemies dog, though he had bit me,
Should have stood that night against my fire,
And was it thou fine (poor Father)
To houell thee with Swine and Rogues forlorn,
In short, and musty straw? Alack, alack,
It is wonder that thy life and wits, at once
Had not concluded all. He wakes, speak to him.
Madam do you, it is fittest.
How does my Royal Lord?
How fares your Majesty?
You do me wrong to take me out of the grave,
Thou art a Soul in bliss, but I am bound
Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears
Do scaled, like molten Lead.
Sir, do you know me?
You are a spirit I know, where did you dye?
Still, still, far wide.
He's scarce awake,
Let him alone a while.
Where have I bin?
Where am I? Fair day light?
I am mightily abused; I should even dye with pity
To see another thus. I know not what to say:
I will not swear these are my hands: let's see,
I feel this pin prick, would I were assured
Of my condition.
O look upon me Sir,
And hold your hand in benediction o'er me,
You must not kneel.
Pray do not mock me:
I am a very foolish fond old man,
Fourscore and upward,
Not an hour more, nor less:
And to deal plainly,
I fear I am not in my perfect mind.
Me thinks I should know you, and know this man,
Yet I am doubtful: For I am mainly ignorant
What place this is▪ and all the skill I have
Remembers not these garments: nor I know not
Where I did lodge last night. Do not laugh at me,
For (as I am a man) I think this Lady
To be my child Cordelia.
And so I am: I am.
Be your tears wet?
Yes faith: I pray weep not,
If you have poison for me, I will drink it:
I know you do not love me, for your Sisters
Have (as I do remember) done me wrong.
You have some cause, they have not.
No cause, no cause.
Am I in France?
In your own kingdom Sir.
Do not abuse me.
Be comforted good Madam, the great rage
You see is killed in him: desire him to go in,
Trouble him no more till further settling.
Wilt please your Highness walk?
You must bear with me:
Pray you now forget, and forgive,
I am old and foolish.
Know of the Duke if his last purpose hold,
Or whether since he is advised by ought
To change the course, he's full of alteration,
And self reproving, bring his constant pleasure.
Our Sisters man is certainly miscarried.
It is to be doubted Madam.
Now sweet Lord,
You know the goodness I intend upon you:
Tell me but truly, but then speak the truth,
Do you not love my Sister?
In honoured Love.
But have you never found my Brothers way,
To the fore-fended place?
No by mine honour, Madam.
I never shall endure her, dear my Lord
Be not familiar with her.
Fear not, she and the Duke her husband.
Our very loving Sister, well be-met:
Sir, this I heard, the King is come to his Daughter
With others, whom the rigour of our State
Forced to cry out.
Why is this reasond?
Combine together against the Enemy:
For these domestic and particurlar broils,
Are not the question here.
Let's then determine with the ancient of war
On our proceeding.
Sister you'll go with vs?
No.
It is most convenient, pray go with vs.
Oh ho, I know the Riddle, I will go.
If ere your Grace had speech with man so poor,
Hear me one word.
Isle overtake you, speak.
Before you fight the Battle, op this Letter:
If you have victory, let the Trumpet sound
For him that brought it: wretched though I seem,
I can produce a Champion, that will prove
What is avouched there. If you miscarry,
Your business of the world hath so an end,
And machination ceases. Fortune loves you.
Stay till I have read the Letter.
I was forbid it:
When time shall serve, let but the Herald cry,
And Isle appear again.
Why farethee well, I will o're-looke thy paper.
The Enemy's in view, draw up your powers,
Here is the guess of their true strength and Forces,
By diligent discovery, but your hast
Is now urged on you.
We will greet the time.
To both these Sisters have I sworn my love:
Each jealous of the other, as the stung
Are of the Adder. Which of them shall I take?
Both? One? Or neither? Neither can be enjoyed
If both remain alive: To take the Widow,
Exasperates, makes mad her Sister Gonerill,
And hardly shall I carry out my side,
Her husband being alive. Now then, we'll use
His countenance for the Battle, which being done,
Let her who would be rid of him, devise
His speedy taking off. As for the mercy
Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia,
The Battle done, and they within our power,
Shall never see his pardon: for my state,
Stands on me to defend, not to debate.
Here Father, take the shadow of this Tree
For your good host: pray that the right may thrive:
If ever I return to you again,
Isle bring you comfort.
Grace go with you Sir.
Away old man, give me thy hand, away:
King Lear hath lost▪ he and his Daughter tan,
Give me thy hand: Come on.
No further Sir, a man may rot even here.
What in ill thoughts again?
Men must endure
Their going hence, even as their coming hither,
Ripeness is all come on.
And that's true too.
Some Officers take them away: good guard,
Until their greater pleasures first be known
That are to censure them.
We are not the first,
Who with best meaning have incurred the worst:
For thee oppressed King I am cast down,
My self could else out-frowne false Fortunes frown.
Shall we not see these Daughters, and these Sisters?
No, no, no, no: come let's away to prison,
We two alone will sing like Birds in the Cage:
When thou dost ask me blessing, Isle kneel down
And ask of thee forgiveness: So we'll live,
And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh
At gilded Butterflies: and here (poor Rogues)
Talk of Court news, and we'll talk with them too,
Who looses, and who wins; who's in, who's out;
And take vpon's the mystery of things,
As if we were Gods spies: And we'll wear out
In a walled prison, packs and sects of great ones,
That ebb and flow by the Moon.
Take them away.
Upon such sacrifices my Cordelia,
The Gods themselves throw Incense.
Have I caught thee?
He that parts vs, shall bring a Brand from Heaven,
And fire vs hence, like Foxes: wipe thine eyes,
The good years shall devour them, flesh and fell,
Ere they shall make vs weep?
Weal see i'm starved first: come.
Come hither Captain, hark.
Take thou this note, go follow them to prison,
One step I have advanced thee, if thou dost
As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way
To Noble Fortunes: know thou this, that men
Are as the time is; to be tender minded
Do's not become a Sword, thy great employment
Will not bear question: either say thou'lt do it,
Or thrive by other means.
Isle do it my Lord.
About it, and write happy, when the hast done,
Mark I say instantly, and carry it so
As I have set it down.
Sir, you have showed to day your valiant strain
And Fortune led you well: you have the Captives
Who were the opposites of this days strife:
I do require them of you so to use them,
As we shall find their merits, and our safety
May equally determine.
Sir, I thought it fit,
To send the old and miserable King to some retention,
Whose age had Charms in it, whose Title more,
To pluck the common bosom on his side,
And turn our impressed Lances in our eyes
Which do command them. With him I sent the Queen:
My reason all the same, and they are ready
To morrow, or at further space, t'appeare
Where you shall hold your Session.
Sir, by your patience,
I hold you but a subject of this War,
Not as a Brother.
That's as we list to grace him.
Methinkes our pleasure might have bin demanded
Ere you had spoke so far. He led our Powers,
Bore the Commission of my place and person,
The which immediacy may well stand up,
And call it self your Brother.
Not so hot:
In his own grace he doth exalt himself,
More then in your addition.
In my rights,
By me invested, he compeetes the best.
That were the most, if he should husband you.
Easters do oft prove Prophets.
Hola, hola,
That eye that told you so, looked but a squint.
Lady I am not well, else I should answer
From a full flowing stomach. General,
Take thou my Soldiers, prisoners, patrimony,
Dispose of them, of me, the walls is thine:
Witness the world, that I create thee here
My Lord, and Master.
Mean you to enjoy him?
The let alone lies not in your good will.
Nor in thine Lord.
Halfe-blooded fellow, yes.
Let the Drum strike, and prove my title thine.
Stay yet, hear reason: Edmund, I arrest thee
On capital Treason; and in thy arrest,
This gilded Serpent: for your claim fair Sisters,
I bare it in the interest of my wife,
It is she is sub-contracted to this Lord,
And I her husband contradict your Bane•.
If you will marry, make your loves to me,
My Lady is bespoke.
An interlude.
Thou art armed Gloster,
Let the Trmpet sound:
If none appear to prove upon thy person,
Thy heinous, manifest, and many Treasons,
There is my pledge: Isle make it on thy heart
Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less
Then I have here proclaimed thee.
Sick, O sick.
If not, Isle ne'er trust medicine.
There's my exchange, what in the world lies
That names me Traitor, villain-like he lies,
Call by the Trumpet: he that dares approach;
On him, on you, who not, I will maintain
My truth and honour firmly.
A Herald, ho.
Trust to thy single virtue, for thy Soldiers
All levied in my name, have in my name
Took their discharge.
My sickness grows upon me.
She is not well, convey her to my Tent.
Come hither Herald, let the Trumper sound,
And read out this.
IF any man of quality or degree, within the lists of the Are∣my, will maintain upon Edmund, supposed Earl of Gloster, that he is a manifold Traitor, let him appear by the third sound of the Trumpet: he is bold in his defence.
Again.
Again.
Ask him his purposes, why he appears
Upon this Call of the Trumpet.
What are you?
Your name, your quality, and why you answer
This present Summons?
Know my name is lost
By Treasons tooth: bare-gnawne, and Canker-bit,
Yet am I Noble as the Adversary
I come to cope.
Which is that Adversary?
What's he that speaks for Edmund Earl of Glo∣ster?
Himself, what say thou to him?
Draw thy Sword,
That if my speech offend a Noble heart,
Thy arm may do thee Justice, here is mine:
Behold it is my privilege,
The privilege of mine Honours,
My oath, and my profession. I protest,
Maugre thy strength, place, youth, and eminence,
Despise thy victor-Sword, and fire new Fortune,
Thy valour, and thy heart, thou art a Traitor:
False to thy Gods, thy Brother, and thy Father,
Conspirant against this high illustirous Prince,
And from the extremest upward of thy head,
To the descent and dust below thy foot,
A most Toad-spotted Traitor. Say thou no,
This Sword, this arm, and my best spirits are bent
To prove upon thy heart, whereto I speak,
Thou lie.
In wisdom I should ask thy name,
But since thy out-side looks so fair and Warlike,
And that thy tongue (some say) of breeding breathes,
What safe, and nicely I might well delay,
By rule of Knight-hood, I disdain and spurn:
Back do I toss these Treasons to thy head,
With the hell-hated Lye, ore-whelme thy heart,
Which for they yet glance by, and scarcely bruise,
This Sword of mine shall give them instant way,
Where they shall rest for ever. Trumpets speak.
Save him, save him.
This is practise Gloster,
By the law of War, thou wast not bound to answer
An unknown opposite: thou art not vanquished,
But consent, and be guild.
Shut your mouth Dame,
Or with this paper shall I stop it: hold Sir,
Thou worse then any name, read thine own evil:
No tearing Lady, I perceive you know it.
Say if I do, the Laws are mine not thine,
Who can arraign me for it?
Most monstrous! O, know thou this paper?
Ask me not what I know.
Go after her, she's desperate, govern her.
What you have charged me with,
That have I done,
And more, much more, the time will bring it out.
It is past, and so am I: But what art thou
That hast this Fortune on me? If you're Noble,
I do forgive thee.
Let's exchange charity:
I am no less in blood then thou art Edmond,
If more, the more the hast wronged me.
My name is Edgar and thy Fathers Son,
The Gods are just, and of our pleasant vices
Make instruments to plague vs:
The dark and vicious place where thee he got,
Cost him his eyes.
The hast spoken right, it is true,
The Wheel is come full circle, I am here.
Me thought thy very gate did prophecy
A Royal Nobleness: I must embrace thee,
Let sorrow split my heart, if ever I
Did hate thee, or thy Father.
Worthy Prince I know it.
Where have you hid your self?
How have you known the miseries of your Father?
By nursing them my Lord. List a brief tale,
And when it is told, O that my heart would burst.
The bloody proclamation to escape
That followed me so near, (O our lives sweetness,
That we the pain of death would hourly dye,
Rather then die at once) taught me to shift
Into a mad-mans rags, t'assume a semblance
That very Dogs disdained: and in this habit
Met I my Father with his bleeding Rings,
Their precious Stones new lost: became his guide,
Led him, begged for him, saved him from despair.
Never (O fault) reueal'd my self unto him,
Until some half hour past when I was armed,
Not su•e, though hoping of this good success,
I asked his blessing, and from first to last
Told him our pilgrimage. But his flaw'd heart
(Alack too weak the conflict to support)
Twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief,
Burst smilingly.
This speech of yours hath moved me,
And shall perchance do good, but speak you on,
You look as you had something more to say.
If there be more, more woeful, hold it in,
For I am almost ready to dissolve,
Hearing of this.
Help, help: O help.
What kind of help?
Speak man.
What means this bloody Knife?
It is hot, it smokes, it came even from the heart of—O she's dead.
Who dead? Speak man.
Your Lady Sir, your Lady; and her Sister
By her is poisoned: she confesses it.
I was contracted to them both, all three
Now marry in an instant.
Here comes Kent.
Produce the bodies, be they alive or dead;
This judgment of the Heavens that makes vs tremble.
Touches vs not with pity: O, is this he?
The time will not allow the complement
Which very manners urges.
I am come
To bid my King and Master aye good night.
Is he not here?
Great thing of vs forgot,
Speak Edmund, whore's the King? and whore's Cordelia?
See thou this object Kent?
Alack, why thus?
Yet Edmund was beloved:
The one the other poisoned for my sake,
And after slew herself.
Even so: cover their faces.
I pant for life: some good I mean to do
Despite of mine own Nature. Quickly send,
(Be brief in it) to the Castle, for my Writ
Is on the life of Lear, and on Cordelia:
Nay, send in time.
Run, run, O run.
To who my Lord? Who he's the Office?
Send thy token of repreeue.
Well thought on, take my Sword,
Give it the Captain.
Hast thee for thy life.
He hath Commission from thy Wife and me,
To hang Cordelia in the prison, and
To lay the blame upon her own despair,
That she for-did her self.
The Gods defend her, bear him hence awhile.
Howl, howl, howl: O your are men of stones,
Had I your tongues and eyes, Il'd use them so,
That Heavens vault should crack: she's gone for ever.
I know when one is dead, and when one lives,
She's dead as earth: Lend me a Looking-glasse,
If that her breath will mist or stain the stone,
Why then she lives.
Is this the promised end?
Or image of that horror.
Fall and cease.
This feather stirs, she lives: if it be so,
It is a chance which do's redeem all sorrows
That ever I have felt.
O my good Master.
Prithee away.
It is Noble Kent your Friend.
A plague upon you Murderors, Traitors all,
I might have saved her, now she's gone for ever:
Cordelia, Cordelia, stay a little. Ha:
What is it thou say? Her voice was ever soft,
Gentle, and low, an excellent thing in woman.
I killed the Slave that was a hanging thee.
It is true (my Lords) he did.
Did I not fellow?
I have seen the day, with my good biting Falchion
I would have made him skip: I am old now,
And these same crosses spoil me. Who are you?
Mine eyes are not of the best, Isle tell you straight.
If Fortune brag of two, she loved and hated,
One of them we behold.
This is a dull sight, are you not Kent?
The same: your Servant Kent,
Where is your Servant Caius?
He's a good fellow, I can tell you that,
He'll strike and quickly too, he's dead and rotten.
No my good Lord, I am the very man.
Isle see that straight.
That from your first of difference and decay,
Have followed your sad steps.
Your are welcome hither.
Nor no man else:
Ell's cheerless, dark, and deadly,
Your eldest Daughters have fore-done themselves,
And desperately are dead
I so I think.
He knows not what he says, and vain is it
That we present vs to him.
Very bootless.
Edmund is dead my Lord.
That's but a trifle here:
You Lords and Noble Friends, know our intent,
What comfort to this great decay may come,
Shall be applied. For vs we will resign,
During the life of this old Majesty
To him our absolute power, you to your rights,
With boot, and such addition as your Honours
Have more then merited. All Friends shall
Taste the wages of their virtue, and all Foes
The cup of their deservings: O see, see.
And my poor Fool is hanged: no, no, no life?
Why should a Dog, a Horse, a Rat have life,
And thou no breath at all? Thou'lt come no more,
Never, never, never, never, never.
Pray you undo this Button. Thank you Sir,
Do you see this? Look on her? Look her lips,
Look there, look there.
He faints, my Lord, my Lord.
Break heart, I prithee break.
Look up my Lord.
Vex not his ghost, O let him pass, he hates him,
That would upon the wrack of this tough world
Stretch him out longer.
He is gon indeed.
The wonder is, he hath endured so long,
He but usurped his life.
Bear them from hence, our present business
Is general woe: Friends of my soul, you twain,
Rule in this Realm, and the gored state sustain.
I have a journey Sir, shortly to go,
My Master calls me, I must not say no.
The weight of this sad time we must obey,
Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say:
The oldest hath borne most, we that are young,
Shall never see so much, nor live so long.

CAmilla, now me thinks this golden time,
Invites our minds to bathe in streams of joy:
See how the earth doth flourish in his prime,
Whose livery shows the absence of annoy.
These woods, how they bedecked with natures pride,
Show inward touche of new conceived mirth.
The pretty birds, that in their coverts hide,
(Free Citizens, even happy from their birth)
How they rejoice! and every senseless thing,
Even smiles with joy: the earth perfumes the ayre,
The ayre, sweet Nectar to the earth doth bring,
And both with joy, beget these children fair.
How richly nature doth her wealth enrobe:
Giving each thing his beauty, form and grace.
Eye-pleasing greene, circle of this our globe,
Great mirror of Apollos youthful face▪
Coulor of life, youths livery, how delight
Dwells still with thee, whiles we, whom reason named
(But falsely named and if I judge aright)
Princes of all the rest that nature framed:
Still subject are to sorrows tyranny;
Slaves to mischance, vassals of fortunes power;
Bearing the yoke of endless misery:
Fair baits of time which doth vs all devour.
Now raised aloft in honours highest seat,
Yet in that height far short of sweet content,
Now, thrown down headlong, be we ne'er so great,
In gulf of grief, which we may not prevent.
Our pleasures, (posting guests,) make but small stay,
And never once look back when they are gone:
Where griefs bide long, and leave such scores to pay;
As make vs banckerout ere we think thereon.
Yet this same earth with new-borne beauties graced,
Doth say me thinks in his dumb eloquence:
Thus shall you spring, amongst heavenly angels placed,
Whē deaths cold winter once hath snatched you hence.
These flowers, do bid vs in their language, read
In beauties books, how beauty is most frail:
Whose youthful pride, th'vntimely steps doth tread,
To deaths black kingdom, dark obliuions veil.
These natures choristers, do plainly say,
Waste thus your time, in setting forth his praise:
Who feeds, who clothes, who fills our harts with joy:
And from this dead earth, doth our bodies raise▪
Thus all their mirth, are accents of our moan:
Their blis full state, of our unhappiness,
A perfect map, where only we alone,
May see our good, but never it possess.
Madam, as nature more then perfect is,
And far more fair, then that we fairest call:
So you as heir apparent to his bliss,
Chief treasurer of his perfections all;
Will show you•… self most wise, and most divine,
In curious search of her most hidden will;
And following but his footsteps, yet refine:
The universal secrets of his skill.
Yet I admire, your Eagle-sighted eye,
Which hath truths sun-bright circle so well known:
In others worth, discerns each Attomie,
Forgetful most, of what is most your own.
These other creatures, have their properties,
Which show, their Sire no niggard of his store,
But such great gifts our minds immortalise,
As proud ambitious self, can wish no more.
And you, great Lady, whose high honour flies,
With virtues wings, in admirations ayre:
Towering, an Eagles pyche, aboue the skies,
Where vulgar thoughts, are settled in despair;
You, whose designs, have put out envies eyes,
Whose lamp of virtue gives the purest light;
You, that enforce weak fame to royallize,
Such high reuolues, as far surpass her might,
You, whose large praise, makes naked virtue lower,
And tyres report, in painting out your story;
You, in whose lap doth stream the golden shower,
Of all good fortune, gracing highest glory.
O how can you, once entertain a thought,
That these high joys should stoup to sorrows lure?
Or how can true felicity be brought,
The smallest touche of passion to endure?
Let those complain, which suck misfortunes paps:
Who know nought else of virtue but the name,
Who seeming wise, are snar'd in follies traps,
Whose rash attempts, breed swift ensuing shame,
But you heavens day-starre, pillar of our bliss,
O want you ever, clouds of discontent:
You are our joy, we all joys, all should miss,
Did not your sun beams guild our firmament.
Did not thy true love seal this president,
I should suspect a serpent amongst the flowers:
And hardly judge fair words from false intent,
Pore niggard truth, rich flattry, powers down showrs.
But loyal Ladies, doo you think in faith,
That highest honour, joys most sweet content?
It doth no doubt, for high, and heavenly saith
The proverb old, to which I give consent.
Thē hear me speak, what I shall say by proof,
And what experience printed in my hart?
Perhaps a story for your own behoof,
Where I my self, have played an actors part.
In youth, I thought though falsely thought) that best
Which fairest seemed, and my aspiring mind
Disdained (though not with pride) that there should rest
Amean borne thought, within my thoughts confined.
Treading this path, I was at last desired,
By Lord Marcellus, for his spouse, and wife.
Marcellus, he whose worthy fame aspired,
To th'highest top of honour, during life.
If wealth, (nurse of delight) mought breed content:
I had no want of store to make me glad:
My greatness did ambitious thoughts prevent:
Such high success Marcellus honours had.
Proud Carthage knows, his youthful sword did pay
Large tribute of their souls to stygian lake:
His middle age, the stoutest Gaules did fray,
Marcellus name made their huge armies quake.
His ancient years, made crafty Hanniball
Admire the proves, and valour of his foe:
Thrice bitter name, that cursed Cannibal,
By bloody treason, made him life forgo.
Five times this city graced my worthy Lord,
Or rather he them graced, with Consuls name.
What they to others suites would scarce afford,
They joyed to see my Lord accept the same.
Now Ladies to forget my present state,
Did joy think you this while orecharge my mind?
I joyed I must confess, to see how fate
With bounds of honour, had my life confined.
But when I found, how monster envy, feeds
On highest honour, as his daintiest pray:
How brightest fire, great store of fuel needs,
To keep his light, and beauty from decay.
When that I found the music of my mind,
Tunde to the concorde, of Marcellus bliss:
And saw, true valour had his life assigned,
To haughty Mars, whose course most dangerous is.
I lived in him, he spent his royal days,
In bloody bosom of life scorning wars.
Safety may breed delight, not nourish praise;
Harde is the way, from th'earth unto the stars.
Whiles thus our state, depended on his sword,
And thousand thousands sought his final end:
Could my true love, in all this time, afford
One quiet thought in perfect mirth to spend?
So many perils as on earth are found,
So many dangers as on raging seas,
So many terrors all my joys confound,
For true love passions are no weak disease.
But is this all? no, more if more may be,
Tic greater care, to keep, then get, a crown.
Virtue doth raise by small degrees we see:
Where in a moment Fortune casts vs down.
And surely those that live in greatest place,
Must take great care, to be such as they seem:
They are not princes, whom sole tytles grace,
Our princely virtues, we should most esteem.
The sands on Neptunes shores, and beamy stars,
Do not exceed the number of those cares
Which in our minds, do stir up civil wars,
And cross delights accounts, at unawares.
Let this suffice, the tempest soonest tears
The highest towers, and who will mount aloft,
The more he climes, the more his footing fears:
Often he slides, but seldom falls soft.
What words, can paint the infinite of woes?
What tongue, can half those miseries relate?
Which thundering fortune, threatened to impose
Upon my head, at Tarent, but of late.
When as mine eyes mought see (though loath to see)
The suns, with whose eclipse, my fortune changed:
Mine own dear Lord, and brother, both to be
In mortal arms, against each other ranged.
Which tempest calmed, the storm begins again,
On mischiefs maine, full sails mishap doth bear:
I know not now what doth my Lord detain,
But for I know not, I know cause to fear.
To visit him, at last I was contented,
And in those foreign coasts to make appeal:
But my access, at Athens he prevented,
Which makes me think, more then I will reveal.
And can I then with sorrows weight oppressed,
Think to enamel my conceit with joy?
Can I, that am with fortunes wrack distressed,
Hope to escape the Ocean of annoy?
Why, this is joy, to taste no sconce of death,
Till dying hour, have stopped our vital breath.
Ti's true delight, to know no cause of greese,
Although the outward signs of joy be small:
Who most rejoicing, feels that inward thief,
A stained conscience finds no joy at all.
Indeed I think, true joy, a thing severe,
Springing from fountain of a virtuous mind:
From spotless faith, and conscience pure and clear,
The chiefest good, the heavens have vs assigned.
For as some weep, that are not passing sad:
So many laugh that are not rightly glad.
Say worthy Titius, what rare accident,
In so short time, did bring to happy end,
The cruel wars; which Caesars discontent,
Against Lord Antonius, lately did intend;
How could so many weapons thirsting blood,
Be satisfied with unexpected peace?
What powerful stars importuned vs such good?
And did their angers tyranny suppress?
That will I doo, my good friend Geminus.
And much the sooner, for that you may know,
No force, or weapons, hath procured vs,
The happy truce, wherein we glory now.
It was the time, when the declining sun
Made greatest show of least performed light:
And by his swift departure had begun,
To yield his interest, to th'encroching night.
When as the seas, even burdened with our weight,
Delivered vs unto the perfect view
Of dreadful Tarent: where for vs did weight,
Antonius fleet, with all their martial crew.
There did our drowned anchors make vs stay,
Within the jaws of dangers tyranny:
There, we discovered by the flying day,
The agents of our threatened misery.
Who can express the horror of that night,
When darkness lent his robes to monster fear?
And heavens black mantle banishing the light,
Made every thing in ugly form appear.
Until Aurora, with fair purple flowers,
Like loving spouse, had strawed Titans way:
Whose glorious beams, began to guilde the towers,
As joyful post, of pleasure-bringing day.
Then did loud Martial music charm a sleep,
Each languishing conceit, in doubtful breast:
And new borne comfort, now began to creep,
In every mind, with causeless fear oppressed.
Then, pride of honour, made vs scorn our foes:
And courage added wings to our desire.
To present fight, we all our selves dispose:
With bloody showers, to quench incensed ire.
But ere our armies, had their charge fulfild,
Ere weapons, had our inward rage expressed:
Lo where Octauia, comes into the field,
Twixt both our armies, she his self addressed.
Where with the Nectar of his eloquence,
With words that mought relent indurate frost:
With majesty, and beauties influence,
She stays our Captains, and affronts each host.
O how I see that wonder-breeding face!
O how I hear those hart-enchaining words!
O face! o words! that merit highest grace!
Immortal sure, base earth none such affords,
No women's weapon blinds her princely eye;
No women's weakness, his tongues passage stays:
Like one, that did both death, and fate defy,
Minerua-like she stands, and thus she says.
Here will I bide, and this same breast oppose
To all your weapons, and whose wicked hand,
Shall first begin t'assaile or strike his foes,
Shall strike this hart, and break this vital band.
No bloody deed, Octauiaes eyes shall gain,
A witness of your loathed cruelty:
But through this body shall the first be slain,
That in this battle, is compelled to dye.
If honour, virtue, worth, or piety,
Live in your minds, which bear such lofty names:
Return your weapons, and here quietly,
With reason, quench the force, of angry flames.
Else, let some bloody executioner,
First rob this i•…alious tomb, of loathed life:
And then, no longer need you to defer,
The issue, of your more then mortal strife.
Much more she said, which none but she can say,
And with her sugared speech, so much prevailed,
That like Medusaes marbled creatures, they
Amazed stood, so was their fury quaild.
Look how that trident sceptre bearing king,
His oft rebelling subjects, doth suppress,
And with a sudden beck in order bring,
Their disproportion, with a quiet peace;
When that the pride, of some truce-wanting storm,
Doth summon up their treason-working power;
Now gracing terror, with huge mountains form,
Now with steep whirlepoole, seeking to devour:
So stood the Emperors, with his words amazed,
His words, which seemed the mirror of hi•… deed•….
As men enchanted so on his they gazed,
And in his face, new lectures ganne to reed.
But when she saw, hi•… words did take effect,
Then poured she forth the quintessence of wit:
And never did his enterprise neglect,
Till both the Emperors bewitched with it;
Not only, did forget all former hate,
But even there, before Octauiaes face,
A league of friendship they did consummate,
And lovingly each other did embrace.
O what a joyful sight, it was to behold
A dangerous fight, turned to a dainty feast.
To see how •…riends salute each other could,
That but even now, each other did detest.
There did both armies sport in great delight,
And interchangeably their loves expressè:
As captives, foiled without blood, wound or fight;
They praise the conquest, and the victor bless
Then did Antoniu•…, for 〈◊〉 sake,
Give unto Caesar twenty Brigantines:
Which Caesar did in courteous manner take,
And in requital of his kind designs,
Did twice five hundred armed soldiers, give
To Anthony: and quickly one mought find,
The sparks of emulation made them strive,
Who mought doe most, to please Octauiaes mind.
O noble deed, deserving highest praise,
Well worthy •…o out-liue all memory:
Life saving Empress, how thy wisdom stays,
Even swarms of souls, from Plu•…os tyranny,
But why did not Antonius, in like sort
Return to Room, to pay delight her due.
He presently to'ards Parthia did resort,
Against their King the wars for to renew.
And recommending all his own affairs,
His wife, his children, and what else was dear,
To Caesars best disposing: he repairs,
To Syria, and entends to winter there.
Room thou that keepst, the pearl that doth include,
Heavens dearest treasure, in earths finest frame:
Be never so ungrateful, to obtrude
Night-blacke oblivion, to her noble name.
Come Geminus, and unto me relate,
What made the Empress, alter her intent:
What did your voyage thus abbreviate,
And all your expectations prevent.
Fame (bad concealer of our close intents)
Said, that the Empress would to Syria go:
To see Antonius, who himself abscentes,
But your return, doth show it was not so.
Madame, when Aeolus had once conveyed
Our mooing houses, unto that same place,
Where noble Cecrops, the foundations laid,
Which are the Grecian confines chiefest grace:
There, long before we could approach the gates
Of that fair City, we encountered were,
With people of all ages, and estates,
Who in their hands, did boughs of Laurel bear.
Some on their knees, with joy, and wonder filed,
Salute the Empress: some rich gifts present.
Some straw'd the way with flowers, and some distilled
Their sweet perfumes, along the fields we went.
Thus to the City were we guarded straight,
Where for our coming, all the states await.
There were our eyes, invited to behold
Most sumptuous shows, with many pleasing sights:
There did we hear, their learned tongues unfold.
The muses skill, with ravishing delights,
Their loud applause, which pierced the very skies,
Extolled Octauia past the reach of fame:
And silent Echo, wakened with their cries,
Taught all the neighbour hills, to bless her name.
Thus frankly did two days themselves bestow,
To gratify our entertainment there:
Whiles Antonie, who as it seemed did know
Of our approach, and thereof stood in fear:
Sent Niger, unto Athens, with all speed,
Who to Octauia letters did convey:
Requiring her no further to proceed,
But for his coming in that place to stay.
For thither meant he shortly to repair,
And therefore would not, she should undertake
So long a journey, which mought much impair
Her health, and quiet, bootless for his sake.
She, half suspecting (as there was good cause)
That this was but a practise of delay:
Although unwilling, yet she made a pause,
As one that knew not how to disobey.
But finding all his words to want effect,
And seeing nothing mought his mind recall:
Such things, she doth unto him straight direct,
As she had brought, to pleasure him withal.
Which was, two thousand chosen men at arms:
Great store of horses, wont to win their price;
Much armour, to defend themselves from harms,
As richly wrought, as cunning could devise;
Gifts, to reward his best∣deserving friends;
A sum of money for his soldiers paye;
And briefly all his care, and study bends,
To save his waning honour, from decay.
But whē she saw, nought mought his thoughts recline
Unkind, saith she, seno•…less of thine own shame,
Isle be my self, since thou wilt not be mine:
Thus she concluded, and away we came.
O peerless paragon! O natures pride!
Fair Cabinet, where wisdoms treasure lies,
Earths glory, and the heavens beloved bride,
Rich seat of honour, virtues paradise.
Most noble Empress, praise of women kind,
Whose faith endures the rage of fortunes flame:
Whose constant truth, and truly virtuous mind,
Scorns smallest touche of iust-deserued blame.
How natural, and vndeuided, 〈◊〉
The sparks of honour, in a noble heart:
How industry, and wit, may not compare,
With that true touche, our birthright doth impart.
Live virtuous Empress, mirror of our age,
Though chance discharge whole volleys of reproach;
With fortitude withstand proud fortunes rage,
Let not despair, near thy sweet thoughts encroach.
Time must needs turn thy mourning unto joy,
For true delight from hence his spring doth take:
When we with patience suffer sharpe annoy,
Not for our merits, but for virtues sake.
Heavens, hear poor earth complain,
How wee, your frowns doe bear:
When all things else rejoice,
Joy scorns with vs to dwell.
And reasons self can tell,
Each mirth discovering voice,
Assures our judging ear,
How all things else want pain:
Scence-following creatures know
No cause, why to lament,
In them, remorse doth sow,
No seeds of discontent.
We see, and know, but want our bl•…sse:
Imperfect nature causes this.
Yea nature most unkind,
Contriver of our fall:
Begins our life with tears,
And ends the same with woe.
Greese (pleasures mortal foe)
Confounds our hope with fears:
And sowers our sweet with gall.
This Tyrant of the mind:
By reason, w•…t, or skill,
Can never be withstood:
These aggravate our ill,
By showing what was good.
And want of that torments vs most:
Whose worth appears in being lost.
Were nature falsely named
A stepdame to mankind,
That sex, which we account
Imperfect, weak, and frail,
Could not in worth prevail:
And men so far surmount.
We should Octauia find,
In some sort to be blamed.
She wins immortal fame,
Whiles he who should excel:
Dishonoured hath his name,
And by his weakness fell.
For double shame he doth deserve,
Who being guide doth soonest swerve.
And Lord Antonius, thou
Thrice woman conquered man:
Shall not thy hart rapine,
Their triumphs to adorn?
Octauiaes virtues scorn,
That wanton life of thine:
And Cleopatra can,
Command thy ghost even now.
And fine would I refrain,
From Fuluiaes stately name:
Which doth thy manhood flaine,
And makes thee blush for shame.
In this one thing, yet happy moist thou bee:
They Princess are, that triumph over thee.
Dwell in fems living breath,
T'eternitie resigned,
Ye fair Mars-conquering wights:
And fear not Lethes flood,
Your virtues always bud,
Your story, honour wrights,
And Phoenix-like you find,
A new life in your death.
Arm but your Angel-soules,
With perfect virtues shield,
That Thanatos controls,
And makes Erynnis yield,
Then shall the heavens your worth descry:
Earth, sing your praise, and so will I.
OThrice, and four times, happy messenger,
Hast thou from Parthia made return of late?
Can thou declare the issue of the war,
And make me know, Antonius happy state?
What caused my Lord in Syria make such staye,
Since he against Parthia did his forces bend?
When doth he mean, to'ards Room to take his way•…
And to those wars, impose a final end?
Unkind he is: not so, but distant far,
And his great trouble, much my good impairs:
Else would he not mine ears so long time bar,
From much expected news of his affairs.
Madame, these eyes have seen what hath bin done
In Syria, Parthia, and each other place;
I present was, when Lord Antonius, won
Eighteen great battles, in a little space.
I often saw, when mischief, in the field
Had all his force against my Lord brought forth:
How he with valour, made even fortune yield,
And chance, awaight on well approved worth.
I was in Media, when Phraortes slue
Great Tatianus, fighting for my Lord:
I saw when he our engines from vs drew,
And put ten thousand Romaines, to the sword.
I was in presence, when a sudden fear.
In blackest horror of the darkest night,
So much astonished all that present were,
With shrieking cries that mought even stones affright:
That Antony, with fear of treason moved,
Made Ramnus humbly swear upon his knee,
To strike that head, that head so much beloved,
From of his shoulders, when he once should see,
Vneuitable danger, to lay hold,
Upon himself; yet could not all this, quail
His haughty courage, but as uncontrolled,
He still proceeds, his stoutest foes t'assaile.
And having now, summed with the Parthian blood,
The largest scores, of wrongs we did sustain,
Thence to retire, he now hath thought it good:
And for a time at Blanckbourg to remain.
Blanckbourg a City near to Sydon placed,
Unto the which our whole Camp did resort,
There he entends to stay, and not in haste
To visit Room, as most of them report.
O what should move my Lord thus long to stay?
An others tongue mought better yt bewray.
What dost thou know more the thou hast ye•… said?
Madame no more.
Why thē am I dismayed?
Why doe I see thy sorrow-clowded brow,
Seem to conceal I know not what annoy?
Say Byllius whence those troubled looks may grow▪
Is my Antonius safe? doth he enjoy
That body free from hurt, wound or disease?
Doth he yet live and draw his vital breath?
Speak, quickly speak, truth cannot me displease,
Where now suspicion wounds as deep as death.
It cannot be but that your grace doth know,
For what can be concealed from Princes ear?
And further speech mought seeds of discord sow,
Between your highēss and my Lord I fear.
O how delay torments a doubtful mind.
I know, no, •…e procures I may not hear
Of any thing from thence, whereby I find,
Although unknown yet double cause of fear.
Then banish doubt, and see thou plainly tell,
What strange occasion doth enforce his stay?
What can Antonius princely mind compel,
In foreign coasts to make so long delay?
Madame, the cause that made him to remain
In Syria, so long time when as we went
To'ards Parthia, is the same that doth detain,
His highness now and thus your grace prevent.
Am I an Empress still thus disobeyed?
And dost thou dare to dally with me still?
I first enquired, what him in Syria staide.
Why dost thou fear to tell the worst of ill.
If this likewise be hidden from your grace,
In humble sort a pardon I beseech:
That high displeasure against me take not place,
For what shall be disclosed by my speech.
I pardon all, so long as all be true.
Who doth delude let sharp death be his due.
Then if you list the truth to understand,
The truth is this: that fond Egyptian Queen,
Queen Cleopatra doth your will withstand,
And him detains, who else had present been.
By force?
O no, worlds could not him con∣strain
To stay this long in any place by force:
But his affection is the loving chain,
That from your highness doth his mind divorce.
What chilling fear doth stream along these
What frozen terror makes me thus to quake?
What monstrous grief, what horror, thus constrains veins?
My stiuing hart, his lodging to forsake?
Tell me, from what conceit may this be guest?
They live together, who knows not the rest.
I must believe it sore against my will.
Hardly we credit what imports our ill.
But slow belief from wisdom doth proceed.
But mortal wounds of present cure have need.
Some fond report hath made thee falsely deem.
I shun report, and lightly it esteem,
But this I saw, when we to Syria came,
Antonius straight to Cleopatra sent,
A messenger Fonteius was his name:
Whose swiftness did even hast it self prevent.
More, then we knew not, but within short space
Came Cleopatra royally attended,
And met directly at th'appointed place,
Which for their stay they had before pretended.
There did they sport a time in great excess
Of all delights which any eye hath seen,
And there Antonius his great love t'expresse
Did frankly give to this Egyptian queen,
Phoenicia, Cyprus and Cylicia,
Part of Arabia where those people dwell
Called Nabatheians, part of Syria:
And finding that she could prevail so well
With Antony, she further 〈◊〉 proceed,
And begged part of that land we Iewry call.
From whence mought be transported at his need,
True balm, for to preserve his grace withal.
This don•…, my Lord, to'ards Parthia took his way,
Which we with fire and sword did waste and burn,
But in those confines did not long time stay,
But back again to Blanckbourge we return.
From whence, a post was speedily addressed,
For to conduct this Cleopatra thither:
She kindly condescends to his request,
Thus there they met, and there they live together.
O what hart-piercing grief doth thē tormē•…,
That are thus countercheckt with rivals love?
What worlds of horror do themselves present,
Unto their minds that do like passions prove?
O Jealous•…e, when truth once takes thy part,
What mercy-wanting tyrant so severe?
What Syl•…a, what Charibdi•…, can impart
But half those horrors which in thee appear?
Poor Pluto, why do we thy rigour dread?
All torments are contained within my breast:
Alecto doth whole troupes of fury•… lead
Within my soul, with endless grief oppressed.
O deserts, now you deserts are indeed:
Your commonwealths are couched within my hart,
Within my hart, all ravening beasts do feed:
And with mad fury, still increase my smart.
O grief, I feel the worst that thou can doe.
I taste the powerful force of mischieses pride.
I prove the worst that chance can put me to.
The deepest wound of fortune I abide.
But staye Octauia, if this be a lye:
If thy dear Lord do constant yet remain,
Whom dost thou wrong, is it not Antony?
O fault too great, recall it back again.
Can thou be so unkind, nay so unjust,
To censure, judge, condemn without a cause?
Shall flying tales make thee so much mistrust,
Him bound to thee by Gods, and natures laws?
O traitor passion, if thou could subdue
Thy sovereign reason, what ill tragedies
Would thou soon act, but Jealousy adieu,
My Lord is constant, and these are but lies.
Did not he swear on that our nuptial day,
By all the sacred rights we holy deem,
By those immortal powers which we obey,
By all things else which dearly we esteem,
By his right hand, by this our wedding ring,
By all that mought a perfect truth entend:
One time, one day, one hour; should surely bring,
His life, and love unto a final end.
Did not he say, the stars from heaven should fall,
The fishes should upon the mountains range,
And Tyber should his flowing streams recall:
Before his love should ever think on change.
But what of this? these are but only words,
And so are those which do his faith impeach.
O poor Octauta, how thy state affords,
Nought but despair to stand within thy reach.
The seat of truth is in our secret harts,
Not in the tongue, which falsehood oft imparts.
Hast back then Tyber to thy fountains head,
Descend ye stars, and this base earth adorn,
Let Neptunes people on these hills be fed,
For Antony is fled, false, and forsworn.
But tic not so, my Antony is true:
His honour will not let him basely fall,
Octaves name will faithful love renew.
His In•…ate virtue will his mind recall.
As fear of torment holds the wicked in:
So virtues love makes good men loath their sin.
Madam, I cannot force you to believe
That which I speak, but that I speak is true,
I knew too well it would your highness grieve,
And would be loathe your sorrows to tenew;
But would to God that all my words were lies,
So my disgrace mought work your sweet content;
Would this my soul mought be the sacrifice,
To reconcile his love thus fondly bent.
O virtue, thou that did my good assure,
Arm now my soul against proud fortunes might:
Without thy succour I may not endure,
But this strong tempest will destroy me quite.
O sacred lamp, pure virtues living flame,
That never fails sweet comfort to impart:
I feel thy power and glory in the same,
I hear thee say in closet of my heart,
Octauta, live, and show thy self a Queen,
Tread thou my path, make constancy thy guide;
Let no base fear within thy mind be seen,
Let thine own foot into no error slide;
Make thine own thoughts no witness of thy miss;
Let thine own conscience know no cause of blame;
A bulwark strong, a brazen wall this is,
That will resist, both sorrow, grief and shame.
Antonius fall, his own disgrace procures,
His is the fault, and on his head shall fall,
The storm of mischiefs deep-reuenging showers:
When thine own worth, in heaven shall thee enstall.
His is the fault, but what? mine is the wrong.
The error his, but I endure the smart;
O virtue, if thou be so passing strong,
Yet once again remove this from my heart.
Why, virtue grieves but at his own disgrace,
And minds distressed, with patience doth relieve:
With wisdoms light it still directs his pace,
And cannot fall and therefore cannot grieve.
Well grief, I feel that thou art grief indeed,
But patience is a prince and must not yield:
O sacred virtue help me at my need;
Repulse my foes with thy all mastering shield.
But what, I must not here stand and lament,
Thy deeds Octauta, must approve thy worth:
Tic wisdom, must these injuries prevent,
I will no more excuse thy wrongs henceforth.
Isle seek by all means thee to reconcile,
And in my thoughts revenge shall find no place,
But if thou needs wilt work a thing so vile,
To seek my ruin and thine own disgrace,
If nothing can prevail, Isle make it seen,
Thou wrongst an Empress, and a Romaine queen.
O dear Camilla, what a woeful sight,
Ti's to behold the Empress doleful state?
Though others burdens in our eyes seem light:
Death in my heart, her grief doth intimate.
O what exceeding pity it is to see,
Such noble virtues nursed in wisdoms breast:
Snar'd in the trap of human misery,
By others baseness thus to be distressed.
Madame, the case is pitiful indeed,
And such as may relent a flinty heart:
A patient mind, must stand her grace instead,
Till time and wisdom, may his love convert.
But who dares tell a Prince he goes aside?
His conscience best, if wisdom were his guide.
But they are great and may do what they will.
Great if much good: not great if they do ill.
But we must yield to what the Prince will have.
He is no Prince, that is affections slave.
Be what he will his power is ouer-stronge.
Heavens will not suffer sin to flourish long.
And sure who list but to behold the end,
Shall see Antonius dearly buy his lust:
They never prosper long that lewdly spend
Their granted time, for God is not unjust.
Well, let them talk of virtue, those that list,
Of patience, justice and of constancy;
For me, I think the Empress sure hath mist,
The only way to cure this malady.
Buy living fame that list, with pinching pain,
And starve themselves with feeding fond conceit:
Were I Octauta I would entertain
His double dealing, with as fine a slight.
I would nor weep, nor wail, but soon return
Upon his head the wrongs he doth pretend:
I would compel him spite of him to learn,
It were no jest a woman to offend.
He 〈◊〉 not now the gre•…e that makes her smart:
But I know what would touch him to the heart.
What force, what wit, can Antony compel,
Now to forgo his late ill-placed love?
One nail you see another will expel,
When nothing else can force the same to move.
Should lie that swims in streams of sweet content,
Make his delight the agent of my pain?
No, no, •…e rather were a president,
How to 〈◊〉 him with the like again.
Had I bin touched with 〈◊〉 of inward grief,
When such like chances had be-fallen me,
Or at their leisure hoped for relief,
When I my self, mought best my self set free:
I had bin dead for many years ago,
Or must have lived in endless misery,
But I take order not to perish so,
He shall c•…re little, that cares less then I.
But doth not Syluia blush to disanull,
His own good name, his faith, and constancy:
Doth not she fear, the wrath of heaven to pull
Upon his head, for such impiety?
The wrath of heaven, why no, the heavens are just,
And Justice yields a man his due desert:
Then sith I do no injury, I trust
Not I, but he, for both our faults shall smart.
And for my faith and constancy, no doubt
Isle deal for that as well as others shall:
But tic most strange to see you go about,
To praise the thing that works all women's fall.
Why constancy is that which mars all.
A weak conceit which cannot wrongs resist,
A chain it is which binds our selves in t•…rall,
And gives men scope to use vs as they list,
For when they know that you will constant bide,
Small is their care, how often they do slide.
O if you would but mark the little map
Of my poor world, how in times swift career
I manage fortune, and with wit entrap
A thousand such as hold these courses dear;
Then would you say you want the art of love,
For I fear nothing less then such relapse,
The frowardness which I in men approve,
Most troubles me for fear of after claps.
And Lord, you cannot govern one alone,
When I have many subject to my beck:
I always pleasant, you still making moan,
You full of fear, they dread my frowning check.
Nor do I marvel, for this union breeds
A loathing sure, by nature unto things:
And constancy the mind with quiet feeds,
And settled quiet soon corruption brings.
Thus first we loathe, and then we straight ways hate,
When to one object we entend our mind:
But I with choice do still renew the state,
Of fainting love, and still new pleasures find.
Look how a Bee amongst the verdant fields,
From divers flowers extracts the pleasant thyme,
Which well compounded, one sweet matter yields:
So do I spend my pleasure-tasting time.
I seek not grains of gould in barren ground,
Nor hope for fruit, when harvest is once past:
I like not where affection is not found,
If any fall, I fly from him as fast.
And surely who will taste the sweet of love,
Must not be tied unto one poor conceit:
One cannot work or half his practise prove,
Upon one mind which will be dulled straight.
But there must be an emulation placed,
Amongst favourites as spur of swift desire:
By letting one still see another graced,
As though the on's deserts did so require.
Two at a time I seldom entertain,
Nor one alone, but always if I might,
Whiles any one to court me I detain,
Some other of the crew should be in sight:
Who mought behold, how frankly I bestow,
Both smiles; and favours, where it pleased me;
They thinking this from his deserts to grow,
Will strive for to deserve as well as he.
Thus I abound with store of proffered love,
With vowed faith, with presents and what not:
When in the end one fortune all must prove,
And all these favours must be clean forgot.
But will not all thy servants thee forsake,
To see a rival such high favour gain?
If any jealous fool a surf•…te take,
Then thus with art I bring him on amain.
Some extraordinary favour falls
On him unawares, which may new fire his mind:
Or else some trusty agent him recalles,
In secret manner thereunto assigned;
Who tells him (as of friendship) I admire
His discontent, and my unkindness blame;
How I doe oftentimes of him enquire,
And still a sigh awaits upon his name.
This way I seldon fail, till at the last,
In follies lap affection hath him lulled.
From whence with fresh desire he flies as fast,
As if (poor fool) his wings had ne'er been pulled.
But sith thy mind can never be so free,
But that affection will on thee lay hold:
That being partial, me thinks should be
A cause, that others love would soon wax cold.
Affection, no, I know not such a thought,
That were a way to make my self a slave;
I hate subjection and will no•…e be brought,
What now I give, at others hands to crave.
But yet I know some one aboue the rest
Is most beloved, but that you list to jest.
I love one most? I favour, love, and grace,
Most every one, whiles he in presence is:
But being gone, look who comes next in place,
He's next my heart, my course is always this.
And if that any chance to fall away,
Shall loss of him thus vex me at the heart?
No grief, I never mean to be thy pray,
My care and he together shall depart.
Of straying, falling, and I wot not what,
So many words hath Syluia spent in vain:
That time, and truth, and purpose are forgot,
To Antony let vs return again.
We speak not of thy suitors, we complain
Of his untruth, that second unto none,
In faithlessness: of duty should remain,
For ever constant unto one alone.
Of his untruth, who hath his honour stained,
By base defiling of his marriage bed:
Who being vowed, and by oath detained,
Is false for sworn, seduced and fondly fled.
Why all is one, no wedlock can compel,
No law, no fear, no reason can constrain
Our minds, whiles we in natures castles dwell,
The pleasing course of nature to refrain.
Nature it self doth most delight in change,
The heavens, by motion do their music make:
Their lights by divers ways and courses range;
And some of them new forms doe always take.
Their working power is never always one,
And 〈◊〉 it self least constant is of all:
This earth we see and all that lives thereon,
Without new change, into destruction fall.
Nay what is more, the life of all these things,
Their essence, and perfection, doth consist
In this same change, which to all creatures brings
That pleasure, which in life may not be mist.
Sith then all creatures are so highly blessed,
To taste the sweet of life in often change:
If we which are the princes of the rest,
Should want the same me thinks it were very strange.
For proof hereof, I need not to un•…old:
Such far fetched secrets, sconce will make it plain.
What pleasure hath the eye, when you behold
One only object: is it not rather pain?
What sweet delight doth charm the listening ear,
When only one tune it doth apprehend?
In taste and smell, like loathing doth appear,
Whose evidence, no wit can reprehend.
Since nature then hath framed for the eye,
Such sundry colours to delight the same;
And for the ear such strange variety,
Of sweetest tunes, which doe our music frame;
Such divers meates, to please the dainty taste;
So many savours to delight that sense;
Each other part, with divers pleasures graced;
Least want of change mought happily breed offence.
What, shall the heart the master of the rest,
Be more restrained then any savage beast?
Shall not the heart, on whom all those depend,
Have greater scope then any of them all,
To taste the pleasure of each pleasing friend?
Faith mine hath had, and so it ever shall.
Peace wicked woman, nay foul monster peace
Whose very steps defile the guiltless earth:
Stain of thy sex, thy poisoned speech surcease,
That hath from sin, and wickedness, his birth.
Is it not too much to glory in thy sin,
Lewd creature, that hast ouer-liu'd all shame?
Emboldening others to persist therein,
When thou thy self should shun and fly the same;
But thou must make the heavens a president,
For thy misdeeds, which on thy head will power,
Eternal vengeance, unless thou repent,
And stay the force of mischiefs dreadful shower.
These mooing things are constant in their kind,
Unto the end for which they were ordained:
Not mutable like thy ungodly mind,
Whose very thoughts with wickedness are stained.
Our sconces their peculiar objects have,
Whose store, and number, doth unto vs show,
How reverently we should our selves behave,
To'ards him whose bounty did the same bestow.
O Chastity bright virtues sacred flame,
Be never woman lovely wanting thee.
Be never woman wronged adorned with thee.
Be all disgraced that merit not thy name.
Come Iulia, we have tarried here too long.
Sy•…uia adieu in faith I wish thee well,
No honest mind I think will doe thee wrong.
It is punishment enough to hang in hell.
GReat guide of this same golden flame,
Which days and times deutdeth.
Whose beauty ever is the same,
And always one abides.
Why hast thou such a monster made▪
which always thus rebelleth:
And with new torments doth invade,
The heart wherein it dwells.
Affection is the savage beast,
Which always vs annoys:
And never lets vs live in rest,
But still our good destroys.
Affections power who can suppress
And master when it sins:
Of worthy praise deserves no less,
Then he that kingdoms wins.
Were Antony a Prince indeed,
That base affection scorned:
Him to bemoan we should not need,
With vicious life deformed.
But this seducing virtues foe,
In whom all pleasure shines:
Doth all our sconces overthrow,
and reason undermines.
Who doth not joy, when from his neck,
The yoke of bondage slideth:
And wish to live without the check,
Of him that others guides?
Yet what more hard, then to observe,
In such licentious pleasure:
The golden mean, which doth not swerve,
From sacred virtues measure:
Who know, and see, the way of sin
Beset with dangers many:
Yet still persist and walk therein,
As negligent as any.
The mind with deepest wisdom fraught,
That mischiefs hand eschewed:
And envies craft doth bring to nought,
Affections force subdues.
The haughty heart with courage bold,
That deaths pale face despises:
The Prince which scorns to be controlled;
Affections power surprises.
And having made it self a king,
Our mind with error feeds:
Till we our selves effect the thing,
Which our destruction breeds.
The path of error, is so graced,
With sweetest seeming pleasures:
As if delight had therein placed,
The store house of her treasures.
But who to prove the same are bent,
In sinful maze included:
In vain at last will sure repent,
with shameful end deluded.
Where virtues little beaten ways,
with divers troubles cumbred:
Direct our steps, unto true •…oyes,
Amongst the Ange•…s numb•…ed.
OFearce desire, the spring of sighs and tears,
Relieved with want, impoverished with store,
Nursed with vain hopes, and sed with doubtful fears,
Whose force withstood, increases more and more.
How doth thy pride thus torture my poor heart,
Whiles I for bodies shadows entertain:
And in the harvest of most high desert,
Do reap no fruit, but scorn and deep disdain.
No fearce Hyrcanian forest doth possess,
So wilde a Tiger, nor no Lybian coast,
Hath ever known a greedy Lioness,
Robed of the pray which she affected most,
So beyond measure full of furious Ire,
As is the mind robed of his chief desire.
O destinies, that draw the golden twine,
Which doth conduct the neuer-tyred post,
Why have you lest unclosed these eyes of mine,
To see the field of all mine honour lost?
In vain I sought a while, to cure the wound
With balm of hope, drawn from a constant mind,
But now the truth is manifestly found:
I hear, I see, I know, I feel, I find,
The shameful wrong, the scorn and high disdain
Which faithless he most falsely doth pretend,
To power on me whiles from despair in vain,
With constant hope, my weakness I defend,
O torment, worse then deaths most bitter gall:
Worse then is found in that infernal place;
To see another glory in my fall;
To see another proud with my disgrace.
Why dost thou stay, distressed Octave•…a dye.
Dead to all joys let death thy torments end,
Who gave thee life, the same doth now deny:
And to another his affection bend.
Another doth thy interest enjoy:
And yet thou lives, and yet thou dost delay,
To calm with death the tempest of annoy,
When to disgrace 〈◊〉 doth thee betray.
Dye dead Octauia. What? and basely dye?
Shall I sit down and ye•…lt my self to shame?
Shall I content my self with wrongs? not•….
Revenge Octauia, or thou art too blame.
Dye never unrevenged of such a wrong.
My power is such that I may well prevail.
And rather then I will endure it long,
With fire and sword I will you both assail.
My nature doth abhor to be thus used,
My heart doth scorn such monstrous injury:
My birth, my state, disdain to be abused,
And I will deeply score thy perjury.
Then grief give place a 〈◊〉 unto disdain.
Mild pity, make thee wings and fly away:
And death, withdraw thy hasty hand again,
Whiles with advantage I their debts repay.
How now Octauia, whither wilt thou fly?
Not what thou moist, but do thou what is just:
Shall these same hands attempt impiety?
I may, I can, I will, I ought, I must,
Revenge this high disgrace, this Caesar will,
Birth, nature, reason, all require the same.
Yet virtue will not have me to do ill.
Yield, all things yield, to virtues sacred name.
Howthen? even thus, with patience make thee strong,
The heavens are just, let them revenge thy wrong.
Cruel to me, selfe-wronging Antony,
Thy folly shall not make Octauia sin:
Isle be as true in virtuous constancy,
As thou art false and infamous therein.
Isle be as famous for a virtuous wife,
As thou notorious for so lewd a life.
As is a sweet pearl dropping silver shower,
Which some mild cloud down from the shady skies
Upon the parched flowery fields doth power:
Such is Octauiaes sight to Caesars eyes.
Hath •…icons travail gained the golden fleece,
Or hath Octauia failed of his intent?
Is Antony within the bounds of Greece,
Or doth he stay at Blanckbourg malecontent?
O Caesar, how my now distracted mind
Vnites it self to render worthy thanks:
But woe is me, no way, no means I find,
No hope to hide Antonius lustful pranks.
I him besought, by all that words might say,
By this same ring that knit the Gored a•… knot:
By all the rights past on our wedding day,
But all in vain, for all is now forgot.
Look how some proud hard hearted mighty rock,
Which makes the sea a mirror for his face,
Repell's the waters with a churlish stroke,
Which mildly strive his body to embrace:
So his indurate mind reiects my words,
And rudely makes me and my hopes forlorn,
His flinty heart nought but repulse affords,
And my deserts return me nought but scorn.
Were not Octauia precious in my sight,
Whose will withstood what I did most desire:
The bloody lines had not been now to wright,
Of such revenge as his lewd deeds require.
But worthy branch of brave Octauius lyne,
In Caesars thoughts live and predominate:
Yours is my kingdom and what else is mine,
My self▪ my sceptre and my royal state.
Then sith I ever granted your request,
And let you prove al means his love to win:
Since you and we in vain have done our best,
To stay his foot out of the sink of sin;
Now for my sake, if I may ought prevail,
For dead Octauius never stained worth:
For dear Anchariaes love, and your avail,
Excuse no more his faithlessness henceforth,
Yield but to this, live here and banish care,
Forget his name that traytor-like is fled:
Live like a Queen, remember who you are,
And let me rouse him from his Lemmans bed.
Leave you this house of his, and what is his,
Stand of your self since he entends your fall:
Dishonour not your name with others miss,
If love cannot recall him terror shall.
Dishonour not my name! O Caesar no,
My misery is not of that degree:
Wrought by my folly or forced by my foe,
Which mought attribute that disgrace to me.
Tic pain, and grief, to bear and suffer wrong,
But shame and sin to him that doth the same:
True patience can mildly suffer long,
Where rage and fury do our lives defame.
Tic fortitude which scorns the force of wrong,
And temperance not to be moved withal:
Tic constancy makes vs continue strong,
And wisdoms work to free our selves from thrall.
But I am wronged you say, and tic base fear.
Without revenge to suffer injury:
Its cowardice unworthy wrongs to bear,
And madness to give way to treachery,
Well then, revenge, but what? Octauiaes wrong,
Of whom? of Antony. And who is he?
Ah my dear Lord, that will return ere long,
And hate his fall, and be most true to me.
If not, Isle then revenge, but how? with death?
He is my self, his grief procures my pain.
With spoil and loss? O no that were not good,
By certain loss to hope for doubtful gain.
How then 〈◊〉 be false as he is most untrue.
One wound doth not an others balm procure.
Flame is not quenched with flame, but both renew,
A double force not easy to endure.
Whence springs revenge? from malice and disdain:
Then speak not of it, for it is in vain.
Earth'open first thine vndeuided Jaws,
And swallow me in thine infernal womb:
Ear willingly I swerve from virtues laws,
Truth my loves childbed was, truth be his tomb.
Were Antony as loyal in his love,
As he is false forsworn, and fondly bent:
Then would I think it reason to approve,
And highly praise your virtuous intent.
But sith he willingly doth you forsake,
And wilfully persists to do vs wrong:
High honour doth require our swords to take,
Most just revenge, which we may not prolong.
His falsehood doth not malice raise in me,
But rather shows how frail mans nature is:
An argument which bids me careful be,
Least I my self should like wise do amiss.
Can my persuasions then no wh•…t prevail?
Can my request no thought of yielding find?
Can you esteem of him whose truth doth fail?
There are few women of Octauiaes mind.
Too few I grant, and therefore am I such,
And though alone, yet will persevere still:
We imitate the multitude too much,
Most do, as do the most, and most do ill.
The number of the virtuous is so small,
That few delight to tread that loanely way:
But wisdoms heirs are jealous of their fall;
And think it shameful all should go astray.
A virtuous act seems strange in some men's sight,
Because they seldom saw the like before,
But noble minds are careful of the right,
And others errors make them fear the more.
How senselessly we sleep in follies bed,
How few there are indeed, how all would seem
Wife, honest, just, how fondly are we led,
To use that least which we do most esteem?
Then ought a prince to fear much more then any:
Least his fault be a president to many.
And is it virtue then to be misused?
To give no cause why we should be abused.
Do but consent, Isle act and bear the blame.
To give consent to sin, is sin &amp; shame.
And is it sin to punish lewdness then?
Sin to exult upon repentant men.
But he persists in hateful treachery.
True love may spring from pardoned injury.
How may they love, whō worlds of distance part?
He is not far thats lodged within the heart.
But time, and absence, will consume all love.
Sooner the hart, which doth those passions prove.
Not so, no mortal dart near love is found.
But we are mortal which endure the wound.
Yet leave this house, if not his love deny.
First let this soul out of his lodging fly.
Can nature then no privilege obtain?
Are his deserts in such abundant store?
Must all I do be fruitless and in vain?
Antonius be your guide, I say no more.
If that my words so much offend your mind,
O silent death, thou my best refuge art:
O break my heart, for Caesar is unkind,
In silent grief, O break my wounded heart.
What in a trance? O sister, sister dear,
Light of my life, dear model of my soul:
Hurt not your self, O banish needless fear,
Woe, woe, to me, that did you thus control:
O dear Octauia, I spake but to prove,
How far your thoughts were bent with jealousy;
To see if malice had exiled your love,
To find how you esteemed of Antony.
O Caesar more beloved then these same eyes,
More then the light which glads my tired life:
Do not my truly loving mind despise,
Kill not my heart with this your factious strife.
Alas tic not his house that I respect,
His wealth, or tripartite high regiment:
I would the worlds great treasury neglect,
Rather then hazard Caesars discontent.
Tic not affection that enchaines my mind,
Or partial love that makes my faith so strong:
Too well alas my self abused I find,
And this my hart too sensible of wrong.
And what is worse, this wrong so full of scorn,
As mought incense the mildest mind alive:
To see my Lord a graceless Queen suborn;
And my dishonour carelessly contrive.
Nay worse then that, if worse then that may be,
No creature ever felt the like disgrace:
Each wronged wight may hope for remedy,
My shameful story nothing may deface.
For if my Lord would cure this wound again:
Yet woe is me, the scarre will still remain.
In these respects, perhaps I could be brought,
To strike revenge as deep as any could:
I want no means whereby it mought be wrought,
For many thousands wish it if I would.
And what is more, my self can scarcely let:
But Caesars sword for me would pay the debt.
But when I find in closet of my heart,
How I have paun'd my faith to Antony,
How I have vowed that nought but death should part
From him my love, and my fidelity.
When that I see the vulgar peoples eyes,
Make my designs the pattern of their deeds:
How with my thoughts they strive to sympathise,
And how my miss their certain error breeds.
When that I find how my departure were,
The opening of a gate to cruel wars:
Then Atlas-like I am constrained to bear,
A hated hell though not the happy stars.
Isle rather dye then witness with these eyes,
In mortal wounds and bloody lines enrowled,
The argument of my calamities,
Whom proud mischance, unjustly thus controlled.
Shall never two such noble Emperors,
Their dearest lives adventure for my sake:
Shall never for my sake such mighty powers,
The doubtful chance of battle undertake.
Shall never tongue recount Octauiaes error,
An instance of his faithless perjury
Isle rather dye the world unspotted mirror,
And with my faith surmount his injury.
Well sister, then I see that constancy
Is sometimes seated in a women's breast:
Your strange designs even from your infancy,
Can never without wonder be expressed.
I know not what you think of woman kind,
That they are faithless and inconstant ever:
For me, I think all women strive to find
The perfect good, and therein to persevere.
Even as a Torch, or Sulphur poudered light,
Whiles any nourishment maintains his flame,
Fails not to burn, and burning shines bright,
Till a•…te obscure, or force put out the same:
Such is the mind in women's breast contained,
With the true zeal of virtues love inflamed,
We may be dead, but living never stained,
We may be wronged, but never rightly blamed.
Well, for your self proceed as you think best:
Time and the heavens, must see these wrongs redressed.
Great peers that strive with wisdoms sacred fame,
To over live all human memory:
Show me, for what intent you hither came,
What caused you to revolt from Antony?
By our access we nothing else entend,
But humbly to beseech your majesty:
Under your gracious favour to defend,
Our wronged selves from hateful injury.
Proud Cleopatra, Aegypts crafty Queen,
Rules Antony, and wrongs she cares not where:
So insolent his late attempts have been,
As no pride-scorning Romaine heart can bear.
She is become our Queen and governor,
And we whose courage fears the force of no man:
By servile baseness of our Emperor,
Must be content to stoop unto a woman.
What Angel Queen rules those Nyleian coasts,
Whose beauty can so ouer-rule men's minds:
What goddess can command the man that boasts
To equal In•…juice, in his high designs.
If in those gifts, by nature we enjoy,
Unto Octauiaes sacred majesty,
She be but comparable any way:
Be never Romaines so disgraced as we.
But for his artificial ornaments,
For pomp, for pride, for superfluity,
For all excess that folly represents:
She doth exceed the height of vanity.
His sunne-burnt beauty cannot please his sight,
That hath a mind with any reason fraught:
But tic his Siren tongue that doth delight,
His crafty Cyrces wit which hath him caught.
As when from Athens, Niger made return,
And did relate the Empress intent,
Which he of purpose had in charge to learn:
And did his princely gifts to him present.
And further did with truth discovering words,
Octauiaes well deserved praises frame:
An argument which to that Queen affords,
A furious blast to raise a Jealous flame.
Then did she nothing unattempted leave,
That art mought frame, or wit mought well devise•…
Which mought his mind, of reason quite bereave:
And thus she straight began to Syrenize.
She pines his body with the want of food,
That she mought seem to languish for his sake:
And by his gestures would be understood,
How from his absence she his death should take.
His deep lamenting looks fixed in his face,
In silent terms present an earnest suit:
As who should say, O pity my hard case,
Whom violence of passion makes mute.
Then would she stand of purpose in his way,
In any place where he should passage make:
And there as though unwilling to bewray,
What bitter grief she inwardly did take:
Down from her eyes distils a Crystal tide,
Which at his coming she would dry again,
And suddenly would turn her head a side,
As though unwilling to reveal her pain,
Thus in his presence ravished with joy,
She smiles, and shows, what mirth she can devise▪
But in his absence drowned with annoy,
She seems to take her life from those his eyes.
Then Meeremaid-like his sconces she invades,
With sweetest nectar of a sugared tongue:
Unto her will, she ever him persuades,
The force of her words witch-craft is so strong.
Then came the kenell of her flattering crew,
Who largely paint the story of her death,
Like feed Atturneys they her suit renew,
And hunt Antonius spirits out of breath.
Wherewith assailed, he like a man enchanted,
To make her know she need not to misdoubt him:
Or like to one with some mad fury haunted,
Assembleth all the people round about him.
In that fair City royalliz'd by fame,
By that great Macedonian monarch builded:
Of whom it took beginning, birth and name;
Where on a high Tribunal seat which yielded,
A large prospect, were placed too chairs of gold;
One for himself, another for her grace,
And humbler seats which mought her childrē hold,
Of such like mettle, in the self same place.
There he established Cleopatra, Queen
Of Aegipt, Cyprus, and of Lidia:
And that his bounty mought the more beseene,
He joined thereto the lower Syria.
Caesarian, heir apparent to her grace
Was constituted King of those same lands.
His own two sons by her were there in place,
Attended with great troops of martial bands.
These two, the mighty Kings of Kings he called,
And to the eldest gave Armenia,
The country Media, and forthwith enstalled
Him regent of the Kingdom Parthia.
To Ptol•…my he gave Phoenicia,
And all the territories there adjoining:
The upper Syria, and Cilicia,
Unto them both peculiar guards assigning.
A Median gown the elder of them ware,
And all the Armenian soldiers so instructed:
Accomplishing the charge they had before,
About him came and thence they him conducted.
In Macedonian robes the other stands,
In distance from his brother little space:
About him came the Macedonian bands,
And guarded safe his person from the place.
These things proclaimed, the trumpets loudest voice,
Unto all peoples ears forthwith imparted,
Whereat some frown, some murmur, some rejoice,
Whiles he, with his immortal queen departed.
Immortal? why you said she was not such.
Not she, but her attire did claim thus much.
Was her attire so admirable then?
Scorning the baseness of vs mortal men.
Clad like the Goddess Ices she did go:
Then what hard heart wold not have thought her so
When that Appollodorus on his back,
A flockbed did to Iulius Caesar bring:
With thongs of leather trust up like a sack;
As though there had been need of such a thing,
Where was the Goddess when this came to pass?
She, noble she, was riding on her Ass.
When Antony about the streets doth run,
Listening at each mans window in the night:
To hear what in the house is said or done,
And with strange noises passengers affright.
Where is this Goddess then so highly blessed?
She ambles after to laugh at the jest.
And shall our state maintain their hateful pride?
Shall bleeding Room procure their wanton peace?
Tic time we stould a remedy provide,
And their ambition speedily suppress.
WHat gilded baits of sin,
Doe still procure our miss:
And seek our souls to win,
From their intended bliss?
Even natures self doth draw,
And force vs still to slide:
And violate the law,
Which reason makes our guide.
Of pleasures we allow,
Which doe our thraldom bring:
When starveling virtue now,
Is scarcely judged a thing;
The one a poor conceit, the other proved a King.
If that it be so sweet,
To tread the path of sin:
And so exceeding meet,
We should not walk therein;
O nature most unkind,
That proves weak reasons foe:
O reason too too blind,
That crosses nature so.
Three mal-seducing foes,
Conduct false errors train:
Misleading most of those,
Which virtues praise would gain.
Whose force unless we foil, we labour all in vain.
Th'examples of the most,
Which most doe take least care,
To anchore on the coast,
Where sacred virtues are.
Sweet Syrenyzing tongues,
In flattery most expert:
Whose ill persuading songs,
Our sconces doe pervert.
And men's injurious deeds,
Doe cause vs to digress:
Our error fury breeds,
When wrongs our minds oppress.
These treason working mates, still work our great distress.
Examples make vs bold.
To tread the doubtful way,
Which we before were told,
Would lead vs quite a stray.
Persuasions kindly move,
And win vs to dpe ill:
Whose poison when we prove,
We poisoned, love it still.
But injury more strong,
Doth fiercely vs incite:
By suffering to doe wrong,
Forgetful of the right,
All these thrice virtuous Queen, assail thee with their might.
Who can vile deeds despise,
And flattering tongues neclect:
With malice temporise,
As wisdom doth direct.
Give him the laurel crown,
Triumphant victors wear:
The tytles of renown,
Which virtues monarchs bear.
And thou most glorious queen,
These traitor foes repell:
That virtue may be seen,
In that your sex to dwell.
And bravely vaunt thy worth where he most basely fell.
YOu haughty Lords, that bury death and fate,
In living monuments of lo•…tie fame:
Whose worthy praise doth claim the boundless date,
wherewith eternity doth blaze her name.
Against whom raise y•…u these forces in such haste?
Against whom lead you this danger threatening power?
Doth hateful Hanniball your confines waste?
Or Brennus sword your lives seek to devour:
No no my Lords, this your concea'ld design,
Resounding Echoes of most strange debate:
With tragike tidings filled these ears of mine,
That powered on me the storm of all your hate.
Never since princely hand of Syluias son,
Laid the foundations of these stately towers:
Did sharpe mischance so much eclipse the sun,
Of our good fortune, with such fatal lowers.
But if that wisdom ever found a place,
Within your souls, which beautifies your praise:
Now show the same, and save from high disgrace,
Our bleeding honour, and death breathing joys.
You know how blood maintains the life of wars,
As doubtful as dear bought the victory:
Mans destiny is chained by unknown stars,
To happy joys or mournful misery.
If you triumph, you conquer not your foes,
But neighbours, kinsefolkes and your dearest friends:
Whose wounds bleed shame, and deep hart-peircing woes,
Instead of conquest this is your amends.
But if my Lord obtain the laurel wreath,
And fortune smile on him with like success:
What fatal tempests, furious rage will breath,
From his hearts cave, your selves may easily guess.
You know when touch of honour wings his mind,
What lyon thoughts tyre on his haughty soul.
Where wronged valour reigns tic hard to find,
Such pity as may honours pride coutroule.
Then sith your course to loose your selves is bent,
To loose your lives or purchase living shame:
Let wisdoms eyes, blind errors faults prevent.
With ease a spark, with pain is quenched a flame.
Be advocates for me to Caesars grace,
And stop in time the current of his hate:
Let gentle pity in your minds find place,
When swords have pleaded, words will come too late.
You know my fortune ever hath been such,
As dazzled Envies eyes with honours shine:
But since Antonius hath augmented much,
This sovereignty, and great estate of mine;
Since nature, fortune, birth and majesty,
In fields of glory stir up civil wars,
Which of them most should raise my dignity,
And lift mine honour nearest to the stars;
Since these two Emperors whose princely hands,
Doe sway the sceptre of the Romaine state:
The one my brother, linked in natures bands,
The other is my spouse and loving mate;
Since heavens themselves did in my life provide,
To show the map of their felicities:
This Room my Lords and all the world beside,
Make me the object of their wondering eyes.
Thus I that was more happy then the rest,
And did excel in glory and renoune:
With more then most disgrace shall be suppressed,
No fall like his that falls from a crown.
And that which nature grants the meanest wight,
They cannot loose which have the conquest won:
Yet with this strange Dilemma works my spite,
Who s'euer win Octauia is undone.
Great Empress, this bright sun can witness well,
So can these heavens before whose powers I stand:
That against our minds Caesar doth vs compel,
This enterprise you see, to take in hand.
But for my self, and if the case be such,
That but report is actor of this jar:
If Caesars honour may be free from touch
Of any stain, relinquishing the war.
Isle doe my best, and what I may persuade,
To lay down arms, wherein if I prevail:
A perfect league of friendship shall be made,
That may the fury of this tempest quail.
And pardon me (dear sovereign) though my speech
Include exceptions in this doubtful wise:
I may not Caesar move, nor him beseech,
What may his majesty disroyallize.
This said, behold my hand, my sword, my soul,
Here humbly prostrate at your princely feet:
What you command let none dare to control,
This Caesar will and this we think most meet,
Madam; your speech I think doth not extend,
To the disparagement of your own blood:
And sooner shall my life have final end,
Then I refuse to doe your highness good.
Though last my speech, yet second unto none
Is my desire, t'effectuate your will:
But lo where Caesar comes himself alone,
Arm we our tongues with words, our words with skill.
Fair issue of renowned Octauius race,
My second self, Rooms glorious Empress:
Behold vs all assembled here in place,
To work your safety and your wrongs redress.
Your Lord Antonius (as we hear) doth threat,
To power sharpe storms of deep revenging Ire,
Upon our heads: and make the imperial seat
His sole possession, ere he hence retire.
But let him know, though finely he pretend,
To guilde injustice with a Princes name:
Though he triumph in words, yet ere I end,
What he begins, he may repent the same.
My gracious Lord, high words doe but increase
The flame of valour in incensed minds:
Leave arms my Lord, and let vs treat of peace:
Who best doth speed in war, small safety finds,
Full well the world your noble worth hath known,
Let not new dangers needless trophies raise.
Let not th'effect of hateful deeds be shown,
Against my Lord who may deserve your praise.
Shall he be praised that is become our foe,
Stain of our name, foil of the Romaine state:
A servile man, contriver of our woe,
And from all honour doth degenerate?
Nay what is more, tic said he doth pretend,
To work our ruin, and our fatal end.
Can foul suspicion then, and false report,
In wisdoms confines hold so large a place:
That it can foil our reason in such sort,
To fly the good, and work his own disgrace?
The ancient Romaines wont to draw their swords,
To purchase honour, of their stoutest foes:
But you whose grounds are vain surmised words,
By seeking honour, shall your honours loose.
Fame hath two wings, the one of false report:
The other hath some plumes of verity;
Why then should doubtful rumour, raise a forte
Of mortal hate, against my Lord and me.
Suppose he raised as you have done, a power:
He to defend, not to offend his friend,
The heavens forbid that any fatal hour,
Should your proceedings turn t'vnhappy end.
Unhappy no, he never falls amiss,
That foils his foe before his final end:
High honour, not long life, the treasure is,
Which noble minds without respect defend.
The prize of honour is not always blood.
Tic honour all whose end imports our good.
O wretched state where men make haste to dye.
True valour feels nor grief nor misery.
He is your brother, be not then unkind.
Justice, not pity, fits a Princes mind.
He hath done nothing, spare an innocent.
He doth too much that bears a false intent.
You both are strong and both will buy it dear.
I armed with justice, know not how to fear.
O Caesar shall my heart be made a stage,
For you to play a bloody tragedy?
Shall fearce misfortune, breathing spiteful rage,
Make me vicegerent of all misery?
If both of you misled in •…rrours maze,
Doe seek revenge of misconceived wrongs,
For your own sakes out of your fancies raze,
The spots of malice grafted with your tongues.
But if mischance have offered disgrace,
To either party: O let me entreat,
That for my sake, kind pardon may deface,
A fault so small, with breath of words made great.
Bright lamp of virtue, honours living flame,
Whosoever win, you can no loss sustain:
Whom partial fortune list to crown with fame,
His be the day, the triumph and the gain.
The victor must be either your own Lord,
Or else your brother, who will both consent,
To try their fortunes with the dint of sword.
But shield you as the worlds chief ornament.
If both we fall, (which hap the heavens forbid)
All that survive, are subject to your will.
Your birth, your state, your virtues are not hid:
But known, and lo•…'d, and will be honoured still.
no ear so deaf which hath not heard your name;
Whose ears have heard, their minds your worth admire
Whose minds admire, their harts love doth inflame,
And wins them subject to your own desire.
No perils threaten you, you need not fear.
But many you, and I their burden bear.
Tic reason I, none else my griefs sustain.
Where nature forces, reason is but vain.
And therefore Caesar here I thee beseech,
By these same scepter-bearing hands of mine:
By these same tears, true witness of my speech;
By that same princely port and grace of thine;
By all the love thou bear to Acciaes ghost,
By all the rights that loving minds hold dear;
Lay arms aside dismiss this puissant host,
Let friendly truce release my mind of fear.
If not, isle drown my life in these same tears,
And tyre with plaints the Pandionian birds:
Tyre the Halciones, with grief that bears
To high a strain, for highest climbing words.
Isle make the sun for pity cloth his steeds
In sorrows livery, and disdain your sight:
Force niggard Pluto with my woeful deeds,
To entertain my souls disgraced flight.
Else will I fly and shroud my face from shame,
Where Pyndus hides his head amongst the stars:
Or where ambitious Othris, wanting flame
Of heavenly lamps, the clouds swift motion bars.
Ought will I doe, before these eyes behold
Death's visage painted in that princely face:
Before isle see captivity, lay hold
On those fair limbs, which merit highest grace.
Before isle see their bloody weapons drink,
The nectar of thy life, or Ivory stained,
With ugly gore: O let me never think,
Or hope till then, to have this life maintained.
Before that time, death is a welcōme guest
To my lives lodging: and O sisters dear,
If ever pity dwelt in direful breast,
Draw not my thread till that news pierce mine ear.
How oft when sleep invites my drowsy eye,
With natures curtain to repell the light:
And hide my mind from sorrows tyranny,
Under the darkness of the silent night?
Shall thy pale ghost defiled with deaths foul hand,
Stand in my sight, as in the clearest day:
And fury-like armed with black fiery brand;
Affright my mind and chase dead sleep away?
Which being gone, fierce sorrows cruel claws,
Seize on my waking thoughts like tigers fell:
And gripe my heart with sharpe tormenting paws,
That thousand times deaths rigour doth excel.
O perfect virtue gracing woman kind,
Invincible Octauia cease to plain:
O had Antonius half so good a mind,
No discord could betwixt vs two remain.
My Lords what think you, how may we proceed?
High honour cries revenge upon our foes:
And yet Octauia crossing this our deed.
Cannot resolve which of vs she would loose.
I think it is a brave and Princely thing,
With fire and sword to ruinate our foes:
But greater glory is it for a King,
To save his subjects from wars common woes.
Tic wisdom noble Caesar, must advance
Our state beyond the reach of fortunes arm:
Not fierce revenge which works effects by chance,
And glories most when most it works harm.
And valour, such as doth contemn all fear,
And guild our acts with honour and renown:
With gentle clemency, our deeds endear,
And mount with virtue where chance throws vs down.
The rarest thing a Princes fame to raise,
Is to excel those that are excellent:
All other to surmount in virtues praise,
And be his kingdoms chiefest ornament.
Make quiet peace within his coasts remain,
And succour those that live in great distress:
From bloody slaughter ever to refrain,
With time, and wisdom, passions rage suppress.
These are the wings directing virtues flight.
This is the fuel feeding honours flame.
This is the path that leads to heaven aright.
and sun-bright beams that guild brave Caesars name.
Pity my Lords, is often like a mask,
That hides our eyes from seeing what is just:
Inviting any t'vndertake the task,
To work our woes and execute their lust.
For to neclect the course we have begun,
Were to betray our selves unto our foes:
Where keeping strong though no exploit be done,
Yet gaining nothing, nothing shall we loose.
Why you'are ill informed of Antony,
And his attempts exceed your knowledge far:
I fear me when you know as much as I,
You'll plead as fast to prosecute the war.
But see a stranger hastes into our sight,
With further news, and if I judge a right.
Thrice noble Caesar, hither am I sent,
Having in charge from great Mark Antony:
Th'ambassage of his pleasure to present,
Before Octauia and thy majesty.
First he commands Octauia to depart,
Out of his house, and leave all that is his:
The reason why, he list not to impart,
It must suffice that such his pleasure is.
He likewise will, thy highness knowledge take,
How much he scorns thou should his will withstā•…
And thereof means with fire and sword to make,
A perfect demonstration out of hand.
Will Antony our confines then invade,
With Civil wars, contriver of our woe?
Great reason preparation should be made,
For to withstand so puissant a foe.
Five hundredth sail of warlike ships he brings,
Wherewith the froathing Ocean he scores:
And in his army are eight foreign Kings,
Eight Kings in person with their mighty powers.
A hundred thousand well armed foot, are led
Under Canidius their chief general:
Twelve thousand horse most strongly furnished,
All these are known, and known these are not all.
How now my Lords, is this think you a time,
To talk of clemency? or of delay?
Is not this mischief in his chiefest prime,
Before we could the speedy spring bewray?
What saith Octauia to these tidings strange,
Are our conjectures upon falsehood grounded?
Can this suffice your settled thoughts to change?
Are not our lives with mischiefs Ocean bounded?
Had I so many tongues to paint my woes,
As ever silent night had shining eyes:
Yet could not all their eloquence disclose,
The throws of grief which do my mind surprise.
But would to God, this world of misery,
Mought presently be trebled unto me:
So that from imminent calamity,
My dearest brother Caesar mought be free.
For me, long since I well discerned the storm,
And sought by all means how I mought prevent it:
But sith no wit can Antony reform,
O it is not I, but he, that will repent it.
I feared the stroke before I felt the wound,
But now resolved the worst of chance to bide:
True fortitude doth in my soul abound,
My honour scorns the height of fortunes pride.
The worst that can befall me is but death:
And O how sweet is his lives sacrifice,
On virtues altar that expires his breath,
And in the arms of innocence dyes.
They only fear, and only wretched are,
From whose bad lives stained with impiety:
Their dying fame doth to the world declare,
Most shameful stories of foul infamy.
But those that know not, let them learn in me:
That virtuous minds can never wretched be.
My Lords, I will ye presently proclaim
Mark Antony, a foe unto our state:
That all his soueraignties ye straight reclaim,
And all his dignities annihilate.
We will not see the Romaine Empires shine,
By any servile mind to be defamed:
To manage steel our nature doth incline,
Of women's wanton toys we are ashamed.
And therefore with such hast, as may be-fit,
A matter that imports our dearest blood:
Weal meet Antonius, if the heavens permit,
And what we say, there will we make it good.
Adieu Octauia, and your self prepare
To run what course of fortune I approve:
I•… happy stars to vs allotted are,
Isle never be forgetful of your love.
Honour attend thy steps, and till I see,
The period of my worlds declining state:
Isle never to my self a traitor bee,
But seek the means to stay your mortal hate.
EArth-ruling heavenly powers,
Great Ioues immortal mates:
That from your Crystal bowers,
Direct all mortal states,
And vs like Actors do dispose:
To play what parts you list t'impose.
Must we▪ poor we, consent
To call you ever just?
Though you our harts torment,
Even after your own lust?
And for each drop of hoped joy:
Power down whole tempests of annoy.
And that which is much more,
Look what we best do deem:
Doth vex our minds more sore,
Then that wee least esteem.
And that which nature saith is best:
By trial yields vs smallest rest.
Who doth not wish, to wear
The terror breeding crown:
And direful sceptre bear,
As badge of high renoune?
Yet who more justly do complain:
That they the brunt of woes sustain.
Stand who so list for me,
In highest slippery place:
Though great their glory be,
Yet greater their disgrace.
And who so subject to mischance:
As those whom fortune doth advance.
These base earth-creeping mates,
Proud envy never spies:
When at the greatest states,
His poisoned quiver flies.
Each tempest doth turmoil the seas:
When little lakes have quiet ease.
Not those that are bedight,
With burnished glistening gould,
Whose pomp doth steal our sight,
With wonder to behold:
Taste smallest sweet without much ga•…le:
Nor find true joys within their call.
This did the heavens impose,
Not that they are unjust:
But for to punish those,
Who glory in their lust.
And our misdeeds procure vs still:
To seek our good amongst much ill.
A monster honour is,
Whose eyes are virtues flame:
His face contempt of this,
Which we pale death do name.
His Lyon heart nought else doth fear:
But crowing cock of shame to hear.
His wings are high desires,
His feet of Justice frame:
Food dangerous aspires,
His seat immortal fame.
Only the train of Envies plumes,
With others growth it self consumes.
HAth Geminus beheld th'Aegyptian Queen,
The actor of the troubled worlds distress?
Hast thou his gifts and rare perfections seen,
That makes Antonius sconces thus digress?
Tell vs, is she so admirable fair,
That Italy hath none which may come nigh his?
Doth she all beauties else so much impair,
Or else indeed, doth partial fame be lye his?
Have those his eyes so rare an influence,
To hold and captivate men's senses so,
That foiling wit, and reasons best defence,
They ravished, must needs themselves forgo?
I know not what may seem fair in your sight,
Because some like what others discommend:
But for my self, and if I judge aright,
Speaking of Cleopatra as a friend.
The fairest thing that in her may be seen:
Is, that she is a Lady and a Queen.
Madame, that sun-burnt coast, yields not a face
Which with the Romaine beauties may compare:
There mought be found a thousand in this place;
Whose natural perfections are more rare.
How passing strange it seems that Antony,
Should leave the paragon of natures pride:
And follow his whose shameful luxury,
Doth make the world his folly to deride.
Whence should it spring that such a thing should be?
Is this his folly, or the heavens decree?
His fault no doubt, &amp; crosses natures laws.
And I think not, for nature is the cause.
By nature we are moved, nay forced to love:
And being forced, can we resist the same?
The powerful hand of heaven we wretches prove:
Who strike the stroke, and poor we, bear the blame.
Love sure, frō nature took his birth by right,
But love of what?
Of beauty loves delight.
And what is beauty?
first say what is love?
Loue's a desire of what doth liking move.
Desire doth spring, frō what we wish, and want,
Doth loose himself in winning of his saint:
Enjoying doth that humour quite supplant,
And therefore cannot this loves nature paint.
If love were a desire, as you do guess,
Sith none desires that which he doth enjoy,
We could not love the thing we do possess:
For why, enjoying, would our love destroy.
But this is false, and you have judged amiss.
Speak you the truth, whose judgment better is.
I think this love a deep affection sure,
Wrought by th'instinct of natures hidden might,
Which in our hearts an union doth procure,
With that which perfect seems unto our sight.
Such is that love which in vs doth arise,
When such a beauty we do chance to see:
As with our nature best doth sympathise,
Which nature, faulty is, and not poor we.
Well, what is beauty?
that which likes best.
Which likes whō?
Some one aboue ye rest.
Why? some do like what others disalowe.
Some love, what others hate: and few there are
In whom a like affection doth grow,
Of any one thing, though the same be rare.
Were beauty then such as you here do name,
One thing should be, and not be beautiful,
One thing should be, and yet not be the same:
And that me thinks were strange and wonderful.
I rather think these outward beauties grow,
From just proportion and right symmetry:
Of these same gifts which nature doth bestow,
Upon vs all in our nativity.
Indeed we see a mixture far more fine
In some, then others, wrought by natures frame:
To whom the praise of beauty we ascribe,
Yet do not all alike affect the same.
Now, if this were the object of our love,
We all should like some one that were most fair:
Who should alone most deep affection move,
Whil's vulgar minds mought drown in deep despair.
But as no woman easily can endure,
To be deprived of beauties lovely praise:
So is there none so much deformed sure,
That in some minds, affection doth not raise.
Ther's none so fair whose beauty all respect,
Although we were enforced it should be so:
Some nothing fair, whom we must needs affect,
Though reason, wit, and all the world say no.
And what should be the cause of all this same?
I think because we lodge in natures frame.
Look how the Loadstone draws nought else but steel
Though metals far more precious are about it:
Yet this as his fit subject seems to feel
His power attractive, and moos not without it,
Or as in diverse instruments we see,
When any one doth strike a tuned string:
The rest which with the same in concord be,
Will show a motion to that senseless thing;
When all the other neither stir nor play,
Although perhaps more musical then they:
So are our minds, in spite of reasons nay,
Strained with the bent of natures sympathy:
Whose powerful force, no wit, no art, can stay.
And if you ask a farther reason why:
In these two things, but show the cause of both:
And then isle tell you why we love, and loathe.
Now, if the power of nature be so strong
That even senseless things yield thereunto:
O why should we endure so great a wrong,
To bear the blame of that which others doe.
What living man can cease himself to be,
And yet as possible as to refrain,
From that whereto our nature doth agree:
And spite of vs, doth vs thereto constrain.
Who can be angry with the scencelesse steel,
For cleaving unto this hard-harted thing?
Or blame that which can neither hear, nor feel,
For mooing to the other sounding string.
If these may be excusd by natures laws:
O how much more should we be free from blame,
Within whose tender hearts affection draws▪
Such deep characters leading to the same.
Is beauty then, sole object of our love?
That which seems so, doth our affection move.
I ever thought that virtue had been best.
We praise that most, but yet esteem it least.
Why disestemd, whose worth is so well known.
To show that vice the world hath overgrown.
The name is often hard in each mans mouth.
The thing more rare then Eagles in the south.
The thing contemnd can we the name esteem?
Yes all that are not such as all would seem.
But sith this is the beauty of the mind,
And nothing fits our natural discourse:
Let vs excuses for Antonius find,
And to our former purpose have recourse.
No Iulta, no, your harvest is too long,
For such a simple crop as you receive:
You may not thus persist the truth to wrong,
And with your wit, the world seek to deceive.
But Lord how willing are we to invent,
And find out coverts to obscure our sin:
As though to hide the same, and not repent,
Could vs preserve from being drowned therein.
Tic true, that nature did these buildings frame.
And true, that they to natures power are thrall.
And true, that imperfections foil the same.
And true, that we by natures weakness fall.
And this is true, that God vnnatured all,
And gave vs wisdom to suppress our will:
He gave vs perfect reason to recall,
Affections scouts from following what is ill.
Why we are men: and this same spark divine,
Our trouping thoughts should marshall in such wise,
That no affect from reason should decline,
Nor rebel passion in our hearts arise.
Th'instinct of nature, which doth all things move,
Bids love whereas you like without regard:
But piety saith, where tic lawful love,
Or else hell torments shall be your reward.
And is it true, is Antony unkind?
Hath this new love, of faith and troth bereft him?
Can fond affection so obscure his mind,
That not one spark of honour should be left him?
Can he so far forget his own good name,
As to dishonour all that are about him?
Ah can he not without a further blame,
Permit them dye that cannot live without him?
Come poor companions of my misery,
The issue of the faithlest man alive:
Support the burden of his treachery,
Whose base revolt, our ruin doth contrive.
Come poor beholders of your mothers fall,
Whose innocence mought greater pity move:
Your impious father doth despise vs all,
Forsaken we, must other fortunes prove.
Come poor attendants of a falling state,
Whose silent sadness doth my grief renew:
Yet be you all much more unfortunate,
Ere any seeds of lewdness rest in you.
Come let vs go, and leave this loanly place,
Your fathers dying love bequeaths you hence:
O 〈◊〉 this house, as from your own disgrace,
Tic his command you should be banished hence▪
Dead Fuluia, how can thy imperious ghost
Endure to see thine Orphants thus oppressed?
Yet of mine honour though his love be lost,
Whiles I survive, they shall not be distressed.
O Antony, borne of no gentle Sire,
Some cruel Caucasus did thee beget:
Even scencelesse things thy scencelesnesse admire,
And seem to feel, what thou seem to forget.
Oft have I seen. these stones with pity moved,
Shed dropping tears, lamenting my disgrace:
When in thy heart where most it most behooved,
No kind remorse could ever find a place.
More mild then thee, I find each cruel beast,
For they but give a smale-time lasting death:
With endless grief, my soul thou dost molest,
Which ever killing, never steps my breath.
O failing pillar of my falling state!
O fading flower of virtues fairest field!
O why should thou so much degenerate,
And honours byrth-right to dishonour yield.
Yield to dishonour all that dear bought wealth,
Which earthly kings doth in heavens kingdom place.
Let thy minds treasure fall away by stealth.
By stealth contrive and work thine own disgrace.
O Erecina that my Lord did know,
As thy fond boy shoots shaftes of swist desire:
So mighty Jove, sharpe thunder-boults doth throw,
Confounding such as from his laws retire.
He nursed in sin, sees not his own disgrace,
Augmenting still, our sorrow and his shame:
That greatness hides the danger from his face,
But yet my care is doubled with the same.
The greedy Wolf, and cruel ravening bear,
Touched with th'extremitie of hungry pain,
The guiltless cattle furiously do tear:
And being fed, from cruelty resraine.
But tyranizing grief prays on the heart,
And cloyed with sighs and tears doth still persevere:
His raging fury nothing may divert,
But still, still fed, is satisfied never.
O happy he, a thousand times and more,
Whose quiet thoughts so mild a calm do gain:
That neither hope can force from safeties shore,
Nor deep despair can sink on mischiefs main•….
But majesty, and honour, for these too,
Shall be the only objects of mine eye:
What virtue faith is just, that will I doe,
Thus I resolve to live, thus will I dye.
And are you sure that Antony is slain?
May we believe that this report is true?
Why should you wish me to recount again,
The story that doth double grief renew?
O had you but discovered with your eyes,
The face of woe in all that pre•…ent were:
Or heard their doleful no•…e and shrieking cries,
You would have cause to grieve and not to fear.
What tragic tidings bring these wo•…ull wights,
That ring such peals of horror in mine ears?
What unknown cause your martial hearts 〈◊〉?
What silent grief in your sad looks appears?
Did but our words import the sound of woe,
To wound your ears withal were double sin:
But sith your highness will, it should be so,
And that your safety is contained therein;
We will not from your grace conceal the same;
And though we should, yet time will open all.
From Aegipts common woes I lately came,
And did bewail Antonius wilful fall.
Is Antony ore'throwne?
Yes all is lost.
His power and forces wholly are decayed:
He is deceived by his he loved most,
By Cleopatra shamefully betrayed.
And she that taught him first to swim in sin:
Was even the first that drowned his life therein.
Ah, by what means did she my Lord abuse?
By such a means as lewd offenders use.
For when the wars at first pretended were,
And that Antonius with him would not take his:
She fearing least his self not being there,
He happily mought be moved to forsake his.
She •…ees Canidius our chief General,
Him to persuade, that she mought present be:
He sues, obtains, and we embarked all,
Make joyful hast our woeful end to see.
For whiles our powers of equal •…orces were,
And neither side could disadvantage spy:
Like one that knew a secret cause of fear,
Out of the army she began to fly.
Lo, how no greatness can our conscience free,
From inward horror of our wicked deeds:
For that same better part of vs doth see,
A greater power whose Justice terror breeds.
But he, whose thoughts were to his looks enchained,
Although the army did not loss sustain,
As though for his he had the world disdained:
Forsakes them all, and after flies amain.
Whose causeless fear so much dismayed the host,
Who scorned to fight for him which run away:
That with small hurt, the battle there was lost,
And Caesar had the honour of the day.
The Legions, thus deprived of a guide,
Themselves to Caesars clemency submit:
Antonius baseness they do all deride,
And think a chamber were for him more fit.
But Lyon▪hearted Caesar still proceeds,
His strength is doubled, weakened is his foe:
Unto Pelusium hastily he speeds,
These fugitives may not escape him so.
There lay Antonius navy in the rode,
Who yielded when Augustus fleet was seen:
And likewise showed how Antony abode,
At Alexandria with this fearful Queen,
Who seeing thus himself deprived of aid,
Cries out that Cleopatra hath betrayed him:
She whether guilty, or perhaps afraid,
That frō his slaughter nothing could have staid him;
Flies from his sight, and falsely sends him word,
That she (drowned in despair) his self had slain:
Wherewith enraged, he takes a bloody sword,
And breathing out these speeches all in vain;
O Cleopatra princess of my heart;
And art thou dead? lo dying I adore thee:
This more then death, doth now procure my smart,
That wanting courage▪ I went not before thee;
With that, yet warm death-couloured instrument,
In his fair breast he did the gate set op,
Which to the earth, his bloodless limbs hath sent:
His dying soul up to the heavens I hope.
And is he dead?
His better part yet lives,
But to his corps a tomb sweet queen•…t gives
O poor 〈◊〉, now I feel thy pains,
Griefs greedy vulture feeds upon my heart:
Upon my head a shower of mischief rains,
And all the heavens conclude to work my smart.
O my Antonius, O my Lord, my Lord:
O that Octauia had been slain for thee;
O that the heavens would unto me afford,
That this my blood mought thy lives ransom be.
Mine was the wound thou gave that noble breast,
That purple stream extracted from my heart:
In my deep passions is thy death expressed,
Thou feltst the stroke, but I endure the smart,
And O that grief did not thus stop my breath,
And all my words dissolve in showers of tears,
That I mought worthily lament thy death:
And Catadupa-like, dull all men's ears.
Unhappy world, the pilgrimage of pain,
The stage where mischief acts a dyreful part:
What hast thou had, what dost thou now contain,
Which but a thought of pleasures mought impart.
Not one care-wanting hour my life hath tasted:
But from the very instant of my birth,
Incessant woes my tyred heart have wasted,
And my poor thoughts are ignorant of mirth.
Look how one wave, another still pursues,
When some great tempest holds their troops in chase:
Or as one hour an others loss renews;
Or posting day supplies another place;
So do the billows of affliction beat me,
And hand in hand the storms of mischief go;
Successive cares with utter ruin threat me;
Grief is enchained with grief, and woe with woe,
Yet must I bear it with a patient mind:
For why the heavens have this to me assigned.
IN exorable fates,
That on both high and low,
Your equal rigour show:
Correcting all estates,
and stately minds suppressing.
Your favour none 〈◊〉 win,
No cloak or faults can hide:
But needs we must abide,
The punishment of sin,
And hope for no releasing.
No greatness may withstand,
No words can pity move:
But we must all approve,
The vigour of your hand:
Great Ioues decrees expressing.
Great Ioues decrees, which some,
Fate, fortune, chance, doe name:
Are not indeed the same,
But heavens eternal doom,
Our witless steps directing▪
Their speech exceeds our skill,
Their words pierce not our ears:
But in our life appears,
The legent of their will:
Our errors miss correcting.
Then let the greatest know,
Dole on their ruin feeds:
Whiles they obscure vile deeds,
Under a glorious show;
The vulgar sort infecting.
Octauia still distressed,
Doth not to vs declare,
How they most wretched are,
Who are with griese oppressed:
But shows what heaven requires.
How through affliction great,
Great troubles and annoy:
We find the doubtful way,
That leads to virtues seat:
Which wisdoms self desires.
In fairest crystal stone,
Let men her trophies show:
That all the world may know,
Here lives such a one,
As virtues height asspireth.
Sharpe grief and sweet delight,
Are Giants to approve:
If ought may vs remove,
And turn vs from the right,
Thence double error springs.
The weakest wrought his fall,
Whiles that Octauia true:
The other did subdue.
And purchased therewithal:
That fame her honour sings.
A monument most rare,
Of pure Arabian gold,
The highest worth t'vnfold,
Let art for her prepare:
Who time in triumph brings.
Time shall endear thy name,
With honours breath make sweet:
The garland is most meet,
For such as win the same;
Thy virtue best deserved.
Whiles any spark of worth,
Doth lodge in women's breast:
Thy praise among the rest,
Be evermore henceforth,
In noblest minds preserved:
Of Diamonds most pure,
A tomb let Angels frame:
And there engrave her name,
For evermore t'endure,
T'eternity reserved.
OUr Play is done, now what your censures a•…e,
If with, or against Arts i•…dustrie, the care
Took by the Author (and our pains to peas)
We know not yet, 'till judgement give us ease.
Why should we do•…bt? this Theater do's appear
The Music Rome of concord; you being here.
Let no harsh jarring •…and of discord then,
Echo dislike; claps crown the Tragic Pen.

