Son, I tell ye you have done you know not what:
I have married a woman, else I am decesue•… mot•…er.
Married a woman? married indéed,
Here is a marriage that befits a King:
It is no matudile it was done in haste,
Here is a B•…dall and with hell to boot,
You have mad•… work?
Faith mother some we have indéed, but ere long you shall see vs make work for an heir apparent I doubt not, nay, nay, come-come, Gods will what chid•…g stille
O God that •…re I •…de to see this day.
B•… my faith mother, I hope you •…al see the night too, and in the morning I will be bold to •…lt you to the Christ•…ing Gr•…ndmother, and Godmother to a Prince of Wales, tut mother, tic a st•…ing world.
Have you sent Warwick into France for this?
No by my faith mother I sent Warwick into France for •…n other, but this by chance being néerer hand, and com∣ming in the way I cannot tell how, we concluded, and now (as you see) are going about to get a young King.
But tell me son how will you answer this?
First possible •…our rash unlawful act,
Should not bréed mortail hate betwixt the Kealme•…
What may the French King think when he shall hear
That whilst you send to entreat about his daughter,
Basely to take a subject of your own?
What may the Princess Bone think of this?
Our noble Cousin Warwick that great Lord,
That Center-shaking 〈◊〉 of war,
That like a Colum propped the house of York:
And boar our white Rose brave•…lie in his top,
When he shall hear his embassage abusor,
In this but made an instrument by you,
I know his soul will blush within his bosom,
And shame will sit i•… Scarl•…t on his Brew,
To have his hon•…r touched with this foul ble•…h
Son, son I tell •…ou that is done by you,
Which yet the child that is unborn shall rue.
•…sh mother you are dece•…ude, all true subjects shall have 〈◊〉 use to thank God, to have their King borne of a true Angle•… woman, I tell you it was never u•…ll since wee imatched wi•…h strangers, so our children have béene still l•…ke Chickens of the half kind but where the rock and the hen be both of one •…reed, there is like to be birds of the game: h•…re you mother, hear you, had I gone to it by fortune, I •…d made your sons George and Dicke to have stood ga∣ping after the crown: this wench mother is a widow, and hath made proof of her valour, and for any thing I know, I am as like to do the deed as John Gray her husband was, I had rather the people prayed to bless mine heir, then solid me an heir: hold your peace, if you can see, there was never mother had a to warder son, why Cousin Howard and
Tom Sellinger heard you ever such a coil about a wife?
My sovereign Lord with patience bear her spl•…
Your princely mothers zeal is like a river,
That from the free abundance of the waters,
Breaks out into this inundation,
From her abundant care this rage proceeds,
O'er swollen with the extremity of love.
My Lord, my Lord, avoid a women's humour,
If you resist this tumor of her will,
Here you shall have her dwell upon this passion,
Until she lade and dull our ears again:
Séeme you but sorry for what you have done,
And straight shéele put the finger in the e•…e,
With comfort now, since it cannot be helped:
But make you show to justify the act
If ever other language in her lips,
Then out upon it, it is abominable, I dare be hanged,
Say any thing it makes no matter what,
Then thus be wearied with a women's chat.
I, I, you are the spamels of the Court,
And thus you sawn and sooth your want•…n king,
But Edward had thou prized thy maize•…ie,
Thou never would have stained thy princely state,
with the base leavings of a subjects bed:
Nor borne the blemish of her Bigamy.
A widow, first not a goodly thing?
Greys children come ask blessing of the King.
Nay I beséech your Grace my Lady York,
Even as you are a Princess and a widow,
Think not so meanly of my widowhood,
A spotless virgin came I first to Gray,
With him I •…ude a true and faithful wife:
And since his hie imperial majesty,
Hath pleas•…e to bless my poor del•…ed state
With the high Sovereign title of his Quéene,
I here protest before the host of heaven,
I came as chasse a widow to his bed,
As when a virgin 〈◊〉 to Gray was wed.
Come, come have done, n•…w have you ch•…d •…nough, G•…ds •…ote, we were as merry ere she came, as any people in Chrstendome, I with the mist•…s, and these with the ma•…es: only wee have no fiddlers at our feast, but mother you have m•…de a sit of mirth: welcome to Grafton mother, by my troth you are even •…used come as I wished you here, let vs go to supper, and in Charity give vs your blessing ere we go to Bed.
O Edward, Edward, stic and leave this place,
Wherein poor Glee King thou art enchanted,
This is her d•…m of Bedtords work her mother,
That hath be w•…tcht thée Edwa•…d my poor child,
D•…honour not the Princes of thy land,
To make the 〈◊〉 kneel with reverence at her féete,
That ere thou dl•…st e•…pale with sovereignty,
The•… would have scorned to have looked upon,
T•…eres no such different•…e twixt the greatest Péere,
And the poor sill•…st kitchen maid that lives,
A•…ls bet wirt thy worthiness and hers.
I do confess it, yet my Lady York,
M•… mother is a duchess as you are,
A Princess borne, the Duke of Bedfords wi•…e,
And as you •…no, a daughter and a sister,
U•…to the royal blood of Burgundy.
But you cannot so basely think on me,
As I do think of these vain worldly titles,
God fro•… soul my sin as far dcuide.
As I am far •…rome boasting in this pride,
Madam, she is the mirror of her kind,
H•…d she but so much spleen as hath a gnat,,
Her spirits would startle to abide your taunts,
She is a Sain•…, and Madam you blaspheme,
•…o wrong so sweet a Lady.
Thou art a •…neon and a slatterer.
Madam but that you are my sovereigns mother,
I would let you know you wrong a Gentleman,
Good Cousin Sellinger have patience,
Her Graces rage by too much violence,
Hath spent it self already into •…re:
Déere Madam I beseeth you on my knee,
Tender that loving kindness to the Quéene,
That I dare swear she doth in soul to you.
Well said good Cos, I pray thee make them friends, why how now Bess, what weep? nay then isle chide y•…u: what sudden news comes by this messenger?
My sovereign Lord, the bastard Falconbridge,
Of late hath stirred rebellion in the South,
Encouraging his forces to deliver,
King Henrie late deposde out of the Tower,
To him the malcontented commons flock,
From every part of Sussex, Kent, and Esier,
His arms waxed twenty thousand strong.
And as it is supposed by circumstance,
Mean to take London, if not well defended.
Well let this Phaeton that is mountel thus,
Look he sit surely, or by Englands George,
Isle break his neck, this is no new evasion,
I surely thought that one day I should see,
That bastard Falcon take his wings to mount,
Into our Eagle airy, me thought I saw,
Black •…iscontent sit ever on his brow,
And now I see I calculated well,
Good Cousin Howard, and Tom Sellinger,
This night wéele spend in fe•…st and •…llitie,
With our new Quéene, a•…d our beloved mother,
To morrow you shall hau•… commission,
To raise up power against this haughty rebel:
Sir depart not till you know our pleas•…re,
You shall convey vs letters back to London,
Unto the Mayor, Recorder, and our friends,
Is supper ready? come by my bonnie Bess,
Welcome mother, we are all your guests.
Hold drum,
Hold drum and be hanged,
Hold drum hold, peace then ho, silence to the 3 proclamation.
You lie you rogue, tic to the Oration,
Nay then you all lie, it is to the coblication,
True hearted English and our valiant friends,
Do brave general isaith.
Peace there you rogues, or I will split your chaps:
De are countrymen, I publicly proclaim,
If any wronged discontented English,
Touched with true faeling of King Hens wrongs,
Henrie the •…rt the lawful King of England,
Who by that tyrant Edward the usurper,
Is held a wretched prisoner in the Lower,
If any man that fine would be enfranchisde,
From the sad yoke of •…orkrsh servitude,
Under which w•… toil like naked Gallislaues,
Know he that Thomas Neuill the Lord Falconbridridge:
I &amp;, a Falconbridge a falconbridge:
P•…ace ye clamorous rogues, on General on with poor
Oration, peace there,
Pit•…ing King Henries poor distressed case,
Armed with his title, and a subjects zeal,
Takes up just arm•…s against the house of Yorks:
And do proclaim our ancient liberty:
Liberty, liberty, liberty, general liberty.
We do not rise like Tiler, Cade, and Straw,
Blewbeard, &amp; other of that rascal route,
Bascly like Linkers, or such mnddle •…anes,
For mending measures, or the price of corn,
Or for some common in the wild of Kent,
Thats by some gréedie Cormorant enclosed:
But in the true and ancient lawful right,
Of the redoubted boss of Lancaster.
Our blood is noble, by our birth a Neuill,
And by our lawful line Lord Falconbridge,
Whose here thats of so dull a leaden temper,
That is not fired with a Novels name?
A Neuill, a Neuill, a Neuill.
Our quarrel like our self is honourable,
The law our warrant.
I, I, the law is on our side.
I, the law is in our own hands,
Peace you rogues.
And more, a blessing by the word proposoe,
To those that aide a true anointed King,
Courage brave spirits and cry a Falconbridge,
A Falconbridge, a Falconbridge.
We will be masters of the mint our selves,
And set our own stamp on the golden coin:
Wéele shoe our neighing coursers with no worse
Then the purest s•…iuer that is sold in Cheap.
At Leaden hall weal sell pearls by the peck,
As now the mealemen use to sell their meal:
In Westminster wéele kéep a solemn court,
And build it bigger to receive our men,
Cry Falconbridge my hearts liberty,
Falconbridge and liberty, &amp;c.
Peace ye slaves, or I will smoke ye else,
Peace ye slaves, or I will chub your chappes, but indeed thou moist well smoke them, because thy name is Smoke.
Why sir, I hope Smoke the Smith of Chepsted, is as good a man as Chub the Chandler of Sandwich.
Peace ye rogues, what are you quarrelling? and
now list to Captain Spicing.
You know Cheapside there are the Mercers shops,
Where we will measure velvet by the pikes:
And Silks and Sattens by the streets whole breadth:
Weal take the Tankards from the Conduit cocks,
To fill with Ip•…ras and drink carouse.
Where chains of gold and plate shall be as plenty,
As wooden dishes in the wild of Kent:
Oh bravely said Ned Spicing, the honestest Lad that ever punt spice in a mortar, now speaks Captain Smoke.
Look Lads for from this hill ye may discern,
The lovely town which we are ma•…hinge to,
That same is London Lads yelook•… upon,
Range all arrow my hearts and stand at gaze,
As doe the herds of Déere at some strange sight:
Or as a troupe of hungry travel•…s,
That fire their eyes upon a fur•…d feast,
Look how the Tower doth tice vs to come on,
To take out Henry the sixth there prisoner,
See how S. Katherines smokes, wipe slaves four eyes
And whet your stomachs for the good malt pies.
Why then belike I am no body: room and auoy∣dance, for now speaks Captain Chub:
No sooner in London will we be,
But the Bakers for you, the Brewers for me,
Bear•…hen lane shall suit vs, the Costermongers fruit vs:
The Poulters send vs in soul,
And Butchers meat without control:
And ever when we sup or dine,
The Vintners freely bring vs in wine:
If any body ask who shall pay,
Cut off his head and send him away.
This is Captain Chubs law whosoever say nay.
Bravely resolude, so m•…rch we forward all,
And boldly say, good luck shall vs be•…all.
This is well done, thus should good Citizens,
F•…hion themselves as well for war as peace:
Have ye command•…d that in every streese,
They h•…g forth ligh•…s as soon as •…light comes one
Say Colin Sn•…are that was referd to you.
•…hoar 〈◊〉 have my Lord, besides from every hall
T•…ere is at least two hunt•…ed men in arms.
〈◊〉 cheers my heart to hear this readiness,
Let never r•…bells put true Subjects down,
Come when they will, th•… welcome shall be such,
As they had better kept them further off.
But where is M. Recorder? his advise,
Must not be wanting in these high affairs.
About an hour ago, and somewhat more,
I left him fortifying the bridge my Lord,
Which done he purposed to méete you here:
A discreet paineful Gentleman he is,
And we must all of vs be so inclined:
If we entend to have the City safe,
Or look for thanks, and credit with the King,
I tell ye masters, aged though I be,
I (for my pa•…t) will to no bed this night.
Why is it thought the Bastard is so near?
How •…cane ye M. Iosseline by near?
He neither comes from Italy nor Spain:
But out of Kent, and Esser which you know,
Are both so near, as nearer cannot be.
Nay, by your patience good my Lord a word,
Simple though I am, yet I must confess,
A mischief further off, would, and so forth,
You know my meaning, things not seen before,
Are, and so forth, yet in good sadness,
I would that all were well, and perchance,
It may be so, what, were it not for hope,
The heart, and so forth, but to the matter,
You mean and purpose, I, I, am sure ye doe?
Well M. Iosseline, we are sure ye mean well
Although somewhat defective in your utterance.
I, I, my Lord Mayor, I am you know,
Willing ready, &amp; so forth, tut, tut, for me, ha, ha,
My Manston is at Ham, and thence you know,
I come to help you in this néedfull time:
When rebels are so busy, and so forth,
What masters, age must never be despised,
You shall find me my Lord, still, and so forth.
My Lord, now here comes M. Recorder.
Good even my good Lord Mayor, the stréets are chainde,
The bridge well manned &amp; every place prepared,
Shall we now go together and consult.
What else there is to be determinde of?
Your coming M. Recorder was the thing
We all desired, therefore let vs consult,
And now what say ye, if with half our power,
Wee issue forth, and give the rebels fight?
Before they do provoke vs nearer hand
There were no way to that, if all be pleased,
Whats your opinion M. Iosseline?
Good so•…h my L. Mayor, and M. Recorder,
You may take your choice, but in my conceit,
Issue if you will, or else stay if you will,
A man can never be too wary and so forth,
Yet as to issue will not be the worst,
Even so to tarry, well, you may think more on it,
But all is one, we shall be sure to fight,
And you are wise enough, to sée your time, I, I, a Gods name.
My Lord accept his meaning better then his counsel.
I, so we do, or else we were to blame,
What if we stop the passage of the Thames,
With such provision as we have of ships?
Its doubtful yet my Lord, whether the rebels,
Purpose that way to séeke our detriment,
Rather me séemeth they will come by land,
And either make assault at London bridge,
Or else at Algate, both which enterances,
Were good they should be strongly lortified.
Well said master Recorder, you do, I I, Iye warrant
As for the other, the whole companies
Of Mercers, Grocers, Drapers, and the rest,
Are drawn together for their best defence,
Beside the Tower, a neighbour to that place,
As on the one side it will cléere the river,
So on the other with their ordinance,
It may repulse and beat them from the gate,
What noise is this? provide ye suddenly:
And every man betake him to his charge.
Soft who is this, how now my friend what news?
My master the Lieutenant of the Tower, gives ye to understand, he hath descried the army of the rebels.
Which may come they?
From Essexward, and therefore tic his mind,
You guard both Algate well, and Bishopsgate.
Saint George away, and let vs all resolve,
Either to vanquish this rebellious rout,
Preserve our goods, our children and our wives,
Or seal our resolution with our lives.
Summon the City, and command our entrance,
Which if we shall be stubbornly denied,
Our power shall rush like thunder through the walls,
Open your gates slaves when I command ye,
Spicing beats on the gates, and then enters the Lord Ma∣ior
and his associates with prentices.
Whats he that beats thus at the City gates,
Commaun•…ing entrance as •…e were a King?
He that will have releasement for a King:
I 〈◊〉 Neuell the Lord Falconbridge.
H•… sir, you, clap•…n, •…che, •…olt,
Or •…e bolt you if I get in, stand you preaching with a pore?
We have no warrant I ho. Falconbridge,
To let your armed troupes into our City,
Considering you have taken up these arms,
Against our sovereign and our c•…untries peace.
I tell thee Mawr, and know he tells thée so,
That comes armed in a Kings defence,
That I crave entrance in Kings He•…es name,
In right of the true line of Lancaster,
Me thinks that word spoke from a No•…ls mouth
Should like an earthquake rend your chained gates,
And tear in péeces your port•…ullcises,
I thunder it again into you ears,
You stout and brave courageous London•…rs,
In Henries name I crave my entrance in.
Should Henries name command thee entrance here
We should deny allrageance not•… Edward,
Whose true and f•…thfull subjects we are •…uorne,
And in whose presence is our sue•… up by•…no.
I tell thee traitor then th•…u bear thy 〈◊〉
Against thy true undoubted King.
Nay then I tell thee bastard Falconbridge,
My Lord Ma•…or bears his sword in his defence,
That put the sword into the arms of London,
Made the Lord Malors for ever after Knights,
Richard, d•…ost . . . Henrie Bollingbrooke,
From whom the house of York doth claim their right.
Whats he that answers vs thus saucil•…
Sir your name, that we may know ye hereafter,
My name is Shore, a Goldsmith by my trade,
What not that Shore that hath the da•…e wife,
Shores wife, the flower of London for her beauty.
Yes rebel even the very same.
Run rascal and fetch thy wife to our General pre∣sently, or else all the Gold in Cheapside cannot ransom her: wilt thou not stir when I bid thee.
Shore listen me, thy wise is mine thats flat,
This night in thine own house shée sleeps with me,
Now Crosebie Lord Mayor shall we enter in?
Crosebie the Lord Mayor tells thée proud rebel no.
No Croseby shall I not: then doting Lord,
I cra•…e the name of rebel down thy throat,
Theres not the poorest rascal of my camp,
But if he chance to meet thee in Cheapside
Upon thy footcloath, he shall make thee light,
And hold his stirrup while he mount thy horse,
Then lackey him which way he please to go,
Crosebie •…le make the Citizens be glad,
To send thee and the Aldermen thy brethren,
All m•…nicled, and chainde like Gally slanes,
To ransom them, and to redéeme the City.
Nay then proud •…bell, pause &amp; hear me speak,
Theres not the poorest and meanest Citizen,
That is a faithful subject to the King.
But in despite of thy rebellious route,
Shall walk to Bow, a small wand in his •…d
Although thou lie encamped at M•…leant Greene,
And not the proudest rebel of you all,
Shall dare to touch him for his damned soul.
Come, we will pull up our port•…ses,
And let me see thee enter if thou dare.
Spoken like a man, and true Velvet •…acket,
And we will enter or strike by the way.
Wheres master Recorder, and master Iosseline?
Here my Lord Mayor, wee now have mande the
walls, and fortified such places as were need•…ll,
Why it is well, brothers and Citizens,
Stick to your City as good men should do,
Think that in Richards time even such a rebel,
Was then by Walworth the L. Mayor of London,
Stabbed dead in Smithfield:
Then show your selves as it be fits the time.
And let this find a hundredth Walworth, now,
Dare stab a rebel were he made of brass,
And Prentices stick to your officers,
For you may come to be as we are now,
God and our King against an arrant rebel,
Brothers away, let vs defend our walls:
My Lord your words are able to in•…use,
A double courage in a cowards breast,
Then fear not vs although our chins be bare,
Our hearts are good, the trial shall be séene,
Against these rebels on this champion gréene.
We have no tricks nor polices of war,
But by the ancient custom of our Fathers,
Wéele soundly lay it on, takte off that will.
And London Prentices be ruled by me,
Die ere ye loose fair Londons liberty.
How now my flatcaps, are you grown so brave?
Tic but your words, whē matters come to proofs
You'll scudde as it were a company of shéepe,
My counsel therefore is to kéepe your shops,
What lack you, better will bes•…em your mouths,
Then terms of war, in sooth you are too young:
Sir go too, you shall not find it so,
Flatcaps thou call vs, wée scorn not the name,
And shortly by the virtue of our swords,
Wéele make your cap so sit unto your crown,
As sconce and cap and all kiss the ground.
You are those desperate idle swaggering mates,
That haunt the suburbs in the time of peace,
And raise up a•…-house brawls in the stréet,
And when the rumour of the war begins,
You hide your heads, and are not to be found,
Thou term it better that we kéepe our shops,
It's good indéed we should have such a care,
But yet for all our kéeping now and then,
Your Pelfring fingers break into our lockes,
Until at Tyborne you acquit the fault:
Go to, albeit by custom we are mild,
As those that doe profess civility,
Yet being moude, a nest of angry hornets
Shall not be more offence•… then we will,
Wéele fly about your ears and sting your hearts.
He tells you truth my friends, and so forth.
Who can endure to be so vrauce by boys?
Nay scorn vs not that we are Prentices,
The Chronicles of England can report,
What memorable actions we have done,
To which this days achievement shall be knit,
To make the volume larger then it is.
Now of mine honour, yée doe cheer my heart
Brave English ofsprings, valiantly resolude.
My Lord return you back, let vs alone,
You are our Masters, give vs leave to work,
And if we do not banquish them in fight,
Let vs go supperless to bed at night.
Get thée up on the top of S. Buttolphs stéeple, and make a proclamation.
What a plague should I proclaim there?
That the hells be rung backward,
And cutting of throats be cried havoc,
No more calling of lantern and candlelight,
That maidenheads be valued at just nothing:
And Sack be sold by the Sallet.
That no piddling slave stand to pick a locke, but slash me off the hinges, as one would slit up a Cowes paunch.
Let no man have less then a warehouse to his wardrobe: cry a fig for a Sergeant, and walk by the Counter like a Lord, pluck out the clapper of Bow bell, and hang up all the Sextons in the City.
Rantam Scantam, Rogues follow your leader, Caualero Spicing the maddest slave that ere punt spice in a mortar.
Take me an Usurer by the gr•…asie pouch, and shake out his Crowns, as a hungry dog would shake a Hags, Bar foul play Rogues, and live by honest silching and sty∣ling, he that hath a true finger, let him •…aite his face to the fryingpan.
Follow your Leader Rogues, follow your Leader.
Assault, Assault, and cry a Falconbridge.
Sir Spicing, if Spicing bee thy name, we are here for matters and causes as it might •…me for the King, therefore it were good, and so forth.
Open the gates, or if we be the picklocks, ye Rogues weal play the Mastiff dogs amongst you: If I woorie not a thousand of you with my teeth, let me bee hanged in a packethreed, and so forth.
Fond fellow, justice is to be used, I marie is it, and law in some sort as it were is to be followed, oh God forbid else, this our Magistrate hath power as might seem, and soforth, for duty is to be observed, and Officers must be obeyed, in sort and calling, and so forth.
Weal talk more anon, good M. and so forth.
Why this it is to trust to these base Rogues.
This dirty scun•… of rascal •…esanirie:
This hartles rout of base rascalitie;
A plague upon you all, you cowardly Rogues;
You crauand cures, you s•…y muddy clowns,
Whose courage but consists in multitude,
Like shéepe and •…eat that follow one another,
Which if one run away, all follow after:
This hedge-bred rascal, this filthy fry of ditches,
A vengeance take you all, this it is to lead you,
Now doe you cry and shrike at every shock,
A hot consuming mischief follow you.
Swounds scale rogues, scale, a Falconbridge, a Falconbridge.
Set open the gates, nay then wéel sally out,
It never shall be said when I was Mayor,
The Londoners were shut up in the City,
Then cry King Edward, and lets vs issue out.
Now if ye be true hearted Englishmen,
The gat'es set open and the portcullis up:
Lets Pel Mel in, to stop their passage out,
He that first enters, be possessed of Cheap,
I give him it fréely, and the chiefest wench.
That he can find, let that lie in the bargain.
Hear thou General, theres hot drinking at the mouth of Bishopsgate, for our soldiers are all Mouth, they lie like Rascals with their brains beaten out, therefore since we are all like to féed h•…gs in Houndsditch, let vs retire our troupes, and save our maimed men, or if we issue further, we are put to the sword every mothers son of vs.
Art thou that villain in whose damned mouth,
Was never heard of any word but wounds?
Whose r•…rcant limbs are noshed with gaping scars,
Thicker then any corking craft-mans score,
Whose very skalpe is scracht and crest and broken,
Like an old mazzer beaten on the stones,
And stand thou now to save our maimed men?
A plague upon thee coward.
Why how now base Thomas? Swounds, were thou a base Vial, thou art but a rascal and a rebel as I am, hey∣rest thou, if I do not turn true Su•…ed and leave thee, let me be wooried with dogs, Swounds dost thou impeach my manhood? Tom Neuill thou had as good to have •…nnde thy self as uttered such a word, flatly I forsake thee, and all that love Ned Spicing follow me.
Come come ye testic s•…le, thou séest me gréende,
Yet can not bear with mine infirmity,
Thou know I hold thee for as tall a man
As any lines or breathes our English ay•…e,
I know there lives not a more fiery spirit,
A more resolved daliant, a plague upon it,
Thou know I love thée, yet if a word escape
•…y lips in anger, how testy then thou art?
I had rather all men left me then thy self,
Thou art my soul, thou art my Genius:
I cannot live without thee not an hour,
Thus must I still be forced against my will,
To sooth this durtic slave, this cowardly rascal.
Come, come be friends, ye testy firebrand,
We must retire there is no remedy.
Nay Tom, if thou wilt have me mount on the walls,
And cast my self down headlong on their pikes,
He doe it, but to impeach my valour,
Had any man but thou spoke half so much,
I would have sp•…t his heart, still be ware
My valour, such words go hardly down,
Well, I am friends, thou thought not as thou spoke.
No on my soul, thou think not that I did,
Sound a retreat there I command ye strait,
But whither shall wée retire
To Mileend Greene, theres no fitter place.
Then let vs back retire to Mil•…nd Greene,
And there expect fresh succour from our friends,
With such supply as shall ere long assure
The Citic is our own, march on, away.
Ye have best•…d yée like good Citizens,
And she wne your selves true subjects to your king,
You worthily p•…entice bestirde your selves,
That it did th•…re my heart to sée your valour,
The rebels are retired to M•…eerd Greene,
Where so we may not suffer them to rest.
But issue forth upon them with fresh force.
My L. Mayor, d•…gence doth well, and so forth. Matters must be looked into as they ought, indéed should they, when things are well done, they are, and so forth, for causes and things must indeed be look•… into.
Well sir, we ver•…e well conceive your meaning,
And you have •…wne your self a worthy gentleman:
See that our walls be kept with courts of guard,
And well defended against the enemy,
For we will now withdraw vs to Guild hall,
To take advise what further must be don.
Be not afraid (swéet heart) the worst is past,
God have the praise, the victory is ours,
We have prevailed, the rebels are repulsoe,
And every str•…te of London sounds joy,
Can thou then (gentle Ions) be sad alone?
I am not sad now you are here with me,
My toy, my hope, my comfort, and my love,
My déere, déere husband, kindest Matthew shore,
But when these arms the circles of my soul,
Were in the fight so forward as I heard,
How could I choose, swéet heart, but be afraid?
Why dost thou tremble now, when perilspast•…
I think upon the horror of the tune,
But tell me why you fought so desperately?
First to maintain King Edwards royalty,
Next to defend the Cities libertic,
But chiefly •…anc to keep thee from the foil,
Of him that to my face did how thy spoil,
Had he prcua•…de, where then had béene our lives,
Dishonoured our daughters, ravished our fair wives,
Possessed our goods, and set our servants free,
Yet all this nothing to the loss of thee.
Of me sweet heart? why how should I be lost?
Were I by thousand storms of fortune tossed?
And should endure the poorest wretched life,
Yet Iane will be thy honest loyal wife,
The greatest Prince the sun did ever see,
Shall never make me prove vntruc to thee:
I fear not fair means, but a rebels force,
These hands shall make this body a dead corse,
•…re force or flattery shall mine honour stain,
True fame sir•…eves, when death the •…sh hath slain.
God save ye moister Shore, and mistress by your leave,
Sir my L. Mayor sends for ye by Maio•…,
And prates your speedy presence at Guild hall,
Theres news the rebels have made head again,
And have ensco•…de themselves upon Mileeud,
And prescutly our armed men must out,
You being Captain of two companies
In honour of your v•…lore and your skill,
Must lead the vaward, God &amp; right stand with ye.
Friend tell my Lord isle wait upon him strait.
Friend tel my Lord he does my husband wrong,
To set him foremost in the danger still,
Ye shall not go if I may have my will,
Peace wife, no more, friend I will follow yée,
I faith ye shall not, prethée do not go.
Not go swéet heart? that were a cowards trick,
A traitors part to shrink when others fight,
Envy shall never say that Matthew Shore
The Goldsmith •…aid, when other men went out,
To meet his Kings and countries enemy,
No Iane against all the rebels on Mileend,
I dare alone K. Edwards right defend.
If you be slain, what shall become of mée?
Kite well my w•…ch, •…now will marry thée,
I leave thee worth at least five thousand pound.
Marry again. that word my heart doth wound,
Isle never marry, nor I will not live,
If thou be kilt, let me go with thée Mat.
•…is idle talk good Iane, no more of that,
Go to my Lady Maioresse and the rest,
As you are still companion with the best,
With them be merry, and pray for our good speed,
To part from thee my very heart doth bléed.
Yet stand we in the sight of v•…card Troy,
And suck the ayre she draws: our •…erie breath
Flies from our nostrils warm unto the walls,
We beard her bristling spires, her battled towers,
And proudly stand and g•…e her in the face,
Look on me, and I doubt not ye imagine,
My worth as great as any one of yours,
My fortunes, would I basely fawn on Edward,
To be as fair as any mans in England,
But he that kéepes your sovereign in the Tower,
Hath sea•…de my land, and robbed me of my right:
I am a Gentleman as well as hee,
What he hath got, he bolds by tyranny,
Now if you faint, or cowardly should fly,
There is no hope for any one to live,
We hear the Londoners will leave the City,
And bid vs battle here on •…ilcend Greene,
Whom if we vanquish, then we take the town,
And ride in triumph thorough Cheap to Paules,
The Mint is ours, Cheap, Lumbard stréet our own
The meanest soldier wealthier then a king.
March fair ye rogues, all kings or capknitters: dost thou hear Tom Falconbridge? I pre thee grant me one boon I shall ask thee.
What is it Ned: its hard I should deny thee.
Why that when we have won the Cry, as we can∣not choose but win it, that I may have the knighting of all these rogues and rascals.
What then?
What then? Zonnds I scorn your scurvy way mou∣thed, what then? now a pore take me it I fight a blow.
Why this is fine, go to, knight whom thou wilt:
Who, I knight any of them? Isle sée them hanged first for a company of tattred ragged rascailes, if I were a king, I would not knight one of them?
What not me Caualero Chub?
Yes, I care not if I knight thee: and yet isle see thee hanged ere isle honour thee so much: I care not so much for the matter, but I would not be denied my humour.
Why what a perverse fellow art thou Ned?
Ho my sine Tom, my brave Falconbridge, my mad Greek, my lusty Neuill: thou art a king, a Caesar, a plague 〈◊〉 thee, I love thee not, and yet isle die with thee.
See how rebellion can exalt it self,
•…ing the feathers of sick discipline.
They think they can outlook our tree•…r looks,
Mark but the scornful eye of Falconbridge.
I rather think tic fear upon his cheek,
Deciphers pale disturbance in his heart.
Our coming forth hath, well, I say no more,
But shall we take occasion, and so forth,
Rebellion should have no respite, oh my Lord,
The time hath •…en, but all is one for that.
How like a troupe of rank oreridden jade,
You hue•…se bearded Citizens appear?
Nay, rather so many men in the Moon,
And every one a forzen bush in his mouth.
The so•… and 〈◊〉 wards? now fair befall them,
Would any one have thought before this hour,
There had béene such increase of muddy slaves?
Peace soldsours, they are resolute you sée,
And not to sty•… vs, nor favour them,
Such haughty sto•…hs seldom have béene séene,
Embodied in the breasts of Citizens,
How sternly in their own peculiar strength,
Without the assistance of their lingering king,
Did they of late repulse vs from their walls?
And now again how expeditiously,
And unexpected they have met vs here?
Were we more deadly incensed then we are,
I would not but commend their chivalry.
Captain, shall we go challenge them to fight?
Sbloud we burn daylight, theile think anon,
We are afraid to sée their glittering swords.
Tell them they come in stéed of pudding pies,
And Stratford cakes to makes a banquet here.
Soft give me leave, I will devise with words,
To weaken and abash their fortitude,
The bastard offers to come forth my Lord.
I am the man intend to answer him.
Crosbie.
Traitor.
Traitor? zounds down with him.
Be patient, give me leave I say to speak,
I doubt not but the traitors name shall rest
With those that keeps their lawful K. in bonds:
Mean time ye men of London once again,
Behold my warlike colours are displayed,
Which I have vowed shall never be wrapped up,
Until your lofty buildings kiss our féet,
Unless you grant me passagethrough your stréets.
Passage, say thou? that must be ore our breasts,
If any passage thou art like to have.
Why then upon your bodies will I tread,
And wade through standing pools of your lost blood.
We know thy threats, and reckon them as wind,
Not of sufficient power to shake a reed.
But we shook your gates not long ago,
And made your walls to shake like irish bogs.
I, and so terrified ye, that not one of ye •…rst come to fetch a pint of sack at the mouth at Bishopsgate, no not for your lines.
I but you know what followed, and so forth.
Etretera? are you there? me thinks the sight of the dun Bull, the Neuels honoured crest, should make you leave your broken sentences, and quite forget ever to speak at all.
Nay then look thou upon our Cities arms.
Wherein is a bloody dagger, that is it,
Where with a rebel like to Falconbridge,
Had his desert, meet for his treachery,
Can you behold that, and not quake for fear?
Since when, it is successfuely decreed,
Traitors with vs shall never better speed.
Captain and fellow soldiers talk no more,
But draw your meaning forth in down right blows.
Sound then alarm.
Do the like for vs, and where the right is, there attend success.
Stay and be better advised, why country•…,
What is this Falconbridge you follow so?
I could instruct you, but you know my mind.
And Falconbridge what are these rusticalles,
Thou should repose such confidence in glass,
Shall I inform thee? no, thou art wise enough,
Edward of York delays the time you say,
Therefore hée will not come, imagine so,
The Cities weak, hold that opinion still,
And your pretence King Henries liberty.
True, but as how? shall I declare you? no.
What thē? you'll fight, a gods name take your choice,
I canoe more but give you mine advise.
Away with this parentheses of words,
Crosbie courage thy men, and on this greene,
Whose cause is right, let it be quickly séene.
I am as reads as thou can desire,
On then a Gods name.
This was well fought, now Spicing list to me.
The Citizens thus having given vs ground,
And therefore somewhat daunted, take a band
Of Essex soldiers, and with all the spéede
Thou possibly can make, withdraw thy self,
And get between the City gates and them.
Oh brave Tom Neuill, gallant Falconbridge,
Aim at thy intended policy,
This is thy meaning, while thou art employed,
And holdst them battle here on Mileend Greene,
I must provide as harbinger before,
There be not only clear and open passage,
But the best merchants houses to receive
Vs and our retinew, I am proud of that,
And will not sléepe upon thy just command.
Away then I will follow as I may,
And doubt not but that ours will be the day.
We have recovered what before we lost,
And heaven stands with the justice of our cause,
But this I noted in the fight even now,
That part of this rebellious crew is sent,
By what direction, or for what intent,
I cannot guess, but may suspect the worst,
And as it séemes, they compass it about,
To hem vs in, or get the gate of vs,
And therefore Cousin Shore, as I repose
Trust in thy valour and thy loyalty,
Draw forth thrée hundred •…woman, and some pikes,
And presently encounter their assault.
I have your meaning, and effect my Lord,
I trust shall disappoint them of their hope.
Come on my harts, we will be kings to night,
Carouse in Gold, and sléepe with merchants wives,
While their poor husbands loose their lives abroad,
We are now quite behind our enemies backs,
And theres no let or hindrance in the way,
But we may take possession of the town,
Ah you mad rogues, this is the wished hour,
Follow your leader, and be resolute.
I, my good friend, so certify his grace,
The Rebels are dispersed all and fled,
And now his Highness méetes with victory.
Marshall your sclues, and kéepe in good array:
To add more glory to this victory:
The King in person comes to this place,
How great an honour have you gained to day?
And how much is this City famde for ever,
That twice without the help, either of King,
Or any, but of God, and our own selves,
We have prevailed against our countries foes?
Thanks to his majesty assisted vs,
Who always helps true subjects in their néed.
Where is my Lord Mayor?
Here dread Sovereign.
I hold no Lordship nor no dignity,
In presence of my gracious Lord the King,
But all I humble at your highness féete,
With the most happy conquest of proud rebels,
Dispersed and fled, that now remains no doubt,
Of ever making head to vex vs more.
You have not •…an the bastard Falconbridge:
Or is he slain?
Neither my gracious Lord.
Although we labourd to our uttermost,
Yet all our care came over short,
For apprehending him or Spicing either
But some are taken, others on proffered grace
Yéelded themselves, and at your mercy stand.
Thanks good L. Mayor, you may condemn vs
Of too much slackness in such urgent néed:
But we assure you on our royal word,
So soon as we had gathered vs a power,
We dallied not, but mane all hast we could,
What order have ye tan for Falconbridge,
And his confederates in this rebellion?
Under your leave my Liedge, we have proclaimed
Who brings Falconbridge alive or dead,
Shall be requited with a thousand marks,
As much for Spicing, others of less worth
At easier rates are set.
Well have ye done,
And wee will see it paid from our Erchequer.
Now leave we this and come to you,
That have so well veserude in these affairs,
Affairs, I mean of so maine consequence.
Kneel down and all of you receive in field,
The honour you have merited in field.
Arise Sir Iohn Crosbie, L. Mayor of London &amp; Knight.
Arise up Sir Ralph Iosseline knight.
Arise Sir Thomas Vrswicke our Recorder of London, and Knight.
Now tell me which is M. Shore.
This same my Lord,
And hand to hand he fought with Falconbridge.
Shore knéele thou down.
What call yée else his name?
His name is Matthew Shore my Lord.
Shore, why kneel thou not, and at thy Souetaignes hand receive thy right?
Pardon me gracious Lord,
I do not stand contemptuous or des•…icing
Such royal favour of my Sovereign,
But to acknowledge mine unworthiness:
Far be it from the thought of Matthew Shore,
That he should be advanced with Aldermen,
With our L. Mayor, &amp; our right gran Recorder.
If any thing hath béene performed by me,
That may deserve your Highness mean respect,
I have enough, and I desire no more.
Then let me crave that I may have no more.
Well, be it as thou wilt, some other way
We will devise to quittance thy deserts,
And not to fail therein upon my word.
Now let me tell ye all my friends at once,
Your King is married, since you saw him last,
And haste to help you in this néedfull time,
Made me on sudden to forsake my bride.
But séeing all things are fallen out so well,
And there remains no further doubt of ill,
Let me •…ntreate you would go boot your selves,
And bring your King a little on his way.
How say you my Lord, shall it be so?
Now God forbid but that my Lord the King
Should always have his Subjects at command.
Forbid quoth? I in good sadness, your may∣sty shall find vs always ready, and so forth.
Why then set forward Gentlemen,
And come L. Mayor, I must confer with you.
Art thou the man whose victories drawn at sea,
Filled cuerie heart with terror of thy name?
Art thou that Neuill whom we took thee for?
Thou art a louse, thou bastard Falconbridge?
Thou baser then a bastard, in whose birth
The very dregs of servitude appears,
Why tell me, liver of some rotten shéepe,
After by thy allurements we are brought,
To undertake this course, after thy promises
Of many golden mountains to eusue,
Is this the greatest comfort thou can glue•…?
Hast thou insnarde our héedles feet with death,
And brought vs to the Jebbet of defame,
And now dost bid vs shift and save our selves?
No craven were I sure I should be tan,
I would not stir my feet, until this hand
Had venged me on thee for misguiding vs.
Opprobrious villain, stable excrement,
That never dreamst of other manhood yet,
But how to jerk a horse, until my words
Insusde into thee resolutions sire.
Controlst thou me for that wherein thy self,
Art only the occasion of mishap?
Had thou and they stood to it as well as I,
The day had been our own, and London now,
That laughs in triumph, should have wept in tears,
But being backed by such faint hearted slaves
No marvel if the Lion go to wrack,
As though it were not incident to Kings,
Sometime to take repulse, mine is no more:
Nor is not for that muddy brain of thine
To tutor me how to digest my loss,
Then fly with those that are already fled,
Or stay behind, and hang all but the head.
Oh prejudice to Spicings conquering name,
Whose valour even the hacks this sword has made
Upon the flint, and iron bars at Aldgate:
Like mouths will publish whiles the City stands
That I shrunk back•… that I was never seen
To show my manly spleen, but with a whip.
I tell thee Falconbridge the least of these,
Do challenge blood before they be appeasde,
Away ye scoundrel, tempt not my resolve,
The courage that sir•…es in Falconbridge,
Scorns the encounter of so base a drudge.
By the pure temper of this sword of mine,
By this true flesh and blood that gripes the same,
And by the honour I did win of late,
Against those frosty bearded Citizens,
It shall be tried before we do depart,
Whether accuses other wrongfully,
Or which of vs two is the better man.
I shall but quit the Hangman of a labour,
Yet rather then to be •…pbraided thus,
The Eagle once will stoop to féede on tarrion.
Hold if ye be men, if not, hold as ye are: rebels &amp; 〈◊〉 théeues: I bring you news of a proclamation, the King hath promised that whosoever can bring the head of Falconbridge, or Spicing, shall have for his labour a thousand crowns, what mean you then to swagger? save your selves.
This proclamation comes in happy time,
Isle banquish Falconbridge, and with this sword
Cut off his head, and bear it to the King,
So not alone shall I be pardoned,
But have the thousand crowns is promised.
This rascal was ordained to save my life,
For now when I have overthrown the wretch,
Even with his head •…le yéeld me to the King,
His princely word is past to pardon me,
And though I were the chief in this rebellion,
Yet this will be a means to make my peace.
Oh that I knew how to betray them both.
How say thou Spy. wilt thou yéeld thy self?
For I have vowed either alive or dead
To bring thee to King Edward?
And I have vowed the like by thee.
How will these two bad contrary•…s agree?
And I the same by both of you.
Come sir, isle quickly c•…d you of that care.
And what thou lottest me, shall be thy share.
Here comes a miller, help to part the fray,
These are the rebels Falconbridge and Spicing,
The worst of them is worth a thousand crowns.
Marry and such a boots should I have,
Submit, submit, it is in vain to strive,
Why what art thou:
One that will hamper yon,
But whats the other that is fled away?
Oh miller, that was Falconbridge,
And this is Spicing his companion.
I tell thée miller thou hast béene the means,
To hinder the most charitable déed,
What ever honest Christian undertook.
Thou can bear no witness I had fane
That most notorious rebel but for him.
But I have taken thée, and the world knows,
That Spicing is as bad as who is best.
Why thou mistakst, I am a true subsist.
Miller hée lies, be sure to hold him fast.
Dost thou accuse me? apprehend him too,
For hes as guilty as any of vs.
Come you shall both together answer it,
Before my Lord Mayor, and here he comes.
Sir Ralph Iosseline, have you ever séen a Prince more a•…∣sable then Edward is? what merry talk he had upon the way.
Doubtless my Lord héeie prove a royal King.
But how now what are these?
God save your honour,
Here I present unto you my Lord Mayor,
A pair of rebels, whom I did espy
As I was busy grinding at my mill,
And taking them for vagrant idle k•…ucs,
That had beset some trueman from his house,
I came to kéepe the peace, but afterword,
Found that it was the bastard Falconbridge,
And this his mate together by the ears,
The one, for all that I could doo, escaped,
The other stands at your mercy here.
It is the rebel Spicing.
It is indeed?
I see you are not blind, you know me then.
Well miller, thou hast done a subic•…s part,
And worthily deserust that recompense
Is publicly proclaimed by the King,
But whats this other? I have séene his face,
And as I take it, he is one of them.
I must confess, I took them both together,
•…ee aided me to apprehend the rest.
A tells you true my Lord, I am Chub the Chandler, and I curse the time that ever I saw their faces, for if they had not been, I had lived an honest man in mine own country, and never come to this,
Out rogue, dost thou recant for fear of death?
I Ma•…or, I am he that sought to cut your thrpate,
And since I have miscarried in the fact,
Isle néere deny it, do the worst you can.
Bring him a way, he shall have martial law, and at the next tree we do come unto,
Be hanged to rid the world of such a wretch.
Miller thy duty is a thousand marks,
Which must be shard bet waxed thée and this poor fell∣low, that did reveal him. And sir, your life is saude on this condition, that you hang up Spicing, how say thou, wilt thou do it?
Will I doe it? what a question is that?
I would hang him if he were my father to save mine own life.
Then when yée have done it, come home to my house, and there ve truly shall have your reward.
Well sir, then thou must be my hangman?
I by my troth sir, for fault of a better.
Well, commend me to little Pim, and pray her to re∣d•…me my pande hose, they lie at the blew Bore for eleven pence, and if my hostess will have the other odd penny, tell her she is a damned bawd, and there is no truth in her score.
Take no thought sir for your pande hose, they are lousy, and not worth the redéeming.
There is a Constable sticks in my mind, he got my sword from me, that night I should have killed black Ralph, if I had •…ude, I would have béene meet with him.
I sir, but here is a thing shall take an order for that.
Cemmend me to black Luce, bouncing Bess, &amp; lusty •…ate, and the other pretty morsels of mans flesh. Farewell Pink and Pins, •…libote, and Carvill, Turnbuil, and Spittle, I die like a man.
Oh Captain Spicing, thy vain enticing, brought me from my trade,
From good candles making, to this pains taking, a rebel to be made,
Therefore Ned Spicicing, to quit thy enticing, this must be th•… hope,
By one of thy fellows, to be led to the Gallows, to end in a rope.
Dudgeon, dost thou he are, look well to Broke my mare, drive Dunne and her fair and softly down the hill, and take héede the thorns tear not the horns of my Cow hides, as thou goosed near the hedges: ha what say thou knave? is the Bulls hide down? why lay it up again, what rare I? He meet thee at the stile, and help to set all straight. And yet God help, its a crooked world, and an unthrifty, for some that have ne'er a shoe, had rather go barefoot, then buy clo•…-leather to mend the old, when they can buy no new, for they have time enough to mend all, they sit so long between the cup and the wall, well God amend them, God amend them. Let me see by my executor here, my leather pouch,
what I have taken, what I have spent, what I have gained. what I have lost, &amp; what I have laid cut: my taking is more thē my spending, for here is store left. I have spent but a great, a penny for my two jade, a penny to the poor, a penny pot of ale, and a penny cake for my man and me, a dicker of Cow∣hides cost me.
Snails who comes here? mistress Ferries, or mistress what call ye her? Put up Iohn Hobs, money tempts beauty.
Well met good fellow, saw thou not the hart?
My heart? God bless me from séeing my heart.
Thy heart? the déereman, we demand the decree.
Do you demand whats déere? mary corn and cow hides, Mass a good sni•…g lass, well like my daughter Nil, I had rather then a bend of leather she and I might smutch to∣gender.
Came thou not down the wood?
Yes mistress that I did.
And saw thou not the déere embossed?
By my hood ye make me laugh, what the dickens is it love that makes ye prate to me so fondly, by my fathers soul I would I had iobd faces with you.
Why how now Hobs, so saucy with the Duchess and the Quéene?
Much Queen I trow, these be but women, and one of them is like my wench, I would she had her rags, I would give a load of hair and horns, and a fat of leather, to match her to some justice, by the meghollie.
Be silent Tanner, and ask pardon of the Queen.
And ye be the Queen, I cry ye mercy good mistress Queen.
No fault my friend, Madam lets take our bows,
And in the standing seek to get a shoot.
Come bend our bows, and bring the herd of d•…re.
God send yée-good standing, and good striking, and fat flesh, sée if all Gentle women be not alike when their black facce be on, I took the Quéene, as I am true Tanner, for mistress Ferric.
Soft, who comes here, more knaves yet?
Ho good fellow, saw•… thou not the King?
No good fellow, I saw no King, which King dost thou ask for.
Why King Edward, what King is there else?
Theres another King and ye could hit on him, one Harry, one Harry, and by our Lady they say, hes the honester man of the two.
Sir beware you speak not treason.
What if I doe?
Then thoult be hanged.
A dogs death, •…le not meddle with it, for by my troth I know not when I speak treason, when I do not, theres such halting betwirt two Kings, that a man cannot go up∣right, but he shall offend tone of them, I would God had them both for me.
Well, thou saw not the King?
No, is he in the country?
•…es hunting here at Drayton Beset.
The devil he is, God bless his Mastership: I saw a woman here that they said was the Quéene, shees as like my daughter, but my daughter is the fairer, as ever I sée.
Fare well fellow, speak well of the King,
God make him an honest man, I hope thats well spo∣ken, for byth mouse foot, some give him hard words, whether be •…rues um or not, let him look to that, isle meddle of my cow hide, and let the world slide.
The devil in a dung cart, how these roisters swarm in the •…try now the King is so near? God liver me from this, for this 〈◊〉 like a •…heese, but a man cannot tell amongst
these Courtnoles whose true.
•…whole my friend, good fellow pre thée stay.
No such matter, I have more haste of my way.
If thou be a good fellow, let me borrow a word.
My purse thou meanest, I am no good fellow, and I pray God thou be not one.
Why? dost thou not love a good fellow?
No, good fellows be thieves.
Dost thou think I am one?
Thought is frée, and thou art not my ghostly father.
I mean thée no harm.
Who knows that but thy self? I pray God he spy not my purse.
On my troth I mean she none.
Upon thy oath isle stay: now, what say thou to me? Speak quickly, for my company stays for me beneath at the next stile.
The King is hunting hereabouts, did thou see his Majesty?
His majesty, whats that? his horse, or his mare?
Tush, I mean his Grace.
Grace quoth? pray God he have any: which King dost thou quire for?
Why for King Edward, know thou any more Kings then one?
I know not so many, for I tel thee I know none, mar∣rye I hear of King Edward.
Did thou see his Highness?
By my hollida•…e, thats the best term thou gazed him yet, hes high enough, but hee has put poor King Harry low enough.
How low hath he put him?
Nay, I cannot tel, but he has put him down, for he has got the crown, much good doot him with it.
Amen, I like thy talk so well, I would I knew thy name.
Dost thou not know me?
No.
Then thou know no body: did never hear of Iohn Hobs the Tanner of •…am worth?
Not till now I promise thee, but now I like thee well.
So do not I thee, I fear thou art some out-rider, that lives by taking of purses here on Basse•…s heath, but I fear thée n•…t, for I have wared all my money in Cowhides, at Colesill market, and my man &amp; my mare are hard by at the hill foot.
•…s that thy grey mare thats tide at the stile with the h•…es on her backe':
Thats Broke my mare, and theres Dunne my nag, and Dadgeon my man.
Theres neither man nor horse, but only one mare.
Gods bl•…w budkin, has the knave served me so? farewell, 〈◊〉 may loose h•…s, horns, and mare &amp; all, by prating with thee.
•…arry man, tarry, th•…le sooner take my gelding then thy grav mare, for I •…ue tide mine by her.
That will I see before isle take your word.
Il•… bear thée company.
I had as lieve go alone:
•…ow on my troth the Queen shoots passing well.
So did the Duchess when she was as young.
Age s•…s the hand, and shoots both wide &amp; short:
What have they given vs?
S•…re rose nobles lust:
The Queen gave four.
True, and the Duchess twain.
O were we ever so paid for our pain.
•…ut, had the King come, as they said he would, he 〈◊〉 have ra•…de upon vs showers of gold.
Why he is hunting some where here about, lets first go drink, and then go seek him out.
How •…st thou Tanner, wilt thou take my cour•… s•…t for thy mare?
Courser call thou him? so ill mought I fare, thy skittish jade will never abide, to carry my leather, my horns nor hide. But if I were so mad to scorce, what boot would thou give nice?
May boot, thats boot worthy, I look for boot of thée.
Ha, ha, a merry Jig, why man, Broke my mare knows ha and ree, and will stand when I cry ho, and let me get up and down, and make water when I doe.
Isle give thee a Noble if I like her pace, lay thy Cow∣bides in my saddle, and lets iog towards Drayton.
It's out of my way, but I begin to like thee well.
Thou wilt like me better before we doe part,
I pray thée tell •…ee, what say they of the King?
Of the kings thou mean, art thou no blab if I tel thée.
If the King know it not now, hee shall never know it for me.
Mass they say King Harrie's a very aduowtrie man.
A •…vote man, and whats King Edward?
Hes a frank franion, a merr•… companion, and loves a wench well, they say he has married a poor widow because shecs fair.
Dol•… thou like him the worse for that?
No by my feckens, but the better, for though I bee a ply•… Tanner, I love a fair lass my self.
Prée thee tell me, how love they King Edward?
Faith as poor folks love holidays, glad to have them now and then, but to have them come too often, will vnd•… them, so to sée the king now and then ti's comfort, but euerse day would beggar vs, and I may to thée, we fear wée shall be troubled to lend him no money, for we doubt hes but néedie.
Would thou lend him no money if he should need?
By my hallidome yes, he shall have half my st•…, and isle •…ell sole leather to help him to more.
Faith whether love thou better Harry or Edward.
Nay, thats coúnsel, &amp; two may kéep it, if one be a way.
Shall I say my conscience? I think Harry is the true king.
Art ad•…first of that? Harrie's of the old house of Lan∣casber, and that progenitie do I love.
And thou dost not hate the house of York?
Why no, for I am •…used a kin to Sutton Wind-mill, I can grind which way so ere the wind blow, if it bee Harry I can say well fare Lancaster, if it be Edward I can sing, York, York for my mons.
Thou art of my mind, but I say Harry •…s the law∣full King, Edward is but an usurper, and a fool and a co∣ward.
Nay there thou lie, he has wit enough, and courage enough, do•… thou not speak treason?
I, but I know to whom I speak it.
Dost thou? well if I were Constable, I should be forsworn if I set the•… not in the stocks for it.
Well let it go no further, for I did serve King Harry and I love him best, though now I serve King Edward.
Thou art the arranter knave to speak ill of thy ma•…∣ster, but sir whats thy name, what office hast thou? and what will the King doe for thee?
My name is Ned, I am the Kings Butler, and he will do more for me, then for any Noble man in the Court.
The d•…uel he will, hes the more fool, and so isle tel him, if ere I see him, &amp; I wouid I might sée him in my poor house at Tamworth.
Go with me to the Court and isle bring thée to the king, &amp; what suit so ere thou have to him, the warrant thée to speed
I ha nothing to do at Court, isle home with my cowhids, and if the King will come to me he shall be welcome.
Hast thou no suit touching thy trade, to transport hides or sell leather only in a certain circuit, or about Bark, or such like, to have letters patents?
By the Mass and the Matins I like not those Pat∣tents, sir they that have them, doe as the Priests did in old •…no, buy and sell the sins of the people, so they make the King belée•… they mend whats amiss, and for money they
make the thing worse then it is, theres another thing in 〈◊〉, the more is the pity?
What pity Iohn Hobs? I prée thée say all.
Faith ti's pity that one subica should have in his hand that might do good to many through the land.
Satcst thou me so •…inner well lets cast lots whether thou shalt go with me to Drayton, or I go home with th•…e to Tamworth.
Lot me no lotting, isle not go with thee, if thou wilt go with me, cause thart my Lciges man (and yet I think bee has many honester) thou shalt bee welcome to Iohn Hobs, thou shalt be welcome to •…es and bacon, and perhaps a bag∣pudding, and my daughter Nil shall pop a possell upon thee when thou gost to bed.
Here is my hand, isle but go &amp; see the King served, and •…le be at home as soon as thy self.
Dost thou hear me Ned? if I shall be thy host,
Make haste thou art best, for fear thou kiss the •…oct.
Farewell Iohn Hobs, the honest true Tanner
I see plain men by observation,
Of things that alter in the change of times,
Doghter knowledge, and the meanest life,
Proporrioned with content sufficiency,
Is mericr then the mighty state of Kings.
Now now? what news bring ye sirs,
Wheres the Quoene?
Her Highness and your mother my dread Lord,
Are both invited by Sir Humphrey Bows,
Where they entend to feast and lodge this night,
And do expect your Graces presence there.
Tom Sellinger I have other business;
Astray from you and all my other train,
I met a Tanner, such a merry mate,
So frolic, and so full of good conceit,
That I have given my word to be his guest,
Because he knows me not to be the King:
Good Cousin Howard grudge not at the lest,
But greet my mother and my wife from me,
Bid them be merry, I must have my humour,
Let them both sup and sléepe when they see time,
Commend me kindly to Sir Humphrey Bows,
Tell him at breakfast I will visit him.
This night Tom Sellinger and I must feast
With Hobs the Tanner, there plain Ned &amp; Tom.
No King nor Sellinger for a thousand pound.
The Queen &amp; Duchess will be discontent,
Because his •…ighnes comes not to the feast.
Sir Humphrey Bows may take the most conceit,
But whats the end, the King will have his pleasure?
Good news my boys, Harry the sixth is dead, peruse that letter: sir, drink you that, gives his purse, and stay not but post back again for life, and thank my brother Gloster for his news, commend me to him, isle see him to morrow night. How like yée it sirs?
O passing well my Liege, you may be merry for these happy news.
The merrier with our host the Tanner Tom,
My Lord take you that letter to the Ladies,
Bid them be merry with that second course,
And if wee see them not before wee go,
Pray them to journey easily after vs,
Wéele post to London, so good night my Lord.
Come Nil, come daughter, is your hands and your face washed?
I forsooth Father.
Ye must bee cleanly I tell ye, for there comes a Courtnole hither to night, the kings master ships Butler, Ned, a spruce youth, but beware ye be not in love nor over∣taken
by him, for Courtiers be slippery lads.
No forsooth father.
Gods blessing on thee, that half yéeres schooling at Liechfield, was better to thee then house and land, it has put such manners into thee, I forsooth and no forsooth at every word, ye have a clean smock on. I like your apparel well, is supper ready?
I forsooth father.
Have wee a good barley bagpudding, a péece of fat Bacon, a good cow heel, a hard cheese, and a browne loaf.
All this forsooth, and more, ye shall have a posit, but indeed the rats have spoiled your hard cheese.
Now the dtuell choke them, so they have eat me a farthing candle the other night.
What moister moister.
How now knave, what foist thou Dudgeon?
Here is guests come, wheres Helen?
What guests be they?
A courtnole, one Ned the kings Butcher he sapes, and his friends too.
Ned the kings butcher? ha, ha, the kings butler, take their horses, and walk them, and bid them come near house, Nil lay the cloth, and clap supper oath b•…rd.
Mas here is Ned indeed and another misproud •…uffian,
Welcome Ned, I like thy honesty, thou keep promise.
I faith honest Tanner, isle ever keep promise with thée, pre thee bid my friend welcome.
By my troth ye are both welcome to Tamwoorth: friend I know not your name.
My name is Tom Twist?
Believe ye that list: but ye are welcome both, and I like you both well but for one thing.
Whats that?
Nay that I keep to my self, for I sigh to see and think, that pride brings many one to er•…ion.
Pre thee tell v•… thy meaning.
Troth I doubt ye ne'er came truly by all these gay rags. Tic not your bare wages and thin f•…s ye have of the King, can keep ye thus fine, but either ye must rob the King privily, or his subjects openly, to maintain your probicallitie.
Think thou so Tanner:
Tic no matter what I think, come lets go to supper,
What Nil, what Dudgeon, where be these folks?
Daughter bid my friends welcome.
Ye are welcome Gentlemen as I may say.
I thank ye fair maid.
A pretty wench be my fey.
How likest her Ned?
I like her so well, I would ye would make mée your son in law.
And I like thée so well Ned, that had thou an occu∣potion, for service is no heritage, a young courtier, an old beggar, I could sinde in my heart to cast her away upon thée, and if thou wilt forsake the court and turn La•…ner, or find thy self to a shoemaker in Liechfield, •…le give thee twenty nobles ready money, with my Nil, and trust thée with a dic∣kerr of leather, to set up thy trade.
Ned he offers ye saire, if ye have the grace to take it.
He does indeed, Tom, and hereafter isle tell him more.
Come sit down to supper: go to Nil, no more sheeps eyes, ye may be caught I tell ye, these be licorish lads.
I warrant ye father, yet in truth Ned is a very proper man, and tother may serve, but Neds a pearl in mine eye.
Daughter, cal Dudgeon and his fellows, weal have a thrée men song, to make our guests merry.
Nails what courtnoles are ye? yéele neither talk nor cate, What news at the court? do somewhat for your meat.
Heavy news there, King Henrie is dead.
Thats light news &amp; merry for your master king Edward.
But how will the commons take it?
Well, God be with good King Henrie, faith the com∣mons will take it as a common thing, deaths an bonest man, for he spares not the King: for as one comes, another taue away, and seldom comes the better, thats all we say.
Shrewdly spoken Tanner by my fey.
Come fill me a cup of mother Whetstones ale, I may drink to my friends, and drive down my tale.
Here Ned and Tom I drink to ye: and yet if I come to the court, I doubt you'll not know me.
Yes, Tom shall be thy surety Tanner I will know thée.
If thou dost not Ned, by my troth I beshrew thee.
I drink to my wife that may be.
Faith Ned thou moist live to make her a Lady.
Tush, her father offers nothing, having no more i will∣drone but her.
I would I had not, condition she had all. But I have a knave to my son, I remember him by you, even such an •…∣thrist as one of you two, that spends all on gay clothes and new fashions, and no work will down with him, that I fear héele be hanged, God bless you from a better fortune, yet you wear such filthy bréeks, Lord, were not this a good fashion? yes, and would save many a fair penny.
Let that pass, and let vs hear your song.
Agréed, agréed, come, sol, sol, sol, fa, fa, fa, say Dudgeon.
Agencourt, Agencourt, know ye not Agencourt.
Where the English slew and hurt,
all the French foemen:
With our Guns and bills browne,
O the French were beaten down,
Morris pikes and bowmen, &amp;c.
Well sung good fellows, I would the King heard ye.
So should I faith, I should strain a noate for him: Come take away, and lets to bed, ye shall have clean
sheets Ned, but they be course, good strong hemp, of my baughters own spinning and I tell thee, your Chamber pot, must be a fair horn, a badge of our occupation, for we buy no bending peauter, nor bending earth.
No matter Hobs, wee will not go to bed.
What then?
Even what thou wilt, for it is near day.
Tanner, Gramercies for our hearty cheer,
If ere it be thy chance to come to court,
Enquire for me Ned the Kings butler,
Or Tom of the Kings chamber my companion,
And see what welcome wee will give thee there.
I have heard of courtiers have said as much as you, and when they have been tried, would not bid their friends •…rink.
We are none such, let our horses bee brought out,
For we must a way, and so with thanks farewell.
Farewell to ye both, commend me to the king, &amp; tel him I would have been glad to have seen his worship here.
Come Tom for London, horse, and hence away.
Thomas Neuil, yet hast thou grarious time
Of deer repentance, now discharge thy cōscience,
Lay open thine offences to the world,
That we may witness thou dost die a Christian.
Why sir Harry Moorton have you arraignde,
Condcnmde, and brought me to this place,
Of bloody execution, and now ask,
If I be guilty, therein doth appear,
What justice you have used, call you this law?
〈◊〉 dost mistake our meaning Falconbridge,
Wee do not ask as being ignorant,
Of thy transgression, but as urging thee,
To hearty sorrow for thy vile misdéeds,
That heaven may take compassion on thy soul.
How charitable you would séeme to 〈◊〉:
I fear anon you'll say it is for love,
You bind me thus, and bring me to the block,
And that of méere affcaion you are moude
To cut my head off, cunning policy:
Such butchers as your selves never want,
A colour to excuse your slaughterous minds.
We butcher thée? can thou deny thy self,
But thou hast béen a pirate on the sea?
Can thou deny but with the communaltie
Of Kent and Essex, thou did rise in arms,
And twice assault the City London, where
Thou twice did take repulse, and since that time,
Can thou deny, that being fled from hence,
Thou ioynedst in con federarie with France,
And came with them to burn Southampton here,
Are these no faults, thou shuldst so much presume,
To cléere thy self, and lay thy blood on vs?
Hear me sir Harry, since we must dispute.
Dispute bnciuil wretch, what néeds dispute,
Did not the Viceadmirall héere, and I
Encountering with the Navy of the French,
Attach thee in a ship of Normandy,
And wilt thou stand upon thine innocence?
Dispatch, thou art as rightfully condemned
As ever rebel was. And thou shalt die.
I make no question of it, I must die,
But let me tell you how I scorn your threats,
So little doo I reckon of the name
Of ugly death, as were he bisible,
I'd wrestle with him for the victory,
And tug the slave, and tear him with my téeth,
But I would make him stoop to Falconbridge,
And for this life, this paltry brittle life,
This blast of wind which you have labourde foe,
By juries, sessions, and I know not what,
To rob me off, is of so vile repute:
That to attain that I might live mine age,
I would not give the value of a point,
You cannot be so cruel to afflict,
But I will bée as forward to endure.
Go to, leave of these •…whole braves of thine:
And think upon thy souls health Falconbridge.
Submit and ask forgiveness of thy King.
What King?
Why Edward of the house of York.
He is no King of mine, he does usurp,
And if the destinies had given me leave,
I would have told him so before this time,
And pulled the Diadem from off his head.
Thou art a traitor, stop thy traitors mouth.
I am no traitor, Lancaster is King,
If that be treason to defend his right,
What first for them that do imprison him?
If insurrection to advance his sceptre,
What fault is theirs that step into his throne?
Oh God, thou pour'dst the balm upon his head,
Can that pure unction be wipte off again?
Thou once did crown him in his insancie,
Shall wicked men now in his age depose him?
Oh pardon me, if I expostulate,
More then becomes a sinful man to doe,
England I fear thou wilt thy folly rue.
Thou triflest time, and dost but weary vs
With dilatory questions, make an end,
Indeed the end of all kingdoms must end,
Honour and riches, all must have an end.
And he that thinks he doth the most preu•…le,
His head once laid, there rests but a tale:
Come fellow, do thy office, what me thinks,
Thou look as if thy heart were in thy hose,
Pull up thy spirits, it will be quickly done,
A blow or two at most will serve the turn.
Forgive me sir your death.
Forgive thée? I and give thoe too,
Hold, there is some few crowns for thée to drink,
Tush wéepe not man, give losers leave to plain,
And yet •…faith my loss I count a gain,
First let me see, is thy are sharpe enough,
I am indifferent, well a Gods name to this gear,
Come &amp; yéeld your head gently to the block,
Gently say thou: thou wilt not use me so:
But all is one for that, what strength hast thou,
Throughout the whole proportion of thy limbs,
Keuoke it all into thy manly arms,
And spare me not, I am a Gentleman,
A Neuill and a Falconbridge beside,
Then do thy work, thou moist get credit by it,
For if thou dost not, I must tell thee plain,
I shall be passing angry when tic done.
I warrant you sir, none in the land shall do it better.
Why now thou please me, England farewell
And old Plantagenet, if thou survive,
Think on my love, although it did not thrive.
As for his head, it shall be sent with spéed
To London, and the promised reward,
Allotted for the apprehending him,
Be given unto the poor of Southhampton here:
How say you Captain are you so content?
With all my heart, but I do marvel much
We hear not of the messenger we sent,
To give the King intelligence of this?
Take truce with your surmises, here he comes.
Follow it séemes that thou art slow of gate,
Or very negligent in our affairs,
What says King Edward to our service done?
To answer you directly and as briefly,
I spoke with him, for when I was come
To Drayton Beset, where they said he was,
T was told me there, that even the night before,
His highness in all hast, was rid towards London:
The occasion, Henries death within the Tower,
Of which t•…e people are in sundry tales,
Some thinking he was murdered, some again
Supposing that he died a natural death.
Well how so ere, that concerns not •…s,
We have to doe with no mans death, but his,
That for his treason here hath lost his head.
Come let vs give direction as before,
And afterword make back unto the shore.
I marie Crosbie this befits thée well,
But some will marua•…le that with a scarlet gown,
I wear a gilded rapier by my side:
Why le•… them know, I was knighted in the field
For my good service to my Lord the king,
And therefore I may wear it lawfully,
In Court, in City, or at any royal banquet.
But soft Iohn Crosbie, thou forgetst thy self,
And dost not mind thy birth and parentage,
Where thou wast born, &amp; whence thou art derived,
I do not shame to say, the Hospital
Of London was my chiefest fostering place,
There did I learn, that near unto a Cross,
Commonly called Cow Cross near Islington,
An honest Citizen did chance to find me,
A poor Shoemaker by trade he was,
And doubting of my Christendom or no,
Called me according to the place he found me,
Iohn Crosbie, finding me so by a Cross.
The Masters of the Hospital at further years,
Bound me apprentice to the Grocers trade,
Wherein God pleased to bless my poor endeavours
That by his blessings I am come to this.
The man that found me I have well requited,
And to the Hospital my fostering place,
An hundred pound a year I give for ever,
Likewise in memory of me Iohn Crosbie
In Bishopgate stréete a poor house have I built,
And as my name have called it Crosbie house,
And when as God shall take me from this life,
In little S. Hellens will I be buried:
All this declares, I boast not of my birth,
But found on earth, I must return to earth.
But God for his pity I forget my self,
The King my Sovereign Lord will come anon,
And nothing is as yet in readiness.
Where are ye cousin Shore? nay where is Mistress Shore?
Oh I am sorry that she stays so long,
See what it is to be a widower,
And lack a Lady Maioresse in such need.
Oh are ye come? welcome good Cousin Shore,
But you indéed are welcome gentle Niece.
Needs must you be our Lady Maioresse now,
And help vs, or else we are shamde for ever,
Good Cousin still thus am I bold with you.
With all my heart my Lord, &amp; thank ye too,
That you do please to use our homely help.
Why sée how neatly she bestirs her self,
And in good sooth makes housewifery to shine?
Ah had my Lady Maioresse lived to see
Fair Mistress Shore thus beautify her house,
She would have been not little proud thereof.
Well my Lord Mayor I thank you for that flout,
But let his Highness now come when he please,
All things are in a perfect readiness.
The more am I beholding Niece to you,
That take such pains to save our credit now:
My servants are so slack, his Majesty,
Might have béene here before we were prepared,
But peace here comes his Highness.
Now my Lord Mayor, have we not kept our word?
Because we could not stay to dine with you:
At our departure hence, we promised,
First food we tasted at our back return,
Should be with you, still yielding hearty thanks,
To you and all our London Citizens,
For the great service which you did perform
Against that bold •…de rebel Falconbridge.
My gracious Lord what then we did,
We did account no more then was our duty,
Thereto obliged by true subic as zeal,
And may he never live that not defends,
The honour of his king and country:
Next thank I God, it likes your Majesty,
To bless my poor roof, with your royal presence,
To me could come no greater happiness.
Thanks good Lord Mayor, but wheres my Lady Maio∣resse, I hope that she will bid vs welcome too.
She would my Liedge, and with no little joy,
Had shée but liu•…d to see this blessed day,
But in her sreed this Gentle woman here,
My Cousins wife, that office will supply:
How say you m•…resse Shore?
How? mistress Shore? what not his wife
That did refuse his knighthood at our hand?
The very same my Lord and here hée is.
What M. Shore, we are your debtor still,
But by Gods grace entend not so to die:
And Gentlewoman, now before your face,
I must condemn him of discourtesy,
Yea, and of great wrong that he hath offred you,
For you had béene a Lady but for him.
He was in fault, trust me he was to blame,
To hinder virtue of her due by right.
My gracious L. my poor &amp; humble thoughts,
Ne'er had an eye to such unworthiness,
And though some hold it as a maxim,
That women's minds by nature doo aspire,
Yet how both God and M. Shore I thank
For my continuance in this humble state,
And likewise how I love your Majesty:
For gracious sufferance that it may be so:
Heaven bear true record of my inward soul:
Now it remains, on my Lord Majors behalf,
I doe such duty as becomes me,
To bid your Highness welcome to his house,
Were welcomes virtue powerful in my word,
The King of England should not doubt thereof.
Nor do I mistress Shore, now my Lo. Mayor
Edward dare boldly swear that he is welcome,
You spake the word well, very well in faith,
But mistress Shore her tongue hath gilded it,
Tell me Cousin Howard and Tom Sellinger,
Had ever Citizen so fair a wife?
Of flesh and blood I never did behold,
A woman avarice way so absolute.
Nor I my Liedge, were Sellinger a King,
He could afford Shores wife to be a Quéene.
Why how now Tom? Nay rather how now Ned?
What change is this? proud, saucy roving eye,
What whisperst in my brain, that she is fair?
I know it, I sée it, fairer then my Quéene?
•…oulost thou maintain it? what &amp; thou traitor heart,
Would thou shake hands in this conspiracy?
Down rebel, back base treacherous conceit,
I will not credit thée, my Bess is fair,
And Shores wife but a blouse, compared to her,
Come let vs sit, here will I take my place.
And my Lord Mayor, fill me a bowl of wine,
That I may drink to your elected Maioresse,
And M. Shore tell me how like you this,
My L. Mayor makes your wife his L. Maioresse?
So well my Lord as better cannot be,
All in the honour of your Majesty.
Nay drink to vs L. Mayor, wéele have it so,
Go to I say, you are our Taster now,
Drink then, and we will pledge ye.
Al health &amp; happiness to my sovereign.
Fill 〈◊〉 our cup, and Lady Maioresse,
This •…ll carouse we mean to drink to you,
And you must pledge vs, but yet no more,
Th•…n you shall please to answer vs withal.
Nay you must drink to some body, yea Tom to thee?
Well sir, see you doe her right:
For Edward would, oh would to God he might.
Yet idle eye, wilt thou be gadding still?
Keep home, kéepe home, for fear of further ill.
How now? letters to vs, from whom?
My Liedge, this from the D. of Burgundy.
A•…d this is from the Constable of France.
What news from them?
To claim our right in France?
And they will aid vs, yea, will ye so?
But other aid must aid vs ere we go.
A women's aid, that hath more power then France
To crown vs, or to kill vs with mischance.
If chaste resolve be to such beauty tied,
Sue how thou can, thou wilt be still denied,
Her husband hath deserved well of thee,
Tut, love makes no respect where •…re it be,
Thou wrongst thy Quéene: every enforced ill,
Must be endured, where beauty séekes to kill:
Thou seem to read, only to blind their eyes,
Who knowing it, thy folly would despise.
Thanks for my cheer L. Mayor, I am not well,
I know not how to take these news. This fit I 〈◊〉,
That hath berest me of all reason elaine.
God shield my Sovereign.
Nay nothing I shall be well anon.
May it please your Highness sit.
I, fine with thee, nay we must néeds be gon,
Cousin Howard convey these letters to our counsel,
And bid them give vs their advise of them,
Thanks for my cheer L. Mayor, farewell to you
And farewell Mistress Shore, La. Maioresse I should say,
It's you have caused our parting at this time.
Farewell M. Shore, farewell to all,
Weal meet once more to make amends for this.
Oh God here to be ill?
My house to cause my Sovereigns discontent?
Cousin Shore I had rather spent.
Content your self my L. kings have their humour•…
The letters did contain somewhat no doubt,
That did displease him.
So my Lord think I,
But by Gods help he will be well again.
I hope so too, well Cousin for your pains,
I can but thank ye, chiefly you fair Niece,
At night I pray yée both come sup with me.
How say ye? will ye?
Yes my Lord wee will.
So for this time we humbly take our leave.
Oh now the sudden sickness of my Liedge,
Afflicts my soul with many passions?
His Highness did entend to be right merry,
And God he knows how it would glad my soul,
If I had seen his Highness satisfied
With the poor entertainment of his Mayor,
His humble vassal, whose lands, whose life and all
Are, and in duty must be always his.
Well, God I trust will bless his Graces health,
And quickly ease him of his sudden fit.
Take away there ho, rid this place,
And God of heaven bless my Sovereigns Grace.
Sir Jack, come set out.
You are the elder Prentice, I pray you do it, least my mistcis talk with you when shée comes down, what is it a clock?
Sir by Alhallowes.
Lying and stealing will bring ye to the Gallows.
Is here all the plate?
I that must serve to day,
Where is the weights and balance?
All ready, hark my mistress comes.
Sir boy, while I attend the shop my self,
See if the workman have dispatcht the Cup,
How many ounces weighs it:
Twenty •…orsooth.
What said the Gentleman to the fashiou?
He told my moister I was not within.
Go sir make hast, your M. is in Cheapside:
Take h•…d ye were best your loitering be not spied.
Well fare a case to put a King in yet,
Good mistress Shore this doth your love procure,
This shape is secret, and I hope ti's sure,
The Wlatermen that daily use the Court,
And see me often, knew me not in this,
At Lyon key I landed in their view,
Yet none of them took knowledge of the King,
If any gallant strive to have the wall,
Isle yéelde it gently: Soft here must I turn,
Hears Lumbard stréete, and here is the Pelican,
And theres the Phoenix in the Pelicans nest,
O rare perfection of rich natures work,
Bright twinkling spark of precious Diamond,
Of greater value then all India,
Were there no Sun, by whose kind lovely heat
The earth brings forth those stones we hold of prize,
Her radiant eyes dejected to the ground,
Would turn each pebble to a Diamond.
Gaze gréedie eyes and be not satisfied,
Till you find rest, where hearts desire doth bide.
What would you buy sir that you look on here?
Your fairest jewel, bée it not too dear.
First how this Sapphire mistress that you wear?
Sir it is right that will I warrant ye,
No Jeweller in London shows a better.
No, nor the like, you praise it passing well.
Do •…no, if some Lapidary had the •…no, more would not buy it then I can demand. Tic as well set I think as ere ye saw.
Tic set indeed upon the fairest hand, that ere I saw.
You are disposed to jest, but for value, his Maiestis might wear it.
Might he in faith?
Sir tic the ring I mean.
I meant the hand.
You are a merry man,
I see you come to cheap, and not to buy.
Yet hée that offers fairer then isle doe, shall hardly find a partner in his bargain.
Perhaps in buying things of so small value?
Rather because no wealth can purchase it.
He were too fond, that would so highly prize,
The thing which once was given away for love.
His hap was good that came so easily by it.
The gift so small, that asked, who could deny it?
Oh she gave more, that such a gift then gave,
Then earth ere had, or world shall ever have.
His hap is ill, should it be as you say,
That having given him what you rate so high,
And yet is still the poorer by the match.
That easily proves he doth not know the worth.
Yet having had the use of it so long,
It rather proves you over rate the thing,
He being a chapman, as it séemes you are.
Indéed none should adventure on the thing,
Thats to bée purchased only by a King.
If Kings love that, which no man else respects,
It may be so, else do I sée small reason,
A King should take delight in such course stuff.
Lives there a King, that would not give his crown,
To purchase such a kingdom of content?
In 〈◊〉 conceit, right well you ask that question.
The world I think contains not such fond king.
Why mistress Shore, I am the man will do it.
Its proudly spoke, although I not beléeue it,
Were he King Edward that should offer it.
But shall I have it?
Upon what acquaintance?
Why since I saw thée last.
Where was that?
At the L. Majors, in the presence of the King.
I have forgotten that I saw you there,
For there were many that I took small note of.
Of me you did, and we had some discourse.
You are deceived Sir, I had then no time,
For my attendance on his majesty.
Isle gage my hand unto your hand of that,
Look well upon me.
Now I beséech you let this strange disguise 
Excuse my boldness to your majesty.
What ever we possess is all your highness,
Only mine honour, which I cannot grant,
Only thy love (bright angel) Edward craves,
For which I thus adventured to sée thée.
But here comes one, to whom I only gave it.
And he I doubt will say you shall not have it.
Am I so soon cut off? oh spite.
How say ye mistress, will ye take my offer?
Indeed I cannot sir afford it so.
You'll not be offered fairlier I beléeue.
Indeed you offer like a Gentleman,
But yet the jewel will not so be left.
Sir, if you bid not too much vnder-foot,
Isle drive the bargain twixt you and my wife.
Alas good Shore, my self dare answer no.
Nothing can make thée such a jewel forgo.
She faith you shall be too much looser by it.
See in the row then, if you can spéed better.
See many worlds arrow, affords not like.
Why look thou Mat? know thou the 〈◊〉?
Alas what ails thée that thou look so pale?
What théere swéet hart? alas, where hast thou béen?
Nay nothing Iane, know you the Gentleman?
Not I sweet heart, alas why do you ask?
Is he thine enemy?
〈◊〉 cannot tell,
What came hee here to cheapen at our shop?
This Jewel love.
Well I pray God he came for nothing else.
Why who is it? I do suspect him Shore.
That you demand thus doubtedly of me.
Ah Iane, it is the King.
The king? what then? first for that thou sighst?
Were he a thousand kings thou hast no cause
To fear his presence, or suspect my lout.
I know I have not, sée he comes again.
Still is my hindzer there? be patient heart,
Some fitter season must assuage the smart.
What will ye take that mistress which I offred ye?
I come again sir, as one willing to buy.
Indeed I cannot sir, I pray ye
Deal with my husband, hear what he will say.
Isle sell it worth your money, if you please,
I pray you come near sir.
I am too néere already, thou so near.
Nay, nay, she knows what I did offer her,
And in good sadness, I can give no more,
So fare ye well sir, I will not deal with you.
You are deceiude (swéet heart) tic not the king,
Think you hee would adventure thus alone?
I do assure thee Iane it is the King.
Oh God, twixt the extremes of love and fear,
In what a shivering ague sits my soul?
Keep wée our treasure secret, yet so fond,
As set so rich a beauty as this is,
In the wide view of every gazers eye.
Oh traitor beauty, oh deceitful good,
That dost conspire against thy self and love,
No sooner got, but wished again of others,
In thine own self, injurious to thy self,
Oh rich poor portion, thou good evil thing?
How many joyful woes still dost thou bring?
I pray thée come, swéet love, and sit by me,
No king thats under heaven I love like thee.
Neighbours and friends, the cause that you are called,
Concerns the Kings most excellent majesty,
Whose right you know by his progenitors,
Unto the Crown and sovereignty of France,
Is wrongfully detained by the French,
Which to revenge and royally regain.
His Highness means to put himself in Arms.
And in his princely person to conduct
His warlike troupes against the enemy.
But for his Coffers are unfurnished,
Through civil discord and intestine war,
(Whose bleeding scars our eyes may yet behold)
He prays his faithful loving subjects help,
To further this his just great enterprise.
So the fecke and meaning, whereby as it were of all your long purgation Sir Humphrey is no more in some respect, but the king wants money &amp; would
have some of his Comentie.
Tanner you rightly understand the matter.
Note this withal, where his dread Majesty,
(Our lawful Soucraigne, and most royal King)
Might have exacted or imposde a Tax
Or borrowed greater sums then we can spare,
(For all we have is at his dread command,)
He doth not so, but mildly doth entreat
Our kind ben•…uolence, what we will give,
With willing minds to wards this mightycharge.
Which to receive, his n•…ble Counsellor
And kinsman the Lord Howard here is come.
Now good sir Humphrey Bows, and M. As•…,
Have ye declared y• kings most gracious pleasure?
We have my Lord.
His highness will not force,
As loan or tribute, but will take your gift,
In grateful part and recompense your love.
To show my love, though money now be scarce
A hundredth pound isle give his Majesty.
Tic well sir Humphrey.
I a hundred marks.
Thanks M. Aston, you both show your love,
Now as•…c your neighbours what they will bestow?
Come master Hadland your benevolence.
O good sir Humphrey do not rack my purse,
You know my state, I lately sold my land.
Then you have money, let the king have part.
I, do master Hadland do, they say ye sold a foul deal of dirty land for fair gold and silver, let the king have some now while you have it, for if ye bee forborne a while, all will be spent, for he that cannot kéepe land that lies fast, will have much a do to hold money, its slipperic ware, tic melting ware, tic melting ware.
Gramercy Tanner.
Say, what shall we have?
My forty shillings.
Robert Goodfellowe.
I know you will be liberal to the King.
O M. Aston be content I pray ye,
You know my charge, my household very great,
And my housekéeping holds me very hare:
Thréescore uprising, and down lying Sir,
Spends no sinall store of vittailes in a year,
Two brace of Greyhounds, tt. couple of hounds,
And then my jade devour a deal of Corn,
My Christmas cost, &amp; then my friends that come
Amounts to charge, I am Robin Goodfellow,
That welcomes all and kéepes a frolic house,
I have no money pray ye pardon me.
Héeres a plain Tanner can teach you how to thrive,
Kéepe fewer dogs, and then ye may féede men:
Yet féede no idle men, tic néedles charge,
You that on hounds and hunting mates will spend,
No doubt but something to your King you'll lend.
My brace of Angels, by my troth thats all.
Mass and tic well thy Cures have left so much, I thought they would have eaten up thy house and landere this.
Now Harry Grudgen.
What would you have of me? Money I have none, and isle sell no stock, here is old polling, subsidy, fiftéen, soldiers, and to the poor, and you may have your will, you'll soon shut me out a door.
Hear ye worships, will ye let me answer my neigh∣bore Grudgen? By my hallidome Harry Grudgen, tha'rt but a grumbling, grudging Churl, thou hast two ploughs going, and near a Cradle rocking, tha'st a peck of money, go to, turn thée loose, thou'lt go to law with the Micat for a tithe goose, and wilt not spare the King four or five pound.
Gep goodman Tanner, are ye so round? your
prolicatenes has brought your son to the gallows almost, you can be frank of an other mans cost.
Thart no honest man to twit me with my son, hee may out live thee yet for ought that hee has done, my sons ith gail, is hee the first has been there, and thou •…rt a man, as thart a beast, I would have thee by the ears.
Friend thou wantste nurture, to vpbrasd a Father Weeping.
With a suns fault, we sit not here for this;
Whats thy benevolence towards his majesty?
His benegligence? hang him heel not give a pennis willingly.
I care not much to cast away forty pence.
Out grudging peasant, base ill nurturd groom,
Is th•… the love thou bear unto the King?
Gentlemen take notice of the slave,
And if he fault let him be soundly plagued?
Now frolic Ianner, what wilt thou afford?
Twenty old Angels and a score of hides, if that be too little, take twenty Nobles more, while I have it my king shall spend of my stor•….
The King shall know thy loving liberal heart.
Shall hee in faith, I thank ye heartily, but hear yée Gentleman, you come from the Court?
I doe.
Lord how does the King, and how does Ned the Kings Butler, and Tom of his Chamber, I am sure ye know them?
They doe very well.
For want of better guests they were at my house one night.
I know they were.
They promised me a good turn for kissing my daugh∣la Nil, and now I ha cagion to try them, my sons in Die hell here in Caperdochie, id Gail for péeping into a∣another mans purse, and outstep the King be miserable, hes
like to totter, can that same Ned the Butler doe any thing with the King?
More then my self, or any other Lord.
A halter he can, by my troth ye reiounce my heart to hear it.
Come to the Court I warrant thy sons life,
Ned will save that, and do thée greater good.
Isle wean Broke my maressole, and come up to the King, and it shall go hard but two fat hens for your pains I will bring.
My Lord this fellow gladly now will give,
five pounds so you will pardon his rude speech.
For five and five I cannot brooke the beast.
What gives the Tanner, I am as able as hee
He gives ten pound.
Take twenty then of me.
I pray yée my Lord forgive my rough heaud speech
I wis I meant no hurt unto my Liedge.
Let vs entreat your Lordships patience.
I do at your request remit the offence,
So lets depart, here is all we have to doe.
Ti's for this time and place my Lord, sir bring your money.
What have you sau'de now goodman Grudgen, by your hinching and your pinching, not the worth of a black pudding.
Now mistress Shore, what urgent cause is that, Which made ye send for me in such great haste? I 〈◊〉 it made me half afraid, you were not well.
Trust me, nor sick, nor well, but troubled still with the disease I told yée: here is another le•…er from the King, was never poor soul so importuned.
But will no answer serve?
No mistress Blage, no answer will sustize,
He, he it is, that with a violent siege
Labours to break into my plighted faith,
Oh what am I, he should so much forget
His royal State, and his high majesty?
Still doth he come disguised to my house,
And in most humble terms be wraies his love,
My husband gréeues, alas how can he choose,
Fearing the dispossessement of his Iane?
And when he cannot come (for him) he writes,
Offering beside incomparable gifts,
And all to win me to his princely will.
Beléeue me M. Shore, a dangerous case,
And every way repeat with doubtful fear,
If you should yéeld, your virtuous name were foiled
And your beloved husband made a scorn,
And if not yéeld, its likely that his love,
Which now admires ye, will convert to hate,
And who knows not a princes hate is death?
Yet I will not be she shall counsel yée,
Good mistress Shore do what ye will for me.
Then counsel me what I were best to do.
You know his greatness rā dispense with il,
Making the sin séeme lesser by his worth,
And you your self, your children &amp; your friends,
Be all adn•…nced to worldly dignity,
And this worlds pomp you know is a goodly thing,
Yet I will not be she shall connsaile ye,
Good mistress Shore doe what ye will for me.
Alas I know that I was bound by oath,
To kéepe the promise that I made at first,
And virtue lives, when pomp consumes to dust.
So we do say, dishonour is no shame,
When slander does not touch th'offenders name,
You shall be folded in a princes arms,
Whose beck disperses even the greatest harms,
Many that sit themselves in high degree,
Will then be glad to stoop, and bend the knee,
And who first, having plenty in the hand,
Never commanded, but doth still command,
That cannot work in such excess of things,
To quit the guilt one small transgression brings?
Yet I will not be shée shall counsel ye,
Good mistress Shore do what ye will for mée.
Here do I live, although in mean estate,
Yet with a conscience free from all debate,
Where higher footing may in time procure,
A sudden fall, and mix my swéete with sour.
True, I confess a private life is good,
Nor would I otherwise be understood,
To be a Goldsmiths wife is some content,
But da•…es in court more pleasantly are spent,
A households government deserves renown,
But what is a companion to a crown?
The name of mistress is a pretty thing,
But Madam at each word doth glory bring.
Yet I will not be she shall counsel yée,
Good mistress Shore do what ye will for nice.
Oh that I knew which were the best of twain,
Which for I do not, I am sick•… with pain.
How now sir boy, what is the news with you?
The Gentleman forsooth the other day,
That would have bought the jewel at our stall,
Is here to speak with ye.
Oh God it is the King.
Good mistress Blague withdraw ye from this place,
Oh come anon, so soon as he is gone,
And sir get you to the shop again.
Now mistress Shore bethink ye what to do.
Such suitors come not every day to woo.
Thou moist convent me (beauties pride) of boldness,
That I intrude like an unbidden guest,
But love being guide, my fault will séem the less.
Most welcome to your subjects homely roof,
The foot my Sovereign, seldom doth offend,
Unless the heart some other hurt intend.
The most thou see is hurt unto my self
How for thy sake, is majesty disrobed?
Riches made poor, and dignity brought low,
Only that thou might our affection know.
The more the pity, that within the sky,
The sun that should all other vapours dry,
And guide the world with his most glorious light
Is muffled up himself in •…full night.
The want of thée, fair Cynthia is the cause,
Spread thou thy siluer-brightnesse in the air,
And strait the gladsome morning will appear.
I may not wander, he that guides my carre,
Is an im•…nooued, constant, fixed star,
But I will give that star a comets name,
And shy•…d both thée and him from further blame.
How if the host of heaven at this abuse
Kepine? who can the prodig•…e excuse?
It lies within the compass of my power,
To dim their enu•…os eyes, dare séeme to lower,
But leaving this our Enigmatike talk,
Thou must sweet Iane repair unto the Court,
His tongue entreats, controls the greatest péere,
His hand plights love, a royal sceptre holds,
And in his heart bee hath confirmed thy good,
Which may not, must not, shall not be withstood.
If you enforce me, I have nought to say,
But wish I had not lived to see this day.
Blame not the time, thou shalt h•…ue cause to soy.
Iane in the eueniug I will send for thee,
And thou and thine shall bee advanced by me.
In sign whereof receive this true-loue kiss,
Nothing il meant, there can be no amiss.
Well I will in, and ere the time begin,
Learn how to be repentant for my sin.
But Cousin Shore, are ye assured it was the King you saw in such disguise?
Do I know you the uncle to my wife? know I Frank Emersley her brother here? so surely doe I know that coun∣terseit to bee King.
Well, admit all this. And that his Majesty in such dis∣guise, please to survey the manner of our City, or what occasion else may like himself. Me thinks you have small reason bro∣there Shore, to be displeased thereat.
Oh I have sound him now.
Because my Niece his wife is beautiful,
And well reputed for her virtuous parts:
He in his fond conceit misdoubts the King,
Doth dote on her in his affection.
I know not Cousin how she way be changed,
By any cause in you procuring it,
From the fair carriage of her wonted course:
But well I wot, I have oft heard you say,
She merited no scruple of mislike.
If now some giddy fancy in your brain,
Make you conceive sinisterly of her,
And with a person of such difference.
I tell you Cousin, more for her respect,
Then to sooth you in such sottishness,
I would reucale yée open to the world,
And let your folly justly plague your self.
Uncle you are too forward in your rage,
And much mistake me in this suddenness,
Your Nieces reputation have I prized,
And shrined as devoutly in my soul
As you, or any that it can concern.
Nor when I tell you that it is the King,
Comes muffled like a common Serving-man,
Doe I infer thereby my wife is false?
Or swerues one jot from wonted modesty.
Though in my shop shée sit, more to respect,
Her servants duty, then for any skill,
She doth, or can pretend in what we trade,
Is it not strange, that ever when he comes,
It is to her, and will not deal with me?
Ah Uncle Frank, nay, would all her kin,
Were here to censure of my cause aright:
Though I misoéeme not her, yet give me leave,
To doubt what his sly walking may entend.
And let me tell yée, hee that is possessed,
Of such a beauty, fears undermining guests:
Especially a mighty one, like him,
Whose greatness may guilde over ugly sin.
But say his coming is not to my wife,
Then hath he some sly aiming at my life,
By false compounded metals, or light gold,
Or else some other trifle to be sold.
When kings themselves so narrowly do pry
Into the world, men fear, and why not I?
Beléeue my brother in this doubtful case
I know not well how I should answer ye,
I wonder in this serious busy time,
Of this great gathered benevolence,
For his regaining of his right in France,
The day and nightly turmoil of his Lords,
Yea of the whole estate in general,
He can be spared from these great affairs,
And wander here disguised in this sort.
But is not this your boy?
Yes marie is it: how now, what news with thée?
Moister, my mistress by a Nobleman,
Is sent for to the King in a close Coach,
Shées gon with him, these are the news I bring.
How? my 〈◊〉 sent for to the King?
By a Nobleman, and she is gone with him?
Nay, then I like it not?
How, gone say thou?
Be patient Uncle, storm not gentle Frank:
The wrong is 〈◊〉, by whom? a king,
To talk of such it is no common thing.
She is gone thou say?
Yes truly sir, tic so.
I cannot help it, a Gods name let her go,
You cannot help it Uncle, no, nor you,
Where kings are meddlers, meaner men must rue.
I storm against it? no, farewell lane Shore.
Once thou wast mine, but must be so no more.
Gone to the Court?
Yet uncle will ye rage?
Let mine example your high heat assuage.
To note offences in a mighty man,
It is enough, amend it he that can,
Frank Emersley, my wife thy sister was,
Lands, goods and all I have, to thée I pass,
Save that poor portion must along with me,
To bear me from this badge of obloquy,
It never shall be said that Matthew Shore,
A Kings dishonour in his bonnet wore.
Good brother.
Strive not to change me, for I am resolved,
And will not tarry. England fare thou well,
And Edward, for requiting me so well,
But dare I speak of him? forbear, forbear,
Come Frank I will surrender all to thee,
And then abroad, where ere my fortune be
And have our country subjects béene so frank
And bountiful in their benevolence,
Toward our present expedition?
Thanks Cousin Howard for thy pains herein:
We will ha•…e letters sent to every Shire
Of thankful gratitude, that they may know,
How highly we respect their gentleness.
One thing my L. I had well néere forgot,
Your pleasant host the Tanner of Tamworth.
What of him Cousin?
Hee was right liberal,
I went old Angels did he send your Grace,
And others séeing him so bountiful,
Stretched further then otherwise they had done.
Trust me I must requite that honest Tanner.
Oh had he kept his word, and come to Court,
Then in good sadness we had had good sport.
That is not long my L. which comes at last
Hes come to London, on an earnest cause,
His son lies prisoner in Safford Jail,
And is condemned for a robbery.
Your Highness pardoning his sons •…ffence,
May yéeld the Tanner no mean recompense.
But who hath séen him since he came to rowne?
My Lord in Holborn it was my hap to sée him
Gazing about, I sent away my men,
And clapping on one of their livery cloak•…,
Came to him, and the Tanner knew we strait,
How dost thou Tom? and how doth Ned quoth he
That honest merry hangman, how doth he?
I knowing that your Majesty intended
This day in person to come to the Tower,
There bad him méete me, where Ned and I,
Would bring him to the presence of the King,
And there procure a pardon for his son.
Have then a care we be not séene of him,
Until we bée provided for the purpose,
Because once more wéele have a little sport,
Tom Sellinger, let that care be yours.
I warrant yée my Lord let me alone.
Welcome L. Mayor, what have you signified
Our thankfulness unto our Citizens,
For their •…ate gathered benevolence?
Before the Citizens in our Guildhall,
Moister Recorder made a good Oration,
Of thankful gentitude unto them all,
Which they received with so kind respect,
And love unto your royal majesty,
As it appeared to vs they sorrowed,
Their bounty to your highness was no more,
Lord Mayor, thanks to your self and them,
And go ye with vs now into the Tower,
To sée the order that we shall observe,
In this so needful preparation,
The better may you signify to them,
What need there was of their benevolence.
Isle waite upon your gracious majesty,
Yet there is one thing that much grieves me. aside.
Go honest fellow, bear my trunks aboard,
And tell the moister isle come presently.
We will sir, but what Lady have we here?
Belike she is of no mean countenance,
That hath so many suitors waiting on her.
Go one of you I pray ye, enquire her name,
My honest friend, what Lady call ye this?
Her name is mistress Shore, the kings belove•…d,
A special friend to suitors at the court.
Her name is mistress Shore the kings beloved,
Where shall I hide my head, or stop mine ears.
But like an owl I shall be wondered at?
When she with me was wont to walk the stréets,
The people then as she did pass along,
would say, there goes fair modest mistress Shore,
When she attended like a City Dame,
Was praised of matrons. So that Citizens,
When they would speak of ought unto their wives
Fetched their example still from mistress Shore,
But now she goes decked in her courtly robes,
This is not shée, that once in séemely black,
Was the chaste sober wife of Matthew Shore,
For now she is King Edwards Concubine,
Oh great ill title, honourable shame,
Her good I had, but King her ill is thine,
Once Shores true wife, now Edwards Concubine,
Amongst the rest isle note her new behaviour.
Good mistress Shore remember my sons life.
What is thy name?
My name is Thomas Air.
There is his pardon signed by the King.
In sign of humble hearty thankfulness,
Take this in Angels twenty pound.
What think ye, that I buy &amp; sell for bribes,
His highness favour, or his subjects blood?
No, without gifts God grant I may do good,
For all my good cannot redéeme my ill,
Yet to do good I willendeauour still.
Yet all this good doth but guild ore thy ill.
Mistress the restitution of my lands,
Taken perforce by his highness officers.
The King is content your goods shall be restored,
But the officers will hardly yéeld thereto,
Yet bée content, isle see ye have no wrong.
Thou can not say to mée so, I have wrong.
Mistress good faith gin yeele help me till my land, whelk the faulse lone Billie Grime of Glendale hauds wren∣fully frea me: ise white your gudenes with a bonnie uag, sall swum away so deftly as the wind.
Your suit my friend, requires a longer time,
Yet since you dwell so far off, to ease your charge,
Your diet with my ser•…ants you may take,
And some relief isle get thee of the King.
Its cold relief thou get mée from the King.
Now Gods blessing light on that gudely fair face, ise be your true beadsman mistress, I indead, sal I.
God bless the care you have of doing good.
Pity she should miscarry in her life,
That bears so swéete a mind in doing good.
So say I too, ah Iane this kills my heart,
That thou recks others, and not ru'st my smart.
Mistress I fear you have forgot my suit?
Oh, tic for a licence to transport corn from this land. and lead to foreign Realms, I had your bil, but I have torn your bill, and it were no shame I think, to tear your ears, that care not how you wound the commonwealth. The poor must starve for food to fill your purse. And the enemy bandy bullets of our lead. No moister Rufford, isle not speak for you, except it be to have you punished.
By the mess a dest lass, Christ benison light on her.
Is that another suitor? I have no bill of his,
Go one of you, and know what he would have.
Yes Iane, the bill of my •…bliged faith,
And I had thine, but thou hast concealed•….
Oh God it is my husband, kind Matthew Shore.
Ah Iane, whats he dare say he is thy husband?
Thou wast a wife, but now thou art not so,
Thou wast a maid, a maid when thou wast wife,
Thou wast a wife even when thou wast a maid,
So good, so modest, and so chaste thou wast,
But now thou art diuorcde, whiles yet hee lives,
That was thy husband, while thou wast his wife.
Thy wisehood stained, by thy dishonoured life,
For now thou art nor widow, maid, nor wife.
I must confess I yielded up the Forte,
Wherein lay all the riches of my •…y,
But yet sweet Shore, before I yielded it,
〈◊〉 did endure the longst and greatest siege,
That ever battered on poor chastity,
And but to him that did a•…ault the same,
For ever it had béene invincible,
But I will yéeld it back again to thee.
He cannot blame me, though it be so done,
To loose by me, what first by me was won.
No Iane, there is no place allowde for m•…e,
Where once a King hath tan possession,
Mean men brooke not a Rival in their love,
Much less so high vnriualde Majesty,
•…oncubine to one so great as Edward.
Is tar too great to be the wife of Shore,
I will refuse the pleasures •…f the Court,
Let me go with thee Shore, though not as a wife,
Yet as thy slave, since I have lost that name,
I will redéeme the wrong that I have done thee,
With my true service, if thou wilt accept it.
Thou go with me Iane, oh God forbid,
That I should be a traitor to my King,
Shall I become a felon to his pleasures,
And fly away as guilty of the theft?
No my dear Iane, I say it may not bee,
Oh what have subjects that is not their kings,
He not examine his prerogative.
Why then swéet Mat. let me entreat thée stay,
What first with Edward that I cannot do?
Isle make thee wealthier then ere Richard was,
That entertained the thrée greatst kings in Europe,
And feasted them in London on a day
Ask what thou wilt, were it a million,
That may content thée, thou shalt have it Shore.
Indeed this were some comfort to a man,
That tasted want or worldly misery,
But I have lost what wealth cannot return,
All worldly losses are but toys to mine,
Oh, all my wealth, the loss of thee was more,
Then ever time or Fortune can restore.
Therefore swéet Iane farewell, once thou wast mine,
Too rich for me, and that King Edward knew,
Adieu, oh world, he shall deceived bee,
That puts his trust in women or in thee.
Ah Shore farewell, poor heart in death isle tell,
I ever loud thée Shore, farewell, farewell.
Having awaked forth of their sléepis dens,
Our drourie Cannons, which ere long shall charm
The watchful French, with deaths eternal sléepe,
And all things else in readiness for France,
A while we will give truce unto our care,
There is a merry Tanner néere at hand,
With whom we mean to be a little merry.
Therefore Lord Mayor, and you my other friends,
I must entreat you not, to knowledge me,
No man stand bare, all as companions,
Give me a Cloak, that I may be disguised•…,
Tom Sellinger, go thou and take another,
So Tanner, now come when ye please, we are provided,
And in good time, see hee is come already.
Tom Sellenger, go thou and meet him.
What Iohn Hobs? welcome in faith to court,
Gramercies honest Tom, where is the hangman
Ned? where is that mad rascal, shall I not see him?
See where he stands, that same is hee.
What Ned? a plague found thee, how dost thou for a villain? how dost thou mad Kogue, and how, and how?
In health Iohn Hobs, and very glad to see thee,
But say, what wind drove thee to London.
Ah Ned, I was brought hither with a whirlwind man, my son, my son, did I not tell thee I had a knave to my son?
Yes Tanner, what of him?
Faith hes in Caperdoche Ned, in Stafford Goal, for a robbery, and is like to be hanged, except thou get the King to be more miserable to him.
If that be all Tanner, isle warrant him,
I will procure his pardon of the King.
Wilt thou Ned? for those good words, see what my Daughter Nil hath sent thee, a handkercher wrought with as good Coventry silk blew thread as ever thou saw.
And I perhaps may wear it for her sake,
In better presence then thou art aware off,
How Ned, a better present? that can thou not have for silk, cloth, and workmanship, why Nil made it man. But Ned? is not the King in this company, wshat hee in the long beard and the red petticoat? before God I misooubt Ned that is the King, I know it by my Lord what ye calls players.
How by them Tanner?
Ever when they play an Enterloute or a Commodity at Tamworth, the King always is in a long beard, and a red gown like him, therefore I spiked him to be the King
No trust me Tanner, this is not the King, but thou shalt see the King before thou goosed, and have a pardon for thy son too with thee.
This man is the Lord Mayor, Lord Mayor of London, héere was the Recorder too, but hee is gone.
What Nicnames these courtnoles have? Mare and Corder quoth? we have no such at Liechfield, there is the ho∣nest Bailiff and his brethren, such words grée best with vs.
My Lord Mayor, I pray ye for my sake, to bid this honest Tanner welcome.
You are welcome my honest friend,
In sign whereof I pray you see my house,
And sup with me this night.
I thank ye good goodman Masor, but I care not for no meat, my stomach is like to a sick swines, that will neither eat nor drink, till shée know what shall become of her pig. Ned and Tom, you promised me a good turn when I came to Court, either doo it now, or go hang your selves.
No sooner comes the King, but I will doo it.
I warrant thee Tanner, fear not thy sons life.
Nay, I fear not his life, I fear his death.
All health and happiness to my Sovereign.
The Moister of Saint Katherines hath mart all:
Out alas that ever I was borne.
Look to the Tanner there, he takes no harm,
I would not have him (for my crown) miscarry.
Let me come to him by my kings good leave,
Here is ginger honest man, bite it.
Bite ginger, bite ginger, bite a dogs date, I am but a dead man, ah my Liedge, that you should deal so with a poor well meaniug man, but it makes no matter, I can but die.
But when Tanner can thou tell?
Nay even when you please, for I have so defended ye, by calling ye plain Ned, mad rogue and rascal, that I know you'll have me hanged. Thereof•…re make no more a∣doe, but send me down to Stafford, and there a Gods name hang me with my son. And here is another as honest as your self, you made me call him plain Tom, I warrant his name is Thomas, and some man of worship too, therefore lets to it, even when and where ye will.
Tanner attend, not only doo we pardon thee,
But in all princely kindness welcome thee,
And thy sons trespass doe we pardon too,
Ore go and sée that forthwith it bee drawn,
Under our seal of England, as it ought,
And forty pounds wée give thée to defray
Thy charges in thy coming up to London.
Now Tanner, what say thou to vs?
Marry you speak like an honest man, if you mean as you say.
Wee mean it Tanner, on our royal word.
Now moister of S. Katherines, what would you?
My gracious Lord, the great benevolence,
(Though small to that your subjects could afford,
Of poor S. Katherines do I bring your grace,)
Five hundred pounds here have they sent by me.
For the easier portage, all in Angel gold,
What this good widow mistress Norton will,
She comes her self, and brings her gift with her.
Pardon me gracious Lord, presumption,
Nor over w•…ning in mine own conceit,
Makes me thus bold to come before your Grace,
But love and duty to your majesty:
And great desire to sée my Lord the King,
Our moister here spake of benevolence,
And said my twenty Nobles was enough,
I thought not so, but at your Highness féete,
A widows mite, a token of her zeal,
In humble duty gives you twenty pound.
Now by my crown, a gallant Just Girl,
Of all the exhibition yet bestowed,
This women's liberality likes me best.
Is thy name Norton?
I my gracious Liedge.
How long hast thou béene a Widow?
It is my Lord,
Since I did bury Welkin my goodman,
At Shrouetide next even just a dozen years.
In al which space, could thou not find a man.
On whom thou might bestow thy self again?
Not any like my Welkin whose dear love,
I know is matchless, in respect of whom,
I think not any worthy of a kiss.
No widow? that isle try, how like you this?
Beshrew my heart, it was a honey kiss,
Able to make an aged woman young:
And for the same most swéet and lovely Prince,
See what the widow gives you from her store,
Forty old Angels but for one kiss more.
Marie Widow and thou shalt have it,
Iohn Hobs thou art a widower,
Lackst thou such a wife?
Snails, twenty pound a kiss? had she as many
twenty pound bags as I have knobs of bark in my tansat she might kiss them away in a quarter of a year. •…e no Saint Katherines widows, if kisses be so dear.
Clubs and clouted shoes, theres none enamourd here.
Lord Mayor, we thank you and entreat withal,
To recommend vs to our Citizens:
We must for France, we bid you all farewell,
Come Tanner thou shalt with vs to Court,
To marrow you shall dine with my Lord Mayor,
And after ward set homeward when ye please:
God and our right that only fights for vs,
Adieu, pray that our toil prove prosperous.

Con∣taining his journey into France, for obtaining of his right there: The treacherous falsehood of the Duke of Burgundy, and the Constable of France used against him, and his return home again. Likewise the prosecution of the history of M. Shore and his fair wife: Conclu∣ding with the lamentable death of them both.
IS this the aide our Cousin Burgundy,
And the great Constable of France assured vs?
Have we marched thus fart through the heart of France?
And with the terror of our English Drums:
kourde the poor trembling French, which leave their towns
That now the Wolves affrighted from the fields,
Do get their pray, and kennel in their stréets?
Our thundering Canons, now this fortnight space,
Like common Bell-men in some market town,
Have cried the Constable and Burgundy:
But yet I see they come not to our aide,
Wéele bring them in, or by the blessed light,
Wéele search the Ground-stilles of their Cittis walls,
Since you have brought me hither: I will make,
The proudest Tower that stands in France to quake,
I marvel Scales returns not, for by him
I doe respect to hear their resolutions.
My Sovereign he is happily returned.
Welcome my Lord, welcome good Cousin Scales,
What news from Burgundy, what is his answer?
What comes he to our succour as he promised?
Not by his good will, for ought that I can see
He lingers still in his long fiedge at Nuse.
I urged his promise and your expectation,
Even to the force and compass of my spirit,
I chéerde my firm persuasions, with your hopes.
And gilded them with my best Oratory,
I framed my spéech still fitly as I •…and
The temper of his humour, to be wrought upon,
But still I found him earthly, vnresolude,
Muddy, and me thought ever through his eyes,
I saw his wavering and unsettled spirit,
And to be short, subtle and treacherous,
And one that doth entend no good to you,
And he will come, and yet he wants power,
He would fai•…e come, but may not leave the siege,
He hopes he shall, but yet he knows not when,
He purposed, but some unpediments,
Have hindered his determined intent,
Briefly, I think he will not come at all.
But is he like to take the town of Nuse?
My Lord the town is liker to take him,
That if he chance to come to you at all,
Ti•…s but for succour.
But what says Count Saint Paul?
My Lord he lies, and revels at S. Quintins,
And laughs at Edwards coming into France,
There Dominering with his drunken crew,
Make Jigges of vs, and in their slau•…ring i•…sts,
Tell how like rogues we lie here in the field,
Then comes a slave one of those drunken sots,
In with a Tavern reckoning for a supplication,
Disguised with a cushion on his head,
A Drawers Apron for a Heralds Coat.
And tells the Count, the King of England craves
One of his worthy honours Dog-kennels,
To be his lodging for a day or two.
With some such other Tavern foolery:
With that this filthy rascal greasy rout,
Burst out in laughter at this worthy jest,
Neighing like horses: thus the Count Saint Paul
Regards his promise to your majesty.
Will no man thrust the slave into a sackbut?
Now by this light were I but néere the slave with a black Jacke I would beat out his brains.
If it please your highness but to say the word,
Wéele pluck him out of Quintins by the cares.
No cousin Howard, wéele reserve our valour,
For better purpose, since they both refuse vs,
Our selves will be vnriualde in our honour.
Now our first cast my Lord is at maine France,
Whilst yet our Army is in health and strong,
And have we once but broke unto that war,
I will not leave S. Paul, nor Burgundy,
Not a bare Pigscoate to shroud them in.
Herald.
My Sovereign.
Go Derauld, 〈◊〉 to Lewes the French King,
Denounce sterne war, and tell him I am c•…me,
To take possession of my Realm of France.
Defy him boldly from vs, be thy voice
As fierce as thunder, to affright his soul:
Derauld be gone I say, and be thy breath,
Piercing as lightning, and thy words as death
I go my Liedge resolude to your hie will.
Sound Drum I say, set forward with our power,
And France ere long expect a dreadful hour,
I will not take the English standard down,
Till thou impale my temples with thy Crown.
Herald of England, we are pleased to hear,
What message thou hast brought vs from thy King,
Prepare thy self, and be advised in speech.
English Herald, Right gracious and most Christian king of France,
I come not to thy presence vnpreparde
To doe the message of my Royal Liedge.
Edward the Fourth, of England and of France,
The lawful King, and Lord of Ireland,
Whose puissant magnanimous breast incensed,
Through manifest notorious injuries,
Offred by thee King Lewes and thy French,
Against his title to the crown of France,
And right in all these Dukedoms following,
Aquitaine, Aniow, Guyen, A guilesme,
Breathes forth by me the Organ of his spéech,
Hostile defiance to thy realm and thee:
And trampling now upon the face of France,
With barbed horse, and valiant armed foot:
Himself the leader of those martial troupes,
Bids thée to battle, where and when thou dare,
Except thou make such restitution
And yearly tribute on good hostages,
As may content his just conceived wrath,
And to this message answer I expect.
Right peremptory is this embassage,
And were my royal Brother of England pleased,
To entertain those kind affections,
Where with we d•…e •…brace his amity:
N•…olesse were all these thunder-threatning words,
Let heaven (where all our thoughts are registered)
Bear record, with what déepe desire of peace,
We shall subscribe to such conditions,
As equity for England shall propound,
If Edward have sustained wrong in France,
Lewes was never author of that wrong,
Yet faultless we will make due recompense,
We are assured that his 〈◊〉 thoughts
In his mild spirit •…o never mean these wars,
Till Charles Burgundy once our fawning friend,
But now our open foe, and Count S. Paul,
Our subject once and Constable of France,
But now a traitor to our Realm and vs,
Were motives to incite him unto Arms,
Which having done will leave him on my life.
The King my master reckes not Burgundy,
And scorns S. Paul that treacherous Constable,
His puissance is sufficient in it self,
To conquer France like his progenitors.
He shall not néed to waste by force of war,
Where peace shall yéeld him more then he can win:
We covet peace, and we will purchase it
At any rate that reason can demand,
And it is better England join in league
With vs his strong, old, open enemy,
Than with those weak &amp; new dissenibling friends,
We doe secure vs from our open foes,
But trust in friends (though faithless) we repose,
My Lord S. Pier and cousin Burbon speak,
What censure you of Burgundy, and S. Paul?
Dread Lord, it is well known that Burgundy
Made show of tender service to your majesty,
Till by the engine of his flatteries,
He made a breach into your Highness love,
Where entered once and thereof full posse•…,
He so abused that royal excellence,
By getting footing into many towns,
Castles and forts belonging to your Crown,
That now he holds them against your realm &amp; you.
And Count S. Paul the Constable of France,
Ambitious in that high authority,
•…surps the lands and Seigneuries of those
That are true subjects, noble 〈◊〉 of France,
Your boundless favours did him first suborn,
And now to be your Liegeman he thinks scorn.
By this conjecture, the unsteady course,
Thy royal master undertakes in France,
And Herald intimate what servant •…eale,
We have to league with Edward and his English,
Thrée hundred crowns we give thée for reward,
And of rich Crimson velvet thirty yards,
In hope thou wilt unto thy Sovereign tell,
We show thée not one discontented look,
Nor render him one misbeholden word:
But his defiance and his dare to war,
We swallow with the s•…pple oil of peace:
Which gentle Herald if thou can procure,
A thousand crown shall justly guerdon thée.
So please it your most sacred Majesty,
To send unto my gre•…ious Sovereign,
Equal conditions for the bonds of peace,
And restitution of his injuries,
His temper is not of obdurate malice,
But swéete relenting princely clemency,
Perform your promise of a thousand crowns,
And second me with some fit messenger,
And I will undertake to work your peace.
By the true honour of a Christian King,
Effect our peace and thou shalt have our crowns,
And we will post a Herald after thee,
That shall confirm thy speech, and our designs:
Go Mugeroune, see to this Herald given
The velvet, and thrée hundred crowns pre•…ost,
Farewell good friend, remember our request,
And kindly recommend vs to King Edward.
How think you Lords, st•… not more requisite
To make our peace, then war with Englands power.
Yes gracious Lord, the wounds are bléeding yet,
That Talbot, Bedford, and King Henry made,
Which peace must cure, or France shall languish still.
Besides (my Liege) by these intestine foes,
The Constable and treacherous Burgundy,
The States in danger if the English stirré.
Tic perilous, and full of doubt my Lords,
We must have peace with England every way,
Who shall be Herald in these high affairs?
No better man then Monsieur Mugeroune,
Whose wit is sharpe, whose eloquence is sound,
His presence gracious, and his courage good,
A gentleman, a scholar, and a soldier,
A complete man for such an Embassage:
Art thou content to be employed Mugeroune,
In this negotiation to King Edward?
If your most sacred Majesty command,
Your humble vassal Mugeroune shall go.
Gramercies Mugeroune, but thou must assume,
A Heralds habit, and his office both,
To plead our love, and to procure vs peace
With English Edward, for the good of France.
I know the matter and the form my Lord,
Give me my Heralds coat, and I am gone.
Thou art a man composoe for business,
Attend on vs for thy instructions.
And other fit supplies for these affairs,
And for thy diligence expect reward.
Whither away so fast goes Burgundy?
Nay rather whither goes the Constable?
Why to King Edward (man) is he not come?
Meanst thou not like wise to go visit him?
Oh excellent, I know that in thy soul,
Thou know that I doe purpose nothing less,
Nay I doe know for all thy outward show,
Thou hast no meaning once to look on him.
Brother dissembler, leave this colouring,
With him that means as falsely as thy self.
I, but thou know y• Edward on our letters,
And hoping our assistance when he came,
Did make this purposde voyage into France,
And with his forces is he here arrived,
Trusting that we will kéepe our word with him.
Now, though we mean it not, yet set a face
Upon the matter, as though we intended
To kéepe our word with him effectnally.
And for my better countenance in this case,
My lingering siege at Nuse will serve the turn,
There will I spend the time to disappoint,
King Edwards hope of my consoyning with him.
And I will kéepe me still here in S. Quintins,
Pretending mighty matters for his aide,
But not performing any on my word,
The rather Burgundy, because I aim,
At matters which perhaps may cost your head,
If all hit right to expectation,
In the mean space like a good crafty knave,
That hugs the man, he wishes hanged in hart,
Kéepe I fair weather still with Burgundy.
Till matters fall out for my purpose fit.
Ici sont mon secrets, beau temps pour moi.
Ici sont mon secrets, beau temps pour moi.
Are ye so crafty Constable? procéede, procéede,
You quick sharpe sighted man, imagine me
Blind, witless, and a filly Idiot,
That pries not into all your policies,
Who I? no, God doth know my simple wit,
Can never sound a judgment of such reach,
As is our cunning Constable of France:
Persuade thy self so still, and when time serves,
And that thou art in most extremity,
Néeding my help, then take thou héede of me,
In mean while Sir, you are the only man
That hath my heart, hath? I, and great reason too,
Thus it befits men of déepe reach to doo.
Well Constable, you'll back again to Nuse,
And not aide English Edward?
What else man?
And kéepe thée in S. Quintins, so shall we
Smile at King Edwards weak capacity.
Tell not me Burgundy, tic I am wronged,
And you have dealt like a disloyal Knight.
Edward of England, these are unkingly words,
He that will do (my Lord) what he should not,
Must and shall hear of me what he would not,
I say again you have deluded me.
Am I not come according to my word?
No Charles of Burgundy, thy word was given
To méete with me in April, now tic August,
The place appointed Calice, not Lorraine,
And thy approach to be with martial troupes:
But thou art come, not having in thy train,
So much as Page or Lackey to attend thee,
As who should say thy presence were munition,
And strength enough to answer our expect:
Summer is almost spent, yet nothing done,
And all by dalliance with uncertain hope.
My forces lay before the city Nuse,
From which I could not rise, but with dishonour,
Unless upon some composition had.
There was no such exception in your letters.
Why smiles Lord Scales?
My man reports my Lord,
The composition that the Duke there made,
Was méere compulsion: for the citizens
Drove him from thence perforce.
I thought so much:
We should not yet have seen your excellence,
But that your héeles were better then your hands.
Lord Scales, thou dost me wrong to slander me.
Letting that pass, it shall be seen my Lord,
That we are able of our self to claim
Our right in France, without or your assistance,
Or any others, but the help of heaven.
I make no question of it, yet the Constable
Pressed with no such occasion as I was,
Might have excusde vs both if he had pleased.
Accuse him not, your cities as we came,
Were even as much to be condemned as his,
They gave vs leave to lye within the field,
And scarcely would afford vs meat for money.
This was small friendship in respect of that,
You had ingagde your honour to perform.
But march we forward as we were determined,
This is S. Quintins, where you say my Lord,
The Constable is ready to receive vs.
So much he signified to me by letter.
Well we shall see his entertainment: forward.
Fly to our maine battle, bid them stand,
Theres treason plotted: speak to me Lord Scales,
Or if there be no power of life remaining,
To utter thy hearts gr•…euance, make a sign,
Two of our common soldiers slain beside,
This is hard welcome: but it was not you,
At whom the total enginer did aim,
My breast the level was, though you the mark,
In which conspiracy answer me Duke,
Is not thy soul as guilty as the Earls?
Perish my soul, King Edward, if I knew
Of any such intention: yet I did, and grieve that it
hath sped no otherwise.
Howard and Sellinger?
What is there hope of life in none of them?
The soldiers are both slain outright my Lord,
But the Lord Scales a little is recovered.
Convey his body to our Pavilion,
And let our Surgeons use all diligence
They can devise for safeguard of his life,
Whilst we with all extremity of war,
Go plague S. Quintins: Howard fetch on our powers,
We will not stir a foot, till we have she wne
Just vengeance on the Constable of France.
Oh God, to woo vs first to pass the sea,
And at our coming thus to halt with vs,
I think the like thereof was never seen.
But wheres the Duke?
Gone as it seems my Lord,
Stepped secretly away, as one that knew
His conscience would accuse him if he staide.
A pair of most dissembling hypocrites,
Is he and this base Earl, on whom I vow,
Leaving King Lewis vnpreiudizde in peace,
To spend the whole measure of my kindled rage,
Their stréetes shall sweat with their effused blood,
And this bright Sun be darkened with the smoke,
Of smouldring cinders, when their city lies
Buried in ashes of revengeful fire,
On whose pale superstcies in the stead
Of parchmēt, with my lance Isle draw these lines,
Edward of England left this memory,
In just revenge of hateful treachery.
Lord Howard have ye done as I commanded?
Our battles are disposed, and on the brow
Of every inferior servitor my Lord,
You might behold destruction figured,
Greedily thrusting to begin the fight:
But when no longer they might be restrained,
And that the drum and trumpet both began
To sound wars chéerefull harmony: behold,
A flag of truce upon the walls was hanged,
And forth the gates did issue méekly paced,
Thrée men, whereof the Constable is one,
The other two the Gunner and his mate,
By whose gross ouer-sight (as they report)
This sudden chance unwittingly befell.
Bring forth the Constable: the other two,
Sée them safe guarded, till you know our pleasure.
Now my Lord Howard, how 〈◊〉 with Scales?
Well my dread Sovereign, now his wound is dressed,
And by the opinion of the Surgeons,
Its thought he shall not perish by this hurt.
I am the gladder, but unfaithful Earl,
I doe not see how yet I can dispense
With thy submission, this was not the welcome,
Your letters sent to England, promised me.
Right high and mighty Prince cond•…mne me not,
That am as innocent in this offence,
As any soldier in the English army,
The fault was in our gunners ignorance,
Who taking you for Lewis King of France,
That likewise is within the cities ken,
Made that unlucky shot to beat him back,
And not of malice to your majesty,
To knowledge which, I brought thē with my self,
And thirty thousand crowns within this purse,
Sent by the Burgers to redéeme your lack.
Constable of France, we will not sell a drop
Of English blood, for all the gold in France:
But in so much two of our men are slain,
To quit their deaths, those two that came with thée
Shall both be cramde into a Cannons mouth,
And so he shot into the town again:
It is not like but that they knew our Colours,
And of set purpose did this villainy:
Nor can I be persuaded thoroughly,
But that our person was the mark they aimed at;
Yet are we well content to hold you excusde,
Mary our soldiers must be satisfied,
And therefore first shall be distributed,
These crowns amongst thē, then you shall return,
And of your best provision send to vs,
Thirty wane load, beside twelve t•…no of wine.
This if the Burgers will subscribe unto,
Their peace is made, otherwise I will proclaim,
Frée liberty for all to take the spoil.
Your highness shall be answered presently,
And I will see these articles performed.
Yet one thing more, I will that you my Lord,
Together with the Duke of Burgundy,
Doe ere to morrow noon bring all your force,
And toyne with ours, or else we doe recant,
And these conditions shall be frustrate.
Mine are at hand my Lord, and I will write,
The Duke may like wise be in readiness.
Let him have safe conduct through our army,
And against the morning every leader see,
His troupes be furnished, for no longer time,
God willing shall the trial be deferred,
Twixt Lewis and vs. What echoing sound is this?
A gentleman from the K. of France my Lord,
Craves parlance with your excellence.
A gentleman, bring him in.
What news a Gods name frō our brother Lewis?
Most puissant and most honourable King,
My royal master, Lewis the King of France,
Doth gréete your Highness with unfeigned love,
Wishing your health, prosperity, and rule,
And thus he says by me. When was it séene,
That ever Lewis pretended hurt to England,
Either by close conspirators sent over,
To undermine your state; or openly,
By taking arms, with purpose to invade?
Nay when was it, that Lewis was ever heard,
So much as to detract from Edwards name?
But still hath done him all his due of spéech,
By blazing to the world his high deserts,
Of wisdom, valour, and his heroic birth:
Whence is it then that Edward is incensoe,
To render hate for love, for amity sterne war?
Not of himself we know: but by the means
Of some infectious counsel, that like mud,
Would spoil the pure temper of his noble mind,
It is the Duke, and that pernicious rebel,
Earl of S. Paul, have set abroach these wars,
Who of themselves, unable to procéede,
Would make your Grace the instrument of wrong,
And when you have done what you can for them,
You shall be sure of nothing but of this,
Still to be doubled and dissembled with.
But if it might séeme gracious in your eye,
To cast off these despised consederates,
Unfit companions for so great a Prince,
And join in league with Lewis my royal master,
Him shall you find as willing as of power,
To doe your Grace all offices of love:
And what commodity may spring thereby,
To both the Realms, your Grace is wise enough,
Without my rude suggestions to imagine,
Besides, much bloodshed for this present time,
Will be prevented when two such personages,
Shall méete together to shake hands in peace,
And not with shock of Lance and Curtelaxe,
That Lewis is willing, I am his substitute,
And he himself in person if you please,
Not far from hence will signify as much.
Sir, withdra•… and give vs leave a while,
To take advisement of our Counsellors,
What say ye Lords unto this proffered truce?
In my conceit let it not be slipped my Lord.
Wilt not be dishonour having landed
So great an army in these parts of France,
And not to fight before we doe return:
How can it when the enemy submits,
And of himself makes tender of allegiance?
I thats the question whether he will yéeld,
And doe King Edward fealty or no.
What talk ye Lords? he shall subscribe to that,
Or no conditions Isle accept at all.
Let him be bound my Lord to pay your Grace,
Toward your expenses, since your coming over,
Seventy fine thousand crowns of the Sun,
And yéerely after fifty thousand more,
During your life, with homage there withal,
That he doth hold his royalty from you,
And take his offer, twill not beamisse.
It shall be so, draw you the articles,
And Sellinger call forth the messenger,
Bring with thée too a cup of massy gold,
And bid the bearer of our privy purse,
J•…lose therein a hundred English Kyals,
Friend we doe accept thy masters League,
With no less firm affection then he craves,
If he will méete vs here betwixt our tents,
It shall on both sides be confirmed by oath,
On this condition that he will subscribe,
To certain Articles shall be proposde,
And so thou hast thy answer, to requite
Thy pains herein, we give to thée this cup.
Health and •…crease of honour waite on Edward.
Lord Howard bring the Frenchman on his way.
King Lewis is one that never was precise:
But now Lord Howard and Tom Sellinger,
There is a task remains for you to doe,
And that is this, you two shall be disguised,
And one of you •…ire to Burgundy,
The other to the Constable of France,
Where you shall learn in secret if you can,
If they intend to méete vs here to morrow,
Or how they take this our accord with France,
Somewhat it gives me you will bring from thence
Worthy the noting, will you undertake it?
With all my hart my L. I am for Burgun•…e.
And I am for the Constable of France.
Make spéede again, what news?
The king of France my L. attended royally,
Is marching hitherward to méete your Grace.
He shall be welcome, hast thou drawn the articles?
Yes my dread Sovereign.
Go, call forth our train,
We may receive him with like majesty.
My princely brother, we are grieved much,
To think you have béen at so great a charge,
And toyld your royal self so far from home,
Upon the inconstant promise of those men,
That both bissemble with your Grace and me.
Brother of France, you might condenme vs rightly,
Not only of great wrong and toil sustained,
But of excéeding solly, if incited,
We had presumde to enter these Dominions,
Upon no other reason then the word,
And weak assistance of the Earl S. Paul,
Or Burgundies persuasion: tic our right,
That wings the body of composed war,
And though we listened to their •…atteries,
Yet so we shaped the course of our affairs,
As of our self we might be able found,
Without the trusting to a broken staff.
I know your majesty had more discretion,
But this is not the occasion of our méeting,
If you be pleased to entertain a peace,
My kingly brother in the sight of these,
And of the al-discouering eye of beauen,
Let vs embrace, for as my life I swear,
I tender England and your happiness.
The like do I by you and warlike France:
But princely brother ere this knot be knit,
There are some few conditions to be signed,
That done, I am as ready as your self.
Fair brother, let vs hear them what they be.
Herald repeat the articles.
First it is covenanted that Lewis King of France, ac∣cording to the custom of his predecessors, shall doe homage to King Edward, King of England, as his Sovereign and true heir to all the Dominions of France.
How as his Sovereign? that were to depose
And quite bereave him of his Diadem,
Will kingly Lewis stoop to such vassalage?
Burbon and if he will not let him choose.
Brother have patience, Burbon seal your lips,
And interrupt not these high consequents.
Forward Herald, what is else demanded?
Secondly it is covenanted that Lewis King of France, shall pay unto Edward King of England, immediately upon the agréement betwixt their Majesties, seventy five thou∣sand crowns of the sun, toward the charge King Edward hath béen at since his arrival in these parts of France.
Mort dieu, héele neither leave him Crown nor coin.
Burbon I say be silent, Herald read on.
Thirdly and lastly, it is covenanted, that over and be∣side those seventy five thousand crowns of the sun, now presently to be paid, Lewis King of France shall yéerely here∣after, during the life of Edward King of England, pay fifty thousand crowns more without fraud or guile, to bee ten∣dred at his Majesties Castle, commonly called the Tower of London.
Nay bind him that he bring his Lordship a couple of
Capons too every yéere beside.
Here is a peace indéed far worse then war.
Brother of France are you resolude to doe,
According as you hear the covenants drawn?
Brother of England, mount your royal throne,
For subjects weal, and glory of my God,
And to deal justly with the world beside,
Knowing your title to be lineal,
From the great Edward of that name the third,
Your predecessor, thus I doe resign,
Giving my Crown and Sceptre to your hand,
As an obedient Liegeman to your Grace.
The same doe I deliver back again,
With as large interest as you had before.
Now for the other covenants.
Those my Lord,
Shall likewise be performed with expedition,
And ever after, as you have prescribde,
The yéerely pension shall be truly paid.
Swear on this book King Lewis so help you God,
You mean no otherwise then you have said.
So help me God as I dissemble not.
And so help he me as I entend to kéepe,
Unfeigned league and truce with noble France:
And kingly brother now to consummate,
This happy day feast in our royal tent,
English and French are one, so it is meant.
A peace concluded, says thou? first not so?
My Lord I doe assure you it is so.
And thou affirmst the like? say, dost thou not?
I doe my Lord, and that for certainty.
I have found it now, the villain Constable
Hath secretly with Edward thus compact,
To join our King and him in amity,
And thereby doubtless got into his hands,
Such lands and Dukedoms as I aimed at,
And leaves me disappointed in my hope,
A plague upon such crastie cozening,
Now shall I be a mark for them to aim at,
And that bile •…an to triumph in my toil.
〈◊〉 so, for it can be no otherwise,
Burgundy hath béen privy to this plot,
Conspiros with Lewis and the English King,
To save 〈◊〉 •…no stake, and assure himself,
Of all those Seigneuries I hoped for,
And thereupon this close peace is contriude,
Now must the Constable be as a butte,
〈◊〉 all their bullets to be leveled at,
Hell and hot vengeance light on Burgundle,
For this his subtle secret villainy.
Well fellow for thy pains take that,
Leave me alone, for I am much displeasoe.
And get thée gone my friend, theres for thy pains, to Howard.
So leave me to my self.
Fare ye well Sir, I hope I have pepperd ye.
And so I think have I my Constable.
Now Constable, this peace, this peace,
What think ye of it man?
Nay rather what thinks Burgundy?
I think he that did contrive the same,
Was little less then a dissembling villain.
Dog bite thy self, come on, come on,
Have not you plaid Iohn for the King,
To save your self Sir?
I, art thou good at that?
Adieu Sir, I may chance to hit you pat.
You may Sir, I perhaps may be before ye,
And for this cunning through the nose to bore ye.
So Sellinger, we then perceive by thée
The Duke is passing angry at our league?
I, my dread Lord beyond comparison,
Like a mad dog snatching at every one
That passes by: shall I but show you how,
And act the manner of his tragic fury?
No stay a while, me thought I heard thée say,
They meant to gréet vs by their messengers.
They did my Lord.
What and the Constable too?
My Sovereign yes.
But how t•…ke he the news?
Faith even as discontented as might be,
But being a more déepe melancholiste,
And sullener of temper then the Duke,
He chawes his malice, fumes &amp; froths at mouth,
Uttering but little more then what we gather
By his disturbed looks and rivaled front,
Saving that now and then his boiling passion,
Damned up as in a surnace, finding vent
Breaks through his severed lips into short pusses,
And then he mumbles forth a word or two,
As doth a toothless Monk when hées at matins.
Oh it was sport alone to note their carriage,
Sport my Lord? will you but hear me speak,
And if I do not weary you with laughter,
Ne'er trust Tom Sellinger more upon his word.
I pray thée peace, by this it should appear
One of their messengers is come, go see,
Upon my life we shall have some devise,
Of new dissimulation how now Tom?
Tic as your highness did suppose my Lord,
•…ere is a messenger from Burgundy.
Excellent good, admit him presently,
And brother of France, let me entreat your grace
To stand aside a little in my tent,
Least finding vs together, he refrain,
To tell the message he is sent about,
So sure I am persuaded we shall find
Some notable péece of knavery set a foot.
With al my hart, urge him speak loud enough,
That I my Lord may understand him too.
Fear not, I have the method in my mind:
What it is you my Lord of Conte•… welcome.
How doth the valiant Duke, in health I hope?
In health (my Lord) of body, though in mind
Somewhat distempered, that your Grace hath joint
In league with his professed enemy.
How say you y• my Lord? pray you speak out,
For I of late, by reason of a cold,
Am somewhat thick of hearing.
Thus my Lord,
Your Grace demanded if the Duke were well,
I answer you, he is in health of body,
Though inwardly in mind somewhat perplexed,
That you without his knowledge have tan truce
With childish Lewes that hartlesse King of France.
With whom I pray y•… a little louder sir.
With childish Lewes that hartlesse K. of France.
I now do understand you, is it that
He takes unkindly? why if he had come
With his expected forces as he promised,
I had béene still incapable of peace,
But he deceiving me, the fault was his.
No my good Lord, the fault was not in him,
But in that lewd pernicious counterfeit,
That crafty Fore the Constable of France,
Who counseld him to kéepe him at his siege,
Saying it would be more dishonourable
To rise from thence, then any way profitable,
To méete your Majesty, beside my Lord,
It hath bin proved since, how much the Constable
Hates your procéedings, by that wilful shot,
Was made against you from S. Quintins walls,
Which though he séemde to colour with fair spéech,
The truth is, they did level at your self,
And grieved when they heard you were not slain.
May I be bold to credit your report?
The Duke upon his honour bad me say,
That it was true, and there withal quoth he,
Tell noble Edward if he will recant,
And fall from Lewes again, knowing it is
More for his dignity to be sole King,
And conquer France as did his ancestors,
Then take a fée, and so be satisfied,
That I am ready with twelve thousand soldiers
All well appointed, and not only will,
Deliver him the Constable of France,
That he may punish him as he sées good,
But seat him in the threne imperial,
Which now another basely doth usurp,
Speak that again, I heard not your last words
But seat you in the throne imperial,
Which now another basely doth usurp.
I thank his honour for his good regard,
Pleases you stay till wee have paste upon it,
And you shall have our answer to the Duke,
Tom Sellinger receive him to your tent,
And let him taste a cup of Drleance wine,
Now my kingly brother, have you heard this news?
So plainly my Lord, that I scarce held my self,
From stepping forth, hearing my royal name,
So much prophande and slubberd as it was,
But I do weigh the person like himself
From whence it came, a sly dissembler,
And spite my anger I was forced sometime,
To smile to think the Duke doth hang his friend,
Behind his back, whom to his face he smothes.
But we shall have far better sport anon:
Howard tells me that another messenger,
is come in Post-bast from the Constable,
As you have begun with patience hear the re•….
No more ado, isle to my place again,
Remember that you still be deaf my Lord,
I warrant you, Howard, call in the messenger.
Health to the victorious King of England:
Tell him he must strain out his voice aloud,
For I am somewhat deaf, and cannot hear.
His Majesty requests you to speak out,
Because his hearing is of late decayde.
The worthy Earl S. Paul.
Come néere mée.
The worthy Earl S. Paul gréets noble Edwa.
And gives your grace to understand by me,
That whereas Charles that painted sepulchre,
And most disloyal Duke of Burgundy,
Hath but usurped the habit of a friend,
Being in heart your deadly enemy,
As well appears in his false breach of promise,
And that whereas he never meant himself,
To send you aide, but likewise was the means,
To binder my Lords well affected duty,
Alleging you desired his company
But that you might betray him to his King,
Beside whereas it will be proud my Lord,
That he did hire the Gunner of S. Quintins,
For a large sum of money, to discharge
Thrée several péeces of great Ordinance,
Upon your coming to that cursed town,
To slay your Majesty: in which regard
If it will please you to revoke from France.
And think of Burgundy as hee deserves,
The Duke with expedition bad me say,
That he would put the Earl into your hands.
Whereby you might revenge his treacherous purpose
And aid you too with twice flue thousand men,
And seat you like a conqueror in France,
Can it séeme possible that two such friends,
So firmly knit together as they were,
Should on a sudden now be such great soes•…
The Earl my Lord could never abide ye Duke
Since his last treason against your sacred person,
Before Saint Quintins came to open light.
Was that the cause of their dissention the•…
It was my lord.
Well I will think vpont,
And you shall have our answer by and by,
Cousin Howard take him aside,
But let him be kept from the others sight.
Sir will you walk in, my Lord will take advise,
And so dispatch you back again unto the Earl,
Here is bying of billanie who shall have all,
Fraud with deceit, deceit with fraud outfacde,
I would the devil were there to cry swoope-stake,
But how intends your Grace to deal with them?
Faith in their kind, I am the stéele you sée,
Against the which their envy being struck,
The Sparkles of hypocriste fly forth,
T were not amiss to quench them in their blood.
My Lord here is letters to your Majesty, One from the Duke of Burgundy, the other from the Constable,
More villainy, a thousand crowns to nothing:
Can there be more then is already broached,
We thinks they have already done so well,
As this may scrue to bring them both to hell.
No, no, they are indifferently well laden,
But yet their fraught, not full, sée other ware,
Other provision to prepare their way,
The very same (my Lord) which they pretend,
In love to you against my life and crown,
The same they undertake to doe for me
Against your safety, urging if I please,
That they will join their forces both with mine,
And in your back return to Calice, cut the throats
Of you and all your soldiers.
Oh damnable.
But that I see it figurde in these lines,
I would have sworn there had bin nothing left,
For their pernicious brain to work upon.
A traitor is like, a boldfacde hypocrite,
That never will be brought unto a nonplus,
So long as hee hath liberty to speak.
The way to cure them, is to cut them off,
Call forth their messengers once more to vs,
Both of them my Lord?
Yes, both together.
Wéele sée if they have grace to blush or no,
At that their masters shame now to attempt.
What is his Majesty of France so near?
And Monsieur Rosse the Earls secretary?
I fear some hurt depends upon his presence,
How comes it that I sée the french King here?
I and the Lord of County too me thinks,
Pray God our message be not made a scorn.
You told me that you came from earl S. Paul.
I did my Lord, and therein fabled not.
You told me too of many kind indeyour•…
Which hee intended for our benefit?
No more then hee is willing to perform.
Know you his hand-writing if you séete?
I doe my Lord.
Is this his hand or no•…:
I cannot say but that it is his hand.
How comes it then that underneath his hand
My death is sought, when you that are his mouth,
Tune to our ears a quite contrary tale?
The like read you decyphred in this paper,
Concerning treacherous wavering Burgundy,
Unless you grant they can divide themselves,
And of two shapes become four substances,
How is it I should have their knightly aide,
And yet by them be utterly destroyed?
And I to be protected by their means,
And yet they shall conspire against my life.
What call you this, but vile hypocrisy?
Nay pesant-like unheard of treachery
My Lord upbraid not me with this offence:
I do protest I knew of no such letters.
Nor any other intention of the Duke,
More then before was uttered in my message.
Will you bee halting too before a creeple?
Do you not remember what they were,
That first did certify the Duke of truce,
Betwixt the renowned Edward and the French?
Yes they were two soldiers, what of that?
Those soldiers were this Gentleman and I,
Where we did hear ye foul mouthed Duke exclaim
Against our noble Sovereign and this Prince,
And rorde and bellowed like a parish bull,
And that in hearing both of you and him,
His words so please my Lord I can repeat,
As he did speak them at that very time.
Well they are messengers, &amp; for that cause
We are content to bear with their amiss,
But kéepe them safe, and let them not return,
To carry tales unto those counterfeits,
Until you have them both as fast insnarde,
To compass which the better, brother of France,
Five thousand of our soldiers here we leave,
To be employed in service to that end,
The rest with vs to England shall return.
King Edward is returned home to England,
And Lewes King of France soon afterword,
Surprised both his subtle enemies,
Rewarding them with traitorous recompense.
Now do we draw the curtain of our Scene,
To speak of Shore and his fair wife again,
With other matters thereupon depending,
You must imagine since you saw him last
Prepared for travail, he hath bin abroad,
And séene the sundry fashions of the world,
Vlysses like, his countries love at length,
Hoping his wives death, and to see his friends,
Such as did sorrow for his great mishaps,
Come home is hee, but so unluckily,
As hée is like to loose his life thereby:
His and her fortunes shall we now pursue,
Graced with your gentle sufferance &amp; view.
Have ye bestowed our small benevolence,
On the poor prisoners in the common Gaol,
Of the white Lion and the Kings bench?
Yes forsooth?
What prisons this?
The Marshalsea for sooth.
Well met fair Lady, in the happiest time,
And choice•… place that my desire could wish,
Without offence, where have yée béene this way?
To take the air here in Saint Georges field,
Sir Robert Brackenburie, and to visit some
Poor patients that cannot visit me•….
Are you a physician?
I a simple one.
What disease cure ye?
Faith none perfectly,
My physic doth but mitigate the pain•…
A little while, and then it comes again.
Swéet mistress Shore, I understand ye not.
Moister lieutenant I beléeue you well.
Good faith Sir Robert brobenbellie, may masters spéekes deftly and truly, for she hes been till see there that cannot come till see her: and theyes peatients perforce. The prisoners man in the twea prisons. And shée hes gin tham her siller and her géere till bay tham fut.
Gramercies Jockey thou resolust my doubt.
A comfort ministering kind physician,
That once a wéeke in her own person visits,
The prisoners and the poor in Hospitals,
In London or néere London every way,
Whose purse is open to the hungry soul,
Whose piteous heart save many a tall mans life.
Peace good sir Robert, tic not worthy praise,
Nor yet worth thanks, that is of duty done,
For you know well, the world doth know too well,
That all the coals of my poor charity,
Cannot consume the scandal of my name,
What remedy? well, tell me gentle knight,
What meant your kind salute and gentle spéech,
At our first meetin•…, when you seemed to bless
The time and place of our encounter here?
Lady there lies here prisonde in the Marshalsea,
A gentleman of good parents and good descent.
My dear néere kinsman, Captain Harry Stranguidge,
As tall a skilful Nauigator tried,
As ere set foot in any ship at sea,
Whose luck it was to take a prize of France,
As hée from Rochell was for London bound:
For which (except his pardon be obtained,
By some especial favourite of the King).
Hee and his crew, a company of proper men,
Are sure to die, because it was since the League.
Let me sée him and all his company.
Kéeper bring forth the Captain &amp; his crew.
Now say oath dial, that seek bonnie men sud be hampered like plue Jade, weas me for ye good Lads.
I Cousin Harry, this is mistress Shore,
Peerless in Court, for beauty, bounty, pity.
And if she can not save thee, thou must die.
Will she if she can?
I Cousin Stranguidge I.
O torment worse then death to see her face,
That caused her shame, &amp; my unjust disgrace,
O that our mutual eyes were, Basilisks,
To kill each other at his interview,
How like ye him Lady? you have viewed him well?
I pity him, and that same proper man,
That turns his back, ashamed of this distress.
Ashamed of thee, cause of my heaviness?
And all the rest, oh were the king returned,
There might be hope, but ere his coming home,
They may be tried, condemned, and judged, and dead.
I am condemned by sentence of vefame,
O were I dead I might not sée my shame.
Your credit Lady may prolong their trial,
What Judge is he that will give you denial:
Isle rack my credit, and will launch my crowns,
To save their lives, if they have done no murder.
O thou hast cracked thy credit with a crown.
And murdered me poor Matthew Shore alive.
Fair Lady, we did shed no drop of blood
Nor cast one Frenchman over board, and yet,
Because the league was made before the fact,
Which we poor sea men God knows never heard:
We doubt our lives, yea though we should restore
Treble the value that we took, and more.
It was lawful prize when I put out to sea,
And warranted in my commission.
The kings are since combined in amity,
(Long may it last) and I unwittingly
Have took a Frenchman since the truce was tanc
And if I die, via, one day I must.
And God will pardon all my sins I trust,
My grief will be for these poor harmless men,
Who thought my warrant might suborn the deed,
Chiefly that Gentleman that stands sadly there,
Who on (my soul) was but a passenger.
Well Captain Stranguidge, were the king at home,
I could say more.
Lady, hes come a shore.
Last night at Dover, my boy came from thence,
And saw his highness land.
Then courage sirs
Isle use my fairest means to save your lives,
In the mean season spend that for my sake.
By your leave mistress Shore, I have taken pain•…,
To find you out, come you must go with me.
Whither my Lord?
Unto the Quéene my mother.
Good my Lord Marquess Dorset wrong me not.
I can not wrong thee as thou wrongst my mother,
Isle bring thee to her let her use her pleasure.
Against my will I wrong her good my Lord,
Yet am ashamed to sée her majesty.
Swéet Lord excuse me, say ye saw me not.
Shall I delude my mother for a whore?
No mistress Shore ye must go to the Quéene.
Must I my Lord? what will she do to me?
Use violence on me now the kings away?
Alas my Lord, behold this shower of tears,
Which kind King Edward would compassionate,
Bring me not to her, she will slit my nose.
Or mark my face, or spurn me unto death.
Look on me Lord, can ye find in your heart?
To have me spoiled that never thought you harm?
O rather with your rapier run me through,
Then carry me to the displeased Quéene.
O had thou never broke thy how to me
From fear and wrong had I defended thee.
I am inexorable, therefore arise,
And go with me, what rascal crew is this,
Mistress Shores suitors, such slaves make her proud,
What sir Robert Brackenburie you a Shorist too?
No Shorist, but to save my Cousins life.
Then isle be hanged if he escape for this,
The rather for your means to mistress Shore.
My mother can do nothing, this whore all,
Come away minion you shall prate no more.
Pray for me friends and I will pray for you,
God send you better hap then I expect,
Go to my lodging you, and if I perish,
Take what is there in lieu of your true service.
Na a may sale eyes ne'er forsake my good mistress,
Till aye hey séene tha worst that spite can du her.
For all the wrong that thou hast done to me,
They should not hurt thée yet if I were free.
Sée cousin Stranguidge how the case is changed,
She that should help thee can not help her self.
What remedy? the God of heaven helps all.
What say ye mates? our hope of life is dashed,
Now none but God, lets put our trust in him,
And cuerie man repent him of his sin,
And as together we have lived like men,
So like tall men together let vs die:
The best is if we die for this offence,
Our ignorance shall plead our innocence,
Your meat is ready (Captain) you must in.
Must I? I will: Cousin what will you do?
Visit you soon, but now I will to Court
To see what shall become of mistress Shore.
God speed ye well.
Come sir will you go in?
Isle eat no meat, give me leave to walk here,
Am I now left alone? no millions
Of miseries attend me every where:
Ah Matthew Shore, how doth all séeing heaven,
Punish some sin, from thy blind conscience hid?
Inflicting pame where all thy pleasure was,
And by my wife came all these woes to pass,
She falsde her faith, and brake her wedlocks band,
Her honour falue, how could my credit stand?
Yet will not I poor Iane on thee exclaim,
Though guilty thou, I guiltless suffer shame.
I left this land too little for my grief,
Returning, am accounted as a these,
Who in that ship came but a passenger,
To sée my friends, hoping the death of her,
At fight of whom some sparks of former love,
(Hid in affections ashes) pity move,
Kindling compassion in my broken heart,
That bleeds to think on her ensuing smart.
O see weak women's imperfections,
That leave their husbands safe protections,
Hazarding all on strangers flatteries,
Whose 〈◊〉 ala•…d, leaves them to miseries,
See what dishonour breach of wedlock brings,
Which is not safe even in the arms of kings:
Thus do I Iane lament thy present state,
Wishing my tears thy torments might abate.
Now (as I am a Quéene) a goodly creature,
Son how was she attended where you found her?
Madame I found her at the Marshalsea,
Going to visit the poor prisoners,
As she came by, having been to take the ayre,
And there the keeper told me she oct deals
Such bounteous alms as seldom hath béene séene.
Now before God, she would make a gallant Queen,
But good son Dorset stand aside a while.
God save your maiestiomy my Lady Shore,
My Lady Shore said I? Oh blasphemy,
To wrong your title with a Ladies name,
Queen Sure, nay rather Empress Shore,
God save your grace, your majesty, your highness
Lord I want titles, you must pardon me:
What? you knéele there, king Edwards bedfellow
And I your subject sit? sie, sie for shame.
Come take your place, &amp; •…e knéele where you do,
I may take your place, you have taken mine,
Good Lord that you will so debase your self:
I am sure you are our sister Queen at least.
Nay that you are, then let vs sit together.
Great Queen, yet hear me, if my sin committed,
Have not stopped up all passage to your mercy,
To tel y• wrongs that I have done your highness,
Might make revenge exceed extremity,
Oh had I words or tongue to utter it,
To plead my women's weakness, &amp; his strength,
That was the only worker of my fall.
Even innocence her self would blush for shame,
Once to be named or spoken of in this,
Let them expect for mercy whose offence,
May but be called sin, oh mine is more,
Prostrate as earth, before your highness féete,
Inflict what torments you shall think most meet.
Spurn the whore (mother) tear those enticing eyes,
That robbed you of King Edwards dearest love.
Mangle those locks, the baits to his desires,
Let me come to her, you but stand and talk,
As if revenge consisted but in words.
Son stand aloof, and do not trouble me,
Alas poor soul, as much ado have I,
To for bear tears to keep her company.
Yet once more will I to my former humour.
Why as I am, think that thou were a Queen,
And I as thou should wrong thy princely bed,
And win the king thy husband, as thou mine:
Would it not sting thy soul? Or if that I
Being a Queen, while y• did love thy husband:
Should but have done as thou hast done to me,
Would it not grieve thee? yes I warrant thee.
There's not the meanest woman that doth live,
But if she like and love her husband well,
She had rather feel his warm l•…mmes in her bed
Then sée him in the arms of any Queen,
You are flesh and blood as we, and we as you,
And all alike in our affections,
Though maiestic makes vs the more ambitious.
What tic to fall into so great a hand,
Knowledge might teach thée. There was once a king
Henry the second, who did keep his leman,
Cag'de up at Woodstocke in a Labyrinth,
His Quéene yet got a trick to find her out,
And how she used her, I am sure thou hast heard,
Thou art not mewed up in some secret place,
But kept in Court here underneath my nose,
Now in the absence of my Lord the King,
Have I not time most fitting for revenge?
Fair Rosamond, she a pure virgin was,
Until the King seduced her to his will.
She wronged but one bed, only the angry Quéenes,
But thou hast wronged two, mine &amp; thy husbands,
Be thine own Judge, and now in justice see,
What due revenge I ought to take on thee.
Even what you will (great Quéen) here do I lie,
Humble and prostrate at your Highness feet,
Inflict on me what may revenge your wrong,
Was never lamb abode more patiently,
Then I will doe. Call all your griefs to mind,
And do even what you will, or how likes you,
I will not stir, I will not shrike or cry,
Be it torture poison, any punishment,
Was never Done, or Turtle more submiss,
Then I will be unto your chastisement.
Fetched I her for this? mother let me come to her,
And what compassion will not suffer you
To d•… to her, refer the same to me.
Touch her not son, upon thy life I charge thee,
But kéepe off still, if thou wilt have my love.
I am glad to hear ye are so well resolved,
To bear the burden of my just displeasure.
Thus then Isle doe, alas poor soul,
Shall I wéepe with thée? in saith poor hart I will,
Be of good comfort, thou shalt have no harm,
But if that kisses have the power to kill thée,
Thus, thus, and thus, a thousand times isle stab thée.
Iane I forgive thée: what fort is so strong,
But with be sieging he will batter it?
Wéepe not (sweet Iane) alas I know thy sex,
Touched with the selfsame weakness that thou art,
And if my state had béen as mean as thine,
And such a beauty to allure his eye,
(Though I may promise much to mine own strength)
What might have hoped to me, I cannot tell.
Nay fear not, for I speak it with my hart,
And in thy sorrow truly bear a part.
Most high and mighty Quéene, may I beléeue
There can be found such mercy in a woman,
And in a Quéene, more then in a wife,
So déeply wronged as I have wronged you?
In this bright crystal mirror of your mercy,
I sée the greatness of my sin the more,
And makes my fault more odious in mine eyes,
Your princely pity now doth wound me more,
Then all your threatenings ever did before.
Rise my swéet Iane, I say thou shalt not knéele,
Oh God for bid, that Edwards Quéene should hate
Her, whom she knows he both so dearly love,
My love to her, may purchase me his love.
Iane, speak well unto the King of me and mine,
Remember not my sons ore-hastie spéech,
Thou art my sister, and I love thée so.
I know thou majesty doe much with my déere Lord,
Speak well of vs to him in any case,
And I and mine will love and cherish thee.
All I can do is all too little too,
Tut to requite the least part of this grace,
The dearest thoughts that harbour in this breast,
Shall in your service only be expressed.
What is my Iane with her•… it is too true,
See where she hath her down upon her knees.
Why how now Bess? what, will ye wrong my Iane?
Come hither love, what hath she done to thee?
Oh royal Edward, love, love, thy beauteous Quéene,
The only perfect mirror of her kind,
For all the thoysest virtues can be named.
Oh let not my bewitching looks withdraw
Your dear affections from yo•… déerer Queen,
But to requite the grace that she hath shown,
To me the worthless creature on this earth,
To banish me the Court immediately,
Great King let me •…t beg one boon of thee,
That Shores wife ne'er do her more injury.
Nay then isle beg against her royal Edward,
Love thy Iane still, nay more if more may be,
And this is all the harm that at my hands
She shall endure for it, Oh where my Edward loves,
It ill beseems his Queen to grudge thereat.
Say thou me so Bess, on my kingly word,
Edward will honour thee in heart for this:
But trust me Bess, I greatly was afraid,
I should not find ye in so good a tune,
How now, what would our Constable of the Tower?
The Queen and •…strts Shore do know my suit.
It is for Stranguidge and his men at sea,
Edward needs must you pardon them.
Have I not vowed the contrary already?
Dishonour me when I have made a league?
My word is past, and they shall suffer death,
Or never•…re let me see France again.
Why there is one was but a passenger.
Shall hee die too?
Pass me no passage Iane, fuse•… he in comp∣no, hee dies for company.
Good Iane entreat for them.
Come Edward, I must not take this answer.
Needs must I have some grace for Stranguidge.
Why Iane, have I not denied my Quéenes
Yet what first Iane I would deny to thee?
I pretheel / Brackenkutie be not thou displeased,
My word is past, not one of them shall live,
One go &amp; see them forth with sent to death.
I cannot see this prophecy you speak of,
Should any way so much displease the •…ing,
And yet I promise you good Brother Clarence,
Tic such a letter as concerns vs both,
That G. should put away King Edwards children,
And sit upon his throne? that G. should? well.
God bless the king, &amp; th•…se two swéet young Princes.
Amen good brother Clarence:
Amen.
And send them all to heaven shortly I beseech him.
The Kings much troubled in his sickness with it.
I promise you hee is, and very much,
But Doctor Shaw, who prophested that G. should be so sadly
ominous to vs?
My Lord of Gloucester, I recefude the same
From old Friar Anselme of S. Bartholmewes.
A great learned man he was, and as I have heard,
Hath prophested of very many things,
I promise you it troubles me,
I hope in me his propheste is true.
And so it does me, I tell you brother Gloucester.
I am sure it does, for look you brother Clarence,
We know not how his Highness will apply it,
We are but two, your self my Lord and I,
Should the young Princes fail, which God defend.
Which God defend.
Which God defend.
But they should be cut off: Amen, Amen.
You brother first, and should your issue fail,
Poor I am next, the youngest of the thrée.
But how far I am from a thought of that,
Heaven witness with me, that I wish you dead.
Brother I durst be sworn.
God bless you al, and take you to him if it be his will.
Now brother, this prophesse of G. troubling the King,
He may as well apply it unto Gloucester,
My Dukedoms name, if he be fealfous,
As unto George your •…am, good brother Clarence,
God help, God help: •…faith it troubles me,
You would not think how: aside. that any of you live.
It cannot thuse: how innocent I am,
And how unspotted are my loyal thoughts
Unto his Highness, and those swéete young Princes,
God be my record.
Who you, I, I durst answer for you,
That I shall cut you off ere it be long.
But reverend Doctor, you can only tell,
Being his Highness Confessor, how he takes it.
Shaw, you know my mind, a villain like my self.
My Lord of Clarence, I must tell your Lord•…,
His Highness is much troubled in his sickness
With this same prophecy of G. Who is this G?
Oft times he will demand, then will he sigh,
And name his brother George, your self my Lord,
And then he strikes his breast, I promise you,
This morning in th'extreamest of his fit,
He lay so still, we all thought he had slept,
When suddenly, George is the G. quoth he,
And gave a groan, and turned his face away.
God be my witness, witness with my soul,
My just and upright thoughts to him and his,
I stand so guiltless and so innocent,
As I could wish my breast to be transparent,
And my thoughts written in great letters there,
The world might read the secrets of my soul.
Ah brother Clarence, when you are suspected,
Well, well, it is a wicked world the while:
But shall I tell you brother in plain terms,
I fear, your self and I have enemies,
About the King, God pardon them,
The world was never worser to be trusted:
Ah brother George, where is that love that was?
Ah it is banished brother from the world:
Ah Conscience, Conscience, and true brotherhood,
Tic gone, tic gone, brother I am your friend,
I am your loving brother, your own self,
And love you as my soul, use me in what you please,
And you shall see Isle doe a brothers part,
Send you to heaven I hope, ere it be long,
I am a true stamped villain as ever lived.
I know you will, then brother I beséech you,
Plead you mine innocence unto the King,
And in mean time to tell my loyalty,
Isle kéepe within my house at Bainards Castle,
Until I hear how my dread Sovereign takes it.
Do so good brother.
Farewell good brother Gloster.
My tears will searcely let me take my leave,
I love you so: Farewell sweet George.
So, is he gone: now Shaw tic in thy power,
To bind me to thee everlastingly,
And there is not one step that I shall rise,
But I will draw thee with me unto greatness,
Thou shalt sit in my bosom as my soul,
Incense the king, now being as thou art,
So near about him, and his Confessor,
That this G. only is George Duke of Clarence,
Doctor thou need not my instruction,
Thou hast a searching brain, a nimble spirit,
Able to master any mans affections.
Effect it Shaw, and bring it to pass •…ce,
Isle make thee the greatest Shaw that ever was.
My Lord, I am going by commandment,
Unto the Marshalsea, to Captain Stranguidge,
For Piracy of late condemned to die,
There to confess him and his company,
That done, •…e come with spéed back to the king,
And make no doubt but •…e effect the thing.
Farewell gentle Doctor.
Farewell my Lord of Gloster.
Let me awake my sléeping wits a while,
•…a, the mark thou aimst at Richard is a crown,
And many stand betwixt thee and the same,
What of all that? Doctor play thou thy part,
Isle climb up by degrees, through many a heart.
Why moister Wax is there no remedy?
But instantly they must be led to death?
Can it not be deferd till after noon,
Or but two hours, in hope to get reprie?
Moister Lieutenant, tic in vain to speak,
The kings incensed, and will not pardon them,
The men are patient, and resolude to die,
The Captain and that other Gentleman,
Have cast the dice whether shall suffer first.
How fell the Lot, to Stranguidge or to him?
The guiltless passenger must first go toot,
They are all guiltless from intent of ill.
And yet must die for doing of the deed,
Besides the Duke of Exeter found dead,
And naked floating up and down the sea,
Twixt Calice and our coast, is laid to them,
That they should rob, and cast him overboard.
My soul be pauwne, they never knew of it.
Well bring them forth.
Stay them yet but an hour.
I dare not do it sir Robert Brackenburie,
You are Lieutenant of the Tower your self,
And know the peril of protracting time,
Moreover here is that pickthanke Doctor Shaw,
The Duke of Glosters spaniel shriving them,
Come bring them forth.
Poor Stranguidge must thou die?
I dare not say good morrow, but ill day,
That Harry Stranguidge is thus cast away.
Strah. Good Cousin Brackenbury be as well content
To see me die, as I to suffer death,
Be witness that I die an honest man,
Because my fact proves ill through ignorance,
And for the Duke of Erceter his death,
So spéede my soul as I am innocent,
Here goes my grief, this guiltless gentleman,
L•…ke A•…sops Stork, that dyes for company,
And came (God knows) but as a passenger.
Ah master •…lute, a thousand floods of woe
Ore-slow my soul, that thou must perish so.
Good Captain set no perturbation,
•…inder our passage to a better world,
This last breaths blast will wafte our weary souls,
Over deaths gulf, to heavens most happy port,
There is a little battle to be fought.
Wherein by lot the leading must be mine,
Second me Captain, and this bitter breakfast,
Shall bring a sweeter supper with the Saints.
This Christian patiece at the point of death,
Doth argue he hath led no wicked life,
How ever heaven hath laid this cross on him,
Well Matthew Flood. for so thou call thy self,
Finish a good course as thou hast begun,
And cl•…re thy conscience by confession,
What know thou of the Duke of Exceters death?
So God respect the waygate of my soul, as I know nothing.
Then concerning this for which thou diet, knew Stranguidge of the league betwixt the Kings before he took that prize?
No in my conscience.
Stranguidge what say you?
You see theres but a turn betwixt your lives,
You must be next, confess and save yeur soul,
Concerning that wherein I questioned him:
I am your ghostly father to absolve
You of your sins, if you confess the truth.
True D. Shaw, and as I hope for heaven,
In that great day when we shall all appear,
I neither knew how that good Duke came dead,
Nor of the league, till I had tan the prize.
Neither was Fludde, (that innocent dying man)
Ever with me but as a passenger.
More happy he, well Flood forgive the world,
As thou wilt have forgiveness from the heavens.
O so I doe, and pray the world forgive,
What wrong I did whilst I therein did live,
And now I pray you turn your pains to them,
And leave me private for a little space,
To meditate upon my parting hence.
Do gentle Flood, and we will pray for thée.
Pray not for Flood, but pray for Matthew Shore,
For Shore covered with the cloak of Flood,
If I have send in changing of my name,
Forgive me God, it was done to hide my shame,
And I forgive the world, King Edward first,
That wrecked my state, by winning of my wife,
And though he would not pardon trespass small,
In these, in me God knows no fault at all,
I pardon him, though guilty of my fall.
Perhaps he would, if hee had known it was I,
But twenty deaths I rather wish to die,
Than live beholding for one minutes breath
To him, that living, wounded me with death.
Death of my joy, and hell of my defame,
Which now shall die under this borrowed name.
God forgive thée, even as I forgive,
And pray thou moist repent while thou dost live,
I am as glad to leave this loathed light,
As to embrace thee on our marriage night.
To die unknown thus, is my greatest good,
That Matthew Shores not hanged, but Matthew flood.
For floods of woe have washed away the shore
That never wife nor kin shall look on more:
Now when ye will, I am prepared to go.
Hawd, hawd, say for spéede, vntaye, untruss, pull down, pull off, God sea the King: off with the halters, hence with the prisoners, a pardon a pardon.
Good news unlooked for, welcome gentle friend, who brings the pardon?
Stay first lat ma blaw: my masters, masters Shore shoe brings tha pardon, tha kings pardon: off with there bands, bestow them o tha hangman, may masters made me runue the néerest way ore tha fields, she raids a pace the hee way, shees at hand bay this: sir ye that preach, come down, lat Doctor Shaw hey your place, hes tha better school∣ler, masters Shore bring a new lesson for you.
O I had read my latest lesson well.
Had hee béene ready to have said, Amen.
Now shall I live to see my shame again.
O had I did unwitting to my wife,
Rather then see her, though she bring me life.
Alas I see that even my smallest stay,
Had lost my labour, and cast them away,
God knows I basted all that ere I might,
Here master Wax, King Edward gréets ye well,
His gracious pardon frées this Gentleman,
And all his company from shameful death.
God save the king, &amp; God bless mistress Shore.
Amen, &amp; kéep these frea cōming here any mar.
You must discharge them paying of their fées,
Which for I fear their store is very small,
I will defray, hold, here, take purse and all,
Nay master Wax tic gold, if not enough,
Send to me, I will pay you royally.
Lady, in the behalf of all the rest,
With humble thanks I yéeld my self your slave,
Command their service, and command my life.
No Captain Stranguidge, let the king command
Your lives and service, who hath given you life,
These and such offices conscience bids me doe.
Pity that ere awry she trod her shoe.
O had that cōscience pricked when love provoked.
Lady the last but not the least in debt,
To your devotion for my Cofins life,
I render thanks, yet thanks is but a breath,
Command (Madame) during life,
Old Brackenburie bows for you to stand,
Whilst I have limbs or any foot of land.
Thus is her glory builded on the sand.
Thanks good M. Lieutenant of the Tower.
Sir prepare my borse, why stay you here?
Pray ye commend me to my noble friend
The Duke of Clarence now your prisoner,
Bid him not doubt the kings displeasures past
I hope to gain him favour and release.
God grant ye may, hées a noble Gentleman.
My patron Gloster will cross it if he can.
Wheres mistress Shore? Lady I come in post,
The King hath had a very dangerous fit
Since you came from him, twice his majesty,
Hath sounded, and with much a doe revived,
And still as breath will give him leave to speak,
He calls for you: the Quéene and all the Lords
Have sent to séeke ye, hast unto his Grace,
Or else I fear you'll never see his face.
O God desend, good friends pray for the king,
More bitter are the news which he doth bring,
Then those were swéet I brought to you but late:
If Edward die, confounded is my state,
Isle hast unto him and will spend my blood,
To save his life or do him any good.
And so would I for thée had thou béen true:
But if I die, hid all thy pomp adieu.
Bra. Belee•… but I do not like these news,
Of the Kings dangerous sickness.
No nor I,
Captain, and moister Fludde, and all the rest,
I dorcioice your pardon was obtained,
Before these news, these inauspicious news,
If the king die, the state will soon be changed,
Lieutenant, you'll go to the Tower:
Isle take my lean, gallants God buoy all.
God buoy M. Wax, I was ye ha lost good guests.
You shall be my guest for a night or two,
Cousin, till your own lodging be prepared,
But tell me sir what means hath M. Fludde.
I cannot tell, isle ask him if ye will.
Do so, and if his fortunes be debasde,
Isle entertain him if heel dwell with me,
On good condition.
Matthew Fludde,
He are ye my Cousin Brackenburies mind?
He hath concetude such liking of your parts,
That if your means surmount not his suppose,
Héele entertain ye gladly at the Tower,
To waite on him, and put ye in great trust.
In what I undertake I will be just,
And hold me happy, if my diligence
May please so worthy a Gentleman as he,
What ere my fortunes have béene, they are now,
Such as to service make their moister bow.
No Fludde more like a frieud &amp; fellow mate,
I mean to use thee, then a servitor,
And place thee in some credit in the Tower,
And give thée means to live in some good sort.
I thank ye sir, God grant I may deserve it.
Cousin and all your crew come home with me,
Where after sorrow we may merry be.
The Tower will be a place of secret rest,
Where I may hear good news &amp; bad, and use the best,
God bless the king, a worse may wear the crown
And then Iane Shore thy credit will come down,
For though isle never bed nor board with thee,
Yet thy destruction with I not to see,
Because I loved thee when thou wast my wise,
Not for now saving my disdained life,
Which lasts too long. God grant vs both to mend,
Well I must in my service to attend.
Well met my good Lord Louell.
Whither away so fast goes Doctor Shaw?
Why to the Tower, to shrive the Duke of Clarence,
Who as I hear is salne so grievous sick,
As it is thought be can by no means scope.
He neither can nor shall I warrant thee:
I hope my Lord he is not dead already?
But I hope sir he is, I am sure I saw him dead,
Of a Flies death, drowned in a butte of Malmesey.
Dround in a butte of Malmesey? that is strange,
Doubtless he never wonid misdo himself?
No, that thou know right well, he had some helpers,
Thy hand was in it with the Duke of Glosters,
As smoothly as thou séekst to cover it.
Oh foul words my Lord, no more of that,
The world knows nothing, then what should I fear?
Doth not your honour séeke promotion?
Oh give the Doctor then a little leave,
So that he gain preferment with a King,
Cares not who goes to wrack, whose heart doth wring.
A King? what King?
Wy Richard man? who else? good Lord I see,
Wise men sometimes have weak capacity.
Why is not Edward living? and if he were not,
Hath be not children? what shall become of them?
Why man, lining for beds, a knife, or so,
What make a boy a King, and a man by,
Richard, a man for vs? fie that were a shame.
Nay then I sée if Edward were deceased,
Which way the game would go.
What else my Lord?
That way the current of our fortune runs,
By noble Richard gallant royal Richard,
He is the man must only doe vs good,
So I have honour, let me swim through blood.
My Lord, be but at Pals cross on Sunday next,
I hope I have it here shall soundly prove,
King Edwards chtldren not legitimate.
Nay, and that for Edward ruling now,
And George the Duke of Clarence so late dead:
Their mother hoped to tread the shoe awry,
Why what is Richard then?
Tut, lawful man, he says it so himself.
And what he says isle be so hold to swear,
Though in my soul I know it otherwise,
Beware promotion while you live my Lord.
A staff, a staff, a thousand crowns for a staff.
What staff sir William Catesbie?
Why man a white staff for my lord Protector.
Why is King Edward dead?
Dead Louel, dead, and Richard our good Lord
Is made Protector of the sweet young Prince.
Oh for a staff, where might I have a staff,
That I might first present it to his hand?
Now do I smell two Bishoprics at least,
My sermon shall be pepperd sound for this.
Why how now mistress Shore? what, put finger in the es,
Nay then I see you have some cause to erie.
I blame her not, her chiefest stay is gene,
The only staff, she had to lean upon,
I see by her these tidings are too true.
I my Lord Louell, they are too true indeed,
Royal King Edward now hath breathed his last,
The Quéene turned out, and every friend put by,
None now admitted, but whom Richard please.
Why doubtless Richard will be kind to you.
Ah my Lord Louell, God bless me from his kindness:
No sooner was the white staff in his hand,
But finding me and the right woeful Queen,
Sadly bemoaning such a mighty loss:
Here is no place quoth he, you must be gone,
We have other matters now to think upon.
For you, (quoth he to me) ant bit his lip,
And stroke me with his staff, but said no more.
Whereby I know he means me no good.
Well mistress Shore, its like to be a busy time,
Shift for your self, come lads let vs be gone,
Royal King Richard must be waite upon.
Well mistress Shore, if you have need of me,
You shall command me to the uttermost.
First let me die ere I do put my trust,
In any fleering Spaniel of you all.
Go Jockey, take down all my hangings,
And quickly see my trunks be conveyed forth,
To mistress Blages, an Inn in Lombardstreete,
The Flower de Luce, good Jockey make some speed,
She, she must be my refuge in this néed.
Sée it done quickly Jockey.
Whickly quoth a? marry here is a whisk change indéed, seek whisk change did I ne'er sée before. Now dream I, that ise be a very pure fellow, and hardly ha any siller to drink with a good fellow. But what stand I tattling here. I must go do my masters bidding, carry all her stuff and géere to mistress Blages, at the Flower de luce in Lombardstréet, whisk then dispatch.
Come hither Flood let me hear thy opinion,
Thou know I build upon thy confidence,
And honest dealing in thy greatst affairs:
I have received letters from the Duke,
Gloster I mean, Protector of the land,
Who gives in charge the Tower be prepared,
This night to entertain the two young princes,
It is my •…utie to obey I know,
But manifold suspicion troubles me.
He is their uncle Sir, and in that sense,
Nature should warrant their security,
Next his deceased brother at his death,
To Richards care communitted both the realm,
And their protection: where humanity
Stands as an Orator to plead ag•…inst
All wrong suggestion of uncivil thoughts:
Beside you are Lieutenant of the Tower,
Say there should be any hurt prefended,
The privilege of your authority
Pries into every corner of this house,
And what can then be done without your knowledge?
Thou say true Flood, though Richard be Protector,
When once they are within the Tower limits,
The charge of them (unless he derogate)
From this my office, which was never siene,
In any kings time; doth belong to me:
And ere that Brackenburie will consent,
Or suffer wrong be done unto these babes,
His sword, &amp; all the strength within the Tower
Shall be opposoe against the proudest commer,
Be it to my soul as I intend to them.
And faith in me unto this commonwealth,
And truth to men hath hitherto béene séene,
The Pilot that hath guided my lives course,
Though it was my fortune to be wronged in both:
And therefore Sir neither the mighties frown,
Nor any bribes shall win me otherwise.
Tic well resolved: still me thinks they should
Be safe enough with vs, and yet I fear,
But now no more, it séemes they are at hand.
Uncle, what Gentleman is that?
It is (swéet Prince) Lieutenant of the Tower.
Sir we are come to be your guests to night:
I pray you tell me did you ever know,
Our father Edward lodged within this place,
Never to lodge (my liege) but oftentunes,
On other occasions I have seen him here.
Brother last night when you did send for me
My mother told me, hearing we should lodge
Within the Tower, that it was a prison,
And therefore marveled that my uncle Gloster,
Of all the houses for a Kings receipt,
Within this City, had appointed none,
Where you might keep your court but only here.
Vile brats, how they do descant on the Tower.
〈◊〉 gentle Nephew they were ill abuisde,
To tutor you with such unfitting terms,
(Who ere they were) against this royal mansion:
What if some part of it hath béene reserved,
To be a prison for Nobility?
Follows it therefore that it cannot serve,
To any other use? Caesar himself
That built the same, within it kept his Court,
And many kings since him, the rooms are large,
The building stately, and for strength beside,
It is the safest and the surest hold you have.
Uncle of Gloster, if you think it so,
Tic not for me to contradict your will,
We must allow it, and are well content.
On then a Gods name.
Yet before we go,
One question more with you M. Lieutenant,
We like you well, and but we do perceive,
More comfort in your looks, then in these walls,
For all our uncle Glosters friendly spéech,
Our hearts would be as heavy still as lead,
I pray you tell me, at which door or gate
Was it my uncle Clarence did go in,
When he was sent a prisoner to this place?
At this my •…iedge: why sighs your majesty?
He went in here that ne'er came back again,
But as God hath decreed, so let it be,
Come brother shall we go?
Yes brother, any where with you.
Sir were it best I did attend the Duke,
Or stay his leisure till his back return?
I pray master Tirill stay without,
It is not good you should be seen by day
Within the Tower, especially at this time,
Isle tell his honour of your being here,
And you shall know his pleasure presently.
Even so fir•…men would be glad by any means.
To raise themselves, that have béene overthrown,
By fortunes scorn, and I am one of them.
Here comes the Duke.
Catesbie, is this the man?
It is left like your excellence.
Come near.
Thy name I hear is Tirill, is it not?
Iames Tirill is my name, my gracious Lord.
Welcome, it should appear that thou hast bin
In better state then now it séemes thou art.
I have bin by my fey my Lord, though now depressed,
And clouded over with adversity.
Be ruled by me, &amp; then thou shalt rise again,
And prove more happy then thou ever wast,
There is but only two degrees by which
It shall be néedfull for thee to ascend,
And that is faith and taciturnity.
If ever I prove false unto your grace,
Convert your favour to afflictions.
But can thou too bee secret?
Try me my Lord:
This tongue was never known to be a blab.
Thy countenance hath like a silver key,
Opend the closet of my heart, read there,
If scholar like thou can expound those lines,
Thou art the man ordained to serve my turn.
So far as my capacity will reach,
The sense my Lord is this, this night you say,
The two young Princes both must suffer death.
Thou hast my meaning, wilt thou do it, speak?
It shall be done.
Enough, come follow me,
For thy direction, and for gold to fée,
Such as must aid thee in their Tragedy.
Welcome good Jockey, what good news bring you?
Marry masters my good masters gréets ye masters, and prays ye masters till dight up her Chamber, for sheel leg we ye to night masters. And here is her cat skin till she come.
Why how now loiterer? make ye no more haste?
When will my trunks and all my stuff be brought,
If you thus loiter, go, make hast withal.
Marie sall aye, gin yéele be bud patient a while.
Now gentle mistress Blage the only friend,
That fortune leaves mée to rely upon,
My counsels Closet and my Tower of strength,
To whom for safety I retire my self,
To be secure in these tempestuous times,
O smile on me, and give me gentle looks,
If I be welcome, then with chéerefull heart,
And willing hand show me true signs thereof.
Doubt ye of welcome Lady to your friend?
Nay to your servant, to your bradswoman,
To speak but truth, your bounties bond woman:
Use me, command me, call my house your own,
And all I have swéete Lady at your will.
A way with titles, lay by courtly terms,
The Case is altered now the King is dead,
And with his life my favouring friends are fled,
No Madam now, but as I was before,
Your faithful kind companion, poor Iane Shore.
I loud you then, and since, and ever shall,
You are the woman, though your fortunes fall,
You when my husbands lewd transgression
Of all our wealth had lost possession,
By forfeiture into his Highness hands,
Got restitution of our goods and lands,
He fled, and died in France, to heal that harm,
You helped me to three manors in fée farm,
The worst of which cléers thréescore pound a yéere,
Have I not reason then to hold ye déere?
Yes hap what will until my life do end,
You are and shall be my best beloved friend,
How if misfortune my folly do succéed.
Trust me true friends bide touch in time of need.
If want consume the wealth I had before.
My wealth is yours, and you shall spend my store.
But the Protector prosecutes his hate.
With me live secret from the worlds debates
You will be weary of so bad a guest.
Then let me never on the earth be blessed.
Ah mistress Blage, you tender me such love,
As all my sorrows from my soul remove,
And though my portion be not very large,
Yet come I not to you to be a charge,
Coin, plate, and fewels prized at lowest rate,
I bring with me to maintain my estate,
Worth twenty thousand pound, and my array,
If you survive to sée my dying day,
From you no penny will I give away.
And I thank you that so my wealth increased,
Am worth I trow, ten thousand pounds at least,
I think like two warm widows we may live,
Until good fortune two good husbands give,
For surely mistress Shore your husbands dead,
When heard ye of him?
Never since he fled.
O mistress Blage, now put you in my head
That kills my heart, why should I breath this ayre,
Whose lost good name no treasure can repair?
Oh were he here with me to lead his life,
Although hee never used me as a wife,
But as a drudge to spurn me with his •…ecte,
Yet should I think with him that life were swéete,
How can ye once conceit so base a thing,
That have béene kissed and cokerd by a king,
Wéepe not, you hurt your self by Gods blessed mother,
Your husbands dead woman, think upon another,
Let vs in to supper, drink wine, cheer your heart,
And whilst I live, be sure isle take your part.
Sir I assure ou tic my Lord Protectors warrant.
My friend, I have conferd it with his letters,
And tic his hand indéed, isle not deny,
But blame me not although I be precise,
In matters that so nearly do concern me.
My Lord Protector, sir I make no doubt,
Dare justify his warrant, though perhaps,
He doth not now acquaint you why he doth it.
I think sic theres no subject now in England,
Will urge his Grace, to show what he dare doe,
Nor will I ask him why hee does it,
I would I might, to rid me of my doubt.
Why sir I think he néeds no president,
For what he does, I think his power is absolute enough.
I have no power sir to examine it.
Nor will I do: obey your warrant,
Which I will keep for my security.
You shall do well in that sir.
Here is the keys.
And yet I could wish my Lord Protector,
Had sent his warrāt thither by some other, aside.
I do not like their looks I tell you true.
Nor I Flood I assure thee.
What does that slave mutter to his master?
I hear him say hée does not like our looks?
Why not our looks sir?
Sir we hear you.
I am glad you doe sir? all is one for that,
But if you did not hearken better now,
I never saw three faces in whose looks,
Did ever sit more terror: or more death,
God bless the Princes if it bee his will,
I do not like these villains.
Zounds stab the villainy, sir do you bran vs?
I thats your coming, for you come to stab.
Stab him.
Nay then isle stab with thee.
Zbloud cut his throat.
Hold Gentle men I pray you.
Sir I am hurt, stabbed in the arm,
This is not to be justified my friends, I
To draw your weapons here within the Tower,
And by the law it is no less then death,
I cannot think the Duke will like of this,
I pray ye be content, too much is done.
He might have held his peace then, and been quiet Farewell, farewell.
Hell and damnation follow murderers.
Go Flood get thee some surgeon to look to thy wound.
Hast no acquaintance with some skilful surgeon?
Keep thy wound close, and let it not take air.
And for my own part, I will not stay here.
Whither wilt thou go that I may send to thee.
To one mistress Blages, an Inn in Gracious stróete,
There you shall find me, or shall hear of me.
Swéete Princely babes, farewell I fear you sore,
I doubt these eyes shall never sée you more.
How does your Lordship?
Well good brother Richard, how does your selfe's
You told me your headaked.
Indeed it does, my Lord feel with your hands how hot it is.
Indeed you have caught cold,
With sitting yester night to hear me read,
I pray thee go to bed, swéet Dick, poor little heart.
Doule give me leave to wait upon your Lordship.
I had more need brother to wait on you:
For you are sick, and so am not I.
O Lord, me thinks this going to our bed,
How like it is to going to our grave:
I pray thee do not speak of graves sweet heart,
Indeed thou frightest me.
Why my Lord Brother, did not our Tutor teach vs,
That when at night we want unto our bed,
We still should think we sent unto our grave.
Yes thats true, ye we should do as every christian ought.
To bee prepared to die at every hour, but I am heavy.
Indeed and so am I.
Then let vs say our prayers and go to bed.
What, bléedes your Grace?
I two drops and no more.
God bless vs both, and I desire no more,
Brother see here what Dauid says, and so say 〈◊〉
Lord in thee will I trust although I die.
Go lay ye down, but never more to rise,
I have put my hand into the foulest murder,
That ever was committed since the world,
The very senseless stones here in the walls,
Break out in tears but to behold the fact,
Me thinks the bodies lying dead in graves,
Should rise and cry against •…s O hark, hark,
The Mandrakes shrieks are music to their cries,
The very night is frighted, and the stars,
Do drop like torches, to behold this déed:
The very Center of the earth doth shake,
Me thinks the Tower should rent down from the top,
To let the heaven look on this monstrous deed.
Stand further damned rogue, and come not néere me.
Nay stand thou further villain, stand aside.
Are we not both damned for this cur•…cd deed?
Thou art the witness that thou bear the King
And what hearst thou?
It is too true, oh I am damned indeed,
I am as deep as you, although my hand
Did not the deed.
O villain, art thou there?
A plague light on thee.
Curse not, a thousand plagues will light upon vs all.
The priest here in the Tower will bury them,
Let vs away.
So, set him here a while, where is more air,
How cheer you sir, alack he doth begin
To change his colour, where is mistress Shore?
Gone to her Closet for a precious Balm,
The same (she said) King Edward used himself.
Alack I fear héele die before st•…ée come.
Ran quickly for some Rosa-solis, faint not sir,
Be of good comfort, come good mistress Shore,
What have you there?
Stand by and give me leave.
Unhappy me to lodge him in my house.
I warrant you woman, be not so afraid,
If not this bloud-stone hangdc about his neck,
This balm will stanch it by the help of God:
Lift up his arm whilst I do bath his wound,
The sign belike was here when he was hurt,
Or else some principal and chief vein is pierced.
How ever sure the surgeon was a knave,
That looked no better to him at the first.
Blame him not mistress Blage, the best of them
In such a case as this, may bée to séeke.
Now God be blessed, sée the crimson blood,
That was precipitate, and falling down
Into his arm, retires into his face,
How fare you sir? how do you féele your self?
Oh wherefore have you waked me from my sleep?
And broke the quiet slumber I was in,
Me thought I sate in such a pleasant place,
So full of all delight as never eye
Beheld, nor heart of man could comprehend,
If you had let me go I felt no pain,
But being now reuok't my grief renews.
Give him some Rosa-solis mistress Blage,
And that will like wise animate the sprites,
And send alacrity unto the heart,
That hath bin struggling with the pangs of death.
Here sir drink this, you néed not fear it sir,
It is no hurt, sée I will be your taster,
Then drink I pray you.
Now fellows raise hi•… body from the chair•…
And gently let him walk a turn or two.
Good sooth mistress Shore, I did not think till now
You had béene such a cunning skilled Physician.
Oh mistress Blage, though I must néeds confess,
It would have béene more welcome to my soul,
If I had died and been remote at last,
From the confused troubles of this world,
Whereof I have sustained no mean weight,
Then lingering here be made a packhorse still
Of torments, in comparison of which
Death is but as the pricking of a thorne,
Yet I do thank you for your taken pains,
And would to God I could requite your love.
Sir I did you little good, what was done
Ascribe the benefit and praise thereof
Unto this Gentlewoman, kind mistress Shore,
Who next to God preserved your féeble life.
How? Mistress Shore, good friends let go your hold,
My strength is now sufficient of it self.
Oh is it she that still prolongs my wo•…?
Was it ordained not only at the first,
She should be my destruction, but now twice,
When gracious destinies had brought about,
To end this weary pilgrimage of mine,
Must she and none but she prevent that good,
And stop my entrance to eternal bliss?
Oh lasting plague, oh endless corrosive,
It now repents me double that I escaped,
Since lifes made death, and lifes author hate.
Sir take my counsel and sit down again,
It is not good to be so bold of foot,
Upon the sudden till you have more strength.
Mistress I thank you, and I care not much
If I be ruled by you.
Oh God that she should pity me unknown,
That knowing me by her was overthrown,
Or ignorantly she should regard this smart,
That heretofore spared not to stab my heart.
By your leave mistress Blague, I am somewhat bold,
Is there not a Gentleman within your house,
Called M. Flood, came hither hurt last night?
Is his name Flood, I knew it not till now,
But here he is, and well recovered,
Thanks to this Gentlewoman mistress Shore.
Pardon me mistress Shore, I saw you not,
And trust me I am sorry at the heart,
So good a creature as your self hath béene,
Should be so vilely dealt with as you are,
I momise you the world laments your case.
How mean•… you sir? I understand you not?
Lament my case, for what? for Edwards death?
I know that I have lost a gracious friend,
But that is not to be remedied now.
No mistress Shore, it is for Richards hate,
That too much envies your prosperity.
I know he loves me not and for that cause,
I have withdrawn me wholly from the court.
You have not séene the Proclamation then?
The proclamation? no, what proclamation?
Oh mistress Shore, the king in every stréet
Of London, and in every borough town,
Throughout this land hath publicly proclaimed,
On pain of death that none shall harbour you,
Or give you food or clothes to kéep you warm,
But having first done shameful penance here,
You shall be then thrust forth the City gates,
Into the naked cold forsaken field,
I fable not, I would to God I did,
Sée, here is the manner of it put in print,
Tic to be sold in every Stationers shop,
Besides a number of them clapped on posts.
Where people crowding as they read your fall,
Some murmur, and some sigh, but most of them,
Have their relenting eyes even big with tears.
Gods will be done, I know my sin is great,
And he that is omnipotent and just,
Cannot but must reward me heavily.
It grieves me mistress Shore, it was my chance,
To be the first reporter of this news.
Let it not grieve, I must have heard of it,
And now as good, as at another time.
I pray ye mistress Blage have care of Flood,
And what his charge is I will sée you paid,
Farewell to all that still shall be my song,
Let men impose upon me ne'er such wrong,
And this extremity shall seem the less,
In that I have a friend to lean unto,
Sweet mistress Blage, there were upon the earth,
No comfort left for miserable Iane,
But that I do presume upon your love,
I know though tyrant Richard had set down,
A greater penalty then is proclaimed,
Which cannot well be thought, yet in your house,
I should have succour and relief beside.
What, and so I should be a traitor, should I?
Is that the care you have of me and mine?
I thank you truly, no theres no such matter,
I love you well, but love my self better:
As long as you were held a true subject,
I made account of you accordingly,
But being otherwise, I do reject you,
And will not cherish my kings enemy:
You know the danger of the Proclamation:
I would to God you would depart my house.
When was it ever éen Iane Shore was false
Either unto her country, or her king?
And therefore tic not well good mistress Blage,
That you upbraid me with a traitors name.
I, but you have béene a wicked liver,
And now you see what tic to be unchaste,
You should have kept you•… your honest husband:
T was never other like but that such filthiness,
Would have a foul and detestable end.
Time was that you did tell me otherwise,
And studied how to set a gloss on that
Which now you say is ugly and deformde.
I told you then as then the time did serve,
And more indéed to try your disposition,
Then any way to encourage you to sin:
But when I say you were ambitious,
And saintly stood on terms of modesty,
I left you to your own arbitrament:
Can you deny it was not so? how say you?
We will not mistress Blage dispute of that,
But now in charity and womanhood,
Let me find favour if it be but this,
That in some barn or stable I may shroud.
Till otherwise I be provided for.
I pray you do not urge me mistress Shore.
I will not have my house endangered so.
Oh you did promise I should never want,
And that your house was mine, &amp; swore the same,
To keep your oath be then compassionate.
So you did swear you would be true to Shore,
But you were not so good as your word,
My oaths disherit which by the kings command.
Yet let me have those jewels and that money,
Which is within my trunks.
I know of none:
If there be any, isle be so bold,
As kéepe it for your diet and your mans,
It is no little charge I have been at,
To •…de your dainty tooth, since you came hither,
Beside houseroome, I am sure is somewhat worth.
Ah Iane I cannot choose but pity thee,
Here is the first step to thy déepe misery.
Oh that my grave had thē bin made my house,
When either first I went unto the Court,
Or from the court returned unto this place.
How now, what are you? it had béen manners
You should have knocked before you had come in.
We are the Bishops Parators my friend,
And mistress Shore our errand is to you.
This day it is commanded by the King,
You must be stripped out of your rich attire,
And in a white shéete go from Temple bar,
Until you come to Algate, bare footed,
Your hair about your ears, and in your hand,
A burning taper, therefore go with vs.
Even when and whither you will, and would to God,
The King as soon could rid my soul of sin,
As he may stripped my body of these rags.
That would be soon enough, but come away,
And mistress Blage you'll hardly answer it,
When it is known we found her in your house.
It séemes you do not fear to harbour her.
I harbour her? out on her strumpet queen,
She pressed upon me where I would or no:
Isle see her hanged ere I will harbour her.
So now her jewels and her gold is mine,
And I am made at least four thousand pound,
Wealthier by this match then I was before:
And what can be objected for the same,
That once I loved her: well perhaps I did,
And women all are governed by the Moon,
But now I am of another humour,
Which is you know a planet that will change.
Now M. Sheriff of London do your office,
Attach this rebel to his Majesty,
And having stripped her to her petticoat,
Turn her out a doors, with this condition,
That no man harbour her, that durst presume
To harbour that lewd courtesan Shores wife,
Against the strait commandment of the King.
I beséech you sir.
Away with her I say.
The while •…le seize upon her house &amp; goods,
Which wholly are confiscate to the King.
Oh what have I beheld, were I as young,
As when I came to London to be prentice,
This pageant were sufficient to instruct,
And teach me ever after to be wise.
First have I séene desert of wantonness,
And breach of wedlock: then of flattery,
Next of dissembilng love, and last of all,
The ruin of base catching avarice:
But poor Iane Shore in that I loved thee once,
And w•…s thy husband I must pity, thee,
The sparks of old affection long ago,
〈◊〉 up in ashes of displeasure kindle,
And in this furnace of adversity,
The world shall see a husbands loyalty.
Spuria vitulamina non agent radices altos.
Bastardly slips have always slender grouth.
Ah Shaw, this was the cursed theme,
That at Pals cross thou made thy sermon of,
To prove the lawful issue of thy King,
Got out of wedlock, illegitimate.
Ah Duke of Gloster this did thou procure.
Did Richard (villain) no it was thy fault,
Thou would be won to such a damned déed,
Which now to think on makes my soul to bléed.
Ah Friar Anselme, sleep among the blessed,
Thy propheste thus falsely did I wrest.
Thou did, and be thou damned therefore,
Ne'er come thy soul where blessedness abides,
Did thou not know the letter G. was Gloster?
Anselme I did.
Why then did thou affirm,
That it was meant by George the duke of Clarēce
That honourable harmless Gentleman,
Whose thoughts all innocent as any child,
Yet came through thée to such a luckless death.
I was enforced by the Duke of Gloster.
Enforced say thou? would you then be enforced,
Being a man of thy profession,
To sin so vilely, and with thine own mouth,
To damn thy soul? No thou wast not enforced,
But gain and hope of high promotion
Hired thée thereto, say was it so or no?
It did, it did.
Why then record in thy black hellish thoughts,
How many mischiefs have ensude hereon?
First wronged Clarence drowned in the Tower,
Next, Edwards children murdered in the Tower:
This day at Pomfret noble Gentlemen,
Thrée the Quéenes kindred, lose their harmless heads.
Think thou that here this flood of mischief 〈◊〉
No villain, many are marked to the block,
And they the nearest, think them furthest off,
Even Buckingham, creator of that king,
Shall he to woe and wretched ending bring.
All this (accursed man) hath come by thee,
And thy false wresting of my prophecy,
For Englands good disclosed to thy trust,
And so it had béene, had thou proved just.
But thou and every one that had a hand,
In that most woeful murder of the Princes,
To settle ends you are appointed all.
Here in thy study shalt thou starve thy self,
And from this hour not taste one bit of food,
The rest shall after follow on a row,
To all their deaths, vengeance will not be slow.
Where is M. Doctor Shaw?
Here friend, what is thy will with me?
K. Richard prays ye to come to him strait.
For he would be consest.
I cannot come, I pray thée take that Friar,
For he can do it better far then I.
A Friar M. Doctor I sée none.
Doest thou not? no, thy untainted soul
Cannot discern the horrors that I do.
Shaw go with him, &amp; tell that tyrant Richard,
He hath but thrée years limited for life,
And then a shameful death takes hold on him,
That done, return, and in thy study end
Thy loathed life that did vs all offend,
With all my heart, would it were ended now,
So it were done, I care not where nor how.
Now mistress Shore, here our commissionends,
Put off your robe of shame, for this is Algate,
Whither it was appointed we should bring you,
My robe of shame? Oh that so soul a name
Should be applied unto so fair a garment,
Which is no more to bée condemned of shame,
Then snow of putrefaction is deserved,
To cover an infectious heap of dung,
My robe of shame, but not my shame put off,
For that sits branded on my forehead still,
And therefore in derision was I wrapped,
In this white Sheet: and in derision bore
This burning taper, to express my folly,
That having light of reason to direct me,
Delighted yet in by-waies of dark error.
Well mistress Shore, I hope you grudge not vs,
We she with you all the favour poor men could.
Oh God forbid: I know the Kings Edia
Set you a work, and not your own desires.
I truly mistress, and for our parts,
We could be well content it were otherwise,
But that the laws severe, and so we leave you.
Farewell unto you both: and London too,
Farewell to thee, where first I was inticde,
That scandalizde thy dignity with shame,
But now thou hast returned me treble blame,
My tongue that gave consent inioynde to beg.
Mine eyes adiudgde to hourly laments,
Mine arms for their embracings, catch the air,
And these quick nimble féet that were so ready
To step into a kings for bidden bed,
London thy •…ints have punished for their pride,
And thou hast drunk their blood for thy revenge,
What now avails to think what I have béene,
Then welcome nakedness and poverty,
Welcome contempt, welcome you barren fields,
Welcome the lack of meat, and lack of friends,
And wretched Iane, according to thy state,
Sit here, sit here, and lower if might be:
All things that breath in their extremity,
Have some recourse of succour, thou hast none,
The child offended flies unto the mother,
The Soldier struck, retires unto his Captain,
The fish distressed, slides into the river,
Birds of the ayre do fly unto their dams,
And underneath their wings are quickly shrouded
Nay, beat the spaniel, &amp; his master mons him,
But I have neither where to shroud my self,
Nor any one to make my moan unto,
Come patience then, and though my body pine,
Make then a banquet to refresh my soul,
Let hearts déepe throbbing sighs be all my bread,
My drink salt tears, my guests repentāt thoughts
That who so knew me, and doth sée me now,
May shun by me the breach of wedlockes vow.
Oh God how full of dangers grows these till
And no assurance séene in any state,
No man can say that hee is moister now,
Of any thing is his, such is the tide
Of sharpe disturbance running through the land,
I have given over my office in the Tower,
Because I cannot brooke their vile complots,
Nor smoother such outrageous villainies:
But mistress Shore, to be so basely wronged,
And wildly used, that hath so well deserved,
It doth afflict me in the very soul,
She sau'de my kinsman, Harry Stranguidge life,
Th•…refore in duty am I bound to her,
To do what good I way, though law forbid,
Sée where she sits, God comfort thée good soul,
First take that to reléeue thy body with,
And next receive this book, wherein is food,
Manna of heaven to refresh thy soul:
These holy meditations mistress Shore,
Will yield much comfort in this misery,
Whereon contemplate still, and never linne,
That God may be unmindful of thy sin.
Master Lieutenant, in my hart I thank ye,
For this kind comfort to a wretched soul:
Welcome •…wéet prayer-booke, food of my life,
The sovereign balm for my sick conscience:
Thou shalt be my souls pleasure and delight,
To wipe my sins out of Ichouacs sight.
B. Do so good mistress Shore, now I must leave ye,
Because some other business calls me hence,
And God I pray regard your penitence.
Farewell sir Robert, and for this good to mée,
The God of heaven bee mindful still of thee.
This way she went, and cannot be far off,
For but even now I met the officers,
That were attendant on her in her penance,
Yonder she sits, now then Air show thy self,
Thankful to her, that sometime sau'de thy life,
When Law had made thée subject to base death,
Give her thy purse, for here comes some Lady,
Stand by a while, for fear thou be discovered.
What mistress Shore, King Edwards concubine•…,
Set on a mole-hill, oh disparagement.
A throne were •…tter for your Ladyship,
Fie will you •…ubber these fair cheeks with fears?
Or sit so solitary, wheres all your servants?
Where is your gown of silk, your periwigs,
Your fine robe•…os, and your costly jewels,
What not so much as a shoe upon your foot,
Nay then I see the world goes hard with whoores.
The villain slave gibes at her misery.
Now whether is it better to be in court,
And there to beg a licence of the King,
For transportation of commodities,
Then here to sit forsaken as thou dost,
I think upon condition Edward lived,
And thou were still in favour as before,
Thou woulds not say that Rufford had deserved,
To have his ears rent for a worser suite,
Then licence to ship over corn and lead,
What not a word, faith wench isle tell thee what,
If thou dost think thy old trade out of date,
Go learn to play the bawd another while.
Jnbum•…e wretch, why dost thou scorn her so,
And vere her grieved soul with bitter taunts,
Because I will, she is a courtesan,
And one abhorred of the world for lust.
If all thy faults were in thy forehead writ,
Perhaps thou would thy self appear no less,
But much more horrible then she doth now.
You are no judge of mine sir.
Why nor thou of her.
The world hath judged, and found her guilty,
And tic the Kings command she be held odious.
The King of heaven commands otherwise,
And if thou b•… not willing to relieve her,
Let it suffice thou see her miserable,
And study not to amplify her grief.
What other woeful spectacle comes here?
Mistress take that and spend it for my sake.
Oh I am pinched with more thē common want,
Where shall I find relief? Good Gentleman,
Pity a wretched woman like to starve,
And I will pray for ye. One halfepennie
For Christs sake, to comfort me withal.
What mistress Blage, first you? no marvel sure,
But you should be relieude, a halfepenie quoth?
I marie sir, and so be hanged my self,
Not I, this Gentleman may if he please,
Get you to your companion mistress Shore,
And then there is a pair of queens wellmet,
Now I bethink me, isle go to the King,
And tell him that some will relieve Shores wife,
Except some officer there be appointed,
That carefully regards it be not so.
Thereof my self will I make offer to him,
Which questionless hee cannot but accept,
So shall I still pursue Shores wife with hate,
That scorned mée in her high whoores estate.
Good Gentleman bestow your charity,
One single halfepennie to help my need.
Not one, were I the master of a mint,
What? succour thee that did betray thy friend?
See where she sits, whom thou did scorn indeed,
And therefore rightly art thou scorned again:
Thou thoughtst to been riched with her goods,
But thou hast now lost both thy own and hers,
And for my part, knew It would save thy life,
Thou should not get so much as a crum of bread
Pack counterfeit, pack a way dissembling drab.
Oh misery, but shall I stay to look
Her in her face, whom I so much have wronged?
Yes mistress Blage, I fréely pardon you,
You have done me no wrong, come sit by me:
It was so in wealth, w•…y not in poverty?
Oh willingly if yo u can brooke her presence,
Whom you have great er reason to despise.
Why woman, Ric hard that hath banished me,
And séekes my ruin (c•…useless though it bee)
Do I in heart pray for, and will do still,
Come thou &amp; share wit h me what God hath sent,
A stranger gave it me, and part thereof
I do as fréely now bestow on you.
I thank you mistress Shore, this curtsy
Renews the grief of my inconstancy.
Yonder she sits how like a withered tree,
That is in winter leauelesse and bereft
Of lively sap, sits she poor ibis•… soul,
How much unlike the woman is sh•… now,
She was but yesterday: so short and brittle
Is this worlds happiness: but who is that.
False mistress Blage? how can thou brook his Iane?
I thou wast always mild and pitiful,
Oh had thou béene as chaste, we had béene blessed,
But now no more of that: she shall not starve,
So long as this, and such as this may serve,
Here mistress Shore, féed on these homely Cates,
And there is wine to drink them down withal.
Good sir your name, that pities poor In. Shore
That in my prayers I may remember you.
No matter for my name, I am a friend,
That loves you well, so farewell mistress Shore,
When that is spent, I vow to bring you more.
Gods blessing be your guide where ere you go,
Thus mistress Blage you sée •…idst our woe,
For all the world can doe, God sends relief,
And will not yet wée peris•… in our grief,
Come let vs step into some secret place.
Tic not amiss, if you be so content,
For here the fields too open &amp; frequent.
Where vndisturbde we may partake this grace.
What is she gone so soon? alack poor Iane,
How I compassionate thy woeful case?
Whereas we lived tog•…there man and wife,
Oft on an humble stool by the fire side,
Sate she contented, when as my high heat,
Would chid her for it. But what would she say
Husband we both must lower sit one day,
When I dare swear thee never dreamd of this,
But see good God what prophesying is.
This is King Richards hand, I know it well,
And this of thine is justly counterfeit,
As hee himself would swear it were 〈◊〉 ou n•….
The kings hand 〈◊〉 more of that.
Why cu•…e letter, every little •…ash,
In all respects alike, how may I use,
My transportation of my cozne and hides,
Without the danger of forbidding law,
And so I would have done in Edwards days,
But that good •…ris Shore did please to cross mée,
But mark how now I will requite her for it.
I moude my suit, and plainly told the King,
Some would rely•…e her, if no man had charge,
To sée seucrcly to the contrary.
Forth with his Grace appointed me the man,
And gave me officers to waite upon me,
Which will so countenance thy cunning work,
As I shall no way be suspected in it: how say thou Fog?
It will do well indéed:
But good sir have a care in any case,
For else you know what barm may come thereon.
A care say thou? why man, I will not trust
My house, my strongest locks, nor any place,
But mine own bosom, there will I kéepe it still,
If I miscarry, so doth it with me.
Are ye so cunning sir, I say no more,
Iane Shore or I may quittance you for this.
Well Fog I have contented thee,
Thou moist be gone, I must about my charge,
To sée that none reléeue Shores wife with ought.
Come on good fellows, you that must atcend,
King Richards service under my command,
Your charge is to be very vigilant,
Over that strumpet whom they call Shores wife:
If any traitor give her but a mite,
A draught of water, or a crust of bread,
Or any other food what ere it bee,
Lay hold on him, for it is present death,
By good King Richards proclamation,
This is her haunt, here stand I Sentincll,
Kéepe you vnséene, and aide me when I call.
Now must I under colour of playing at bowls, help till relieve my good masters, masters Shore. Come, Ief∣frey, wee will play five up for this bottle of Ale, and yonder good pure woman shall keep the stakes, and this cheese shall be the master.
Here is a villain, that will not relieve her,
But yet héele loose he bowls, that way to help her,
Apprehend him fellows when I bid ye:
Although his mate be gone, he shall pay for it.
Take him, and let the Beadles whip him well.
Hear ye sir, shall they be whipped and hanged that gfu•… to the pure, then they shall bee damn that take fro the pure.
Oh yonder sits the swéet forsaken soul,
To whom for ever I stand déeply bound:
She sau'de my life, then Air help to save hers.
Whither go ye sir?
You come to give this strumpet some relief.
She did more good then ever thou can doe,
And if thou wilt not pity her thy self,
Give others leave, by duty bound thereto:
Here mistress Shore, take this, and would to God
It were so much as my poor heart could wish.
Who is it that thus pities my poor wife?
Ti•… M. Air, Gods blessing on him for it.
Dare thou do so Air?
Rufford I dare do more:
Here is my ring, it ways an ounce of Gold,
And take my cloak to keep yée from the cold.
Thou art a traitor Air.
Rufford, thou art a villain so to call me.
Lay hold on him, attach him officers.
Rufford, •…e answer thine arrest with this.
All this contending sir will not avail,
This treason will be rated at thy life.
Life is too little for her sake that sau'de it.
Is he a traitor sir, for doing good?
God save the King, a true heart means no ill.
I trust he hath reclaimde his •…arpe edict,
And will not that his poorest subject perish,
And so persuaded I my self will doe,
That which both love and nature binds me to.
I c•…nnot give her as she well deserves.
For she hath lost a greater benefit.
〈◊◊〉 take that purse.
〈◊〉 •…kte away.
You shall not sir, for I will answer it,
Before the King if you enforce it so.
It must be so, you shall unto the King.
You will be he will first repent the thing:
Come M. Air, isle bear ye company,
Which wise men doth say ease calamity,
If gre•…e to spéech frée passage could afford,
Or 〈◊〉 w•…e I had a fitting word,
I migh•… complain, or if my floods of tears,
Could move remorse of minds, or pearce dull ears,
Or wash away my cares, or cleanse my crime:
With words &amp; tears I would be wail the time.
But it is bootless, why live I to see,
All those despised that do pity me.
Despised? alas, destroyed, and led to death,
That gave me alms here to prolong my breath.
Fair Dames behold, let my example prove,
There is no love like to a husbands love.
Now tell vs Rufford which of these it is,
That in the heat of his vpheaued spléene,
Contemns our crown, disdains our dignity,
And arms himself against authority.
Both have offended my dread sovereign,
Though not alike, yet both faults capital,
These l•…es declare what, when, &amp; where it was.
Which is that Air?
This young man my Liege.
I thought it was some hot distempred blood,
That feared his giddy brain with business:
Is thy name Air?
It is.
This paper says so.
Perish may he that made that paper speak.
Ha? Dost thou wish confusion unto vs?
This paper is the Organ of our power,
And shall pronounce thy condemnation,
We make it speak thy treasons to thy face,
And thy malicious tongue speaks treas•…n still.
Relieu'st thou Shores wife in contempt of vs?
No, but her just desert,
She sau'de my life, which I had forfeited,
Whereby my goods and life she me•…ited.
And thou shalt pay it in the self same place,
Where thou this man our Officer, did out face,
And scorndst vs saying if we stood by,
Thou would relieve her.
I do not deny,
For want of food her breath was néere expired,
I gave her means to buy it vndesirde,
And rather choose to die for charity,
Then live condemned of ingratitude.
Your good d•…tion brings you to y• gall•…ws,
He hath his sentence, Rufford sée him •…gd.
Now sir your name?
Is it not written there?
Here is Matthew Flood.
That is his name my Lord.
Is thy name Flood?
So M. Rufford sates.
Flood and Air? the elements conspire,
In ayre and water to confound our power:
Did thou relieve that hateful wretch Shores wife?
I did relieve that woeful wretch Shores wife.
Thou séemst a man well staid and temperate,
Durst thou infringe our proclamation?
I did not break it.
Yes, and added more,
That you would answer it before the King.
And added more, you would repent the thing.
Who, I? his Highness knows my innocence,
And ready service with my goods and life,
Answer thy treasons to his majesty.
What can thou say Flood why thou should not die?
Nothing, for I am mortal and must die,
When my time comes, but that I thinks not yet,
Although (God knows) each hour I wish it were,
So full of dolor is my wearje life:
Now say I this, that I do know the man,
Which doth abette that traitorous libeller,
Who did compose &amp; spread that slauderous rime,
Which scandals you, and doth abuse the time.
What libeller? another Collingborne?
That wrote: The Cat, the Rat, and Louell our Dog,
Do rule all England under a Hog.
Can thou repeat it Flood?
I think I can if you command me so.
We do command thee.
In this sort it goes.
The crook bakt Boar the way hath found,
To root our Roses from our ground,
Both flower and bud will he confound,
Till King of beasts the swine be crowned:
And then the Dog, the Cat, and Rat,
Shall in his trough feed and be fat.
quoth M. Fog, chief secretary and counsel∣lore to M. Rufford.
How say thou Flood, doth Rufford 〈◊〉 this?
He is a traitor if he do my Lord.
I 〈◊〉 it? dread Lord I ask no grace,
If I be guilty of this libelling,
Vouchsafe me justice as you are my Prince,
Against this traitor that accuses me.
What justice crau'st thou? I will combat thée,
In sign whereof I do vnbutton me,
And in my shirt my challenge will maintain,
Thou call me traitor, I will prove thee one,
Open thy bosom like me if thou dare?
I will not be so rude before his grace.
Thou wilt not op the pack of thy disgrace.
Because thy doublets stuffed with traitorous libels.
Catesbie tear off the buttons from his breast.
What findst thou there?
Your highness hand and seal,
For transportation of Hides, Corn and Lead.
Traitor, did I sign that commission?
O pardon me most royal King.
Pardon? to counterfeit my hand and seal?
Have I bestowed such love, such countenance?
Such trust on thee, and such authority,
To have my hand and signet counterfeit?
To carry Corn the food of all the land,
And Lead, which after might annoy the land,
And Hides, whose leather must relieve the land,
To strangers enemies unto the land:
Did thou so néerely connterfet my hand?
Not I my liege, but Fog the Attorney.
Away with him Louell and Catesbie, go,
〈◊〉 the Sheriffs of London presently,
To see h•…m drawn, and hango, and quartered,
Let them not drink before they see him dead.
Hast you again.
Well Flood thou art my death,
I might have liudet' have séene thee lose thy head.
Thou hast but •…ustice for thy cruelty,
Against the guiltless souls in misery,
I ask no fau•…ur if I merit death.
Cra•…st thou no favour? then I tell thee Flood,
Thou art a traitor •…reeking our edict,
By succouring that traitrous queen Shores wife.
And thou shalt die.
If I have broke the law.
If 〈◊〉? did thou not give her thy purse?
And d•…st thou not maintain the deed?
I do, if it be death to the relenting heart,
Of a kind husband, wronged by a King,
To 〈◊〉 his 〈◊◊〉 seduced wife,
Whom all the world must suffer by command,
To pine and perish for the want of food:
If it be treason for her husband then,
In the dear bowels of his former love,
To bury his own wrong and her misdéed,
And give her meat whom he was wont to féede,
Then Shore must die, for Flood is not my name,
Though once I took it to conceal my shame,
Pits permits not injured Shore pass by,
And see his once loud wife with famine die.
Louell &amp; Catesbie, this is Shore indéed,
We confess that thou hast p•…ledge,
And art excepted in our Proclamation,
Because thou art her husband whom it concerns,
And thou moist lawfully relieve thy wife,
Upon condition thou forgive her fault,
Take her again, and use her as before,
Hazard new horns, how sasist thou, wilt thou Shore?
If any but your Grace should so upbraid,
Such rude reproach should roughly be repaid.
Suppose for treason that she lay condemned,
Might I not séede her till her hour of death,
And yet my self no traitor for it?
Thou might.
And why not now (O pardon me dread lord)
When she hath had both punishment and shame
Sufficient, since a King did cause her blame,
May I not give her food to save her life,
Yet never take and use her as my wife?
Except thou take her home again to thée,
Thou art a stranger, and it shall not be,
For if thou do, expect what doth belong.
I never can forget so great a wrong.
Then never féede her whom thou can not love.
My charity doth that compassion move.
Move vs no more, Louell let Air be hanged,
Just in the place where he relicud Shores wife:
Shore hath his pardon for this first offence.
The name of husband pleads his innocence,
Away with them: Catesbie come you with v•…?
Good mistress Shore, 〈◊〉 not with your tears,
But let me go in quiet to mine end.
Alas poor soul,
Was never innocent thus put to death.
The mores my joy, that I am innocent,
My death is the less grievous, I am so.
Ah M. Air the time hath béene ere now,
When I have kn•…old to Edward on my knees,
And begged for him, that now doth make me beg.
I have given him, when he hath begged of me,
Though he forbids to give me when I beg,
I have ere now relieved him and his,
Though he and his deny relief to me:
Had I béene envious then, as Richard now,
I had not starved, nor Edwards sons bin murdered,
Nor Richard lived to put you now to death.
The more Iane is thy virtue and his sin.
Come sir dispatch.
Dispatch say you? dispatch you may it call,
He cannot stay when death dispatches all.
Lord, is my sin so horrible and grievous,
That I should now become a murderer?
I have sau'de the life of many a man condemned,
But never was the death of man before.
That any man thus for my sake should die,
Afflicts me more then all my misery.
Iane be content,
I am as much indebted unto thee,
As unto nature, I owed thee a life,
When it was forfeit unto death by law,
Thou b•…gdst it of the king and gau'st it me:
This house of flesh wherein this soul doth dwell,
Is thine, and thou art Landlady of it,
And this poor life a Tenant but at pleasure,
It never came to pay the rent till now,
But hath run in arerage all this while,
And now for very shame comes to discharge it,
When death distraines for what is but thy due,
I had not ought thée so much as I doe,
But by thy only mercy to preserve it,
Until I loose it for my charity.
Thou giu'st me more then ever I can pay,
Then do thy pleasure executioner,
And now farewell kind virtuous mistress Shore,
In heaven wéele méete again, in earth no more.
Farewell, farewell, thou for thy alms dost die.
And I must end here starved in misery,
In life my friend, in death isle not forsake thee,
Thou goosed to heaven, I hope to overtake thee.
O world what art thou? man, even from his birth
Finds nothing else but misery on earth,
Thou never (world) scorn'dst mée so much before,
But I (vain world) do hate thee ten times more.
I am glad I féele approaching death so no,
World thou hottest mée, I thée vain world defy.
I pray ye yet good master officers,
Do but this kindness to poor wretched souls,
As let vs have the burial of our friend,
It is but so much labour saude for you.
There take his body, bury it where you will,
So it be quickly done out of the way.
Whats he that begs the burial of my friend,
And hath so oftentimes relieved me?
Ah gentle sir, to comfort my sad woe,
Let me that good kind man of mercy know.
Ah Iane, now there is none but thou and I
Look on me well, know thou thy Ma. Shore?
My Husband? then break and live no more.
Ah my déere Iane, comfort thy heavy soul,
Go not away so soon, a little stay,
A little, little while, that thou and I,
Like man and wife may here together die,
How can I look upon my husbands face,
That shamde my self, and wrought his déep disgrace•…
Iane be content, our woes are now alike,
With one self rod thou séest God d•… vs strike,
If for thy 〈◊〉, isle pray to heaven for thee,
And if for mine, do thou as much for me.
Ah Shore, first possible thou can forgine mée?
Yes Iane, I doc.
I cannot hope thou wilt:
My faults so great that I cannot expect it.
I faith I doe, as fréely from my soul,
As at Gods hands I hope to be forgiven.
Then God reward thée, for we now must part,
I féele cold death doth seize upon my heart.
And hee is come to me, here he lies,
I féele him ready to close up mine eyes,
Lend mée thy hand to bury this our friend,
And then we both will hasten to our end.
sit thou there, here I my place will have,
Give mée thy hand, thus wée embrace our grave,
Ah Iane, he that the depth of woe will see,
Let him but now behold our misery:
But be content, this is the best of al,
Lower then now we are, wée cannot fall.
Ah, I am faint, how happy Airs art thou,
Not féeling that which doth afflict vs now?
Oh happy grave, to vs this comfort giving,
Here less two living dead, here one dead living,
Here for his sake, lo this we doe for thee,
Thou look for one, and art poss•…st of thrée.
Oh dying marriage, o•…, swéet married death
Thou grave which only should part faithful friends,
Bring vs together, and dast i•…in our h•…nds,
Oh •…ing death, even in this d•…ing life,
Yet ere I go, once Matthew kiss thy wife.
Ah my swéet Iane, farewell, farewell poor soul,
Now tyrant Richard doo the worst thou can,
She doth defy thée, oh inconstant world,
Here lies a true Anatom•…e of thee,
A King had all my joy, that her enjoyed,
And by a King again 〈◊〉 was destroyed:
All ages of my kingly w•…es shall tell,
Once more inconstant world farewell, farewell.
Sirs if the King, or else the Duke of Buckingham
Do send for me, I will attend them straight,
But what are these here openly lie dead,
Oh God, the one is mistress Shore, &amp; this is Flood,
That was my man: the third is master Air,
Who suffered death for his reléeuing her,
They shall not thus lie in the open way,
Lend me your hands, and heavy hearts withal,
At mine own charge lie give them burial.
Most noble Lords, since it hath pleased you,
Beyond our expectation on your bounties,
To•… mpale my temples with the Diadem.
How far my quiet thoughts have ever béene,
From this great 〈◊◊〉,
Heaven best can •…ness: I am your King,
Long may I be so, to deserve your love,
But I will be a servant to you all,
Pray God my broken sléeps may give you rest.
But only that my blood doth challenge it,
Being your lawful Prince by true succession,
I could have wished, with all my heart I could,
This majesty had sat on the brow
Of any other: so much do I affect a private life,
To spend my dates in contemplation.
But since that heaven and you will have it so,
I take the crowue as méekely at your hands,
As free and pure from an ambitious thought,
As any new borne babe. Thus must thou Richard
Séeme as a saint to men in outward show, aside.
Being a very devil in thy heart:
Thus must thou cover all thy villainies,
And kéepe them close from ouerlookers eyes.
My Sovereign by the general consent
Of all the Lords and commons of the land,
I tender to your royal majesty,
This princely Lady, the Lady Anne of Warwick
Judged the only worthiest of your love,
To be your highness bride, fair Englands Quéen
My royal Princely Cousin Buckingham,
I see you strive to bless me more and more,
Your bounty is so large and ample to me,
You overflow my spirits with your great love,
I willingly accept this virtuous Princess,
And crown her Angel beauty with my love.
Then as the hand of your high parliament,
I give her here unto your majesty.
Lord Louell I as heartily receive her,
Welcome fair Queen.
And from the Lords &amp; commons of your land
I give the frée and voluntary oath,
Of their allegiance to your majesty.
As to their sovereign and liege Lord and Lady,
Richard the third, &amp; beauteous Anne his Quéene,
The true and lawful King &amp; Quéene of England.
I doe accept it Catesbie, and return,
Exchange of mutual and party love.
Now Fog too, that in your traitorous Libels,
Besides the counterfeiting of our hand and seal
For Rufford, though so great a fault deserved•…
To suffer death, as hee already hath,
Going about to siubber our renowue,
And wound vs with reproach and infamy,
Yet Fog that thou thy self moist plainly see,
How far I am from séeking sharp revenge,
Fog I forgive thee, and withal wee doe,
Repeal our heavy sentence against Shores wi•…e,
Restoring all her goods, for we intend,
With all the world now to be perfect friends.
Why my good Lord, you kn•…w shées dead already.
True Catesbie, else I ne'er had spoke such words,
Alas I see our kindness comes too late,
For Catesbie tells me she is dead already.
I my good Lord, so is her husband too.
Would they had lived, to see our friendly change,
But Catesbie say, where did Shore and his wife?
Where Air was hanged for giving her relief,
There both of them round circling his cold grave,
And arm in arm departed from this life:
The people for the love they bear to her,
And her kind husband, pitying his wrongs,
For ever after mean to call the ditch,
Shores Ditch, as in the memory of them,
Their bodies in the Friars minorites,
Are in one grave enterred all together,
But mistress Blage for ingratitude,
To mistress Shore, lies dead unburied,
And no one will afford her burial.
But mistress Blage she shall have burial too,
What now we must be friends, indeed we must,
And now my Lords, I give you all to know,
In memory of our eternal love,
I do ordame an order of the Bathe,
Twelve knights in number of that royal sort,
Which order with all princely ceremonies,
Shall be observed in all royal pomp,
As Edwards our forefather of the Barter,
Which feast our self, and our beloved Quéene,
Will presently solemnise in our person.
Now am I bold to put your grace in mind
Of my long suite, and partly your own promise,
The Earl of Herefords lands.
Cousin wéele better think on that here after.
M•… pains my Lord hath not deserved delay.
W•…l you appoint our time: then you shall stay,
For this hot hastiness sir you shall stay,
Moo•… 〈◊〉 no more you were best.
I Richard, is it come to this?
In my first suite of all, dost thou dense me?
Break thine o•… word, &amp; turn me off so slightly,
Richard thought had as good have damned thy soul,
As basely thus to beale with Buckingham:
Richard isle sit upon thy crew•…ped shoulder:
I faith I will, if heaven will give me leave,
And Harry Richmond, this hand alone,
Shall fetch thée home, and seat thee in his throne.
What is he gone in heat, why farewell bee,
He is displeased, let him be pleased again,
We have no time to think on angry men:
Come my swéet Quéene, let vs go solemnise,
Our Knighthoods order in most royal wise.

Naked, as at their birth:
(Be not too bold.
You trouble me) and with a whip of steel,
Print wounding lashes in their iron ribs.
I fear no mood stamped in a private brow,
When I am pleased t'vnmaske a public vice.
I fear no strumpets drugs, nor ruffians stab,
Should I detect their hateful luxuries;
No brokers, usurers, or lawyers gripe,
Were I disposed to say, they're all corrupt.
I fear no courtiers frown, should I applaud
The easy flexure of his supple hummes.
Tut, these are so innate, and popular,
That drunken custom would not shame to laugh
(In scorn) at him, that should but dare to taxe'hem.
And yet, not one of these but knows his works,
Knows what damnation is, the devil, and hell,
Yet, hourly they persist, grow rank in sin,
Puffing their souls away in perj'rous air,
To cherish their extortion, pride, or lusts.
Forbear, good ASPIRE, be not like your name.
O, but to such, whose •aces are all zeal,
And (with the words of HERCVLES) invade
Such crimes as these! that will not smell of sin,
But seem as they were made of Sanctify!
Religion in their garments, and their hair
Cut shorter than their eye-browes! when the conscience
Is vaster than the Ocean, and devours
More wretches than the Counters.
Gentle ASPIRE,
Contain your spirit in more stricter bounds,
And be not thus transported with the violence
Of your strong thoughts.
Unless your breath had power
To melt the world, and mould it new again,
It is in vain; to spend it in these moods.
I not observed this thronged round till now.
Gracious, and kind spectators, you are welcome,
APOLLO, and the MVSES feast your eyes
With graceful objects, and may our MINERVA
Answer your hopes, unto their largest strain.
Yet here, mistake me not, judicious friends.
I doe not this, to beg your patience,
Or servilely to fawn on your applause,
Like some dry brain, despairing in his merit:
Let me be censured, by th'austerest brow,
Where I want art, or judgment, tax me freely:
Let envious Censors with their broadest eyes
Look through and through me; I pursue no favour.
Only vouchsafe me your attentions,
And I will give you music worth your ears.
O, how I hate the monstrousness of time,
Where every servile imitating spirit,
(Plagued with an itching leprosy of wit)
In a mere halting fury, strives to fling
His •lc'rous body in the Thespian spring,
And straight loop's forth a Poet! but as lame
As VULCAN, or the founder of Cripple-gate.
In faith, this Humour will come ill to some,
You will be thought to be too peremptory.
This Humour? good; and why this Humour, MITIS?
Nay doe not turn, but answer.
Answer? what?
I will not stir your patience, pardon me,
I urged it for some reasons, and the rather
To give these ignorant well-spoken days,
Some taste of their abuse of this word Humour.
O doe not let your purpose fall, good ASPIRE,
It cannot but arrive most acceptable,
Chiefly to such, as have the happiness,
Daily to see how the poor innocent word
Is racked, and tortured.
I; I pray you proceed.
Ha? what? what is it?
For the abuse of Humour.
O, I crave pardon, I had lost my thoughts.
Why Humour (as it is ens) we thus define it
To be a quality of air or water,
And in it self holds these two properties,
Moisture and fluxure: As, for demonstration,
Power water on this floor, twill wet and run:
Likewise the air (forced through a horn or trumpet)
Flows instantly away, and leaves behind
A kind of dew; and hence we doe conclude,
That what so ever hath fluxure, and humidity,
As wanting power to contain it self,
Is Humour: so in every humane body
The choler, melancholy, phlegm, and blood,
By reason that they flow continually
In some one part, and are not continent,
Receive the name of Humours. Now thus far
It may, by Metaphor, apply it self
Unto the general disposition:
As when some one peculiar quality
Doth so possess a man, that it doth draw
All his affects, his spirits, and his powers,
In their confl•ctions, all to run one way,
This may be truly said to be a Humour.
But that a Rooke, in wearing a pied feather,
The cable hat-band, or the three-pild ruff,
A yard of shoe-tie, or the Switzers knot
On his French garters, should affect a Humour!
O, it is more then most ridiculous.
He speaks pure truth: now if an Idiot
Have but an apish, or fantastic strain,
It is his Humour.
Well I will scourge those Apes;
And to these courteous eyes oppose a mirror,
As large as is the stage, whereon we act:
Where they shall see the times deformity
Anatomized in every nerve, and sinew,
With constant courage, and contempt of fear.
ASPIRE (I urge it as your friend) take heed,
The days are dangerous, full of exception,
And men are grown impatient of reproof.
Ha, ha:
You might as well have told me, yond is heaven,
This earth, these men; and all had moved alike.
Doe not I know the times condition?
Yes MITIS, and their souls, and who they be
That either will, or can except against me.
None, but a sort of fools, so sick in taste,
That they contemn all physic of the mind,
And like gald camels kick at every touch.
Good men, and virtuous spirits, that loathe their vices,
Will cherish my free labours, love my lives,
And with the fervor of their shining grace,
Make my brain fruitful to bring forth more objects,
Worthy their serious, and intent eyes.
But why enforce I this? as fainting? no.
If any here chance to behold himself,
Let him not dare to challenge me of wrong,
For, if he shame to have his follies known,
First he should shame to act 'hem: my strict hand
Was made to cease on vice, and with a gripe
Squeeze out the humour of such spongy souls,
As like up every idle vanity.
Why this is right Furor Poeticus!
Kind gentlemen, we hope your patience
Will yet conceive the best, or entertain
This supposition, that a mad-man speaks.
What? are you ready there? MITIS sit down:
And my CORDATVS. Sound hough, and begin.
I leave you two, as censors, to sit here:
Observe what I present, and liberally
Speak your opinions, upon every Scene,
As it shall pass the view of these spectators.
Nay, now, you're tedious Sirs, for shame begin.
And MITIS, note me, if in all this front,
You can espy a gallant of this mark,
Who (to be thought one of the judicious)
Sits with his arms thus wreathed, his hat pulled here,
Cries meaw, and nods, then shakes his empty head,
Will show more several motions in his face,
Then the new London, Rome, or Niniueh,
And (now and then) breaks a dry bisquet jest,
Which that it may more easily be chewed,
He sleeps in his own laughter.
Why? will that
Make it be sooner swallowed?
O, assure you.
Or if it did not, yet as HORACE sings,
" Ieiunus raro stomachus vulgaria temnit,
" Mean cares are welcome still to hungry guests.
It is true, but why should we observe 'hem, ASPIRE?
O I would know 'hem, for in such assemblies,
They are more infectious then the pestilence:
And therefore I would give them pills to purge,
And make 'hem fit for fair societies.
How monstrous, and detested is it, to see
A fellow, that has neither art, nor brain,
Sit like an ARISTARCHVS, or starke-asse,
Taking men's lines, with a tobacco face,
In snuff, still spitting, using his wried looks
(In nature of a vice) to wrest, and turn
The good aspect of those that shall sit near him,
From what they doe behold! O, it is most vile.
Nay, ASPIRE.
Peace, MITIS, I doe know your thought.
You'll say, your guests here will except at this:
Pish, you are too timorous, and full of doubt.
Then, he, a patient, shall reject all physic,
Because the physician tells him, you are sick:
Mary, with all my heart, Sir, you shall doe it yet, and I thank you.
Nay, nay, stay, stay, hear you?
You could not have studied to have done me a greater benefit at the instant, for I protest to you, I am imperfect, and (had I spoke it) I must of necessity have been out.
Why, but doe you speak this seriously?
Seriously! I (wit's my help doe I) and esteem my self in debted to your kindness for it.
For what?
Why, for undertaking the prologue for me.
How? did I undertake it for you?
Did you! I appeal to all these gentlemen, whether you did or no? Come, it pleases you to cast a strange look on it now; but twill not serve.
Before me, but it must serve: and therefore speak your pro∣logue.
And I doe, let me die poisoned with some venomous hiss, and never live to look as high as the two-penny room again.
He has put you to it, sir.
Stead, what a humorous fellow is this? Gentlemen, good ••ith I can speak no prologue, howsoever his weak wit has had the for∣tune to make this strong use of me, here before you: but I protest—
Come, come, leave these fustian protestations: away, come, I cannot abide these gray-headed ceremonies. Boy, fetch me a glass, quick∣lie, I may bid these gentlemen welcome; give 'hem a health here: I marl'e whose wit it was to put a prologue in you'd •ack-buts mouth: they might well think he would be out of tune, and yet you'd play upon him too.
Hang him, dull block.
O good words, good words, a well-timberd fellow, he would have made a good column, and he had been thought on, when the house was a building. O, art thou come? well said; give me boy, fill, so. Here's a cup of wine sparkles like a diamond. Gentle∣women (I am sworn to put them in first) and Gentlemen, a round, in place of a bad prologue, I drink this good draught to your health here, Canary, the very Elixir and spirit of wine. This is that our Poet calls Castalian liquor, when hee comes abroad (now
and then) once in a fortnight, and makes a good meal among Players, where he has Caninum appetitum: mary, at home he keeps a good philo∣sophicall diet, beans and butter-milke: an honest pure Rogue, hee will take you off three, four, five of these, one after another, and look vila∣nously when he has done, like a one-headed CR•BERVS (he do not hear me I hope) and then (when his belly is well ballac't, and his brain rigged a little) he sails away withal, as though he would work wonders when he comes home. He has made a Play here, and he calls it, Every Man out of his humour: Sbloud, and he get me out of the humour hee has put me in, Isle trust none of his Tribe again, while I live. Gentles, all I can say for him, is, you are welcome. I could wish my bottle here amongst you: but there's an old rule, No pledging your own health. Mary, if any here be thirsty for it, their best way (that I know) is, sit still, seal up their lips, and drink so much of the play, in at their ears.
What may this fellow be, CORDATVS?
Faith, if the time will suffer his description, Isle give it you. He is one, the Author calls him CARLO BVFFONE, an impudent common easter, a violent rayler, and an incomprehensible Epicure; one, whose com∣pany is desired of all men, but beloved of none; hee will sooner lose his soul then a jest, and profane even the most holy things, to excite laugh∣la: no honourable or reverend personage whatsoever, can come within the reach of his eye, but is turned into all manner of variety, by his adul∣t'rate simile's.
You paint forth a monster.
He will prefer all Countries before his native, and thinks he can never sufficiently, or with admiration enough, deliver his affectionate conceit of foreign Atheistical policies: but stay—Observe these, he will ap∣pear himself anon.
O, this is your envious man (MACILENTE) I think.
The same, sir.
VIri est, fortune caecuatem facilè far.
Tic true; but, Stoique, where (in the vast world)
Doth that man breathe, that can so much command
His blood, and his affection? well: I see,
I strive in vain to cure my wounded soul;
For every cordial that my thoughts apply,
Turns to a cor'siue, and doth eat it farther.
There is no taste in this Philosophy,
Tic like a potion that a man should drink,
But turns his stomach with the sight of it.
I am no such pild Cinique, to believe
That beggary is the only happiness;
Or (with a number of these patient fools)
To sing: My mind to me a kingdom is,
When the lank hungry belly barks for food.
I look into the world, and there I meet
With objects, that doe strike my bloud-shot eyes
Into my brain: where, when I view my self;
Having before observed, this m•n is great,
Mighty, and feared: that, loved and highly favoured:
A third, thought wise and learned: a fourth, rich,
And therefore honoured: a fifth, rarely featured:
A sixth, admired for his nuptial fortunes:
When I see these (I say) and view my self,
I wish the organs of my •ight were cracked;
And th•t the engine of my grief could cast
Mine eye-balls, like two globes of wild-fire forth,
To melt this vnproportion'd frame of nature.
Oh, they are thoughts that have transfixed my heart,
And often (in the strength of apprehension)
Made my cold passion stand upon my face,
Like drops of dew on a stiff cake of ice.
This alludes well to that of the Poet,
Inuidus suspirat, ge••it, in••tit{que} demes,
S•d•t frigidus, intuem quote odit.
O peace, you break the Scene.
Soft, who be these?
I'll lay me down a while till they be past.
Signior, note this gallant, I pray you.
What is he?
A tame Rooke, you'll take him presently: List.
NAy look you CARLO: this is my Humour now! I have land and money, my friends left me well, and I will be a Gentleman what∣soever it cost me.
Tut, and I take an humour of a thing once, I am like your tay∣lors needle, I go through: but, for my name, Signior, how think you? will it not serve for a gentleman's name, when the Signior is put to it? Ha?
Let me hear: how is it?
Signior In•ulso Sogliardo: me thinks it sounds well.
O excellent! tut, and all fitted to your name, you might very well stand for a gentleman: I know many Sogliardos gentlemen.
Why, and for my wealth I might be a Justice of Peace.
I, and a Constable for your wit.
All this is my Lordship you see here, and those Farms you came by.
Good steps to gentility too, mary: but SOGLIARDO, if you affect to be a gentleman indeed, you must observe all the rare qualities, humours, and complements of a gentleman.
I know it, signior, and if you please to instruct, I am not too good to learn, He assure you.
Enough sir: Isle make admirable use in the proiection of my me∣dicine upon this lump of copper here. Isle bethink me, for you sir.
Signior, I will both pay you, and pray you, and thank you, and think on you.
Is not this purely good?
Sbloud, why should such a prick-card hen as this,
Bearish? Ha? a fool? such a transparent gull
That may be scene through? wherefore should he have land,
Houses, and lordships? O, I could eat my entrails,
And sink my soul into the earth with sorrow.
First (to be an accomplished gentleman, that is, a gentleman of the time) you must give o'er house-keeping in the country, and live al∣together in the city amongst gallants; where, at your first appearance, it were good you turned four or five hundred acres of your best land into two or three trunks of apparel (you may doe it without going to a coniu∣rer) and be sure, you mix your self still, with such as flourish in the spring of the fashion, and are least popular; study their carriage, and behaviour in all: learn to play at Primero and Passage, and (ever when you lose) ha'two or three peculiar oaths to swear by, that no man else swears: but aboue all, protest in your play, and affirm, Upon your credit; As you are a true gentleman (at every cast) you may doe it with a safe conscience, I warrant you.
O admirable rare! he cannot choose but be a gentleman, that he's these excellent gifts: more, more, I beseech you.
You must endeavour to feed cleanly at your Ordinary, sit me∣lancholy, and pick your teeth when you cannot speak: and when you come to Plays, be humorous, look with a good startch't face, and ruffle
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
your brow like a new boot; laugh at nothing but your own jests, or else as the Noblemen laugh. That's a special grace you must observe.
I warrant you, sir.
I, and •it of the stage, and stout: provided, you have a good suit.
O, I'll have a suit only for that, sir.
You must talk much of your kindred, and allies.
Lies! no Signior, I shall not need to doe so, I have kindred in the city to talk of: I have a niece is a merchants wife; and a nephew, my brother SORDIDOS son, of the Innes of Court.
O, but you must pretend alliance with Courtiers and great per∣sons: and ever when you are to dine or sup in any strange presence, hire a fellow with a great chain (though it be copper it's no matter) to bring you letters, feigned from such a Nobleman, or such a Knight, or such a Lady, To their worshipful, right rare, and noble qualified friend or kins∣man, Signior In•ulso Sogliardo; give your self stile enough. And there (while you intend circumstances of news, or enquiry of their health, or so) one of your familiars (whom you must carry about you still) breaks it up (as it were in a jest) and reads it publicly at the table: at which, you must seem to take as unpardonable offence, as if he had torn your Mi∣stress colours, or breathed upon her picture; and pursue it with that hot grace, as if you would advance a challenge upon it presently.
Stay, I doe not like that humour of challenge, it may be accep∣ted; but I'll tell you what's my humour now: I will doe this. I will take occasion of sending one of my suites to the Taylors to have the pocke• repaired, or so; and there such a letter, as you talk of (broke open and all) shall be left: O, the Taylor will presently give out what I am, upon the reading of it, worth twenty of your Gallants.
But then you must put on an extreme face of discontentment at your mans negligence.
O, so I will, and beat him too: I'll have a man for the purpose.
You may; you have land and crowns: O partial fate!
Mass well remembered, you must keep your men gallant, at the first, fine pie•d liveries, laid with good gold lace, there's no loss in it, they may tipped off and pawn it, when they lack victuals.
By'r Lady, that is chargeable Signior, twill bring a man in debt.
Debt? why, that's the more for your credit sir: it's an excellent policy to owe much in these days, if you note it.
As how good Signior? I would fine be a Politician.
O! look where you are indebted any great sum, your credi∣tor observes you with no less regard, then if hee were bound to you for some huge benefit, and will quake to give you the least cause of offence, lest he loose his money. I assure you (in these times) no man has his ser∣uant more obsequious and pliant, then gentlemen their creditors: to whom (if at any time) you pay but a moitie, or a fourth part, it comes more acceptedly, then if you gave them a new-yeares gift.
I perceive you, sir: I will take up, and bring my self in credit sure.
Mary this, always beware you commerce not with bankrupts, or poor needy Ludgathians▪ they are impudent creatures, turbulent spy∣ritz, they care not what violent tragedies they stir, nor how they play fast and loose with a poor gentleman's fortunes, to get their own. Mary, these rich fellows (that have the world, or the better part of it, sleeping in their counting-houses) they are ten times more placable, they; either fear, hope, or modesty, restrains them from offering any outrages: but this is nothing to your followers, you shall not run a penny more in arrerage for them, and you list your self.
No? how should I keep 'hem then?
Keep 'hem? Sbloud let them keep themselves, they are no sheep, are they? What? you shall come in houses, where plate, apparel, jewels, and divers other pretty commodities lye negligently scattered, and I would have those Mercuries follow me (I trow) should remember they had not their fingers for nothing.
That's not so good, me thinks.
Why, after you have kept 'hem a fortnight, or so, and showed 'hem enough to the world, you may turn 'hem away, and keep no more but a boy, it's enough.
Nay, my humour is not for boys, Isle keep men, and I keep a∣ny; and Isle give coats, that's my humour: but I lack a cullisen.
Why, now you ride to the city, you may buy one, Isle bring you where you shall have your choice for money.
Can you, sir?
O, I: you shall have one take measure of you, and make you a Co•• of arms, to fit you of what fashion you will.
By word of mouth, I thank you, Signior; Isle be once a little prodigal in a humour, in faith, and have a most prodigious coat.
Torment and death! break head and brain at once,
To be delivered of your fighting issue.
Who can endure to see blind Fortune dote thus?
To be enamoured on this dusty turf?
This clod? a whoreson puck-fist? O god, god, god, god, &amp;c.
I could run wild with grief now, to behold
The rankness of her bounties, that doth breed
Such bull-rushes; these mushrompe gentlemen,
That shoot up in a night to place, and worship.
Let him alone, some stray, some stray.
Nay, I will examine him before I go, sure.
The Lord of the soil he's al vvests, and strays here? he's he not?
Yes, sir.
Faith, then I pity the poor fellow, he's fallen into a fools hands.
His barnes are full! his reekes, and mowes well trod!
His garners crack with store! O, tic well; ha, ha, ha:
A plague consume thee, and thy house.
O here, S. Swithins, the xv day, variable weather, for the most part rain, good; for the most part rain: Why, it should rain forty days after, now, more or less, it was a rule held, before I was able to hold a plough, and yet here are two days, no rain; ha? it makes me muse. Weal see how the next month begins, if that bee better. September, first, se∣cond, third, and fourth days, rainy, and blustering; this is well now: fifth, sixth, seventh, eight, and ninth, rainy, with some thunder; I mary, this is excellent; the other was false printed sure: the tenth, and eleventh, great store of rain; O good, good, good, good, good! the twelfth, their∣teenth, and fourteenth days, rain; good still: fifteenth, and sixteenth, rain; good still: seventeenth, and eighteenth, rain, good still; nineteenth, and twentieth, good still, good still, good still, good still, good still! one and twentieth, some rain; some rain? well, we must be patient, and at∣tend the heavens pleasure, would it were more though: the one and tvventieth, two and tvventieth, three and tvventieth, great tempest of rain, thunder, and lightning.
O good again, past expectation good!
I thank my blessed angel; never, never,
Laid I penny better out, then this,
To purchase this dear book: not dear for price,
And yet of me as dear•lie prized as life,
Since in it, is contained the very life,
Blood, strength, and sinews of my happiness.
Blessed be the hour, wherein I bought this book,
His studies happy, that composed the book,
And the man fortunate, that sold the book.
Sleep with this charm, and be as true to me,
As I am joyed, and confident in thee.
Ha, ha, ha? In not this good? Is it not pleasing this?
Ha, ha, ha! God pardon me! ha, ha!
Is it possible that such a spacious villain
Should live, and not be plagued? or lies he hid
Within the vvrinckled bosom of the world,
Where heaven cannot see him? Sbloud (me thinks)
It is rare, and strange, that he should breathe, and vvalke,
Feed with digestion, sleep, enjoy his health,
And (like a boisterous whale, svvallowing the poor)
Still swim in wealth, and pleasure! is 't not strange?
Unless his house, and skin were thunder-proofe,
I wonder at it! Me thinks, now, the hectic,
Gout, leprosy, or some such loathed disease
Might light upon him; or that fire (from heaven)
Might fall upon his barnes; or mice, and rats
Eat up his grain; or else that it might rot
Within the hoary reekes, even as it stands:
Me thinks this might be well; and after all
The devil might come and fetch him. I, it is true!
Mean time he sursets in prosperity,
And thou (in envy of him) gnaw'st thy self,
Peace, fool, get hence, and tell thy vexed spirit,
"Wealth in this age will scarcely look on merit.
Who brought this same, sirha?
Mary, sir, one of the Justices men, he says it is a precept, and all their hands be at it:
I, and the prints of them stick in my flesh,
Deeper then i'their letters: They have sent me
Pills wrapped in paper here, that should I take 'hem,
Would poison all the sweetness of my book,
And turn my honey into homlocke juice.
But I am wiser then to serve their precepts,
Or follow their prescriptions. Here's a device,
To charge me bring my grain unto the markets:
I, much, when I have neither barn nor garner,
Nor earth to hide it in, I'll bring it; till then,
Each corn I send shall be as big as Pa•les.
O, but (say some) the poor are like to starve.
Why let 'hem starve, what's that to me? are bees
Bound to keep life in drones, and idle moths? no:
Why such are these (that term themselves the poor,
Only because they would be pitied,
But are indeed a sort of lazy beggars)
Licentious rogues, and sturdy vagabonds,
Bred (by the sloth of a fat plenteous year)
Like snakes, in heat of summer, out of dung,
And this is all that these cheap times are good for:
Whereas a wholesome, and penurious dearth
Purges the soil of such vile excrements,
And kills the vipers up.
O, but master,
Take heed they hear you not.
Why so?
They will exclaim against you.
I, their exclaims
Move me as much, as thy breath moves a mountain!
Poor worms, they hiss at me, whilst I at home
Can be contented to applaud my self,
To fit and clap my hands, and laugh, and leap,
Knocking my head against my roof, with joy
To see how plump my bags are, and my barnes.
Sirrah, go, hie you home, and bid your fellows,
Get all their flails ready, agoing I come.
I will, Sir.
I'll instantly set all my hens to thrashing
Of a whole reeke of corn, which I will hide
Under the ground; and with the straw thereof
I'll stuff the out-sides of my other mowes:
That done, I'll have 'hem empty all my garners,
And in the friendly earth bury my store,
That, when the searchers come, they may suppose
Ell's spent, and that my fortunes were belied.
And, to lend more opinion to my want,
And stop that many-mouthed vulgar dog,
(Which else would still be baying at my door)
Each market day, I will be seen to buy
Part of the purest wheat, as for my household:
Where when it comes, it shall increase my heaps,
Twill yield me treble gain, at this dear time,
Promise•d in this dear book: I have cast all.
Till then I will not sell an ear. I'll hang first.
O, I shall make my prizes as I list,
My house and I can feed on peas, and barley,
What though a world of wretches starve the while?
"He that will thrive, must think no courses vile.
Now, Signior, how approve you this? have the Humorists ex∣pressed themselves truly or no?
Yes (if it be well prosecuted) it is hitherto happy enough: but me thinks, MACILENTE went hence too soon, hee might have been made to stay, and speak somewhat in reproof of SORDIDO'S wretched∣ness, now at the last.
O, no, that had been extremely improper, besides, he had con∣tinued the Scene too long with him, is it was, being in no more action.
You may enforce the length, as a necessary reason; but for pro∣priety, the Scene would very well have borne it, in my judgment.
O, worst of both: why, you mistake his Humour utterly then.
How? doe I mistake it? is it not envy?
Yes, but you must understand, Signior, he envies him not as he is a villain, a wolf in the common-wealth, but as he is rich, and fortunate; for the true condition of envy, is, Dolor altenae foelicitatis, to have our eyes continually sixth upon another mans prosperity, that is, his chief happi∣ness, and to grieve at that. Whereas, if we make his monstrous, and ab∣horde actions our object, the grief (we take then) comes nearer the na∣ture of hate, then envy, as being bred out of a kind of contempt and loathing, in our selves.
So you'll infer it had been hate, not envy in him, to repre∣hend
the humour of SORDIDO?
Right, for what a man truly envies in another, he could al∣ways love, and cherish in himself: but no man truly reprehends in ano∣there, what he loves in himself; therefore reprehension is out of his hate. And this distinction hath he himself made in a speech there (if you marked it) where he says, I envy not this BVFFON, but I hate him.
Stay, sir: I envy not this BVFFON, but I hate him: why might he not as well have hated SORDIDO, as him?
No, sir, there was subject for his envy in SORDIDO; his wealth: So was there not in the other. He stood possessed of no one eminent gift, but amostodious, and fiend-like disposition, that would turn charity it self into hate, much more envy, for the present.
You have satisfied me, sir; O, here comes the Fool and the Easter, again, me thinks.
It were pity they should be parted, sir.
What bright-shining gallant's that with them? the knight they went to?
No, sir, this is one Monsieur FASTIDIVS BRISK, otherwise called the fresh Frenchefied courtier.
A humorist too?
As humorous as quick-siluer, doe but observe him, the Scene is the cou•try still, remember.
CINEDO, watch when the knight comes, and give vs word.
I will, sir.
How lik'st thou my boy, CARLO?
O, well, well. He looks like a colonel of the Pigmies horse, or one of these motions, in a great antique clock: he would show well up∣on a hob•erdashers stall, at a corner shop, rarely.
S'heart, what a damned witty rogne's this? how he confounds with his simile's?
Better with simile's, then smiles: and whither were you riding now, Signior?
Who, I? what a silly east's that? whither should I ride, but to the court?
O, pardon me, sir, twenty places more: your hot-house, or your whore-house—
By the virtue of my soul, this knight dwells in Elizium, here.
Hoe's gone •ow, I thought he would fly out presently. These be our nimble-spirited Ca•so's, that have their evasions at pleasure, will run
over a bog like your wild Irish: no sooner started, but they'll leap from one thing to another, like a squirrel, heigh: dance! and doe tricks in their discourse, from fire to water, from water to air, from air to earth, as if their tongues did but even like the four elements over, and away.
Sirrha, CARLO, thou never •aw'st my grey-hobbie yet, did thou?
No: have you such a one?
The best in Europe (my good villain) thou'lt say, when thou see him.
But when shall I see him?
There was a noble man in the court offered me 100. pound for him, by this light: a fine little fiery slave, he runs like a (oh) excellent, excellent! with the very sound of the spur.
How? the sound of the spur?
O, it's your only humour now extant, sir: a good gingle, a good gingle.
Sbloud, you shall see him turn morris-dancer, he he's got him bells, a good suit, and a hobby-horse.
Signior, now you talk of a hobby-horse, I know where one is, will not be given for a brace of angels.
How is that, Sir?
Mary, sir, I am telling this gentleman of a hobby-horse, it was my fathers indeed, and (though I say it—
That should not say it) on, on.
He did dance in it, with as good humour, and as good regard, as any man of his degree what soever, being no gentleman: I have danced in it my self too.
Not since the humour of gentility was upon you? did you?
Yes, once; mary, that was but to show what a gentleman might doe, in a humour.
O, very good.
Why, this fellows discourse were nothing, but for the word Humour.
O, bear with him, and he should lack matter, and words too, it were pitiful.
Nay, look you, sir, there's ne'er a gentleman in the country has the like humours, for the hobby-horse, as I have; I have the method for the threeding of the needle and all, the—
How, the method.
I, the leigeritie for that, and the wigh-hie, and the daggers in the nose, and the travels of the egg from singer to singer, all the humours incident to the quality. The horse hangs at home in my parlour. I'll keep it for a monument, as long as I live, sure.
Doe so; and when you die, twill be an excellent trophy, to hang over your tomb.
Mass, and I'll have a tomb (now I think on it) it is but so much charges.
Best build it in your life time then, your heirs may hap to for∣get it else.
Nay, I mean so, Isle not trust to them.
No, for heirs, and executors, are grown damnably careless, specially, since the ghosts of testators left walking: how like you him, Signior?
Fore heavens, his humour arrides me exceedingly.
Arrides you?
I, pleases me (a pox on it) I am so haunted at the count, and at my lodging, with your refined choice spirits, that it makes me clean of an∣other garb, another sheaf, I know not how! I cannot frame me to your harsh vulgar phrase, it is against my genius.
Signior CARLO.
This is right to that of HORACE, D•m vitant sl•l•i la, in con∣traria currunt: so this gallant, labouring to anoid popularity, false into a ha∣bit of affection, ten thousand times hatefuller then the former.
Who, hee? a gull, a fool, no salt in him in the earth, man: hee looks like a fresh salmon kept in a tub, he will be spent shortly. His braine's lighter then his feather already, and his tongue more subject to lie, then that's to wag: he sleeps with a muske-cat every night, and walks all day hung'd in pomander chains for penance: he he's his skin tanned in civet, to make his complexion strong, and the sweetness of his youth lasting in the sense of his sweet lady. A good empty puff, he loves you well, Signior.
There shall be no love lost, sir, Isle assure you.
Nay, CARLO, I am not happy in thy love, I see: pray thee suffer me to enjoy thy company a little (sweet mischief) by this air, I shall envy this gentleman's place in thy affections, if you be thus private, in faith. How now? is the knight arrived?
No, sir, but it is guest he will arrive presently, by his fore-run∣ners.
His bounds! by MINERVA an excellent figure; a good boy.
You should give him a french crown for it: the boy would find two better figures in that, and a good figure of your bounty beside.
Tut, the boy wants no crowns.
No crown: speak in the singular number, and we'll believe you.
Nay, thou art so capriciously conceited now. Sir (damnation) I have heard this knight PVNTARVOLO, reported to bee a gentleman of
exceeding good humour; thou know him: prithee, how is his dispo∣sition? I ne'er was so favoured of my stars, as to see him yet. Boy, doe you look to the hobby?
I, sir, the groom has set him up.
It is well: I rid out of my way of intent to visit him, and take knowledge of his— Nay, good wickedness, his humour, his humour.
Why, he loves dogs, and hawks, and his wife, well: he has a good riding face, and he can fit a great horse; hee will taint a staff well at tilt: when he is mounted, he looks like the sign of the George, that's all I know; save, that in stead of a dragon, he will brandish against a tree, and break his sword as con•idently upon the knotty bark, as the other did upon the skales of the beast.
O, but this is nothing to that's delivered of him. They say hee has dialogues, and discourses between his horse, himself, and his dog: and that he will court his own lady; as she were a stranger never encoun∣ter'd before.
I, that he will, and make fresh love to her every morning: this gentleman has been a spectator of it, Signior Insulso.
I am resolute to keep a page: say you sir?
You have seen Signior Puntaruolo accost his lady?
O, I sir.
And how is the manner of it, prithee, good Signior?
Faith sir, in very good sort, he has his humours for it, sir: as first, (suppose he were now to come from riding, or hunting, or so) he has his trumpet to sound, and then the waiting gentlewoman, she looks out, and then hee speaks, and then she speaks—very pretty in faith, gentle∣men.
Why, but doe you remember no particulars, Signior?
O, yes sir: first, the gentlewoman, she looks out at the win∣dow.
After the trumpet has summoned a parley? not before?
No, sir, not before: and then says he—ha, ha, ha, ha, &amp;c.
What says he? be not rapt so.
Says he—ha, ha, ha, ha, &amp;c.
Nay, speak, speak.
Ha, ha, ha, says he: God save you, says he: ha, ha, &amp;c.
Was this the ridiculous motive to all this passion?
Nay, that, that comes after, is—ha, ha, ha, ha, &amp;c.
Doubtless, he apprehends more then he utters, this fellow: or else.
List, list, they are come from hunting: stand by, close under this 〈◊〉, and you shall see it done, better then I can show it.
So it had need, twill scarce poise the observation else.
Faith I remember all, but the manner of it is quite out of my head.
O, with-draw, with-draw, it cannot bee but a most pleasing object.
Forester, give wind to thy borne. Enough, by this, the sound hath touched the ears of the enclosed: Depart, leave the dog, and take with thee what thou hast deserved, the horn, and thanks.
I, mary, there's some taste in this.
Is it not good?
Ah, peace, now aboue, now aboue!
Stay: mine eye hath (on the instant) through the bounty of the window, received the form of a Nymph. I will step forward three pa∣ses: of the which, I will barely retire one; and (after some little flexure of the knee) with an erected grace salute her (one, two, and three.) Sweet lady, God save you.
No, forsooth: I am but the waiting gentlewoman.
He knew that before.
Pardon me: Humanum est error.
He learned that of his chaplain.
To the perfection of complement (which is the Dial of the thought, and guided by the Sun of your beauties) are required these three specials: the gnomon, the puntilio's, and the superficies: the superficies, is that we call, place; the puntilio's, circumstance; and the gnomon, ceremo∣ny: in either of which, for a stranger to err, it is easy and facile, and such am I.
True, not knowing her horizon, he must needs err: which I fear, he knows too well.
What call you the lord of the castle? sweet face.
The lord of the castle is a knight, sir; Signior PVNTAR∣VOLO.
PVNTARVOLO? O.
Now must he ruminate.
Does the wench know him all this while, then?
O, doc you know me, man? why, therein lies the sirrup of the jest, it's a project, a designement of his own, a thing studied, and re∣hearst as ordinarily at his coming from hawking, or hunting, as a jig after a play.
I, even like your jig, sir.
It is a most sumptuous and stately edifice! of what years is the knight, fair damsel?
Faith, much about your years, sir.
What complexion, or what stature bears he?
Of your stature, and very near upon your complexion.
Mine is melancholy:
So is the dogs, just.
And doth argue constancy, chie•lie in love. What are his en∣dowments? Is he courteous?
O, the most courteous knight in Christian land, sir.
Is he magnanimous?
As the skin between your brows, sir.
Is he bountiful?
Slut, he takes an inuentory of his own good parts.
Bountiful? I, sir, I would you should know it; the poor are seen'd at his gate, early, and late, sir.
Is he learned?
O, I sir, he can speak the French, and Italian.
Then he is travailed?
I, forsooth, he hath been beyond-sea, once, or twice.
As far as Paris, to fetch over a fashion, and come back again.
Is he religious?
Religious? I know not what you call religious, but hee goes to church, I am sure.
S'lid, methinkes, these answers should offend him.
T'ut, no; he knows they are excellent, and to her capacity, that speaks 'hem.
Would I might see his face.
She should let down a glass from the window at that word, and request him to look in it.
Doubtless, the gentleman is most exact, and absolutely qua∣lified? doth the castle contain him?
No, sir, he is from home, but his lady is within.
His lady? what, is she fair? splendidious? and amiable?
O, Lord, sir!
Prithee, dear Nymph, entreat her beauties to shine on this side of the building.
That he may erect a new dial of complement, with his gno∣mons, and his puntilio's.
Nay, thou art such another Cinique now, a man had need walk uprightly before thee.
Heart, can any man walk more upright then hee does? Look, look; as if he went in a frame, or had a suit of wanescot on: and the dog watching him, let he should leap out on it.
O, villain!
Well, and ever I meet him in the city, I'll ha'him jointed, I'll pawn him in east cheap, among the butchers else.
Peace, who be these, CARLO?
YOnder's your god-father; doe your duty to him, son.
This, sir? a poor elder brother of mine, sir, a y•omen, may despond some seven or eight hundred a year: that's his son, my nephew, there.
You are not ill-come, neighbour SORDIDO, though I have not yet said, well-come: what, my god-sonne is grown a great proficient by this?
I hope he will grow great one day, sir.
What does he study? the law?
I sir, he is a gentleman, though his father be but a yeoman.
What call you your nephew, signior?
Mary, his name is FVNGOSO.
FVNGOSO? O, he looked somewhat like a sponge in that pink• yellow doublet, me thought: well, make much of him; I see he was no∣for borne to ride upon a moil.
My lady will come presently, sir.
O, now, now.
Stand by, retire your selves a space: nay, pray you, forget not the use of your hat; the air is piercing.
What? will not their presence prevail against the current of his humour?
O, no: it's a mere flood, a torrent, carries all before it.
What more then heavenly pulchritude is this?
What magazine, or treasury of bliss?
Dazzle, you organs to my optique sense,
To view a creature of such eminence:
O, I am planet-strooke, and in yond sphere,
A brighter sharre then VENVS doth appear!
How? in verse!
An ecstasy, an ecstasy, man.
Is your desire to speak with me, sir knight?
He will tell you that anon; neither his brain, nor his body, are yet moulded for an answer.
Most debonair, and luculent lady, I decline me low, as the basis of your altitude.
He makes congees to his wife in geometrical proportions.
Is it possible there should be any such Humorist?
Very easily possible, Sir, you see there is.
I have scarce collected my spirits, but lately scattered in the ad∣miration
of your form; to which (if the bounties of your mind be any way responsible) I doubt not, but my desires shall find a smooth, and se∣cure passage. I am a poor knight errant (lady) that hunting in the adja∣cent forest, was by adventure in the pursuit of a hart, brought to this place; which hart (dear Madame) escaped by enchantment: the eve∣ning approaching (my self, and servant wearied) my suit is, to enter your fair castle, and refresh me.
Sir knight, albeit it be not usual with me (chiefly in the absence of a husband) to admit any entrance to strangers, yet in the true regard of those innated virtues, and fair parts, which so strive to express them∣selves, in you; I am resolved to entertain you to the best of my unworthy power which I acknowledge to bee nothing, valued with what so worcester∣thy a person may deserve. Please you but stay, while I descend.
Most admired lady, you astonish me!
What? with speaking a speech of your own penning?
Nay, look; pry thee peace.
Pox on it▪ I am impatient of such foppery.
O, let's hear the rest.
What? a tedious chapter of courtship, after sir LANCELOT, and queen GVEVENER? away. I mar'le in what dull cold nook he found this lady out? that (being a woman) she was blessed with no more copy of wit, but to serve his humour thus. Slut, I think he feeds her with pore∣ridge, I: she could ne'er have such a thick brain else.
Why, is porridge so hurtful, signior?
O, nothing under heaven more prejudicial to those ascending subtle powers, or doth sooner abate that which we call, acumen ingenij, then your gross fare: why, I'll make you an instance: your city wives, but observe 'hem, you haven't more perfect true fools in the world bred, then they are generally; and yet you see (by the fineness and delicacy of their diet, living into the far capons, drinking your rich wines, feeding on larks, sparrows, potato-pies, and such good vnctuous meats) how their wits are refined, and rarefied! and sometimes a very quintessence of conceit flows from 'hem, able to drown a weak apprehension.
Peace, here comes the lady.
Gods me, here's company: turn in again.
Slight, our presence has cut off the convoy of the jest.
All the better; I am glad on it: for the issue was very perspicu∣os Come, let's discover, and salute the knight.
Stay: who be these that address themselves towards vs? what, CARLO? now, by the sincerity of my soul, welcome; welcome gentle∣men: and how doest thou, thou grand scourge; or, second untruss of the rime?
Faith, spending my mettle, in this reeling world (here and there) as the sway of my affection carries me, and perhaps stumble upon a yeoman pheuterer, as I doe now; or one of Fortunes moiles, laden with
treasure, and an empty cloke-bagge following him, gaping when a bag will untie.
Peace, you, ban-dogge, peace: what brisk Nimfadoro is that in the white virgin boot there?
Mary, sir, one, that I must entreat you take a very particular knowledge of, and with more then ordinary respect: Monsieur FASTI∣DIVS.
Sir, I could wish that for the time of your vouchsafed abiding here, and more real entertainment, this my house stood on the Muses hill; and these my orchards were those of the Hesperide's.
I possess as much in your wish, sir, as if I were made lord of the Indies; and I pray you, believe it.
I have a better opinion of his faith, then to think it will be so corrupted.
Come, brother, I'll bring you acquainted with gentlemen, and good fellows, such as shall doe you more grace, then—
Brother, I hunger not for such acquaintance:
Doe you take heed, lest—
Hushed: my brother, sir, for want of education, sir, somewhat nodding to the boor, the clown: but I request you in private, sir.
By heaven, it's a very fine suit of clothes!
Doe you observe that, signior? there's another humour has new cracked the shell.
What? he is enamoured of the fashion, is he?
O, you forestall the jest.
I mar'le what it might stand him in!
Nephew?
Before me, it's an excellent suit, and as neatly becomes him. What said you, uncle?
When saw you my niece?
Mary, yesternight I supped there. That kind of boot does very rare too!
And what news hear you?
The guilt spur and all! would I were hanged, but it is exceeding good. Say you, uncle?
Your mind is carried away with somewhat else: I ask what news you hear?
Troth, we hear none. In good faith, I was never so pleased with a fashion, days of my life! O (and I might have but my wish) I'd ask no more of god now, but such a suit, such a hat, such a band, such a doublet, such a hose, such a boot, and such a—
They say, there's a new Motion of the city of Niniueh, with
IONISE, and the whale, to be seen at Fleet-bridge? you can tell, cousin?
Here's such a world of question with him, now: Yes, I think there be such a thing, I saw the picture: would he would once be satisfied. Let me see, the doublet, say fifty shillings the doublet, and between three or four pound the hose; then boots, hat, and band: some ten or eleven pound would doe it all, and suit me for the heavens.
I'll see all those devices, and I come to London once.
Gods s'lid, and I could compass it, it were rare: hark you, uncle.
What says my nephew?
Faith uncle, I'd have desired you to have made a motion for me to my father in a thing, that—walk aside and I'll tell you, sir, no more but this: there's a parcel of law—books, (some twenty pounds worth) that lie in a place for little more then half the money they cost; and I think for some twelve pound, or twenty mark, I could go near to redeem 'hem; there's PLOWDEN, DIAR, BROOKE, and FITZ-HERBERT, di∣uers such, as I must have ere long: and you know, I were as good save five or six pound as not, uncle. I pray you, move it form.
That I will: when would you have me doe it? presently?
O, I, I pray you, good uncle: God send me good luck; Lord (and•t be thy will) prosper it: O, my stars, now, now, if it take now, I am made forever.
Shall I tell you, sir? by this air, I am the most beholding to that lord, of any gentleman living; hee does use me the most honourably, and with the greatest respect, more indeed, then can be uttered with any opine∣on of truth.
Then, have you the count GRATIATO?
As true nobles gentleman too, as any breathes; I am excee∣dingly endeared to his love: by this hand (I protest to you, signior, I speak it not gloriously, nor out of affectation, but) there's hee, and the count FRVGALE, signior ILLVSTRE, signior LVCVLENTO, and a sort of 'hem; that (when I am at court) they doe share me amongst 'hem. Happy is he can enjoy me most private. I doe wish my self sometime an ubiquitary for their love, in good faith.
There's ne'er a one of these, but might lie a week on the rack, ere they could bring forth his name; and yet he powers them out as fami∣liarly, as if he had scene 'hem stand by the fire in the presence, or ta•no ta∣basso with them, over the stage, in the lords room.
Then you must of necessity know our court-starre there? that planet of wit, MADDONA SAVIOLINA?
O, lord sir! my mistress.
Is she your mistress?
Faith, here be some slight favours of hers, sir, that doe speak it, she is: as this scarf, sir, or this rib and in mine ear, or so; this feather grew in her sweet sanne sometimes, though now it be my poor fortunes to wear it, as you see, sir: flight, flight, a foolish toy.
Well, she is the lady of a most exalted, and ingenious spirit.
Did you ever hear any woman speak like her? or enriched with a more plentiful discourse?
O, villainous! nothing but sound, sound, a mere echo; she speaks as she goes tired, in cob-web lawn, light, thin: good enough to catch flies withal.
O, manage your affections.
Well, if thou be not plagued for this blasphemy, one day—
Come, regard not a easter: it is in the power of my purse, to make him speak well, or ill, of me.
Sir, I affirm it to you (upon my credit, and judgment) she has the most harmonious, and musical strain of wit, that ever tempted a true ear; and yet to see, a rude tongue would profine heaven, if it could.
I am not ignorant of it, sir.
Oh, it flows from her like nectar, and she doth give it, that sweet, quick grace, and exornation in the composure, that (by this good air, as I am an honest man, would I might never stir, sir, but) she does observe as pure a phrase, and use as choice figures in her ordinary confe∣rinses, as any be in the Arcadia.
Or rather in Greenes works, whence she may steal with more security.
Well, if ten pound will fetch 'hem, you shall have it, but I'll part with no more.
I'll try what that will doe, if you please.
Doe so: and when you have 'hem, study hard.
Yes, sir. And I could study to get forty shillings more now! well, I will put my self into the fashion, as far as this will go presently.
I wonder it rains not! the Almanac says wee should have store of rain, today.
Why, sir, to morrow I will associate you to court my self; and from thence to the city, about a business, a project I have, I will ex∣pose it to you, sir: CARLO, I am sure, has heard of it.
What's that, sir?
I doe intend, this year of Jubilee, coming on, to travail: and (because I will not altogether go upon expense) I am determined to put forth some five thousand pound, to be paid me, five for one, upon the re∣turn of my self, my wife, and my dog, from the Turks court in Constan∣tinople. If all, or either of vs miscarry in the journey, it is gone: if we be successful, why, there will be five and twenty thousand pound, to enter∣taine time withal. Nay, go not neighbour SORDIDO, stay to night, and help to make our society the fuller. Gentlemen, frolic: CARLO? what? dull now?
I was thinking on your project, sir, and you call it so: is this the dog goes with you?
This is the dog, sir.
He do' not go bare-foot, does he?
Away, you traitor, away.
Nay, before god, I speak simply; he may prick his foot with a thorne, and be as much as the whole venture is worth. Besides, for a dog that never travailed before, it's a large journey to Constantinople: I'll tell you now (and he were mine) I'd have some present conference with a physician, what antidotes were good to give him, preseruatiues against poison: for (assure you) if once your money be out, there'll be divers at∣tempts made against the life of the poor animal.
Thou art still dangerous.
Is signior DELIROS wife your kinswoman?
I, sir, she is my niece, my brothers daughter here, and my no∣phewes sister.
Doe you know her, sir?
O, God sir, Signior DELIRO, her husband, is my merchant.
I, I have seen this gentleman there, often.
I cry you mercy, sir: let me crave your name, pray you.
FVNGOSO, sir.
Good signior FVNGOSO, I shall request to know you bet∣la, sir.
I am her brother, sir.
In fair time, sir.
Come, gentlemen, I will be your conduct.
Nay, pray you, sir; we shall meet at signior DELIRO'S often.
You shall have me at the Heralds office, sir, for some week or so, at my first coming up. Come, CARLO.
Methinkes, CORDATVS, he dwelt somewhat too long on this Scene; it hung in the hand.
I see not where he could have insisted less, and to have made the humours perspicuous enough.
True, as his subject lies: but hee might have altered the shape of his argument, and explicated 'hem better in single Scenes.
That had been single indeed: why? be they not the same per∣sons in this, as they would have been in those? and is it not an object of more state, to behold the Scene full, and relieved with variety of speakers to the end, then to see a vast empty stage, and the actors come in (one by one) as if they were dropped down with a feather, into the eye of the spe∣ctators?
Nay, you are better traded with these things then I, and there∣fore I'll subscribe to your judgment; mary, you shall give me leave to make objections.
O, what else? it's the special intent of the author, you should
doe so: for thereby others (that are present) may as well be satisfied, who happily would object the same you doe.
So, sir: but when appears MACILENTE again?
Mary, hee stays but till our silence give him leave: here hee comes, and with him signior DELIRO, a merchant, at whose house hee is come to sojourn: Make your own observation now, only transfer your thoughts to the city, with the Scene; where, suppose they speak.
i'll tell you by and by, sir.
Welcome (good MACILENTE) to my house,
To sojourn even for ever: if my best
In cares, and every sort of good entreaty
May move you stay with me.
I thank you, sir:
And yet the muffled fates (had it pleased them)
Might have supplied me, from their own full store,
Without this word (I thank you) to a fool.
I see no reason, why that dog (called Chance)
Should fawn upon this fellow, more then me:
I am a man, and I have limbs, flesh, blood,
Bones, sinews, and a soul, as well as he:
My parts are every way as good as his,
If I said better? why, I did not lie.
Nath'lesse, his wealth (but nodding on my wants)
Must make me bow, and cry: (I thank you, sir.)
Dispatch, take heed your mistress see you not.
I warrant you, sir. I'll steal by her softly.
Nay, gentle friend, be merry, raise your looks
Out of your bosom, I protest (by heaven)
You are the man most welcome in the world.
(I thank you, sir,) I know my cue, I think.
Where will you have 'hem burn, sir?
Here, good FIDO▪
What? she did not see thee?
No, sir.
That's well:
Strew, strew, good FIDO, the freshest flowers, so.
What means this, signior DELIRO? all this censing?
Cast in more frankincense, yet more, well said.
O, MACILENTE, I have such a wife!
So passing fair, so passing far unkind,
But of such worth, and right to be unkind,
(Since no man can be worthy of her kindness.)
What can there not?
No, that is sure as death,
In your gross judgment. If you make no difference
Betwixt the sent of growing flowers, and cut ones,
You have a sense to taste lamp-oile, in faith.
And with such judgment have you changed the chambers,
Leaving no room, that I can joy to be in,
In all your house: and now my walk, and all,
You smoke me from, as if I were a fox,
And long, belike, to drive me quite away.
Well, walk you there, and I'll walk where I list.
What shall I doe? Ô, I shall never please her,
Out on thee, dotard! what star ruled his birth?
That brought him such a star? blind Fortune still
Bestows her gifts on such as cannot use them:
How long shall I live, ere I be so happy,
To have a wi•e of this exceeding form?
Away, with 'hem, would I had broke a joint,
When I deuis'd this, that should so dislike her.
Away, bear all away.
I, doe: for fear
Ought that is there should like her. O, this man,
How cunningly he can conceal himself!
As though he loved? nay, honoured, and adored?
Why, my sweet heart?
Sweetheart! Ô! better still!
And asking, why? wherefore? and looking strangely,
As if he were as white as innocence.
Alas, you're simple, you: you cannot change,
Look pale at pleasure, and then red with wonder:
No, no, not you! it is pity o'your naturals.
I did but cast an amorous eye, even now,
Upon a pair of gloves, that somewhat liked me,
And straight he noted it, and gave command,
All should be taken away.
Be they nay bane then.
What, sir, FIDO, bring in those gloves again,
You took from hence.
S'body, sir, but doe not,
Bring in no gloves, to spite me: if you doe—
Ay, me, most wretched; how am I misconstrued?
O, how she tempts my heart-strings, with her eye,
To knit them to her beauties, or to break?
What moved the heavens, that they could not make
Me such a woman? but a man, a beast,
That hath no bliss like to others. Would to heaven
(In wreak of my misfortunes) I were turned
To some fair water-Nymph, that (set upon
The deepest whirle-pit of the rau'nous seas,)
My adamantine eyes might head-long hale
This iron world to me, and drown it all.
Behold, behold, the translated gallant.
O, he is welcome.
Save you brother, and sister, save you, sir; I have commendations for you out ī the country: (I wonder they take no knowledge of my suit:) mine uncle SOCLIARDO is in town. Sister, me thinks, you are melancholy: why are you so sad? I think you took me for ma∣ster FASTIDIVS BRISTLE (sister) did you not.
Why should I take you for him?
Nay, nothing—I was lately in master FASTIDIVS his comp∣ny, and, me thinks, we are very like.
You have a fair suit, brother, give you joy on it.
Faith, good enough to ride in, brother, I made it to ride in.
O, now I see the cause of his idle demand, was his new suit.
Pray you good brother, try, if you can change her mood.
I warrant you, let me alone. I'll put her out of her dumps. Sister, how like you my suit?
O, you are a gallant in print now, brother.
Faith, how like you the fashion? it's the last edition, I assure you.
I cannot but like it, to the desert.
Troth, sister, I was fine to borrow these spurs, I have le•t my gown in gage for'hem, pray you lend me an angel.
Now, beshrow my heart, then.
Good truth, I'll pay you again at my next exhibition: I had but bare ten pound of my father, and it would not reach to put me whole∣lie into the fashion.
I care not.
I had spurs of mine own before, but they were not ginglers. Monsieur FASTIDIVS will be here anon, sister.
You jest?
Never lend me penny more (while you line then) and that I'd be loath to say, in truth.
When did you see him?
Yesterday, I came acquainted with him at sir PVNTARVO∣LO'S: nay, sweet sister.
I fine would know of heaven now, why yond fool
Should wear a suit of satin? he? that rooke?
That painted jay, with such a deal of out-side?
What is his inside trow? ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
Good heaven, give me patience, patience, patience.
A number of these popen jayes there are,
Whom, if a man confer, and but examine
Their inward merit, with such men as want;
Lord, lord, what things they are!
Come, when will you pay me again, now?
O god, sister!
Here comes another.
Save you, signior DELIRO: how dost thou, sweet lady? Let me kiss thee.
How? a new suit? Aim.
And how do's master FASTIDIVS BRISK?
Faith, live in court, signior DELIRO; in grace, I thank god, both of the noble masculine, and feminine. I must speak with you in private, by and by.
When you please, sir.
Why look you so pale, brother?
S'lid, all this money is cast away, now.
I, there's a newer edition come forth.
Tic but my hard fortune! well, I'll have my suit changed, I'll go fetch my taylor presently, but first I'll devise a letter to my father. Have you any pen, and ink, sister?
What would you doe withal?
I would use it. S'light, and it had come but four days sooner, the fashion.
There was a countess gave me her hand to kiss to day, in the presence: did me more good by that light, then—and yesternight sent her coach twice to my lodging, to entreat me accompany her, and my sweet mistress, with some two, or three nameless ladies more: O, I have been graced by 'hem beyond all aim of affection: this 's her garter my dagger hangs in: and they doe so commend, and approve my apparel, with my judicious wearing of it, it 's aboue wonder.
Indeed sir, it is a most excellent suit, and you doe wear it as ex∣traordinary.
Why, I'll tell you now (in good faith) and by this chair, which (by the grace of god) I intend presently to sit in, I had three suits in one
year, made three great ladies in love with me: I had other three, vn-did three gentlemen in imitation: and other three, gat three other gentlemen widows of three thousand pound a year.
Is it possible?
O, believe it, sir; your good face is the witch, and your ap∣apparel the spells, that bring all the pleasures of the world into their circle.
Ah, the sweet grace of a courtier!
Well, would my father had left me but a good face for my portion yet; though I had shared the unfortunate wit that goes with it, I had not cared: I might have past for somewhat in the world then.
Why, assure you, signior, rich apparel has strange virtues: it makes him that hath it without means, esteemed for an excellent wit: he that enjoys it with means, puts the world in remembrance of his means: it helps the deformities of nature, and gives lustre to her beauties; makes continual holy-day where it shines; sets the wits of ladies at work, that otherwise would be idle: furnishes your two-shilling ordinary; takes possession of your stage at your new play; and enriches your oars, as scorning to go with your scull.
Pray you, sir, add this; it gives respect to your fools, makes many thieves, as many strumpets, and no fewer bankrupts.
Out, out, unworthy to speak, where he breaths.
What's he, signior?
A friend of mine, sir.
By heaven, I wonder at you, citizens, what kind of creatures you are!
Why, sir?
That you can consort your selves, with such poor seame-rent fellows.
He says true.
Sir, I will assure you (how ever you esteem of him) he's a man worthy of regard.
Why? what has he in him, of such virtue to be regarded? ha?
Mary, he is a scholar, sir.
Nothing else?
And he is well travailed.
He should get him clothes; I would cherish those good parts of travail in him, and prefer him to some nobleman of good place.
Sir, such a benefit should bind me to you for ever (in my friends right) and, I doubt not, but his desert shall more then answer my praise.
Why, and he had good clothes, I'd carry him to court with me to morrow.
He shall not want for those, sir, if gold and the whole city will furnish him.
You say well, sir: faith, signior DELIRO, I am come to have
you play the Alchemist with me, and change the species of my land, into that mettle you talk of.
With all my heart, sir, what sum will serve you?
Faith, some three, or four hundred.
Troth, sir, I have promised to meet a gentleman this morning, in Par•les, but upon my return I'll dispatch you.
I'll accompany you thither.
As you please, sir; but I go not thither directly.
It is no matter, I have no other designement in hand, and therefore as good go along.
I were as good have a quartain fever follow me now, for I shall ne'er bee rid of him: (being me a cloak there, one) Still, upon his grace at court, am I sure to bee visited; I was a beast to give him any hope. Well, would I were in, that I am out with him, once, and— Come, signior MACILENTE, I must confer with you, as wee go. Nay, dear wife, I beseech thee, forsake these moods: look not like winter thus. Here, take my keys, open my counting houses, spread all my wealth before thee, choose any object that delights thee: If thou wilt eat the spirit of gold, and drink dissolved pearl in wine, it is for thee.
So, sir.
Nay, my sweet wife.
Good lord! how you are perfumed! in your terms, and al! pray you leave vs.
Come, gentlemen.
Adieu, sweet lady.
I, I! Let thy words ever sound in mine ears, and thy graces disperse contentment through all my senses! O, how happy is that lady aboue other ladies, that enjoys so absolute a gentleman to her servant! A countess give him her hand to kiss? ah, foolish countess! hoe's a man worthy (if a woman may speak of a mans worth) to kiss the lips of an empress.
What's master FASTIDIVS gone, sister?
I, brother (he has a face like a Cherubin!)
Gods me, what lucke's this? I have fetched my taylor and all: which way went he, sister? can you tell?
Not I, in good faith (and he has a body like an angel!)
How long is it since he went?
Why, but even now: did you not meet him? (and a tongue able to ravish any woman in the earth!)
O, for gods sake (I'll please you for your pains:) but even now, say you? Come, good, sir: S'lid, I had forgot it too: Sister, if any body ask for mine uncle SOGLIARDO, they shall have him at the Heralds office, yonder by Paules.
Well, I will not altogether despair: I have heard of a citizens wife, has been beloved of a courtier; and why not I? heigh, ho: well, I
will into my private chamber, locke the door to me, and think over all his good parts, one after another.
Well, I doubt, this last Scene will endure some grievous torture.
How? you fear twill be racked, by some hard construction?
Doe not you?
No, in good faith: unless mine eyes could light me beyond sense. I see no reason, why this should be more liable to the rack, then the rest: you'll say, perhaps, the city will not take it well, that the merchant is made here to dote so perfectly upon his wife; and she again, to bee so Fastidiously affected, as she is?
You have uttered my thought, sir, indeed.
Why (by that proportion) the court might as well take offence at him we call the courtier, and with much more pretext, by how much the place transcends, and goes before in dignity and virtue: but can you imagine that any noble, or true spirit in court (whose sinewy, and altoge∣there vn-affected graces, very worthily express him a courtier) will make any exception at the opening of such an empty trunk, as this BRISK is? or think his own worth impeached, by beholding his motley inside?
No sir, I doe not.
No more, assure you, will any grave, wise citizen, or modest matron, take the object of this folly in DELIRO, and his wife: but rather apply it as the foil to their own virtues. For that were to affirm, that a man, writing of NARROW, should mean all Emperors: or speaking of MA∣CHIAVEL, comprehend all States-men; or in our SORDIDO, all Farmers; and so of the rest: then which, nothing can be uttered more malicious, or absurd. Indeed, there are a sort of these narrow-ey'd decipherers, I con∣fesse, that will extort strange, and abstruse meanings out of any subject, be it never so conspicuous and innocently delivered. But to such (where ever they sit concealed) let them know, the author defies them, and their wri∣ting-tables; and hopes, no sound or safe judgment will infect it self with their contagious comments, who (indeed) come here only to pervert, and poison the sense of what they hear, and for nought else.
Stay, what new Mute is this, that walks so suspiciously?
O, mary this is one, for whose better illustration; we must de∣sire you to presuppose the stage, the middle isle in Paules; and that, the west end of it.
So, sir: and what follows?
Faith, a whole volume of humour, and worthy the vnclasping.
As how? what name doe you give him first?
He hath shift of names, sir: some call him APPLE IOHN, some Signior WHIFF, mary, his maine standing name is CAVALIER SHIFT: the rest are but as clean shirts to his natures.
And what makes he in Paules, now?
Troth, as you see, for the advancement of a Siquis, or two; wherein he has so varied himself, that if any one of 'hem take, he may hull •p and down in the humorous world, a little longer.
It seems then, he bears a very changing sail?
O, as the wind, sir: here comes more.
THis is rare, I have set up my bills, without discovery.
What? Signior WHI••E? what fortune has brought you into these west parts?
Troth, signior, nothing but your rheum; I have been ta∣king an ounce of tobacco hard by here, with a gentleman, and I am come to spit private, in Pau•es. Save you sir.
Adieu, good signior WHI••E.
Master APPLE IOHN? you are well met: when shall we •up together; and laugh, and be fat with those good wenches? ha?
Faith, sir, I must now leave you, upon a few humours, and occasions: but when you please, sir.
Farewell, sweet APPLE IOHN: I wonder, there are no more store of gallants here!
What be these two, signior?
Mary, a couple sir, that are mere strangers to the whole scope of our play; only come to walk a turn or two, i'this Scene of Paules, by chance.
Same you, good master CLOVE.
Sweet master ORANGE.
How? CLOVE, and ORANGE?
I, and they are well met, for it is as dry an ORANGE as ever grew: nothing, but Salutation; and, O god, sir; and, It pleases you to say so, Sir; one that can laugh at a jest for company with a most plausible, and extemporal grace; and some hour after, in private, ask you what it was: the other, monsieur CLOVE, is a more spic't youth: he will fit you a whole afternoon sometimes, in a booke-sellers shop, reading the Greek, Italian, and Spanish; when he understands not a word of either: if he had the tongues, to his suits, he were an excellent linguist.
Doe you hear this reported, for certainty?
O god, sir.
SIrrah, take my cloak: and you sir knave, follow me closer. If thou lose my dog, thou shalt die a dogs death; I will hang thee.
Tut, fear him not, hoe's a good lean slave, he loves a dog well, I warrant him; I see by his looks, I: mass hoe's somewhat like him. Slut poison him, make him away with a crooked pin, or somewhat, men; thou moist have more security of thy life: and so sir, what? you have not put out your whole venture yet? have you?
No, I doe want yet some fifteen, or sixteen hundred pounds: but my lady (my wife) is out of her humour; she does not now go.
No? how then?
Mary, I am now enforced to give it out, upon the return of my self, my dog, and my cat.
Your cat? where is she?
My squire has her there, in the bag: Sirrah, look to her: How lik'st thou my change, CARLO?
Oh, for the better, sir; your cat has nine lines, and your wife have but one.
Besides, she will never bee sea-sicke, which will save me so much in conserves: when saw you signior SOGLIARDO?
I came from him but now, he is at the Heralds office yonder: he requested me to go before, and take up a man or two for him in Paules, against his cognisance was ready.
What? has he purchased arms, then?
I, and rare ones too: of as many colours, as ever you saw any •ooles co•• in your life. I'll go look among your• bill, and I can fit him with legs to his arms—
With legs to his arms! Good: I will go with you, sir.
COme, let's walk in Mediterraneo: I assure you, sir, I am not the least respected among ladies; but let that pass: doe you know how to go into the presence, sir?
Why, on my feet, sir.
No, on your head, sir: for it is that must bear you out, I assure you: as thus, sir. You must first have an especial care so to wear your hat, that it oppress not confusedly this your predominant, or fore-top; be∣cause (when you come at the presence door) you may, with once or twice stroking up your fore-head thus, enter, with your predominant perfect: that is, standing up stiff.
or rather diamondizing of your subject, you shall perceive the Hipothesis, or Galaxia, (whereof the Meteors long since had their initial inceptions and notions) to be merely Pithagoricall, Mathematical, and Aristocratical— For look you, sir, there is ever a kind of concinnitie and species— Let vs turn to our former discourse, for they mark vs not.
Mass, yonder 's the knight PVNTARVOLO.
And my cousin SOGLIARDO, me thinks.
I, and his familiar that baunts him, the devil with a shi∣ning face.
Let 'hem alone, observe 'hem not.
Nay, I will have him, I am resolute for that. By this parch∣meant, gentlemen, I have been so toiled among the Harrots yonder, you will not believe, they doe speak in the strangest language, and give a man the hardest terms for his money, that ever you knew.
But have you arms? have your arms?
Y faith, I thank god, I can write my self gentlemen now, here's my patent, it cost me thirty pound, by this breath.
A very saire coat, well charged, and full of armoury.
Nay, it has as much variety of colours in it, as you have seen a cost have, how like you the crest, sir?
I understand it not well, what is it?
Mary, sir, it is your Bore without a head Rampant.
A Bore without a head, that's very rare!
I, and rampant too: troth, I commend the Heralds wi•, hee has deciphered him well: A Swine without a head, without brain, wit, any thing indeed, romping to gentility. You can blazon the rest, signior? can you not?
O, I, I have it in writing here of purpose, it cost me two shil∣lings the tricking.
Let's hear, let's hear.
It is the most vile, foolish, absurd, palpable, &amp; ridiculous escut∣cheon, that ever this eye survis'd. Save you, good monsieur FASTIDIVS.
Silence, good knight: on, on.
GVRONY, of eight pieces; AZURE and GULES, between three plates; a CHEV'RON, ••grailed checkey, OR, VERT, and ERMINES; on a chief ARGENT between two ANN'LETS, sables; a Bores head, PROPER.
How's that? on a chief ARGENT?
On a chief ARGENT, a Bores head, PROPER between two ANN'LETS sables.
S'lud, it's a Hogs-cheeke, and puddings in a pewter field this.
How like you 'hem, signior?
Let the word bee, Not without mustard; your crest is very rare, sir.
A frying pan to the crest had had no fellow.
Entreat your poor friend to walk off a little, signior, I will salute the knight.
Come, lopped up, lopped up.
You are right well encountered, sir, how do's your saire dog?
In reasonable state, sir: what citizen is that you were consor∣ted with? a merchant of any worth?
It is signior DELIRO, sir.
Is it he? Save you, sir.
Good sir PVNTARVOLO.
O, what copy of fool would this place minister, to one en∣dewed with patience, to observe it?
Nay, look you sir, now you are gentleman, you must carry a more exalted presence, change your mood, and habit, to a more a•stere form, be exceeding proud, stand upon your gentility, and scorn every man. Speak nothing humbly, never discourse under a nobleman, though you ne'er saw him butriding to the Starre-chamber, it's all one. Love no man. Trust no man. Speak ill of no man to his face: nor well of any man behind his back. Salute fairly on the front, and wish 'hem hanged upon the turn. Spread your self upon his bosom publicly, whose heart you would ca•e in private. These be principles, think on 'hem, I'll come to you again presently.
Sir, keep close; yet not so close: thy breath will thawmy ruff.
O, good cousin, I am a little busy, how do's my niece? I am to walk with a knight, here.
O He is here, look you sir, that's the gentleman.
What, he in the blush-colour'd satin?
I, he sir: though his suit blush, hee blushes not, look you, that's the suit, sir: I would have mine, such a suit without difference, such stuff, such a wing, such a sleeve, such a skirt, belly, and all; there∣fore, pray you observe it. Have you a pair of tables?
Why, doe you see, sir? they say I am fantastical: why, true, I know it, and I pursue my humour still, in contempt of this censorious age. S'light, and a man should doe nothing, but what a sort of stale judge∣mints about this town will approve in him, he were a sweet ass: I'd beg him in faith. I ne'er knew any more find fault with a fashion, then they that knew not how to put themselves in to it. For mine own part, so I please mine own appetite, I am careless what the fusty world speaks of me. Puh.
Doe you mark, how it hangs at the knee there?
I warrant you, sir.
For gods sake, doe, note all: doe you see the collar, sir?
Fear nothing, it shall not differ in a stitch, sir.
Pray heaven, it doe not, you'll make these linings serve? and help me to a chapman for the out-side, will you?
I'll doe my best, sir: you'll put it off presently?
I, go with me to my chamber, you shall have it—but make haste of it, for the love of a customer, for I'll fit i'my old suit, or else lie a bed, and read the Arcadia, till you have done.
O, if ever you were struck with a jest, gallants, now, now. I doe usher the most strange piece of military profession, that ever was dis∣covered in Insula Pauline.
Where? where?
What is he, for a creature?
A pimp, a pimp, that I have observed yonder, the rarest su∣perficies of a humour; hee comes every morning to empty his hangs in Paules here: and offers up some five, or six Hecatomb's of faces, and sighs, and away again. Here he comes; nay, walk, walk, be not seen to note him, and we shall have excellent sport.
S'Lid, hee vented a sigh•'ne now, I thought he would have blown up the church.
O, you shall have him give a number of those false fires ere hee depart.
See, now he is expostulating with his rapier! look, look.
Did you ever, in your days, observe better passion over a hilt?
Except it were in the person of a cutlers boy, or that the fell∣low were nothing but vapour, I should think it impossible.
See, again, he claps his sword of the head, as who should say, well, go to.
O violence! I wonder the blade can contain it self, being so provoked.
With that, the moody squire thumpt his breast,
Andrear'd his even to heaven, •or revenge.
Troth, and you be good gentlemen let's make 'hem friends, and take up the matter, between his rapier, and him.
Nay, if you intend that, you must lay down the matter, for this rapier (it seems) is in the nature a hanger on, and the good gentle∣man would happily be rid of him.
By my faith, and it is to be suspected, I'll ask him.
O, here's rich stuff, for lifes sake, let vs go.
A man would wish himself a senseless pillar,
Rather then view these monstrous prodigies:
Nil habit inf•alex paupertas durius in se,
Quàm quòd ridiculous homines facet—
Signior.
At your service.
Will you sell your rapier?
Sbloud, he is turned wild upon the question, hee looks as hee had seen a sergeant.
Sell my rapier? now fate bless me.
Amen.
You asked me, if I would sell my rapier, sir?
I did indeed.
Now, lord have mercy upon me.
Amen, I say still.
S'lud sir, what should you behold in my face, sir, that should move you (as they say, sir) to ask me, sir, if I would sell my rapier?
Nay (let me pray you, sir) bee not moved: I protest, I would rather have been silent, then any way offensive, had I known your nature.
Sell my rapier? odds lid! Nay, sir (for mine own part) as I am a man that has served in causes, or so, so I am not apt to injure any gentle∣man in the degree of falling foul, but (sell my rapier?) I will tell you sir, I have served with this foolish rapier, where some of vs dare not appear in haste, I name no man: but let that pass. (Sell my rapier?) death to my lungs. This rapier, sir, has travailed by my side, sir, the best part of France and the low Country: I have seen V•ishing Brill, and the H•ghe, with this rapier, sir, in my lord of Leysters time: and (by gods will) he that should offer to disrapier me now, I would— Look you sir, you presume to be a gentleman of sort, and so likewise your friends here, if you have any dis∣position to travel, for the sight of service, or so, one, two, or all of you, I can lend you letters to di•ers officers and commanders in the low Coun∣tries, that shall for my cause doe you all the good offices, that shall pertain or belong to gentlemen of your— Please you to show the bounty of your mind, sir, to impart some ten groats, or half a crown to our use, till our ability be of grow'th to return it, and we shall think our self— Sbloud! sell my rapier?
I pray you, what said he, signior, hoe's a proper man.
Mary, he tells me, if I please to show the bounty of my mind, to impart some ten groats to his use, or so.
Break his head, and give it him.
I thought he had been playing of the Jaws trump, I.
My rapier? no sir: my rapier is my guard, my defence, my re∣uenew, my honour: (if you cannot impart, be secret, I beseech you) and I will maintain it, where there is a grain of dust, or a drop of water.
(Hard is the choice when the valiant must eat their arms, or clem:) Sell my rapier? no, my dear, I will not bee diuorc't from thee, yet, I have ever found thee true as steel—and (you cannot impart sir?) Save you gen∣tlemen: (nevertheless if you have a fancy to it, sir.)
Pray thee away: is Signior DELIRO departed?
Ha'you seen a pimp out-face his own wants better?
I commend him, that can dissemble 'hem so well.
True, and having no better a cloak for it, then he has neither.
Gods precious, what mischievous luck is this! adieu gen∣tlemen.
Whither? in such haste, Monsieur FASTIDIVS?
After my merchant, signior DELIRO, sir.
O hinder him not, hee may hap lose his tide, a good flounder i'faith.
Hark you, signior WHIFF, a word with you.
How? signior WHIFF?
What was the difference between that gallant that's gone, and you, sir.
No difference: he would ha'giu'n me five pound for my ra∣pier, and I refused it; that's all.
O, was it no otherwise? wee thought you had been upon some terms.
No other then you saw, sir.
Adieu, good Master APPLE-IOHN.
How? WHIFF, and APPLE-IOHN too? Heart, what'll you say if this be the appendix, or labell to both youd' indentures?
It may be.
Resolve vs of it, IANVS, thou that look every way: or thou HE•CVLES, that hast travailed all countries.
Nay, CARLO, spend not time in invocations now, it is late.
Signior, here's a gentleman desirous of your name, sir.
Sir, my name is CAVALIER SHIFT: I am known sufficient∣lie in this walk, sir.
SHIFT? I heard your name varied even now, as I take it.
True, sir, it pleases the world (as I am her excellent Tobacco∣nest) to give me the stile of signior WHIFF: as I am a poor esquire about the town here, they call me Master APPLE-IOHN. Varierie of good names does well, sir.
I, and good parts, to make those good names: out of which I imagine yond' bills to be yours.
Sir, if I should deny the manuscripts, I were worthy to be banished the middle I'll, for ever.
I take your word, sir: this gentleman has subscribed to 'hem, and is most desirous to become your pupil. Mary you must use expedite∣on. Signior Insulso Sogliardo, this is the professor.
In good time, sir, nay, good sir, house your head, doe you pro∣fesse those sleights in tobacco?
I, doe more then profess, sir, and (if you please to bee a pra∣ctitioner) I will undertake in one fortnight to bring you, that you shall take it plausibly in any ordinary, theatre, or the tilt-yard, if need be, in the most popular assembly that is.
But you cannot bring him to the whiff so soon?
Yes, as soon, sir, hee shall receive the first, second, and third whiff, if it please him, and (upon the receipt) take his horse, drink his three cups of Canary, and expose one at Hounslow, a second at Stones, and a third at Bogshot.
Baw-waw!
You will not ser•e me, sir, will you• I'll give you more then countenance.
Pardon me, sir, I doe scorn to serve any man.
Who? he serve? Sbloud he keeps high men, and low men, he; he has a fair living at Fullam.
But in the nature of a fellow, I'll bee your follower, if you please.
Sir, you shall stay, and dine with me, and if wee can agree, weal not part in haste: I am very bountiful to men of quality. Where shall we go, signior?
Your Meter is your best house.
I can make this dog take as many whiffs as I list, and hee shall retain, or efume them at my pleasure.
By your patience, follow me, fellows.
Sir, PVNTARVOLO!
Pardon me, my dog shall not eat in his company for a million.
Nay, bee not you amazed, signior WHIFF, what ever that stiffeneckt gentleman soy's.
No, for you doe not know the humour of the Dog, as wee doe: where shall we dine, CARLO? I would fine go to one of these or∣dinaries, now I am a gentleman.
So you may, were you never at any yet?
No faith, but they say, there resorts your most choice gallants.
True, and the fashion is, when any stranger comes in amongst 'hem, they all stand up and stare at him, as he were some unknown beast, brought out of Africa, but that'll bee helped with a good adventurous face, you must be impudent enough, sit down, and use no respect; when any thing's propounded aboue your capacity, smile at it, make two or three faces, and it is excellent, they 'le think you have travailed: though you argue a whole day in silence thus, and discourse in nothing but laugh∣la, twill pass. Only (now and then) give fire, discharge a good full oath, and offer a great wager, twill be admirable.
I warrant you, I am resolute: come, good signior, there's a poor french crown, for your ordinary.
It comes well, for I had not so much as the least portcullis of come before.
I travel with another objection, signior, which I fear will bee enforced against the author, ere I can be delivered of it.
What's that, sir?
That the argument of his Comoedie might have been of some other nature, as of a duke to be in love with a countess, and that coun∣tesse to bee in love with the dukes son, and the son to love the ladies waiting maid: some such cross wooing, with a clown to their serving∣man, better then to be thus near, and familiarly allied to the time.
You say well, but I would fine hear one of these autumne-judgements define once, Quid sit Comoedia? if he cannot, let him content himself with CICEROS definition (till hee have strength to propose to himself a better) who would have a Comoedie to be Imitatio vitae, Speculum consuetudinis, Imago veritatis; a thing throughout pleasant, and ridiculous, and accommodated to the correction of manners: if the maker have failed in any particle of this, they may worthily tax him, but if not, why— be you (that are for them) silent, as I will bee for him; and give way to the actors.
NAy, gods precious, if the weather and season bee so respectless, that beggars shall live as well as their betters; and that my hun∣ger, and thirst for riches, shall not make them hunger and thirst with poverty; that my sleeps shall be brokes, and their hearts not bro∣ken; that my coffers shall bee full, and yet care; theirs empty, and yet merry! Tic time, that a cross should bear flesh and blood, since flesh and blood cannot bear this cross.
What, will he hang himself?
Faith I, it seems his Prognostication has not kept touch with him, and that makes him despair.
Beshrow me, he will be out of his humour then, indeed.
Tut, these star-monger knaves, who would trust 'hem? one says, dark and rainy, when it is as clear as crystal; another says, tempestuous blasts, and storms, and it was as calm as a milke-bowle; here bee sweet rascals for a man to credit his whole fortunes with: You skie-staring cocks-combs you, you fat brains, out upon you; you are good for no∣thing
but to sweat night-caps, and make rug-gownes dear! You lear∣ned men, and have not a legion of devils, a vostre service! a vostre service! by heaven, I think I shall die a better scholar then they! but soft, how now, sir.
Here's a letter come from your son, sir.
From my son, sir? what would my son, sir? some good news, no doubt.
Sweet and dear father (desiring you first to send me your bless∣sing, which is more worth to me then gold or silver) I desire you like∣wise to be advertised, that this Shrouetide (contrary to custom) we use always to have revels; which is indeed dancing, and makes an excellent show in truth; especially if wee gentlemen bee well attired; which our seniors note, and think the better of our fathers, the better we are maintained, and that they shall know if they come up, and have any thing to doe in the law: therefore, good father, these are (for your own sake as well as mine) to re-desire you; that you let me not want, that which is fit for the setting up of our name, in the hono∣rabble volume of gentility, that I may say to our calumniators, with TVLLIE, Ego sum ortus domus meae, tu occasus tu. And thus (not doubting of your fatherly benevolence) I humbly ask you blessing, and pray god to bless you.
Yours, if his own.
How's this? Yours, if his own? is he not my son, except he be his own son? Belike this is some new kind of subscription the gallants use. Well, wherefore doest thou stay, knave? Away: go. Here's a letter indeed; ie•else? and benevolence? is this a weather to send benevolence? or is this a season to revel in? Slid the devil and all takes part to vex me, I think! this letter would never have come now else, now, now, when the sun shines, and the air thus clear. Soul, if this hold, we shall shortly have an excellent crop of corn spring out of the high ways: the streets, and houses of the town will be hid with the rankness of the fruits, that grow therein spite of good husbandry. Go to, I'll prevent the •ight of it, come as quickly as it can, I will prevent the sight of it. I have this reme∣die, heaven. Stay; I'll try the pain thus a little, Ô, nothing, nothing. Well now, shall my son gain a benevolence by my death? or any body be the better for my gold, or so forth? No, alive, I kept it from 'hem, and (dead) my ghost shall walk about it, and preserve it, my son and daugh∣la shall starve ere they touch it, I have bid it as deep as hell from the sight of heaven, and to it I go now.
AYe me, what pitiful sight is this! help, help, help.
How now? what's the matter?
O, here's a man has hanged himself, help to get him again.
Hanged himself? Slid carry him before a justice, it is chance medley, of my word.
How now, what's here to doe?
How comes this?
One has executed himself, contrary to order of law, and by my consent he shall answer't.
Would he were in case, to answer it.
Stand by, he recovers, give him breath.
Oh.
Mass, it was well you went the foot-way, neighbour.
I, and I had not cut the halter.
How! cut the halter? Aye me, I am undone, I am undone.
Mary, if you had not been undone, you had been hanged, I can tell you.
You thred-bare horse-bread-eating rascals, if you would needs have been meddling, could you not have untied it, but you must out it? and in the midst too! Aye me.
Out on me, it is the caterpillars SORDIDO! how cursed are the poor, that the viper was blessed, with this good fortune?
Nay, how accursed art thou, that art cause to the curse of the poor?
I, and to save so wretched a caitiff?
Cursed be thy fingers that loosed him.
Some desperate fury possess thee, that thou moist hang thy self too.
Never moist thou be saved, that saved so damned a monster.
What curses breathe these men! how have my deeds
Made my looks differ from another mans,
That they should thus detest, and loathe my life!
Out on my wretched humour, it is that
Makes me thus monstrous in true humane eyes.
Pardon me (gentle friends) I'll make fair mends
For my foul errors past, and twenty-fold
Restore to all men, what with wrong I robed them:
My barnes, and garners shall stand open still
To all the poor that come, and my best grain
Be made almes-bread, to feed halfe-famisht mouths.
Though hither to amongst you I have lived,
Like an unsauourie muck-hill to my self,
Yet now, my gathered heaps being spread abroad,
Shall turn to better, and more fruitful uses.
Bless then this man, curse him no more for saving
My life, and soul together. O, how deeply
The bitter curses of the poor doe pierce!
I am by wonder changed; come in with me
And witness my repentance: now I prove,
"No life is blessed, that is not graced with love.
O miracle! see when a man he's grace!
Had't not been pity, so good a man should have been cast away?
Well, I'll get our clarke put his conversion in the Acts, and Monuments.
Doe, for I warrant him hoe's a Martyr.
O god, how he wept, if you marked it! did you see how the tears trilled?
Yes, believe me, like master vicars bowls upon the greene, for all the world.
O neighbour, god's blessing of your heart, neighbour, it was a good grateful deed.
How now, MITIS? what's that you consider so seriously?
Troth, that which doth essentially please me, the vvarping con∣dition of this greene, and soggy multitude: but in good saith, signior, your author hath largely out-stript my expectation in this Scene, I will liberal∣lie confess it. For, when I saw SORDIDO so desperately intended, I thought I had had a hand of him, then.
What? you supposed he should have hung himself, indeed?
I did, and had framed my objection to it ready, which may yet be very fitly urged, and with some necessity: for though his purposed vio∣lence lost the effect, and extended not to death, yet the intent and horror of the object, was more then the nature of a Comoedie will in any sort admit.
I? what think you of PLAVTVS, in his Comoedie, called Cistel∣laria, there? where he brings in ALCESIMARCHVS with a drawn sword ready to kill himself, and as hee is even fixing his breast upon it, to bee re∣strained from his resolved outrage, by SILENIVM, and the bawd: is not his authority of power to give our Scene approbation?
Sir, I have this only evasion left me, to say, I think it bee so in∣deed, your memory is happier then mine: but I wonder, what engine hee will use to bring the rest out of their humours!
That will appear anon, never preoccupy your imagination
withal. Let your mind keep company with the Scene still, which now removes it self from the country, to the court. Here comes MACILEN∣TE, and signior BRISK, freshly suited, lose not your self, for now the Epitasis, or busy part of our subject, is in act.
WEll, now, signior MACILENTE, you are not only welcome to the court but also to my mistress with∣drawing chamber: Boy, get me some tobacco, I'll but go in, and show I am here, and come to you presently, sir.
What's that he said? by heaven, I marked him not:
My thoughts, and I, were of another world.
I was admiring mine own out-side here,
To think what privilege, and palm it bears
Here, in the court! Be a man ne'er so vile
In wit, in judgement, manners, or what else;
If he can purchase but a silken cover,
He shall not only pass, but pass regarded:
Whereas, let him be poor, and meanly clad,
Though ne'er so richly parted; you shall have
A fellow (that knows nothing but his beef,
Or how to rince his clammy guts in beer)
Will take him by the shoulders, or the throat,
And kick him down the stairs. Such is the state
Of virtue, in bad clothes! ha, ha, ha, ha,
That raiment should be in such high request!
How long should I be, ere I should put off
To the lord Chancelors tomb, or the Shriues posts?
By heaven (I think) a thousand, thousand year.
His gravity, his wisdom, and his faith,
To my dread Sovereign (graces that survive him)
These I could well endure to reverence,
But not his tomb: no more then I'd commend
The chapel organ, for the guilt without,
Or this base viol, for the varnished face.
I fear I have made you stay somewhat long, sir, but is my ta∣basso ready, boy?
I, sir.
Give me, my mistress is upon coming, you shall see her pre∣sently, sir,  you'll say you never accosted a more piercing wit. This •abacco is not dried, boy, or else the pipe's defective. Oh, your wits of
Italy are nothing comparable to her! her braine's a very quiver of jests! and she do's dart them abroad with that sweet loose, and judicial aim, that you would—here she comes sir.
It was time, his invention had been bogd else.
Give me my fan there.
How now, Monsieur BRISK?
A kind of affectionate reverence strikes me with a cold shive∣ring (me thinks.)
I like such tempers well, as stand before their mistresses with fear and trembling, and before their maker, like impudent mountains.
By this hand, I'd spend twenty pound my vauting-horse stood here now, she might see me doe but one trick?
Why, do's she love activity?
Or if you had but your long stockings on, to be dancing a gal∣liard, as she comes by.
I either. O, these stirring humours make ladies mad with de∣sire• she comes. My good GENIVS embolden me, boy, the pipe quickly.
What? will he give her music?
A second good morrow to my fair mistress.
Fair servant, I'll thank you a day hence, when the date of your salutation comes forth.
How, like you that answer? is it not admirable?
I were a simple courtier, if I could not admire trifles, sir.
Troth, sweet lady, I shall  be prepared to give you thanks for those thanks, and  study more officious, and obsequious re∣guards  to your fair beauties.  mend the pipe, boy.
I ne'er knew tobacco taken as a parenthesis, before.
Fore god (sweet lady) believe it, I doe honour the meanest rush in this chamber, for your love.
I, you need not tell me that, sir, I doe think, you doe prize a rush, before my love.
Is this the wonder of nations?
O, by this ayre, pardon me, I said, for your love, by this light: but it is the accustomed sharpness of your ingenuity, sweet mistress, to—Mass your viol's new strung, methinkes.
Ingenuity. I see his ignorance will not suffer him to slander her, which he had done most notably, if he had said wit, for ingenuity, as he meant it.
By the soul of music, lady (hum, hum.)
Would we might hear it once.
I doe more adore, and admire your (hum, hum) predominant perfections, then (hum, hum) ever I shall have power, and faculty to ex∣press (hum.)
Upon the viol de Gambo, you mean?
It's miserably out of tune, by this hand.
Nay, rather by the fingers.
It makes good harmony with her wit.
Sweet lady, tune it. Boy, some tobacco.
Tobacco again? he do's court his mistress with very excee∣ding good changes.
Signior MACILENTE, you take none, sir? 
No, unless I had a Mistress, signior, it were a great indecorum for me to take tobacco.
How like you her wit? 
Her ingenuity is excellent, sir.
You see the subject of her sweet fingers, there?  Oh, she tickles it so, that  she makes it laugh most divinely;  I'll tell you a good jest now, and yourself shall say it's a good one: I have wished my self to be that instrument (I think) a thousand times, and not so few, by heaven 
Not unlike, sir: but how? to be cased up, and hung by on the wall?
O, no, sir, to be in use I assure you; as your judicious eyes may testify. 
Here, servant, if you will play, come.
Instantly, sweet lady.  In good faith, here's most divine tobacco!
Nay, I cannot stay to dance after your pipe.
Good! nay, dear lady, stay: by this sweet smoke, I think your wit be all fire. 
And, hoe's the Salamander belongs to it.
Is your tobacco perfumed, servant? that you swear by the sweet smoke?
Still more excellent! (before heaven, and these bright lights) I think  you are made of ingenuity, I. 
True, as your discourse is: Ô abominable!
Will your ladyship take any?
O, peace I pray you; I love not the breath of a woodcockes head.
Meaning my head, lady?
Not altogether so, sir; but (as it were fatal to their follies that think to grace themselves with taking tobacco, when they want better entertainment) you see your pipe bears the true form of a wood∣cocks head.
O admirable simile!
It is best leaving of you in admiration, sir.
Are these the admired lady-wits, that having so good a plaine-song, can run no better division upon it? S'heart, all her jests are of the stamp, (March was fifteen years ago.) Is this the Comet, Monsieur FA∣STADIVS, that your gallants wonder at so?
Hart of a gentleman, to neglect me before presence thus! Sweet sir, I beseech you be silent in my disgrace. By the Muses, I was never in so vile a humour in my life, and her wit was at the •loud too. Report it not for a million, good sir; let me be so far endeared to your love.
What follows next, signior CORDATVS? this gallants hue∣more is almost spent, me thinks, it ebbes apace, with this contrary breath of his mistress.
O, but it will •low again for all this, till there come a general drought of humour among all our actors, and then, I fear not but his will fall as low as any. See, who presents himself here!
What, in the old case?
In faith, which makes it, the more pitiful, you understand where the Scene is?
WHy, are you so melancholy, brother?
I am not melancholy, I thank you, sister.
Why are you not merry then? there are but two of vs in all the world, and if wee should not bee comforts one to ano∣there, god help vs.
Faith, I cannot tell, sister, but if a man had any true melancho∣lie in him, it would make him melancholy, to see his yeomanly father cut his neighbours throats, to make his son a gentleman: and yet when he has cut 'hem, he will see his sons throat cut too, ere he make him a true gentleman indeed, before death cut his own throat. I must bee the first head of our house, and yet he will not give me the head till I bee made so. Is any man termed a gentleman that is not always in the fashion? I would know but that.
If you bee melancholy for that, brother, I think I have as much cause to bee melancholy, as one: for I'll be sworn, I live as little in the fashion, as any woman in London. By the faith of a Gentlewoman, (beast that I am to say it) I haven't one friend in the world besides my hus∣band. When saw you master FASTIDIVS BRISK, brother?
But a while since, sister, I think: I know not well in truth. By this hand, I could fight with all my heart, me thinks.
Nay, good brother, be not resolute.
I sent him a letter, and he writes me no answer neither.
Oh, sweet FASTIDIVS BRISK! Ô fine courtier! thou art hee make me sigh, and say, how blessed is that woman that hath a cour∣tier to her husband! and how miserable a dame she is, that hath neither
husband, nor friend in the court! O, sweet FASTIDIVS! Ô, fine courtier! How comely he bows him in his curtsy! how full hee hits a woman between the lips when hee kisses! how upright hee sits at the table! how daintily he carves! how sweetly he talks, and tells news of this lord, and of that lady! how cleanly he wipes his spoon, at every spoonful of any whit-meat he eats, and what a neat case of pick-tooths he carries about him, still! O, sweet FASTIDIVS! Ô, fine courtier!
SEe, yonder she is, gentlemen. Now (as ever you'll bear the name of musicians) touch your instruments sweetly, she has a delicate ear, I tell you: play not a false note, I beseech you.
Fear not, siguior DELIRO.
O, begin, begin, some sprightly thing: Lord, how my image∣nation labours with the success of it. Well said, good in faith! heaven grant it please her. I'll not be seen, for then she'll be sure to dislike it.
Hey—da! this is excellent! I'll lay my life, this is my husbands dotage. I thought so; nay, never play peeke-boe with me, I know, you doe nothing but study how to anger me, sir.
Anger thee, sweet wife? why did thou not send for musicians to supper last night, thy self?
To supper, sir? now, come up to supper, I beseech you: as though there were no difference between supper time, when folks should be merry, and this time when they would be melancholy? I would never take upon me to take a wife, if I had no more judgment to please her.
Be pleased, sweet wife, and they shall have done: and would to fate, my life were done, if I can never please thee.
Save you, lady, where is master DELIRO?
Here, master MACILENTE: you are welcome from court, sir; no doubt you have been graced exceedingly of master BRISKES Mi∣stress, and the rest of the ladies, for his sake?
Alas, the poor fantastic! hoe's scarce known
To any lady there; and those that know him,
Know him the simplest man of all they know:
De•id, and play upon his amorous humours,
Though he but apishly doth imitate
The gallant'st courtiers, kissing ladies pumps.
Holding the cloth for them, praising their wits,
And servilely observing every one,
May doe them pleasure: fearful to be seen
With any man (though he be ne'er so worthy)
That's not in grace with some, that are the greatest.
Thus courtiers doe, and these he counterfeits.
But sets not such a sightly carriage
Upon their vanities, as they themselves;
And therefore they despise him: for indeed
Hoe's like the Zani, to a tumbler,
That tries tricks after him, to make men laugh.
Here's an unthankful spiteful wretch! the good gentleman vouchsafed to make him his companion (because my husband put him into a few rags) and now see, how the vnrude rascal back-bites him!
Is he no more graced amongst 'hem, then? say you?
Faith, like a pawn, at Chess: fills up a room, that's all.
O monster of men! can the earth bear such an e•uious caitiff?
Well, I repent me, I ever credited him so much: but (now I see what he is, and that his masking visor is off) I'll forbear him no longer. All his lands are mortgaged to me, and forfeited: besides, I have bonds of his in my hand, for the receipt of now fifty pound, now a hundred, now two hundred: still, as he has had a fan but wagg'd at him, he would be in a new suit. Well, I'll salute him by a Sergeant, the next time I see him, in faith, I'll suit him.
Why, you may soon see him, sir, for hee is to meet signior PVNTARVOLO at a Notaries, by the Exchange, presently: where he means to take up, upon return—
Now, out upon thee, IVDAS; can thou not be content to back-bite thy friend, but thou must betray him? wilt thou seek the un∣doing of any man? and of such a man too? and will you, sir, get your li∣uing by the counsel of traitors?
Dear wife, have patience.
The house will fall, the ground will open, and swallow vs: I'll not bīde here, for all the gold, and silver in heaven.
O, good MACILENTE, let's follow and appease her, or the peace of my life is at an end.
Now peas, and not peace, feed that life, whose head bangs so heavily over a women's manger.
Help me, brother: odds body, and you come here, I'll doe my self a mischief.
Nay, hear me, sweet wife, unless thou wilt have me go, I will not go.
Tut, you shall ne'er have that vantage of me, to say, you are un∣done by me: I'll not bid you stay, I. Brother, sweet brother, here's four angels, I'll give you toward your suit: for the love of gentry, and as ever you came of christen creature, make haste to the water fide (you know where Master FASTIDIVS uses to land) and give him warning of my hus∣bands malicious intent; &amp; tel him of that lea•e rascals treachery: O heuens!
how my flesh rises at him! nay, sweet brother, make haste: you may say, I would have writ to him, but that necessity of the time would not permit. He cannot choose but take it extraordinarily from me: and com∣mend me, to him, good brother, say, I sent you.
Let me see, these four angels, and then, forty shillings more I can borrow on my gown in Fetter-lane. Well, I will go presently, say on my suit, pay as much money as I have, and swear my self into credit with my taylor, for the rest.
O, on my soul you wrong her, MACILENTE,
Though she be froward, yet I know she is honest.
Well, then have I no judgment: would any woman (but one that were wild in her affections) have broke out into that immodest and violent passion against her husband? or is it possible—
If you love me, forbear; all the arguments in the world shall never wrest my heart to believe it.
How like you the deciphering of his dotage?
O, strangely! and of the others envy too, that labours so seri∣ously to set debate betwixt a man, and his wife. Stay, here comes the knight aduenturer.
I, and his scrivener with him.
I Wonder, Monsieur FASTIDIVS comes not! but, NOTARY, if thou please to draw the indentures the while, I will give thee thy in∣structions.
With all my heart, sir; and I'll fall in hand with 'he• presently.
Well then, first, the sum is to be understood.
Good, sir.
Next, our several appellations, and character of my dog, and cat, must be known: show him the cat, sirrah.
So, sir.
Then, that the intended bound, is the Turks court in Constan∣tinople: the time limited for our return, a year: and that if either of vs miscarry, the whole venture is lost. These are general, conceiu'st thou? or if either of vs turn Turk.
I, sir.
Now for particulars: That I may make my travails by sea or land, to my best liking: and that (hyring a coach for my self) it shall bee lawful for my dog, or cat, or both, to ride with me in the said coach.
Very good, sir.
That I may choose to give my dog, or cat fish, for fear of bones: or any other nutriment, that (by the judgment of the most au∣tenticall physicians, where I travail) shall be thought dangerous.
Well, sir.
That (after the receipt of his money) he shall neither in his own person, nor any other, either by direct or indirect means, as magic, witchcraft, or other such exotic arts, attempt, practise, or complot a∣•iething, to the prejudice of me, my dog, or my cat: Neither shall I use the help of any such forceries, or enchantments, as vnctious, to make our skins impenetrable, or to travail invisible by virtue of a powder, or a ring, or to hang any three-forked charm about my dogs neck, se∣cretly conveyed into his collar: (understand you?) but that all be perfor∣med, sincerely, without fraud, or imposture.
So, sir.
That (for testimony of the performance) my self am to bring thence a T•rkes moustache, my dog a Gracian hares lip, and my cat the train, or tail of a Thracian rat.
It is done, sir.
It is said, sir, not done, sir: but forward. That upon my re∣turn, and landing on the Tower-wharfe, with the aforesaid testimony, I am to receive five for one, according to the proportion of the sums put forth.
Well, sir.
Provided, that if before our departure, or setting forth, either my self, or these be visited with sickness, or any other casual event, so that the whole course of the adventure bee hindered, thereby; that then, he is to return, and I am to receive the prenominated proportion, upon fair and equal terms.
Very good, sir, is this all?
It is all, sir: and dispatch them, good NOT ARIE.
As fast as is possible, sir.
O, CARLO! welcome: saw you Monsieur BRISK?
Not I: did he appoint you, to meet here?
I, and I muse he should be so tardy: hee is to take an hundred pounds of me in venture, if he maintain his promise.
Is his hour past?
Not yet, but it comes on apace.
Tut, be not jealous of him: he will sooner break all the com∣mandements, then his hour, upon my life, in such a case trust him.
Me thinks, CARLO, you look very smooth! ha?
Why, I come but now from a hot-house, I must needs look smooth.
From a hot-house!
I, doo you make a wonder on it? why it's your only physic.
Let a man sweat once a week in a hothouse, and be well rubbed, fro∣ted, with a good plump juicie wench, and sweet linen: hee shall ne'er have the pox.
What, the French pox?
The French pox! our pox. S'bloud we have 'hem in as good form as they, man: what?
Let me perish, but thou art a salt one! was your new-created gallant there with you? SOGLIARDO?
O, porpoise! hang him, no: hoe's a leaguer at Horns ordinary yonder: his villainous GANIMEDE, and he have been droning a tobacco pipe there, ever senator yesterday no one.
Who? signior TRIPARTITE, that would give my dog the Whiff?
I, hee. They have hired a chamber, and all private to practise in, for the making of the Pato••, the Receipt reciprocal, and a number∣ber of other mysteries, not yet extant. I brought some dozen, or twenty gallants this morning to view 'hem (as you'd doe a piece of Perspective) in at a key-hole: and there wee might see SOGLIARDO sit in a chair, holding his snout up like a sow under an apple-tree, while the other op∣n'd his nostrils with a poking-sticke, to give the smoke a more free deliue∣rye. They had spit some three, or fourscore ounces between 'hem, before we came away.
How! spit three, or fourscore ounces?
I, and preserved it in porringers; as a barber does his blood▪ when he opens a vein.
Out, Pagan: how dost thou open the vein of thy friend?
Friend? Is there any such foolish thing in the world? ha? S'lid I ne'er relished it yet.
Thy humour is the more dangerous.
No, not a whit, Signior: Tut, a man must keep time in all. I can oil my tongue when I meet him next, and look with a good slick fore-head; twill take away all soil of suspicion, and that's enough: what LYNCEVS can see my heart? Pish, the title of a friend, it's a vain idle thing, only venerable among fools: you shall not have one that has any opinion of wit affect it.
Save you, good sir PVNTARVOLO.
Signior DELIRO! welcome.
Pray you, sir, did you see Master FASTIDIVS BRISK? I heard he was to meet your worship here.
Your heard no segment, sir, I doe expect him at every pulse of my watch.
In good time, sir.
There's a fellow now, looks like one of the Patricians of Spar∣ta, mary his wit's after ten in the hundred. A good bloud-hound, a closemouthed dog, he follows the sent well, mary he's at a fault now, me thinks.
I should wonder at that creature is free from the danger of thy tongue.
O, I cannot abide these limbs of satin, or rather Satan in∣deed, that 'll walk (like the children of darkness) all day in a melancho∣lie shop, with their pockets full of blanks, ready to swallow up as ma∣no poor unthrifts, as come within the verge.
So! and what hast thou for him that is with him, now?
O, (dam' me) Immortality! I'll not meddle with him, the pure element of fire, all spirit, extraction.
HOW, CARLO? ha, what is he, man?
A scholar, MACILENTE, doe you not know him? a lank raw-bon'd anatomy, he walks up and down like a charged musket, no man dares encounter him: that's his rest there.
His rest? why has he a forked head?
Pardon me, that's to be suspended, you are too quick, too ap∣prehensiue.
Troth (now I think on it) I'll defer it till some other time.
Not, by any means, signior, you shall not lose this opportune∣tie, he will be here presently now.
Yes saith, MACILENTE, it is best. For look you, sir, I shall so exceedingly offend my wife in it, that—
Your wife? now for shame lose these thoughts, and become the master of your own spirits. Should I (if I had a wife) suffer my self to be thus passionately carried (to and fro) with the stream of her humour? and neglect my deepest affairs, to serve her affections? S'light I would geld my self first.
O but, signior, had you such a wife as mine is, you would—
Such a wife? Now hate me, sir, if ever I discerned any wonder in your wife, yet, with all the speculation I have: I have seen some that have been thought fairer then she, in my time; and I have seen those, have not been altogether so tall, esteemed properer women; and I have seen less noses grow upon sweeter faces, that have done very well too, in my judge∣meant: but in good faith, signior, for all this, the gentlewoman is a good pretty proud hard-fauour'd thing, mary not so peerelessely to bee doted upon, I must confess: nay, be not angry.
Well, sir, (how ever you please to forget your self) I have not deserved to bee thus played upon, but henceforth, pray you forbear my house, for I can but faintly endure the favour of his breath at my table, that shall thus jade me for my courtesies.
Nay, then, signior, let me tell you, your wife is no proper wo∣man,
and, by my life, I suspect her honesty, that's more, which you may likewise suspect (if you please:) doe you see? Isle urge you to nothing, a∣against your appetite, but if you please, you may suspect it.
Good, sir.
Good sir? Now horn upon horn pursue thee, thou blind e∣gregious dotard.
O, you shall hear him speak like ennie. Signior MACILEN∣TE, you saw monsieur BRISK lately? I heard you were with him at court.
I, BVFFONE, I was with him.
And how is he respected there? (I know you'll deal ingenu∣ously with vs) is he made of amongst the sweeter sort of gallants?
Faith I, his civet and his casting-glasse,
Have helped him to a place amongst the rest:
And there, his Seniors give him good slight looks,
After their garb, smile, and salute in French
With some new complement.
What, is this all?
Why say, that they should show the frothie fool,
Such grace, as they pretend comes from the heart,
He had a mighty wind-fall out of doubt.
Why, all their Graces are not to doe grace
To virtue, or desert: but to ride both
With their guilt sputres quite breathless, from themselves.
It is now esteemed Precisianisme in wit;
And a disease in nature, to be kind
Toward desert, to love, or seek good names:
Who feeds with a good name? who thrives with loving?
Who can provide feast for his own desires,
With serving others? ha, ha, ha:
It is folly, by our wisest worldlings proved,
(If not to gain by love) to be beloved.
How like you him? is it not a good spiteful slave? ha?
Shrewd, shrewd.
Dam'me, I could eat his flesh now: divine sweet villain!
Nay, pray thee leave: what's he there?
Who? this in the starcht beard? it's the dull stiff knight PVN∣TARVOLO, man; hoe's to travail now presently: hee has a good knotty wit, marry he carries little o't out of the land, with him.
How then?
He puts it forth in venture, as hee does his money; upon the re∣turn of a dog, and cat.
Is this he?
I, this is hee; a good tough gentleman: hee looks like a shield of brawn, at Shrouetide, out of date, and ready to take his leave:
or a dry poule of ling upon Easter-eue, that has furnished the table all Lent, as he has done the city this last vacation.
Come, you'll never leave your stabbing smile's: I shall have you aiming at me with 'hem by and by, but—
O, renounce me then: pure, honest, good devil, I love thee aboue the love of women: I could even melt in admiration of thee, now! gods so, look here, man; Sir DAGONET, and his squire!
Save you, my dear GALLANTO'S: nay, come approach, good CAVA∣LIER: pray thee (sweet knight) know this gentleman, hoe's one that it pleases me to use as my good friend, and companion; and there∣fore doe him good offices: I beseech you, gentles, know him, know him all over.
Sir (for signior SOGLIARDO'S sake) let it suffice, I know you.
Why (as I am true gentleman) I thank you, knight, and it shall suffice. Hark you, sir PVNTARVOLO, you'd little think it; he's as resolute a piece of flesh, as any's in the world.
Indeed, sir?
Upon my gentility, sir: CARLO, a word with you; Doe you see that same fellow, there?
What? CAVALIER SHIFT?
O, you know him; cry you mercy: before me, I think him the tallest man, living within the walls of Europe.
The walls of Europe! take heed what you say, signior, Eu∣rope's a huge thing within the walls.
Tut, (and it were as huge again) I'd justify what I speak. Slid, he swaggered even now in a place where we were: I never saw a man doe it more resolute.
Nay, indeed swaggering is a good argument of resolution. Doe you hear this, signior?
I, to my grief. O, that such muddy flags,
For every drunken flourish, should achieve
The name of manhood; whilst true perfect valour
(Hating to show it self) goes by despised!
Heart, I doe know now (in a fair just cause)
I dare doe more then he, a thousand times:
Why should not they take knowledge of this? ha?
And give my worth allowance before his?
Because I cannot swagger! Now the pox
Light on your Pickt-hatch prowess.
of fates) to have fed on wood-cocks, with the rest: but it was his heavy fortune to sink, poor CLOG, and therefore talk no more of him.
Why, had he more eiders, then?
O god, sir! I, there were some present there, that were the nine Worthies to him, in faith.
I, sir, I can satisfy you at more convenient conference: but (for mine own part) I have now reconciled my self to other courses, and pro∣fesse a living out of my other qualities.
Nay, he has left all now (I assure you) and is able to live like a gentleman, by his quality. By this dog, hee has the most rare gift in ta∣basso, that ever you knew.
S'heart, hee keeps more ado with this monster, then ever BANKS did with his horse, or the fellow with the elephant.
He will hang out his picture shortly, in a cloth, you shall see.
O, hee do's manage a quarrel, the best that ever you saw, for terms, and circumstances.
Good faith, signior, (now you speak of a quarrel) I'll ac∣quaint you with a difference, that happened between a gallant, and my self sir PVNTARVOLO, you know him if I should name him, signior LVCVLENTO.
LVCVLENTO! what in-auspicious chance interposed it self to your two loves?
Faith, sir, the same that sundried AGAMEMNON, and great THETIS son; but let the cause escape, sir: Hee sent me a challenge (mict with some few braves) which I restored, and in fine we met. Now indeed, sir, (I must tell you) he did offer at first very desperately, but with∣out judgment: for look you, sir. I cast my self into this figure: now he, comes violently on, and withal advancing his rapier to strike, I thought to have took his arm (for he had left his whole body to my election, and I was sure he could not recover his guard) Sir, I mist my purpose in his arm, rasht his doublet sleeve, ran him close by the left cheek, and through his hair. He again, lights me here (I had on, a gold cable hatband, then new come up, which I wore about a murray French hat I had) cuts my hatband (and yet it was massy, gold-smithes work) cuts my brims, which by good fortune (being thick embroidered with gold-twist, and spangles) disappointed the force of the blow: Nevertheless, it grazed on my shoulder, takes me away six purls of an Italian cut-worke band I wore (cost me three pound in the exchange, but three days before.)
This was a strange encounter!
Nay, you shall hear, sir: with this wee both fell out, and breathed. Now (upon the second sign of his assault) I betook me to the former manner of my defence; he (on the other side) abandoned his by∣die to the same danger, as before, and follows me still with blows: But I (being loath to take the deadly advantage that lay before me of his left side) made a kind of stramazoun, ran him up to the hilts, through the
doublet, through the shirt, and yet mist the skin. Hee (making a reverse blow) falls upon my embossed girdle (I had thrown off the hangers a lit∣tle before) strikes off a skirt of a thick—laced satin doublet I had (lined with some four taffataes) cuts off two panes, embroidered with pearl, rends through the drawings out of tissew, enters the linings, and skips the flesh.
I wonder he speaks not of his wrought shirt!
Here (in the opinion of mutual damage) wee paused: but (ere I proceed) I must tell you, signior, that (in this last encounter) not having leisure to put off my silver spurs, one of the rowels caught hold of the rue••le of my boot, and (being Spanish leather, and subject to tear) overthrows me, rends me two pair of silk stockings (that I put on, be∣ing somewhat a raw morning, a peach colour and another) and strikes me some half inch deep into the side of the calfe; Hee (seeing the blood come) presently takes horse, and away. I (having bound up my wound with a piece of my wrought shirt)—
O! comes it in there?
Rid after him, and (lighting at the court-gate, both together) embraced, and marched hand in hand up into the presence: was not this bu∣sinesse well carried?
Well? yes, and by this we can guess what apparel the gentle∣man wore.
Fore valour, it was a designement begun with much resolute∣on, maintained with as much prowess, and ended with more humanity. How now, what says the Notary?
He says, he is ready, sir, he stays but your worships pleasure.
Come, we will go to him, Monsieur. Gentlemen, shall we en∣treat you to be witnesses?
You shall entreat me, sir: come Resolution.
I follow you, good Countenance.
Come, signior, come, come.
O, that there should be fortune
To clothe these men, so naked in desert!
And that the just storm of a wretched life,
Beats 'hem not ragged, for their wretched souls,
And, since as fruitless, even as black as coals!
Why, but signior, how comes it, that FVNGOSO appeared not with his sisters intelligence, to BRISK?
Mary, long of the evil angels that she gave him, who have in∣deed tempted the good simple youth, to follow the tail of the fashion, and neglect the imposition of his friends. Behold, here hee comes, very worshipfully attended and with good variety.
Gramercy, good shoo-maker, I'll put to strings my self. Now, sir, let me see, what must you have for this hat?
Here's the bill, sir.
How does't become me? well?
Excellent, sir, as ever you had any hat in your life.
Nay, you'll say so, all.
In faith, sir, the hat's as good as any man in this town can serve you; and will maintain fashion as long: ne'er trust me for a great else.
Do's it apply well to my suit?
Exceeding well, sir.
How lik'st thou my suit, haberdasher?
By my troth, sir, it is very rarely well made, I never saw a suit sit better, I can tell, on.
Nay, we have no art to please our friends, we.
Here, haberdasher, tell this fame.
Good faith, sir, it makes you have an excellent body.
Nay (believe me) I think I have as good a body in clothes, as another.
You lack points, to bring your apparel together, sir.
I'll have points anon: how now? is it right?
Faith, sir, it is too little, but upon farther hopes—Good morrow to you, sir.
Farewell, good haberdasher. Well, now master SNIP, let me see your bill.
Me thinks he discharges his followers too thick.
O, therein he fancily imitates some great man. I warrant you, though he turns off them, he keeps this taylor, in place of a page, to follow him still.
This bill is very reasonable, in faith (hark you, master SNIP) Troth, sir, I am not altogether so well furnished at this present, as I could wish I were, but— If you'll doe me the favour to take part in hand, you shall have all I have, by this hand—
Sir—
And, but give me credit for the rest, till the beginning of the next term.
O lord, sir—
Fore god, and by this light, I'll pay you to the utmost, and
acknowledge my self very deeply engaged to you, by the curtsy.
Why, how much have you there, sir?
Mary I have here four angels, and fifteen shillings of white money: it's all I have, as I hope to be blessed.
You will not fail me, at the next term, with the rest.
No, and I doe, pray heaven, I be hanged. Let me never breathe again, upon this mortal stage, as the philosopher calls it. By this air, and (as I am a gentleman) I'll hold.
He were an yron-hearted fellow, in my judgment, that would not credit him upon this volley of oaths.
Well, sir, I'll not stick with any gentleman for a trifle: you know what it is, remains?
I, sir, and I give you thanks in good faith. O fate! how hap∣pie am I made in this good fortune! Well, now I'll go seek out Mon∣sieur BRISK. Odds so, I have forgot ribbon for my shoes, and points. Slid, what luck 's this! how shall I doe? Master SNIPPE, pray let me re∣duct some two or three shillings for points, and ribbon: as I am an honest man, I have utterly disfurnisht my self, in the default of memory, pray¦le me be beholding to you, it shall come home in the bill, believe me.
Faith, sir, I can hardly depart with ready money, but I'll take up, and send you some by my boy, presently. What coloured ribbon would you have?
What you shall think meet i'your judgment, sir, to my suit.
Well, I'll send you some presently.
And points too, sir?
And points too, sir.
Good lord! how shall I study to deserve this kindness of you, sir? Pray, let your youth make haste, for I should have done a business an hour since, that I doubt I shall come too late. Now, in good faith, I am exceeding proud of my suit.
Doe you observe the plunges, that this poor gallant is put to (signior) to purchase the fashion?
I, and to bee still a fashion behind with the world, that's the sport.
Stay: O here they come, from sealed, and delivered.
WEll, now my whole venture is forth, I will resolve to depart shortly.
Faith, sir PVNTARVOLO, go to the court, and take leave of the ladies first.
I care not, if it be this afternoons labour. Where is CARLO?
Here he comes.
Faith, gallants, I am persuading this gentleman to turn cour∣tier. He is a man of fair revenue, and his estate will bear the charge well. Besides, for his other gifts of the mind, or so, why, they are as nature lent him 'hem, pure, simple, without any artificial drug or mixture of these two thred-bare beggarly qualities, learning, and knowledge, and therefore the more accommodate, and genuine. Now, for the life it self—
O, the most celestial, and full of wonder, and delight, that can be imagined, signior, beyond all thought, and apprehension of pleasure! A man lives there, in that divine rapture, that hee will think himself in the ninth heaven for the time, and lose all sense of mortality whatsoever; when he shall behold such glorious (and almost immortal) beauties, hear such angelical and harmonious voices, discourse with such flowing and ambrosiam spirits, whose wits are as sudden as lightning, and humo∣rous as nectar, Oh: it makes a man al quintessence, and flame, &amp; lifts him up (in a moment) to the very crystal crown of the sky, where (hovering in the strength of his imagination) he shall behold all the delights of the HESPERIDES, the Insulae Fortunate, ATONES gardens, Tempe or what else (condfin'd within the amplest verge of poesy) to bee mere vmbrae, and imperfect figures, conferred with the most essential felicity of your court.
Well, this Encomion was not extemporal, it came too perfe∣ctly off.
Besides, sir, you shall never need to go to a hot-house, you shall sweat there with courting your mistress, or losing your money at primero, as well as in all the stones in Sweden. Mary this, sir, you must e∣for be sure to carry a good strong perfume about you, that your mistress dog may smell you out amongst the rest; and (in making love to her) no∣for fear to be out: for you may have a pipe of tobacco, or a base viol shall hang of the wall, of purpose, will put you in presently. The tricks your Resolution has taught you in tobacco, (the whisse, and those sleights) will stand you in very good ornament there?
I, to some perhaps: but, and hee should come to my mistress with tobacco (this gentleman knows) shee'ld reply upon him, in faith. O, (by this bright sun) she has the most acute, ready, and facetious wit, that—tut there's no spirit able to stand her. You can report it, sig∣nior, you have seen her?
Then can hee report no less, out of his judgment, I assure him.
Troth, I like her well enough, but shoe's too selfe-conceited, me thinks.
I indeed, shoe's a little too self conceited, and it were not for that humour, she were the most-to-be-admir'd lady in the world.
Indeed, it is a humour that takes from her other excellencies.
Why, it may easily be made to forsake her, in my thought.
Easily, sir? then are all impossibilities easy.
You conclude too quick upon me, signior, what will you say, if I make it so perspicuously appear now, that your self shall confess nothing more possible?
Mary, I will say, I will both applaud, and admire you for it.
And I will second him, in the admiration.
Why, I'll show you, gentlemen. CARLO, come hither.
Good faith, I have a great humour to the court: what thinks my Resolution? shall I adventure?
Troth, Countenance, as you please; the place is a place of good reputation, and capacity.
O, my tricks in tobacco (as CARLO says) will show excel∣lent there.
Why, you may go with these gentlemen now, and see fashi∣once: and after, as you shall see correspondence.
You say true. You will go with me, Resolution?
I will meet you, Countenance, about three or four of clock, but, to say to go with you I cannot, for (as I am APPLE-IOHN) I am to go before the Cocatrice you saw this morning, and therefore pray, present me excused, good Countenance.
Farewell, good Resolution, but fail not to meet.
As I live.
Admirably excellent!
If you can but persuade SOGLIARDO to court, there's all now.
O let me alone, that's my task.
Now, by wit, MACILENTE, it's aboue measure excellent: twill be the only court-exploit that ever proved courtier ingenious.
Upon my soul, it puts the lady quite out of her humour, and we shall laugh with judgment.
Come, the gentleman was of himself resolved to go with you, before I moved it.
Why then, gallants, you two, and CARLO, go before to
prepare the jest: SOGLIARDO and I will come some while after you.
Pardon me, I am not for court.
That's true: CARLO comes not at court indeed. Well, you shall leave it to the faculty of monsieur BRISK, and my self, upon our lives wee will manage it happily. CARLO shall bespeak supper, at the meter, against we come back: where we will meet, and dimple our cheeks with laughter at the success.
I, but will you all promise to come?
My self shall manfrede it for them: he that fails, let his repu∣tation lye under the lash of thy tongue.
Gods so, look who comes here!
What, nephew!
Uncle, god save you; did you see a gentleman, one monsieur BRISK? a Courtier, he goes in such a suit as I doe.
Here is the gentleman, nephew, but not in such a suit.
Another suit!
How now, nephew?
Would you speak to me, sir?
I, when he has recovered himself: poor poll.
Some Rosa-solis.
How now, signior?
I am not well, sir.
Why, this it is, to dog the fashion.
Nay, come gentlemen, remember your affairs; his disease is nothing but the flux of apparel.
Sirs, return to the lodging, keep the cat safe; I'll be the dogs Guardian my self.
Nephew, will you go to court with vs? these gentlemen and I are for the court: nay, be not so melancholy.
By gods lid, I think no man in christendom has that rascal∣lie fortune that I have.
Faith, your suit is well enough, signior.
Nay, not for that, I protest; but I had an errand to Monsieur FASTIDIVS, and I have forgot it.
Why, go along to court with vs, and remember it, come. Gentlemen, you three take one boat, and SOGLIARDO and I will take a∣another: we shall be there instantly.
Content: good sir, vouchsafe vs your pleasance.
Farewell, CARLO; remember.
I warrant you: would I had one of Kemps shoes to throw af∣la you.
Good Fortune will close the eyes of our jest, fear not: and we shall frolic.
This MACILENTE, signior, begins to bee more sociable on a sudden, me thinks, then hee was before: there's some portent in it, I believe.
O, hoe's a fellow of a strange nature. Now do's hee (in this calm of his humour) plot, and store up a world of malicious thoughts in his brain, till hee is so full with 'hem, that you shall see the very torrent of his envy break forth like a land-floud: and, against the course of all their affections oppose it self so violently, that you will almost have won∣der to think, how it is possible the current of their dispositions shall re∣ceiue so quick, and strong an alteration.
I mary, sir, this is that, on which my expectation has dwelt al this while: for I must tel you, signior (though I was loath to interrupt the Scene) yet I made it a question in mine own private discourse, how he should properly call it, Every man out of his Humour, when I saw all his actors so strongly pursue, and continue their humours?
Why, therein his art appears most full of lustre, and approaches nearest the life: especially, when in the flame, and height of their humours, they are laid flat, it fills the eye better, and with more contentment. How tedious a sight were it to behold a proud exalted tree lopped, and cut down by degrees, when it might bee field in a moment? and to set the axe to it before it came to that pride, and fullness, were, as not to have it grow.
Well, I shall long till I see this fall, you talk of.
To help your longing, signior, let your imagination be swifter them a pair of oars: and by this, suppose PVNTARVOLO, BRISK, FVNGOSO, and the dog arrived at the court gate, and going up to the great chamber. MACILENTE, and SOGLIARDO, we'll leave them on the water, till possibility and natural means may land 'hem. Here come the gallants, now prepare your expectation.
COme, gentles. Signior, you are sufficiently instructed.
Who, I, sir?
No, this gentleman. But stay, I take thought how to be∣stow my dog, he is no competent attendant for the presence.
Mass, that's true indeed, knight, you must not carry him into the presence.
I know it, and I (like a dull beast) forgot to bring one of my cormorants to attend me.
Why, you're best leave him at the porters lodge.
Not so: his worth is too well known amongst them, to bee forth-comming.
Slight, how'll you doe then?
I must leave him with one, that is ignorant of his quality, if I will have him to be safe. And see! Here comes one that will carry coals, ergo, will hold my dog. My honest friend, may I commit the tuition of this dog to thy prudent care?
You may, if you please, sir.
Pray thee let me find thee here at my return: it shall not bee long, till I will ease thee of thy employment, and please thee. Forth, gentles.
Why, but will you leave him with so slight command, and in∣firse no more charge, upon the fellow?
Charge? no; there were no policy in that: that were to let him know the value of the gem he holds, and so, to tempt frail nature against her disposition. No, pray thee let thy honesty be sweet, as it shall be short.
Yes, sir.
But hark you gallants, and chiefly Monsieur BRISK. When we come in eye-shot, or presence of this lady, let not other mat∣ters carry vs from our project: but (if wee can) single her forth to some place—
I warrant you.
And bee not too sudden, but let the device induce it self with good circumstance. On.
Is this the way? good truth, here be fine hangings.
Honesty sweet, and short? mary it shall, sir, doubt you not: for even at this instant if one would give me twenty pounds, I would not deliver him; there's for the sweet; but now, if any man come offer me but two pence, he shall have him; there's for the short now. Slid, what a mad humorous gentleman is this to leave his dog with me? I could run away with him now, and hee were worth any thing.
Come on, signior, now prepare to court this all-witted lady, most naturally, and like your self.
Faith, and you say the word, I'll begin to her in tobacco.
O, fie on it: no: you shall begin with, How does my sweet lady? or, Why are you so melancholy, Madame? though she bee very merry, it's all one: be sure to kiss your hand often enough; pray for her health, and tell her, how, more then most fair she is. Screw your face at one side thus, and protest; let her fleer, and look a skaunce, and hide her teeth with her fan, when she laughs a fit, to bring her into more matter, that's no∣thing: you must talk forward (though it be without sense, so it be with∣out blushing) it is most court-like, and well.
But shall I not use tobacco at all?
O, by no means, twill but make your breath suspected, and that you use it only to confound the rankenesse of that.
Nay, I'll be advised, sir, by my friends.
Gods my life, see, where sir PVNTARS dog is.
I would the gentleman would return for his follower here, I'll leave him to his fortunes else.
S'heart, it were the only true jest in the world to poison him now: ha? by this hand, I'll doe it, if I could but get him of the fellow. Signior SOGLIARDO, walk aside, and think upon some device, to enter∣taine the lady with.
So I doe, sir.
How now, mine honest friend? whose dog-keeper art thou?
Dogge-keeper, sir? I hope I scorn that in faith.
Why? dost thou not keep a dog?
Sir, now I doe, and now I doe not: I think this be sweet and short. Make me his dogge-keeper?
This is excellent, aboue expectation: nay stay, sir, you'd bee travailing, but I'll give you a dram shall shorten your voyage: here. So sir, I'll be bold to take my leave of you. Now to the Turks court in the devils name, for you shall never go o'gods name. SOGLIARDO, come.
I have 't ysaith now, will sting it.
Take heed you leese it not, signior, ere you come there: pre∣serve it.
How like you this first exploit of his?
O, a piece of true envy: but I expect the issue of the other device.
Here they come, will make it appear.
WHy, I thought, sir PVNTARVOLO, you had bin gone your voyage?
Dear, and most amiable lady, your divine beauties doe bind me to those offices, that I cannot depart when I would.
It is most court-like spoken, sir: but how might we do to have a sight of your dog, and cat?
His dog is in the court, lady.
And not your cat? how dare you trust her behind you, sir?
Troth, madame, she hath sore eyes, and she doth keep her
chamber: mary I have left under sufficient guard, there are two of my followers to attend her.
I'll give you some water for her eyes: when doe you go, sir?
Certes, sweet lady, I know not.
He doth stay the rather, madame, to present you acute judge∣meant with so courtly, and wel-parted a gentleman, as yet your lady-ship hath never seen.
What's hee, gentle Monsieur BRISK? not that gentleman?
No lady, this is a kinsman to justice Silence.
Pray sir, give me leave to report him: he's a gentleman (lady) of that rare and admirable faculty, as (I protest) I know not his like in Europe: hee is exceedingly valiant, an excellent scholar, and so exactly travailed, that hee is able in discourse, to deliver you a model of any prin∣ces court in the world: speaks the languages with that purity of phrase, and facility of accent, that it breeds astonishment: his wit, the most exu∣berant, and (aboue wonder) pleasant, of all that ever entered the concave of this eve.
It is most true, lady: mary, he is no such excellent proper man.
His travails have changed his complexion, madame.
O, sir PVNTARVOLO, you must think, every man was not borne to have my servant BRISKES feature.
But that which transcends all, lady; hee doth so peerelessely imitate any manner of person for gesture, action, passion, or what∣for—
I, especially a rustic, or a clown, madame, that it is not pos∣sible for the sharpest-sighted wit (in the world) to discern any sparks of the gentleman in him, when he does.
O, Monsieur BRISK, be not so tyrannous to confine all wits within the compass of your own: not find the sparks of a gentleman in him, if he be a gentleman?
No in truth (sweet lady) I believe you cannot.
Doe you believe so? why, I can find sparks of a gentleman in you, sir.
I, he is a gentleman, madame, and a reveller.
Indeed, I think I have seen your ladyship at our revels.
Like enough, sir: but would I might see this wonder you talk of: may one have a sight of him, for any reasonable sum?
Yes, madame, he will arrive presently.
What, and shall we see him clown it?
I faith (sweet lady) that you shall: see, here he comes.
This is he! pray observe him, lady.
Be shrew me, he clowns it properly indeed.
Nay, mark his courtship.
How does my sweet lady? hot, and moist? beautiful and lusty? ha?
Beautiful, and it please you, sir, but not lusty.
O ho, lady; it pleases you to say so in truth: and how does my sweet lady? in health? Bonaroba, quaeso, que novels? que nouells? sweet creature.
O excellent: why gallants, is this hee that cannot bee deci∣pher'd? they were very bleare-witted, in faith, that could not discern the gentleman in him.
But, doe you, in earnest, lady?
Doe I, sir? why, if you had any true court-iudgement in the car∣riage of his eye, and that inward power that forms his countenance, you might perceive his counterfeiting as clear, as the noone-day: Alas— Nay, if you would have tried my wit, indeed, you should never have told me he was a gentleman, but presented him for a true clown indeed; and then have seen if I could have deciphered him.
Fore god, her ladyship says true (knight:) but does he not af∣fact the clown most naturally, mistress?
O, she cannot but affirm that, out of the bounty of her judgment.
Nay, out of doubt hee does well, for a gentleman, to imitate; but I warrant you, he becomes his natural carriage of the gentleman, much better then his clownerie.
It is strange, in truth, her ladyship should see so far into him.
I, is it not?
Faith, as easily as may be: not decipher him, quoth you?
Good sadness, I wonder at it!
Why, has she deciphered him, gentlemen?
O, most miraculously, and beyond admiration!
Is it possible?
She hath gathered most infallible signs of the gentleman in him, that's certain.
Why, gallants, let me laugh at you, a little: was this your de∣vice, to try my judgment in a gentleman?
Nay, lady, doe not scorn vs, though you have this gift of per∣spicacie aboue others: What if hee should bee no gentleman now, but a clown indeed, lady?
How think you of that? would not your ladyship bee out of your humour?
O, but she knows it is not so.
What if he were not a man, ye may as well say? nay, if your worships could gull me so, indeed, you were wiser then you are taken for.
In good faith, lady, hee is a very perfect clown, both by fa∣there, and mother: that I'll assure you.
O, sir, you are very pleasurable.
Nay, doe but look on his hand, and that shall resolve you: look you, lady, what a palm here is.
Tut, that was with holding the plough.
The plough! did you discern any such thing in him, madame?
Faith no, she saw the gentleman as bright, as at noon-day, she: she deciphered him at first.
Troth, I am sorry your ladyships sight should be so sudden∣lie struck.
O, you're goodly beagles!
What, is she gone?
Nay, stay, sweet lady, que novels? que novels?
Out, you fool, you.
Shoe's out of her humour in faith.
Nay, let's follow it while it is hot, gentlemen.
Come, on mine honour wee shall make her blush in the pre∣sense: my spline is great with laughter.
Your laughter will be a child of a feeble life, I believe, sir. Come, signior, your looks are too dejected, me thinks: why mix you not mirth with the rest?
By gods will, this suit frets me at the soul. I'll have it altered to morrow, sure.
I Am come to the court, to meet with my Countenance SOGLIARDO: poor men must be glad of such countenance, when they can get no better. Well. Need may insult upon a man, but it shall never make him despair of consequence. The world will say, tic base: tush, base! it is base to live under the earth, not base to live aboue it, by any means.
The poor lady is most miserably out of her humour, in faith.
There was never so witty a jest broken, at the tilt of all the court-wits christened.
O, this applause taints it, foully.
I think, I did my part in courting. O! Resolution!
Aye me, my dog.
Where is hee?
Gods precious, go seek for the fellow, good signior.
Here, here I left him.
Why, none was here when we came in now, but CAVALIER SHIFT, enquire of him.
Did you see sir PVNTARVOLO'S dog here, Cavalier, since you came?
His dog sir? he may look his dog, sir, I saw none of his dog, sir.
Upon my life, he hath stolen your dog, sir, and been hired to it by some that have ventured with you: you may guess by his peremp∣tory answers.
Not unlike; for he hath been a notorious thief by his own confession. Sirrah, where is my dog?
Charge me with your dog, sir? I have none of your dog, sir.
Villain, thou lie.
Lie, sir? S'bloud, y' are but a man, sir.
Rogue, and thief, restore him.
Take heed, sir PVNTARVOLO, what you doe: heel bear no coals, I can tell you (of my word.)
This is rare.
It's mar'le hee stabs you not: by this light, he hath stabbed forty, for forty times less matter, I can tell you, of my knowledge.
I will make thee stoop, thou abject.
Make him stoop, sir! gentlemen, pacify• him or he will be killed.
Is he so tall a man?
Tall a man? if you love his life, stand betwixt 'hem: make him stoop!
My dog, villain, or I will hang thee: thou hast confessed rob∣beries, and other felonious acts, to this gentleman thy Countenance—
I'll bear no witness.
And, without my dog, I will hang thee, for them.
What? kneel to thine enemies?
Pardon me, good sir; god is my witness, I never did robbery in all my life.
O, sir PVNTARVOLO, your dog lies giving up the ghost in the wood-yard.
Heart! is he not dead, yet?
O, my dog, born to disastrous fortune! pray you conduct me, sir.
How? did you never doe any robbery, in your life?
O, this is good: so he swore, sir.
I, I heard him. And did you swear true, sir?
I, (as I hope to be forgiven, sir) I ne'er robed any man, I never stood by the high-way-side, sir, but only said so, because I would get my self a name, and be counted a tall man.
Now out, base viliaco: Thou my Resolution? I thy Count∣nonce? By this light, gentlemen, he hath confessed to me the most inexora∣ble company of robberies, and damned himself that he did 'hem; you no∣for heard the like: out skoundrell, out, follow me no more, I command thee: out of my sight, go, hence, speak not: I will not hear thee: away camouccio.
O, how I doe feed upon this now, and fat my self! here were a couple unexpectedly dishumour'd: well, by this time, I hope, sir PVN∣TARVOLO and his dog are both out of humour to travail. Nay, gentle∣men,
why doe you not seek out the knight, and comfort him? our sup∣per at the Mitre must of necessity hold to night, if you love your re∣putations.
Before god, I am so melancholy for his dogs disaster, but I'll go.
Faith, and I may go too, but I know, I shall be so melancholy.
Tush, melancholy? you must forget that now, and remember you lie at the mercy of a fury: CARLO will rack your sinews asunder, and rail you to dust, if you come not.
O, then their fear of CARLO, belike, makes them hold their meeting.
I, here he comes: conceive him but to be entered the Mitre, and it is enough.
HOlla: where be these shot-sharkes?
By and by: you're welcome, good master BVFFONE.
Whore's GEORGE? calm GEORGE hither, quickly.
What wine please you have, sir? I'll draw you that's neat, ma∣ster BVFFONE.
Away NEOPHITE, do as I bid thee, bring my dear GEORGE to me: Mass, here he comes.
Welcome, master CARLO.
What! is supper ready, GEORGE?
I, sir, almost: will you have the cloth laid, master CARLO?
O, what else? are none of the gallants come, yet?
None yet, sir.
Stay, take me with you, GEORGE: let me have a good fa¦loin of pork laid to the fire, presently.
It shall, sir.
And withal, hear you? draw me the biggest shaft you have, out of the butt you wo• of: away, you know my meaning, GEORGE, quick.
Done, sir.
I never hungered so much for thing in my life, as I doe to know our gallants success at court: now is that lean bald-rib MACILENTE, that salt villain, plotting some mischicuous device, and lies a soking in their frothy humours like a dry crust, till he has drunk 'hem all up: could the pummise but hold up his eyes at other men's happiness, in any reason∣ble proportion: S'lid, the slave were to be loved next heaven, aboue ho∣nor, wealth, rich fare, apparel, wenches, all the delights of the belly, and the groin, whatever.
Here, master CARLO.
Is it right, Boy?
I, sir, I assure you it is right.
Well said, my dear GEORGE, depart: Come, my small gym∣blet, you in the false scabbard, away, so. Now to you, sir B•rgomaster, let's taste of your bounty.
What, will he deal upon such quantities of wine, alone?
You will perceive that, sir.
I mary, sir, here's purity: O, GEORGE, I could bite off his nose for this, now: Sweet rogue, he has drawn Nectar, the very soul of the grape! I'll wash my temples with some on it presently, and drink some half a score draughts; twill heat the brain, kindle my imagination, I shall talk nothing but crackers, and fire-worke, to night. So, sir! please you to be here, sir, and I here: So.
This is worth the observation, signior.
Now, sir; here's to you; and I present you with so much of my love.
I take it kindly from you, sir, and will return you the like proportion: but withal, sir, remembering the merry night wee had at the countesses, you know where, sir.
By heaven, you put me in mind now of a very necessary of∣fice, which I will propose in your pledge, sir: the health of that honora∣ble countess, and the sweet lady that sate by her, sir.
I doe veil to it with reverence. And now, signior, with these la∣dies, I'll be bold to mix the health of your divine Mistress.
Doe you know her, sir?
O lord, sir, I: and in the respectful memory and mention of her, I could wish this wine were the most precious drug in the world.
Good faith, sir, you doe honour me in it exceedingly.
Whom should he personate in this, signior?
Faith, I know not, sir, observe, observe him.
If it were the basest filth, or mud that runs in the channel, I am bound to pledge it, respectively, sir. And now, sir, here is a replenished bowl, which I will reciprocally turn upon you, to the health of the count FRVGALE.
The count FRVGALES health, sir? I'll pledge it on my knees, by this light.
Will you, sir? I'll drink it on my knee, then, by the light.
Before god, sir PVNTARVOLO, I am sorry for your heaviness: body a me, a shrewd mischance! why, had you no unicorns horn, nor bezoars stone about you? ha?
SIr, I would request you, be silent.
Nay, to him again.
Take comfort, good knight, if your cat have recovered her catarrh, fear nothing; your dogs mischance may be helped.
Say how (sweet CARLO) for so god mend me, the poor knights moves draw me into fellowship of his misfortunes. But be not discouraged, good sir PVNTARVOLO, I am content your adventure shall be performed upon your cat.
I believe you, musk cod, I believe you, for rather then thou would make present repayment, thou would take it upon his own bare return from Calice.
Nay, 'ds life, hee'ld bee content (so hee were well rid out of his company) to pay him five for one, at his next meeting him in Paules. But for your dog, sir PVNTAR, if hee bee not out-right dead, there is a friend of mine, a quack-saluer, shall put life in him again, that's certain.
O, no, that comes too late.
Gods precious, knight, will you suffer this?
Drawer, get me a candle, and hard wax, presently.
I, and bring up supper; for I am so melancholy.
O, signior, whore's your Resolution?
Resolution! hang him rascal: O, CARLO, if you love me, doe not mention him.
Why, how so? how so?
O, the arrant'st crocodile that ever Christian was acquainted with. By my gentry, I shall think the worse of tobacco while I live, for his sake: I did think him to be as tall a man—
Nay, BVFFONE, the knight, the knight.
S'hid, hee looks like an image carved out of box, full of knots: his face is (for all the world) like a dutch purse, with the mouth downward; his beard the tassels: and hee walks (let me see) as me∣lancholy as one of the Masters side in the Counter. Doe you hear, sir PVNTAR?
Sir, I doe entreat you no more, but enjoin you to silence, as you affect your peace.
Nay, but dear knight, understand (here are none but friends, and such as wish you well) I would have you doe this now; Flea me your dog presently (but in any case keep the head) and stuff his skin well with straw, as you see these dead monsters at Bartholomew fair.
I shall be sudden, I tell you.
Or if you like not that, sir, get me somewhat a less dog, and clap into the skin; here's a slave about the town here, a Jew, one YOHAN; or a fellow that makes perrukes, will glow it on artificially, it shall ne'er be discerned, besides, twill be so much the warmer for the hound to travail in, you know.
Sir PVNTARVOLO, 'death, can you be so patient?
O• thus, sir: you may have (as you come through Germany) a familiar for little or nothing, shall turn it self into the shape of your dog, or any thing (what you will) for certain hours; odds my life, knight, what doe you mean? you'll offer no violence, will you? hold, hold.
'Sdeath, you slave, you bandog, you.
As you love wit, stay the enraged knight, gentlemen.
By my knighthood, he that stirs in his rescue, dies. Drawer, be gone.
Murder, murder, murder.
I, are you howling, you wolf? Gentlemen, as you tender your lives, suffer no man to enter, till my revenge be perfect. Sirha, BVFFONE, lie down; make no exclamations, but down: down, you cur, or I will make thy blood flow on my rapier hilts.
Sweet knight, hold in thy •urie, and before heaven, I'll honour thee more, then the Turk do's MAHOMET.
Down (I say.) Who's there?
Here's the Constable, open the doors.
Good, MACILENTE.
Open no door, if the ADALANTADO of Spain were here, he should not enter: On, help me with the light, gentlemen: you knock in vain, sir officer.
Et in Brute!
Sirha, close your lips, or I will drop it in thine eyes by heaven.
O, O.
Open the door, or I will break it open.
Nay, good Constable, have patience a little, you shall come in presently, we have almost done.
So; now, are you out of your humour, sir? Shift, gentlemen.
LAy hold upon this gallant, and pursue the rest.
Lay hold on me, sir! for what?
Mary, for your not here, sir, with the rest of your com∣pinions.
My riot! master Constable, take heed what you doe. CARLO, did I offer any violence?
O, sir, you see he is not in case to answer you, and that makes you so peremptory.
Peremptory, s'life I appeal to the drawers, if I did him any hard measure.
They are all gone, there's none of them will bee laid any hold on.
Well, sir, you are like to answer till the rest can be found out.
Slid, I appear to GEORGE, here.
Tut, GEORGE was not here: away with him to the Counter, sirs. Come, sir, you were best get your self dressed somewhere.
Good lord, that master CARLO could not take heed, and knowing what a gentleman the knight is, if hee bee angry.
A pox on 'hem, they have left all the meat on our hands, would they were choked with it form.
What, are they gone, sirs?
O, here's master MACILENTE.
Sirha, GEORGE, doe you see that concealment there? that napkin under the table?
Gods so, signior FVNGOSO!
Her's good pawn for the reckoning, bee sure you keep him here, and Ice him not go away till I come again, though hee offer to dis∣charge all: Isle return presently.
Sirrah, we have a pawn for the reckoning.
What? of MACILENTE?
No, look under the table.
I hope, all be quiet now: if I can get but forth of this street, I care not, masters, I pray you tell me, is the Constable gone?
What? master FVNGOSO?
Was it not a good device this same of me, sirs?
Yes saith; have you been here all this while?
O god, I▪ good sir, look, and the coast be clear, I'd fine be going.
Al's clear, sir, but the reckoning; and that you must clear, and pay before you go, I assure you.
I pay? Slight, I eat not a bit since I came into the house, yet.
Why, you may when you please, sir, it is all ready below, that was bespoken.
Bespoken? not by me, I hope?
By you, sir? I know not that: but it was for you, and your company, I am sure.
My company? S'lid, I was an invited guest, so I was.
Faith, we have no thing to doe with that, sir, they're all gone but you, and we must be answered; that's the short and the long on it.
Nay, if you will grow to extremities, my masters, then would this pot, cup, and all were in my belly, if I have a cross about me.
What, and have such apparel? doe not say so, signior, that mightily discredits your clothes.
As I am an honest man, my taylor had all my money this more∣ning, and yet I must be fine to alter my suit too: good sirs, let me go, it is friday night, and in good truth I have no stomach in the world, to eat a∣no thing.
That's no matter, so you pay, sir.
Pay? gods light, with what conscience can you ask me to pay that I never drank for?
Yes, sir, I did see you drink once.
By this cup, (which is silver) but you did not, you doe me infinite wrong, I looked in the pot once, indeed, but I did not drink.
Well sir, if you can satisfy our master, it shall bee all one to vs. (by and by.)
Lose not your self now signior.
TVt, sir, you did bear too hard a conceit of me in that, but I will now make my love to you most transparent, in spite of any dust of suspicion, that may bee raised to cloud it: and henceforth, since I see it is so against your humour, I will never labour to persuade you.
Why, I thank you, signior, but what's that you tell me may concern my peace so much?
Faith, sir, it is thus. Your wives brother, signior FVNGOSO, being at supper to night at a tavern, with a sort of gallants, there hap∣pined some division amongst 'hem, and he is left in pawn for the recko∣ning: now, if ever you look that time shall present you with a happy oc∣cession to doe your wife some gracious and acceptable service, take hold of this opportunity, and presently go, and redeem him; for, being her
brother, and his credit so amply engaged as now it is, when she shall hear (as hee cannot himself, but hee must out of extremity report it) that you came, and offered your self so kindly, and with that respect of his reputation, why, the benefit cannot but make her dote, and grow mad of your affections.
Now, by heaven, MACILENTE, I acknowledge my self ex∣ceedingly indebted to you, by this kind tender of your love; and I am sorry to remember that I was ever so rude, to neglect a friend of your im∣portance: bring me shoes, and a cloak there, I was going to bed, if you had not come, what tavern is it?
The Mitre, sir.
O, why FIDO, my shoes. Good faith it cannot but please her exceedingly.
Come, I marle what piece of nightwork you have in hand now, that you call for your cloak, and your shoes! what, is this your Pander?
O, sweet wife, speak lower, I would not he should hear thee for a world—
Hang him rascal, I cannot abide him for his treachery, with his wilde quick-set beard there. Whither go you now with him?
No whither with him, dear wife, I go alone to a place, from whence I will return instantly. Good MACILENTE, acquaint not her with it by any means, it may come so much the more accepted, frame some other answer. I'll come back immediately.
Nay, and I be not worthy to know whither you go, stay, till I take knowledge of your coming back.
Hear you, mistress DELIRO.
So sir, and what say you?
Faith lady, my intents will not deserve this slight respect, when you shall know 'hem.
Your intents? why, what may your intents bee, for god sake!
Troth, the time allows no circumstance, lady, therefore know, this was but a device to remove your husband hence, and bestow him securely, whilst (with more convenience) I might report to you a misfortune that hath happened to Monsieur BRISK — nay comfort, sweet lady. This night (being at supper a sort of young gallants com∣meted a riot, for the which he (only) is apprehended and carried to the Counter, where if your husband, and other creditors should but have knowledge of him, the poor gentleman were undone for ever.
Aye me! that he were.
Now therefore, if you can think upon any present means for his delivery, doe not forslow it. A bribe to the officer that commit∣ted him, will doe it.
O god, sir, he shall not want for a bribe: pray you, will you commend me to him, and say I'll visit him presently?
No, lady, I shall doe you better service, in protracting your
husbands return, that you may go with more safety.
Good truth, so you may: farewell, good sir. Lord, how a wo∣man may be mistaken in a man? I would have sworn upon all the testa∣mints in the world, he had not loved master BRISK. Bring me my keys there, maid. Alas, good gentleman, if all I have in this earthly world will pleasure him, it shall be at his service.
How MACILENTE sweates i'this business, if you mark him.
I, you shall see the true picture of spite anon: here comes the pawn, and his redeemer.
COme, brother, be not discouraged for this, man, what?
No truly, I am not discouraged, but I protest to you, brother, I have done imitating any more gallants either in purse or apparel, but as shall become a gentleman, for good carriage, or so.
You say well. This is all, in the bill here? is it not?
I, sir.
There's your money, tell it: and brother, I am glad I met with so good occasion to show my love to you.
I will study to deserve it in good truth, and I live.
What, is it right?
I, sir, and I thank you.
Let me have a capons leg saved, now the reckoning is paid.
You shall, sir.
Whore's signior DELIRO?
Here, MACILENTE.
Hark you, sir, have you dispatcht this same?
I marie have I.
Well then, I can tell you news, BRISK is in the Counter.
In the Counter?
It is true, sir, committed for the stir here to night. Now would I have you send your brother home before, with the report of this your kindness done him, to his sister, which will so pleasingly possess her, and out of his mouth too, that in the mean time you may clap your action on BRISK, and your wife (being in so happy a mood) cannot entertain it ill, by any means.
It is very true, she cannot indeed, I think.
Think? why it is past thought, you shall never meet the like opportunity, I assure you.
I will doe it. Brother, pray you go home before, this gentle∣man, and I have some private business; and tell my sweet wife, I'll come presently.
I will, brother.
And, signior, acquaint your sister, how liberally and out of his bounty, your brother has used you. (Doe you see?) made you a man of good reckoning; redeemed that you never were possessed of, credit; gave you as gentleman-like terms as might be; found no fault with your coming behind the fashion; nor nothing.
Nay, I am out of those humours now.
Well, if you be out, keep your distance, and be not made a shot-clog any more. Come, signior, let's make haste.
O Master FASTIDIVS, what pity is it to see so sweet a man as you are, in so sour a place?
As upon her lips, do's she mean?
O, this is to be imagined the Counter, belike?
Troth, fair lady, it is first the pleasure of the Fates, and next of the Constable, to have it so: but, I am patient, and indeed comforted the more in your kind visitation.
Nay, you shall bee comforted in me, more then this, if you please, sir. I sent you word by my brother, sir, that my husband laid to rest you this morning, I know not whether you received it, or no.
No, believe it, sweet creature, your brother gave me no such intelligence.
O, the lord!
But has your husband any such purpose?
O sweet master BRISK, yes: and therefore be presently dis∣charged, for if he come with his actions upon you (lord deliver you) you are in for one half a score year; he kept a poor man in Ludgate once, twelve year, for sixteen shillings. Whore's your keeper? for loves sake call him, let him take a bribe, and dispatch you. Lord, how my heart trembles! here are no spies? are there?
No, sweet mistress, why are you in this passion?
O lord, Master FASTIDIVS, if you knew how I took up my husband to day, when hee said hee would arrest you; and how I railed at him that persuaded him to it, the scholar there, (who on my conscience loves you now) and what care I took to send you intelligence by my brother; and how I gave him four sovereigns for his pains; and now,
how I came running out hither without man or boy with me, so soon as I heard on it; you'd say, I were in a passion indeed: your keeper, for gods sake. O, Master BRISK (as it is in EVPHVES) Hard is the choice, when one is compelled either by silence to die with grief, or by speaking to live with shame.
Fair lady, I conceive you, and may this kiss assure you, that where adversity hath (as it were) contracted, prosperity shall not— gods me! your husband.
O, me!
I? is it thus!
Why, how now, signior DELIRO? has the wolf seen you? ha? hath GORGONS head made marble of you?
Some Planet strike me dead.
Why, look you; sir, I told you, you might have suspected this long before, had you pleased; and have saved this labour of admiration now, and passion, and such extremities as this frail lump of flesh is sub∣jest unto. Nay, why doe you not dote now, signior? Me thinks you should say it were some enchantment, deceptio visus, or so, ha? if you could persuade your self it were a dream now, it were excellent: saith, try what you can do, signior; it may be your imagination will be brought to it in time, there's nothing impossible.
Sweet husband:
Out lascivious strumpet.
What? did you see, how ill that stale vein became him before, of sweet wife, and dear heart? and are you fallen just into the same now? with sweet husband. Away, follow him, go, keep state, what? Re∣member you are a woman, turn impudent: give him not the head, though you give him the horns. Away. And yet me thinks you should take your leave of Enfans-perdus here, your forlorn hope. How now, Mon∣sieur BRISK? what? friday night? and in affliction too? and yet your Pulpamenta? your delicate morsels? I perceive, the affection of ladies and gentlewomen, pursues you wheresoever you go, Monsieur.
Now, in good faith (and as I am gentle) there could not have come a thing, in this world, to have distracted me more, then the wrinck∣led fortunes of this poor spinster.
O, yes, sir: I can tell you a thing will distract you much bet∣la, believe it. Signior DELIRO has entered three actions against you, three actions, Monsieur; mary, one of them (I'll put you in comfort) is but three thousand, and the other two, some five thousand a piece, trifles, trifles.
O, I am undone.
Nay, not altogether so, sir, the knight must have his hundred pound repaid, that 'll help too, and then sixe-score pound for a diamond, you know where. These be things will weigh, Monsieur, they will weigh.
O, heaven!
What, doe you sigh? this it is to kiss the hand of a countess, to have her coach sent for you, to hang poinards in ladies garters, to wear bracelets of their hair, and for every one of these great favours to give some slight jewel of five hundred crowns, or so, why it is nothing. Now, Monsieur, you see the plague that treads of the heals of your foppery: well, go your ways in, remove your self to the two-penny ward quick∣lie, to save charges, and there set up your rest to spend sir PVNTARS hun∣dred pound for him. Away, good pomander, go.
Why, here's a change! Now is my soul at peace.
I am as empty of all envy now,
As they of merit to be envied at.
My humour (like a flame) no longer lasts
Then it hath stuff to feed it, and their folly,
Being now raked up in their repentant ashes,
Affords no ampler subject to my spleen.
I am so far from malicing their states,
That I begin to pity 'hem. It grieves me
To think they have a being. I could wish
They might turn wise upon it, and be saved now,
So heaven were pleased: but let them vanish, vapors.
Gentlemen, how like you it? has't not been tedious?
Nay, we have done censuring, now.
Yes, faith.
How so?
Mary, because we'll imitate your actors, and be out of our Humours. Besides, here are those (round about you) of more ability in censure then wee, whose judgements can give it a more satisfying allow∣ance: we'll refer you to them.
I? is it even so? Well, gentlemen, I should have gone in, and re∣turned to you, as I was ASPIRE at the first: but (by reason the shift would have been somewhat long, and we are loath to draw your patience far∣der) we'll entreat you to imagine it. And now (that you may see I will be out of humour for company) I stand wholly to your kind approba∣tion, and (indeed) am nothing so peremptory as I was in the beginning: Mary, I will not doe as PLAVTVS, in his Amphytrio, for all this (Sum Ionise causa, Plaudit:) beg a Plaudit, for gods sake; but if you (out of the bounty of your good liking) will bestow it; why, you may (in time) make lean MACILENTE as fat, as Sir IOHN FALSTAFF.

NAy my dear Aspire,
Stay your mind,
Away.
Who is so patient of this impious world,
That he can check his spirit, or reine his tongue?
Or who hath such a dead unfeeling sense,
That heavens horrid thunders cannot wake?
To see the earth, cracked with the weight of sin,
Hell gaping under vs, and o'er our heads
Black rau'nous Ruin with her saile-stretcht wings,
Ready to sink vs down and cover vs.
Who can behold such prodigies as these,
And have his lips sealed up? not I: my soul
Was never ground into such oily colours,
To flatter Vice and daube Iniquity:
But (with an armed, and resolved hand)
Isle strip the ragged follies of the time
Naked as at their birth:
Be not too bold,
You trouble me, and with a whip of steel
Print wounding lashes in their iron ribs.
I fear no mood stamped in a private brow,
When I am pleased t'vnmaske a public vice.
I fear no strumpets drugs, nor ruffians stab,
Should I detect their hateful luxuries;
No brokers, usurers, or lawyers gripe,
Were I disposed to say, they're all corrupt.
I fear no courtiers frown, should I applaud
The easy flexure of his supple hams:
Tut, these are so innate and popular,
That drunken Custom would not shame to laugh
(In scorn) at him, that should but dare to tax 'hem:
And yet, not one of these but knows his Works,
Knows what Damnation is, the Devil, and Hell,
Yet hourly they persist, grow rank in sin,
Puffing their souls away in perj'rous air,
To cherish their extortion, pride, or lusts.
Forbear good Aspire, be not like your name.
O, but to such, whose faces are all zeal,
And (with the words of Hercules) invade
Such crimes as these; that will not smell of sin,
But seem as they were made of Sanctity;
Religion in their garments, and their hair
Cut shorter than their eie-browes; when the conscience
Is vaster than the Ocean, and devours
More wretches than the Counters.
Gentle Aspire,
Contain your spirit in more stricter bounds,
And be not thus transported with the violence
Of your strong thoughts.
Vnl•sse your breath had power
To melt the world, and mould it new again,
It is in vain to spend it in these moods.
I not observed this thronged round till now:
Gracious, and kind Spectators, you are welcome,
Apollo, and the Muses feast your eyes
With graceful objects; and may our Minerva
Answer your hopes, unto their largest strain.
Yet here, mistake me not judicious friends:
I doe not this to beg your patience,
Or servilely to fawn on your applause,
Like some dry brain, despairing in his merit:
Let me be censured, by th'austerest brow,
Where I want art, or judgement, tax me freely:
Let envious Critickes with their broadest eyes
Look through and through me; I pursue no favour:
Only vouchsafe me your attentions,
And I will give you music worth your ears.
O how I hate the monstrousness of time,
Where every servile imitating spirit,
(Plagued with an itching leprosy of wit)
In a mere halting fury, strives to fling
His vlc'rous body in the Thespian spring,
And straight loop's forth a Poet; but as lame
As Volcano, or the founder of Criplegate.
In faith this Humour will come ill to some,
You will be thought to be too peremptory.
This Humour? good; and why this Humour, Mitis?
Nay doe not turn, but answer.
Answer? what?
I will not stir your patience, pardon me,
I urged it for some reasons, and the rather
To give these ignorant well-spoken days
Some taste of their abuse of this word Humour.
O doe not let your purpose fall, good Aspire,
It cannot but arrive most acceptable,
Chiefly to such as have the happiness
Daily to see how the poor innocent word
Is racked, and tortured.
I; I pray you proceed.
Ha? what? what is 't?
For the abuse of Humour.
O, I crave pardon, I had lost my thoughts.
Why Humour (as it is ens) we thus define it
To be a quality of air or water,
And in it self holds these two properties,
Moisture and Fluxure: As for demonstration,
Pour water on this floor, twill wet and run,
Likewise the air (forced through a horn or trumpet)
Flows instantly away, and leaves behind
A kind of dew; and hence we doe conclude,
That what so ever hath fluxure and humidity,
As wanting power to contain it self,
Is Humour: so in every humane body
The choler, melancholy, phlegm, and blood,
By reason that they flow continually
In some one part, and are not continent,
Receive the name of Humours. Now thus far
It may by Metaphor apply it self
Unto the general disposition,
As when some one peculiar quality
Doth so possess a man, that it doth draw
All his affects, his spirits, and his powers
In their confluctions all to run one way,
This may be truly said to be a Humour,
But that a Rooke in wearing a pied feather,
The cable hatband, or the three-pild ruff,
A yard of shoe-tie, or the Switzers knot
On his French garters, should affect a Humour,
O, it is more than most ridiculous.
He speaks pure truth: now if an Idiot
Have but an Apish or Fantastic strain,
It is his Humour.
Well I will scourge those apes,
And to these courteous eyes oppose a mirror
As large as is the stage whereon we act,
Where they shall see the times deformity,
Anatomized in every Nerve and sinew,
With constant courage, and contempt of fear.
Aspire (I urge it as your friend) take heed,
The days are dangerous, full of exception,
And men are grown impatient of reproof.
Ha, ha:
You might as well have told me, yond' is heaven,
This earth, these men; and all had moved alike.
Doe not I know the times condition?
Yes Mitis; and their souls, and who they be
That either will or can except against me:
None but a sort of fools, so sick in ta•t,
That they contemn all Physic of the mind,
And like gald Camels kick at every touch
Good men, and virtuous spirits, that loath their vices,
Will cherish my free labours, love my lines,
And with the fervor of their shining grace,
Make my brain fruitful to bring forth more objects
Worthy their serious and intent eyes.
But why enforce I this, as fainting? no:
If any here chance to behold himself,
Let him not dare to challenge me of wrong,
For if he shame to have his follies known,
First he should shame to act 'hem: my strict hand
Was made to cease on vice; and with a gripe
Crush out the Humour of such spongy souls,
As like up every idle vanity.
Why this is right Furor Po•ticus:
Kind gentlemen, we hope your patience
Will yet conceive the best, or entertain
This supposition, That a madman speaks.
What? are you ready there? Mitis sit down;
And my Cordatus. Sound hoe, and begin:
I leave you two as Censors to sit here,
Observe what I present, and liberally
Speak your opinions, upon every Scene,
As it shall pass the view of these Spectators,
Nay now, you're tedious Sirs, for shame begin:
And Mitis, note me if in all this front,
You can espy a gallant of this mark,
Who (to be thought one of the judicious)
Sits with his arms thus wreathed, his hat pulled here,
Cries meaw, and nods, then shakes his empty head,
Will show more several motions in his face
Than the new London, Rome, or Nineueh,
And (now and then) breaks a dry biscuit jest,
Which that it may more easily be chewed,
He steeps in his own laughter.
Why? will that
Make it be sooner swallowed?
O, assure you:
Or if it did not, yet as Horace sings:
"Ieiunus rar stomachus vulgaria temnit,
"Mean cates are welcome still to hungry guests.
It is true, but why should we observe 'hem Aspire?
O I would know 'hem, for in such assemblies,
They are more infectious than the Pestilence,
And therefore I would give them pills to purge,
And make 'hem fit for fair societies.
How monstrous and detested is 't to see
A fellow that has neither art nor brain,
Sit like an Aristarchus, or stark ass,
Taking men's lines with a Tobacco face
In snuff, still spitting, using his wried looks
(In nature of a vice) to wrest and turn
The good aspect of those that shall sit near him,
From what they doe behold? O tic most vile.
Nay Aspire.
Peace Mitis, I doe know your thought:
You'll say, your audience will except at this?
Pish: you are too timorous, and full of doubt:
Then, he a patient, shall reject all Physic
Because the physician tells him you are sick:
Or, if I say That he is vicious,
You will not hear of virtue: come, you're fond.
Shall I be so extravagant to think
That happy judgements and composed spirits
Will challenge me for taxing such as these?
I am ashamed.
Nay, but good pardon vs:
We must not bear this perempt ore sail,
But use our best endeavours how to please.
Why therein I commend your careful thoughts,
And I will mix with you in industry
To please; but whom? attentive auditors,
Such as will join their profit with their pleasure,
And come to feed their understanding parts:
For these, Isle prodigally spend my self,
And speak away my spirit into air;
For these, Isle melt my brain into invention,
Coin new conceits, and hang my richest words
As polished jewels in their bounteous ears.
But stay, I loose my self, and wrong their patience;
If I dwell here, they 'le not begin, I see:
Friends sit you still, and entertain this troupe
With some familiar and by-conference,
Isle hast them sound: now gentlemen I go
To turn an Actor, and a Humorist,
Where (ere I doe resume my present person)
We hope to make the circles of your eyes
Flow with distilled laughter: if we fail,
We must impute it to this only chance,
"Art hath an enemy called Ignorance.
How doe you like his spirit, Mitis?
I should like it much better, if he were less confident.
Why, doe you suspect his merit?
No, but I fear this will procure him much envy.
O, that sets the stronger seal on his desert, if
he had no enemies, I should esteem his fortunes most wret∣ched
at this instant.
You have seen his play Cordatus? pray you; how is it?
Faith sir, I must refrain to judge, only this I can say
of it, it is strange, and of a particular kind by it self, somewhat
like Vetus Comoedia: a work that hath bounteously pleased me,
how it will answer the general expectation, I know not.
Does he observe all the laws of Comedy in it?
What laws mean you?
Why the equal division of it into Acts and Scenes,
according to the Terentian manner, his true number of A∣ctors;
the furnishing of the Scene with Grex or Chorus, and that
the whole Argument fall within compass of a days office∣encie.
O no, these are too nice observations.
They are such as must bee received by your favour, or
it cannot be Authentic.
Troth I can discern no such necessity.
No?
No, I assure you signior; if those laws you speak of,
had been delivered vs, ab Initio; and in their present virtue
and perfection, there had been some reason of obeying their
powers: but it is extant, that that which wee call Comoedia, was
at first nothing but a simple and continued Satire, sung by one
only person, till Susario invented a second, after him Epicharmus
a third, Phormus, and Chionides devised to have four actors, with
a Prologue and Chorus; to which Cratinus (long after) added a fifth
and sixth; Eupolis more, Aristophanes more than they: every
man in the dignity of his spirit and judgement, supplied some∣thing:
and (though that in him this kind of Poem appeared
absolute, and fully perfected) yet how is the face of it changed
since, in Menander, Philemon, Cecilius, Plautus, and the rest; who
have utterly excluded the Chorus, altered the property of the
persons, their names, and natures, and augmented it with all
liberty, according to the elegance and disposition of those
times wherein they wrote? I see not then but we should enjoy
the same Licentia or free power, to illustrate and heighten our
invention as they did; and not be tied to those strict and re∣gular
forms, which the niceness of a few (who are nothing
but Form) would thrust upon vs.
Well, we will not dispute of this now: but what's his
Scene?
Mary Insula fortunate, Sir.
O, the fortunate Island? mass hee has bound himself
to a strict law there.
Why so?
He cannot lightly alter the Scene without crossing the
seas.
He needs not, having a whole Island to run through,
I think.
No? how comes it then, that in some one play wee see
so many seas, countries, and kingdoms, past over with such
admirable dexterity?
O, that but shows how well the Authors can travail
in their vocation, and out-run the apprehension of their Au∣ditorie.
But leaving this, I would they would begin once: this
protraction is able to sower the best-setled patience in the
Theatre.
They have answered your wish sir: they sound.
O here comes the Prologue: Now sir, if you had staid
a little longer, I meant to have spoke your Prologue for you,
I faith.
Mary with all my heart sir, you shall doe it yet, and I
thank you.
Nay, nay, stay, stay, hear you?
You could not have studied to have done me a greater
benefit at the instant, for I protest to you, I am imperfect, and
(had I spoke it) I must of necessity have been out.
Why but doe you speak this seriously?
Seriously! I (God's my help doe I) and esteem my
self indebted to your kindness for it.
For what?
Why for undertaking the Prologue for me.
How? did I undertake it for you?
Did you! I appeal to all these gentlemen whether
you did or no? Come, it pleases you to cast a strange look
on it now; but twill not serve.
Fore God but it must serve: and therefore speak your
Prologue.
And I doe, let me die poisoned with some venomous
hiss, and never live to look as high as the two-pennie
room again.
He has put you to it, sir.
Stead, what a humorous fellow is this? Gentlemen,
good faith I can speak no Prologue, howsoever his weak
wit has had the fortune to make this strong use of me here be∣fore
you: but I protest;
Come, come, leave these fustian protestations: away,
come, I cannot abide these gray-headed ceremonies. Boy,
fetch me a glass, quickly, I may bid these gentlemen welcome;
give 'hem a health here: I marl'e whose wit it was to put a Pro∣logue
in you'd sackbuts mouth: they might well think hee'ld
be out of tune, and yet you'd play upon him too.
Hang him dull block.
O good words, good words, a well-timberd fellow, he
would have made a good column and he had been thought on
when the house was a building. O art thou
come? well said: give me; boy, fill, so:
here's a cup of wine sparkles like a diamond. Gentlewomen,
(I am sworn to put them in first) and Gentlemen, a round, in
place of a bad Prologue, I drink this good draught to your
health here, Canary, the very Elixi'r and spirit of 
wine: this is that our Poet calls Castalian liquor, whē he comes
abroad (now and then) once in a fortnight, and makes a good
meal among Players, where hee has Caninum appetitum: mary
at home he keeps a good Philosophical diet, beans and but∣ter-milke:
an honest pure rogue, he will take you off three,
four, five of these one after another, and look villainously
when he has done, like a one-headed C•rb•rus (he do 'not hear
me I hope) and then (when his belly is well ballac't, and his
brain rigged a little) hee sails away withal, as though hee
would work wonders when he comes home: he has made a
play here, &amp; he calls it; Every man out of his Humour: Sblood and
he get me out of the humour hee has put me in, Isle ner'e trust
none of his tribe again, while I live: Gentles, all I can say
for him, is, you are welcome. I could wish my bottle here a∣amongst
you: but there's an old rule; No pledging your own health:
mary if any here be thirsty for it, their best way (that I know)
is, sit still, seal up their lips, and drink so much of the play in
at their ears.
What may this fellow be, Cordatus?
Faith, if the time will suffer his description, I'll give it
you: he is one, the Author calls him Carlo Buffone, an impudent
common jester, a violent railer, and an incomprehensible Epi∣cure:
one, whose company is desired of all men, but beloved
of none; hee will sooner loose his soul than a jest, and pro∣phone
even the most holy things, to excite laughter: no ho∣nourable
or reverend personage whatsoever, can come with∣in
the reach of his eye, but is turned into all manner of variety,
by his adult' rate simile's.
You paint forth a monster.
Hee will prefer all countries before his native, and
thinks he can never sufficiently, or with admiration enough,
deliver his affectionate conceit of foreign Atheistical polli∣cies:
but stay, observe these, he will appear himself anon.
O, this is your envious man (Macilente) I think.
The same, sir.
Veriest, fortune caecitatem facile far:
Tic true; but Stoique: where (in the vast world)
Doth that man breath, that can so much command
His blood and his affection? well: I see,
I strive in vain to cure my wounded soul;
For every cordial that my thoughts apply
Turns to a cor'siue, and doth eat it farther.
There is no taste in this Philosophy,
Tic like a Potion that a man should drink,
But turns his stomach with the sight of it.
I am no such pild Cinique, to believe
That beggary is the only happiness;
Or (with a number of these patient fools)
To sing: My mind to me a kingdom is,
When the lank hungry belly barks for food:
I look into the world, and there I meet
With objects, that doe strike my blood-shot eyes
Into my brain: where, when I view my self;
Having before observed: this man is great,
Mighty, and feared: that, loved and highly favoured:
A third, thought wise and learned: a fourth, rich,
And therefore honoured: a fifth, rarely featured:
A sixth, admired for his nuptial fortunes:
When I see these (I say) and view my self,
I wish my Optique instruments were cracked;
And that the engine of my grief could cast
Mine eye-balls like two globes of wild-fire forth,
To melt this vnproportion'd frame of Nature.
Oh, they are thoughts that have trance•ixt my heart,
And often (in the strength of apprehension)
Made my cold passion stand upon my face,
Like drops of sweat on a stiff cake of ice.
This alludes well to that of the Poet,
Inuidus suspirat, gemit, incutitque dentes,
Sudat frigidus, intuens quote odit.
O peace, you break the Scene.
Soft, who be these?
I'll lay me down a while till they be past.
Signior, note this gallant I pray you.
What is hee?
A tame Rooke, you'll take him presently: List.
Nay look you Carlo: this is my Humour now; I have
land and money, my friends left me well, and I will be a gen∣tleman
whatsoever it cost me.
A most gentleman-like resolution.
Tut, and I take an humour of a thing once, I am like
your taylors needle, I go through: but, for my name Signior,
how think you? will it not serve for a gentleman's name, when
the Signior is put to it? Ha?
Let me hear: how is it?
Signior Insulso Sogliardo: me thinks it sounds well.
O excellent: tut and all fitted to your name, you might
very well stand for a gentleman: I know many Sogliardos gen∣tlemen.
Why and for my wealth I might be a Justice of peace.
I, and a Constable for your wit.
All this is my lordship you see here, and those farms
you came by.
Good steps to gentility too, mary: but Sogliardo, if you
affect to be a gentleman indeed, you must observe all the rare
qualities, humours, and complements of a gentleman.
I know it signior, and if you please to instruct, I am not
too good to learn, Isle assure you.
Enough sir: Isle make admirable use in the proiection of
my medicine upon this lump of copper here. Isle bethink me
for you sir.
Signior, I will both pay you and pray you, and thank
you and think on you.
Is not this purely good?
Sbloud, why should such a prick-eard Hind as this
Bee rich? Ha? a fool? such a transparent gull
That may be seen through? wherefore should hee have land,
Houses, and lordships? O, I could eat my entrails,
And sink my soul into the earth with sorrow.
First (to be an accomplished gentleman, that is, a gentle∣man
of the time) you must give o'er housekeeping in the coū∣trey,
and live altogether in the city amongst gallants; where,
at your first appearance, it were good you turned four or five
hundred acres of your best land into two or three trunks of
apparel; you may doe it without going to a Conjurer: and be
sure you mix your self still, with such as flourish in the spring
of the fashion, and are least popular; study their carriage and
behaviour in all: learn to play at Primero and Passage, and (ever
when you loose) have two or three peculiar oaths to swear by,
that no man else swears: but aboue all, protest in your play,
and affirm, Upon your credit; As you are a true gentleman (at eve∣rye
cast:) you may do it with a safe conscience, I warrant you.
O admirable rare! hee cannot choose but bee a gentle∣man,
that he's these excellent gifts: more, more, I beseech
you.
You must endeavour to feed cleanly at your Ordinary,
sit melancholy, and pick your teeth when you cannot speak:
and when you come to Plays, bee Humorous, look with a
good starch't face, and ruffle your brow like a new boot, laugh
at nothing but your own jests, or else as the Noblemen laugh;
that's a special grace you must observe.
I warrant you, sir.
I, and sit of the stage, and flout; provided, you have a
good suit.
O I'll have a suit only for that sir.
You must talk much of your kindred and allies.
Lies! no Signior, I shall not need to doe so, I have kin∣red
in the •ittie to talk of: I have a niece is a merchants wife;
and a nephew, my brother Sordidos son, of the Innes of court.
O but you must pretend alliance with Courtiers and
great persons: and ever when you are to dine or •uppe in any
strange presence, hire a fellow with a great chain (though
it be copper it's no matter) to bring you letters, feigned
from such a noble man, or such a knight, or such a Lady, To
their worshipful, right rare, and noble qualified friend or
kinsman, Signior Insulso Sogliardo; give your self stile enough.
And there (while you intend circumstances of news, or en∣quirie
of their health, or so) one of your familiars (whom
you must carry about you still) breaks it up (is it were in a
jest) and reads it publicly at the table: at which, you must
seem to take as unpardonable offence as if hee had torn
your mistress colours, or breathed upon her picture; and pur∣sue
it with that hot grace, as if you would enforce a challenge
upon it presently.
Stay, I doe not like that humour of challenge, it may
be accepted: but I'll tell you what's my humour now: I will do
this, I will take occasion of sending one of my suites to the
Taylors to have the pocket repaired, or so; and there such a
letter as you talk of (broke open and all) shall be left: O,
the Taylor will presently give out what I am upon the rea∣ding
of it: worth twenty of your Gallants.
But then you must put on an extreme face of discon∣tentment
at your mans negligence.
O, so I will, and beat him too: I'll have a man for the
purpose.
You may; you have land and crowns: O partial
Fate!
Mass well remembered, you must keep your men gal∣lant,
at the first, fine pied Liveries laid with good gold lace,
there's no loss in it, they may rip't off and pawn it, when they
lack victuals.
Bier Lady that is chargeable Signior, twill bring a man
in debt.
Debt? why that's the more for your credit sir: it's an
excellent policy to owe much in these days, if you note it.
As how good Signior? I would fine be a Politician.
O, look where you are indebted any great sum,
your creditor observes you with no less regard, than if he were
bound to you for some huge benefit, and will quake to give
you the least cause of offence, least hee loose his money: I as∣sure
you (in these times) no man has his servant more obse∣quious
and pliant, than gentlemen their creditors: to whom
(if at any time) you pay but a moiety or a fourth part, it comes
more acceptedly, than if you gave 'hem a navy ears gift.
I perceive you sir, I will take up, and bring my self in
credit sure.
Marry this; always beware you commerce not with
bankrupts, or poor needy Ludgathians: they are impudent
creatures, turbulent spirits, they care not what violent trage∣dies
they stir, nor how they play fast and loose with a poor
gentleman's fortunes to get their own: marry, these rich fell∣lowes
(that hawed world, or the better part of it, sleeping in
their countinghouses) they are ten times more placable, they:
either fear, hope, or modesti•, restrains them from offering
any outrages: but this is nothing to your followers, you shall
not run a penny more in arrerage for them, and you list your
self.
No? how should I keep 'hem then?
Keep 'hem? Sbloud let them keep themselves, they
are no sheep, are they? What? you shall come in houses,
where plate, apparel, rewels, and diverse other pretty com∣modities
lie negligently scattered, and I would ha'those Mer∣cu•ies
follow me (I trow) should remember they had not their
fingers for nothing.
That's not so good me thinks.
Why after you have kept 'hem a fortnight or so, and
showed 'hem enough to the world, you may turn 'hem away,
and keep no more but a boy, it 's enough.
Nay my humour is not for boys, Isle keep men, and I
keep any; and Isle give coats, that's my humour: but I lack a
Cullisen.
Why now you ride to the city, you may buy one, Isle
bring you where you shall have your choice for money.
Can you sir?
O I: you shall have one take measure of you, and
make you a Coat of arms to fit you of what fashion you will.
By word of mouth I thank you Signior; Isle be once a
little prodigal in a Humour in faith, and have a most prodigious
Coat.
Torment and death, break head and brain at once
To be delivered of your fighting issue.
Who can endure to see blind Fortune dote thus?
To be enamoured on this dusty Turf?
This clod? a whoreson Puckefist? O God, God, God, God, &amp;c.
I could run wild with grief now to behold
The rankness of her bounties, that doth breed
Such bulrushes; these Mushrompe Gentlemen,
That shoot up in a night to place and worship.
Let him alone, some stray, some stray.
Nay I will examine him before I go sure.
The Lord of the soil he's all we•ts and strays here? he's
he not?
Yes sir.
Faith then I pity the poor fellow, he's fallen into a
fools hands.
Sirah, who gave you commission to lie in my Lordship?
Your Lordship?
How? my Lordship? doe you know me sir?
I doe know you sir.
S'heart, he answers him like an Echo.
Why, who am I Sir?
One of those that fortune favours.
The Periphrasis of a fool; Isle observe this better.
That fortune favours? how mean you that friend?
I mean simply; That you are one that lives not by
your wits.
By my wits? No sir, I scorn to live by my wits, I; I have
better means I tell thee, than to take such base courses, as to
live by my wits. Sbloud doest thou think I live by my wits?
Me thinks Easter, you should not relish this well.
Ha? does he know me?
Though yours be the worst use a man can put his wit
too of thousands, to prostitute it at every Tavern and Ordi∣nary;
yet (me thinks) you should have turned your broad side
at this, and have been ready with an Apology, able to sink
this Hulk of Ignorance into the bottom, and depth of his
Contempt.
Sbloud it is Macilente: Signior, you are well encountered,
how is it? O we must not regard what he says man, a Trout, a
shallow fool, he he's no more brain than a Butterfly, a mere
stuffed suit, he looks like a musty Bottle, new wickerd, his head's
the Cork, light, light. I am glad to see you so well returned
Signior.
You are? Gramercy good Ianus.
Is he one of your acquaintance? I love him the better
for that.
Gods precious, come away man, what do you mean? and
you knew him as I do, you'd shun him, as you'd do the plague?
Why sir?
O, hoe's a black fellow, take heed on him.
Is he a Scholar or a Soldior?
Both, both; a lean Mongrel, hee looks as if he were
chap-falne with barking at other men's good fortunes: 'ware
how you offend him, hee carries Oil and Fire in his pen, will
scald where it drops, his Spirit's like Powder, quick, violent:
he will blow a man up with a jest: I fear him worse than a rot∣ten
VVall do's the Cannon, shake an hour after at the report:
away, come not near him.
For Gods sake let's be gone, and he be a Scholar, you
know I cannot abide him, I had as leeue see a Cocatrice, speci∣ally
as Cocatrices go now.
What, you'll stay signior? this gentleman Sogliardo
and I are to visit the knight Punta•volo, and from thence to the
City, we shall meet there.
I, when I cannot shun you, we will meet.
It is strange: of all the creatures I have seen,
I envy not this Buffon, for indeed
Neither his fortunes nor his parts deserve it;
But I doe hate him as I hate the devil,
Or that brasse-visag'd monster Barbarism.
O, it is an open-throated, blacke-mouth'd cur,
That bites at all, but eats on those that feed him,
A slave, that to your face will (Serpent-like)
Creep on the ground, as he would eat the dust;
And to your back will turn the tail and sting
More deadly than a Scorpion: stay, who's this?
Now for my soul, another minion
Of the old lady Chance's: I'll observe him.
O rare, good, good, good, good, good, I thank my
Christ, I thank my Christ for it.
Said I not true? doth not his passion speak
Out of my di•ination? O my senses,
Why loose you not your powers, and become
Dead, dull, and blunted with this Spectacle?
I know him, it is Sordido, the farmer,
A Boor•, and brother to that Swine was here.
Excellent, excellēt, excellēt, as I would wish, as I would wish.
See how the strumpet Fortune tickles him,
And makes him swoon with laughter, O, O, O.
Ha, ha, ha, I will not sow my grounds this year, Let
me see, what harvest shall we have? June, July?
What is 't a Prognostication rep's him so?
The xx.xxi.xxij. days, rain and wind, O good, good;
the xxiij. and xxiiij. rain and some wind, good; the xxv. rain,
good still; xxvj.xxvij.xxviij, wind and some rain; would it
had been rain and some wind: well it is good (when it can bee
no better) xxix. inclining to rain: in clining to rain that's not
so good now. xxx. and xxxj. wind and no rain: no rain? S'lid
stay; this is worse and worse: what says he of S. Swithins? turn
back, look, S. Swithins: no rain?
O here's a precious filthy damned rogue,
That fats himself with expectation
Of rotten weather, and unseasoned hours;
And he is rich for it, an elder brother,
His barnes are full, his reekes, and mowes well trod,
His garners crack with store. O, tic well; ha, ha, ha:
A plague consume thee and thy house.
O here, S. Swithins, the xv. day, variable weather, for
the most part rain, good; for the most part rain: Why it
should rain forty days after now, more or less, it was a rule
held before I was able to hold a plough, and yet here are two
days, no rain; ha? it makes me muse. VVeele see how the next
month begins, if that be better. August: August, first, second,
third, and fourth days, rainy, and blustering; this is well now:
fifth, sixth, seventh, eight, and ninth, rain, with some thunder; I
marry, this is excellent; the other was false printed sure: the
tenth and eleventh, great store of rain; O good, good, good,
good, good; the twelft, thirteenth, and fourteenth days, rain;
good still: fifteenth and sixteenth, rain; good still: seventeenth
and eighteenth, rain, good still; nineteenth and twentieth,
Good still, good still, good still, good still, good still; one and
twentieth, some rain; some rain? well, wee must bee patient,
and attend the heavens pleasure, would it were more though:
the one and twentieth, two and twentieth, three and twentieth,
great tempest of rain, thunder, and lightning.
O good again, past expectation good:
I thank my blessed angel; never, never,
Laid I penny better out than this,
To purchase this dear book: not dear for price,
And yet of me as dearly prized as life,
Since in it is contained the very life,
Blood, strength, and sinews of my happiness:
Blessed be the hour wherein I bought this book,
His studies happy that composed the book,
And the man fortunate that sold the book:
Sleep with this charm, and be as true to me
As I am joyed and confident in thee.
Ha, ha, ha? I'not this good? Is 't not pleasing this? ha, ha? Gods ha?
Is it possible that such a spacious villain
Should live and not be plagued? or lies he hid
Within the wrinkled bosom of the world,
Where heaven cannot see him? Sbloud (me thinks)
It is rare and admirable, that he should breath, and walk.
Feed with digestion, sleep, enjoy his health,
And (like a boisterous Whale swallowing the poor)
Still swim in wealth and pleasure: is it not strange?
Unless his house and skin were thunder-proofe,
I wonder at it. Me thinks now, the Hectic,
Gout, Leprosy, or some such loathed disease
Might light upon him; or that fire (from heaven)
Might fall upon his barnes; or mice and rats
Eat up his grain; or else that it might rot
Within the hoary Reekes, even as it stands:
Me thinks this might be well; and after all
The devil might come and fetch him: I, it is true.
Mean time he surfeits in prosperity,
And thou (in envy of him) gnaw'st thy self,
Peace fool, get hence, and tell thy vexed spirit,
"Wealth in this age will scarcely look• on merit.
Who brought this same sir ha?
Marry sir one of the justices men, hee says it is a pre∣cept,
and all their Hands be at it:
I, and the prints of them stick in my flesh
Deeper than in their letters: They have sent me
Pills wrapped in paper here, that should I take 'hem,
Would poison all the sweetness of my Book,
And turn my Honey into Hemlock juice:
But I am wiser than to serve their precepts,
Or follow their prescriptions: Here's a devise,
To charge me bring my Grain unto the markets:
I, much, when I have neither Barn nor Garner,
Nor Earth to hide it in, I'll bring it; but till then,
Each corn I send shall be as big as Paules.
O, but (say some) the poor are like to starve.
Why let 'hem starve, what's that to me? are Bees
Bound to keep life in Drones and idle Moods? no:
Why such are these (that term themselves the poor▪
Only because they would be pitied)
But are indeed a sort of lazy Beggars,
Licentious Rogues and sturdy Vagabonds,
Bred (by the sloth of a fat plenteous year)
Like snakes in heat of summer out of dung,
And this is all that these cheap times are good for:
Whereas a wholesome and penurious Dearth
Purges the soil of such vile excrements,
And kills the Vipers up.
O but moister,
Take heed they hear you not.
Why so?
They will exclaim against you.
I, their exclaims
Move me as much, as thy breath moves a Mountain;
Poor worms, they hiss at me, whilst I at home
Can be contented to apple••d my self,
To sit and clap my hands, and laugh and leap,
Knocking my head against my roof, with joy
To see how plump my bags are, and my barnes.
Sirah, go, hie you home, and bid your fellows
Get all their flails ready again I come.
I will Sir.
I'll instantly set all my hinds to thrashing
Of a whole Reeke of corn, which I will hide
Under the ground; and with the straw thereof
I'll stuff the outsides of my other Mowes:
That done, I'll have 'hem empty all my Garners,
And in the friendly Earth bury my store,
That when the Searchers come they may suppose
Ell's spent, and that my fortunes were belied.
And to lend more opinion to my want,
And stop that many-mouthed vulgar Dog,
(Which else would still be baying at my door)
Each market day, I will be seen to buy
Part of the purest VVheat, as for my household:
Where when it comes, it shall increase my heaps,
Twill yield me treble gain at this dear time,
Promised in this dear Book: I have cast all,
Till then I will not sell an care, I'll hang first.
O I shall make my prizes as I list,
My House and I can feed on Peas and Barley,
What though a world of Wretches starve the while?
"He that will thrive, must think no courses vile.
Now signior, how approve you this? have the Humo∣rests
expressed themselves truly or no?
Yes (if it be well prosecuted) it is hitherto happy enough:
but me thinks Macilente went hence too soon, he might have
been made to stay and speak somewhat in reproof of Sordido's
wretchedness, now at the last▪
O no, that had bin extremely improper, besides he had cōti∣nued
the Scene too lōg with him is it was, being in no more actiō.
You may enforce the length as a necessary reason; but for
propriety the Scene wold very well have born it, in my judgemēt.
O worst of both: why you mistake his Humour utterly thē.
How? do I mistake it? is it not Envy?
Yes, but you must understand Signior, hee envies him
not as he is a villain, a wolf in the commonwealth, but as he is
rich and fortunate; for the true condition of envy, is Dolor alien•
felicitatis, to have our eyes continually fixed upon another mans
prosperity, that is his chief happiness, and to grieve at that.
Where as if we make his monstrous and abhord actions, our
object, the grief (we take then) comes nearer the nature of
Hate than Envy, as being bred out of a kind of contempt and
loathing in our selves.
So you 〈◊〉 infer it had been Hate, not Envy in him, to
reprehend the humour of Sordido?
Right, for what a man truly envies in another, he could
always love, and cherish in himself; but no man truly repre∣hends
in another what he loves in himself, therefore Repre∣hension
is out of his Hate. And this distinction hath he himself
made in a speech there (if you marked it) where hee says, I envy
not this Buffon, but I hate him.
Stay sir: I envy not this Buffon, but I hate him: why might
he not as well have hated Sordido as him?
No sir, there was subject for his envy in Sordido; his
wealth: So was there not in the other, he stood possessed of no
one eminent gift, but a most odious and fiend-like disposition,
that would turn Charity it self into Hate, much more Envy
for the present.
You have satisfied me sir, O here comes the Fool and
the Easter again me thinks.
It were pity they should be parted sir.
What bright-shining gallant's that with them? the
knight they went to?
No sir, this is one Monsieur Fastidius Brisk, otherwise
called the fresh Frenchefied courtier.
A humorist too?
As humorous as quickesiluer, doe but observe him, the
Scene is the country still, remember.
Cinedo, watch when the knight comes, &amp; vs word.
I will sir.
How lik'st thou my boy, Carlo?
O well, well, he looks like a colonel of the Pigmies horse,
or one of these motions in a great antique clock: hee would
show well upon a Haberdashers stall, at a corner shop rarely.
S'heart, what a damned witty rogue's this? how hee
confounds with his simile's?
Better with simile's than smiles: and whither were you
riding now Signior?
Who I? what a silly jest's that? whither should I ride
but to the Court?
O pardon me sir, twenty places more: your hot-house,
or your—
By the virtue of my soul this knight dwells in Elizium
here.
Hoe's gone now, I thought he would fly out present∣lie.
These be our nimble-sprighted Catso's that have there euasi∣once
at pleasure, will run over a bog like your wild Irish; no so∣ner
started, but they'll leap from one thing to another like a
squirrel, heigh; Dance, and do tricks in their discourse, from
Fire to Water, frō Water to Air, frō Air to Earth, as if their
tongues did but even lick the four Elements over, and away.
Sir Carlo, thou never saw my grey Hobby yet,
did thou?
No: have you such a one?
The best in Europe (my good villain) thou'lt say,
when thou see him.
But when shall I see him?
There was a Noble man in the Court offered me 100
pound for him by this light: a fine little fiery slave, hee runs
like a (O) excellent, excellent, with the very sound of the spur.
How? the sound of the spur?
O, it's your only humour now extant sir: a good gingle,
a good gingle.
Sbloud you shall see him turn morrisedancer, he he's
got him bells, a good suit, and a Hobbie-horse.
Signior, now you talk of a Hobby-horse, I know where
one is, will not be given for a brace of angels.
How is that Sir?
Mary sir I am telling this gentleman of a Hobby-horse,
it was my fathers indeed, and (though I say it
That should not say it) on, on.
He did dance in it with as good humour and as good
regard as any man of his degree whatsoever, being no Gen∣tleman:
I have danced in it my self too.
Not since the Humour of gentility was upon you? did
you?
Yes once; marry, that was but to show what a gentle∣man
might doe in a Humour.
O very good.
Why this fellows discourse were nothing but for
the word Humour.
O bear with him, and he should lack matter and
words too, it were pitiful.
Nay look you Sir, there's ne'er a Gentleman in the
country has the like humours for the Hobby-horse as I have; I
have the Method for the threeding of the needle, the—
How the Method.
I, the Leigeritie for that, and the wigh-hie, and the
daggers in the nose, and the travels of the egg from finger to
finger, all the humours incident to the quality. The horse hangs
at home in my parlour, I'll keep it for a monument, as long as
I live sure.
Doe so; and when you die, twill be an excellent Trow∣phee
to hang over your tomb•.
Mass, and I'll have a tomb (now I think on it) it is but
so much charges.
Best build it in your life time then, your heirs may
hap to forget it else.
Nay I mean so, Isle not trust to them.
No, for heirs and executors are grown damnably care∣less,
specially since the ghosts of Testators left walking: how
like you him Signior?
Before heavens his Humour arrides me exceedingly.
Arrides you?
I, pleases me (a pox on 't) I am so haunted at the court
&amp; at my lodging with your refined choice spirits, that it makes
me clean of another Garb, another strain, I know not how;
I cannot frame me to your harsh vulgar phrase, it is against my
Genius.
Signior Carlo.
This is right to that of Horace, Dum vitant stulti vitia in
contrary currunt: so this gallant labouring to avoid
Popularity, false into a habit of Affectatiō ten thou∣sand
times more hateful than the former.
Who he? a gull? a fool? no salt in him in the earth man:
he looks like a fresh Salmon kept in a tub; he will bee spent
shortly, his braine's lighter than his feather already, and his
tongue more subject to lie, than that's to wag: he sleeps with
a muske-cat every night, and walks all day hanged in Poman∣der
chains for penance: hee he's his skin tanned in civet, to
make his complexion strong, and the sweetness of his youth
lasting in the sense of his sweet lady. A good empty Puff, hee
loves you well Signior.
There shall be no love lost Sir, I'll assure you.
Nay Carlo, I am not happy in thy love I see, pray thee
suffer me to enjoy thy company a little (sweet mischief) by
this air, I shall envy this gentleman's place in thy affections,
if you be thus private I faith: how now? is the knight arrived?
No sir, but it is gest he will arrive presently, by his fore∣runners.
His hounds! by Min•rue an excellent Figure; a good
boy.
You should give him a French crown for it: the boy
would find two better Figures in that, &amp; a good Figure of your
bounty beside.
Tut, the boy wants no crowns.
No crown: speak in the singular number, and we'll
believe you.
Nay, thou art so capriciously conceited now: Sir
(Damnation) I have heard this knight Puntarvolo, reported to be
a gentleman of exceeding good humour: thou know him;
prithee, how is his disposition? I ne'er was so favoured of my
stars as to see him yet. Boy, doe you look to the Hobby?
I sir, the groom has set him up.
It is well: I rid out of my way of intent to visit him,
and take knowledge of his: Nay good Wickedness, his humour,
his humour.
Why he loves dogs, and hawk, and his wife well:
he has a good riding face, and he can sit a great horse; hee will
taint a staff well at tilt: when hee is mounted, he looks like
the sign of the George, that's all I know; save that in stead of
a Dragon he will brandish against a tree, and break his sword
as confidently upon the knotty bark, as the other did upon
the skales of the beast.
O, but this is nothing to that's delivered of him: they
say he has dialogues, and discourses between his horse, him∣self,
and his dog; and that he will court his own Lady, as
she were a strange•r never encountered before,
I, that he will, and make fresh love to her every more∣ning:
this Gentleman has been a Spectator of it, Signior Insulso.
I am resolute to keep a Page▪ say you sir?
You have seen Signior Puntarvolo accost his Lady?
O, I sir.
And how is the manner of it prithee good Signior?
Faith ••r in very good sort; he has his humours for it sir▪
as first, (supp•se he were now to come from riding, or hunting,
or so) he has his trumpet to sound, and then the waiting Gen∣tlewoman,
she looks out; and then he speaks, and then she
speaks: very pretty I faith Gentlemen.
Why, but doe you remember no particulars, Signior?
O, yes sir: first, the Gentlewoman she looks out at
the window.
After the trumpet has summoned a parley? not before?
No sir, not before: and then says hee; ha, ha, ha, ha, &amp;c.
What says he? be not rapt so.
Says he; ha, ha, ha, ha, &amp;c.
Nay speak, speak.
Ha, ha, ha, Says he: God save you, ha, ha, &amp;c.
Was this the ridiculous motive to all this passion?
Nay that, that comes after is: ha, ha, ha, ha, &amp;c.
Doubtless hee apprehends more than hee utters, this
fellow: or else.
Lift, lift, they are come from hunting:
stand by, close under this Terrace, &amp; you shall
see it done better than I can show it.
So it had need, twill scarce poise the observation else.
Faith I remember all, but the manner of it is quite out
of my head.
O withdraw, withdraw, it cannot be but a most plea∣sing
object.
Forester, give wind to thy Horn. Enough; by this
the sound hath touched the ears of the enclosed: Depart, leave
the dog, and take with thee what thou hast deserved; the
Horn, and thanks.
I mary, there's some taste in this.
It's not good?
Ah peace, now aboue, now aboue.
Stay: mine eye hath (on the instant) through the
bounty of the window, received the form of a Nymph. I
will step forward three paces: of the which, I will barely retire
one; and (after some little flexure of the knee) with an ere∣cted
grace salute her: 1, 2, and 3. Sweet Lady, God save you.
No forsooth: I am but the waiting Gentlewoman.
He knew that before.
Pardon me: Humanum est •rrare.
He learned that of a Puritan.
To the perfection of Complement (which is the dial
of the thought, and guided by the Sun of your beauties)
are required these three Projects: the Gnomon, the Puntilio's, and
the Superficies: the Superficies, is that we call Place; the Puntilio's,
Circumstance; and the Gnomon, Ceremonic: in either of which, for a
stranger to err, it is easy and facile; and such am I.
True, not knowing her Horizon, hee must needs err:
which I fear, he knows too well.
What call you the Lord of the castle? sweet Face.
The Lord of the castle is a knight sir; Signior Punter∣volo.
Puntarvolo? O.
Now must he ruminate.
Does the wench know him all this while then?
O, doe you know me man? why therein lies the sirrup
of the jest; it's a Project, a designment of his own, a thing
studied, and rehearsed as ordinarily at his coming from haw∣king
or hunting, as a jig after a Play.
I, even like your jig sir.
It is a most sumptuous and stately edifice; what years
is the knight, fair Damsel?
Faith much about your years sir.
What complexion, or what stature bears hee?
Of your stature, and very ne'er upon your complexion.
Mine is Melancholy:
So is the dogs, just.
And doth argue constancy, chiefly in love. What are
his endowments? Is he courteous?
O the most courteous Knight upon Gods earth sir.
Is he magnanimous?
As the skin between your brows sir.
Is he bountiful?
Sbloud, hee takes an Inuentorie of his own good
parts.
Bountiful? I sir I would you should know it; the poor
are served at his gate early and late sir.
Is he learned?
O, I sir, he can speak the French and Italian.
Then he is travailed?
I forsooth, he hath been beyond-sea once or twice.
As far as Paris, to fetch over a fashion and come back
again.
Is he religious?
Religious? I know not what you call Religious, but
he goes to Church I am sure.
S••d me thinks these answers should offend him.
Tut no; he knows they are excellent, and to her ca∣pacitie
that speaks 'hem.
Would I might see his face.
She should let down a glass from the window at
that word, and request him to look in it.
Doubtless, the gentleman is most exact, and abso∣lutely
qualified? doth the castle contain him?
No Sir, he is from home, but his Lady is within.
His Lady? what is she fair? splendidious? and ami∣able?
O Iesu sir!
Pray thee dear Nymph, entreat her beauties to shine
on this side of the building.
That he may erect a new dial of complement, with
his Gnomons, and his Puntilio's.
Nay, thou art such another Cinique now, a man had
need walk uprightly before thee.
Heart, can any man walk more upright than hee
does? Look, look; as if hee went in a frame, or had a suit
of wanescot on: and the dog watching him least he should
leap out on it.
O villain!
Well, and ever I meet him in the city, I'll have him
jointed, I'll pawn him in East-cheape among butchers else.
Peace, who be these, Carlo?
Yonder's your godfather; do your duty to him son.
This sir? a poor elder brother of mine sir, a yeoman,
may despond some seven or eight hundred a year: that's his
son, my nephew there.
You are not ill-come neighbour Sordido, though I have
not yet said welcome: what, my god-sonne is grown a great
Proficient by this?
I hope he will grow great one day, sir.
What does he study? the law?
I sir, he is a gentleman, though his father be but a yeo∣man.
What call you your nephew, Signior?
Mary his name is Fungoso.
Fungoso? O, hee look• somewhat like a sponge in that
pinckt doublet me thought: well, make much of him; I see he
was never borne to ride upon a moil.
My Lady will come presently sir.
O now, now.
Stand by, retire your selves a space: nay, pray you, for∣get
not the use of your hat; the air is piercing.
What? will not their presence prevail against the
current of his humour?
O no: it's a mere flood, a Torrent, carries all before it.
What more than heavenly pulchritude is this?
What Magazine, or treasury of bliss?
Dazzle, you organs to my optique sense,
To view a creature of such eminence:
O I am planet-strooke, and in yond Sphere,
A brighter star than Venus doth appea••.
How? in verse?
•n Ecstasy, an Ecstasy, man.
Is your desire to speak with me, sir Knight?
He will tell you that anon; neither his Bra••e, nor his
Body, are yet moulded for an answer.
Most debonair, and Luculent Lady, I decline me as
l•w as the Basis of your Altitude.
Hee makes congees to •is wife in Geometrical pro∣portions.
Is it possible there should be any such Humorist?
Very easily possible, Sir, you see there is.
I have ••arse collected my spirits, but lately scattered
in the admiration of your Form; to which (if the bounties of
your mind be any way respo•sible) I doubt not but my desires
shall find a s•ooth and secure passage. I am a poor Knight∣•rrant
(Lady) that hunting in the adjacent Forest, was by
adventure in the pursuit of a Hart, brought to this place;
which Hart (dear Madame) escaped by enchantment: the
evening approaching (my self and servant wear•ed) my suit is,
to enter your fair Castle, and refr•sh me.
Sir Knight, albeit it be not usual with me (chiefly in
the absence of a husband) to admit any entrance to strangers,
yet in the true regard of those i•nate• virtues, and fair parts
which so strive to express themselves in you; I am resolved to
entertain you to the best of my unworthy power; which I
acknowledge to be nothing, valued with what so worthy a
person may deserve. Please you but stay, while I descend.
Most admired Lady, you astonish me.
What? with spe•king a speech of your own penning?
Nay look; pr•y thee peac•.
Pox on it: I am impatient of such •opperie.
O lets hear the rest.
What? a tedious Chapter of Courtship, after sir Lan••∣lot,
and Queen Guevener? away: I mar'le in what dull cold
nook he found •his Lady out? that (being a woman) she was
blessed with no more Copy of wit, but to serve his Humour thus.
Sblood, I think he feeds her with Porridge, I: she could ne'er
have such a thick brain else.
Why is Porridge so hurtful, Signior?
O, nothing under heaven more prejudicial to those
ascending subtle powers, or doth sooner abate that which we
call, Acumen Ingenij, than your gross fare: why I'll make you an
Instance: your City wives, but observe 'hem, you have not
more perfect true fools in the world bred than they are gene∣rally;
&amp; yet you see (by the fineness and delicacy of their Di∣et,
di•ing into the fat Capons, drinking your rich wines, fee∣ding
on Larks, Sparrows, Potato pies, and such good vnctu∣os
meats) how their wits are refi•'d and rare•i'd: &amp; sometimes
a very Quintessence of conceit ••owes from 'hem, able to drown a
weak Apprehension.
Peace, here comes the Lady.
Gods me, here's company: turn in again.
S'light, our presence has cut off the convoy of the jest.
All the better; I am glad on it: for the issue was very
perspicuous. Come, let's discover, and salute the knight.
Stay: who be these that address themselves towards
vs? what Carlo? now by the Sincerity of my Soul, welcome;
welcome Gentlemen: and how doest thou, thou Grand Scourge;
or, Second Untruss of the time?
Faith spending my mettle in this Reeling world (here
and there) as the sway of my Affection carries me, and per∣haps
stumble upon a yeoman Pheuterer, as I doe now; or one
of Fortunes Moyles laden with treasure, and an empty Cloak∣bag
following him, gaping when a bag will untie.
Peace you Bandogge peace: what brisk Nim•adoro is
that in the white virgin boot there?
Mary sir, one, that I must entreat you take a very par∣ticular
knowled•e of, and with more than ordinary respect:
Monsieur Fasted•••.
Sir, I could wish that for the time of your vouchsafed
abiding here, and more Real entertainment, this my house
stood on the Muses hill; and these my Orchards were those of
the Hesperide's.
I possess as much in your wish sir, as if I were made Lord
of the Indies; and I pray you believe it.
I have a better opinion of his Faith, than to think it
will be so corrupted.
Come brother, I'll bring you acquainted with Gentle∣men,
&amp; good fellows, such as shall do you more grace, than—
Brother, I hunger not for such acquaintance:
Do you take heed, least:—
Hushed: my Brother sir, for want of education sir, some∣what
nodding to the Boor, the Clown; but I request you in
private sir.
By Iesu, it's a very fine suit of clothes.
Doe you observe that, Signior? there's another Hue∣more
has new cracked the shell.
What? he is enamoured of the Fashion, is hee?
O you forestall the jest.
I mar'le what it might stand him in?
Nephew?
Before God it's an excellent S•te, and as neatly becomes
him. What said you Uncle?
When saw you my Niece?
Mary yesternight I supped there. That kind of Boot does
very rare too.
And what news hear you?
The guilt Spur and all: would I were hanged, but it is
exceeding good. Say you?
Your mind is carried away with somewhat else: I ask
what news you hear?
Troth wee hear none: in good faith I was never so
pleased with a fashion days of my life; O• (•nd I might have
but my wish) I'd ask no more of God no•• but such a Suit,
such a Hat, such a Band, such a Doublet, such a Hose, such a
Boot, and such a—
They say there's a new Motion of the city of Nineueh,
with Ionise and the Whale, to be seen at Fleet-bridge? you
can tell cousin?
Here's such a world of question with him now: Yes, I
think there be such a thing, I saw the picture: would hee
would once be satisfied. Let me see, the Doublet, say fifty shil∣lings
the Doublet, &amp; between three or four pound the Hose;
then Boots, the Hat, and Band: some ten or eleven pound
would do it all, and suit me for the heavens.
I'll see all those devises, and I come to London once.
Gods s'lid, and I could compass it, it were rare: hark
you Uncle.
What says my Nephew?
Faith Uncle, I'd have desired you to have made a mo∣tion
for me to my father in a thing, that; walk aside and I'll
tell you sir, no more but this: there's a parcel of Law books,
(some twenty pounds worth) that lie in a place for little more
than half the money they cost; and I think for some twelve
pound or twenty mark, I could go near to redeem 'hem:
there's Plowden, Diar, Brooke, and Fitz-Herbert; divers such as I
must have ere long: and you know I were as good save five or
six pound as not, Uncle: I pray you move it for me.
That I will: when would you have me do it? presently?
O I, I pray you good Uncle: God send me good luck;
Lord (and't be thy will) prosper it: O Iesu; now, now, if it
take (O Christ) I am made for ever.
Shall I tell you sir: by this air I am the most behol∣ding
to that Lord, of any Gentleman living; hee does use me
the most honourably, and with the greatest respect, more in∣deed,
than can be uttered with any opinion of truth.
Then have you, the Count Gratiato?
As true noble a Gentleman too as any breaths; I am
exceedingly endeared to his love: by Iesu, (I protest to you
Signior, I speak it not gloriously, nor out of affectation, but)
there's he, and the Count Frugal, Signior Illustre, Signior Lu∣culento,
and a sort of 'hem; that (when I am at the Court) they
doe share me amongst 'hem. Happy is he can enjoy me most
private; I doe wish my self sometime an Ubiquitary for their
love, in good faith.
There's ne'er a one of these but might lie a week on
the rack, ere they could bring forth his name; and yet hee
powers them out as familiarly as if hee had seen 'hem stand
by the firc in the Presence, or taken Tobacco with them over the
stage in the Lords room.
Then you must of necessity know our Court-starre
there? that Planet of wit, Maddona Saviolina?
O Lord Sir! my mistress.
Is she your mistress?
Faith, here be some slight favours of hers sir, that doe
speak it, She is; as this Scarf sir, or this Ribbon in mine ear,
or so; this Feather grew in her sweet Fan sometimes, though
now it be my poor fortunes to wear it as you see sir; slight,
slight; a foolish toy.
Well, she is the Lady of a most exalted, and inge∣nous spirit.
Did you ever hear any woman speak like her? or
enriched with a more plentiful discourse?
O villainous! nothing but Sound, Sound, a mere Echo;
she speaks as she goes tired, in Cobweb lawn, light, thin:
good enough to catch flies withal.
O, manage your affections.
Well, if thou be not plagued for this blasphemy
one day:—
Come, regard not a jester; it is in the power of my
purse to make him speak well or ill of me.
Sir, I affirm it to you (upon my Credit and Judge∣meant)
she has the most Harmonious and Musical strain of
Wit, that ever tempted a true ear; and yet to see, a rude
tongue will profane Heaven.
I am not ignorant of it sir.
Oh, it flows from her like Nectar, and she doth give
it, that sweet, quick grace, and exornation in the compo∣sure,
that (By this good Heaven) she does observe as pure a Phrase,
and use as choice Figures in her ordinary conferences, as any
be in the Arcadia.
Or rather in Greenes works, whence she may steal with
more security.
Well, if ten pound will fetch 'hem, you shall have it,
but I'll part with no more.
I'll try what that will doe, if you please.
Doe so: and when you have 'hem, study hard.
Yes sir: and I could study to get forty shillings more
now: well, I will put my self into the Fashion, as far as this
will go presently.
I wonder it rains not! the Almanac says we should
have store of rain to day.
Why sir, to morrow I will associate you to the Court
my self; and from thence to the City, about a Business, a
Project I have: I will expose it to you sir: Carlo I am sure has
heard of it.
VVhat's that sir?
I doe entend this year of Jubilee to travail: and (be∣cause
I will not altogether go upon expense) I am determi∣ned
to put forth some five thousand pound, to be paid me five
for one, upon the return of my self, my Wife, and my Dog,
from the Turks Court in Constantinople. If all, or either of vs
miscarry in the journey, it is gone: if we be successful, why,
there will be xxv. thousand pound to entertain time withal.
Nay, go not neighbour S•dido; stay to night, and help to make
our society the fuller▪ Gentlemen, frolic: Carlo? what? dull
now?
I was thinking on your Project sir, and you call it so:
is this the Dog goes with you?
This is the Dog sir.
He do'not go bare-foot, does he?
Away you traitor, away.
Nay before God, I speak simply; he may prick his foot
with a thorne, and be as much as the whole venture is worth.
Besides, for a Dog that never travailed before, it's huge jour∣ney
to Constantinople: I'll tell you now (and hee were mine)
I'd have some present conference with a Physician, what An∣tidotes
were good to give him, and Preseruatiues against poi∣son:
for (assure you) if once your money be out, there'll be
divers attempts made against the life of the poor Animal.
Thou art still dangerous.
Is Signior D•liros wife your kinswoman?
I sir, she is my Niece, my brothers daughter here, and
my Nephews sister.
Doe you know her sir?
O God sir, Signior Deliro her husband is my Merchant.
I, I have seen this Gentleman there, often.
I cry you mercy sir: let me crave your name, pray you.
Fungoso sir.
Good Signior Fungoso, I shall request to know you bet∣la sir.
I am her brother Sir.
In fair time sir.
Come Gentlemen, I will be your Conduct.
Nay pray you sir; we shall meet at Signior Deliro's often.
You shall ha'me at the Heralds office sir, for some week
or so, at my first coming up. Come Carlo.
Me thinks Cordatus, he dwelt somewhat too long on this
Scene; it hung in the hand.
I see not where he could have insisted less, and t'haue
made the Humours perspicuous enough.
True, as his Subject lies: but he might have altered the
shape of Argument, &amp; explicated 'hem better in single Scenes.
That had been Single indeed: why? be they not the
same persons in this, as they would have been in those? and is
it not an object of more State, to behold the Scene full, and re∣leaved
with variety of Speakers to the end, than to see a vast
empty stage, and the Actors come in (one by one) as if they
were dropped down with a feather into the eye of the Audience?
Nay, you are better traded with these things than I, and
therefore I'll subscribe to your judgement; mary you shall
give me leave to make objections.
O what else? it's the special intent of the Author you
should do so: for thereby others (that are present) may as well
be satisfied, who happily would object the same you doe.
So sir, but when appears Macilente again?
Mary he stays but till our silence give him leave: here
he comes, and with him Signior Deliro a merchant, at whose
house he is come to sojourn: Make your own obscruation
now; only transfer your thoughts to the City with the
Scene; where, suppose they speak.
I'll tell you by and by sir.
Welcome (good Macilente) to my house,
To sojourn even for ever; if my best
In cates, and every sort of good entreaty
May moou• you stay with me.
I thank you sir:
And yet the muffled Fates (had it pleased them)
Might have supplied me from their own full store
Without this word (I thank you) to a fool.
I see no reason why that Dog (•all'd Chance)
Should fawn upon this fellow more than me:
I am a man, and I have Limbs, Flesh, Blood,
Bones, Sinews, and a Soul as well as he:
My parts are every way as good as his,
If I said better? why I did not lie,
Nath'lesse his wealth (but nodding on my wants)
Must make me bow, and cry: I thank you Sir.
Dispatch, take heed your mistress see you not.
I warrant you sir.
Nay gentle friend be merry, raise your looks
Out of your bosom, I protest (by heaven)
You are the man most welcome in the world.
I thank you Sir, I know my cue I think.
Where will you have 'hem burn Sir?
Here good Fido:
What? she did not see thee?
No Sir.
That's well:
Strew, strew, good Fido, the freshest flowers, so.
What means this Signior Deliro?
Cast in more Frankincense, yet more, well said.
O Macilente, I have such a wife,
So passing fair, so passing fair unkind,
And of such worth and right to be unkind,
(Since no man can be worthy of her kindness.)
What can there not?
No, that is sure as death,
No man alive: I doe not say is not,
But cannot possibly be worth her kindness•.
Nay that is certain, let me doe her Right:
How said I? do her Right? as though I could,
As though this dull gross tongue of mine could utter
The rare, the true, the pure, the infinite Rights
That sit (as high as I can look) within her.
This is such dotage as was never heard.
Well, this must needs be granted.
Granted quoth you?
Nay Macilente; doe not so discredit
The goodness of your judgement to deny it,
For I doe speak the very least of her.
And I would crave and beg no more of heaven
For all my fortunes here, but to be able
To utter first in fit terms, what she is,
And then the true joys I conceive in her.
Is it possible she should deserve so well
As you pretend?
I, and she knows so well
Her own deserts that (when I strive t'enjoy them)
She ways the things I doe, with what she merits:
And (seeing my worth outwai'd so in her graces)
She is so solemn, so precise, so froward,
That no observance I can doe to her,
Can make her kind to me: if she find fault,
I mend that fault, and then she says I faulted
That I did mend it. Now good Friend advise me
How I may temper this strange Spline in her.
You are too amorous, too obsequious,
And make her, too assured she may command you.
When women doubt most of their husbands loves,
They are most loving. Husbands must take heed
They give no gluts of kindness to their wives,
But use them like their Horses, whom they feed
Not with a manger-full of meat together,
But half a peck at once, and keep them so
Still with an appetite to that they give them.
He that desires to have a loving wife,
Must bridle all the show of that desire:
Be kind, not amorous, nor betraying kindness,
As if Love wrought it, but considerate Duty:
"Offer no loue-rites, but let wives still seek them,
"For when they come unsought, they seldom like them.
Believe me Macilente, this is Gospel.
O that a man were his own man so much,
To rule himself thus; I will strive in faith
To be more strange and careless: yet I hope
I have now taken such a perfect course,
To make her kind to me, and live contented,
That I shall find my kindness well returned,
And have no need to fight with my affections.
She (late) hath found much fault with every room
Within my house; One was too big (she said)
Another was not furnished to her mind,
And so through all: All which I have altered.
Then here she hath a place (on my backside)
Wherein she loves to walk; and that (she said)
Had some ill smells about it. Now this walk
Have I (before she knows it) thus perfumed
With herbs and flowers, and laid in diverse places
(As it were on Altars consecrate to her)
Perfumed Gloves, and delicate chains of Amber,
To keep the air in awe of her sweet nostrils:
This have I done, and this I think will please her.
Behold she comes.
Here's a sweet stink indeed:
What, shall I ever be thus crossed and plagued?
And sick of Husband? O my head doth ache
As it would cleave asunder with these savours,
All my Room's altered, and but one poor VValke
That I delighted in, and that is made
So fulsome with perfumes, that I am feared
(My brain doth sweat so) I have caught the Plague.
Why (gentle wife) is now thy VValke too sweet?
Thou said of late it had sower aires about it,
And found much fault, that I did not correct it.
Why, and I did find fault Sir?
Nay dear wife;
I know thou hast said thou hast loved perfumes,
No woman better.
I, long since perhaps,
But now that Sense is altered: you would have me
(Like to a puddle or a standing poole)
To have no motion, nor no spirit within me.
No, I am like a pure and sprightly River,
That moves for ever, and yet still the same;
Or fire that burns much wood, yet still one flame.
But yesterday, I saw thee at our garden
Smelling on Roses and on purple flowers,
And since I hope the Humour of thy Sense
Is nothing changed.
Why those were growing flowers,
And these within my walk are cut and strewed.
But yet they have one sent.
I, have they so?
In your gross judgement: if you make no difference
Betwixt the sent of growing flowers and cut ones,
You have a sense to taste Lampe-oyle, in faith.
And with such judgement have you changed the chambers,
Leaving no room that I can joy to be in
In all your house: and now my VValke and all
You smoke me from, as if I were a Fox,
And long belike to drive me quite away:
Well walk you there, and I'll walk where I list.
What shall I doe? oh I shall never please her.
Out on thee dotard, what star ruled his birth?
That brought him such a Star? blind Fortune still
Bestows her gifts on such as cannot use them:
How long shall I live, ere I be so happy,
To have a wife of this exceeding Form?
Away with 'hem, would I had broke a joint,
When I deuis'd this that should so dislike her,
Away, be are all away.
I doe: for fear.
Ought that is there should like her. O this man
How cunningly he can conceal himself,
As though he loved? loved? nay honoured and adored?
Why, my sweet heart?
Sweet heart? oh, better still:
And asking, why? wherefore? and looking strangely,
As if he were as white as innocence.
Alas, you're simple, you: you cannot change,
Look pale at pleasure, and then red with Wonder:
No, no, not you: I did but cast an amorous eye e'ennow
Upon a pair of Gloves that somewhat liked me,
And straight he noted it, and gave command
All should be taken away.
Be they my bane then:
What sir, Fido, bring in those Gloves again
You took from hence.
S'body sir, but do not:
Bring in no Gloves to spite me: if you doe—
Ay me, most wretched; how am I misconstrued?
O, how she tempts my heart-strings with her eye,
To knit them to her Beauties, or to break?
What moved the heavens, that they could not make
Me such a woman? but a man; a Beast,
That hath no bliss like to others. Would to God
(In wreak of my misfortunes) I were turned
To some fair water-Nymph, that set upon
The deepest whirlepit of the rau'nous Seas,
My Adamantine eyes might headlong hale
This Iron world to me, and drown it all.
Behold, behold, the translated Gallant.
O, he is welcome.
God save you Brother, and Sister, God save you sir;
I have commendations for you out in the country: (I wonder
they take no knowledge of my Suit:) mine Uncle Soghardo
is in town; Sister, me thinks you are Melancholy: why are
you so sad? I think you took me for Master Fastidius Brisk
(Sister) did you not?
Why should I take you for him?
Nay nothing, I was lately in Moister Fastidius his com∣panie,
and me thinks we are very like.
You have a fair suit Brother, God give you joy on it.
Faith good enough to ride in Brother, I made it to
ride in.
O, now I see the cause of his idle demand was his
new suit.
Pray you good Brother; try if you can chāge her mood.
I warrant you, let me alone. I'll put her out of her
dumps. Sister, how like you my suit?
O you are a gallant in print now Brother.
Faith, how like you the fashion? it's the last Edition I
assure you.
I cannot but like it to the desert.
Troth sister, I was fine to borrow these Spurs, I have
left my gown in gage for 'hem, pray you lend me an angel.
Now beshrow my heart then.
Good truth I'll pay you again at my next exhibit∣or:
I had but bare ten pound of my father, and it would not
reach to put me wholly into the fashion.
I care not.
I had Spurs of mine own before, but they were no•
Ginglers. Monsieur Fastidius will be here anon Sister.
You jest?
Never lend me penny more (while you live then) and
that I'd be loath to say, in truth.
When did you see him?
Yesterday, I came acquainted with him at Sir Punter∣•olo's:
nay sweet Sister.
I fine would know of heaven now, why yond fool
Should wear a suit of Satin? he? that Rooke?
That painted Iay with such a deal of outside?
What is his inside trow? ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
Good Heaven give me patience,
A number of these Popinjays there are,
Whom if a man confer, and but examine
Their inward merit, with such men as want;
Lord, Lord, what things they are!
Come, when will you pay me again now?
O God Sister.
Here comes another.
Save you Signior Deliro: how do' st thou sweet Lady?
Let me kiss thee.
How? a new suit? Ay me.
And how do's Moister Fastidius Brisk?
Faith live in court Signior Deliro, in grace I thank
God, both of the noble Masculine and Feminine. I must speak
with you in private by and by.
When you please Sir.
Why look you so pale brother?
S'lid all this money is cast away now.
I, ther's a newer Edition come forth.
Tic but my hard fortune: well, I'll have my suit chāg'd,
I'll go fetch my tailor presently, but first I'll devise a letter to
my father. Have you any pen and ink Sister?
What would you doe withal?
I would use it. S'light and it had come but four days
sooner the Fashion.
There was a Countess gave me her hand to kiss to
day in the presence: 'did me more good by Iesu, then, and ye∣sternight
sent her Coach twice to my lodging, to intre at me ac∣company
her, and my sweet mistress, with some two or three
nameless Ladies more: O, I have been graced by 'hem beyond
all aim of affection: this' her garter my dagger hangs in: and
they doe so commend and approve my apparel, with my ju∣dicious
wearing of it, it's aboue wonder.
Indeed Sir, it is a most excellent suit, and you do wear
it as extraordinary.
Why I'll tell you now (in good faith) and by this
Chair, which (by the grace of God) I entend presently to sit
in, I had three Suits in one year, made three great Ladies in
love with me: I had other three, undid three Gentlemen in
imitation: &amp; other three, gat three other Gentlemen, VVid∣dowes
of three thousand pound a year.
Is it possible?
O believe it sir; your good Face is the Witch, &amp; your
Apparel the Spells, that bring all the pleasures of the world
into their Circle.
Ah, the sweet Grace of a Courtier!
Well, would my father had left me but a good Face
for my portion yet; though I had shared the unfortunate Wit
that goes with it, I had not cared: I might have past for some∣what
in the world then.
Why, assure you Signior, rich apparel has strange
virtues: it makes him that hath it without means, esteemed
for an excellent Wit: he that enjoys it with means, puts the
world in remembrance of his means: it helps the deform∣ties
of Nature, and gives Lustre to her beauties; makes conti∣nuall
Holiday where it shines; sets the wits of Ladies at work,
that otherwise would be idle: furnishes your two-shilling
Ordinary; takes possession of your Stage at your new Play;
and enriches your Oars, as scorning to go with your Scull.
Pray you sir, add this; it gives Respect to your fools,
makes many Thieves, as many Strumpets, and no fewer
Bankrupts.
Out, out, unworthy to speak where he breaths.
VVhat's he, Signior?
A friend of mine, sir.
By heaven, I wonder at you Citizens, what kind of
Creatures you are?
Why sir?
That you can consort your selves with such poor
seame-rent fellows.
He says true.
Sir I will assure you (how ever you esteem of him)
hoe's a man worthy of regard.
Why? what he's he in him of such virtue to bee re∣guarded?
ha?
Marry he is a Scholar Sir.
Nothing else?
And he is well travailed.
He should get him cloths: I would cherish those good
parts of travel in him, and prefer him to some Nobleman of
good place.
Sir, such a benefit should bind me to you for ever (in my
friends right) and I doubt not but his desert shall more than
answer my praise.
Why, and he had good cloths, I'd carry him to the
Court with me to morrow.
Hee shall not want for those Sir, if Gold and the whole
City will furnish him.
You say well Sir: faith Signior Deliro, I am come to have
you play the Alchemy••• with me, and change the Species of my
land, into that mettle you talk of.
With all my heart Sir, what sum will serve you?
Faith some three or fourscore pound.
Troth Sir I have promised to meet a Gentleman this
morning in Paules, but upon my return I'll dispatch you.
I'll accompany you thither.
As you please Sir; but I go not thither directly.
It is no matter, I have no other designem•••• in hand,
and therefore as good go along.
I were as good have a Quartain fever follow me now,
for I shall ne'er bee rid of him: (bring me a Cloak there one)
Still upon his grace at the Court am I sure to be visited; I was
a beast to give him any hope. Well, would I were in that I am
out with him once, and—Come Signior ••••lent, I must cō∣far
with you as wee go. Nay de•re wife, I beseech the• for∣sake
these moods: look not like winter thus. Here take my
cares, open my counting houses, spread all my wealth before
thee, choose any object that delights thee: If thou wilt eat
the spirit of Gold, and drink dissolved Pearl in wine, it is
for thee.
So Sir.
Nay my sweet wife.
Good Lord! how you are perfumed in your terms
and all: pray you leave vs.
Come Gentlemen.
Adieu, sweet Lady.
I, I, Let thy words ever sound in mine ears, and thy
Graces disperse contentment through all my senses: O, how
happy is that Lady aboue other Ladies, that enjoys so ab∣solute
a Gentleman to her Servant! A Countess give him
her hand to kiss! a••foolish Countess; he e's a man worthy
(if a woman may speak of a mans worth) to kiss the lips of
an Empress.
VVhat's Master Fastidius gone, Sister?
I brother: he has a Face like a Cherubin.
Gods me, what lucke's this? I have fetched my Tay∣lore
and all: which way went he Sister? can you tell?
Not I, in good faith: and hee has a Body like an An∣gell.
How long is it since he went?
Why but even now: did you not meet him? and a
Tongue able to ravish any woman in the earth.
O, for Gods sake (I'll please you for your pains:) but
even now, say you? Come good sir: S'lid I had forgot it too:
Sister, if any body ask for mine Uncle Sogliardo, they shall have
him at the Heralds Office yonder by Paules.
Well, I will not altogether despair: I have heard of
a Citizens wife has been beloved of a Courtier; and why not
I? heigh ho: well, I will into my private Chamber, locke the
door to me, and think over all his good parts one after ano∣there.
Well, I doubt this last Scene will endure some gre∣uous
Torture.
How? you fear twill be racked by some hard Construe∣ction▪
Doe not you?
No in good faith: unless mine eyes could light me
beyond Sense, I see no reason why this should be more Liable
to the Rack than the rest: you'll say perhaps the City will
not take it well, that the Merchant is made here to dote so per∣fectly
upon his wife; and she again, to be so Fastidiously affe∣cted,
as she is?
You have uttered my thought sir, indeed.
Why (by that proportion) the Court might as well
take offence at him we call the Courtier, and with much more
Pretext, by how much the place transcends and goes before
in dignity and virtue: but can you imagine that any Noble
or true spirit in the Court (whose Sinewy, and altogether un∣affected
graces, very worthily express him a Courtier) will
make any exception at the opening of such an empty Trunk
as this Brisk is? or think his own worth impeached by behol∣ding
his motley inside?
No Sir, I doe not.
No more, assure you, will any grave wise Citizen, or
modest Matron, take the object of this Folly in Deliro and his
Wife; but rather apply it as the foil to their own virtues:
For that were to affirm, that a man writing of Narrow, should
mean all Emperors: or speaking of Machiavell, comprehend
all States-men; or in our Sordido, all Farmers; and so of the
rest: than which, nothing can bee uttered more malicious
and absurd. Indeed there are a sort of these narrow-ey'd De∣cipherers,
I confess, that will extort strange and abstruse
meanings out of any Subject, bee it never so Conspicuous
and Innocently delivered. But to such (where ever they sit con∣ceald)
let them know, the Author defies them, and their
writing-Tables; and hopes, no sound or safe judgement
will infect it self with their contagious Comments, who
(indeed) come here only to pervert and poison the sense of
what they hear, and for nought else.
Stay, what new Mute is this that walks so suspiciously?
O, marry this is one, for whose better Illustration; we
must desire you to presuppose the Stage, the middle Isle in
Paules; and that, the West end of it.
So Sir: and what follows?
Faith a whole volume of Humour, and worthy the un∣clasping
As how? what name doe you give him first?
Hee hath shift of names Sir: some call him Apple Iohn,
some Signior Whiff, marry his maine standing name is Cavalier
Shift: the rest are but as clean shirts to his Natures
And what makes he in Paules now?
Troth as you see, for the advancement of a Siquis or two;
wherein he has so varied himself, that if any one of 'hem take,
he may hul up and down in the Hue•orous world a little longer:
It seems then, he bears a very changing sail▪
O, as the wind Sir: here comes More.
This is rare, I have set up my bills without discovery.
What? Signior Whiff? what •ortune has brought you
into these West parts?
Troth Signior, nothing but your Rheum; I have ben
taking an ounce of Tobacco hard by here with a gentleman,
and I am come to spit private in Paules. God save you Sir.
A dieu good Signior Whiff.
Moister Apple Iohn? you are well met: when shall wee
sup together, and laugh and be fat with those good wenches?
ha?
Faith Sir, I must now leave you, upon a few Humours
and occasions: but when you please Sir.
Farewell sweet Apple Iohn: I wonder there are no more
store of Gallants here▪
What be these two, Signior?
Mary a couple sir, that are mere strangers to the
whole scope of our Play; only come to walk a turn
or two i'this Scene of Paules by chance.
Save you, good Master Clouc.
Sweet Master Orange.
How? Clove, and Orange?
I, &amp; they are well met, for it is as dry an Orange as ever
Grew: nothing but Salutation, and O God sir, and It pleases
you to say so Sir; one that can laugh at a jest for cōpanie with a
most plausible, and extemporal grace; and some hour af∣la
in private ask you what it was: the other, Monsieur
Clove, is a more spic't youth: he will sit you a whole afternoon
sometimes, in a book-sellers shop, reading the Greek, Ita∣lian,
and Spanish; when hee understands not a word of ei∣there:
if hee had the Tongues to his Suits, he were an excel∣lent
Linguist.
Doe you hear this reported for certainty?
O good sir.
Sirrah, take my Cloak: and you sir knave, follow
me closer: if thou loosest my Dog, thou shalt die a Dogs
death; I will hang thee.
Tut, fear him not, hoe's a good lean slave, hee loves
a Dog well I warrant him; I see by his looks, I: mass hoe's
somewhat like him. Sblood poison him, make him away with
a crooked pin, or somewhat man; thou moist have more security
of thy life: and so Sir, what? you have not put out your
whole venture yet? have you?
No, I doe want yet some fifteen or sixteen hundred
pounds: but my Lady (my wife) is out of her Humour; she does
not now go.
No? how then?
Mary, I am now enforced to give it out, upon the re∣turn
of my self, my Dog, and my Cat.
Your Cat? where is she?
My Squire has her there in the Bag: Sirrah, look to
her: How lik'st thou my change, Carlo?
Oh, for the better sir; your Cat has nine lives, &amp; your
wife have but one.
Besides, she will never be Sea-sicke, which will save
me so much in Conserves: when saw you Signior Sogliardo?
I came from him but now, hee is at the Heralds Office
yonder: hee requested me to go before and take up a man or
two for him in Paules, against his Cognisance was ready.
What? has he purchased arms then?
I, and rare ones too: of as many Colours, as ever you
saw any fools coat in your life▪ I'll go look among yond' Bills,
and I can •it him with Legs to his Arms.
With Legs to his Arms! Good: I will go with you sir.
Come, lets walk in the Mediterraneum: I assure you sir
I am not the least respected among Ladies; but let that pass:
doe you know how to go into the Presence Sir?
Why, on my feet sir.
No, on your head sir: for it is that must bear you out,
I assure you: as thus sir: You must first have an especial care
so to wear your Hat, that it oppress not confusedly this your
Predominant or Fore-top; because (when you come at the
Presence door) you may with once or twice stroking up your
Forehead thus, enter with your Predominant perfect: that is,
standing up stiff.
As if one were frighted?
I sir.
Which indeed, a true fear of your 〈◊〉 should
doe, rather than Gum water, or whites of Eggs: is it not
so Sir?
An Ingenious observation: give me leave to crave
your name sir.
His name is Macilente sir.
Good Signior Macilente: if this Gentleman, Signior
D•liro, furnish you (as he says he will) with clothes, I will bring
you to morrow by this time into the Presence of the most Di∣vine
and Acute Lady of the Court: you shall see sweet Silent
Rhetoric, and Dumb Eloquence speaking in her eye; but
when she speaks her self, such an Anatomy of Wit, so
Sinewiz'd and Arteriz'd, that it is the goodliest Model of
pleasure that ever was, to behold. Oh, she strikes the world
into Admiration of her; (O, O, O) I cannot express 'hem be∣leeue me.
O, your only Admiration, is your silence, sir.
Before God Carlo, this is good; let's read 'hem again:
If there be any Lady, or Gentlewoman of good carriage, that is desirous
to entertain• (to her private •ses) a young, straight, and upright Gen∣tleman,
of the age of five, or six and twenty at the most: who can serve
in the nature of a Gentleman Usher, and hath little legs of purpose, and
a black Satin Suit of his own to go before her in: which Suit (for the
more sweetening) now lies in Lavender: and can hide his face with her
Fan, if need require: or sit in the cold at the stayre foot for her as well as
an other Gentleman: Let her subscribe her Name and Place, and dili∣gent
respect shall bee given. This is aboue measure excellent:
ha?
No this, this: here's a fine slave.
If this City, or the Suburbs of the same, doe afford any young
Gentleman, of the first, second, or third head, more or less, whose friends
are but lately deceased, &amp; whose lands are but new come to his hands, that
(to bee as exactly qualified as the best of our Ordinaric Gallants are)
is affected to entertain the most Gentlemanlike use of Tobacco: as
first, to give it the most exquisite Persume: then, to know all the deli∣cate
sweet Forms for the Assumption of it: as also the rare Corollary and
practise of the ••ban Abolition, EVRIPVS, and Whiff; which •ee
shall receive or take in here at London, and evaporate at Vxbridge, or far∣der,
if it please him. If there be any such Generous spirit, that is truly en∣amour'd
of these good faculties: May it please him, but (by a note of his
hand) to specify the place, or Ordinary• where he uses to •at and Lie, and
most sweet attendance with Tobacco, and Pipes of the best sort shall be
ministered: STET QVAESO CANDID LECTOR▪ why
this is without Parallel, this!
Well, I'll mark this fellow for Sogliardo's use pre∣sently.
Or rather, Sogliardo for his use.
Faith either of 'hem will serve, they are both good
Properties: I'll design the other a place too, that we may see
him.
No better place than the Mitre, that we may be Spe∣ctators
with you Carlo. Soft, behold, who enters here: Signior
Sogliardo! God save you.
Save you good sir Punt arvolo; your Dogge's in health
sir I see: how now Carlo?
We have taken simple pains to choose you out foal∣lowers here.
Come hither Signior.
Monsieur Orange, yond' Gallants observes vs; pray
thee let's talk Fustian a little and gull 'hem: make 'hem be∣leeue
we are great Scholars.
O Lord sir.
Nay, pray thee let's, by Iesu; you have an excellent
habit in discourse.
It pleases you to say so sir.
By this Church you have la: nay come, begin: Ari∣stotle
in his Daemonologia approoues Scaliger for the best Nauigator in his
time: and in his Hypercritiques, •ee reports him to be H•autontimorume∣nos:
you understand the Greek sir?
O God sir.
For societies sake hee does. O here be a couple of fine
tame Parrots.
Now Sir, Whereas the Ingenuity• of the time, and the
souls Synderisis are but Embrions in Nature, added to the paunch
of Esquiline, and the Inter-vallum of the Zodiac, besides the Eclip∣tick
line being Optic, and not Mental, but by the contemplatine
and Theoricke part there of, doth demonstrate to vs the vegetable
circumference, and the ventositie of the Tropicks, and whereas our
intellectual or mincing capreall, (according to the Metaphisickes) as
you may read in Plato's Histriomastix. You conceive me Sir?
O Lord Sir.
Then coming to the pretty Animal, as Reason long since
is fled to Animals you know, or indeed for the more modellizing
or enam•lling, or rather diamondizing of your subject, you shall
perceive the Hipothersis or Galaxia, (where of the Meteors long
since had their Initial inceptions and Notions) to be merely Pitha∣goricall,
Mathematical, and Aristocratical: for look you Sir, there is
ever a kind of Concinnitie and Species. Let us turn to our former
discourse, for they mark vs not.
Mass, yonder's the knight Puntarvolo.
And my cousin Sogliardo me thinks.
I, and his familiar that haunts him, the Devil with a
shining face.
Let 'hem alone, obscrue 'hem not.
Nay I will have him, I am resolute for that, by this Parch∣meant
Gentlemen, I have ben so toiled among the Harrots yon∣der,
you will not believe, they doe speak in the strangest lan∣gauge,
and give a man the hardest terms for his money, that
ever you knew.
But have you arms? have your arms?
In faith, I thank God I can write my self Gentleman
now, here's my Patent, it cost me thirty pound by this breath.
A very fair Coat, •ell charged and full of Armoury.
Nay, it has as much variety of colours in it, as you have
seen a Coat have, how like you the Crest Sir?
I understand it not well, what is it?
Marry Sir, it is your Bore without a head Rampant.
A Bore without a head, that's very rare.
I, and Rampant too: troth I commend the Heralds wit,
he has deciphered him well: A Swine without a head, without
brain, wit, any thing indeed, Romping to Gentility. You can
blazon the rest signior? can you not?
O, I have it in writing here of purpose, it cost me two
shillings the tricking.
Let's hear, Let's hear.
It is the most vile, foolish, absurd, palpable, and ridicu∣lous
Escutch•on that ever this eye survis'd. Save you good
Monsieur Fastidius.
Silence good knight: on, on.
GYRONY of eight pieces, AZURE and GULES,
between three plates a CHEV'RON engrailed checkey, OR,
VERT and ERMINES; on a chief ARGENT between
two ANN'LETS, •ables a Bores head PROP••
How's that? on a chief ARGENT?
On a Chief ARGENT, a Bores head PROPER be∣tweene
two ANN'LETS •ables.
S'lud, it's a Hogs Cheek and Puddings in a Peuter
field this
How like you them signior?
Let the word be, Not without
mustard, your Crest is very rare sir.
A frying pan to the Crest had had no fellow.
Entreat your poor friend to walk off a little Signior,
I will salute the knight.
Come, lopped up, lopped up.
You are right well encoūtred sir, how do's your fair Dog?
In reasonable state sir, what Citizen is that you were
consorted with? a merchant of any worth?
It is Signior Deliro sir.
Is it he? Save you sir.
Good sir Puntarvolo.
O what Copy of fool would this place minister to one
endowed with Patience to observe it?
Nay look you sir, now you are a Gentleman, you must
carry a more exalted presence, change your mood and habit
to a more austere form, be exceeding proud, stand upon your
Gentility, and scorn every man▪ Speak nothing humbly, no∣for
discourse under a Nobleman, though you ne'er saw him but
riding to the Starre-chamber, it's all one. Love no man, Trust no
man, Speak ill of no man to his face, nor well of any man be∣hind
his back. Salute fairly on the front, and wish 'hem hanged
upon the turn. Spread your self upon his bosom publicly,
whose heart you would eat in private. These be principles, think
on 'hem, I'll come to you again presently.
Sirah, keep close, yet not so close, thy breath will thaw my ruff.
O good cousin, I am a little busy, how do's my niece, I
am to walk with a knight here.
〈◊〉 is here, look you sir, that's the Gentleman:
What he in the blush-colour'd Satin?
I, he sir, though his Suit blush, he blushes not: look you,
that's the Suit sir: I would have mine, such a Suit without diffe∣rēce,
such Stuff, such a Wing, such a Sleeve, such a Skirt, Belly
&amp; all; therefore, pray you observe it. Have you a pair of Tables?
Why do you see sir? they say I am Fantastical: why true,
I know it, &amp; I pursue my Humour still in cōtempt of this censor•os
age: S'light &amp; a man should do nothing but what a sort of stale
iudgemēts about this town will approve in him, he were a sweet
Ass, Il'd beg him in faith: I ne'er knew any more find fault with a
fashion, then they that knew not how to put themselves into it.
For mine own part, so I please mine own appetite, I am care∣less
what the fusty• World speaks of me, puh:
Doe you mark how it hangs at the knee there?
I warrant you sir.
For Gods sake do, note all: do you see the Collar sir▪
Fear nothing, it shall not differ in a stitch sir.
Pray God it do not, you'll make these linings serve? &amp;
help me to a Chapman for the outside, will you?
I'll doe my best sir: you 'le put it off presently:
I, go with me to my chamber you shall have it, but
make hast of it, for the love of Christ, for I'll sit • my old suit,
or else lie a bed and read the Arcadia, till you have done.
O, if ever you were struck with a jest, gallants, now,
now▪ I doe usher the most strange piece of Military Profess∣on,
that ever was discovered in Insula Pauline.
Where? where?
What is he for a Creature?
A Pimp, a Pimp, that I have observed yonder, the ra∣rest
Superficies of a Humour; hee comes every morning to empty
his lungs in Paules here, and offers up some five or six Hecatomb's
of faces and sighs, and away again. Here he comes; nay walk,
walk, be not seen to note him, and wee shall have excellent
sport.
S'lid he vented a sigh even now, I thought hee would
have blown up the church.
O you shall have him give a number of those false fires
ere he depart.
See now he is expostulating with his Rapier, Look,
Look.
Did you ever in your days observe better passion over
a hilt?
Except it were in the person of a Cutlers boy, or that
the fellow were nothing but Vapour, I should think it im∣possible.
See, again, he claps his sword of the head, as who should
say, Well, go to.
O violence, I wonder the blade can contain it self,
being so provoked.
With that, the moody Squire thumpt his breast,
And reared his even to Heaven for Revenge.
Troth, and you be Gentlemen, Let's make 'hem friends,
and take up the matter between his Rapier and he.
Nay, if you intend that, you must lay down the mat∣la,
for this Rapier (it seems) is in the nature of a Hanger on▪
and the good Gentleman would happily be rid of him.
By my faith, and it is to be suspected, I'll ask him.
O here 's rich stuff, for Christ sake, let vs go,
A man would wish himself a senseless pillar,
Rather than view these monstrous prodigies:
Nil habit in s•alex Papered as durius inse,
Quam quote Ridiculous •omens facet.
Signior.
At your service.
Will you •ell your Rapier?
Sbl••d he is turned wild upon the question, hee looks
as he had seen a Sergeant.
Sell my Rapier? now God bless me.
Amen.
You asked me, if I would sell my Rapier Sir?
I did indeed.
Now Lord have mercy upon me.
Amen I say still.
S'lud Sir, what should you behold in my face Sir, that
should move you (as they say Sir) to ask me Sir, if I would sell
my Rapier?
Nay (let me pray you Sir) bee not moved: I protest I
would rather •aue been silent than any way offensive, had I
known your nature.
Sell my Rapier? Gods lid: Nay Sir (for mine own part)
as I am a man that has served in causes, or so, so I am not apt to
injure any Gentleman in the degree of falling foul, but: sell
my Rapier▪ I will tell you Sir, I have served with this foolish Ra∣pier,
where some of vs dare not appear in hast, I name no man:
but let that pass; Sell my Rapier? Death to my Lungs. This
Rapier Sir, has travailed by my side Sir, the best part of France
and the low Country: I have seen Vlishing, Brill, and the
High with this Rapier sir, in my Lord of Leysters time: and (by
Gods will) he that should offer to disrapier me now, I would.—
Look you sir, you presume to bee a Gentleman of good sort,
and so likewise your friends here, if you have any disposition
to travel, for the sight of service or so, One, two, or all of you,
I can lend you letters to divers Officers and Commanders in
the Low Countries, that shall for my cause do you all the good
offices that shall pertain or belong to Gentlemen of your—
Please you to show the Bounty of your mind Sir, to impart
some ten groats or half a Crown to our use, till our abilitle
be of grow'th to return it, and we shall think our self.—
Sbloud, sell my Rapier?
I pray you what said he Signior, hoe's a proper man.
Mary hee tells me, If I please to show the bounty of
my mind, to impart some ten groats to his use or so.
Break his head, and give it him.
I thought he had been playing on the Jaws Trump I.
My Rapier? no Sir: my Rapier is my Guard, my De∣fence,
my Revenue, my Honour: (if you cannot impart bee
secret I beseech you) and I will maintain it, where there is a
grain of dust or a drop of water: (hard is the choice when the
valiant must eat their Arms or clem:) Sell my Rapier? no my
Dear, I will not be diuor•'t from thee yet, I have ever found
thee true as Steel: and (you cannot impart Sir) God save you
Gentlemen: (nevertheless if you hauie a fancy to it sir.)
Pray thee away: is Signior Deliro departed?
Have you seen a Pimp out-face his own wants better.
I commend him, that can dissemble them so well.
True, and having no better a cloak for it than he has
neither.
Gods precious, what mischievous luck is this: adieu• Gentlemē.
Whither? in such hast, Monsie ur Fastidius?
After my Merchant, Signior Deliro sir.
O hinder him not, he may hap loose his Tide, a good
Flounder in faith.
Hark you Sig. Whiff, a word with you.
How? Signior Whiff?
What was the difference between thast young Gal∣lant
that's gone, and you sir.
No difference: hee would have given me sieve pound for
my Rapier, and I refused it; that's all.
O, was it no otherwise? we thought you had ben upon some terms.
No other than you saw sir.
Adieu good Master Apple Iohn.
How? Whiff, and Apple Join too? Hart, what'll you say
if this be the Appendix, or Labell to both yond' Indentures?
It may be.
Resolve vs of it Ianus, thou that look
every way; or thou Hercules, that hast travailed all Countries.
Nay Carlo, spend not time in Invocations now; tic late.
Signior, here's a Gentleman desirous of your name sir.
Sir, my name is Cavalier Shift: I am known sufficiently
in this walk sir.
Shift? I heard your name varied even now, as I take it.
True sir, it pleases the world (as I am her excellent
Tobacconist) to give me the Style of Signior Whiff: as I am a
poor Esquire about the town here, they call me Master Ap∣ple
Iohn: variety of good names does well sir.
I, and good parts, to make those good names: out of
which I imagine yond' Bills to be yours.
Sir, if I should deny the Scriptures, I were worthy to be
banished the middle I'll for ever.
I take your word Sir: this Gentleman has subscribed to
'hem, &amp; is most desirous to become your Pupil; mary yo• must
use expedition: Signior Insulso Sogliardo, this is the Professor.
In good time sir, nay good sir house your head, doe your
profess these sleights in Tobacco?
I doe more than profess sir, and (if you please to be a
practioner) I will undertake in one fortnight to bring you, that
you shall take it plausibly in any Ordinary, Theatre, or the
Tilt-yard if need be; the most popular assembly that is.
But you cannot bring him to the Whiff so soon?
Yes as soon sir; he shall receive the 1, 2, and 3 Whiff,
if it please him, &amp; (upon the receipt) take his horse, drink his
three cups of Canary, and expose one at Hounslow, a second
at Stones, and a third at Bagshot.
Baw-waw.
You will not serve me sir, will yoū▪ I'll give you more thā Countenance.
Pardon me sir, I doe scorn to serve any man.
Who? he serve? Sbloud he keeps High men, &amp; Low
men, he; he has a fair living at Fullam.
But in the nature of a fellow, I'll bee your follower if
you please.
Sir you shall stay and dine with me, and if we can agree,
weal not part in hast: I am very bountiful to men of qual∣tie.
Where shall we go Signior.
Your Meter is your best house.
I can make this dog take as many whiffs as I list, and
he shall retain or e•um them at my pleasure.
By your patience, follow me fellows.
Sir Puntarvolo.
Pardon me, my Dog shall not eat in his company for
a Million.
Nay be not you amazed signior Whiff, what ever that
stiffeneckt Gentleman soy's.
No, for you doe not know the Humour of the dog as wee
do: whereshall we dine Carlo? I would fine go to one of these
Ordinaries now I am a Gentleman.
So you may, were you never at none yet?
No faith, but they say there resorts your most choice
gallants.
True, and the fashion is, when any stranger comes in
amongst 'hem, they all stand up and stare at him, as hee were
some unknown beast brought out of Africa, but that'll bee
helped with a good adventurous face, you must bee impudent
enough, sit down and use no respect, when any thing's pro∣pounded
aboue your capacity, smile at it, make two or three
faces, and it is excellent, they 'le think you have travailed:
though you argue a whole day in Silence thus, and discourse in
nothing but Laughter, twill pass. Only (now and then) give
fire, Discharge a good full Oath, and offer a great VVager,
twill be admirable.
I warrant you, I am resolute, come good Signior, theres
a poor French crown for your Ordinary.
It comes well, for I had not so much as the least Port∣•ullice
of come before.
I travel with another objection Signior, which I fear
will be enforced against the Author, ere I can be delivered of it
VVhat's that sir?
That the argument of his Comedy might have ben of
some other nature, as of a Duke to be in love with a Countess,
&amp; that Countess to be in love with the Dukes son, &amp; the son to
love the Ladies waiting maid: some such cross wooing, with a
Clown to their serving-man, better than to be thus near and
familiarly allied to the time.
You say well, but I would fine hear one of these Au∣tumne-
judgements define once, Quid sit Comoedia? if he cannot,
let him content himself with Ciceros definition (till hee have
strength to propose to himself a better) who would have a Co∣medie
to be •mitatio vitae, Speculum Consuetudinis, Imago veritatis, a
thing throughout pleasant and ridiculous, and accommodated
to the correction of manners: if the maker have failed in any
particle of this, they may worthily tax him, but if not, why;
be you (that are for them) silent, as I will bee for him; and give
way to the Actors.
Nay Gods-pretious, if the weather and the Season be
so respectless, that Beggars shall live as well as their betters;
and that my hunger and thirst for Riches, shall not make them
hunger and thirst with Poverty; that my sleeps shall be bro∣ken,
and their hearts not broken; that my coffers shall be full,
and yet care; theirs empty, and yet merry: Tic time that a
Cross should bear flesh and blood, since flesh and blood can∣not
bear this cross.
What will he hang himself?
Faith I, it seems his Prognostication has not kept
touch with him, and that makes him despair.
Be shrove me, he will be out of his Humour then indeed.
Tut, these star-monger knaves, who would trust 'hem?
one says, dark and rainy, when it is as clear as Crystal; ano∣there
says, tempestuous blasts, and storms, and it was as calm
as a Milk bowl; here be sweet rascals for a man to credit his
whole fortunes with: You skie-staring Cocks combs you: you
fat brains, out upon you; you are good for nothing but to
sweat night-caps and make rug-gownes dear: you learned
men, and have not a Legion of Devils, a vostr• service: a vostre ser∣vice?
By heaven I think I shall die a better scholar than they,
but soft, how now sirah.
Here's a letter come from your Son sir.
From my Son sir? what would my Son sir? some
good news no doubt.
Sweet and dear father, (desiring you first to send me your blessing, which is more worth to me than Gold or Silver) I desire you likewise to bee
advertised, that this Shrouctide (contrary to custom) wee use always to
have Revels; which is indeed Dancing, and makes an excellent show in
truth; especially if wee Gentlemen bee well attired, which our Seniors note,
and think the better of our fathers, the better wee are maintained, and
that they shall know if they come up, and have any thing to doe in the
Law: therefore good Father, these are (for your own sake as well as mine)
to re-desire you, that you let me not want that which is fit for the setting up
of our name in the honourable volume of Gentility, that I may say to our
Calumnators with Tulle, EGO SVM ORTVS DOMVS
MEAE, TV OCCASVSTVAE. And thus (not doubting of your
fatherly Benevolence) ••umbly ask you blessing, and pray God to bless you.
Yours, if his own.
How's this; Yours, if his own? is he not my Son, except he be
his own Son. Belike this is some new kind of subscription
the Gallants use. Well, wherefore doest thou stay knave?
Away: go.
Here's a letter
indeed; Reu•ls? and benevolence? is this a weather to send be∣neuolence?
or is this a season to revel in? Slid the Devil and
all takes part to vex me I think: this letter would never have
come now else, now, now, when the sun shines, and the air
thus clear. Soul if this hold, we shall shortly have an excel∣lent
crop of Corn spring out of the high ways, the Streets,
and Houses of the town will be hid with the rankenesse of the
fruits that grow there in spite of good Husbandry. Go to
I'll prevent the sight of it, come as quickly as it can, I will pre∣uent
the sight of it. I have this remedy Heaven: stay; I'll try
the pain thus a little, O, nothing, nothing. Well now: shall
my son gain a benevolence by my death▪ or any body be
the better for my Gold or so forth: No Alive, I kept it frō 'hem,
and (dead) my ghost shall walk about it and preserve it, my
Son and Daughter shalsterue ere they touch it, I have hid it
as deep as Hell from the •ight of Heaven, and to it I go now.
Aye me, what pitiful sight is this? help, help, help▪
How now? what's the matter?
O here's a man has hanged himself, help to get
him again.
Hanged himself? Slid carry him before a Justice, it is
chance medley on my word.
How now, what's here to do?
How comes this?
One has executed himself contrary to the order of
Law, and by my consent he shall answer't.
Would he were in case to answer it.
Stand by, he recovers, give him breath.
Oh.
Mass, it was well you went the footway neighbour.
I, and I had not cut the halter.
How? cut the halter? Aye me, I am undone, I am un∣done.
Marry if you had not been undone, you had been
hanged I can tell you.
You threadbare horse-bread eating rascals, if you would
needs have been meddling, could you not have untied it, but
you must cut it? and in the midst too? Aye me.
Out on me, it is the Caterpillar Sordido; how cursed
are the poor, that the viper was blessed with this good fortune?
Nay how accursed are thou, that art cause to the curse
of the poor?
I, and to save so wretched a Caitiff.
Cursed be thy fingers that loosed him.
Some desperate fury possess thee, that thou moist
hang thy self too.
Never majesty thou be saved, that saved so damned a
monster.
What curses breath these men? how have my deeds
Made my looks differ from another mans,
That they should thus detest, and loath my life?
Out on my wretched Humour, it is that
Makes me thus monstrous in true humane eyes.
Pardon me (gentle friends) I'll make fair mends
For my foul errors past and twentie-fold
Restore to all men, what with wrong I robed them:
My Barnes and Garners shall stand open still
To all the poor that come, and my best grain
Be made almes-bread to feed halfe-famisht mouths.
Though hitherto amongst you I have lived
Like an unsavoury Muck hill to my self,
Yet now my gathered heaps being spread abroad,
Shall turn to better, and more fruitful uses.
Bless•e then this man, curse him no more for saving
My life and soul together. O how deeply
The bitter curses or the poor do pierce!
I am by wonder changed; come in with me
And witness my repentance: now I prove,
"No life is blessed, that is not graced with Love.
O miracle! see when a man he's grace.
Had't not been pity so good a man should have ben
cast away?
Well, I'll get our Clarke put his conversion in the
Chronicle.
Doe, for I warrant him hoe's a virtuous man.
O god how he wept if you marked it: did you see how
the tears trilled?
Yes believe me; like moister Vicars bowls upon
the greene, for all the world.
O neighbour, god's blessing your heart neighbour,
it was a good grateful deed.
How now Mitis? what's that you consider so seriously?
Troth, that which doth essentially please me: the war∣ping
condition of this greene and soggy multitude: but in
good faith Signior, your Author hath largely outstripped my ex∣pectation
in this Scene, I will liberally confess it. For when I
saw Sordido so desperately intended, I thought I had had a hand
of him then.
What? you supposed hee should have hung himself
indeed?
I did; and had framed my objection to it ready, which
may yet be very fitly urged, &amp; with some necessity: for though
his purposed violence lost th'effect, &amp; extended not to death,
yet the Intent &amp; Horror of the object was more than the na∣ture
of a Come die will in any sort allow.
I? what think you of Plautus in his Come die called
Cistellaria there? where he brings in Alcesimarchus with a drawn
sword ready to kill himself, and as hee is even fixing his breast
upon it, to bee restrained from his resolved outrage by Selenium
and the Bawd: is not his authority of power to give our Scene
approbation?
Sir, I have this (your only) evasion leftmee, to say, 〈◊〉
think it bee so indeed, your memory is happier than mine: but I won∣der
what engine he will use to bring the rest out of their Hue∣morse?
That will appear anon, never preoccupy your ima∣gination
withal. Let your mind keep company with the
Scene still, which now removes it self from the Country to the
Court. Here comes Macilente and Signior Brisk freshly suited,
loose not your self, for now the Epitasis or busy part of our
Subject is in Action.
Well now Signior Macilente, you are not only well∣come
to the Court, but also to my mistress with drawing chā∣ber:
Boy get me some Tobacco, I'll but go in, and show I am
here, and come to you presently sir.
VVhat's that he said? by heaven I marked him not,
My thoughts, and I were of another world;
I was admiring mine own outside here,
To think what privilege and palm it bears
Here in the court: Be a man ne'er so vile
In wit, in judgement, manners, or what else;
If he can purchase but a Silken cover,
He shall not only pass, but pass regarded:
Whereas let him be poor and meanly clad,
Though ne'er so richly parted; you shall have
A fellow (that knows nothing but his Beef
Or how to rince his clammy guts in beer)
Will take him by the shoulders or the throat,
And kick him down the stairs, Such is the state
Of virtue in bad Cloths, ha, ha, ha, ha,
That Raiment should be in such high request?
How long should I be ere I should put off
To my Lord Chancelors tomb, or the Shriues posts?
By heaven (I think) a thousand thousand year,
His Gravity•, his wisdom, and his faith,
To my dread Sovereign (graces that survive him)
These I could well endure to reverence,
But not his Tomb, no more than I'll commend
The Chapel Organ for the guilt without,
Or this base Viol for the varnished face.
In faith I have made you stay somewhat long sir, but is
my Tobacco ready boy?
I Sir.
Give me, my mistress is upon coming, you shall see
her presently sir, (Tab.) you'll say you never accosted a more
piercing wit. This Tobacco is not dried Boy, or else the Pipe's
defective. Oh, your wits of Italy are nothing comparable to
her, her braine's a very Quiver of jests, and she do's dart them
abroad with that sweet loose and judicial aim that you
would—here she comes sir.
It was time, his invention had been bogd else.
Give me my fan there.
How now Monsieur Brisk?
A kind of affectionate reverence strikes me with a cold
shivering (me thinks.)
I like such tempers well, as stand before their Mistress∣ses
with fear and trembling, and before their Maker like im∣pudent
mountains.
By Iesu, I'd spend twenty pound my vatting Horse
stood here now, she might see me doe but one trick?
Why do's she love activity▪
Or if you had but your long stockings on to be dan∣cing
a Galliard, as she comes by.
I either. O these stirring humours make Ladies mad with
desire, she comes. My good Genius embolden me, Boy the Pipe
quickly.
What? will he give her music?
A second good morrow to my fair mistress.
Fair servant, I'll thank you a day hence, when the
date of your salutation comes forth.
How like you that answer? is it not admirable?
I were a simple Courtier, if I could not admire tri•••es sir.
Troth sweet Lady I shall (Tab.) be prepared to give you
thanks for those thanks, and (Tab.) study more officious and
obsequous regards (Tab.) to your fair beauties: (Tab.) mend
the pipe boy.
I ne'er knew Tobacco taken as a parenthesis before.
Fore God (sweet Lady) believe it, I doe honour the
meanest rush in this chamber for your love.
I, you need not tell me that sir, I do think you do prize
a rush before my love.
Is this the wonder of nations?
O, by Iesu pardon me, I said for your love, by this light;
but it is the accustomed sharpness of your Ingenuity sweet
Mistress to—Mass your Viol's new str•ng me thinks.
Ingenuitic; I see his ignorance will not suffer him to
stander her; which he had done most notably, if he had said Wit
for Ingenuity•, as he meant it.
By the soul of Music Lady (hum, hum.)
Would we might hear it once.
I doe more adore and admire your (hum, hum) predo∣minant
perfections than (hum, hum) ever I shall have power
and faculty to express (hum.)
Upon the Viol de Gambo you mean?
It's miserably out of tune, by this hand.
Nay rather by the fingers.
It makes good Harmoni• with her wit.
Sweet Lady tune it. Boy some Tobacco.
Tobacco again? hee do's court his mistress with very
exceeding good changes.
Signior Macilente, you take none sir? (Tab.)
No, unless I had a mistress Signior, it were a great
Indecorum for me to take Tobacco.
How like you her wit? (Tab.)
Her ing•nuitie is excellent sir.
You see the subject of her sweet fingers there? (Tab.)
▪Oh she tickles it so, that (Tab.) she makes it
laugh most
Divinely; (Tab.) I'll tell you a good jest now, and your self
shall say it's a good one: I have wished my self to be that In∣strument
(I think) a thousand times, and not so few, by Hey∣uens
(Tab.)
Not unlike Sir: but how? to be cased up and hung by
on the wall?
O, no Sir, to be in use I assure you; as your judicious
eyes may testify. (Tab.)
Here Servant, if you will play, come.
Instantly sweet Lady (Tab.) In good faith here's most
Divine Tobacco.
Nay, I cannot stay to Dance after your Pipe.
Good, nay dear Lady stay: by this sweet Smoke, I
think your wit be all fire: (Tab.)
And hoe's the Salamander that lives by it.
Is your Tobacco perfumed Sir? that you swear by the
sweet Smoke?
Still more excellent: (before God, and these bright
Heavens) I think (Tab.) you are made of Ingenuity, I (Tab.)
True, as your discourse is: O abominable!
Will your Ladyship take any?
O, peace I pray you; I love not the breath of a Wood∣cocks
head.
Meaning my head, Lady?
Not altogether so Sir; but (as it were Fatal to their foal∣lies
that think to grace themselves with taking Tobacco, when
they want better entertainment) you see your Pipe bears
the true form of a Woodcocks head.
O Admirable Simile•!
It is best leaving of you in Admiration, Sir▪
Are these the admired Ladie-wits, that having so good
a Plaine-song, can run no better Division upon it. S'heart,
all her jests are of the stamp March was fifteen years ago.
Is this the Com•t Monsieur Fastidius, that your Gallants won∣der
at so?
Hart of a Gentleman to neglect me before presence
thus: Sweet sir, I bese•ch you be silent in my disgrace, By Iesu,
I never was in so vile a Humour in my life, and her wit was at the
•loud too, Report it not for a million good sir; let me be so far
endeared to your love.
What follows next Signior Cordatus? this Gallants
Humour is almost spent me thinks, it •bbes apace, with this
contrary breath of his mistress.
O, but it will flow again for all this, till there come a
general drought of Humour among all our Actors, and then I
fear not but his will fall as low as any. See who presents him∣self
here:
What, in the old case?
In faith, which makes it the more pitiful, you under∣stand
where the Scene is?
Why are you so melancholy Brother?
I am not melancholy I thank you Sister.
Why are you not merry then? there are but two of vs
in all the world, and if we should not be comforts to one ano∣there,
God help vs.
Faith, I cannot tell Sister, but if a man had any true
Melancholy in him, it would make him melancholy, to see
his yeomanly father cut his neighbours throats to make his
son a Gentleman: and yet when he has cut 'hem, hee will
see his sons throat cut too, ere he make him a true Gentle∣man
indeed, before Death cut his own throat▪ I must be the
first Head of our house, and yet he will not give me the head,
till I be made so. Is any man termed a Gentleman that is not
always in the fashion? I would know but that.
If you be melancholy for that Brother, I think I have
as much cause to be melancholy, as one; for I'll be sworn I
live as little in the fashion, as any woman in London. By the Bi∣ble
of heaven (beast that I am to say it) I have not one friend
in the world besides my husband. When saw you Moister Fasti∣dius Brisk, Brother?
But a while since Sister, I think, I know not well in
truth. By Gods lid I could sight with all my heart me thinks.
Nay good Brother, be not resolute.
I sent him a letter, and hee writes me no answer
neither.
Oh sweet Fastidius Brisk, O fine Courtier, thou a• hee
make me sigh and say, How blessed is that woman that hath a
Courtier to her husband? and how miserable a dame she is that
hath neither husband nor friend in the Court: O sweet Fastidius,
O fine Courtier. How comely hee bows him in his curtsy?
how full hee hits a woman betwixt the lips when hee kisses?
how upright hee sits at the Table? how daintily hee carves?
how sweetly hee talks, and tells news of this Lord, and of
that Lady? how cleanly hee wipes his spoon at every spoon∣full
of any whit-meat hee eats, and what a near case of pick∣tooths
hee carries about him still? Oh sweet Fastidius, O sine
Courtier!
See yonder she is Gentlemen, now (as ever you'll
bear the name of Musicians) touch your instruments sweetly,
she has a delicate ear, I tell you, play not a false note I be∣seech
you.
Fear• not Signior Deliro.
O begin, begin, some sprightly thing; Lord, how my
imagination labours with the success of it: well said, good
in faith, heaven grant it please her, I'll not bee seen, for then
she'll be sure to dislike it.
Hey da, this is excellent, I'll lay my life this is my hus∣bands
dotage, I thought so, nay never play peeke-boe with
me, I know you do nothing but study how to anger me sir.
Anger thee, sweet wife? why did thou not send for
Musicians to supper last night thy self?
To Supper sir? now come up to Supper I beseech you:
as though there were no difference between Supper time
when folks should be merry, and this time when they would
be Melancholy? I would never take upon me to take a wife,
if I had no more Judgment to please her.
Be pleased sweet wife, and they shall have done: &amp; would
to Christ my life were done, if I can never please thee.
God save you Lady; where is Master Deliro?
Here, Master Macilente: you're welcome from the Court
Sir; no doubt you have been graced exceedingly of Master
Briskes Mistress, and the rest of the Ladies for his sake?
Alas, the poor Fantastic, hoe's scarce known
To any Lady there: and those that know him,
Know him the simplest man of all they know:
Deride, and play upon his amorous Humours,
Though he but Apishly doth imitate
The gallan't Courtiers, kissing ladies Pumps,
Holding the Cloth for them, praising their VVits,
And servilely observing every one,
May doe them pleasure: Fearful to be seen
With any man (though he be ne'er so worthy)
That's not in grace with some that are the greatest.
Thus Courtiers doe, and these he counterfeits,
But sets not such a sightly carriage
Upon their vanities, as they themselves;
And therefore they despise him: for indeed
Hoe's like a Zani to a Tumbler,
That tries tricks after him to make men laugh.
Here's an unthankful spiteful wretch: the good Gen∣tleman
vouchsafed to make him his companion (because my
husband put him into a few Rags) and now see how the un∣rude
Rascal backbites him.
Is he no more graced amongst'hem then? say you?
Faith like a pawn at Chess, fills up a rome, that's all.
O monster of men! can the Earth bear such an envious Caitiff?
Well, I repent me I ever credited him so much: but
(now I see what he is, and that his masking viz or is of) I'll for∣bear
him no longer: all his lands are mortgaged to me, and for∣feited:
besides, I have Bonds of his in my hand for the receipt of
now xx pound, now xxx, now xxv: still as hee has had a Fan
but wagg'd at him, he would be in a new Suit. Well, I'll salute
him by a Sergeant, the next time I see him in faith, I'll Suit him.
Why, you may soon see him Sir, for hee is to meet
Signior Puntarvolo at a Notaries by the Exchange presently, where
he means to take up upon return.
Now out upon thee Iudas; can thou not be content
to backbite thy friend, but thou must betray him? wilt thou
seek the undoing of any man? and of such a man too? and
will you Sir get your living by the counsel of Traitors?
Dear wife, have patience.
The house wilfal, the ground will open, and swallow vs:
I'll not bide here for all the Gold an Silver in Heaven.
O good Macilente, let's follow and appease her, or the
Peace of my life is at an end.
Now Peas, and not Peace feed that life, whose head
hangs so heavily over a women's Manger.
Help me brother: Gods body and you come here, I'll
do my self a mischief.
Nay, hear me sweet wife, unless thou wilt have mec
go, I will not go.
Tut, you shall ne'er have that vantage of me, to say you
are undone by me: I'll not bid you stay, I. Brother, sweet
brother, here's four Angels, I'll give you toward your Suit;
for the love of Iesu, and as ever you came of Christen cry∣ture,
make hast to the water side (you know where Master
Fastidius uses to land) and give him warning of my husbands
intent; and tell him of that lean Rascals treachery: O Iesu,
how my flesh rises at him? nay, sweet brother make hast; you
may say I would have writ to him, but that the necessity of
the time would not suffer it: He cannot choose but take it ex∣traordinarily
from me: and Commend me to him, good bro∣there:
say I sent you.
Let me see; these four Angels: and then forty shil∣lings
more I can borrow on my Gown in Fetter-lane: well,
I will go presently, say on my Suit, pay as much money as I
have, and swear my self into Credit with my Taylor for the
rest.
O, on my Soul you wrong her, 〈◊〉,
Though she be froward, yet I know she is honest.
Well, then have I no Judgment; would nay woman
(but one that were wild in her affections) have broke out in∣to
that immodest and violent Passion against her husband?
or is it possible—
If you love me, forbear; all the Arguments in the world
shall never wrest my heart to believe it.
How like you the Deciphering of his Dotage?
O, strangely; and of the others Envy too, that labours
so seriously to set debate betwixt a man and his wife, Stay, here
comes the Knight Aduenturer.
I, and his Scrivener with him.
I wonder Monsieur Fastidius comes not! but Notary,
if thou please to draw the Indentures the while, I will give
thee the Theory.
With all my heart Sir; and I'll fall in hand with 'hem
presently.
Well then, first; the Sum is to be understood.
Good sir.
Next, our several Appellations, and Character of my Dog
and Cat must be known: show him the Cat Sirrah.
So sir.
Then, that the intended Point, is the Turks Court in
Constantinople: the Time limited for our Return, a year: and
that if either of vs miscarry, the whole Venture is lost. These
are General; conceiu'st thou? or if either of vs turn Turque.
I Sir.
Now for Particulars: that I may make my travails by
Sea or Land, to my best liking: and that (hiring a Coach for my
self) it shall be lawful for my Dog and Cat to ride with me
in the said Coach.
Very good sir.
That I may choose to give my Dog or Cat Fish, for
fear of Bones, or any other Nutriment, that (by the judge∣meant
of the most Autenticall Physicians where I travail) shall
be thought dangerous.
Well sir.
That (after the receipt of his money) he shall neither
in his own person, nor any other, either by direct or indirect
means; as Magique, Witchcraft, or other such Exotic Arts,
attempt, practise, or complot any thing, to the prejudice of
Me, my Dog, or my Cat: Neither shall I use the help of
any such Sorceries or Enchantments; as Vnctions, to make
our skins impenetrable, or to travail invisible by virtue
of a Powder, or a Ring, or to hang any three-forked Charm
about my Dogs neck, secretly conveyed into his Collar: un∣derstand
you? but that all be performed, sincerely, without
fraud or Imposture.
So sir.
That (for testimony of the Performance) my self am
to bring thence a Turks Moustache, my Dog a Hares lip, and
my Cat the train or tail of a Rat.
It is done sir.
It is said Sir, not done sir, but forward. That upon my
return and landing on the Tower wharf with the aforesaid
Testimony, I am to receive five for one, according to the pro∣portion
of the sums putforth.
Well Sir.
Provided, That if before our departure or setting
forth, either my self, or these be visited with sickness, or any
other casual event, so that the whole course of the Adventure
be hindered thereby; that then, He is to return, and I am to
receive the prenominated Proportion, upon fair and equal
terms.
Very good sir; is this all?
It is all Sir: and dispatch them good Notary.
As fast as is possible Sir.
O Carlo, welcome: saw you Monsieur Brisk?
Not I: did he appoint you to meet here?
I, and I muse he should be so tardy: hee is to take an
hundred pounds of me in venture, if hee maintain his pro∣mise.
Is his hour past?
Not yet, but it comes on apace.
Tut, be not jealous of him; he will sooner break all
the ten Commandments, than his Hour; upon my life in such
a case trust him.
Me thinks Carlo, you look very smooth? ha?
Why I come but now from a Hothouse, I must needs
look smooth.
From a Hothouse?
I, doe you make a wonder on it? why it's your only
Physic. Let a man sweat once a week in a Hothouse, and be
well rubbed and froted with a good plump juicie wench, and
sweet linen, he shall ne'er hawed Pox.
What? the French Pox?
The French Pox! our Pox: S'blood wee have 'hem
in as good form as then man: what?
Let me perish, but thou art a Villain: was your new-created
Gallant there with you? Sogliardo?
O Porpoise, hang him, no: hoe's a Leaguer at Horns Ordi∣nary
yonder: his villainous Ganimede and hee ha'been dro∣ning
a Tobacco Pipe there, ever senator yesterday noon.
Who? Signior Tripartite, that would give my Dog
the Whiffs?
I, hee: they h•ue hired a chamber and all private to pra∣ctise
in, for the making of the Piton, the Receipt Reciprocal, and a
number of other mysteries, not yet extant▪ I brought some do∣sen
or twenty Gallants this morning to view'hem (as you'd
doe a piece of Perspective) in at a key-hole; and there we might
see Sogliardo sit in a Chair, holding his snout up like a Sow un∣der
an Apple-tree, while the other opened his Nostrils with a
Poking-sticke, to give the smoke a more free delivery. They
had spit some three or fourscore ounces between 'hem, before
we came away.
How! spit three or fourscore ounces?
I, and preserved it in Porringers, as a Barber does his
Blood when he pricks a vein.
Out Pagan; how dost thou prick the Vain of thy
friend?
Friend? Is there any such foolish thing in the world?
ha? S'lid I ne'er relished it yet.
Thy Humour is the more dangerous.
No not a whit Signior: Tut, a man must keep time in
all: I can oil my tongue when I meet him next, and look
with a good slick forehead; twill take away all soil of Suss∣picion,
and that's enough: what Lynceus can see my heart? Pish,
the title of a Friend, it's a vain idle thing, only venerable a∣mong
fools: you shall not have one that has any opinion of
wit affect it.
Save you good Sir Puntarvolo.
Signior Deliro! Welcome.
Pray you sir, did you see Master Fastidius Brisk? I heard
he was to meet your Worship here.
You heard no Figment s••, I doe expect him every mi∣nut
my Watch strikes.
In good time sir.
There's a fellow now, looks like one of the Patricians
of Sparta, mary his wit's after ten in the hundred. A good Blood∣hound,
a close mouthed Dog, hee follows the sent well, marry
hoe's at a fault now me thinks.
I should wonder at that Creature is free from the
danger of thy tongue.
O I cannot abide these limbs of Satin, or rather Sa∣than
indeed, that 'll walk (like the children of darkness) all
day in a melancholy shop, with their pockets full of Blanks,
ready to swallow up as many poor unthrifts, as come within
the verge.
So: and what hast thou for him that is with him now?
O (Damn me) Immortality, I'll not meddle with him,
the pure Element of Fire, all Spirit, Extraction.
How Carlo? ha, what is he man?
A scholar, Macilente, doe you not know him? a lank
rawboned Anatomy, he walks up and down like a charged Mus∣ket,
no man dares encounter him: that's his Rest there.
His Rest? why has he a forked head?
Pardon me, that's to be suspended, you are too quick,
too apprehensive.
Troth (now I think on it) I'll defer it till some other time.
Gods-pretious, not by any means Signior, you shall
not loose this opportunity, he will be here presently now.
Yes faith Macilente, it is best. For look you sir, I shall so
exceedingly offend my wife in it, that—
Your wife? now for shame loose these thoughts, and
become the master of your own spirits. Should I (if I had a wife)
suffer my self to be thus passionately carried (to and for) with the
stream of her Humoured and neglect my deepest affairs, to serve
her affections? Sbloud I would geld my self first.
O but Signior, had you such a wife as mine is, you wold—
Such a wife: Now God hate me sir, if ever I discerned
any wonder in your wife yet, with all the Speculation I have: I
have seen some that ha'beene thought fairer than she, in my
time; and I have seen those, haven't been altogether so tall,
esteemed proper women; and I have seen less Noses grow up∣on
sweeteer Faces, that have done very well too in my judgem∣meant:
but in good faith Signior for all this, the Gentlewoman
is a good pretty proud hard-fauour'd thing, mary not so peer∣loosely
to be doted upon, I must confess: nay be not angry.
Well sir (how ever you please to forget your self) I
have not deserved to be thus played upon, but henceforth, pray
you forbear my house, for I can but faintly endure the savor of
his breath at my table, that shall thus jade me for my courtesies.
Nay then Signior, let me tell you, your wife is no pro∣per
woman by Iesu, and I suspect her honesty, that's more,
which you may likewise suspect (if you please:) doe you see? Isle
urge you to nothing against your appetite, but if you please,
you may suspect it.
Good Sir.
Good sir? Now Horn upon Horn pursue thee, thou
blind egregious Dotard.
O you shall hear him speak like Envy. Signior Maci∣lent,
you saw Monsieur Brisk lately? I heard you were with
him at the Court.
I Buffone, I was with him.
And how is hee respected there? (I know you'll deal
ingeniously with us) is he made of amongst the sweeter sort of
gallants?
Faith I, his Civet and his casting glass,
Have helped him to a place amongst the rest,
And there his Seniors give him good slight looks,
After their Garb, smile, and salute in French
With some new complement.
What is this all?
Why say, that they should show the frothie fool,
Such grace as they pretend comes from the heart,
He had a mighty wind-fall out of doubt.
Why all their Graces are not to doe Grace
To virtue, or desert: but to ride both
With their guilt Spurs quite breathless from them•elves.
It is now esteemed Precisianisme in wit;
And a Disease in Nature to be kind
Toward Desert, to Love, or seek good Names:
Who feeds with a Good name? who thrives with loving?
Who can provide feast for his own desires,
With serving others? ha, ha, ha:
It is folly by our wisest worldlings proved
(If not to gain by love) to be beloved.
How like you him? is it not a good spiteful slave? ha?
Shrewd, shrewd.
Damme me, I could eat his flesh now: Divine sweet
villain.
Nay, pray thee leave: what's he there?
Who? this in the starcht Beard? it's the dull stiff
Knight Puntarvolo man; hoe's to travail now presently: hee
has a good knotty wit, marry he carries little on it out of the
land with him.
How then?
He puts it forth in venture, as he does his money; upon
the return of a Dog and Cat.
Is this hee?
I, this is hee; a good tough Gentleman: he looks like
a Chine of Brawn at Shrouetide, out of date, and ready to
take his leave: or a dry Poule of Ling upon Easter-eue, that
has furnished the Table all Lent, as hee has done the City this
last Vacation.
Come, you'll never leave your stabbing Simile•'s: I shall
have you aiming at me with 'hem by and by, but—
O, renounce me then: pure, honest, good Devil, I love
thee aboue the love of women; I could even melt in Admire∣tion
of thee now: Gods so, look here man; Sir Dagonet and
his Squire.
Save you my dear Gallanto's. nay, come approach,
good Cavalier: pray thee (sweet Knight) know this Gentleman,
hoe's one that it pleases me to use as my good friend and com∣pinion;
and therefore doe him good offices: I beseech you
Gentles, know him.
Sir (for Signior Sogliardos sake) let it suffice, I know
you.
Why by Iesu, I thank you Knight, and it shall suffice.
Hark you Sir Puntarvolo, you'd little think it; hoe's as reason∣lute
a piece of flesh as any's in the world.
Indeed sir?
Upon my Gentility sir: Carlo, a word with you; Doe
you see that same fellow there?
What? Cavalier Shift?
O, you know him; cry you mercy: before God, I think
him the tallest man living within the walls of Europe.
The walls of Europe! take heed what you say Signior,
Europe's a huge thing within the walls.
Tut, (and it were as huge again) I'd justify what I
speak. S'lid he swaggered even now in a place where we were:
I never saw a man doe it more resolute.
Nay indeed swaggering is a good Argument of Resolution.
Doe you hear this, Signior?
I, to my grief. O that such muddy Flags
For every drunken flourish, should achieve
The name of Manhood; whilst true perfect Valour
(Hating to show it self) goes by despised.
Sbloud, I doc know now (in afaire just cause)
I dare doe more than hee; a thousand times:
Why should not they take knowledge of this? ha?
And give my worth allowance before his?
Because I cannot swagger. Now the Pox
Light on your Pickt-Hatch prowess.
Why I tell you Sir, he has been the only Bid-stand that
ever was, kept New-Market, Salisbury Plain, Hockley in the hole,
Gads-Hill; all the high plac•s of any Request: hee has had his
Mares and his Geldings hee, have been worth forty, threescore,
a hundred pound a Horse, would have sprung you over hedge
and ditch like your Greyhound: hee has done five hundred
Robberies in his time, more or less, I assure you.
What? and escaped?
Escaped! in faith I: he has broken the jail when hee has
been in irons, and irons; and been out, and in again; &amp; out,
and in; forty times and not so few, hee.
A fit Trumpet to proclaim such a person.
But can this be possible?
why' tic nothing sir, when a man gives his Affections to it.
Good Pylades discourse a Robbery or two, to satisfy
these Gentlemen of thy worth.
Pardon me my dear Orestes: Causes have their Quid∣dits,
and it is ill jesting with Bell-ropes.
How? Pylades and Orestes?
I, he is my Pylades, and I am his Orestes: how like you the
conceit?
O, it's an old stale Interlude devise: No, I'll give you
Names my self: look you, he shall be your Iudas, and you shall
be his Elder tree to hang on.
Nay rather, let him be Captain Pod, and this his Mo∣tion;
for he does nothing but Show him.
Excellent: or thus; you shall be Holden, and hee your camel.
You doe not mean to ride Gentlemen?
Faith let me end it for you Gallants: you shall be his
Countenance, and he your Resolution.
Troth that's pretty: how say you Cavalier, shalt be so?
I, I, most voices.
Faith I am eas'ly yielding to any good Impressions:
Then give hands good Resolution.
Mass he cannot say good Countenance now (properly) to
him again.
Yes, by an Ironie.
O sir, the countenance of Resolution should, as hoe's al∣together
grim and unpleasant.
Good hours make Music with your mirth Gen∣tlemen,
and keep time to your humours: how now Carlo?
Monsieur Brisk! many a long look have I extended
for you sir.
Good faith I must crave pardon; I was invited this
morning ere I was out of my bed, by a Beuie of Ladies, to a
Banquet: whence it was almost one of Hercules Labours for me
to come away, but that the respect of my promise did so pre∣uaile
with me: I know they'll take it very ill, especially one
that gave me this Bracelet of her Hair but over night, and
this Pearl another gave me from her forehead, Mary she—
what? are the Writings ready?
I will send my man to know. Sirrah, go you to the
Notaries, and learn if he be ready: leave the Dog sir.
And how does my rare qualified friend Sogliardo? oh
Signior Macilente! by these eyes I saw you not, I had saluted
you sooner else on my troth: I hope sir I may presume upon
you that you will not divulge my late cheek, or disgrace in∣deed
sir.
You may sir.
S'heart hee knows some notorious jest by this Gull,
that he hath him so obsequious.
Monsieur Fastidius, doe you see this fellow there? does
hee not look like a Clown? would you think there's any
thing in him?
Any thing in him? beshrow me, I; the fellow hath a
good ingenious face.
By this Element, hee is an ingenious tall man as ever
swaggerd about London: hee and I call Countenance &amp; Resolution,
but his name is Cavalier Shift.
Cavalier, you knew Signior Clog, that was hanged for the
robbery at Harrow on the hill?
Knew him Sir! why it was hee gave all the directions
for the Action.
How? was it your Project sir?
Pardon me Countenance, you doe me some wrong to
make that public, which I imparted to you in private.
Gods will, here are none but friends Resolution.
That's all one; things of Consequence must have their
respects, where, how, and to whom. Yes sir, he showed him∣self
a true Clog in the Coherence of that affair sir; for
if he had managed matters as they were corroborated to him,
it had been better for him by a forty or fifty score of pounds
sir, and hee himself might have lived (in despite of Fate) to
have fed on Woodcockes with the rest: but it was his heavy
fortunes to sink poor Clog, and therefore talk no more of
him.
why, had hee more Agents then?
O God sir; I, there were some present there, that were
the nine Worthies to him in faith.
I sir, I can satisfy you at more convenient conference:
but (for mine own part) I have now reconciled my self to
other courses, and profess a living out of my other qualities.
Nay, he has left all now (I assure you) and is able to live
like a Gentleman by his Quality. By this Dog, hee has the
most rare gift in Tobacco that ever you knew.
S'heart, hee keeps more ado with this Monster, than
ever Banks did with his Horse, or the Fellow with the Elephant.
Hee will hang out his Picture shortly in a cloth, you
shall see.
O, hee do's manage a quarrel the best that ever you
saw, for Terms and Circumstances.
Good faith Signior (now you speak of a quarrel)
I'll acquaint you with a difference that happened between a
Gallant and my self: sir Puntarvolo, you know him if I should
name him; Signior Luculento.
Luculento! what inauspicious chance interposed it
self betwixt your two loves?
Fai•h sir, the same that sundried Agamemnon and great
Thetis son; but let the cause escape Sir: He sent me a challenge
(mixed with some few braves) which I restored, and in fine wee
met. Now indeed Sir (I must tell you) he did offer at first very
desperately, but without judgement: for look you sir. I cast
my self into this figure: now he, comes violently on, and with∣all
advancing his Rapier to strike, I thought to have took his
arm (for he had left his whole body to my election, and I was
sure he could not recover his guard) Sir, I mist my purpose in
his arm, rasht his doublet sleeve, ran him close by the left
cheek, and through his hair: He again lights me here, I had
a gold Cable hatband then new come up, (which I wore a∣bout
a murray French Hat I had) cuts my Hatband (and yet it
was Massy, gold-Smithes work) cuts my brims, which by
good fortune (being thick embroidered with gold twist, and
Spangles) disappointed the force of the blow: Nevertheless it
grazed on my shoulder, takes me away six purls of an
Italian cut-worke Band I wore, cost me three pounds in the
exchange but three days before.
This was a strange encounter.
Nay you shall hear sir, with this wee both fell out
and breathed: Now (upon the second •igne of his assault) I
betook me to the former manner of my defence; hee (on
the other side) abandoned his body to the same danger as
before, and follows me still with blows. But I (being loath
to take the deadly advantage that lay before me of his left
side) made a kind of stramazoun, ran him up to the hilts, through
the Doublet, through the Shirt, and yet mist the skin. He
(making a reverse blow) false upon my embossed girdle (I had
thrown off the hangers a little before) strikes off a skirt of a
thick laced Satin Doublet I had (lined with some four Taffa∣taes)
cuts of two panes embroidered with Pearl, rents through
the drawings out of Tyss•w, enters the linings, and skips the
flesh.
I wonder he speaks not of his wrought Shirt.
Here (in the opinion of mutual damage) we paused:
but (ere I proceed) I must tell you Signior, that (in this last
encounter) not having leisure to put off my silver Spurs,
one of the rowels caught hold of the ruffle of my Boot, and
(being Spanish leather, and subject to tear) overthrows
me, rends me two pair of silk stockings (that I put on being
somewhat a raw morning, a Peach colour and another) and
strikes me some half inch d•epe into the side of the Calfe; He
(seeing the blood come) presently takes horse and away. I (ha∣uing
bound up my wound with a piece of my wrought
Shirt)
O comes it there?
Rid after him, and (lighting at the court gate both to∣gether)
embraced and marched hand in hand up into the Pre∣sense.
Well, by this we can guess what apparel the Gentle∣man
wore.
Before God it was a designment begun with much reason∣lution,
maintained with as much prowess, and ended with
more humanity. How now, what says he?
The Notary• says hee is ready sir, he stays but your
VVorships pleasure.
Come wee will go to him Monsieur. Gentlemen
shall wee entreat you to be witnesses.
You shall entreat me sir, come Resolution.
I follow you good Countenance.
Come Signior, come, come.
O, that there should be fortune
To cloth these men, so naked in desert,
And that the just Storm of a wretched life,
Beats'hem not ragged for their wretched souls,
And since as fruitless, even as black as coals.
Why but Signior, how comes it that Fungoso appeared
not with his sisters intelligence to Brisk.
Mary long of the evil Angels that she gave him,
who have indeed tempted the good simple youth to foal∣low
the tail of the Fashion, and neglect the imposition of
his friends. Behold here hee comes, very VVorshipfully atten∣ded,
and with good variety.
Gramercy good Shoe-maker, I'll put too strings
my self.
Now Sir, let me see, what must you have for this Hat?
Here's the bill, sir.
How doest become me, well?
Excellent Sir, as ever you had any Hat in your
life.
Nay faith Sir, the Hat's as good as any man in this
town can serve you. And will maintain Fashion as long,
ne'er trust me for a great else.
Do's it apply well to my suit?
Exceeding well sir.
How lik'st thou my suit Haberdasher?
By my troth sir it is very rarely well made, I never saw
a suit sit better I can tell on.
Nay, we have no Art to please our friends, we.
Here Haberdasher tell this same.
Good faith sir, it makes you have an excel∣lent
body.
Nay (believe me) I think I have as good a body in
cloths as another.
You lack points to bring your apparel toge∣there.
I'll have points anon: how now? is it right?
Faith sir it is too little, but upon farther hopes. Good
morrow to you sir.
Farewell good Haberdasher, well now moister Smp let
me see your bill.
Me thinks he discharges his followers too thick,
O therein he faucily imitates some Great man. I war∣rant
you though he turns off them, he keeps this
Taylor in place of a Page to follow him still.
This Bill is very reasonable in faith, hark you my∣ster
Snip. Troth sir I am not altogether so well furnished at this
present, as I could wish I were: but—If you'll doe me the fa∣uour
to take part in hand, you shall have all I have by Iesu.
Sir—
And but give me credit for the rest, till the begin∣ning
of the next Term.
O •ord sir—
Before God and by this light I'll pay you to the vt∣most,
and acknowledge my self very deeply engaged to you
by this hand.
Why how much have you there Sir?
Marry I have here four Angels, and fifteen shil∣lings
of White money, it's all I have as'hope to be saved.
You will not fail me at the next Term with the
rest.
No and I doe, pray God I bee hanged. Let me never
breath again upon this mortal Stage, as the Philosopher
calls it. By this air, and (as I am a Gentleman) I'll hold.
He were an yron-hearted fellow in my judgement,
that would not credit him upon these monstrous
others.
Well sir, I'll not stick with any Gentleman for a
trifle: you know what it is remains?
I sir, and I give you thanks in good faith, O God how
happy am I made in this good fortune. Well, now I'll go
seek out Monsieur Brisk. Gods so, I have forgot Ribbon
for my shoes; and points. S'lid what lucke's this? how shall I
doe? Moister Snippe, pray let me reduced some two or three shil∣lings
for points and Ribbon, by Iesu I have utterly disfurnisht
my self in the default of memory, pray, le' me bee beholding
to you, it shall come home in the bill believe me.
Faith sir, I can hardly depart with money, but I'll take
up and send you by my boy presently. What coloured
Ribbon would you have?
What you shall think meet i'your judgement Sir to
my suit.
Well, I'll send you some presently.
And points too sir?
And points too sir.
Good Lord how shall I study to deserve this kindness
of you sir. Pray let your youth make hast, for I should have
done a business an hour since, that I doubt I shall come too
late. Now in good truth I am exceeding proud of my fut.
Do you observe the plunges that this poor Gallant
is put too (Signior) to purchase the Fashion.
I, and to be still a Fashion behind with the world, that's
the sport.
Stay: O here they come from sealed and delivered.
Well now my whole venture is forth, I will resolve to
depart shortly.
Faith sir Puntaruolo go to the Court, and take lea•e of
the Ladies first.
I care not if it bee this afternoons labour. Where is
Carlo?
Here he comes.
Faith Gallants, I am persuading this Gentleman to
turn Courtier, he is a man of fair Revenue, and his estate will
bear the charge well, besides for his other gifts of the mind,
or so, why, they are as Nature lent him 'hem, pure, simple, with∣out
any Artificial drug or mixture of these two threadbare beg∣gerly
qualities, Learning and Knowledge, and therefore the more
accommodate and Gen•in. Now for the life it self—
O, the most Celestial, and full of wonder and de∣light
that can bee imagined Signior, beyond all thought and
apprehension of Pleasure. A man lives there in that divine
Rapture, that he will think himself in the third Heaven for the
time, and loose all sense of Mortality whatsoever; when hee
shall behold such glorious (and almost immortal) beauties,
hear such Angelical and Harmonious voices, discourse with
such flowing and Ambrosian spirits, whose wits as sudden as
Lightning, and humorous as Nectar; Oh: it makes a man all
Quintessence and Flame, and lifts him up (in a moment) to the ve∣rye
Crystal Crown of the sky, where (hovering in the strēgth
of his Imagine•tion) he shall behold all the delights of the Hasp∣rides,
the Insulae Fortunate, Atones gardens, Tempe, or what else
(confined within the amplest verge of Poesy) to bee mere Um∣bra,
and imperfect Figures, conferred with the most essential
felicity of your Court.
Well this ENCOMION was not extemporal, it came
too perfectly off.
Besides Sir, you shall never need to go to a hothouse,
you shall sweat there with courting your mistress, or loosing
your money at Primero, as well as in all the Stoues in Flaunders.
Mary this sir, you must ever be sure to carry a good strong per∣fume
about you, that your mistress Dog may smell you out
amongst the rest; and (in making love to her) never fear to
be out: for you may have a pipe of Tobacco, or a base Viol shall
hang of the wall of purpose, will put you in presently. The
Tricks your Resolution has taught you in Tobacco, (the VVhiffe,
and those sleights) will stand you in very good Ornament
there?
I, to some perhaps: but, and hee should come to
my Mistress with Tobacco (this Gentleman knows) she 'ld
reply upon him in faith. Oh (by this bright sun) she has the
most acute, ready, and facetious wit, that—tut there's no
spirit able to stand her. You can report it Signior, you have
seen her?
Then can he report no less out of his judgement, I as∣sure
him.
Troth I like her well enough, but shoe's too selfe-con∣ceited
me thinks.
I indeed, shoe's a little too selfe-conceited, and it were
not for that Humour, she were the most to bee admired Lady in
the world.
Indeed it is a Humour that takes from her other excel∣lencies.
Why it may easily bee made to forsake her in my
thought.
Easily Sir? then are all impossibilities easy.
You conclude too quick upon me Signior, what will
you say if I make it so perspicuously appear now, that your
self shall confess nothing more possible.
Marry I will say, I will both applaud you, and admire you
for it.
And I will second him.
Why I'll show you Gentlemen, Carlo come hither.
Good faith I have a great Humour to the Court, what
thinks my Resolutions? shall I adventure?
Troth Countenance, as you please; the Place is a place of
good Reputation and Capacity.
O, my tricks in Tobacco (as Carlo says) will show excel∣lent
there.
Why you may go with these Gentlemen now, and
see fashions; and after, as you shall see Correspondence.
You say true. You will go with me Resolution?
I will meet you Countenance, about three or four of
Clock, but, to say to go with you I cannot, for (as I am Ap∣ple
Iohn) I am to go before the Cocatrice you saw this morning,
and therefore pray, present me excused good Countenance.
Farewell good Resolution, but fail not to meet.
As I live.
Admirably excellent.
If you can but persuade Sogliardo to the Court, there's
all now.
O let me alone, that's my task:
Now by Iesu Macilente, it 's aboue measure excellent:
twill bee the only courtly exploit that ever proved Courtier
ingenious.
Upon my soul it puts the Lady quite out of her Hue∣more,
and we shall laugh with judgement.
Come, the Gentleman was of himself resolved to go
with you, before I moved it.
Why then Gallants, you two and Carlo go before to
prepare the jest: Sogliardo and I will come some while after
you.
Pardon me, I am not for the Court.
That's true: Carlo comes not at the Court indeed well,
you shall leave it to the faculty of Monsieur Brisk, and my
self; upon our lives wee will manage it happily. Carlo
shall bespeak supper at the Meter against wee come back:
where we will meet, and dimple our cheeks with laughter at
the success.
I, but will you all promise to come.
My self shall manfrede it for them: he that fails, let
his Reputation lie under the lash of thy tongue.
Gods so', look who comes here.
What, Nephew?
Uncle, God save you; did you see a Gentleman, one
Monsieur Brisk? a Courtier, he goes in such a Suit as I doe.
Here is the Gentleman Nephew, but not in such a Suit.
Another Suit!
How now Nephew?
Would you speak to me Sir?
I, when he has recovered himself: poor Poll.
Some Rosa-•olis.
How now Signior?
I am not well Sir.
Why this it is, to dog the Fashion.
Nay come Gentlemen, remember your affairs; his
disease is nothing but the Flux of Apparel.
Sirs, return to the lodging, keep the Cat safe; I'll
be the Dogs Guardian my self.
Nephew, will you go to the Court with vs; these Gen∣tlemen
and I are for the Court: nay be not so Melancholy.
By Gods lid I think no man in Christendom has that
rascally fortune that I have.
Faith your Suit is well enough Signior.
Nay, not for that I protest; but I had an errand to Mon∣sieur
Fastidius, and I have forgot it.
Why go along to the Court with vs, and remember
it, come. Gentlemen, you three take one Boat, and Sogliardo
and I will take another: we shall be there instantly.
Content: good Sir vouchsafe vs your pleasance.
Farewell Carlo; remember.
I warrant you: would I had one of Kemps shoes to
throw after you.
Good Fortune will close the eyes of our jest, fear
not: and we shall frolic.
This Macilente Signior begins to bee more sociable on a
sudden me thinks, than he was before, there 's some Portent
in it, I believe.
O hoe's a fellow of a strange Nature. Now do's hee (in
this calm of his Humour) plot and store up a world of malicious
thoughts in his brain, till he is so full with 'hem, that you shall
see the very Torrent of his Envy break forth, and against
the course of all their affections oppose it self so violently,
that you will almost have wonder to think how it is possible
the current of their Dispositions shall receive so quick and
strong an alteration.
I marry sir, this is that on which my Expectation has
dwelt all this while: for I must tell you Signior (though I was
loath to interrupt the Scene) yet I made it a question in mine
own private discourse, how hee should properly call it, Every
man out of his Humour, when I saw all his Actors so strongly pur∣sue
and continue their Humours?
Why therein his Art appears most full oflustre, and
approaches nearest the life, especially when in the flame and
height of their Humours they are laid flat, it fills the eye better,
and with more contentment. How tedious a sight were it to
behold a proud exalted tree lopped and cut down by degrees,
when it might be field in a moment? and to set the Axe to it, be∣fore
it came to that pride and fullness, were as not it have it
grow.
Well I shall long till I see this fall you talk of.
To help your longing, Signior, let your imagination
be swifter than a pair of Oars, and by this, suppose Puntarvo∣lo,
Brisk, Fungoso, and the Dog, arrived at the court gate, and go∣ing
up to the great chamber. Macilente and Sogliardo, wee 'le
leave them on the water till Possibility and Natural means
may land 'hem. Here come the Gallants, now prepare your
Expectation.
Come Lordings. Signior you are sufficiently instructed.
Who I sir?
No, this Gentleman. But stay, I take thought how to
bestow my dog, he is no competent attēdant for the Presence.
Mass that 's true in deed knight, you must not carry
him into the Presence.
I know it, and I (like a dull beast) forgot to bring one
of my Cormorants to attend me.
Why you're best leave him at the Porters lodge.
Not so: his worth is too well known amongst them, to
be forth-comming.
Slight, how'll you doe then?
I must leave him with one that is ignorant of his qual∣tie,
if I will have him to be safe. And see; Here comes one that
will carry coals, Ergo, will hold my Dog. My honest friend,
may I commit the tuition of this Dog to thy prudent care?
You may if you please sir.
Pray thee let me find thee here at my return: it shall
not be long, till I will Ease thee of thy employment, and Please
thee. Forth Gentles.
Why, but will you leave him with so slight command,
and infuse no more charge upon the fellow?
Charge? no, there wear no policy in that; that were
to let him know the value of the Gem he holds, and so, to •emp
frail nature against her disposition. No, pray thee let thy Ho∣nestie
be sweet and short.
Yes sir.
But hark you Gallants, and chiefly Monsieur Brisk•
When wee come in eye-shot or presence of this Lady, let
not other matters carry vs from our Project: but (if wee can)
single her forth to some place.
I warrant you.
And be not too sudden, but let the devise induce it
self with good Circumstance: on.
Is this the way? good truth here be fine hangings.
Honesty, Sweet and Short? mary it shall sir, doubt
you not: for even at this instant if one would give me twenty
pounds, I would not deliver him; there's for the Sweet: but
now, if any man come offer me but two-pence, he shall have
him; there's for the Short now. Sbloud, what a mad Humorous
Gentleman is this to leave his Dog with me: I could run
away with him now and he were worth any thing: well, I pray
God send him quickly again.
Come on Signior, now prepare to Court this All-wit∣ted
Lady, most Naturally and like your self.
Faith and you say the word, I'll begin to her in Tobacco.
O, fie on it. no: you shall begin with, How does my sweet
Lady; or, Why are you so melancholy Madame? though she be very
merry, it's all one: be sure to kiss your hand often enough;
pray for her health, and tell her, how more than most fair she is:
Screw your face it one side thus, &amp; Protest; let her fleer and
look a skaunce, and hide her Teeth with her Fan, when
she laughs a fit, to bring her into more matter; that's no∣thing:
you must talk forward (though it be without sense, so
it be without blushing) it is most Courtlike and well.
But shall I not use Tobacco at all?
O, by no means, twill but make your breath suspe∣cted;
and that you use it only to confound the rankenesse of
that.
Nay, I'll be advised sir by my friends.
Gods my life, see where sir Punters Dog is.
I would the Gentleman would return for his foal∣lower
here, I'll leave him to his fortunes else.
S'heart, it were the only true jest in the world to poi∣son
him now: ha? by Gods will I'll doe it, if I could but get
him of the fellow. Signior Sogliardo, walk aside, and think
upon some devise to entertain the Lady with.
So I doe sir.
How now mine honest friend? whose Dog-keeper art
thou?
Dog-keeper sir? I hope I scorn that in faith.
Why? dost thou not keep a Dog?
Sir, now I doe, and now I doe not: I think this be
Sweet and Short: make me his Dog-keeper?
This is excellent aboue expectation: nay stay sir,
you'd be travailing; but I'll give you a Dram shall shor∣ten
your voyage: here: so sir, I'll be bold to take my leave of
you: now to the Turks Court in the Devils name, for you shall
never go on Gods name.  Sogliardo, come.
I have 't in faith now, will sting it.
Take heed you leese it not Signior, ere you come
there: preserve it.
How like you this first exploit of his?
O, a piece of true Envy, but I expect the issue of the
other devise.
Here they come, will make it appear.
Why I thought Sir Puntarvolo, you had been gone your
Voyage?
Dear, and most Amiable Lady, your Divine Beau∣ties
doe bind me to those Offices, that I cannot depart when I
would.
It is most Courtlike spoken sir; but how might we doe
to have a sight of your Dog and Cat?
His Dogge's in the Court, Lady.
And not your Cat? how dare you trust her behind you
Sir?
Troth Madame she hath sore eyes, and she doth
keep her Chamber: marry I have left her under sufficient
guard: there are two of my Hinds to attend her.
Isle give you some Water for her eyes: when do you
go sir?
Certes sweet Lady, I know not.
He doth stay the rather Madame, to present your Acute
judgement with so Courtly, and well-Parted a Gentleman, as
yet your Ladyship hath never seen.
VVhat's hee, gentle Monsieur Brisk? not that Gen∣tleman?
No Lady, this is a Kinsman of Justice Silence.
Pray sir, give me leave to report him: hoe's a Gentle∣man
(Lady) of that rare and admirable •acultie, as (I protest)
I know not his like in Europe: he is exceedingly Valiant, an ex∣cellent
Scholar, and so exactly travailed, that hee is able in
discourse, to deliver you a Model of any Princes Court in the
world: speaks the Languages with that purity of Phrase, and
facility of Accent, that it breeds astonishment: his Wit, the
most Exuberant, and (aboue wonder) pleasant, of all that ever
entered the concave of this care.
It is most true Lady; mary he is no such excellent pro∣per
man.
His Travails have changed his complexion, Madam.
O Sir Puntarvolo, you must think every man was not
borne to have my Servant Briskes feature.
But that which transcends all, Lady; he doth so Peer∣loosely
imitate any manner of person for Gesture, Action, Pas∣zion,
or what ever—
I, especially a Rustic or a Clown Madam, that it is
not possible for the sharpest-sighted wit (in the world) to dis∣corn
any sparks of the Gentleman in him, when he does it.
O Monsieur Brisk, be not so Tyrannous to confine all
VVits within the compass of your own: Not find the sparks
of a Gentleman in him, if he be a Gentleman?
No in truth (sweet Lady) I believe you cannot.
Doe you believe so? Why I can find sparks of a Gen∣tleman
in you Sir.
I, he is a Gentleman Madam, and a Reveller.
Indeed I think I have seen your Ladyship at our Re∣uels.
Like enough sir: but would I might see this wonder
you talk of: may one have a sight of him for any reasonable
sum?
Yes Madam, he will arrive presently.
What, and shall we see him Clown it?
I faith (sweet Lady) that you shall: see here he comes.
This is hee; pray observe him Lady.
Beshrew me, he Clowns it properly indeed.
Nay, mark his Courtship.
How does my sweet Lady; hot and moist? Beautiful and
lusty? ha?
Beautiful and it please you sir, but not lusty.
O ho Lady; it pleases you to say so in truth: and how
does my sweet Lady; in health? Bonaroba, quaeso? que Novelles?
que Novelles? Sweet creature.
O excellent: why Gallants, is this hee cannot be
Deciphered? they were very bleare-witted in faith that could
not discern the Gentleman in him.
But doe you, in earnest Lady?
Doe I sir? why if you had any true Court-judgement
in the carriage of his eye, and that inward power that forms
his countenance, you might perceive his counterfeiting as
clear as the noon day: Alas; Nay if you would have tried my
Wit indeed, you should never have told me hee was a Gen∣tleman,
but presented him for a true Clown indeed; and then
have seen if I could have Deciphered him.
Before God, her Ladyship says true (Knight:) but does
he not affect the Clown most naturally, Mistress?
O, she cannot but affirm that, out of the Bounty
of her Judgment.
Nay out of doubt hee does well, for a Gentleman to
imitate; but I warrant you, he becomes his Natural carriage
of the Gentleman, much better than his Clownerie.
It is strange in truth, her Ladyship should see so far
into him.
I, is it not.
Faith as easily as may bee: not Decipher him, quoth
you?
Good sadness, I wonder at it.
Why, has she Deciphered him, Gentlemen?
O most miraculously, and beyond Admiration.
Is it possible?
She hath given most infallible signs of the Gentle∣man
in him, that's certain.
Why Gallants, let me laugh at you a little: was this
your device, to try my judgement in a Gentleman?
Nay Lady, doe not scorn vs, though you have this
gift of Perspicacie aboue others: What if he should be no Gen∣tleman
now, but a Clown indeed Lady?
How think you of that? would not your Ladyship be
out of your Humour?
O, but she knows it is not so.
What if he were not a man, ye may as well say? nay
if your VVorships could Gull me so indeed, you were wiser
than you are taken for.
In good faith Lady, hee is a very perfect Clown, both
by Father and Mother: that I'll assure you.
O Sir, you are very pleasurable.
Nay, do but look on his Hand, and that shall resolve
you: Look you Lady, what a Palm here is.
Tut, that was with holding the Plough.
The Plough! did you discern any such thing in him
Madame?
Faith no, she saw the Gentleman as bright as at noon∣day
she: she deciphered him at first.
Troth I am sorry your Ladyships sight should be so
suddenly struck.
O, you're goodly Beagles!
What, is she gone?
Nay stay sweet Lady; Que Novelles, Que Novelles.
Out, you fool you.
Shoe's out of her Humour in faith.
Nay, let's follow it while it is hot Gentlemen.
Come, on mine Honour we'll make her blush in the
Presence: my spline is great with laughter.
Your laughter will be a child of a feeble life I believe
sir. Come Signior, your looks are too dejected me thinks:
why mix you not mirth with the rest?
By Gods will this Suit frets me at the Soul. I'll have
it altered to morrow sure.
I am come to the Court to meet with my Countenance
Sogliardo: poor men must be glad of such Countenance, when
they can get no better. Well, Need may insult upon a man, but
it shall never make him despair of Consequence: The world
will say, it is base; tush, base! it is base to live under the earth,
not base to live aboue it, by any means.
The poor Lady is most miserably out of her Humour
in faith.
There was never so witty a jest broken at the Tilt, of
all the Court wits christened.
O, this applause taints it foully.
I think I did my part in Courting. O Resolution!
Aye me, my Dog.
Where is hee?
Gods precious, go seek for the fellow, good Signior.
Here, here I left him.
Why none was here when we came in now, but Ca∣ualier
Shift, enquire of him.
Did you see Sir Puntarvolos Dog here Cavalier, since
you came?
His Dog sir? he may look his Dog sir; I see none of
his Dog sir.
Upon my life hee hath stolen your Dog sir, and been
hired to it by some that have ventured with you; you may guess
by his peremptory answers.
Not unlike; for he hath been a notorious thief by his
own confession. Sirrah, whore's my Dog?
Charge me with your Dog sir? I have none of your Dog
Sir.
Villain, thou lie.
Lie sir? S'blood you're but a man sir.
Rogue and Thief, restore him.
Take heed sir Puntarvolo what you doe; he will bear no
coals I can tell you (of my word.)
This is rare.
It's mar'le he stabs you not: by this Light, he hath stabbed
forty for forty times less matter, I can tell you, of my know∣ledge.
I will make thee stoup, thou Abject.
Make him stoup sir! Gentlemen pacify him or he will
be killed.
Is he so tall a man?
Tall a man? if you love his life stand betwixt 'hem▪
make him stoup!
My Dog Villain, or I will hang thee: thou hast con∣fest
robberies, and other Felonious acts to this Gentleman thy
Countenance.
I'll bear no witness.
And without my Dog I will hang thee, for them.
What? kneel to thine enemy?
Pardon me good sir; God is my Judge I never did
Robbery in all my life.
O sir Puntarvolo, your Dog lies giving up the ghost in
the wood-yard.
S'blood is he not dead yet?
O, my Dog borne to disastrous fortune! pray you
conduct me sir.
How? did you never doe any robbery in your life?
O this is good: so he swore sir.
I, I heard him. And did you swear true sir?
I (as God shall have part of my soul Sir) I ne'er robed
any man I; never stood by the high way side sir, but only said
so, because I would get my self a name &amp; be counted a tall mā.
Now out base Viliaco: Thou my Resolution? I thy Count∣nonce?
By this light Gentlemen, he hath confessed to me the most
inexorable company of Robberies, and damned himself that
he did 'hem; you never heard the like: out skoundrell out,
follow me no more I command thee: out of my •ight, go,
hence, speak not: I will not hear thee; away Camouccio.
O, how I do feed upon this now, and fat my self? here
were a couple unexpectedly dishumor'd: well, by this time I
hope sir Puntarvolo and his Dog are both out of Humour to tra∣uaile:
nay Gentlemen, why do you not seek out the Knight,
and comfort him? our Supper at the Mitre must of necessity
hold to night, if you love your Reputations.
Before God I am so Melancholy for his Dogs disaster,
but I'll go.
Faith and I may go too, but I know I shall be so Melan∣cholly.
Tush, Melancholy? you must forget that now, and re∣member
you lie at the mercy of a Fury: Carlo will rack your
sinews asunder, and rail you to dust if you come not.
O then their fear of Carlo be like, makes them hold
their meeting.
I, here he comes: conceive him but to b•e entered
the Mitre, and it is enough.
Holla: where be these Shot-sharkes?
By and by: you're welcome good Master Buffone.
VVhere's George? call me George hither quickly.
What wine please you have Sir? I'll draw you that's
neat Master Buffone.
Away Neophite, doe as I bid; bring my dear George to
me: Mass here he comes.
Welcome Master Carlo.
VVhat's Supper ready, George?
I sir, almost: will you have the cloth laid, Master
Carlo?
O, what else: are none of the Gallants come yet?
None yet sir.
Stay, take me with you George: let me have a good fat
Loin of Pork laid to the fire presently.
It shall sir.
And withal, hear you? draw me the biggest shaft you
have out of the But you wot of: away, you know my meaning
George, quick.
Done sir.
Sbloud, I never hungered so much for thing in my life,
as I doe to know our Gallants success at the Court: now is
that lean Bald-rib Macilente, that salt Villain, plotting some
mischievous devise, and lies a soaking in their frothy Humours
like a dry crust, till •e has drunk 'hem all up: could the Ke•ks
but hold vp's eyes at other men's happiness in any reasonable
proportion, S'lid the •lave were to be loved next Heaven, a∣above
Honour, Wealth, rich Fare, Apparel, VVenches, all the
delights of the Belly, and the Groin, whatever.
Here Master Carlo.
Is•t right, Boy?
I sir, I assure you it is right.
Well said my dear George, depart: Come, my small
Gymblet, you in the false scabbard, away;
so: Now to you sir Burgomaster, let's taste of your Bounty.
What, will he deal upon such quantities of Wine
alone.
You shall perceive that sir.
I marry sir, here's purity▪ O George, I could bite off
thy nose for this now: Sweet Rogue, hee has drawn Nectar,
the very Soul of the Grape: I'll wash my temples with some
on it presently, and drink some half a score draughts; twill
heat the Brame, kindle my Imagination, I shall talk nothing
but Crackers and Fire-worke to night. So sir; Please you to
be here sir, and I here: So.
This is worth the observation, Signior.
Now sir, here's to you; and I present you with
so much of my love.
I take it kindly from you Sir.  And will return
you the like proportion: but withal sir, r•membring the mer∣rye
night we had at the Countesses; you know where sir.
By Iesu you ••ce put me in mind now of a very noses∣sarie
office, which I will propose in your pledge sir: The health
of that Honourable Countess, and the sweet Lady that sat by
her sir.
2 I do vail to it with reverence.  2. And now Signior,
with these Ladies, I'll be bold to mix the health of your Di∣vine
Mistress. 1.• Doe you know her sir? 2 O Lord sir, I, and
in the respectful memory and mention of her, I could wish
this Wine were the most 〈◊〉 is drug in the world.
1 Good faith sir, you do honour me 〈◊〉 exceedingly.
Whom should he personate in this, Signior?
Faith I know not sir, observe, observe him.
2 If it were the basest filth or mud that runs in the
channel, I am bound to pledge it by God sir.  And
now sir, here is again a replenished bowl sir, which I will reci∣procally
return upon you to the health of the Count Frugal. 1 The Count Frugales health sir? I'll pledge it on my knees by
Iesu. 2 Will you sir? Isle drink it on my knees then, by the
Lord.
Why this is strange.
Have you heard a better drunken Dialogue?
2 Nay, do me right Sir. 1 So I doe in good faith. 2 Good
faith you doe not; mine was fuller. 1 Why by Ie•u it was
not. 2 By Iesu it was, and you doe lie. 1 Lie sir. 2 I Sir.
1 S'wounds you Rascal. 2 O, come, stab if you have a
mind to it. 1 Stab? dost thou think I dare not? [In his
owne person.] Nay, I beseech you Gentlemen, what means
this; nay look, for shame respect your Reputations.
Why how now Carlo; what Humor's this?
O my good Mischief, art thou come? where are the
•est? where are the rest?
Faith three of our Ordinance are burst.
Burst? how comes that?
Faith overcharged, overcharged.
But did not the train hold?
O yes, and the poor Lady is irrecouerably blown up.
Why, but which of the Munition is miscarried? ha?
Imprimis, Sir Puntarvolo: next, the Countenance, and Re∣solution.
How? how for these love of God?
Troth the Resolution is proved Recreant; the Count∣nonce
hath changed his Copy; and the Passionate Knight, is
shedding Funeral tears over his departed Dog.
VVhat's his Dog dead?
Poisoned it is thought: mary how, or by whom, that's
left for some Cunning woman he•re of the Banke-side to re∣solve:
For my part, I know nothing, more than that wee are
like to have an exceeding Melancholy Supper of it.
S'life, and I had purposed to be extraordinarily merry:
I had drunk off a good Preparative of old Sack here: but
will they come, will they come?
They will assuredly come: marry Carlo (as thoulou'st
me) run over 'hem all freely to night, and especially the
Knight; spare no Sulphurous jest that may come out of that
sweaty Forge of thine, but ply 'hem with all manner of Shot,
Minion, Saker, Culverine, or any thing what thou wilt.
I warrant thee my dear Case of Petrionels, so I stand not
in dread of thee, but that thou'lt second me.
Why my good Germane Tipster, I will.
What George. Lomtero, Lomtero, &amp;c.
Did you call, Master Carlo?
More N•ctar, George: Lomtero, &amp;c.
Your meat's ready sir and your company were come.
Is the Loin a Pork enough?
I Sir, it is enough?
Pork? S'heart what dost thou with such a greasy
Dish; I think thou dost Varnish thy face with the fat on it, it
looks so like a Glew-pot.
True, my Raw-bon'd Rogue: and if thou would
farce thy lean Ribs with it too, they would not (like ragged
Lathes) rub out so many Dublets as they do: but thou know
not a good Dish, thou. O, it's the only nourishing meat in the
world: No marvel though that saucy stub•rne Genera∣tion
the Jaws, were forbidden it: for what would they have
done, well pampered with fat Pork, that• durst murmur
at their maker out of Girl•ke and Onions. S•loot fed with
it, the 〈◊〉 strummell pa•cht, Goggle-ey'd Grumble do∣rios,
would have Gigantomachiz'd. Well said my sweet George,
fill, fill.
This savours too much of Profanation.
O servetur ad imum, qualis ab incepto processerit, &amp; sibo con∣stet.
The necessity of his vain compels a tolleratiō:
for, bar this, and dash him out of Humour before his
time.
It is an Axiom in Natural Philosophy, What comes no∣rest
the Nature of that it feeds, converts quicker to nourishment, and doth
sooner essentiate. Now nothing in Flesh and Entrails, assimulates
or resembles Man more, than a Hog or Swine.
True; and hee (to requite their curtsy) oftentimes
doffed off his own Nature, and puts on theirs; as when hee
becomes as churlish as a Hog, or as drunk as a Sow: but to
your conclusion.
Marry I say, nothing resembling Man more than a
Swine, it follows, nothing can be more nourishing: for in∣deed
(but that it abhors from our nice Nature) if we fed one
upon another, we should shoot up a great deal faster, &amp; thri•e
much better: I refer me to your Long-la•e Cannibals, or such
like: but since it is so contrary; Pork, Pork; is your only
feed.
I take it your Devil be of the same Diet; hee would
ne'er have desired to been incorporated into Swine else. O here
comes the Melancholy mess: vpō 'hem Carlo, charge, charge.
Before God sir Puntarvolo, I am sorry for your heaviness;
Body a me, a shrewd mischance: why had you no Unicorn
horn, nor B•zars stone about you? ha?
Sir, I would request you be silent.
Nay, to him again.
Take comfort good Knight, if your Cat ha'recouered
her Cataract, fear nothing; your Dogs mischance may be
helped.
Say how (sweet Carlo) for so God mend me, the poor
Knights mons draw me into fellowship of his misfortunes.
But be not discouraged good sir Puntarvolo, I am content your
adventure shall be performed upon your Cat.
I believe you Musk-cod, I believe you, for rather
than thou would make present repaimēt, thou would take
it upon his own bare return from Callice.
Nay Gods life, hee'ld be content (so he were well •id
out of his company) to pay him five for one at his next me∣ting
him in Paules. But for your Dog, sir Punter, if he be not
out-right dead, there is a friend of mine a Quack-saluer, shall
put life in him again, that's certain.
O no, that comes too late.
Gods precious Knight, will you suffer this?
Drawer; get me a Candle and hard wax presently.
I, and bring up Supper; for I am so Melancholy.
Ah Signior, whore's your Resolution?
Resolution! hang him Rascal: O Carlo, if you love me doe
not mention him.
Why, how so? how so?
O the arrant'st Crocodile that ever Christian was acquain∣ted
with. By Iesu, I shall think the worse of Tobacco while I
live for his sake: I did think him to be as tall a man—
Nay Buffone, the Knight, the Knight.
Sblood, hee looks like an Image carved out of Box,
full of knots: his Face is (for all the world) like a Dutch purse
with the mouth downward; his beard's the Tassels: and hee
walks (let me see) as Melancholy as one of the Masters side
in the Counter. Doe you hear sir Punter?
Sir, I doe en•reat you no more, but enjoin you to
silence, as you affect your peace.
Nay but dear Knight understand (here are none but
friends, &amp; such as wish you well) I would have you do this now;
Fleam your Dog presently (but in any case keep the head) &amp;
stuff his skin well with straw, as you see these dead monsters
at Bartholomew fair.
I shall be sudden I tell you.
Or if you like not that sir, get me somewhat a less dog
and clap into the skin; here 's a slave about the town here, a
Jew, one Yohan; or a fellow that makes Periwigs will glow it on
artificially, it shall ne'er bee discerned; besides, twill be so much
the warmer for the Hound to travel in you know.
Sir Puntarvolo, Stead can you be so patient?
Or thus Sir: you may have (as you come through Ger∣many)
a Familiar for little or nothing shall turn it self into the
shape of your Dog, or any thing (what you will) for certain
hours: Gods my life knight, what do you mean? you'll offer
no violence, will you? Hold, hold.
Sbloud you slave, you Bandog you.
As you love God, stay the enraged knight, Gentle∣men.
By my knighthood, hee that stirs in his rescue, dies.
Drawer be gone.
Murder, murder, murder.
I, are you howling, you VVolfe? Gentlemen, as you
tender your lives, suffer no man to enter, till my revenge bee
perfect. Sirha Buffone, lie down; make no exclamations, but
down; down you Cur, or I will make thy blood flow on my
Rapier hilts:
Sweet knight hold in thy fury, and before God I'll ho∣nor
thee more than the Turk do's Mahomet.
Down (I say.) Whose there?
Here's the Constable, open the doors.
Good Macilente.
Open no door, if the Adalantado of Spain were here,
he should not enter: On, help me with the light, Gentlemen:
you knock in vain sir officer.
Et tu Brute.
Sirha close your lips, or I will drop it in thine eyes by
heaven.
O, O.
Open the door, or I will break it open.
Nay good Constable have patience a little, you shall
come in presently, we have almost done.
So; now, are you out of your humour sir. Shift Gentle∣men.
Lay hold upon this gallant, and pursue the rest.
Lay hold on me sir! for what?
Mary for your riot here sir, with the rest of your com∣pinions.
My riot! God's my judge, take heed what you doe;
Carlo did I offer any violence?
O sir, you see he is not in case to answer you, &amp; that
makes you so peremptory.
Peremptory, Shife I appeal to the Drawers, if I did
him any hard measure.
They are all gone, there's none of them will bee laid
any hold on.
Well sir, you are like to answer till the rest can bee
found out.
Sbloud I appeal to George here.
Tut George was not here: away with him to the Counter
sirs. Come sir you were best get your self dressed somewhere.
Good Lord that moister Carlo could not take heed, and
knowing what a Gentleman the knight is if he be angry.
A pox on 'hem, they have left all the meat on our
hands, would they were choked with it for me.
What are they gone sirs.
O here's moister Macilente.
Sirha George do'you see that concealment there? that
Napkin under the Table?
Gods so', Signior Fungoso!
Hoe's a good pawn for the reckoning; be sure you
keep him here, and let him not go away till I come again,
though he offer to discharge all; I'll return presently.
Sirrah, we have a pawn for the Reckoning.
What? of Macilente?
No; look under the Table.
I hope all be quiet now; if I can get but forth of this
street, I care not. Masters, I pray you tell me, is the Constable
gone?
What? Master Fungoso?
VVas't not a good devise the same of me Sirs?
Yes faith; have you been here all this while?
O God I: good sirs look and the coast be clear, I'd
fine be going.
Ell's clear Sir, but the Reckoning; and that you must
clear and pay before you go, I assure you.
I pay? S'light, I eat not a bit since I came into the
house yet.
Why you may when you please sir, it is all ready be∣low that was bespoken.
Bespoken? not by me, I hope?
By you Sir? I know not that: but it was for you and your
company, I am sure.
My company? S'lid I was an invited guest, so I was.
Faith we have nothing to doe with that Sir, they're all
gone but you, and we must be answered; that's the short and
the long on it.
Nay, if you will grow to extremities, my Masters, then
would this Pot, Cup, and all were in my belly, if I have a cross
about me.
What, and have such Apparel? Doe not say so, Sig∣nior,
that mightily discredits your clothes.
By Iesu the Taylor had all my money this morning,
and yet I must be fine to alter my Suit too: good sirs, let me
go, it is Friday night; and in good truth I have no stomach in
the world to eat any thing.
That's no matter so you pay sir.
Pay? Gods light, with what conscience can you ask
me to pay that I never drank for?
Yes sir, I did see you drink once.
By this Cup (which is silver) but you did not, you doe
me infinite wrong, I looked in the pot once indeed, but I
did not drink.
Well sir, if you can satisfy my Moister, it shall be all one to vs. By and by.
Loose not your self now Signior.
Tut sir, you did bear too hard a conceit of me in that,
but I will now make my love to you most transparent, in spite
of any dust of suspicion, that may bee raised to dim it: and
henceforth since I see it is so against your Humour, I will never
labour to persuade you.
Why I thank you Signior, but what's that you tell
me may concern my peace so much?
Faith sir it is thus. Your wives brother Signior Fungoso, being
at supper to night at a Tavern with a sort of Gallants: there
happened some division amongst'hem, and he is left in pawn
for the Reckoning: now if ever you look that time shall pre∣sent
you with a happy occasion to doe your wife some graci∣os
and acceptable service, take hold of this Opportunity, and
presently go and redeem him; for being her brother, and his
credit so amply engaged as no•• it is, when she shall hear
(as he cannot himself, but hee must out of extremity report
it) that you came and offered your self so kindly, and with
that respect of his Reputation, Slut the benefit cannot but
make his dote, and grow mad of your affections.
Now by heaven Macilente, I acknowledge my self ex∣ceedingly
indebted to you, by this kind tender of your love;
and I am sorry to remember that I was ever so rude to neglect
a friend of your worth, bring me shoes and a cloak there, I was
going to bed if you had not come, what Tavern is it?
The Meter sir.
O; why Fido, my shoes. Good faith it cannot but please
her exceedingly.
Come, I mar'le what piece of nightworke you have in
hand no•, that you call for your cloak and your shoes: what, is
this your Pander?
O sweet wife speak lower, I would not he should hear
thee for a world—
Hang him rascal, I cannot abide him for his treachery,
with his wild quicke-set beard there. Whether go you now
with him?
No whether with him dear wife, I go alone to a place,
from whence I will return instantly. Good Macilente acquaint
not her with it by any means, it may come so much the more
accepted, frame some other answer, I'll come back immedi∣italy.
Nay, and I be not worthy to know whether you go, stay
till I take knowledge of your coming back.
Hear you mistress Deliro.
So Sir, and what say you?
Faith Lady, my intents will not deserve this slight re∣spect,
when you shall know'hem.
Your intents? why, what may your intents be for Gods
sake?
Troth the time allows no circumstance Lady, therefore
know, this was but a devise to remove your Husband hence, &amp;
bestow him securely, whilst (with more convenience) I might
report to you a misfortune that hath happened to Monsieur
Brisk; nay comfort sweet Lady. This night (being at supper) a
sort of young Gallants committed a Riot, for the which hee
(only) is apprehended and cari•d to the Counter, where if your
Husband and other Creditors should but have knowledge of
him, the poor Gentleman were undone for ever.
Aye me, that he were.
Now therefore, if you can think upon any present
means for his delivery, doe not forslow it. A bribe to the off∣cer
that committed him, will doe it.
O God Sir, he shall not want for a bribe: pray you, will
you commend me to him, and say I'll visit him presently.
No Lady, I shall do you better service in protracting
your husbands return, that you may go with more safety?
Good truth so you may; farewell good Sir▪ Lord how a
woman may be mistaken in a man? I would have sworn upon
all the Testaments in the world he had not loved moister Brisk.
Bring me my keys there maid: Alas good Gentleman, if all
I have in this earthly world will pleasure him, it shall bee at his
service.
How Macilente sweats in this business, if you mark him?
I, you shall see the true picture of Spite anon, here
comes the Pawn and his Redeemer.
Come Brother, be not discouraged for this man, what?
No truly, I am not discouraged, but I protest to you
Brother I have done imitating any more Gallants either in
purse or apparel, but as shall become a Gentleman for good
carriage or so.
You say well. This is all in the bill here? is it not?
I Sir.
There's your money, tell it: and Brother, I am glad I
met with so good occasion to show my love to you.
I will study to deserve it in good truth, and I live.
What is it right?
I Sir, and I thank you.
Let me have a Capons leg saved, now the reckoning
is paid.
You shall Sir:
VVhere's Signior Deliro?
Here Macilente.
Hark you sir, have you dispatcht this same?
I marry have I.
Well then, I can tell you news, Brisk is in the Clone∣•er.
In the Counter?
It is true Sir, committed for the stir here to night.
Now would I have you send your brother home before, with the
report of this your kindness done him to his sister, which will
so pleasingly possess her, and out of his mouth too, that in the
mean time you may clap your Action on Brisk, and your wife
(being in so happy a mood) cannot entertain it ill by any
means.
It is very true, she cannot indeed, I think.
Think? why 'ts past thought, you shall never meet
the like opportunity, I assure you.
I will doe it. Brother pray you go home before, this Gent.
and I have some private business; and tell my sweet wife, I'll
come presently.
I will Brother.
And Signior, acquaint your sister, how liberally and
out of his bounty, you brother has used you. (Doe you see?)
made you a man of good Reckoning; redeemed that you no∣for
were possessed of, Credit; gave you as Gentlemanlike terms
as might be; found no fault with your coming behind the fa∣shion;
nor nothing.
Nay I am out of those Humours now.
Well, if you be out, keep your distance, and be not
made a Shot-clog no more. Come Signior, let's make hast.
O moister Fastidius, what pity is it to see so sweet
a man as you are, in so sour a place?
As upon her lips do's she mean?
O, this is to be imagined the Counter belike?
Troth fair Lady, it is first the pleasure of the Fates,
and next of the Constable to have it so, but, I am patient, and
indeed comforted the more in your kind visitation.
Nay, you shall bee comforted in me more than this, if
you please Sir. I sent you word by my Brother Sir, that my hus∣band
laid to rest you this morning, I know not whether you re∣ceiu'd
it, or no?
No believe it, sweet Creature, your Brother gave me
no such intelligence.
O the Lord!
But has your husband any such purpose?
O God Moister Brisk, yes: and therefore bee presently
discharged; for if he come with his Actions upon you (Lord de∣liver
you) you are in for one half a score year; he kept a poor
man in Ludgate once, twelve year for sixteen shillings. VVhere's
your keeper, for Gods love call him, let him take a bribe, and
dispatch you, Lord how my heart trembles! here are no spies?
are there?
No sweet mistress, why are you in this passion?
O Christ Moister Fastidius, if you knew how I took up
my husband to day, when he said he would arrest you; and how
I railed at him that persuaded him to it, the Scholar there, (who
on my conscience loves you now) &amp; what care I took to send
you intelligence by my Brother; and how I gave him four So∣ueraignes
for his pains; and now, how I came running out
hither without man or boy with me, so soon as I heard on it;
you'd say, I were in a Passion indeed: your keeper for Gods
sake. O Moister Brisk (as it is in Euphues) Hard is the choice, when one
is compelled either by silence to die with gre•e, or by speaking to live with
shame.
Fair Lady I conceive you, and may this kiss assure
you, that where Adversity hath (as it were) contracted, Pros∣parity
shall not—Gods light your Husband.
O me!
I? is it thus!
Why how now Signior Deliro? has the VVolfe seen
you? ha? hath Gorgons head made marble on you?
Some Planet strike me dead.
Why look you Sir, I told you, you might have suss∣pected
this long before, had you pleased; and ha'sau'd this labour
of Admiration now, and Passion, and such extremities as this
frail lump of Flesh is subject unto. Nay, why doe you not
dote now Signior? Me thinks you should say it were some En∣chantment,
Deceptio visus, or so, ha? if you could persuade your
self it were a dream now, it were excellent: faith try what
you can doe Signior; it may bee your Imagination will bee
brought to it in time, there's nothing impossible.
Sweet Husband?
Out lascivious Strumpet.
What? did you see how ill that stale vain became him
before, of Sweet Wife, and Dear heart? and are you fallen
just into the same now? with Sweet Husband. Away, follow
him, go, keep state, what? Remember you are a woman: turn
impudent: give him not the head, though you go 'him the horns,
Away.
And yet me thinks you should take your leave of Infans-per∣dus
here, your forlorn hope. How now Monsieur Brisk: what?
Friday at night? and in affliction too? and yet your Pulpa∣menta?
your delicate Morsels: I perceive the affection of La∣dies
and Gentlewomen, pursues you wheresoever you go
Monsieur.
Now in good faith (and as I am Gentle) there could not
have come a thing in this world to have distracted me more
than the wrinkled fortunes of this poor Dame.
O yes Sir: I can tell you a thing will distract you
much better, believe it. Signior Deliro has entered three Actions
against you, three Actions Monsieur: mary one of them (I'll
put you in comfort) is but three thousand mark, and the other
two some five thousand pound together, trifles, trifles.
O God, I am undone.
Nay not altogether so Sir, the Knight must have his
hundred pound repaid, that'll help too, and then sixescore
pound for a Diamond: you know where? these be things will
weigh Monsieur; they will weigh.
O Iesu!
What doe you sigh? this it is to kiss the hand of a
Countess, to have his Coach sent for you, to hang Poinards in
Ladies garters, to wear Bracelets of their hair, and for every
one of these great ••uours to give some slight Jewel of five
hundred cro•nes, or so, why it is nothing. Now Monsieur, you
see the plague that treads of the heals of your foppery, well,
go your ways in; Remove your self to the two-penny ward
quickly to save charges, and there set up your rest to spend Sir
Punters hundred pound for him. Away
good Pomander, go.
Why here's a change: Now is my soul at peace,
I am as empty of all Envy now,
As they of Merit to be envied at,
My Humour (like a •lame) no longer lasts
Than it hath stuff to feed it, and their virtue,
Being now raked up in embers of their Folly,
Affords no ampler Subject to my Spirit;
I am so far from malicing their states,
That I begin to pity 'hem: it grieves me
To think they have a being; I could wish
They might turn wise upon it, and be saved now,
So Heaven were pleased: but let them vanish Vapors.
And now with Aspers tongue (though not his shape)
Kind Patrons of our spo••s (you that can judge,
And with discerning thoughts measure the pace
Of our strange Muse in this her Maze of Humour,
You, whose true Notions doe confine the former
And nature of sweet Poesi•) to you
I tender solemn and most duteous thanks,
For your stretched patience and attentive grace.
We know (and we are pleased to know so much)
The Cates that you have tasted were not seasoned
For every vulgar Palate, but prepared
To banquet pure and apprehensive ears:
Let then their Voices speak for our desert;
Be their Applause the Trumpet to proclaim
Defiance to rebelling Ignorance,
And the greene spirits of some tainted Few,
That (spite of pity) betray themselves
To Scorn and Laughter; and like guilty Children,
Publish their infancy before their time,
By their own fond exception: Such as these
We pawn 'hem to your censure, till Time, Wit,
Or Observation, set some stronger seal
Of judgment on their indgements; and entreat
The happier spirits in this faire-fild Globe,
(So many as have sweet minds in their breasts,
And are too wife to think themselves are taxed
In any general Figure, or too virtuous
To need that wisdoms imputation:)
That with their bounteous Hands they would confirm
This, as their pleasures Patent: which so signed,
Our lean and spent Endeavours shall renew
Their Beauties with the Spring to senile on you.

COme sirs, come: the musique will sound
straight for entrance. Are ye ready, are
ye perfect?
Faith, we can say our parts: but wee
are ignorant in what mould we must cast our Actors.
Whom doe you personate?
Duke of Venice.
O, ho: then thus frame your exterior shape,
To haughty form of elate majesty;
As if you held the palsy shaking head
Of reeling chance, under your fortunes belt,
In strictest vassalage: grow big in thought,
As swollen with glory of successful arms.
If that be all, fear not, Isle suit it right.
Who can not be proud, stroke up the hair, and strut!
Truth: such rank custom is grown popular;
And now the vulgar fashion strides as wide,
And stalks as proud, upon the weakest stilts
Of the slight'st fortunes, as if Hercules,
Or burly Atlas shouldered up their state.
Good: but whom act you?
The necessity of the play forces me to act two
parts; Andrugio, the distressed Duke of Genoa, and
Alberto, a Venetian gentleman, enamoured on the La∣die
Rossaline: whose fortunes being too weak to suss∣taine
the port of her, he proved always disastrous in
love: his worth being much vnderpoised by the vne∣uen
scale, that currants all things by the outward
stamp of opiniō.
Well, and what dost thou play?
The part of all the world.
The part of all the world? What's that?
The fool. • in good deed law now, I play Ba∣lurdo,
a wealthy mountbanking Burgomasco's heir
of Venice.
Ha, ha: one, whose foppish nature might seem
great, only for wise men's recreation; and, like a Juice∣less
bark, to preserve the sap of more strenuous spy∣ritz.
A servile hound, that loves the sent of forerun∣ning
fashion, like an empty hollow vault, still giving
an echo to wit: greedily champing what any other
well valued judgment had before hand showed.
Ha, ha, ha: tolerably good, good faith sweet wag.
Vmh, why tolerably good, good faith sweet wag?
Go, go; you flatter me.
Right, I but dispose my speech to the habit of
my part.
Why, what plays he?
The wolf, that eats into the breast of Princes; that
breeds the Lethargy and falling sickness in honour;
makes Justice look acquaint, and blinks the eye of me∣rited
reward from viewing desertfull virtue.
Whats all this Periphrasis? ha?
The substance of a supple-chapt flatterer.
O, doth he play Forobosco, the Parasite? Good in faith.
Sirrah, you must seem now as glib and straight
in outward semblance, as a Ladies buck; though in∣wordly,
as cross as a pair of Tailors legs: having a
tongue as nimble as his needle, with servile patches of
glauering flattery, to stitch up the bracks of unworthy∣lie
honoured.
I warrant you, I warrant you, you shall see me
prove the very Periwig to cover the bald pate of
brainelesse gentility.
Ho, I will so tickle the sense of bella gratiosa madonna,
with the titillation of Hyperbolical praise, that Isle
strike it in the nick, in the very nick, chuck.
Thou promise more, than I hope any Specta∣tor
gives faith of performance: but why look you so
dusky? ha?
I was never worse fitted since the nativity of my
Actorshippe: I shalt be hist at, on my life now.
Why, what must you play?
Faith, I know not what: an Hermaphrodite; two
parts in one: my true person being Antonio, son to the
Duke of Genoa; though for the love of Mellida, Pieros
daughter, I take this fained presence of an Amazon, cal∣ling
my self Florizell, and I know not what. I a voice
to play a lady! I shall ne'er doe it.
O, an Amazon should have such a voice, virago-like,
Not play two parts in one? away, away: tic com∣mon
fashion. Nay if you cannot bear two subtle frōts
under one hood, I de or go by, go by; off this worlds
stage. O times impurity!
I, but whē use hath taught me actiō, to hit the right
point of a Ladies part, I shall grow ignorant when I
must turn young Prince again, how but to truss my
hose.
Tush never put them off: for women wear the breaches still.
By the bright honour of a Millanoise, and the re∣splendent
fulgor of this steel, I will defend the femi∣nine
to death; and ding his spirit to the verge of hell,
that dates divulge a ladies prei•dico.
Rampum scrampum, mount tuft Tamburlaine.
What rattling thunder clap breaks from his lips?
O, it is native to his part. For, acting a modern
Bragadoch under the person of Matzagente, the Duke of
Millaines son, it may seem to suite with good fa∣shion
of coherence.
But me thinks he speaks with a spruce Attic ac∣cent
of adulterate Spanish.
So it is resolved. For, Millane being half Spanish,
half high Dutch, and half Italians, the blood of chi∣fest
houses, is corrupt and mungrel'd: so that you shall
see a fellow vaine-glorious, for a Spaniard; gluttonous,
for a Dutchman; proud, for an Italian; and a fantastic
Idiot, for all. Such a one conceit this Matzagente.
But I have a part allotted me, which I have nei∣there
able apprehension to conceit, nor what I con∣ceipt
gracious ability to utter.
Whoop, in the old cut? good show vs a draught of thy spirit.
Tic steady, and must seem so impregnably
fortressed with his own cōtent, that no envious thought
could ever invade his spirit: never surveying any man
so vnmeasuredly happy, whom I thought not justly
hateful for some true impoverishment: never behol∣ding
any favour of Madam Felicity gracing another,
which his well bounded content persuaded not to
hang in the front of his own fortune: and therefore
as far from envying any man, as he valued all men
infinitely distant from accomplished beatitude. These
native adiuncts appropriate to me the name of Feli∣che.
But last, good thy humour.
Tic to be described by signs &amp; tokens. For unless I
were possessed with a legiō of spirits, it is impossible to be
perspicuous by any utterance: For sometimes he must
take austere state, as for the person of Galeatzo, the
son of the duke of Florence, &amp; possess his exterior
presence with a formal majesty: keep popularity
in distance, and on the sudden fling his honour so pro∣digally
into a common Arm, that hee may seem to
give up his indiscretion to the mercy of vulgar cēsure:
Now as solemn as a travailer, and as grave as a Puri∣tanes
ruff: with the same breath as slight and scat∣terd
in his fashion as as as a a any thing. Now, as
sweet and neat as a Barbours casting-bottle; straight
as slovenly as the yeasty breast of an Ale-knight: now,
lamenting: then chafing: straight laughing: then
What then?
Faith I know not what: 'rad been a right part
for Proteus or Gew: ho, blind Gew would ha don't
rarely, rarely.
I fear it is not possible to limb so many per∣sons
in so small a tablet as the compass of our plays
afford.
Right: therefore I have heard that those per∣sons,
as he &amp; you Foolish, that are but slightly drawn
in this Comedy, should receive more exact accom∣plishment
in a second Part: which, if this obtain gre∣tious
acceptance, means to try his fortune.
Peace, here comes the Prologue, clear the
Stage.
THE wreath of pleasure, and delicious sweets,
Begirt the gentle front of this fair troop:
Select, and most respected Auditors,
For wits sake doe not dream of miracles.
Alas, we shall but falter, if you lay
The least sad weight of an unused hope,
Upon our weakness: only we give up
The woorthlesse present of flight idleness,
To your authentic censure; Othat our Muse
Had those abstruse and sinewy faculties,
That with a strain of fresh invention
She might press out the rarity of Art;
The pur'st elixed joyce of rich conceit,
In your attentive ears; that with the lip
Of gracious elocution, we might drink
A sound carouse unto your health of wit.
But O, the heady dryness of her brain,
Foil to your fertile spirits, is ashamed
To breath her blushing numbers to such ears:
Yet (most ingenious) deign to veil our wants;
With sleek acceptance, polish these rude Scenes:
And if our slightness your large hope beguiles,
Check not with bended brow, but dimpled smiles.
HEART, wilt not break! &amp; thou abhorred life
Wilt thou still breath in my enraged blood?
Veins, sinews, arteries, why crack ye not?
Burst and diuul'st, with anguish of my grief.
Can man by no means creep out of himself,
And leave the slough of viperous grief behind?
Antonio, hast thou seen a fight at sea,
As horrid as the hideous day of doom;
Betwixt thy father, duke of Genoa,
And proud Piero, the Venetian Prince?
In which the sea hath swollen with Genoas blood,
And made spring tides with the warm reeking gore,
That gushed from out our Galleys scupper holes;
In which, thy father, poor Andrugio,
Lies sunk, or leapt into the arms of chance,
Choked with the laboring Oceans brackish some;
Who even, despite Pieros can cred hate,
Would with an armed hand have seized thy love,
And linked thee to the beauteous Mellida.
Have I outlived the death of all these hopes?
Have I felt anguish port into my heart,
Burning like Balsamum in tender wounds;
And yet dost live! could not the fretting sea
Have rolled me up in wrinkles of his brow?
Is death grown coy? or grim confusion nice?
That it will not accompany a wretch,
But I must needs be cast on Venice shore?
And try new fortunes with this strange disguise?
To purchase my adored Mellida.
Hark how Piero's triumphs beat the ayre,
O rugged mischief how thou grat'st my heart!
Take spirit, blood, disguise, be confident:
Make a firm stand, here rests the hope of all,
Lower then hell, there is no depth to fall.
Victorious Fortune, with triumphant hand,
Hurled my glory about this ball of earth,
Whilst the Venetian Duke is heaved up
On wings of fair success, to ouer-looke
The low cast ruins of his enemies,
To see my self adored, and Genoa quake,
My fate is firmer then mischance can shake.
Stand, the ground trembles.
Ho? an earthquake?
Oh, I smell a sound.
Piero stay, for I descry a fume,
Creeping from out the bosom of the deep,
The breath of darkness, fatal when it is whist
In greatness stomach: this same smoke, called pride,
Take heed she'll lift thee to improvidence,
And break thy neck from steep security,
She'll make thee grudge to let Iehoua share
In thy successful battles: O, shoe's ominous,
Entices princes to devour heaven,
Swallow omnipotence, out-stare dread fate,
Subdue Eternity in giant thought,
Heaves up their hurt with swelling, puffed conceit,
Till their souls burst with venomed Arrogance:
Beware Piero, Rome it self hath tried,
Confusions train blows up this Babel pride.
Pish, Dimitto superos, sum votorum attigi.
Alberto, hast thou yielded up our fixed decree
Unto the Genoan Ambassador?
Are they content if that their duke return,
To send his, and his son Antonios head,
As pledges steeped in blood, to gain their peace?
With most obsequious, sleek-brow'd intertain,
They all embrace it as most gracious.
Are Proclamations sent through Italy,
That whosoever brings Andrugios head,
Oryoung Anthonios, shall be guerdoned
With twenty thousand double Pistolets,
And be indeened to Pieros love?
They are sent every way: sound policy.
Sweet Lord.
Confusion to these limber Sycophants.
No sooner mischief's borne in regenty,
But flattery christens it with policy.
Why then: O me Celitum excelsissimum!
The intestine malice, and inveterate hate
I always bore to that Andrugio,
Glories in triumph ore his misery:
Nor shall that carpet-boy Antonio
Match with my daughter, sweet cheeked Mellida.
No, the public power makes my faction strong.
Ill, when public power strēgthneth private wrōg.
Tic horse-like, not for man, to know his force.
Tic god-like, for a man to feel remorse.
Pish, I prosecute my families revenge,
Which Isle pursue with such a burning chase
Till I have dri'd up all Andrugios blood;
Weak rage, that with slight pity is withstood.
What means that fresh triumphal flourish sound?
The prince of Millane, and young Florence heir
Approach to gratulate your victory.
VVeele girt them with an ample waste of love;
Conduct them to our presence royally.
Let volleys of the great Artillery
From of our galleys banks play prodigal,
And soūd loud welcome frō their bellowing mouths.
What prince was that passed through my fa∣theirs
guard?
It was Galeatzo, the young Florentine.
Troth, one that will besiege thy maidenhead,
Enter the walls in faith (sweet Mellida)
If that thy flankers be not Canon proof.
Oh Mary Ambree, good, thy judgment wench;
Thy bright electious clear, what will he prove?
Hath a short finger and a naked chin;
A skipping eye, dare lay my judgment (faith)
His love is glibbery; there's no hold ont, wench:
Give me a husband whose aspect is firm,
A full cheeked gallant, with a bouncing thigh:
Oh, he is the Paradizo dell madonna contento.
Even such a one was my Antonio.
By my nine and thirteth servant (sweet)
Thou art in love, but stand on tiptoed fair,
Here comes Saint Tristram Tirlery whiff in faith.
S. Mark, S. Mark, what kind of thing appears?
For fancies passion, spit upon him; figh:
His face is varnished: in the name of love,
What country bred that creature?
What is he Flauia?
The heir of Millane, Segnior Matzagent.
Matzagent? now by my pleasures hope,
He is made like a tilting staff; and looks
For all the world like an ore-rosted pig:
A great Tobacco taker too, thats flat.
For his eyes look as if they had been hung
In the smoke of his nose.
What husband, will he prove sweet Rossaline?
Avoid him: for he hath a dwindled leg,
A lowe forehead, and a thin cole-black beard,
And will be jealous too, believe it sweet:
For his chin sweats, and hath a gander neck,
A thin lip, and a little monkish eye:
Precious, what a slender waste he hath!
He looks like a May-pole, or a notched stick:
Heel snap in two at every little strain.
Give me a husband that will fill mine arms,
Of steady judgment, quick and nimble sense:
Fools relish not a Ladies excellence.
The triumph's ended, but look Rossaline,
What gloomy soul in strange accustrements
Walks on the pavement.
Good sweet lets to her, pree the Mellida.
How covetous thou art of novelties!
Pish, tic our nature to desire things
That are thought strangers to the common cut.
I am exceeding willing, but—
But what? pree the go down, lets see her face:
God send that neither wit nor beauty wants
Those tempting sweets, affections Adamants.
Come down, she comes like: O, no Simile
Is precious, choice, or elegant enough
To illustrate her descent: leap heart, she comes,
She comes: smile heaven, and softest Southern wind
Kiss her cheek gently with perfumed breath.
She comes: Creations purity, admired.
Adored, amazing rarity, she comes.
O now Antonio press thy spirit forth
In following passion, knit thy senses close,
Heap up thy powers, double all thy man:
She comes. O how her eyes dart wonder on my heart!
Mount blood, soul to my lips, taste Hebes cup:
Stand firm on deck, when beauties close fight's up.
Lady, your strange habit doth beget
Our pregnant thoughts, even great of much desire,
To be acquaint with your condition.
Good sweet Lady, without more ceremonies,
What country claims your birth, &amp; sweet your name?
In hope your bounty will extend it self,
In self same nature of fair courtesy,
Isle shun all niceness; my nam's Florizell,
My country Scythia, I am Amazon,
Cast on this shore by fury of the sea.
Nay faith, sweet creature, weal not veil our names.
It pleased the Font to dip me Rossaline.
That Lady bears the name of Mellida,
The duke of Venice daughter.
Madam, I am obliged to kiss your hand,
By imposition of a now dead man.
Now by my troth, I long beyond all thought,
To know the man; sweet beauty deign his name.
Lady, the circumstance is tedious.
Troth not a whit; good fair, lets have it all:
I love not, I, to have a jot left out,
If the tale come from a loved Orator.
Vouchsafe me then your hushed obseruances.
Vehement in pursuit of strange novelties,
After long travail through the Asian maine,
I shipped my hopeful thoughts for Brittany;
Longing to view great natures miracle,
The glory of our sex, whose fame doth strike
Remotest ears with adoration.
Sailing some two months with inconstant winds,
We viewed the glistening Venetian forts;
To which we made: when lo, some three leagues off,
We might descry a horrid spectacle:
The issue of black fury strewn the sea,
With tattered carcasses of splitted ships,
Half sinking, burning, floating, topsy turuie.
Not far from these sad ruins of fell rage,
We might behold a creature press the waives;
Senseless he sprauld, all notched with gaping wounds:
To him we made, and (short) we took him up:
The first word that he spake was, Mellida;
And then he swouned.
Aye me!
Why sigh you, fair?
Nothing but little humours: good sweet, on.
His wounds being dressed, and life recovered,
We began discourse; when lo, the sea grew mad,
His bowels rumbling with wind passion,
Straightswarthy darkness popped out Phoebus eye,
And blurt the jocund face of bright cheeked day;
Whilst crudl'd fogs masked even darkness brow:
Heaven bad's good night, and the rocks groaned
At the intestine uproar of the maine.
Now gusty flaws struck up the very heals
Of our maine mast, whilst the keen lightning shot
Through the black bowels of the quaking ayte:
Straight chops a wave, and in his sliftred paunch
Down false our ship, and there he breaks his neck:
Which in an instant up was belkt again.
When thus this martyrd soul began to sigh;
" Give me your hand (quoth he) now doe you grasp
" Th'vnequall mirror of ragged misery:
" Is it not a horrid storm? O, well shaped sweet,
" Could your quick eye strike through these gashed woūds,
" You should behold a heart, a heart, fair creature,
" Raging more wilde then is this frantic sea.
" VVolt doe me a favour, if thou chance survive?
" But visit Venice, kiss the precious white
" Of my most; nay all all Epithets are base
" To attribute to gracious Mellida:
" Tell her the spirit of Antonio
" VVisheth his last gasp breathed upon her breast.
Why weeps soft hearted Florisell?
Alas, the flinty rocks groaned at his plaints.
Tell her (quoth he) that her obdurate sire
Hath cracked his bosom; therewithal he wept,
And thus sighed on. The sea is merciful;
Look how it gapes to bury all my grief
Well, thou shalt have it, thou shalt be his tomb:
My faith in my love live; in thee, die woe,
Dye unmatched anguish, dye Antonio:
With that he totterd from the reeling deck,
And down he sunk.
Pleasures body, what makes my Lady weep?
Nothing, sweet Rossaline, but the ayer's sharpe.
My fathers Palace, Madam, will be proud
To entertain your presence, if you'll deign
To make repose within. Aye me!
Lady our fashion is not curious.
Faith all the nobler, tic more generous.
Shall I then know how fortune fell at last,
What succour came, or what strange fate insew'd?
Most willingly: but this same court is vast,
And public to the staring multitude.
Sweet Lady, nay good sweet, now by my troth
VVeele be bedfellows: dirt on complement froth.
HO Catzo, your master wants a clean tren∣cher:
doe you hear?
calls for your diminutive attendance.
The belly hath no ears Dildo.
Good pugge give me some capon.
No capon, no not a bit ye smooth bully; ca∣pon's
no meat for Dildo: milk, milk, ye glibbery ur∣chin,
is food for infants.
Upon mine honour
Your honour with a paugh? slid, now every Jack
an Apes loads his back with the golden coat of ho∣nor;
every Ass puts on the Lyons skin and roars
his honour, upon your honour. By my Ladies panta∣ble,
I fear I shall live to hear a Vintners boy cry; tic
rich neat Canary, upon my honour.
My stomack's up.
I think thou art hungry.
The match of fury is lighted, fastened to the lin∣stock
of rage, and will presently set fire to the touch∣hole
of intemperance, discharging the double coulue∣ring
of my incensement in the face of thy opprobrious
speech.
Isle stop the barrel thus; god Dildo, set not fire to
the touch-hole.
My rage is stopped, and I will eat to the health of
the fool thy master Castilio.
And I will suck the juice of the capon, to the
health of the Idiot thy master Balurdo.
Faith, our masters are like a case of Rapiers shea∣thed
in one scabbard of folly.
Right dutch blades. But was it not rare sport at
the sea-battle, whilst rounce robble hobble roared from
the ship sides, to view our masters pluck their plumes
and drop their feathers, for fear of being men of
mark.
Slut (cried Signior Balurdo) O for Don Bessiclers
armour, in the Mirror of Knighthood: what coil's here?
O for an armour, Canon proof: O, more cable, more
fetherbeds, more fetherbeds, more cable, till hee had
as much as my cable hatband, to fence him.
Buxom Flauia: can you sing? song, song.
My sweet Dildo, I am not for you at this time:
Madam Rossaline stays for a fresh ruff to appear in
the presence: sweet away.
Twill not be so put off, delicate, delicious, spark
eyed, sleek skinned, slēder wasted, clean legedd, rarely shaped.
Who, Isle be at all your service another season:
nay faith ther's reason in all things.
Would I were reason then, that I might be in
all things.
The brief and the semiquauer is, wee must
have the descant you made upon our names, ere you
depart.
Faith, the song will seem to come off hardly.
Troth not a whit, if you seem to come off
quickly.
Peart Catzo, knock it lustily then.
Make place gentlemen; pages, hold torches,
the prince approaches the presence.
What squeaking cart-wheel have we here? ha?
Make place gentlemen, pages hold torches, the
prince approaches the presence.
Faugh, what a strong sent's here, some body
uses to wear socks.
By this fair candle light, tic not my feet, I no∣for
wore socks since I sucked pap.
Sauourly put off.
Ho, her wit stings, blisters, galls off the skin
with the tart acrimony of her sharpe quickness: by
sweetness, she is the very Pallas that flew out of In∣piters
brainepan. Delicious creature, vouchsafe me
your service: by the purity of bounty, I shall be proud
of such bondage.
I vouchsafe it; be my slave. Signior Balurdo, wilt
thou be my servant too?
O god: forsooth in very good earnest, law, you wold
make me as a man should say, as a man should say.
Slut sweet beauty, will you deign him your service?
O, your fool is your only servant. But good Fe∣liche
why art thou so sad? a penny for thy thought, mā.
I sell not my thought so cheap: I value my
meditation at a higher rate.
In good sober sadness, sweet mistress, you should
have had my thought for a penny: by this crimson Sat∣ten
that cost eleven shillings, thirteen pence, three
pence, half penny a yard, that you should, law.
What was thy thought, good servant?
Marry forsooth, how many strike of peas would
feed a hog far against Christide.
Paugh; servant rub out my rheum, it soils the pre∣sense.
By my wealthiest thought, you grace my shoo
with an unmeasured honour: I will preserve the soale
of it, as a most sacred relic, for this service.
Isle spit in thy mouth, and thou wilt, to grace
thee.
O that the stomach of this queasy age
Digests, or brookes such raw unseasoned gobs,
And vomits not them forth! O slavish sots.
Servant quoth you? faugh: if a dog should crave
And beg her service, he should have it straight:
Shed give him favours too; to lick her feet,
Or fetch her fan, or some such drudgery:
A good dogs office, which these amorists
Triumph of: tic rare, well give her more Ass,
More sot, as long as dropping of her nose
Is sworn rich pearl by such low slaves as those.
Flauia, attend me to attire me.
In sad good earnest, sir, you have touched the
very bare of naked truth; my silk stocking hath a good
gloss, and I thank my planets, my leg is not alto∣gether
vnpropitiously shaped. There's a word: vnpro∣piteously?
I think I shall speak vnpropitiously as well
as any courtier in Italy.
So help me your sweet bounty, you have the
most graceful presence, applasiue elecuty, amazing
volubility, polished adornation, delicious affability.
Whop: foot how he tickles yon trout under the
gills! you shall see him take him by and by, with gro∣ping
flattery.
That ever ravished the ear of wonder. By
your sweet self, then whom I know not a more
exquisite, illustrate, accomplished, pure, respected, a∣dor'd,
observed, precious, real, magnanimous, boū∣tious:
if you have an idle rich cast jerkin, or so, it shall
not be cast away, if; ho? here is a forehead, an eye,
a head, a hair, that would make a: or if you have a∣ny
spare pair of silver spurs, isle doe you as much
right in all kind offices
Of a kind Parasite
As any of my mean fortunes shall be able to
As I am true Christian now, thou hast won
the spurs
For flattery.
O how I hate that same Egyptian louse;
A rotten maggot, that lives by stinking filth
Of tainted spirits: vengeance to such dogs,
That sprout by gnawing senseless carrion.
Gallants, saw you my mistress, the Lady Ros∣saline?
My mistress, the Lady Rossaline, left the pre∣sense
even now.
My mistress, the Lady Rossaline, withdrew
her gracious aspect even now.
My mistress, the Lady Rossaline, withdrew
her gracious aspect even now.
Well said echo.
My mistress, and his mistress, and your mi∣stress,
&amp; the dogs mistress: precious dear heaven, that
Alberto lives, to have such rivals.
Slid, I have bin searching every private rome,
Corner, and secret angle of the court:
And yet, and yet, and yet she lives concealed.
Good sweet Foolish, tell me how to find
My bright faced mistress out.
Why man, cry out for lantern and candle∣light.
For tic your only way, to find your bright fla∣ming
wench, with your light burning torch: for most
commonly, these light creatures live in darkness.
Away you heretike, you'll be burnt for
Go, you amorous hound, follow the sent of
your mistress shoe; away.
Make a fair presence, boys, advance your
lights:
The Princess makes approach.
And please the gods, now in very good deed,
law, you shall see me tickle the measures for the heauēs,
Doe my hangers show?
Beauteous Amazon, sit, and seat your thoughts
In the reposure of most soft content.
Sound music there. Nay daughter, clear your eyes,
From these dull fogs of misty discontent:
Look sprightly girl. What? though Antonio's droun'd,
That peevish dotard on thy excellence,
That hated issue of Andrugio:
Yet moist thou triumph in my victories;
Since, lo, the high borne bloods of Italy
Sue for thy seat of love.
Beauty and youth run descant on loves ground.
Lady, erect your gracious summitry:
Shine in the sphere of sweet affection:
Your eye as heavy, as the heart of night.
My thoughts are as black as your beard, my
fortunes as ill proportioned as your legs; and all the
powers of my mind, as leaden as your wit, and as
dusty as your face is swarthy.
Faith sweet, isle lay thee on the lips for that jest.
I pree thee intrude not on a dead mans right.
No, but the livings just possession.
Thy lips, and love, are mine.
You ne'er took seizin on them yet: forbear:
There's not a vacant corner of my heart,
But all is filled with dead Antonios loss.
Then urge no more; O leave to love at all;
Tic less disgraceful, not to mount, then fall.
Bright and refulgent Lady, deign your ear:
You see this blade, had it a courtly lip,
It would divulge my valour, plead my love,
Jostle that skipping feeble amorist
Out of your loves seat; I am Matzagent.
Hark thee, I pray thee taint not thy sweet ear
With that sots gabble; By thy beauteous cheek,
He is the flagging'st bulrush that ere droopt
With each slight mist of rain. But with pleased eye
Smile on my courtship.
What said you sir? alas my thought was fixed
Upon another object. Good, forbear:
I shall but weep. Aye me, what boots a tear!
Come, come, lets dance. O music thou distill'st
More sweetness in vs then this earring world:
Both time and measure from thy strains doe breath,
Whilst from the channel of this dirt doth flow
Nothing but timeless grief, unmeasured woe.
O how impatience cramps my cracked veins,
And cruddles thick my blood, with boiling rage!
O eyes, why leap you not like thunderbolts,
Or canon bullets in my rivals face;
Oy me infeliche misero, o lamenteuol fato!
What means the Lady fall upon the groūd?
Belike the falling sickness.
I cannot brooke this sight, my thoughts grow wilde:
Here lies a wretch, on whom heaven never smiled.
What servant, ne'er a word, and I here man?
I would shoot some speech forth, to strike the time
With pleasing touch of amorous complement.
Say sweet, what keeps thy mind, what think thou
Nothing. on?
Whats that nothing?
A women's constancy.
Good, why, would thou have vs sluts, &amp; no∣for
shift the vestur of our thoughts? Away for shame.
O no, thart too constant to afflict my heart,
Too too firm fixed in vnmooued scorn.
Pish, pish; I fixed in vnmooued scorn?
Why, Isle love thee to night.
But whom to morrow?
Faith, as the toy puts me in the head.
And pleased the marble heavens, now would I
might be the toy, to put you in the head, kindly to con∣ceipt
my my my: pray you give in an Epithet for love.
Roaring, roaring.
O love thou hast murdered me, made me a shadow,
and you hear not Balurdo, but Balurdos ghost.
Can a ghost speak?
Scurvily, as I doe.
And walk?
After their fashion.
And eat apples?
In a sort, in their garb.
Pree thee Flauia be my mistress.
Your reason, good Foolish?
Faith, I have nineteen mistresses already, and I
not much disdeigne that thou shold'st make up the full
score.
Oh, I hear you make common places of your
mistresses, to perform the office of memory by. Pray
you, in ancient times were not those satin hose? In
good faith, now they are new dyed, pinked &amp; scoured,
they show as well as if they were new.
What, mute Balurdo?
I in faith, &amp; it were not for printing, and painting,
my breech, and your face would be out of reparation.
I, an faith, and it were not for printing, &amp; poin∣ting,
my breech, and your face would be out of repa∣ration.
Good again, Echo.
Thou art, by nature, too foul to be affected.
And thou, by Art, too fair to be beloved.
By wits life, most spark spirits, but hard chance.
La tie dine.
Gallants, the night grows old; &amp; downy sleep
Courts vs, to entertain his company:
Our tyred limbs, bruised in the morning fight,
Entreat soft rest, and gentle hushed repose.
Fill out Greek wines; prepare fresh cressit-light:
Weal have a banquet: Princes, then good night.
What means these scattred looks? why tremble you?
Why quake your thoughts, in your distracted eyes?
Collect your spirits, Madam; what doe you see?
Dost not behold a ghost?
Look, look where he stalks, wrapped up in clouds of grief,
Darting his soul, upon thy wondering eyes.
Look, he comes towards thee; see, he stretches out
His wretched arms to girt thy loved waste,
With a most wished embrace: see him not yet?
Nor yet? Ha, Mellida; thou well moist err:
For look; he walks not like Antonio:
Like that Antonio, that this morning shone,
In glistening habiliments of arms,
To seize his love, spite of her fathers spite:
But like himself, wretched, and miserable,
Banished, forlorn, despairing, struck quite through,
With sinking grief, rolled up in seven-fold doubles
Of plagues, vanquishable: hark, he speaks to thee.
Alas, I can not hear, nor see him.
Why? al this night about the room he stalked,
And groaned, and houl'd, with raging passion,
To view his love (life blood of all his hopes,
Crown of his fortunes) clipped by strangers arms.
Look but behind thee.
O, Antonio; my Lord, my Love, my
Leave passion, sweet; for time, place, air, &amp; earth,
Are all our foes: fear, and be jealous; fair,
Lets fly.
Dear heart; ha, whether?
O, tic no matter whether, but lets fly.
Ha! now I think ont, I have ne'er a home:
No father, friend, no country to embrace
These wretched limbs: the world, the All that is,
Is all my foe: a prince not worth a doit:
Only my head is hoisted to high rate,
Worth twenty thousand double Pistolets,
To him that can but strike it from these shoulders.
But come sweet creature, thou shalt be my home;
My father, country, riches, and my friend:
My all, my soul; and thou and I will live:
(Lets think like what) and thou and I will live
Like unmatched mirrors of calamity.
The jealous ear of night eaue-drops our talk.
Hold thee, theirs a jewel; &amp; look thee, theirs a note
That will direct thee when, where, how to fly;
Bid me adieu.
Farewell bleak misery.
Stay sweet, lets kiss before you go.
Farewell dear soul.
Farewell my life, my heart.
IS not yon gleam, the shuddering morn that flakes,
With silver tinctur, the east vierge of heaven?
I think it is, so please your excellence.
Away, I have no excellence to please.
Pree the observe the custom of the world,
That only flatters greatness, States exalts.
And please my excellence! O Lucio.
Thou hast bin ever held respected dear,
Even precious to Andrugios in most love.
Good, flatter not. Nay, if thou giu'st not faith
That I am wretched, O read that, read that.
EXCELLENT, the just overthrow, Andrugio
took in the Venetian gulf, hath so assured the Geno∣ways
of the justice of his cause, and the hatefulness of his
person, that they have banished him and all his family: and,
for confirmation of their peace with vs, have vowed, that if
he, or his son, can be attached, to send vs both their heads.
Wee therefore, by force of our united league, forbid you to
harbour him, or his blood: but if you apprehend his person,
we entreat you to send him, or his head, to vs. For wee vow
by the honour of our blood, to recompense any man that
brings his head, with twenty thousand double Pistolets,
and the endearing to our choicest love.
My thoughts are fixed in contemplation
Why this huge earth, this monstrous animal,
That eats her children, should not have eyes &amp; ears.
Philosophy maintains that Natur's wise,
And forms no useless or imperfect thing.
Did Nature make the earth, or the earth Nature?
For earthly dirt makes all things, makes the man,
Moulds me up honour; and like a cunning Dutchmā,
Paints me a puppit even with seeming breath,
And gives a sot appearance of a soul,
Go to, go to; thou least Philosophy.
Nature forms things imperfect, useless, vain.
Why made she not the earth with eyes and ears?
That she might see desert, and hear men's plaints:
That when a soul is splitted, sunk with grief,
He might fall thus, upon the breast of earth;
And in her ear, hello his misery:
Exclaming thus. O thou all bearing earth,
Which men doe gape for, till thou cramst their mouths,
And choakst their throts with dust: O chaune thy breast,
And let me sink into thee. Look who knocks;
Andrugio calls. But O, she's deaf and blind.
A wretch, but lean relief on earth can find.
Sweet Lord, abandon passion, and disarm.
Since by the fortune of the tumbling sea,
We are rolled up, upon the Venice marsh,
Lets clip all fortune, least more lowering fate
More lowering fate? O Lucio, choke that breath.
Now I defy chance. Fortunes brow hath frowned,
Even to the utmost wrinkle it can bend:
Her venom's spit. Alas, what country rests,
What son, what comfort that she can deprive?
Triumphs not Venice in my overthrow?
Gapes not my native country for my blood?
Lies not my son tomb'd in the swelling maine?
And yet more lowering fate? There's nothing left
Unto Andrugio, but Andrugio:
And that nor mischief, force, distress, nor hell can take.
Fortune my fortunes, not my mind shall shake.
Speak like your self: but give me leave, my Lord,
To wish your safety. If you are but seen,
Your arms display you; therefore put them off,
And take
Would thou have me go unarmed among my foes?
Being besieged by passion, entering lists,
To combat with despair and mighty grief:
My soul beleaguerd with the crushing strength
Of sharpe impatience. Ha Lucio, go unarmed?
Come soul, resume the valour of thy birth;
My self, my self will dare all opposits:
Isle muster forces, an vnuanquisht power:
Cornets of horse shall press th'vngratefull earth;
This hollow wombat mass shall inly groan,
And murmur to sustain the weight of arms:
Ghastly amazement, with vpstarted hair,
Shall hurry on before, and usher vs,
Whilst trumpets clamour, with a sound of death.
Peace, good my Lord, your speech is al too light.
Alas, survey your fortunes, look what's left
Of all your forces, and your utmost hopes?
A weak old man, a Page, and your poor self.
Andrugio lives, and a fair cause of arms,
Why that's an army all invincible.
He who hath that, hath a battalion
Royal, armour of proof, huge troops of barbed steeds,
Maine squares of pikes, millions of harguebush.
O, a fair cause stands firm, and will abide.
Legions of Angels fight upon her side.
Then, noble spirit, slide in strange disguise,
Unto some gracious Prince, and sojourn there,
Till time, and fortune give revenge firm means.
No, isle not trust the honour of a man:
Gold is grown great, and makes perfidiousness
A common water in most Princes Courts:
He's in the Chekle-roule: Isle not trust my blood;
I know none breathing, but will cog a dye
For twenty thousand double Pistolets.
How goes the time?
I saw no sun to day.
No sun will shine, where poor Andrugio breaths,
My soul grows heavy: boy let's have a song:
Weal sing yet, faith, even despite of fate.
Tic a good boy, &amp; by my troth, well sung.
O, and thou felt my grief, I warrant thee,
Thou would have struck division to the height;
And made the life of music breath: hold boy: why so?
For Gods sake call me not Andrugio,
That I may soon forget what I have bin.
For heavens name, name not Antonio;
That I may not remember he was mine.
Well, ere yon sun set, isle show my self my self,
Worthy my blood. I was a Duke; that's all.
No matter whether, but from whence we fall.
Castilio? Alberto? Balurdo? none up?
Forobosco? Flattery, nor thou up yet:
Then there's no Courtier stirring: that's firm truth?
I cannot sleep: Foolish seldom rests
In these court lodgings. I have walked all night,
To see if the nocturnal court delights
Could force me envy their felicity:
And by plain troth; I will confess plain troth:
I envy nothing, but the Trauense light.
O, had it eyes, and ears, and tongues, it might
See sport, hear speech of most strange surquedries.
O, if that candle-light were made a Poet,
He would prove a rare firking Satyrist,
And draw the core forth of impostum'd sin.
Well, I thank heaven yet, that my content
Can envy nothing, but poor candle-light.
As for the other glistening copper spangs,
That glisten in the tier of the Court,
Praise God, I either hate, or pity them.
Well here isle sleep till that the scene of up
Is past at Court. O calm hushed rich content,
Is there a being blessedness without thee?
How soft thou down'st the couch where thou dost rest,
Nectar to life, thou sweet Ambrosian feast.
Am not I a most sweet youth now?
Yes, when your throat's perfumed; your very words
Doe smell of Amber greece. O stay sir, stay;
Sprinkle some sweet water to your shoes heals,
That your mistress may swear you have a sweet foot.
Good, very good, very passing passing good.
Foot, what treble minikin squeaks there, ha? good?
very good, very very good?
I will warble to the delicious concave of my
Mistress ear: and strike her thoughts with
The pleasing touch of my voice.
Foolish, health, fortune, mirth, and wine,
To thee my love divine.
I drink to thee, sweating.
Plague on thee for an Ass.
Now thou hast seen the Court; by the perfec∣ction
of it, dost not envy it?
I wonder it doth not envy me.
Why man, I have been borne upon the spirits wings,
The souls swift Pegasus, the fantasy:
And from the height of contemplation,
Have viewed the feeble joints men totter on.
I envy none; but hate, or pity all.
For when I view, with an intent thought,
That creature fair; but proud; him rich, but sot:
The other witty; but unmeasured arrogant:
Him great; yet boundless in ambition:
Him high borne; but of base life: to there feared;
Yet feared fears, and fears most, to be most loved:
Him wise; but made a fool for public use:
The other learned, but selfe-opinionate:
When I discourse all these, and see my self
Nor fair, nor rich, nor witty, great, nor feared:
Yet amply suited, with all full content:
Lord, how I clap my hands, and smooth my brow,
Rubbing my quiet bosom, tossing up
A grateful spirit to omnipotence!
Ha, ha: but if thou knew my happiness,
Thou would even grate away thy soul to dust,
In envy of my sweet beatitude:
I can not sleep for kisses; I can not rest
For Ladies letters, that importune me
With such unused vehemence of love,
Straight to solicit them, that
Confusion seize me, but I think thou lie.
Why should I not be sought to then as well?
Foot, me thinks, I am as like a man▪
Troth, I have a good head of hair, a cheek
Not as yet wan'd; a leg, faith, in the full.
I ha not a red beard, take not tobacco much:
And S'lid, for other parts of manliness
Pew waw, you ne'er assorted them in
pomp:
Put your good parts in presence, graciously.
Ha, and you had, why they would ha come of, sprung
To your arms: and sued, and prayed, and vowed;
And opened all their sweetness to your love.
There are a number of such things, as then
Have often urged me to such loose belief:
But S'lid you all doe lye, you all doe lie.
I have put on good clothes, and smugd my face,
Struck a fair wench, with a smart speaking eye:
Courted in all sorts, blunt, and passionate;
Had opportunity put them to the ah:
And, by this light, I find them wondrous chaste,
Impregnable; perchance a kiss, or so:
But for the rest, O most inexorable.
Nay then in faith, pree thee look here.
To her most esteemed, loved, and generous servant, Sig.
Castilio Balthazar.
Pree the from whom comes this? faith I must see.
Nay, god's my comfort, I must see the rest;
I must, sans ceremony, faith I must.
O, you spoil my ruff, vnset my hair; good
away.
Item for strait canvas, thirteen pence, half
penny. Item for an elle and a half of taffeta to cover
your old canvas doublet, fourteen shillings, &amp; three
pence. S'light, this a tailors bill.
In sooth it is the outside of her letter; on which
I took the copy of a tailors bill.
But tic not crossed, I am sure of that. Lord have
mercy on him, his credit hath given up the last gasp.
Faith isle leave him; for hee looks as melancholy as
a wench the first night she
Honest musk-cod, twill not be so stitched toge∣there;
take that, and that, and belie no Ladies love:
swear no more by Iesu: this Madam, that Lady;
hence go, forswear the presence, travail three years
to bury this bastinado: avoid, puff paste, avoid.
And tell not my Lady mother. Well, as I am
true gentleman, if she had not wild me on her blessing,
not to spoil my face; if I could not find in my heart
to fight, would I might ne'er eat a Potato pie more.
More fool, more rare fools! O, for time and
place, long enough, and large enough, to act these
fools! Here might be made a rare Scene of folly, if
the plat could bear it.
By the suger-candy sky, hold up the glass
higher, that I may see to swear in fashion. O, one aloof
more would ha made them shine; gods neakes, they
would have shone like my mistress brow. Even so
the Duke frowns for all this Cursond world: oh that
gerne kills, it kills. By my golden What's the richest
thing about me?
Your teeth.
By my golden teeth, hold up; that I may put in:
hold up, I say, that I may see to put on my gloves.
O, delicious sweet cheeked master, if you discharge
but one glance from the level of that set face: O, you
will strike a wench; you'll make any wench love you.
By Iesu, I think I am as elegant a Courtier,
as How lik'st thou my suite?
All, beyond all, no peregal: you are wondered at,
for an ass.
Well, Dildo, no christen creature shall know
hereafter, what I will doe for thee heretofore.
Here wants a little white, Flauia.
I, but master, you have one little fault; you sleep
open mouthed.
Pew, thou iestst. In good sadness, Isle have a
looking glass nailed to the the testarn of the bed, that
I may see when I sleep, whether tic so, or not; take heed
you lye not: go to, take heed you lie not.
By my troth, you look as like the princess, now
I, but her lip is lip is a little redder, a very little
redder: but by the help of Art, or Nature, ere I chāge
my periwig, mine shall be as red.
O, I, that face, that eye, that smile, that writhing of
your body, that wanton dandling of your fan, becomes
prethely, so sweethly, tic even the goodest Lady that
breathes, the most amiable Faith the fringe of
your satin petticoat is ripped. Good faith madam, they say
you are the most bounteous Lady to your women, that
ever O most delicious beauty! Good Madam
let me kith it.
Rare sport, rare sport! A female fool, and a fe∣male
flatterer▪
Body a me, the Duke: away the glass.
Take up your paper, Rossaline.
Not mine, my Lord.
Not yours, my Lady? Isle see what tic.
And how does my sweet mistress? O Lady
dear, even as tic an old say, Tic an old horse can nei∣there
wighy, nor wag his tail: even so doe I hold
my set face still: even so, tic a bad courtier that can nei∣there
discourse, nor blow his nose.
Meet me at Abrahams, the Jaws, where I bought
my Amazons disguise. A ship lies in the port, ready
bound for England; make haste, come private.
Antonio, Forobosco, Alberto, Foolish, Castilio, Balurdo? run,
keep the Palace, post to the ports, go to my daugh∣ters
chamber: whether now? scud to the Jaws, stay,
run to the gates, stop the gundolets, let none pass
the marsh, doe all at once. Antonio? his head, his head.
Keep you the Court, the rest stand still, or run, or
go, or shout, or search, or scud, or call, or hang, or
doe doe doe, su su su, something: I know not who who
who, what I do do do, nor who who who, where
I am.
O trista traditriche, rea, ribald fortune,
Negando mi vendetta mi causa fera morte,
Ha ha ha. I could break my spline at his im∣patience.
Alma &amp; gratiosa fortune sia•e favour evole,
Et fortunate siano vnoti del mia dulls Mellida, Mel∣lida.
Alas Antonio, I have lost thy note.
A number mount my stairs; isle straight return.
Antonio,
Be not affright, sweet Prince; appease thy fear,
Buckle thy spirits up, put all thy wits
In wimble action, or thou art surprised.
I care not.
Art mad, or desperate? or
Both, both, all, all: I pree thee let me lie;
Spite of you all, I can, and I will die.
You are distraught; O, this is madness breath.
Each man take hence life, but no man death:
Hoe's a good fellow, and keeps open house:
A thousand thousand ways lead to his gate,
To his wide mouthed porch: when niggard life
Hath but one little, little wicket through.
We wring our selves into this wretched world,
To pull, and weep, exclaim, to curse and rail,
To fret, and ban the fates, to strike the earth
As I doe now. Antonio, curse thy birth,
And die.
Nay, heavens my comfort, now you are perverse;
You know I always loved you; pree thee live.
Wilt thou strike dead thy friends, draw mourning
tears
Alas, Foolish, I ha ne'er a friend;
No country, father, brother, kinsman left
To weep my fate, or sigh my funeral:
I roll but up and down, and fill a seat
In the dark cave of dusky misery.
Fore heaven, the Duke comes: hold you, take my key,
Slink to my chamber, look you; that is it:
There shall you find a suite I wore at sea:
Take it, and slip away. Nay, precious,
If you'll be peevish, by this light, Isle swear,
Thou rail'dst upon thy love before thou died,
And called her strumpet.
Sheele not credit thee.
Tut, that's all one: isle defame thy love;
And make thy dead trunk held in vile regard.
Wilt needs have it so? why then Antonio,
Viue esperanza, in despetto dell fato.
O, my sweet Princes, was it not bravely found?
Even there I found the note, even there it lay.
I kiss the place for joy, that there it lay.
This way he went, here let vs make a stand:
Isle keep this gate my self: O gallant youth!
Isle drink carouse unto your countries health,
Even in Antonio's scull.
Lord bless vs: his breath is more fearful then
a Sergeants voice, when he cries; I arrest.
Stop Antonio, keep, keep Antonio.
Where, where man, where?
Here, here: let me me pursue him down the
marsh.
Hold, there's my signet, take a gundelet:
Bring me his head, his head, and by mine honour,
Isle make thee the wealthiest Mariner that breathes.
Isle sweat my blood out, till I have him safe.
Speak heartily in faith, good Mariner.
O, wee will mount in triumph: soon, at night,
Isle set his head up. Lets think where.
Up on his shoulders, that's the fittest place for
it. If it be not as fit as if it were made for them; say, Ba∣lurdo,
thou art a sot, an ass.
Sprightly, in faith. In troth he's somewhat like
My daughter Mellida: but alas poor soul,
Her honour heals, god knows, are half so light.
Escaped I am, spite of my fathers spite.
Ho, this will warm my bosom ere I sleep.
O my Lord, your daughter.
I, I, my daughter's safe enough, I warrant thee.
This vengeance on the boy will lengthen out
My days vnmeasuredly.
It shall be chronicled, time to come;
Piero Sforza slew Andrugio's son.
I, but my Lord, your daughter.
I, I, my good wench, she is safe enough.
O, then, my Lord, you know she's run away.
Run away, away, how run away?
She's vanished in an instant, none knows when∣there.
Pursue, pursue, fly, run, post, scud away.
Fly, call, run, row, ride, cry, shout, hurry, haste:
Haste, hurry, shout, cry, ride, row, run, call, fly
Backward and forward, every way about.
Maldetta fortune •hy condura sorta
Che faro, che diro, pur fugir tanto mal!
It was you that struck me even now: was it not?
It was I that struck you even now.
You bastinadoed me, I take it.
I bastinadoed you, and you took it.
Faith sir, I have the richest Tobacco in the court
for you; I would be glad to make you satisfaction, if I
have wronged you. I would not the Sun should set v∣pone
your anger; give me your hand.
Content faith, so thou'lt breed no more such lies.
I hate not man, but mans lewd qualities.
STOP, stop Antonio, stay Antonio.
Vain breath, vain breath, Antonio's lost;
He can not find himself, not seize himself.
Alas, this that you see, is not Antonio,
His spirit hovers in Piero's Court,
Hurling about his agile faculties,
To apprehend the sight of Mellida:
But poor, poor soul, wanting apt instruments
To speak or see, stands dumb and blind, sad spirit,
Rolled up in gloomy clouds as black as air,
Through which the rusty coach of Night is drawn:
Tic so, isle give you instance that tic so.
Conceit you me. As having clasp't a rose
Within my palm, the rose being tan away,
My hand retains a little breath of sweet:
So may mans trunk; his spirit slipped away,
Holds still a faint perfume of his sweet guest.
Tic so; for when discursiue powers fl•e out,
And rome in progress, through the boūds of heaven,
The soul it self gallops along with them,
As chiefetaine of this winged troop of thought,
Whilst the dull lodge of spirit stands waste,
Until the soul return from What wast I said?
O, this is nought, but speckling melancholy.
I have been
That Morpheus tender skinp Cousin germane
Bear with me good
Mellida: clod upon clod thus fall.
Hell is beneath; yet heaven is over all.
Come Lucio, lets go eat: what hast thou got?
Roots, roots? alas, they are seeded, new cut up.
O, thou hast wronged Nature, Lucio:
But boots not much; thou but pursu'st the world,
That cuts off virtue, fore it comes to growth,
Least it should seed, and so orerun her son,
Dull pore-blinde error. Give me water, boy.
There is no poison in it I hope, they say
That lukes in massy plate: and yet the earth
Is so infected with a general plague,
That hoe's most wise, that thinks there's no man fool:
Right prudent, that esteems no creature just:
Great policy the least things to mistrust.
Give me Assay How we mock greatness now!
A strong conceit is rich, so most men deem:
If not to be, tic comfort yet to seem.
Why man, I never was a Prince till now.
Tic not the bared pate, the bended knees,
Guilt tipstaues, Tyrrian purple, chairs of state,
Troops of pied butterflies, that flutter still
In greatness summer, that confirm a prince:
Tic not the unsavoury breath of multitudes,
Shouting and clapping, with confused din;
That makes a Prince. No Lucio, he's a king,
A true right king, that dares doe aught, save wrong,
Fears nothing mortal, but to be unjust,
Who is not blown up with the flattering puffs
Of spungy Sycophants: Who stands vnmou'd,
Despite the jostling of opinion:
Who can enjoy himself, maugre the throng
That strive to press his quiet out of him:
Who sits upon Ioues footestoole, as I doe,
Adoring, not affecting, majesty:
Whose brow is wreathed with the silver crown
Of clear content: this, Lucio, is a king.
And of this empire, every man's possessed,
That's worth his soul.
My Lord, the Genowaies had wont to say
Name not the Genowaies: that very word
Vnkings me quite, makes me vile passions slave.
O, you that made open the glibbery Ice
Of vulgar favour, view Andrugio.
Was never Prince with more applause confirmed,
With louder shouts of triumph launched out
Into the surgy maine of government:
Was never Prince with more despite cast out,
Left shipwrecked, banished, on more guiltless ground.
O rotten props of the crazed multitude,
How you still double, falter, under the lightest chance
That strains your veins. Alas, one battle lost,
Your whorish love, your drunken healths, your house
and shouts,
Your smooth God saue's, and all your devils last
That tempts our quiet, to your hell of throngs.
Spit on me Lucio, for I am turned slave:
Observe how passion domineres ore me.
No wonder, noble Lord, having lost a son,
A country, crown, and
I Lucio, having lost a son, a son,
A country, house, crown, son. O lares, misereri lares.
Which shall I first deplore? My son, my son,
My dear sweet boy, my dear Antonio.
Antonio?
I, echo, I; I mean Antonio.
Antonio, who means Antonio?
Where art? what art? know thou Antonio?
Yes.
Lives hee?
No.
Where lies hee dead?
Here.
Where?
Here.
Art thou Antonio?
I think I am.
Dost thou but think? What, dost not know thy self?
He is a fool that thinks he knows himself.
Upon thy faith to heaven, give thy name.
I were not worthy of Andrugio's blood,
If I denied my name's Antonio.
I were not worthy to be called thy father,
If I denied my name Andrugio.
And dost thou live? O, let me kiss thy cheek,
And dew thy brow with trickling drops of joy.
Now heavens will be done: for I have lived
To see my joy, my son Antonio.
Give my thy hand; now fortune doe thy worst,
His blood, that lapped thy spirit in the womb,
Thus (in his love) will make his arms thy tomb.
Bless not the body with your twining arms,
Which is accursed of heaven. O, what black sin
Hath bin committed by our ancient house,
Whose scalding vengeance lights upon our heads,
That thus the world, and fortune casts vs out,
As loathed objects, ruins branded slaves.
Doe not expostulate the heavens will:
But, O, remember to forget thy self:
Forget remembrance what thou once hast bin.
Come, creep with me from out this open ayre.
Even trees have tongues, and will betray our life.
I am a raising of our house, my boy:
Which fortune will not envy, tic so mean,
And like the world (all dirt) there shalt thou rip
The inwards of thy fortunes, in mine ears,
Whilst I sit weeping, blind with passions tears:
Then isle begin, and weal such order keep,
That one shall still tell griefs, the other weep.
Isle follow you. Boy, pree thee stay a little.
Thou hast had a good voice, if this cold marsh,
Wherein we lurk, have not corrupted it.
I pree thee sing, but sir (mark you me)
Let each nor breath the heart of passion,
The sad extracture of extremest grief.
Make me a strain; speak, groaning like a bell,
That towels departing souls.
Breath me a point that may enforce me weep,
To wring my hands, to break my cursed breast,
Rave, and exclaim, lie grovelling on the earth,
Straight start up frantic, crying, Mellida.
Sing but, Antonio hath lost Mellida,
And thou shalt see me (like a man possessed)
Howl out such passion, that even this brinish marsh
Will squeeze out tears, from out his spungy cheeks,
The rocks even groan, and
Pree thee, pree thee sing:
Or I shall ne'er ha done when I am in.
Tic harder for me end, then to begin.
For look thee boy, my grief that hath no end,
I may begin to plain, but pree thee sing.
Heaven keep you sir.
Heaven keep you from me, sir.
I must be acquainted with you, sir.
Wherefore? Art thou infected with misery,
Seared with the anguish of calamity?
Art thou true sorrow, hearty grief, can weep?
I am not for thee if thou can not rave,
Fall flat on the ground, and thus exclaim on heaven;
O trifling Nature, why enspiredst thou breath
Stay sir, I think you named Mellida.
Know thou Mellida?
Yes.
Hast thou seen Mellida?
Yes.
Then hast thou seen the glory of her sex,
The music of Nature, the unequalled lustre
Of unmatched excellence, the united sweet
Of heavens graces, the most adored beauty,
That ever struck amazement in the world.
You seem to love her.
With my very soul.
Shele not requite it: all her love is fixed
Upon a gallant, on Antonio,
The Duke of Genoas son. I was her Page:
And often as I waited, she would sigh;
O, dear Antonio; and to strengthen thought,
Would clip my neck, and kiss, and kiss me thus.
Therefore leave loving her: fa, faith me thinks,
Her beauty is not half so ravishing
As you discourse of; she hath a freckled face,
A lowe forehead, and a lumpish eye.
O heaven, that I should hear such blasphemy.
Boy, rogue, thou least, and
Spauento dell mio core dolce Mellida,
Di graua morte restor• vero dolce Mellida,
Celesta saluatrice sovrana Mellida
Del mio sperar; trofeo vero Mellida.
Diletta &amp; soaue enema mia Antonio,
Godeuole belezza cortese Antonio.
Signior mio &amp; virginal amore bell' Antonio
Gusto delli mei sense, car' Antonio.
O suamisce il cor in un soaue baccio,
Murono i sense nel desiato dessio:
Nel Cielo puo lesser bolt pia chiara.
Nel mondo pol esser bolt pia chiara?
Dammi un baccio da quella boss beata,
Bassiammi, coglier l' aur a odorata
Che in sua neggia in quello dolce libra.
Dammi pimpero del tuo gradit' amore
Che beam, cosempiterno honour,
Cos, cosimi conuerra morir.
Good sweet, scout ore the marsh: for my heart trembls
At every little breath that strikes my ear,
When thou return: and isle discourse
How I deceived the Court: then thou shall tell
How thou escapt'st the watch: weal point our speech
With amorous kissing, kissing cōmaes, and even suck
The liquid breath from out each others lips.
Dull clod, no man but such sweeet favour clips.
I go, and yet my panting blood persuades me stay.
Turn coward in her sight? away, away.
I think confusion of Babel is fallen upon these lovers,
that they change their language, but I fear me, my
master having but fained the person of a woman, hath
got their unfeigned imperfection, and is grown double
tongued: as for Mellida, she were no woman, if she
could not yield strange language. But howsoever, if I
should sit in judgment, tic an error easier to be par∣doned
by the auditors, then excused by the authors;
and yet some private respect may rebate the edge of
the keener censure.
This way she took: search, my sweet gentlemē.
How now Balurdo, can thou meet with any body?
As I am true gentleman, I made my horse sweat,
that he hath ne'er a dry thread on him: and I can meet
with no living creature, but men &amp; beasts, In good
sadness, I would have sworn I had seen Mellida e∣uen
now: for I saw a thing stir under a hedge, and I
peep't, and I spied a thing: and I peered, and I tweerd
underneath: and truly a right wise man might have
been deceived: for it was
What, in the name of heaven?
A dun cow.
Sh'ad ne'er a kettle on her head?
Boy, did thou see a young Lady pass this way?
Why speak you not?
Gods neakes, proud elf, give the Duke rove∣rinse,
stand bare with a
Whogh! heavens bless me: Mellida, Mellida.
Where man, where?
Turned man, turned man: women wear the
breaches, lo here,
Light and vnduteous! kneel not, peevish elf,
Speak not, entreat not, shame unto my house,
Curse to my honour. Whore's Antonio?
Thou traitress to my hate, what is he shipped
For England now? well whimpering harlot, hence.
Good father
Good me no goods. See thou that sprightly
youth? ere thou can term to morrow morning old,
thou shalt call him thy husband, Lord and love.
Ay me.
Blirt on your ay mees, guard her safely hence.
Drag her away, isle be your guard to night.
Young Prince, mount up your spirits, and prepare
To solemnise your Nuptials eve with popme.
The time is scant: now nimble wits appear:
Phoebus begins gleam, the welkin's clear.
Now nimble wits appear: isle my self appear,
Balurdo's self, that in quick wit doth surpass,
Will show the substance of a complete
Ass, ass.
Isle mount my courser, and most gallantly prick
Gallantly prick is too long, and stands hardly
in the verse, sir.
Isle speak pure rime, and will so bravely prank
it, that isle toss love like a prank, prank it: a rime for
prank it?
Blanket.
That isle toss love, like a dog in a blanket: ha
ha, in deed law. I think, ha ha; I think ha ha, I think
I shall tickle the Muses. And I strike it not dead, say,
Balurdo, thou art an arrant sot.
Balurdo, thou art an arrant sot.
Now, come united force of chap-falne death:
Come, power of fretting anguish, leave distress.
O, thus enfolded, we have breasts of proof,
Against all the venomed stings of misery.
Father, now I have an antidote,
Against all the poison that the world can breath.
My Mellida, my Mellida doth bless
This bleak waste with her presence. How now boy,
Why dost thou weep? alas, whore's Mellida?
Ay me, my Lord.
A sodden horror doth invade my blood,
My sinews tremble, and my panting heart
Scuds round about my bosom so go out,
Dreading the assailant, horrid passion.
O, be no tyrant, kill me with one blow.
Speak quickly, briefly boy.
Her father found, and seized her, she is gone.
Son, heat thy blood, be not froze up with grief.
Courage, sweet boy, sink not beneath the weight
Of crushing mischief. O whore's thy dantlesse heart
Thy fathers spirit! I renounce thy blood,
If thou forsake thy valour.
See how his grief speaks in his flow-pac't steps:
Alas, tic more than he can utter, let him go.
Dumb solitary path best sureth woe.
Give me my arms, my armour Lucio.
Dear Lord, what means this rage, when lacking use
Scarce safes your life, will you in armour rise?
Fortune fears valour, presses cowardice.
Then valour gets applause, when it hath place,
And means to blaze it.
Nunquam potest non esse.
Patience, my Lord, may bring your else some end.
What patience, friend, can ruined hopes attēd?
Come, let me die like old Andrugio:
Worthy my birth. O blood-true-honour'd graves
Are far more blessed then base life of slaves. Exeunt.
AND are you a painter sir, can you draw, can
you draw?
Yes sir.
Indeed law? now so can my fathers forehore
horse. And are these the workmanship of your
hands?
I did limn them.
Limn them? a good word, limn them: whose
picture is this? Anno Domini 1599. Believe me,
master Anno Domini was of a good settled age when
you limned him. 1599. years old? Lets see the other.
Etatis sue 24. Bear Lady he is somewhat younger. Belike
master Etatis sue was Anno Dominies son.
Is not your master a
He hath a little procliuitie to him
Procliuitie, good youth? I thank you for your
courtly procliuitie.
Approach good sir. I did send for you to draw
me a devise, an Impress, by Sinecdoche a Mott. By
Phoebus crimson taffeta mantle, I think I speak as
melodiously, look you sir, how think you ont? I wold
have you paint me, for my device, a good fat leg of
ewe mutton, swimming in stewed broth of plummes
(boy keel your mouth, it runs over) and the word
shall be; Hold my dish, whilst I spill my pottage. Sure, in
my conscience, twould be the most sweet device,
now.
Twould sent of kitchen stuff too much.
Gods neakes, now I remember me, I ha
the rarest devise in my head that ever breathed. Can
you paint me a drivelling reeling song, &amp; let the word
be, Vh.
A belch.
O, no no: Vh, paint me vh, or nothing.
It can not be done sir, but by a seeming kind of
drunkenness.
No? well, let me have a good miff•e ring, with
your own poesy graven in it, that must sing a small
treble, word for word, thus; And if you will my
true lover be,
Come follow me to the greene wot.
O Lord, sir, I can not make a picture sing.
Why? z'lid, I have seen painted things sing as sweet:
But I have it will tickle it, for a conceit in faith.
O dear Foolish, give me thy device.
How shall I purchase love of Rossaline?
S'will, flatter her soundly.
Her love is such, I can not flatter her:
Bu with my utmost vehemence of speech,
I have adored her beauties.
Hast writ good moving vnaffected rimes to
her.
O, yes, Foolish, but she scorns my writ.
Hast thou presented her with sumptuous gifts?
Alas, my fortunes are too weak to offer them.
O, then I have it, Isle tell thee what to doe.
What, good Foolish?
Go and hang thy self, I say, go hang thy self,
If that thou can not give, go hang thy self:
Isle rime thee dead, or verse thee to the rope.
How think thou of a Poet that sung thus;
Munera sola pacant, sola attuned munera formam:
Munere solicits Palate, Cypress erit.
Munera, munera.
Isle go and breath my woes unto the rocks,
And spend my grief upon the deafest seas.
Isle weep my passion to the senseless trees,
And load most solitary ayre with plaints.
For woods, trees, sea, or rocky Appenine,
Is not so ruthless as my Rossaline.
Farewell dear friend, expect no more of me,
Here ends my part, in this loves Comedy.
Now master Balurdo, whether are you going, ha?
Signior Foolish, how doe you faith, &amp; by my
troth, how doe you?
Whether art thou going, bully?
And as heaven help me, how doe you?
How, doe you in faith he?
Whether art going man?
O god, to the Court, isle be willing to give you
grace and good countnance, if I may but see you in
the presence.
O to court? farewell.
If you see one in a yellow taffeta doublet, cut
upon carnation valor, a greene hat, a blew pair of
velvet hose, a gilt rapier, and an orange •••ny pair of
worsted silk stockings, thats I, thats I.
Very good, farewell.
Ho, you shall know me as easily, I ha bought
me a new greene feather with a red sprig, you shall
see my wrought shirt hang out at my breeches, you
shall know me.
Very good, very good, farewell.
Marry in the mask twill be somewhat harde.
But if you hear any body speak so wittily, that hee
makes all the room laugh; that's I, that's I. Farewell
good Signior.
Advance the musiques prize, now capering wits,
Rise to your highest mount; let choice delight
Garland the brow of this triumphant night.
Sfoote, a sits like Lucifer himself.
Good sweet Duke, first let their voices, strain
for musics price. Give me the golden harp: faith
with your favour, isle be vmperesse.
Sweet niece cōtent: boys clear your voice &amp; sing.
By this gould, I had rather have a servant with a
short nose, and a thin hair, then have such a high
stretched minikin voice.
Fair niece, your reason?
By the sweet of love, I should fear extreme∣lie
that he were an Eunuch.
Spark spirit, how like you his voice?
Spark spirit, how like you his voice?
So help me, youth, thy voice squeakes like a dry cork
shoe: come, come; lets hear the next.
Trust me, a good strong mean, Well sung my
boy.
Hold, hold, hold: are ye blind, could you not see
my voice coming for the harp. And I knock not di∣vision
on the head, take hence the harp, make me a
slip, and let me go but for nine pence. Sir Mark, strike
up for master Balurdo.
Iudgemēt gentlemen, iudgemēt. Wast not aboue line?
I appeal to your mouths that heard my song.
Doe me right, and dub me knight Balurdo.
Kneel down, and isle dub thee knight of the
golden harp.
Indeed law, doe, and isle make you Lady of the silver fiddlestick,
Come, kneel, kneel.
My troth, I thank you, it hath never a whistle in it.
Nay, good sweet cousin raise up your drooping eyes,
&amp; I were at the point of To have &amp; to hold, from this
day forward, I would be ashamed to look thus him∣pish.
What my pretty Cousin, tic but the loss of an od
maidenhead: shall's dance? thou art so sad, hark in
mine ear. I was about to say, but isle forbear.
I come, I come, more then most hunny-suckle
sweet Ladies, pine not for my presence, isle return
in pomp. Well spoke sir Ieffrey Balurdo. As I am a true
knight, I feel honourable eloquence begin to grope
me already.
Faith, mad niece, I wonder when thou wilt
marry?
Faith, kind uncle, when men abandon jealousy,
forsake taking of Tobacco, and cease to wear their
beards so rudely long. Oh, to have a husband with
a mouth continually smoking, with a bush of furs on
the ridge of his chin, ready still to slop into his foe∣ming
chaps; ah, tic more than most intolerable.
Nay faith, sweet niece, I was mighty strong
in thought we should have shut up night with an old
Comedy: the Prince of Millane shall have Mellida, &amp;
thou should have
No body, good sweet uncle. I tell you, sir, I
have 39. servants, and my munkey that makes the for∣ties.
Now I love al of them lightly for something, but
affect none of them seriously for any thing. One's a
passionate fool, and hee flatters me aboue belief:
the second's a testy ape, and hee rails at me beyond
reason: the third's as grave as some Censor, and hee
strokes up his moustaches three times, and makes six
plots of set faces, before he speaks one wise word: the
ford's as dry, as the bur of an heartichoke; the fifth
paints, and hath always a good colour for what hee
speaks: the sixth
Stay, stay, sweet niece, what makes you thus suss∣pect
young gallants worth.
Oh, when I see one were a periwig, I dread his
hair; another wallow in a great slop, I mistrust
the proportion of his thigh; and wears a ruffled boot,
I fear the fashion of his leg. Thus, something in each
thing, one trick in every thing makes me mistrust im∣perfection
in all parts; and there's the full point of my
addiction.
The roome's too scant: boys, stand in there, close.
In faith, fair sir, I am too sad to dance.
How's that, how's that? too sad? By heaven dance,
And grace him to, or, go to, I say no more.
A burning glass, the word splendent Phoebo?
Tic too curious, I conceit it not.
Faith, isle tel thee. Isle no longer burn, then you'll
shine and smile upon my love. For look ye fairest, by
your pure sweets,
I doe not dote upon your excellence.
And faith, unless you shed your brightest beams
Of sunny favour, and acceptiue grace
Upon my tender love, I doe not burn:
Marry but shine, and isle reflect your beams,
with fervent ardor. Faith I wold be loath to flatter thee
fair soul, because I love, not dote, court like thy hus∣band;
which thy father swears, to morrow morn I
must be. This is all, and now from henceforth, trust me
Mellida, Isle not speak one wise word to thee more.
I trust ye.
By my troth, Isle speak pure fool to thee now.
You will speak the liker your self.
Good faith, Isle accept of the cockescombe, so
you will not refuse the babble.
Nay good sweet, keep them both, I am ena∣mored
of neither.
Go to, I must take you down for this. Lend
me your ear.
A glow worm, the word? Splendescit tantùm te∣nebris.
O, Lady, the glow worm figurates my valour:
which shines brightest in most dark, dismal and whore∣rid
achievements.
Or rather, your glow worm represents your
wit, which only seems to have fire in it, though indeed
tic but an ignis fatuus, and shines only in the dark
dead night of fools admiration.
Lady, my wit hath spurs, if it wet disposed to
ride you.
Faith sir, your wits spurs have but walking to∣wels;
dull, blunt, they will not draw blood: the gen∣tlemen
ushers may admit them the Presence, for any
wrong they can doe to Ladies.
Truly, I have strained a note aboue Ela, for a de∣uise;
look you, tic a fair ruled singing book: the
word, Perfect, if it were pricked.
Though you are masked, I can guess who you
are by your wit. You are not the exquisite Balurdo, the
most rarely shaped Balurdo.
Who, I? No I am not sir Ieffrey Balurdo. I am not
as well known by my wit, as an alehouse by a red lat∣tice.
I am not worthy to love and be beloved of Flauia.
I will not scorn to favour such good parts, as
are applauded in your rarest self.
Truly, you speak wisely, and like a Iantlewo∣man
of fourteen years of age. You know the stone
called lapis; the nearer it comes to the fire, the hotter
it is: and the bird, which the Geometricians cal Auis,
the farther it is from the earth, the nearer it is to the
heaven: and love, the nigher it is to the flame, the
more remote (ther's a word, remote) the more remote
it is from the frost, Your wit is quick, a little thing
pleases a young Lady, and a small favour contents
an old Courtier; and so, sweet mistress I truss my
codpeece point.
What might import this flourish? bring vs word.
Stand away: here's such a company of flibotes,
hulling about this galleasse of greatness, that there's
no boarding him.
Doe you hear yon thing called, Duke?
How now blunt Foolish, what's the news?
Yonder's a knight, hath brought Andrugio's
head, &amp; craves admittance to your chair of state.
Conduct him with attendance sumptuous,
Sound all the pleasing instruments of joy:
Make triumph, stand on tiptoe whilst wee meet:
O sight most gracious, O revenge most sweet!
We vow, by the honour of our birth, to recompense
any man that brngeth Andrugio's head, with twenty thou∣sand
double Pistolets, and the endearing to our choicest love.
We still with most vnmou'd resolved confirm
Our large munificence: and here breath
A sad and solemn protestation:
When I recall this vow, O, let our house
Be even commanded, stained, and trampled on,
As worthless rubbish of nobility.
Then, here, Piero, is Andrugios head,
Royally casked in a helm of steel:
Give me thy love, and take it. My dauntless soul
Hath that unbounded vigour in his spirits,
That it can bear more rank indignity,
With less impatience, then thy cankered hate
Can sting and venom his untainted worth,
With the most viperous sound of malice. Strike,
O, let no glimpse of honour light thy thoughts,
If there be any heat of royal breath
Creeping in thy veins, O stifle it.
Be still thy self, bloody and treacherous.
Fame not thy house with an admired act
Of princely pity. Piero, I am come,
To soil thy house with an eternal blot
Of savage cruelty; strike, or bid me strike.
I pray my death; that thy ne'er dying shame
Might live immortal to posterity.
Come, be a princely hangman, stop my breath.
O dread thou shame, no more then I dread death.
We are amazed, our royal spirits numbed,
In stiff astonished wonder at thy prowess,
Most mighty, valiant, and high towering heart.
We blush, and turn our hate upon our selves,
For hating such an vnpeer'd excellence.
I joy my state: him whom I loathed before,
That now I honour, love; nay more, adore.
But stay: what tragic spectacle appears,
Whose body bear you in that mournful hearse?
The breathless trunk of young Antonio.
Antonio (aye me) my Lord, my love, my
Sweet precious issue of most honoured blood,
Rich hope, ripe virtue, O untimely loss.
Come hither friend. Pree thee doe not weep:
Why, I am glad hoe's dead, he shall not see
His fathers vanquished, by his enemy.
Even in princely honour, nay pree thee speak.
How died the wretched boy?
My Lord
I hope he dyed yet like my son, in faith.
Alas, my Lord
He died unforced, I trust, and valiantly.
Poor gentleman, being
Did his hand shake, or his eye look dull,
His thoughts reel, fearful when he struck the stroke?
And if they did, Isle rend them out the hearse,
Rip up his cearecloth, mangle his bleak face;
That when he comes to heaven, the powers divine
Shall ne'er take notice that he was my son.
Isle quite disclaim his birth: nay pree thee speak:
And it were not hooped with steel, my breast wold break.
O that my spirit in a sigh could mount,
Into the Sphere, where thy sweet soul doth rest.
O that my tears, bedeawing thy wan cheek,
Could make new spirit sprout in thy could blood.
Verily, he looks as pitifully, as a poor Iohn: as
I am true knight, I could weep like a stoned horse.
Villain, tic thou hast murdered my son.
Thy unrelenting spirit (thou black dog,
That took no passion of his fatal love)
Hath forced him give his life untimely end.
Oh that my life, her love, my dearest blood
Would but redeem one minute of his breath.
I seize that breath. Stād not amazed, great states:
I rise from death, that never lived till now.
Piero, keep thy vow, and I enjoy
More vnexpressed height of happiness,
Then power of thought can reach: if not, lo here
There stands my tomb, and here a pleasing stage:
Most wished spectators of my Tragedy,
To this end have I feigned, that her fair eye,
For whom I lived, might bless me ere I die.
Mell, Can breath depaint my vncōceiued thoughts?
Can words describe my infinite delight,
Of seeing thee, my Lord Antonio?
O no; conceit, breath, passion, words be dumb,
Whilst I instill the dew of my sweet bliss,
In the soft pressure of a melting kiss;
Sic, sic la ire sub vmbras.
Fair son (now Isle be proud to call thee son)
Enjoy me thus; my very breast is thine:
Possess me freely, I am wholly thine.
Dear father▪
Sweet son, sweet son; I can speak no more:
My joys passion flows aboue the shore,
And chokes the current of my speech.
Young Florence prince, to you my lips must beg,
For a remittance of your interest.
In your fair daughter, with all my thought,
So help me faith, the naked truth Isle unfold;
He that was ne'er hot, will soon be cold.
No man else makes claim unto her.
The valiant speak truth in brief: no
Truly, for sir Ieffrey Balurdo, he disclaims to have
had any thing in her,
Then here I give her to Antonio.
Royal, valiant, most respected prince,
Let's clip our hands; Isle thus observe my vow;
I promised twenty thousand double Pistolets,
With the endearing to my dearest love,
To him that brought thy head; thine be the gold,
To solemnise our houses unity:
My love be thine, the all I have be thine.
Fill vs fresh wine, the form weal take by this:
Weal drink a health, while they two sip a kiss.
Now, there remains no discord that can sound
Harsh accents to the ear of our accord:
So please your niece to match.
Troth uncle, when my sweet faced cousin hath told
me how she likes the thing, called wedlock; may be Isle
take a survey of the checkroll of my servants; &amp; he that
hath the best parts of, Isle prick him down for my
husband.
For passion of love now, remember me to my
mistress, Lady Rossaline, when she is pricking down the
good parts of her servants. As I am true knight, I grow
stiff: I shall carry it.
I will.
Sound Lidian wires, once make a pleasing note,
On Nectar streams of your sweet airs, to flote.
Here ends the comic crosses of true love:
Oh may the passage most successful prove.
GEntlemen, though I remain an armed Epilogue, I
stand not as a peremptory challenger of desert, either for
him that composed the Comedy, or for vs that acted it: but
a most submissive suppliant for both. What imperfection you
have seen in vs, leave with vs, &amp; weal amend it; what hath
pleased you, take with you, &amp; cherish it. You shall not be more
ready to embrace any thing cōmendable, then we will endea∣uour
to amend all things reproueable. What we are, is by your
favour. What we shall be, rests all in your applausiue incou∣regiments.

THe doubtful Tule (Gentlemen) prefixed
Upon the Argument we have in hand,
May breed suspense, and wrongfully disturb
The peaceful quiet of your settled thoughts:
To stop which scruple, let this brief suffice.
It is no pamperd glutton we present,
Nor aged Councellor to youthful sin,
But one, whose virtue shone aboue the rest,
A valiant Martyr, and a virtuous peer,
In whose true faith and loyalty expressed
Unto his sovereign, and his countries weal:
We strive to pay that tribute of our Love,
Your favours merit, let fair Truth be graced,
Since forged invention former time defaced.
MY Lords, I charge ye in his Highness name,
To keep the peace, you, and your followers.
Good M. Sheriff, look unto your self.
Do so, for we have other business.
Will ye disturb the Judges, and the Assise?
Hear the Kings proclamation ye were best.
Hold then, lets hear it.
But be brief, ye were best.
O yes.
Cossone, make shorter O, or shall mar your Yes.
O yes.
What, has her nothing to say but O yes?
O yes.
O nay, pie Cosse plut down with her, down with her,
A Paws a Paws.
A Herbert a Herbert, and down with Powesse.
Hold, in the Kings name, hold.
Down e tha call naues name, down.
Powesse, I think thy Welsh and thou do smart.
Herbert, I think my sword came near thy heart.
Thy hearts best blood shall pay the loss of mine.
A Herbert a Herbert.
A Paws a Paws.
My Lords, as you are liege men to the Crown,
True noblemen, and subjects to the King,
Attend his Highness proclamation,
Commanded by the Judges of Assise,
For keeping peace at this assembly.
Good M. Mayor of Hereford be brief.
Sergeant, without the ceremony of O yes.
Pronoun aloud the proclamation.
The Kings Justices, perceiving what public mis∣chief may ensue this private quarrel in his majesties name do straightly charge and command all persons, of what degree soever, to depart this city of Hereford, except such as are bound to give attendance at this Assise, and that no man pre∣sum to wear any weapon, especially welsh-hookes, forest bills.
Haw, no pill nor wells hoog? ha?
Peace, and hear the proclamation.
And that the Lord Powesse do presently disperse and discharge his retinue, and depart the city in the Kings peace, he and his followers, on pain of imprisonment.
Haw? put her Lord Paws in prison, A Paws
A Paws, cossone live and tie with her Lord.
A Herbert a Herbert.
Whore's the Lord Herbert? is he hurt or slain?
Hoe's here my Lord.
How fares hid Lordship, friends?
Mortally wounded, speechless, he cannot live.
Convey him hence, let not his wounds take ayre,
And get him dressed with expedition, 
M. Mayor of Hereford M Snriue of the shire,
Commit Lord Powesse to safe custody,
To answer the disturbance of the peace,
Lord Herberts peril, and his high contempt
Of vs, and you the Kings commissioners,
See it be done with care and diligence.
Please it your Lordship, my Lord Powesse is gone,
Past all recovery.
Yet let search be made,
To apprehend his followers that are left.
There are some of them, sirs, lay ho•d on them,
Of vs, and why? what has her done I pray you?
Disarm them Bailiffs.
Officers assist.
Hear you Lore shudge, what reason is for this?
Cosson pe puse for fighting for our Lord?
Away with them.
Harg you my Lord.
Gough my Lord Herberts man's a shitten call naue, 
Ise li•e and •e in good quarrel.
Pray you do shustice, let awl be prison.
Prison no,
Lord shudge I wool give you pale, good suerty.
What Bale? what suerties?
Her cousin ap Ries, ap Euan, ap Morris, ap More∣began, ap Lluellyn, ap Madoc, ap Meredith, ap Griffin, ap Day, ap Owen ap Shinken Shones.
Two of the most, sufficient are ynow,
And't please your Lordship these are al but one.
To Jail with them, and the Lord Herberts men,
Weal talk with them, when the Assise is done, 
Riotous, audacious, and unruly Grooms,
Must we be forced to come from the Bench,
To quiet brawls, which every Constable
In other civil places can suppress?
What was the quarrel that caused all this stir?
About religion (as I heard) my Lord.
Lord Powesse detracted from the power of Rome,
Affirming Wickliffes doctrine to be true,
And Romes erroneous: hot reply was made
By the lord Herbert, they were traitors all
That would maintain it: Powesse answered,
They were as true, as noble, and as wise
As he, that would defend it with their lives,
He named for instance sir Iohn Old-castle
The Lord Cobham: He•bert replied again,
He, thou, and all are traitors that so hold.
The he was given, the several factions drawn,
And so enraged, that we could not appease it.
This case concerns the Kings prerogative,
And•s dangerous to the State and common wealth.
Gentlemen, Justices, master Mayor, and master Shrive,
It doth behove vs all, and each of vs
In general and particular, to have care
For the suppressing of all mutinies,
And all assemblies, except soldiers musters
For the Kings preparation into France.
We hear of secret conventicles made,
And there is doubt of some conspiracies,
Which may break out into rebellious arms
When the King's gone, perchance before he go:
Note as an instance, this one perilous fray,
What factions might have grown on either part,
To the destruction of the King and Realm,
Yet, in my conscience, sir Iohn Old-castle
Innocent of it, only his name was used.
We therefore from his Highness give this charge.
You moister Mayor, look to your citizens,
You moister Sheriff unto your shire, and you
As Justices in every ones precinct
There be no meetings. When the vulgar sort
Sit on their Ale-bench, with their cups and kannes,
Matters of state be not their common talk,
Nor pure religion by their lips prophande.
Let vs return unto the Bench again,
And there examine further of this fray. 
Sirs, have ye taken the lord Powesse yet?
No, nor heard of him.
No, hoe's gone far enough.
They that are left behind, shall answer all. 
Now my lord Bishop, take free liberty
To speak your mind: what is your suit to vs?
My noble Lord, no more than what you know,
And have bin oftentimes invested with:
Grievous complaints have past between the lips
Of envious persons to upbraid the Clergy,
Some carping at the livings which we have,
And others spurning at the ceremonies
That are of ancient custom in the church.
Amongst the which, Lord Cobham is a chief:
What inconvenience may proceed hereof,
Both to the King and to the common wealth,
May easily be discerned, when like a frenzy
This innovation shall possess their minds.
These upstarts will have followers to uphold
Their damned opinion, more than Harry shall
To undergo his quarrel against the French.
What proof is there against them to be had,
That what you say the law may justify?
They give themselves the name of Protestants,
And meet in fields and solitary groves.
Was ever heard (my Lord) the like till now?
That thieves and rebels, s blood heretikes,
Plain heretikes, Isle stand toote to their teeth,
Should have to colour, their vile practises,
A title of such worth, as Protestant?
O but you must not swear, it ill becomes
One of your coat, to rap out bloody oaths.
Pardon him good my Lord, it is his zeal,
An honest country prelate, who laments
To see such foul disorder in the church.
Theres one they call him Sir Iohn Old-castle,
He has not his name for nought: for like a castle
Doth he encompass them within his walls,
But till that castle be subverted quite,
We ne'er shall be at quiet in the realm.
That is our suit, my Lord, that he be tan,
And brought in question for his heresy,
Beside, two letters brought me out of Wales,
Wherein my Lord Herford writes to me,
What tumult and sedition was begun,
About the Lord Cobham, at the Sises there,
For they had much ado to calm the rage,
And that the valiant Herbert is there slain.
A fire that must be quenched; well, say no more,
The King anon goes to the counsel chamber,
There to debate of matters touching France:
As he doth pass by, Isle inform his grace
Concerning your petition: Master Butler,
If I forget, do you remember me,
I will my Lord. 
Not for a recompense,
But as a token of our love to you,
By me my Lords of the clergy do present
This purse, and in it full a thousand Angels,
Praying your Lordship to accept their gift.
I thank them, my Lord Bishop, for their love,
But will not take their money, if you please
To give it to this gentleman, you may.
Sir, then we crave your furtherance herein.
The best I can my Lord of Rochester.
Nay, pray ye take it, trust me but you shall,
Were ye all three upon New Market heath,
You should not need strain curtsy who should ha'te,
Sir Iohn would quickly rid ye of that care.
The King is coming, fear ye not my Lord,
The very first thing I will break with him,
Shall be about your matter. 
My Lord of Suffolk,
Was it not said the Clergy did refuse
To lend vs money toward our wars in France?
It was my Lord, but very wrongfully.
I know it was, for Huntington here tells me,
They have bin very bountiful of late.
And still they vow my gracious Lord to be so,
Hoping your majesty will think of them,
As of your loving subjects, and suppress
All such malicious errors as begin
To spot their calling, and disturb the church.
God else forbid: why Suffolk, is there
Any new rupture to disquiet them?
No new my Lord, the old is great enough,
And so increasing as if not cut down,
Will breed a scandal to your royal state,
And set your Kingdom quickly in an uproar,
The Kentish knight Lord Cobham, in despite
Of any law, or spiritual discipline,
Maintains this upstart new religion still,
And divers great assemblies by his means
And private quarrels, are commenced abroad,
As by this letter more at large my liege,
Is made apparent.
We do find it here,
There was in Wales a certain fray of late,
Between two noblemen, but what of this?
Follows it straight Lord Cobham must be he
Did cause the same? I dare be sworn (good knight)
He never dreamt of any such contention.
But in his name the quarrel did begin,
About the opinion which he held (my hege.)
How if it did? was either he in place,
To take part with them, or abette them in it?
If brabbling fellows, whose in kindled blood,
Seethes in their fiery veins, will needs go fight,
Making their quarrels of some words that passt,
Either of you, or you, amongst their cups,
Is the fault yours, or are they guilty of it?
With pardon of your Highness (my dread lord)
Such little sparks neglected, may in time
Grow to a mighty flame: but thats not all,
He doth beside maintain a strange religion,
And will not be compelled to come to mass.
We do beseech you therefore gracious prince,
Without offence unto your majesty
We may be bold to use authority.
As how?
To summon him unto the Arches,
Where such offences have their punishment.
To answer personally, is that your meaning?
It is, my lord.
How if he appeal?
He cannot (my Lord) in such a case as this.
Not where Religion is the plea, my lord.
I took it always, that our self stood out,
As a sufficient refuge, unto whom
Not any but might lawfully appeal.
But weal not argue now upon that point:
For sir Iohn Old-castle whom you accuse,
Let me entreat you to dispense awhile
With your high title of pre-eminence. 
Report did never yet condemn him so,
But he hath always been reputed loyal:
And in my knowledge I can say thus much,
That he is virtuous, wise, and honourable:
If any way his conscience be seduced,
To waver in his faith: Isle send for him,
And school him privately, if that serve not,
Then afterword you may proceed against him.
Butler, be you the messenger for vs,
And will him presently repair to court. 
How now my lord, why stand you discontent?
In sooth, me thinks the King hath well decreed.
Yea, yea, sir Iohn, if he would keep his word,
But I perceive he favours him so much,
As this will be to small effect, I fear.
Why then Isle tell you what you're best to do:
If you suspect the King will be but cold
In reprehending him, send you a process too
To serve upon him: so you may be sure
To make him answer't, howsoever it fall.
And well remembered, I will have it so,
A Sumner shall be sent about it strait 
Yea, doe so, in the mean space this remains
For kind sir Iohn of Wrotham honest Jack.
Me thinks the purse of gold the Bishop gave,
Made a good show, it had a tempting look,
Beshrew me, but my fingers ends do itch
To be upon those rudduks: well, tic thus:
I am not as the world does take me for:
If ever woolfe were clothed in sheep coat,
Then I am he, old huddle and twang, in faith,
A priest in show, but in plain terms, a th•efe,
Yet let me tell you too, an honest thief.
One that will take it where it may besp.
And spend it freely in good fellowship.
I have as many shapes as Proteus had,
That still when any villainy is done,
There may be none suspect it was sir Iohn.
Besides, to comfort me, for whats this life,
Except the crabbed bitterness thereof
Be sweetened now and then with lechery?
I have my Doll, my concubine as it were,
To frolic with, a lusty bouncing girl.
But whilst I loiter here the gold, may scope,
And that must not be so, it is mine own,
Therefore Isle meet him on his way to court,
And shrive him of it: there will be the sport. 
God help, God help, there's law for punishing,
But theres no law for our necessity:
There be more stocks to set poor soldiers in,
Than there be houses to relieve them at.
Faith, housekeeping decays in every place,
Even as Saint Peter writ, still worse and worse
Moister mayor of Rochester has given command∣meant, that none shall go abroad out of the parish, and they have set an order down forsooth, what every poor houshol∣der must give towards our relief: where there be some ceased I may say to you, had almost as much need to beg as we.
It is a hard world the while.
If a poor man come to a door to ask for Gods sake, they ask him for a licence, or a certificate from a Justice.
Faith we have none, but what we bear upon our by∣dies, our maimed limbs, God help vs.
And yet, as lame as I am, Isle with the king into France, if I can crawl but a ship-boorde, I had rather be slain in France, than starve in England.
Ha, were I but as lusty as I was at the battle of Shrewsbury, I would not doe as I do: but we are now come to the good lord Cobhams, to the best man to the poor that
is in all Kent.
God bless him, there be but few such.
Thou peevish froward man, what would thou have?
This pride, this pride, brings all to beggary,
I served your father, and your grandfather,
Show me such two men now: no, no,
Your backs, your backs, the devil and pride,
Has cut the throat of all good housekeeping,
They were the best Yeomens masters, that
Ever were in England.
Yea, except thou have a crew of seely knaves,
And sturdy rogues, still feeding at my gate,
There is no hospitality with thee.
They may sit at the gate well enough, but the devil of any thing you give them, except they will eat stones.
Tic long then of such hungry knaves as you, 
Yea sir, here is your retinue, your guests be come,
They know their hours I warrant you.
God bless your honour, God save the good Lord Cobham, and all his house,
Good your honour, bestow your blessed alms,
Upon poor men.
Now sir, here be your Alms knights.
Now are you as safe as the Emperor.
My Alms knights: nay, they are yours,
It is a shame for you, and Isle stand too't,
Your foolish alms maintains more vagabonds,
Then all the noblemen in Kent beside.
Out you rogues, you knaves, work for your livings,
Alas poor men, O Lord, they may beg their hearts out,
Theres no more charity amongst men,
Then amongst so many mastiff dogs,
What make you here, you needy knaves?
Away, away, you villains.
I beseech you sit, be good to vs.
Nay, nay, they know thee well enough, I think that all the beggars in this land are thy acquaintance, go bestow your alms, none will control you sir.
What should I give them? you are grown so beg∣garly, you have scarce a bit of bread to give at your door: you talk of your religion so long, that you have banished cha∣rite from amongst you, a man may make a flax shop in your kitchen chimneys, for any fire there is stirring.
If thou wilt give them nothing, send them hence, let them not stand here starving in the cold.
Who I drive them hence? if I drive poor men from your door, Isle be hanged, I know not what I may come to my self: yea, God help you poor knaves, ye see the world in faith, well, you had a mother: well, God be with thee good Lady, thy solo's at rest: she gave more in shirts and smocks to poor children, then you spend in your house, &amp; yet you live a beg∣gar too.
Even the worst deed that ere my mother did, was in relieving such a fool as thou.
Yea, yea, I am a fool still, with all your wit you will die a beggar, go too.
Go you old fool, give the poor people some∣thing, go in poor men into the inner court, and take such alms as there is to be had.
God bless your honour.
Hang you roags, hang you, theres nothing but misery amongst you, you fear no law you. 
God bless you good moister Raf, God save your life, you are good to the poor still.
What fellow's yonder comes along the grove?
Few passengers there be that know this way:
Me thinks he stops as though he stayed for me,
And meant to shroud himself amongst the bushes.
I know the Clergy hate me to the death,
And my religion gets me many foes:
And this may be some desperate rogue,
Subornd to work me mischief: As it
Pleases God, if he come toward me, sure
Isle stay his coming, be he but one man,
What soar he be:
I have been well acquainted with that face.
Well met my honourable lord and friend.
You are welcome sir, what ere you be,
But of this sudden sir, I do not know you.
I am one that wishes well unto your honour,
My name is Powes, an old friend of yours.
My honourable lord, and worthy friend,
What makes your lordship thus alone in Kent,
And thus disguised in this strange attire?
My Lord, an unexpected accident,
Hath at this time enforced me to these parts:
And thus it hoped, not yet full five days since,
Now at the last Assise at Hereford,
It chanced that the lord Herbert and my self,
Amongst other things, discoursing at the table,
To fall in speech about some certain points
Of Wickcliffes doctrine, against the papacy,
And the religion catholic, maintained
Through the most part of Europe at this day.
This wilful teasty lord stuck not to say,
That Wickcliffe was a knave, a schismatike,
His doctrine devilish and heretical,
And what soar he was maintained the same,
was traitor both to God and to his country.
Being moved at his peremptory speech,
I told him, some maintained those opinions,
Men, and truer subjects then lord Herbert was:
And he replying in comparisons:
Your name was urged, my lord, against his challenge,
To be a perfect favourer of the truth.
And to be short, from words we fell to blows,
Our servants, and our tenants taking parts,
Many on both sides hurt: and for an hour
The broil by no means could be pacified,
Until the Judges rising from the bench,
Were in their persons forced to part the fray.
I hope no man was violently slain.
Faith none I trust, but the lord Herberts self,
Who is in truth so dangerously hurt,
As it is doubted he can hardly scope.
I am sorry, my good lord, of these ill news.
This is the cause that drives me into Kent,
To shroud my self with you so good a friend,
Until I hear how things do speed at home.
Your lordship is most welcome unto Cobham,
But I am very sorry, my good lord,
My name was brought in question in this matter,
Considering I have many enemies,
That threaten malice, and do lie in waite
To take aduantange of the smallest thing.
But you are welcome, and repose your lordship,
And keep your self here secret in my house,
Until we hear how the lord Herbert speeds:
Here comes my man. 
Sir, what news?
Yonders one moister Butler of the privy cham∣ber, is sent unto you from the King.
I pray God the lord Herbert be not dead, and the King hearing whither I am gone, hath sent for me.
Comfort your self my lord, I warrant you.
Fellow, what ails thee? dost thou quake? dost thou shake? dost thou tremble? ha?
Peace you old fool, sir, convey this gentleman in the back way, and bring the other into the walk.
Come sir. you are welcome, if you love my lord.
God have mercy gentle friend. 
I thought as much, that it would not be long before I
heard of something from the King, about this matter.
Sir, yonder my lord walks, you see him,
Isle have your men into the Cellar the while.
welcome good moister Butler.
Thanks, my good lord: his Majesty doth com∣mend his love unto your lordship, and wills you to repair un∣to the court.
God bless his Highness, and confound his enne∣mies, I hope his Majesty is well.
In health, my lord.
God long continue it: me thinks you look as though you were not well, what ails you sir?
Faith I have had a foolish odd mischance, that an∣gers me: coming over Shooters hill, there came a fellow to me like a Sailor, and asked me money, and whilst I staide my horse to draw my purse, he takes th'aduantage of a little bank and leaps behind me, whips my purse away, and with a so∣deign jerk I know not how, threw me at least three yards out of my saddle. I never was so robbed in all my life.
I am very sorry sir for your mischance, wee will send our warrant forth, to stay such suspicious persons as shall be found, then moister Butler, we will attend you.
I humbly thank your lordship, I will attend you.
I have the law to warrant what I do, and though the Lord Cobham be a noble man, that dispenses not with law, I dare serve process were a five noble men, though we Sum∣ners make sometimes a mad slip in a corner with a pretty wench, a Sumner must not go always by seeing, a manne may be content to hide his eyes, where he may feel his profit: well, this is my Lord Cobhams house, if I can devise to speak with him, if not, Isle clap my citation vpon's door, so my lord of Rochester bid me, but me thinks here comes one of his men. 
Welcome good fellow, welcome, who would thou
speak with?
With my lord Cobham, I would speak, if thou be one of his men.
Yes I am one of his men, but thou can not speak with my lord.
May I send to him them?
Isle tel thee that, when I know thy errand.
I will not tel my errand to thee.
Then keep it to thy self, and walk like a knave as thou came.
I tell thee my lord keeps no knaves, sir.
Then thou serve him not, I believe, what lord is thy master?
My lord of Rochester.
In good time, and what would thou have with my lord Cobham?
I come by virtue of a process, to ascite him to ap∣pear before my lord, in the court at Rochester.
Well, God grant me patience, I could eat this conger. My lord is not at home, therefore it were good Sum∣ner you carried your process back.
Why, if he will not be spoken withal, then will I leave it here, and see you that he take knowledge of it.
Swounds you slave, do you set up your bills here, go to, take it down again, doest thou know what thou dost, dost thee know on whom thou serve process?
Yes marry doe I, Sir Iohn Old-castle Lord Cob∣ham.
I am glad thou know him yet, and sir dost not thou know, that the lord Cobham is a brave lord, that keeps good beef and beer in his house, and every day feeds a hundred poor people it's gate, and keeps a hundred tall fell∣lowes?
Whats that to my process?
Mary this sir, is this process parchment▪
Yes mary.
And this seal wax?
It is so.
If this be parchment, &amp; this wax, eat you this parch∣meant, and this wax, or I will make parchment of your skin, and beat your brains into wax: Sir Sumner dispatch, devour, sir devour.
I am my lord of Rochesters Sumner, I came to do my office, and thou shalt answer it.
Sir, no railing, but betake you to your teeth, thou shalt eat no worse then thou bring with thee, thou bring it for my lord, and wilt thou bring my lord worse then thou wilt eat thy self?
Sir, I brought it not my lord to eat.
O do you sir me now, ell's one for that, but isle make you eat it, for bringing it.
I cannot eat it.
Can you not? should isle beat you until you have a stomach. 
O hold, hold, good master serving-man, I will eat it.
Be champping, be chawing sir, or Isle chaw you, you rogue, the purest of the honey.
Tough wax, is the purest of the honey.
O Lord sir, oh oh, 
Feed, feed, wholesome rogue, wholesome.
Cannot you like an honest Sumner walk with the devil your brother, to fetch in your Bailiffs rents, but you must come to a noble mans house with process? Sbloud if thy seal were as broad as the lead that covers Rochester church, thou should eat it.
O I am almost choked, I am almost choked.
Who's within there? will you shame my Lord, is there no beer in the house? Butler I say.
Here, here. 
Give him Beer. 
There, tough old sheepskins, bare dry meat.
O sir, let me go no further, Isle eat my word.
Yea mary sir, so I mean you shall eat more then your own word, for isle make you eat all the words in the pro∣cesse. Why you drab monger, cannot the secrets of al the wen∣ches in a sheire serve your turn, but you must come hither with a citation with a pox? Isle cite you.  A cup of sack for the Sumner.
Here sir here.
Here slave I drink to thee.
I thank you sir.
Now if thou findst thy stomach well, because thou shalt see my Lord keep's meat in's house, if thou wilt go in thou shalt have a piece of beef to thy break fast.
No I am very well good M. serving-man, I thank you, very well sir.
I am glad on it, th•n be walking towards Rochester to keep your stomach warm: and Sumner, if I may know you disturb a good wench within this Diocese, if I do not make thee eat her petticoat, if there were four yards of Kentish cloth in it, I am a villain.
God be with you M. seruingmaan.
Farewell Sumner. 
God save you M. Harpoole.
Welcome Constable, welcome Constable, what news with thee?
And't please you M. Harpoole, I am to make hue to cry, for a fellow with one eye that has robed two Clothiers, and am to crave your hindrance, for to search all suspected places, and they say there was a woman in the company.
Hast thou bin at the Alehouse, hast thou sought there?
I durst not search sir, in my Lord Cobhams liberty, except I had some of his servants, which are for my warrant.
An honest Constable, an honest Constable, cal forth him that keeps the Alehouse there.
Ho, who's within there?
Who calls there, come near a Gods name, oh is it
you M. Constable and M. Harpoole, you are welcome with all my heart, what make you here so early this morning?
Sir, what strangers do you lodge, there is a robbery done this morning, and we are to search for all suspected per∣sons.
Gods bores, I am sorry for it, in faith sir I lodge no by∣die but a good honest merry priest, they call him sir Iohn a Wrootham, and a handsome woman that is his niece, that he says he has some suit in law for, and as they go up &amp; down to London, sometimes they lie at my house.
What, is he here in thy house now?
She is sir, I promise you sir he is a quiet man, and be∣cause he will not trouble too many rooms, he makes the wo∣man lie every night at his beds feet.
Bring her forth Constable, bring her forth, let's see her, let's see her.
Dorothy, you must come down to M. Constable.
A non forsooth. 
Welcome sweet lass, welcome.
I thank you good M. serving-man, and master Con∣stable also.
A plump girl by the mas, a plump girl, ha Dol ha, wilt thou forsake the priest, and go with me.
A well said M. Harpoole, you are a merry old man in faith, in faith you will never be old: now by the macke, a pretty wench indeed.
Ye old mad merry Constable, art thou advised of that ha, well said Dol, fill some ale here.
Oh if I wist this old priest would not stick to me, by Jove I would ingle this old serving-man.
Oh you o•d mad colt, in faith Isle feak you: fill all the pots in the house there.
Oh well said M. Harpoole, you are heart of oak when ell's done.
Ha Dol, thou hast a sweet pair of lips by the mass.
Truly you are a most sweet old man, as ever I saw, by my troth, you have a face, able to make any woman in love with you.
Fill sweet Doll, Isle drink to thee.
I pledge you sir, and thank you therefore, and I pray you let it come.
 Doll, can thou love me? a mad mer∣rye lass, would to God I had never seen thee.
I warrant you you will not out of my thoughts this tweluemonth, truly you are as full of favour, as a man may be. Ah these sweet grey lockes, by my troth, they are most lovely.
Gods boors moister Harpoole, I will have one bus too.
No licking for you Constable, hand off, hand off.
Bur lady I love kissing as well as you.
Oh you are an od boy, you have a wanton eye of your own: ah you sweet sugar leapt wanton, you will win as ma∣ny women's hearts as come in your company. 
Doll, come hither.
Priest, she shall not.
Isle come anon, sweet love.
Hand off, old fornicator.
Vicar, Isle sit here in spite of thee, is this fit stuff for a priest to carry up and down with him?
Ah sir, dost thou not know, that a good fellow parson may have a chapel of ease, where his parish Church is far off?
You whooreson stoned Vicar.
You old stale ruffin, you lion of Cotswold.
Swounds Vicar, Isle geld you. 
Keep the Kings peace.
Murder, murder, murder.
Hold, as you are men, hold, for Gods sake be quiet: put up your weapons, you draw not in my house.
You whooreson bawdy priest.
You old mutton monger.
Hold sir Iohn, hold.
I pray thee sweet heart be quiet, I was but sitting to drink a pot of ale with him, even as kind a man as ever I met with.
Thou art a thief I warrant thee.
Then I am but as thou hast been in thy days, lets not be ashamed of our trade, the King has been a thief him∣self.
Come, be quiet, hast thou sped?
I have wench, here be crowns in faith.
Come, lets be all friends then.
Well said mistress Dorothy in faith.
Thou art the midst priest that ever I met with.
Give me thy hand, thou art as good a fellow, I am a singer, a drinker, a bencher, a wencher, I can say a mass, and kiss a lass: faith I have a parsonage, and because I would not be at too much charges, this wench serves me for a sexton.
Well said mad priest, weal in and be friends, 
Now moister Murley, I am well assured
You know our arrant, and do like the cause,
Being a man affected as we are?
Mary God dild ye dainty my dear, no master, good •r Roger Acton Knight, moister Bourne, and moister Beaver∣ley esquires, gentlemen, and justices of the peace, no moister I, but plain William Murly the brewer of Dunstable your ho∣nest neighbour, and your friend, if ye be men of my profess∣on.
Professed friends to Wickliffe, foes to Rome.
Hold by me lad, lean upon that staff good my∣ster Beuerley, all of a house, say your mind, say your mind.
You know our faction now is grown so great,
Throughout the realm; that it begins to smoke
Into the Clergies eyes, and the Kings ears,
High time it is that we were drawn to head,
Our general and officers appointed.
And wars ye wot will ask great store of coin.
Able to strength our action with your purse,
You are elected for a colonel
Over a regiment of fifteen bands.
Few paltry paltry, in and out, to and fro, be it more or less, upon occasion, Lord have mercy upon vs, what a world is this? Sir Roger Acton, I am but a Dunstable man, a plain brewer, ye know: will lusty Caualiering captains gen∣tlemen come at my calling, go at my bidding? Dainty my dear, theile doe a dog of wax, a horse of cheese, a prick and a pudding, no, no, ye must appoint some lord or knight at least to that place.
Why master Murley, you shall be a Knight:
Were you not in election to be shrive?
Have ye not past all offices but that?
Have ye not wealth to make your wife a lady?
I warrant you, my lord, our General
Bestows that honour on you at first sight.
Mary God dild ye dainty my dear:
But tell me, who shall be our General?
Wheres the lord Cobham, sir Iohn Old-castle,
That noble almes-giuer, housekeeper, virtuous,
Religious gentleman? Come to me there boys,
Come to me there.
Why who but he shall be our General?
And shall he knight me, and make me colonel?
My word for that, sir William Murley knight.
Fellow sir Roger Acton knight, all fellows, I mean in arms, how strong are we? how many partners? our e•amiss beside the King are mighty, be it more or less upon occasion, reckon our force.
There are of vs, our friends, and followers,
Three thousand and three hundred at the least,
Of northern lads four thousand, beside horse,
From Kent there comes with sir Iohn Old-castle
Seven thousand, then from London issue out,
Of masters, servants, strangers, prentices
Forty odd thousands into Ficket field,
Where we appoint our special rendezvous.
〈…〉 paltry, in and out to and fro, Lord have 〈…〉 a world is this, wheres that Ficket field, sir Roger?
Behind saint Giles in the field near Holbo•no.
Newgate, up Holborn, S. Giles in the field, and to Tiborne, an old saw: for the day, for the day?
On friday next the foureteenth day of January.
Till valley, trust me never if I have any liking of that day: few paltry paltry, friday quoth a, dismal day, I will∣dermasse day this year was friday.
Nay moister Murley, if you observe such days,
We make some question of your constancy,
All days are like to men resolved in right.
Say Amen, and say no more, but say, and hold ma∣ster Beuerley, friday next, and Ficket field, and William Mur∣ley, and his merry men shall be al one, I have half a score jade that draw my beer cartes, and every jade shall bear a knave, and every knave shall wear a jack, and every jack shall have a scull, and every scull shall show a spear, and every spear shall kill a foe at Ficket field, at Ficket field, Iohn and Tom, and Dicke and Hodge, and Raf and Robin, William &amp; George, and all my knaves shall fight like men, at Ficket field on friday next.
What sum of money mean you to disburse?
It may be modestly, decently, soberly, and hand∣somely I may bring five hundredth pound.
Five hundredth man? five thousand's not enough,
A hundredth thousand will not pay our men
Two months together, either come prepared
Like a brave Knight, and martial Colonel,
In glittering gold, and gallant furniture,
Bringing in coin, a cart load at the least,
And all your followers mounted on good horse,
Or never come disgraceful to vs all.
Perchance you may be chosen Treasurer,
Ten thousand pounds the least that you can bring.
Paltry paltry, in and 〈◊〉 and fro, 〈…〉 I have ten thousand pound to 〈◊〉, and 〈…〉 ra∣there than the Bishop shall have 〈◊〉 will of me for my consci∣ence, it shall out all. Flame and flax, flame and flax, it was got with water and malt, and it shall fly with fire and gun powder. Sir Roger, a cart load of money till the axetree crack, my self and my men in Ficket field on friday next: remem∣ber my Knighthood, and my place: there's my hand Isle bee there. 
See what Ambition may persuade men to,
In hope of honour he will spend himself.
I never thought a Brewer half so •each.
Was never bankrupt Brewer yet but one,
With using too much malt, too little water.
Thats no fault in Brewers nowadays:
Come, away about our business. 
Tic not enough Lord Cobham to submit.
You must forsake your gross opinion,
The Bishops find themselves much injured,
And though for some good service you have done,
We for our part are pleased to pardon you,
Yet they will not so soon be satisfied,
My gracious Lord unto your Majesty,
Next unto my God, I owe my life,
And what is mine, either by natures gift,
Or fortunes bounty, al is at your service,
But for obedience to the Pope of Rome,
I owe him none, nor shall his shaueling priests
That are in England, alter my belief.
If out of holy Scripture they can prove,
That I am in an error, I will yield,
And gladly take instruction at their hands,
But otherwise, I do beseech your grace,
My conscience may not be encroached upon.
We would be loath to press our subjects bodies,
Much less their souls, the dear redeemed part,
Of him that is the ruler of vs all,
Yet let me counsel ye, that might command,
Do not presume to tempt them with ill words,
Nor suffer any meetings to be had
Within your house, but to the uttermost,
Disperse the flocks of this new gathering sect.
My liege, if any breathe, that dares come forth,
And say, my life in any of these points
Deserves th'attaindor of ignoble thoughts
Here stand I, craving no remorse at all,
But even the utmost rigour may be shown.
Let it suffice we know your loyalty,
What have you there?
A deed of clemency,
Your Highness pardon for Lord Powesse life,
Which I did beg, and you my noble Lord,
Of gracious favour did vouchsafe to grant.
But yet it is not signed with our hand.
Not yet my Liege. 
The fact, you say, was done,
Not of prepensed malice, but by chance.
Upon mine honour so, no otherwise.
There is his pardon, bid him make amends, 
And cleanse his soul to God for his offence,
What we remit, is but the bodies scourge, 
How now Lord Bishop?
Justice dread Sovereign.
As thou art King, so grant I may have justice.
What means this exclamation, let vs know?
Ah my good Lord, the state's abused,
And our decrees most shamefully prophande.
How, or by whom?
Even by this heretike,
This Jew, this Traitor to your majesty.
Prelate, thou least, even in thy greasy maw,
Or whosoever twits me with the name,
Of either traitor, or of heretike.
Forbear I say, and Bishop, show the cause
From whence this late abuse hath bin derived,
Thus mighty King, by general consent,
A messenger was sent to cite this Lord,
To make appearance in the concise•ore,
And coming to his house, a ruffian slave,
One of his daily followers, met the man,
Who knowing him to be a parator,
Assaults him first, and after in contempt
Of vs, and our proceedings, makes him eat
The written process, parchment, seal and all:
Whereby his moister neither was brought forth,
Nor we but scorned, for our authority.
When was this done?
At six a clock this morning.
And when came you to court?
Last night my Lord.
By this it seems, he is not guilty of it,
And you have done him wrong t'accuse him so.
But it was done my lord by his appointment,
Or else his man durst ne'er have bin so bold.
Or else you durst be bold, to interrupt,
And fill our ears with frivolous complaints,
Is this the duty you do bear to vs?
Was it not sufficient we did pass our word
To send for him, but you misdoubting it,
Or which is worse, intending to forestall
Our regal power, must likewise summon him?
This savours of Ambition, not of zeal,
And rather proves, you malice his estate,
Than any way that he offends the law.
Go to, we like it not, and he your officer,
That was employed so much amiss herein,
Had his desert for being insolent:
So Cobham when you please you may depart.
I humbly bid farewell unto my liege. 
Farewell, what's the news by Huntington?
Sir Roger Acton, and a crew, my Lord,
Of bold seditious rebels, are in Arms,
Intending reformation of Religion.
And with their Army they intend to pitch,
In Ficket field, unless they be repulsed.
So ne'er our presence? dare they be so bold?
And will proud war, and eager thirst of blood,
Whom we had thought to entertain far off,
Press forth upon vs in our native bounds?
Must wee be forced to hansell our sharp blades
In England here, which we prepared for France?
Well, a Gods name be it, what's their number? say,
Or who's the chief commander of this rowt?
Their number is not known, as yet (my Lord)
But tic reported Sir Iohn Old-castle
Is the chief man, on whom they do depend.
How, the Lord Cobham?
Yes my gracious Lord.
I could have told your majesty as much
Before he went, but that I saw your Grace
Was too much blinded by his flattery.
Send post my Lord to fetch him back again.
Traitor unto his country, how he smoothed,
And seemed as innocent as Truth it self?
I cannot think it yet, he would be false,
But if he be, no matter let him go,
Weal meet both him and them unto their wo.
This falls out well, and at the last I hope 
To see this heretike die in a rope.
Once more my Lord of Cambridge make rehearsal,
How you do stand intiteled to the Crown,
The deeper shall we print it in our minds,
And every man the better be resolved,
When he perceives his quarrel to be just.
Then thus Lord Scroope, sir Thomas Gray, &amp; you
Monsieur de Cha•tres, agent for the French,
This Lionel Duke of Clarence, as I said,
Third son of Edward (Englands King) the third
H•d issue Phillip his sole daughter and heir,
Which Phillip afterword was given in marriage,
To Edmund Mortimer the Earl of March,
And by him had a son called Roger Mortimer,
Which Roger likewise had of his descent,
Edmund, Roger, Anne, and Eleanor,
Two daughters and two sons, but those three
Did without issue, Anne that did survive,
And now was left her fathers only heir,
My fortune was to marry, being too
By my grandfather of King Edwards line,
So of his surname, I am called you know,
Richard Plantagenet, my father was,
Edward the Duke of York, and son and heir
To Edmund Langley, Edward the third's first son.
So that it seems your claim comes by your wife,
As lawful heir to Roger Mortimer,
The son of Edmund, which did marry Phillip
Daughter and heir to Lionel Duke of Clarence.
True, for this Harry, and his father both
Harry the first, as plainly doth appear,
Are false intruders, and usurp the Crown.
For when young Richard was at Pomfret slain,
In him the title of prince Edward did,
That was the eldest of king Edwards sons:
William of Hatfield, and their second brother,
Death in his nonage had before bereft:
So that my wife derived from Lionel,
Third son unto king Edward, ought proceed,
And take possession of the Diadem
Before this Harry, or his father king,
Who fetched their title but from Lancaster,
Forth of that royal line. And being thus,
What reason first but she should have her right?
I am resolved our enterprise is just.
Harry shall die, or else resign his crown.
Perform but that, and Charles the king of France
Shall aid you lords, not only with his men,
But send you money to maintain your wars,
Five hundred thousand crowns he bade me proffer,
If you can stop but Harries voyage for France.
We never had a fitter time than now
The realm in such division as it is.
Besides, you must persuade ye there is due,
Vengeance for Richards murder, which although
It be defend, yet will it fall at last,
And now as likely as another time.
Sin hath had many years to ripen in,
And now the harvest cannot be far off,
Wherein the weeds of usurpation,
Are to be cropped, and cast into the fire.
No more earl Cambridge, here I plight my faith,
To set up thee, and thy renowned wife.
Gray will perform the same, as he is knight.
And to assist ye, as I said before,
Charters doth gage the honour of his king.
We lack but now Lord Cobhams fellowship,
And then our plot were absolute indeed.
Doubt not of him, my lord, his life's pursued
By th'incensed Clergy, and of late,
•roughed in displeasure with the king, assures
He may be quickly won unto our faction.
Who hath the articles were drawn at large
Of our whole purpose?
That have I my Lord.
We should not now be far off from his house,
Our serious conference hath beguiled the way,
See where his castle stands, give me the writing.
When we are come unto the speech of him,
Because we will not stand to make recount,
Of that which hath been said, here he shall read 
Our minds at large, and what we crave of him.
A ready way: here comes the man himself
Booted and spurrd, it seems he hath been riding.
Well met lord Cobham.
My lord of Cambridge?
Your honour is most welcome into Kent,
And all the rest of this fair company.
I am new come from London, gentle •ordes:
But will ye not take Cowling for your host,
And see what entertainment it affords?
We were intended to have been your guests:
But now this lucky me•ing shall suffice
To end our business, and defer that kindness.
Business my lord? what business should you have
But to be merry? we have no delicates,
But this Isle promise you, a piece of venison,
A cup of wine, and so forth: hunters fare:
And if you please, weal strike the stag our selves
Shall fill our dishes with his wel-fed flesh.
That is indeed the thing we all desire.
My lords, and you shall have your choice with me.
Nay but the stag which we desire to strike,
Lives not in Cowling: if you will consent,
And go with vs, weal bring you to a forest,
Where runs a lusty heard: amongst the which
There is a stag superior to the rest,
A stately beast, that when his fellows run,
He leads the race, and beats the sullen earth,
As though he sco•nd it with his trampling hooves,
Aloft he bears his head, and with his breast,
Like a huge bulwark counter-checkes the wind:
And when he stands still, he stretches forth
His proud ambitious neck, as if he meant
To wound the firmament with forked horns.
Tic pity such a goodly beast should die.
Not so, sir Iohn, for he is tyrannous,
And gores the other dear, and will not keep
Within the limits are appointed him.
Of late hes broke into a several,
Which doth belong to me, and there he spoils
Both corn and pasture, two of his wilde race
Alike sor stealth, and covetous incroatching,
Already are removed, if he were dead,
I should not only be secure from hurt,
But with his body make a royal feast.
How say you then, will you first hunt with vs?
Faith Lords, I like the pastime, wheres the place?
Peruse this writing, it will show you all,
And what occasion we have for the sport. 
Call ye this hunting, my lords? Is this the stag
You fine would chase, Harry our dread king?
So we may make a banquet for the devil,
And in the fleede of wholesome meat, prepare
A dish of poison to confound our selves.
Why so lord Cobham? see you not our claim?
And how imperiously he holds the crown?
•asides, you know your self is in disgrace,
Held as a recreant, and pursued to death.
This will defend you from your enemies,
And stablish your religion through the land.
Notorious treason! yet I will conceal 
My secret thought•, to sound the depth of it.
My lord of Cambridge, I doe see your claim,
And what good may redound unto the land,
By prosecuting of this enterprise.
•ut where are men? whore's power and furniture
To order such an action? we are weak,
Harry, you know's a mighty potentate.
Tut, we are strong enough, you are beloved,
And many will be glad to follow you,
We are the light, and some will follow vs:
Besides, there is hope from France: here is an ambassador
That promises both men and money too.
The commons likewise (as we hear) pretend
A sudden tumult, we will join with them.
Some likelihood, I must confess, to speed:
•ut how shall I believe this is plain truth?
You are (my lords) such men as live in Court,
And highly have been favoured of the king,
Especially lord Scroope, whom oftentimes
He m•keth choice of for his bedfellow.
And you lord Gray are of his privy council:
Is not this a train to entrap my life?
Then perish may my soul: wh•t think you so?
VVeele swear to you.
Or take the sacrament.
Nay you are noble men, and I imagine,
As you a•e honourable by birth and blood,
So you will be in heart, in thought, in word.
I crave no other testimony but this.
That you wou•d all subscribe, and set your hands
Unto this writing which you gave to me.
With all our hearts: who hath any pen and ink?
My pocket should have one: yea, here it is.
Give it me lord Scroope: there is my name.
And there is my name.
And mine.
Sir, let me crave,
That you would likewise write your name with theirs,
For confirmation of your masters word,
The king of France.
That will I noble Lord.
So now this action is well knit together,
And I am for you: where`s our meeting, lords?
Here if you please, the tenth of July next.
In Kent? agreed: now let vs in to supper,
I hope your honours will not away to night.
Yes present•y, for I have far to ride,
About soliciting of other friends.
And we would not be absent from the court,
Lest thereby grow suspicion in the king.
Yet taste a cup of wine before ye go.
Not now my lord, we thank you: so farewell.
Farewell my noble lords: my noble lords?
My noble villains, base conspirators,
How can they look his Highness in the face,
Whom they so closly study to betray?
But isle not sleep until I make it known.
This head shall not be burdened with such thoughts,
Nor in this heart will I conceal a deed
Of such impiety against my king.
Madam, how now?
You are welcome home, my Lord,
Why seem ye so disquiet in your looks?
What hath befallen you that disquiets your mind?
Bad news I am afraid touching my husband.
Madam, not so: there is your husbands pardon,
Long may ye live, each joy unto the other.
So great a ki•dnesse as I know not howe to make reply, my sense is quite confounded.
•et that alone: and madam stay me not,
For I must back unto the court again
With all the speed I can: Harpoole, my horse.
So soon my Lord? what will you ride all night?
All night or day it must be so, sweet wife,
Urge me not why or what my business is,
But get you in: Lord Powesse, bear with me,
And madam, think your welcome ne'er the worse:
My house is at your use. Harpoo•e, away.
Shall I attend your lordship to the court?
Yea sir, your gelding, mount you presently 
I prithee Harpoole, look unto thy Lord,
I do not like this sudden posting back.
Some earnest business is a foot belike,
What ever it be, pray God be his good guide.
Amen that hath so highly vs bested.
Come madam, and my lord, weal hope the best,
You shall not into Wales till he return.
Though great occasion be we should depart, yet madam will we stay to be resolude, of this unlooked for doubtful accident. 
Come my hearts of flint, modestly, decently, so∣barley, and handsomely, no man before his L•ader, follow your master, your Captain, your Knight that shall be, for the honour of Meale-men, Millers, and Mault-men dunne is the mouse, Dicke and Tom for the credit of Dunstable, ding down the enemy to morrow, ye shall not come into the field like beggars, wh•re be Leonard and Laurence my two loa∣ders, Lord have mercy upon vs, what a world is this? I would give a couple of shillings for a dozen of good feathers for ye, and forty pence for as many skarffes to set ye out withal, frost and snow, a man has no heart to fight till he be brave.
Master I hope we be no babes, for our manhood, our bucklers, and our town foote-balls can bear witness: and this lite parrell we have shall off, and we'll fight naked a∣fore we run away.
Nay, I am of Laurence mind for that, for he means
to leave his life behind him, he and Leonard your two loaders are making their wills because they have wives, now we Ba∣chillers bid our friends scramble for our goods if we die: but master, pray ye let me ride upon Cut.
Meal and salt, wheat and malt, fire and tow, frost and snow, why Tom thou shalt: let me see, here are you, Will∣liam and George are with my cart, and Robin and Hodge holding my own two horses, proper men, handsome men, tall men, true men.
But master, master, me thinks you are a mad man, to hazard your own person and a cart load of money too.
Yea, and moister theres a worse matter in it, if it be as I heard say, we go to fight against all the learned Bishops, that should give vs their blessing, and if they curse vs, we shall speed ne'er the better.
Nay bear lady, some say the King takes their part, and master, dare you fight against the King?
Fie paltry, paltry in and out, to and fro upon occa∣zion, if the King be so unwise to come there, weal fight with him too.
What if we should kill the King?
Then weal make another.
Is that all, do ye not speak treason?
If we do, who dare trip vs? we come to fight for our conscience, and for honour, little know you what is in my bosom, look here mad knaves, a pair of guilt spurs.
A pair of golden spurs? why do you not put them on your heals? your bosome's no place for spurs.
Be it more or less upon occasion, Lord have mer∣cy vs, Tom you are a fool, and thou speak treason to knight∣hood, dare any wear golden or silver spurs till he be a knight? no, I shall be knighted to morrow, and then they shall on: sirs, was it ever read in the church book of Dunstable, that ever malt man was made knight?
No but you are more, you are meal-man, maultman, miller, corne-master and all.
Yea, and half a brewer too, and the devil and all for wealth, you b•ing more money with you, than all the rest.
The more's my honour, I shall be a knight to morrow, let me spose my men, Tom upon cut, Dicke upon hobbe, Hodge upon Ball, Raph upon Sorrel, and Robin upon the forehorse.
Stand, who comes there?
Al friends, good fellow.
Friends and fellows indeed sir Roger.
Why thus you show your self a Gentleman,
To keep your day, and come so well prepared,
Your cart stands yonder, guarded by your men,
Who tell me it is laden well with come,
What sum is there?
Ten thousand pound sir Roger, and modestly, de∣cently, soberly, and handsomely, see what I have here against I be knighted.
Gilt spurs? tic well.
But whore's our army sir?
Dispersed in sundry villages about,
Some here with vs in Hygate, some at Finchley,
Totnam, Enfield, Edmunton, Newington,
Islington, Hogsdon, Pancredge, Kensington,
Some nearer Thames, Ratcliffe, Blackwall and Bow,
But our chief strength must be the Londoners,
Which ere the Sun to morrow shin•,
Will be ne'er fifty thousand in the field.
Mary God dild ye dainty my dear, but upon oc∣cession sir Roger Acton, doth not the King know of it, and ga∣there his power against vs.
No, hoe's secure at Eltham.
What do the Clergy?
Fear extremely, yet prepare no force.
In and out, to and fro, Bullie my boikin, we shall
•arry the world before vs, I vow by my worship, when I am knighted, weal take the King napping, if he stand on their part.
This night we few in Higate will repose,
With the first cock weal rise and arm our selves,
To be in Ficket field by break of day,
And there expect our General.
Sir Iohn Old-cast•e, what if he come not?
Yet our action stands,
Sir Roger Acton may supply his place.
True M. Bourne but who shall make me knight?
He that hath power to be our General.
Talk not of trifles, come lets away,
Our friends of London long till it be day. 
By my troth, thou art as jealous a man as lives.
Can thou blame me Doll, thou art my lands, my goods, my jewels, my wealth, my purse, none walks within xl. miles of London, but a plies thee as truly, as the parish does the poor mans box.
I am as true to thee, as the stone is in the wall, and thou know well enough sir Iohn, I was in as good doing, when I came to thee, as any wench need to be: and therefore thou hast tried me, that thou hast: by Gods body, I will not be kept as I have bin, that I will not.
Doll, if this blade hold, theres not a peddler walks with a pack, but thou shalt as boldly choose of his wares, as with thy ready money in a Merchants shop, weal have as good sell∣for as the King coins any.
What is al the gold spent you took the last day from the Courtier?
Tic gone Doll, tic flown, merely come, merely gon, he comes a horse back that must pay for all, weal have as good meat, as money can get, and as good gowns, as can be bought for gold, be merry wench, the mault-man comes on monday.
You might have left me at Cobham, until you had bin better provided for.
No sweet Dol, no, I do not like that, yond old ruffian is not for the priest, I do not like a new clerk should come in the old belfry.
Ah thou art a mad priest in faith.
Come Doll, Isle see thee safe at some alehouse here at Croy, and the next sheep that comes shall leave his fleece. 
My lord of Suffolk, post away for life,
And let our forces of such horse and foot,
As can be gathered up by any means,
Make speedy randeuow in Tuttle fields,
It must be done this evening my Lord,
This night the rebels mean to draw to head
Near Islington, which if your speed prevent not,
If once they should unite their several forces,
Their power is almost thought invincible,
Away my Lord I will be with you soon.
I go my Sovereign with all happy speed. 
Make haste my lord of Suffolk as you love vs,
Butler, post you to London with all speed.
Command the Mayor, and shrieues, on their alegiance,
The city gates be presently shut up,
And guarded with a strong sufficient watch,
And not a man be suffered to pass,
Without a special warrant from our self.
Command the Postern by the Tower be kept,
And procl•motion on the pain of death,
That not a citizen stir from his doors,
Except such as the Mayor and Shrieues shall choose,
For their own guard, and safety of their persons,
Butler away, have care unto my charge.
I go my Sovereign.
Butler.
My Lord.
Go down by Greenewich, and command a boat,
At the Friars bridge attend my coming down.
I will my Lord. 
It's time I think to look unto rebellion,
When Acton doth expect unto his aid,
No less then fifty thousand Londoners,
Well, Isle to Westminster in this disguise,
To hear what news is stirring in these brawls.
Stand true-man says a thief?
Stand thief, says a true man, how if a thief?
Stand thief too.
Then thief or true-man I see I must stand, I see how soever the world wags, the trade of theeuing yet will never down, what art thou?
A good fellow.
So am I too, I see thou dost know me.
If thou be a good fellow, play the good fellows part, deliver thy purse without more ado.
I have no money.
I must make you find some before we part, if you have no money you shall have ware, as many sound dry blows as your skin can carry.
Is that the plain truth?
Sir no more ado, come, come, give me the money you have, dispatch, I cannot stand all day.
Well, if thou wilt needs have it, there tic: just the proverb, one thief robs another, where the devil are all my old thieves, that were wont to keep this walk? Falstaff the villain is so fat, he cannot get on's horse, but me thinks Poines and Peto should be stirring here abouts.
How much is there on it of thy word?
A hundred pound in Angels, on my word,
The time has been I would have done as much
For thee, if thou had past this way, as I have now.
Sir, what art thou, thou seem a gentleman?
I am no less, yet a poor one now, for thou hast al• my money.
From whence came thou?
From the court at Eltham.
Art thou one of the Kings servants?
Yes that I am and one of his chamber.
I am glad thou art no worse, thou moist the better spare thy money, &amp; think thou thou might get a poor thief his pardon if he should have need.
Yes that I can.
Wilt thou do so much for me, when I shall have oc∣cession?
Yes faith will I, so it be for no murder.
Nay, I am a pitiful thief, all the hurt I do a man, I take but his purse, Isle kill no man.
Then of my word Isle do it.
Give me thy hand of the same.
There tic.
Me thinks the King should be good to thieves be∣cause he has bin a thief himself, though I think now he be turned true-man.
Faith I have heard indeed he has had an il name that way in his youth, but how can thou tell he has been a thief?
How? because he once robbed me before I fell to the trade my self, when that foul villainous guts, that led him to all that rogery, was in's company there, that Fall∣staff.
Well if he did rob thee then, thou art but even with him now Isle be sworn: thou know not the king now, I think, if thou saw him?
Not I in faith.
So it should seem.
Well, if old King Henry had lived, this King that is now, had made theeuing the best trade in England.
Why so?
Because he was the chief warden of our comp∣ny, it's pity that ere he should have bin a King, he was so brave a thief, but sir, wilt remember my pardon if need be?
Yes faith will I.
Wilt thou? well then because thou shalt go safe, for thou may hap (being so early) be met with again, be∣fore thou come to Southwark, if any man when he should bid thee good morrow, bid thee stand, say thou but sir Iohn, and he will let thee pass.
Is that the word? well then let me alone.
Nay sir, because I think indeed I shall have some occasion to use thee, &amp; as thou come oft this way, I may light on thee another time not knowing thee, here, isle break this Angel, take thou half of it, this is a token betwixt thee and me.
God have mercy, farewell. 
O my fine golden slaves, here is for thee wench in faith, now Dol, we will revel in our beaver, this is a tithe pig of my vicaridge, God have mercy neigbour Shooters hill, you paid your tithe honestly. Well I hear there is a company of re∣belles up against the King, got together in Ficket field near Holborn, and as it is thought here in Kent, the King will be there to night in's own person, well isle to the Kings camp, and it shall go hard, but if there be any doings, Isle make some good boot amongst them. 
My Lords of Suffolk and of Huntington,
Who skouts it now? or who stands Sentinels?
What men of worth? what Lords do walk the round?
May it please your Highness.
Peace, no more of that,
The King's asleep, wake not his majesty,
With terms nor titles, hoe's at rest in bed,
Kings do not use to watch themselves, they sleep,
And let rebellion and conspiracy,
Revel and havoc in the common wealth,
Is London looked unto?
It is my Lord,
Your noble Uncle Exceter is there,
Your brother Gloucester and my Lord of Warwick,
Who with the mayor and the Aldermen,
Do guard the gates, and keep good rule within,
The Earl of Cambridge, and sir Thomas Gray,
Do walk the Round, Lord Scroope and Butler scot,
So though it please your majesty to jest,
Were you in bed, well might you take your rest,
I thank ye Lords, but you do know of old,
That I have bin a perfect night-walker,
London you say is safely looked unto,
Alas poor rebels, there your aid must fail,
And the Lord Cobham sir Iohn Old-castle,
Hoe's quiet in Kent, Acton ye are deceived,
Reckon again, you count without your host,
To morrow you shall give account to vs,
Till when my friends, this long cold winters night,
How can we spend? King Harry is a sleep,
And al his Lords, these garments tel vs so,
Al friends at footebal, fellows all in field,
Harry, and Dicke, and George, bring vs a drum,
Give vs square dice, weal keep this court of guard,
For al good fellows companies that come.
Wheres that mad priest ye told me was in Arms,
To fight, as well as pray, if need required?
Hes in the Camp, and if he knew of this,
I undertake he would not be long hence.
Trip Dicke, Trip George. 
I must have the dice,
What do we play at?
Passage if ye please.
Set round then, so, at all.
George, you are out.
Give me the dice, I pass for twenty pound,
Here is to our lucky passage into France.
Harry you pass indeed for you sweep all.
A sign king Harry shall sweep al in France. 
Edge ye good fellows, take a fresh gamester in.
Master Parson? we play nothing but gold?
And fellow, I tel thee that the priest hath gold, gold? sbloud ye are but beggarly soldiers to me, I think I have more gold than all you three.
It may be so, but we believe it not.
Set priest set, I pass for all that gold.
Ye pass indeed.
Priest, hast thou any more?
Zounds what a question's that?
I tell thee I have more then all you three,
At these ten Angels.
I wonder how thou come by all this gold,
How many benefices hast thou priest?
In faith but one, dost wonder how I come by gold? I wonder rather how poor soldiers should have gold, for Isle tell thee good fellow, we have every day tithes, offerings, christnings, weddings, burials: and you poor snakes come seldom to a booty. Isle speak a proud word, I have but one parsonage, Wrootham, tic better than the Bishopric of To∣chester, theres ne'er a hill, heath, nor down in all Kent, but tic in my parish, Barrham down, Chobham down, Gads hill, Wrootham hill, Black heath, Cocks heath, Birchen wood, all pay me tithe, gold quoth a? ye pass not for that.
Harry ye are out, now parson shake the dice.
Set, set Isle cover ye at al: A plague on it I am out, the devil, and dice, and a wench, who will trust them?
Say thou so priest? set fair, at all for once.
Out sir, pay all.
Sbloud pay me angel gold,
Isle none of your cracked French crowns nor pistolets,
Pay me fair angel gold, as I pay you.
No cracked french crowns? I hope to see more cracked french crowns ere long.
Thou meanest of French men's crowns, when the King is in France.
Set round, at all.
Pay all: this is some luck.
Give me the dice, tic I must shred the priest:
At all sir Iohn.
The devil and all is yours: at that: stead, what •acting is this?
Well thrown Harry in faith.
Isle cast better yet.
Then Isle be hanged. Sir, hast thou not given thy soul to the devil for casting?
I pass for all.
Thou possessed all that ere I played withal:
Sir, dost thou not cog, nor foist, nor slur?
Set parson, set, the dice die in my hand:
When parson, when? what can ye find no more?
Already dry? wast you bragd of your store?
Alls gone but that.
What, half a broken angel?
Why sir, tic gold.
Yea, and Isle cover it.
The devil do ye good on it, I am blind, ye have blown me up.
Nay tarry priest, ye shall not leave vs yet,
Do not these pieces fit each other well?
What if they do?
Thereby begins a tale:
There was a thief, in face much like sir Iohn,
But t'was not hee, that thief was all in greene,
Met me last day on Black Heath, near the park,
With him a woman, I was al alone,
And weaponless, my boy had al my •oo••s,
And was before providing me a boat:
Short tale to make, sir Iohn, the thief I mean,
Took a just hundredth pound in gold from me.
I stormed at it, and 〈◊〉 be revenged
If ere we met, he like a 〈…〉,
Brake with his teeth this 〈◊〉 •used in two,
To be a token at our meeting next,
Provided, I should charge no Officer
To apprehend him, but at weapons point
Recover that, and what he had beside.
Well met sir Iohn, betake ye to your tools
By torch light, for master parson you are he
That had my gold.
Zounds I won't in play, in fair square play of the keeper of Eltham park, and that I will maintain with this poor whinyard, be you two honest men to stand and look vpon's, and let's alone, and take neither part.
A greede, I charge ye do not boudge a foot, Sir Iohn have at ye.
Soldier ware your skonce.
Hold villains hold, my Lords, what do ye mean,
To see a traitor draw against the King?
The King! Gods will, I am in a proper pickle.
Butler what news? why dost thou trouble vs?
Please it your Highness, it is break of day,
And as I skouted near to Islington,
The gray eyed morning gave me glimmering,
Of armed men coming down Hygate hill,
Who by their course are coasting hitherward.
Let vs withdraw, my Lords, prepare our troops,
To charge the rebels, if there be such cause,
For this lawd priest this devilish hypocrite,
That is a thief, a gamester, and what not,
Let him be hanged up for example sake.
Not so my gracious sovereign, I confess I am a frail man, flesh and blood as other are: but set my imperfect∣once aside, by this light ye have not a taller man▪ nor a truer sub∣jest to the Crown and State, than sit 〈◊〉 of VVrootham.
Will a true subject rob• his King?
Alas it was ignoran•e and want, my gracious liege.
It was want of grace: why, you should be as salt
To season others with good document,
Your lives as lamps to give the people light,
As shepherds, not as wolves to spoil the flock,
Go hang hm Butler.
Did thou not rob me?
I must confess I saw some of your gold, but my dread Lord, I am in no humour for death, therefore save my life, God will that sinners live; do not you cause me die, once in their lives the best may go astray, and if the world say true, your self (my liege) have bin a thief.
I confess I have,
But I repent and have reclaimd my self.
So will I do if you will give me time.
Wilt thou? my lords, will you be his suerties?
That when he robs again, he shall be hanged.
I ask no more.
And we will grant thee that,
Live and repent, and prove an honest man,
Which when I hear, and safe return from France,
Isle give thee living, till when take thy gold,
But spend it better then at cards or wine,
For better virtues fit that coat of thine.
La Rex &amp; currat lex, my liege, if ye have cause of battle, ye shall see sir Iohn of Wrootham bestir himself in your quarrel. 
Bring in those traitors, whose aspiring minds,
Thought to have triumphed in our overthrow,
But now ye see, base villains, what success
Attends ill actions wrongfully attempted.
Sir Roger Acton, thou retainst the name
Of knight, and should be more discreetly tempered,
Than join with peasants, gentry is divine,
But thou hast made it more then popular.
Pardon my Lord, my conscience urged me to it,
Thy conscience? then thy conscience is corrupt,
For in thy conscience thou art bound to vs,
And in thy conscience thou should love thy country,
Else what s the difference twixt a Christian,
And the uncivil manners of the Turk?
We meant no hurt unto your majesty,
But reformation of Religion.
Reform Religion? was it that ye sought?
I pray who gave you that authority?
Belike then we do hold the sceptre up,
And sit within the throne but for a cipher,
Time was, good subjects would make known their grief,
And pray amendment, not enforce the same,
Unless their King were tyrant, which I hope
You cannot justly say that Harry is,
What is that other?
A mault-man my Lord,
And dwelling in Dunstable as he says.
Sir what made you leave your barley broth,
To come in armour thus against your King?
Fie paltry, paltry to and fro, in and out upon occasi∣on, what a worlde's this? knight-hood (my liege) it was knight∣hood brought me hither•, they told me I had wealth enough to make my wife a lady.
And so you brought those horses which we saw,
Trapt all in costly furniture, and meant
To wear these spurs when you were knighted once.
In and out upon occasion I did.
In and out upon occasion, therefore you shall be hanged, and in the sted of wearing these spurs upon your heals, about your neck they shall bewray your folly to the world.
In and out upon occasion, that goes hard.
Fic paltry paltry, to and fro, good my liege a pardon, I am sorry for my fault.
That comes too late: but tell me, went there none
Beside sir Roger Acton, upon whom
You did depend to be your governor?
None none my Lord, but sir Iohn Old-castle.
Bears he part in this conspiracy. 
We looked my Lord that he would meet vs here.
But did he promise you that he would come.
Such letters we received forth of Kent.
Where is my Lord the King? health to your grace,
Examining my Lord some of these caitiue rebels,
It is a general voice amongst them all,
That they had never come unto this place,
But to have met their valiant general,
The good Lord Cobham as they title him,
Whereby, my Lord, your grace may now perceive,
His treason is apparent, which before
He sought to colour by his flattery.
Now by my to•altie I would have sworn,
But for his conscience, which I bear withal,
There had not lived a more true hearted subject.
It is but counterfeit, my gracious lords,
And therefore may it please your majesty,
To set your hand unto this precept here,
By which weel cause him forthwith to appear,
And answer this by order of the law.
Bishop, not only that, but take commission,
To search, attach, imprison, and condemn,
This most notorious traitor as you please.
It shall be done, my Lord, without delay:
So now I hold Lord Cobham in my hand,
That which shall finish thy disdained life.
I think the iron age begins but now,
(Which learned poets have so often taught)
Wherein there is no credit to be given,
To either words, or looks, or solemn oaths,
For if there were, how often hath he sworn,
How gently tuned the music of his tongue,
And with what amiable face beheld he me,
When all, God knows, was but hypocrisy. 
Long life and prosperous reign unto my Lord.
Ah villain, can thou wish prosperity,
Whose heart includes nought but treachery?
I do arrest thee here my self, false knight,
Of treason capital against the state.
Of treason mighty prince, your grace mistakes,
I hope it is but in the way of mirth.
Thy neck shall feel it is in earnest shortly,
Dare thou intrude into our presence, knowing
How heinously thou hast offended vs?
But this is thy accustomed deceit,
Now thou perceiust thy purpose is in vain,
With some excuse or other thou wilt come,
To clear thy self of this rebellion.
Rebellion good my Lord, I know of none.
If you deny it, here is evidence,
See you these men, you never counselled,
Nor offered them assistance in their wars
Speak sirs, not one but all, I crave no favour,
Have ever I been conversant with you,
Or written letters to encourage you,
Or kindled but the least or smallest part,
Of this your late unnatural rebellion?
Speak for I dare the uttermost you can.
In and out upon occasion I know you not.
No, did not say that sir Iohn Old-castle,
Was one with whom you purposde to have met?
True, I did say so, but in what respect?
Because I heard it was reported so.
Was there no other argument but that?
To clear my conscience ere I die my lord,
I must confess, we have no other ground
But only Rumour, to accuse this lord,
Which now I see was merely fabulous.
The more pernicious you to taint him then,
Whom you knew not was faulty yea or no.
Let this my Lord, which I present your grace
Speak for my loyalty, read these articles,
And then give sentence of my life or death.
Earl Cambridge, Scroope, and Gray corrupted
With bribes from Charles of France, either to win
My Crown from me, or secretly contrive
My death by treason? Is this possible?
There is the platform, and their hands, my lord,
Each severally subscribed to the same.
Oh never heard of base ingratitude!
Even those I hug within my bosom most,
Are readiest evermore to sting my heart.
Pardon me Cobham, I have done thee wrong,
Hereafter I will live to make amends.
Is then their time of meeting so near hand?
Weal meet with them, but little for their ease,
If God permit: go take these rebels hence,
Let them have martial law: but as for thee,
Friend to thy king and country, still be free. 
Be it more or less, what a world is this?
Would I had continued still of the order of knaves,
And never sought knighthood, since it costs
So dear: sir Roger, I may thank you for all.
Now tic too late to have it remedied,
I prithee Murley doe not urge me with it.
Will you away, and make no more to do?
Fie paltry paltry, to and fro, as occasion serves,
If you be so hasty take my place.
No good sir knight, you shall begin in your hand.
I could be glad to give my betters place. 
I tell ye Lady, its not possible
But you should know where he conveys himself,
And you have hid him in some secret place.
My Lord, believe me, as I have a soul,
I know not where my lord my husband is.
Go to, go to ye are an heretike,
And will be forced by torture to confess,
If fair means will not serve to make ye tell.
My husband is a noble gentleman,
And need not hide himself for any fact
That ere I heard of, therefore wrong him not.
Your husband is a dangerous schismatic,
Traitor to God, the King, and common wealth,
And therefore master Croamer shrive of Kent,
I charge you take her to your custody,
And cease the goods of Sir John Old-castle
To the Kings use, let her go in no more,
To fetch so much as her apparel out,
There is your warrant from his majesty.
Good my Lord Bishop pacify your wrath
Against the Lady.
Then let her confess
Where Old-castle her husband is concealed.
I dare engage mine honour and my life,
Poor gentlewoman, she is ignorant,
And innocent of all his practises,
If any evil by him be practised.
If my Lord Warden? nay then I charge you,
That all the cinque Ports whereof you are chief•
Be laid forthwith, that he escape vs not,
Show him his highness warrant M. Shrive.
I am sorry for the noble gentleman, 
Peace, he comes here, now do your office.
Harpoole what business have we here in hand?
What makes the Bishop and the Sheriff here,
I fear my coming home is dangerous,
I would I had not made such haste to Cobham.
Be of good cheer my Lord, if they be foes weal scramble shrewdly with them, if they be friends they are well∣come: one of th•m (my Lord, Warden) is your friend, but me thinks my lady weeps, I like not that.
Sir Iohn Old-castle Lord Cobham, in the Kings majesties name, I arrest ye of high treason.
Treason M. Croomes?
Treason M. Shrive, sbloud what treason?
Harpoole I charge thee stir not, but be quiet still,
Do ye arrest me M. Shrive for treason?
Yea of high treason, traitor, heretike.
Defiance in his face that calls me so,
I am as true a loyal gentleman
Unto his highness, as my proudest enemy,
The King shall witness my late faithful service,
For safety of his sacred majesty.
What thou art, the kings hand shall testify,
Shewt him Lord Warden.
Iesu defend me,
Is it possible your cunning could so temper
The princely disposition of his mind,
To sign the damage of a royal subject?
Well, the best is, it bears an ancedate,
Procured by my absence, and your malice,
But I, since that, have showed my self as true,
As any churchman that dare challenge me,
Let me be brought before his majesty,
If he acquit me not, then do your worst.
We are not bound to do kind office•
For any traitor, schismatike, nor heretike,
The kings hand is our warrant for our work,
Who is departed on his way for France,
And at Southhampton doth repose this night.
O that it were the blessed will of God, that thou and I were within twenty mile of it, on Salisbury plain! I would lose my head if ever thou broughtst thy head hither a∣gain. 
My Lord Warden of the cinque Ports, &amp; my Lord of Rochester, ye are joint Commissioners, favour me so much, On my expense to bring me to the king.
What, to Southhampton?
Thither my god Lord,
And if he do not clear me of al guilt,
And all suspicion of conspiracy,
Pawning his princely warrant for my truth:
I ask no favour, but extremest torture.
Bring me, or send me to him, good my Lord,
Good my Lord Warden, M Shrive, entreat.
Come hither lady, nay, sweet wife forbear,
To heap one sorrow on another neck,
Tic grief enough falsely to be accused,
And not permitted to acquit my self,
Do not thou with thy kind respective tears,
Torment thy husbands heart that bleeds for thee,
But be of comfort, God hath help in store,
For those that put assured trust in him.
Dear wife, if they commit me to the Tower,
Come up to London to your sisters house:
That being near me, you may comfort me.
One solace find I settled in my soul,
That I am free from treasons very thought,
Only my conscience for the Gospels sake,
Is cause of all the troubles I sustain.
O my dear Lord, what shall betide of vs?
You to the Tower, and I turned out of doors,
Our substance ceased unto his highness use,
Even to the garments longing to our backs.
Patience good madame, things at worst will mend,
And if they doe not, yet our lives may end.
Urge it no more, for if an Angel spake,
I swear by sweet saint Peters blessed keys,
First goes he to the Tower, then to the stake.
But by your leave, this warrant doth not stretch
To imprison her.
No, turn her out of doors, 
Even as she is, and lead him to the Tower,
With guard enough for fear of rescuing.
O God requite thee thou bloud-thirsty man.
May it not be my Lord of Rochester?
Wherein have I incurd your hate so far,
That my appeal unto the King's denied?
No hate of mine, but power of holy church,
Foe•bids all favour to false heretikes.
Your private malice more than public power,
Strikes most at me, but with my life it ends.
O that I had the Bishop in that fear, 
That once I had his Sumner by our selves.
My Lord yet grant one suit unto vs all,
That this same ancient serving man may waite
Upon my lord his master in the Tower.
This old iniquity, this heretike?
That in contempt of our church discipline,
Compelled my Sumner to devour his processet
Old Ruffian past-grace, up start schismatike,
Had not the King prayed vs to pardon ye,
Ye had fried for it, ye grizild heretike.
Sbloud my lord Bishop, ye do me wrong, I am nei∣there
heretike nor puritan, but of the old church, isle swear, drink ale, kiss a wench, go to mass, eat fish all Lent, and fast fridays with cakes and wine, fruit and spicery, shrive me of my old sins before Easter, and begin new before whitson∣tide.
A merry mad conceited knave my lord.
That knave was simply put upon the Bishop.
Well, God forgive him and I pardon him.
Let him attend his master in the Tower,
For I in charity wish his soul no hurt.
God bless my soul from such cold charity,
Tooth Tower with him, and when my leisure serves,
I will examine him of Articles,
Look my lord Warden as you have in charge,
The Shrive perform his office.
Yes my lord. 
What bring thou there? what? books of heresy.
Yea my lord, here is not a latin book,
No not so much as our ladies Psalter,
Here is the Bible, the testament the Psalms in meter,
The sickemans salve, the treasure of gladness,
And al in English, not so much but the Almanack's English.
Away with them, to'th fire with them Clun,
Now fie upon these upstart heretikes,
Al English, burn them, burn them quickly Clun.
But doe not Sumner as voule answer it, for I have there English books my lord, that isle not part with for your Bishopric, Beuis of Hampton, Owleglasse, the Friar and the Boy, Ellen of Rumming, Robin hood, and other such godly stories which if ye burn, by this flesh isle make ye drink their ashes in S. Marget's ale. 
Is it your honours pleasure we shall stay,
Or come back in the afternoon to fetch you.
Now you have brought me here into the Tower,
You may go back unto the Porters Lodge,
And send for drink or such things as you want,
Where if I have occasion to employ you,
Isle send some officer to cal you to me.
Into the city go not, I command you,
Perhaps I may have present need to use you.
We will attend your worship here without.
Do so I pray you.
Come, we may have a quart of wine at the Rose at Bark∣ing, I warrant you, and come back an hour before he be ready to go.
We must hie vs then.
Let's away. 
Ho, M. Lieutenant.
Who calls there?
A friend of yours.
My lord of Rochester, your honor's welcome.
Sir here is my warrant from the Counsel,
For conference with sir Iohn Old-castle,
Upon some matter of great consequence.
Ho, sir Iohn.
Who calls there?
Harpoole, tel Sir Iohn, that my lord of Rochester comes from the counsel to confer with him.
I will sir.
I think you may as safe without suspicion,
As any man in England as I hear,
For it was you most laboured his commitment.
I did sir, and nothing repent it I assure you.
M. Lieutenant I pray you give vs leave,
I must confer here with sir Iohn a little.
With all my heart my lord.
My lord be ruled by me, take this occasion while tic offered, and on my life your lordship shall escape.
No more I say, peace lest he should suspect it.
Sir Iohn I am come unto you from the lords of his highness most honourable counsel, to know if yet you do re∣cant your errors, conforming you unto the holy church.
My lord of Rochester on good advise,
I see my error, but yet understand me,
I mean not error in the faith I hold,
But error in submitting to your pleasure,
Therefore your lordship without more to do.
Must be a means to help me to escape.
What means? thou heretike?
Dare thou but lift thy hand against my calling?
No not to hurt yon for a thousand pound,
Nothing but to borrow your upper garments a lit∣tle; not a word more, for if you do, you die: peace, for waking the children, there, put them on, dispatch, my lord, the window that goes out into the leads, is sure enough, I told you that be∣fore, there, make you ready, isle convey him after, and bind him surely in the inner room.
This is well begun, God send vs happy speed,
Hard shift you see men make in time of need: Harpoole.
Here my Lord, come come away.
I marvel that my lord should stay so long.
He hath sent to seek vs, I dare lay my life.
We come in good time, see where he is coming.
I beseech you good my lord of Rochester, be fauo∣rabble to my lord and moister.
The inner rooms be very hot and close,
I do not like this ayre here in the Tower.
His case is hard my lord, you shall safely get out of the Tower, but I will down upon them, in which time get you away.
Fellow thou trouble me.
Hear me my Lord, hard under Islington wait you my coming, I will bring my Lady ready, with horses
to convey you hence.
Fellow, go back again unto thy Lord and counsel him.
Nay my good lord of Rochester, isle bring you to S. Albons through the woods, I warrant you.
Villain away.
Nay since I am past the Towers liberty, thou part'st not so. 
Clubs clubs, clubs.
Murder, murder murder.
Down with him. 
A villain traitor.
You cowardly rogues. 
Who is so bold as dare to draw a sword,
So near unto the entrance of the Tower?
This ruffian servant to sir Iohn Old-castle was like to have slain my Lord.
Lay hold on him.
Stand off if you love your puddings.
Help help, help, M. Lieutenant help.
Who's that within? some treason in the Tower upon my life, look in, who's that which calls?
Without your cloak my lord of Rochester?
There, now it works, then let me speed, for now is the fittest time for me to scope away. 
Why do you look so ghastly and affrighted?
Old-castle that traitor and his man,
When you had left me to confer with him,
Took, bound, and stripped me, as you see,
And left me lying in his inner chamber,
And so departed, and I
And you! ne'er say that the Lord Cobhams man
Did h•re set upon you like to murder you.
And so he did.
It was upon his master then he did,
That in the brawl the traitor might escape.
Where is this Harpoole?
Here he was even now.
Where can you tell? they are both escaped,
Since it so happens that he is escaped,
I am glad you are a witness of the same,
It might have else been laid unto my charge,
That I had been consenting to the fact.
Come, search shall be made for him with expedition, the havens laid that he shall not escape, and hue and cry conti∣nu thorough England, to find this damned dangerous here∣tike. 
In mine opinion, Scroope hath well advised,
Poison will be the only aptest mean,
And fittest for our purpose to dispatch him.
But yet there may be doubt in their delivery,
Harry is wise, therefore Earl of Cambridge,
I Judge that way not so convenient.
What think ye then of this? I am his bedfellow,
And unsuspected nightly sleep with him.
What if I venture in those silent hours,
When sleep hath sealed up all mortal eyes,
To murder him in bed? how like ye that?
Herein consists no safety for your self,
And you disclosed, what shall become of vs?
But this day (as ye know) he will aboard,
The wind so fair, and set away for France,
If as he goes, or entering in the ship,
It might be done, then it were excellent,
Why any of these, or if you will,
Isle cause a present sitting of the Council,
Wherein I will pretend some matter of such weight,
As needs must have his royal company,
And to dispatch him in the Council chamber.
Tush, yet I hear not any thing to purpose,
I wonder that lord Cobham stays so long,
His counsel in this case would much avail vs.
What shall we rise thus, and determine nothing?
That were a shame indeed, no, sit again,
And you shall have my counsel in this case,
If you can find no way to kill this King,
Then you shall see how I can further ye,
Scroopes way by poison was indifferent,
But yet being bed-fellow unto the King,
And unsuspected sleeping in his bosom,
In mine opinion, that's the likelier way,
For such f•ls friends are able to do much,
And silent night is Treason's fittest friend,
Now, Cambridge in his setting hence for France,
Or by the way, or as he goes aboard,
To do the deed, that was indifferent too,
Yet somewhat doubtful; might I speak my mind,
For many reasons needless now to urge.
Mary Lord Gray came something near the point,
To have the King at council, and there murder him,
As Caesar was amongst his dearest friends:
None like to that, if all were of his mind.
Tell me oh tel me you •right honours staines,
For which of all my kindnesses to you,
Are ye become thus traitors to your king?
And France must have the spoil of Harries life?
Oh pardon vs dread lord. 
How pardon ye• that were a sin indeed,
Drag them to death, which justly they deserve, 
And France shall dearly buy this villainy,
So soon as we set footing on her breast,
God have the praise for our deliverance,
And next, our thanks (Lord Cobham) is to thee,
True perfect mirror of nobility. 
Sir, you are welcome to this house, to such as here is with all my heart, but by the mass I fear your lodging will be the worst, l have but two beds, and they are both in a cham∣ber, and the carrier and his daughter lies in the one, and you and your wife must lie in the other.
In faith sir, for my self I doe not greatly pass,
My wife is weary, and would be at rest,
For we have travelled very far to day,
We must be content with such as you have.
But I cannot tell how to doe with your man.
What, hast thou never an empty room in thy house for me?
Not a bed by my troth: there came a poor Irish man, and I lodged him in the barn, where he has fair straw, though he have nothing else.
Well mine host, I pray thee help me to a pair of fair sheets, and Isle go lodge with him.
By the mass that thou shalt, a good pair of hem∣pen sheets, were never lain in: Come. 
What have you searched the town?
All the town sir, we have not left a house unsearched that uses to lodge.
Surely my lord of Rochester was then deceiude,
Or ill informde of sir Iohn Old-castle,
Or if he came this way, hes past the town,
He could not else have escaped you in the search.
The privy watch hath been abroad all night,
And not a stranger lodges in the town
But he is known, only a lusty priest
We found in bed with a pretty wench,
That says she is his wife, yonder at the shears:
But we have charged the host with his forth coming
To morrow morning.
What think you best to do?
Faith moister mayor, hears a few straggling houses be∣yond the bridge, and a little Inn where cariers use to lodge, though I think surely he would ne'er lodge there: but weal go search, &amp; the rather, because there came notice to the town the last night of an Irish man, that had done a murder, whom we are to make search for.
Come I pray you, and be circumspect. 
First beset the house, before you begin the search.
Content, every man take a several place.
Keep, keep, strike him down there, down with him.
Come you villainous heretic, confess where you• moister is.
Vat master?
Vat master, you counterfeit rebel, this shall no• serve your turn.
Be sent Patrike I ha no master.
VVheres the lord Cobham sir Iohn Old-castle tha• lately is escaped out of the Tower.
Vat lort Cobham?
You counterfeit, this shall not serve you, weal tor∣ture you, weal make you to confess where that arch-here∣tique Lord Cobham is: come bind him fast.
Ahone, ahone, ahone, a C•ee.
Ahone, you crafty rascal?
Harpoole, Harpoole, I hear a marvelous noise a∣bout the house, God warrant vs, I fear wee are pursued: what Harpoole.
Who calls there?
Tic I, dost thou not hear a noise about the house?
Yes mary doe I, zwounds, I can not find my hose, this Irish rascal that was lodged with me all night, hath stolen my apparel, and has left me nothing but a lousy mantle, and a pair of broags. Get up, get up, and if the carrier and his wench be asleep, change you with them as he hath done with me, and see if we can escape.
Stand close, here comes the Irish man that did the murder, by all tokens, this is he.
And perceiving the house beset, would get away: stand sir.
What art thou that bid me stand?
I am the Officer, and am come to search for an Irish man, such a villain as thy self, that hast murdered a man this last night by the hie way.
Sbloud Constable, art thou mad? am I an Irish man?
Sir, weal find you an Irish man before we part: lay hold upon him.
Make him fast: O thou bloody rogue!
What will these Ostlers sleep all day?
Good morrow, good morrow, Come wench, come,
Saddle, saddle, now before God too foord-dayes, ha?
Who comes there?
Oh tic Lankashire carrier, let him pass.
What, will no body open the gates here?
Come, lets int stable to look to our capons.
Host, why ostler, zwookes, here is such oboe∣mination company of boys: a pox of this pigsty at the house end, it filles all the house full of fleas, ostler, ostler.
Who calls there, what would you have?
Zwookes, do you rob your ghosts? doe you lodge rogues and slaves, and scoundrels, ha? they ha stolen our doths here: why ostler?
A murrain choke you, what a bawling you keep.
How now, what would the carrier have? look up there.
They say that the man and woman that lay by them have stolen their clothes.
What, are the strange folks up yet that came in yester night?
What mine host, up so early?
What, moister Mayor, and moister Constable!
We are come to seek for some suspected persons, and such as here we found, have apprehended.
Who comes here?
Who comes here? a plague found ome, you bawl quoth a, odds hat, Isle forswear your house, you lodged a fell∣low and his wife by vs that ha run away with our parrel, and lef• vs such gewgaws here, come Kate, come to me, thowse dizeard in faith.
Mine host, know you this man?
Yes moister Mayor, Isle give my word for him, why neibor Club, how comes this gear about?
Now a foul ont, I can not make this gewgaw stand on my head, now the lads and the lasses won flowt me too too
How came this man and woman thus attired?
Here came a man and woman hither this last night, which I did take for substantial people, and lodged all in one chamber by these folks: me thinks, have been so bold to change apparel, and gone away this morning ere they rose.
That was that villain traitor Old-castle, that thus escaped vs: make out •uy and cry yet after him, keep fast that traitorous rebel his servant there: farewell mine host.
Come Kate Owdham, thou and Ise trimly dizard.
I faith name Club, Ise wot ne'er what to do, Ise be so
flouted and so shouted at: but by th mess Ise cry. 
Come Dol, come, be merry wench,
Farewell Kent, we are not for thee,
Be lusty my lass, come for Lancashi•e,
We must nip the Bong for these crowns.
Why is all the gold spent already that you had the o∣there day?
Gone Doll, gone, flown, spent, vanished, the devil, drink and the dice, has devoured all.
You might have left me in Kent, that you might, until you had bin better provided, I could have sty•ed at Cobham.
No Dol, no, isle none of that, Kent•s too hot Doll, Kent's too hot: the weathercock of Wrotham will crow no longer, we have plucked him, he has lost his feathers, I have pruned him bare, left him thrice, is moulted, is moulted, wēch.
Faith sir Iohn, I might have gone to service again, old moister Harpoole told me he would provide me a mistress.
Peace Doll, peace, come mad wench, Isle make thee an honest woman, weal into Lancashire to our friends, the troth is, Isle marry thee, we want but a little money to buy vs a horse, and to spend by the way, the next sheep that comes shall loose his fleece, weal have these crowns wench I warrant thee: stay, who comes here? some Irish villain me thinks that
has slain a man, and draws him out of the way to rifle him: stand close Doll, weal see the end.
Alas poe master, S. Richard Lee, be saint Patrick is rob and cut thy trot, for dee shaine, and die money, and dee gold ring, be me truly is love thee well, but now dow be kill thee, bee shit∣ten kanaue.
Stand sir, what art thou?
Be saint Patrick master is pore Irisman, is a leufter.
Sir, sir, you are a damned rogue, you have kill∣led a man here, and rifled him of all that he has, sbloud you
rogue deliver, or isle not leave you so much as an Irish hair a∣above your shoulders, you whoreson Irish dog, sir untruss presently, come off and dispatch, or by this cross isle fetch your head off as clean as a bark.
Wees me saint Patrick, Ise kill me master for chain and his ring, and nous be rob of all, mees undo.
Avaunt you rascal, go sir, be walking, come Doll the devil laughs, when one thief robs another, come mad wench, weal to saint Albons, and revel in our bower, hey my brave girl.
O thou art old sir Iohn, when ell's done in faith.
Be me trow master is pore Irisman, is want ludging, is have no money, is starve and cold, good master give her some meat, is famise and tie.
In faith my fellow I have no lodging, but what I keep for my guess, that I may not disappoint, as for meat thou shalt have such as there is, &amp; if thou wilt lie in the barn, theres fair straw, and room enough.
Is thank my master heartily, de straw is good bed for me.
Ho Robin?
Who calls?
Show this poor Irishman into the barn, go sir. 
Ho, who's within here, who looks to the horses? Gods hat here is fine work, the hens in the manger, and the hogs in the litter, a bots found you all, here is a house well looked too yvaith.
Mas goffe Club, Ise very cawd.
Get in Kate, get in to fire and warm thee.
Ho Iohn Hostler.
What gaffer Club, welcome to saint Albons,
How does all our friends in Lancashire?
Well God have mercy Iohn, how does Tom, wheres he?
O Tom is gone from hence, hes at the three horse-loues at Stony-stratford, how does old Dick Dunne?
Gods hat old Dunne has bin moyerd in a slough in Brickhil-lane, a plague found it, yonder is such abomination weather as never was seen.
Gods hat thief, have one half peck of peas and oats more for that, as I am Iohn Ostler, hee has been ever as good a jade as ever travelled.
Faith well said old Jack, thou art the old lad still.
Come Gaffer Club, vnlode, vnlode, and get to sup∣per, and Isle rub dunne the while. Come. 
Come Madam, happily escaped, here let vs sit,
This place is far remote from any path,
And here awhile our weary limbs may rest,
To take refreshing, free from the pursuit
Of envious Winchester.
But where (my Lord,)
Shall we find rest for our disquiet minds?
There dwell untamed thoughts that hardly stoup,
To such abasemen• of disdained rags,
We were not wont to travel thus by night,
Especially on foot.
No matter love,
Extremities admit no better choice,
And were it not for thee, say froward time,
Imposde a greater task, I would esteem it
As lightly as the wind that blows upon vs,
But in thy sufferance I am doubly taskt,
Thou wast not wont to have the earth thy stool,
Nor the moist dewy grass thy pillow, nor
Thy chamber to be the wide horizon,
How can it seem a trouble, having you
A partner with me, in the worst I feel?
No gentle Lord, your presence would give ease
To death it self, should he now seize upon me,
Behold what my foresight hath vndertane 
For fear we faint, they are but homely cates.
Yet sau•de with hunger, they may seem as sweet,
As greater dainties we were wont to taste.
Praise be to him whose plenty sends both this,
And all things else our mortal bodies need,
Nor scorn we this poor feeding, nor the state
We now are in, for what is it on earth,
Nay under heaven, continues at a stay?
Ebbes not the sea, when it hath overflown?
Flows not darkness when the day is gone?
And see we not sometime the eye of heaven,
Dimmd with ouerflying clouds: the•es not that work
Of careful nature, or of cunning art,
(How strong, how beauteous, or how rich it be)
But falls in time to ruin: here gentle Madame,
In this one draught I wash my sorrow down. 
And I incoragde with your cheerful speech,
Will do the like.
Pray God poor Harpoole come,
If he should fall into the Bishops hands,
Or not remember where we bade him meet vs,
It were the thing of all things else, that now
Could breed revolt in this new peace of mind.
Fear not my Lord, hes witty to devise,
And strong to execute a present shift.
That power be still his guide hath guided vs,
My drowsy eyes wax heavy, early rising,
Together with the travel we have had,
Make me that I could gladly take a nap,
Were I persuaded we might be secure.
Let that depend on me, whilst you do sleep,
Isle watch that no misfortune happen vs,
Lay then your head upon my lap sweet Lord,
And boldly take your rest.
I shall dear wife,
Be too much trouble to thee.
Urge not that,
My duty binds me, and your love commands.
I would I had the skill with tuned voice,
To draw on sleep with some sweet melody,
But imperfectoin and unaptness too,
Are both repugnant, fear inserts the one,
The other nature hath denied me use.
But what talk I of means to purchase that,
Is freely happened? sleep with gentle hand,
Hath shut his eie-liddes, oh victorious labour,
How soon thy power can charm the bodies sense?
And now thou likewise climbst unto my brain,
Making my heavy temples stoup to thee,
Great God of heaven from danger keep vs free. 
A murder closely done and in my ground?
Search carefully, if any where it were,
This obscure thicket is the likeliest place.
Sir I have found the body stiff with cold,
And mangled cruelly with many wounds.
Look if thou know him, turn his body up,
A lack it is my son, my son and heir,
Whom two years since, I sent to Ireland,
To practise there the discipline of war,
And coming home (for so he wrote to me)
Some savage hart, some bloody devilish hand,
Either in hate, or thirsting for his coin,
Hath here slucde out his blood, unhappy hour,
Accursed place, but most inconstant fate,
That had reserved him from the bullets fire,
And suffered him to scope the wood-karnes fury,
Did here ordain the treasure of his life,
(Even here within the arms of tender peace,
And where security gate greatest hope)
To be consumed by treasons wasteful hand?
And what is most afflicting to my soul,
That this his death and murder should be wrought,
Wi•hout the •nowledge by whose means it was done,
Not so sir, I have found the authors of it,
See where they sit, and in their bloody fistes,
The fatal instruments of death and sin.
Just judgment of that power, whose gracious eye,
Loathing the sight of such a heinous fact,
Dazzled their senses with benumming-sleepe,
Till their unhallowed treachery were known:
Awake ye monsters, murderers awake,
Tremble for horror, blush you cannot choose,
Beholding this inhumane deed of yours.
What mean you sir to trouble weary souls,
And interrupt vs of our quiet sleep?
Oh devilish! can you boast unto your selves
Of quiet sleep, having within your hearts
The guilt of murder waking, that with cries
Deafes the loud thunder, and solicits heaven,
With mo•e than Mandrakes shrieks for your offence?
What murder? you upbraid vs wrongfully.
Can you deny the fact? see you not here,
The body of my son by you mis-done?
Look on his wounds, look on his purple hew:
Do we not find you where the deed was done?
Were not your knives fast closed in your hands?
Is not this cloth an argument beside,
Thus stained and spotted with his innocent blood?
These speaking characters, were nothing else
To plead against ye, would convict you both.
Bring them away, bereauers of my joy,
At Hartford where the Sises now are kept,
Their lives shall answer for my sons lost life.
As we are innocent, so may we speed.
As I am wronged, so may the law proceed. 
What intricate confusion have we here?
Not two hours since we apprehended one,
In habit Irish, but in speech, not so:
And now you bring another, that in speech
Is altogether Irish, but in habit
Seems to be English: yea and more than so,
The servant of that heretike Lord Cobham.
Feet me be no servant of the lord Cobhams,
Me be Mack Chane of Vlster.
Otherwise called Harpoole of Kent, go to sit,
You cannot blind vs with your broken Irish.
Trust me, my Lord Bishop, whether Irish,
Or English, Harpoole or not Harpoole, that
I leave to be decided by the trial:
But sure I am this man by face and speech
Is he that murdered young sir Richard Lee:
I met him presently upon the fact,
And that he slew his moister for that gold,
Those jewels, and that chain I took from him.
Well, our affairs doe call vs back to London,
So that we cannot prosecute the cause
As we desire to do, therefore we leave
The charge with you, to see they be conveyed
To Hartford Sis: both this counterfeit
And you sir Iohn of Wrotham, and your wench,
For you are culpable as well as they,
Though not for murder, yet for felony.
But since you are the means to bring to light
This graceless murder, you shall bear with you,
Our letters to the Judges of the bench,
To be your friends in what they lawful may.
I thank your Lordship.
So, away with them. 
Bring forth the prisoners, see the court prepared,
The Justices are coming to the bench.
So, let him stand, away, and fetch the rest. 
Oh give me patience to endure this scourge,
Thou that art fountain of that virtuous stream,
And though contempt, false witness, and reproach
Hang on these iron gyves, to press my life
As low as earth, yet strengthen me with faith,
That I may mount in spirit aboue the clouds.
Here comes my lady, sorrow tic for her,
Thy wound is grievous, else I scoff at thee.
What and poor Harpoole! art thou ith briars too?
I faith my Lord, I am in, get out how I can.
Say (gentle Lord) for now we are alone,
And may confer, shall we confess in brief,
Of whence, and what we are, and so prevent
The accusation is commenede against vs?
What will that help vs? being known, sweet love,
We shall for heresy be put to death,
For so they term the religion we profess.
No, if it be ordained we must die,
And at this instant, this our comfort be,
That of the guilt imposde, our souls are free.
Yea, yea my lord, Harpoole is so resolude,
I wreak of death the less, in that I die
Not by the sentence of that envious priest
The Bishop of Rochester, oh were it he,
Or by his means that I should suffer here,
It would be double torment to my soul.
Well, be it then according as heaven please.
Now M. Mayor, what gentleman is that,
You bring with you, before vs and the bench?
The Lord Powes if it like your honour,
And this his Lady, travelling toward Wales,
Who for they lodged last night within my house,
And my Lord Bishop did lay search for such,
Were very willing to come on with me,
Lest for their sakes, suspicion we might wrong.
We cry your honour mercy good my Lord,
Wilt please ye take your place, madame your ladyship,
May here or where you will repose your self,
Until this business now in hand be past.
I will withdraw into some other room,
So that your Lordship, and the rest be pleased.
With all our hearts: attend the Lady there.
Wife, I have eyed yond prisoners all this while,
And my conceit doth tel me, tic our friend,
The noble Cobham, and his virtuous Lady.
I think no less, are they suspected trow ye
For doing of this murder?
What it means,
I cannot tell, but we shall know anon,
Mean space as you pass by them, ask the question,
But do it secretly, you be not seen,
And make some sign that I may know your mind.
My Lord Cobham, madam?
No Cobhā now, nor madam as you love vs,
But Iohn of Lancashire, and Ione his wife.
Oh tel, what is it that our love can do,
To pleasure you, for we are bound to you.
Nothing but this, that you conceal our names,
So gentle lady pass for being spied.
My heart I leave, to bear part of your grief. 
Call the prisoners to the bar: sir Richard Lee,
What evidence can you bring against these people,
To prove them guilty of the murder done?
This bloody towel, and these naked knives,
Beside we found them sitting by the place,
Where the dead body lay within a bush.
What answer you why law should not proceed,
According to this evidence given in,
To tax ye with the penalty of death?
That we are free from murders very thought,
And know not how the gentleman was slain.
How came this linen cloth so body then?
My husband hot with travelling my lord,
His nose gushed out a bleeding, that was it.
But wherefore were your sharpe edged knives un∣shed?
To cut such simple victual as we had.
Say we admit this answer to those articles,
What made ye in so private a dark nook,
So far remote from any common path,
As was the thick where the dead corpse was thrown?
Iournying my lord from London from the term,
Down into Lancashire where we do dwell,
And what with age and travel being faint,
We gladly sought a place where we might rest,
Free from resort of other passengers,
And so we strayed into that secret corner.
These are but ambages to drive of time,
And linger Justice from her purposde end.
But who are these?
Stay Judgment, and release those innocents,
For here is hee, whose hand hath done the deed,
For which they stand indicted at the bar,
This savage villain, this rude Irish slave,
His tongue already hath confessed the fact,
And here is witness to confirm as much.
Yes my good Lords, no sooner had he slain
His loving master for dthe wealth he had,
But I upon the instant met with him,
And what he purchacde with the loss of blood,
With strokes I presently bereaved him of,
Some of the which is spent, the rest remaining,
I willingly surrender to the hands
Of old sir Richard Lee, as being his,
Beside my Lord Judge, I greet your honour,
With letters from my Lord of Winchester. 
Is this the wolf whose thirsty throat did drink
My dear sons blood? art thou the snake
He cherished, yet with envious piercing sting,
Assaildst him mortally? foul stigmatike,
Thou venom of the country where thou lived,
And pestilence of this: were it not that law
Stands ready to revenge thy cruelty,
Traitor to God, thy master, and to me,
These hands should be thy executioner.
Patience sir Richard Lee, you shall have justice,
And he the guerdon of his base desert,
The fact is odious, therefore take him hence,
And being hanged until the wretch be dead,
His body after shall be hanged in chains,
Near to the place, where he did act the murder.
Prithee Lord shudge let me have mine own clothes, my strouces there, and let me be hanged in a with after my cun∣try, the Irish fashion. 
Go to, away with him, and now sir Iohn,
Although by you, this murder came to light,
And therein you have well deserved, yet upright law,
So will not have you be excusde and quit,
For you did rob the Irishman, by which
You stand attained here of felony,
Beside, you have bin lewd, and many years
Led a lascivious unbeseeming life.
Oh but my Lord, he repents, sir Iohn repents he will mend.
In hope thereof, together with the favour,
My Lord of Winchester entreats for you,
We are content you shall be proved.
I thank your good Lordship.
These other falsely here, accused, and brought
In peril wrongfully, we in like sort
Do set at liberty, paying their fees.
That office if it please ye I will do,
For countries sake, because I know them well,
They are my neighbours, therefore of my cost,
Their charges shall be paid.
And for amends,
Touching the wrong unwittingly I have done,
There are a few crowns more for them to drink. 
Your kindness merits praise sir Richard Lee,
So let vs hence. 
But Powesse still must stay,
There yet remains a part of that true love,
He owes his noble friend vnsatisfide,
And vnperformd which first of all doth bind me,
To gratulate your lordships s•fe delivery,
And then entreat, that since unlooked for thus,
We here are met, your honour would vouchsafe,
To ride with me to Wales, where though my power,
(Though not to quittance those great benefits,
I have received of you) yet both my house,
My purse my servants, and what else I have,
Are all at your command, deny me not,
I know the Bishops hate pursues ye so,
As theres no safety in abiding here.
Tic true my Lord, and God forgive him for it.
Then let vs hence, you shall be straight provided
Of lusty geldings, and once entered VVales,
Well may the Bishop hunt, but spite his face,
He never more shall have the game in chase. 

GEntlemen, I come to ye like one that lacks and
would borrow, but was loath to ask least hee
should be denied: I would ask, but I would ask
•o obtain: O would I knew that manner of
asking: to beg were base, and to cooche low and
to carry an humble show of entreaty, were too
Dog-like that fawns on his moister to get a bone from his Tren∣cher:
out Cur• I cannot abide it, to put on the shape and habit of
this new worlds new found beggars, mistermed Soldiers, as thus:
sweet Gentlemen, let a poor Scholar implore and exerate, that you
would make him rich in the possession of amite of your favours, to
keep him a true man in wit, and to pay for his lodging among the
Muses: so God him help he is driven to a most low estate, tic not
unknown what service of words •e hath been at, he lost his limbs
in a late conflict of flout, a brave repulse and a hot assault it was,
he doth protest, as ever he saw since hee knew what the report of a
volley of testes were, he shall therefore desire you: A plague upon it,
each Beadle disdained, would whip him from your company. Well
Gentlemen, I cannot tell howe to get your favours better then by
desert: then the worse luck, or the worse wit or some what, for I
shall not now deserve it. Welcome then, I commit my self to my for∣tunes,
&amp; your contents, contented to dye, •f your severe judgements
shall judge me to be stung to death with the Adders hiss.
GOod moister Barnes, this entertain of yours,
So •ull of curtsy and rich delight,
Makes me misdoubt my poor ability,
In quittance of this friendly curtsy.
O master Goursey, neighbour amity,
Is such ay well of high reckoned worth:
As for the attain of it, what would not I
D•sburse, it is so precious in my thoughts.
Kind sir, near dwelling amity indeed,
Offers the hearts enqui•y better view.
Then love thats seated in a farther soil,
As prospectives the nearer that they be,
Yield better judgment to the judging eye,
Things seen far off, are lessened in the eye,
When their true shape is seen being hard by.
True sir, tic so, and truly I esteem,
Mere amity familiar neighbourhood,
The cousin germaine unto wedded love.
I sir, theirs surely some alliance twixt them,
For they have both the off-spring from the heart,
Within the hearts blood Ocean still are found,
Jewels of amity, and lemmes of love.
I master Goursey, I have in my time,
Seen many shipwrecks of true honesty,
But incident such dangers ever are,
To them that without compass sail so far,
Why what need men to swim when they may wade?
But leave this talk, enough of this is said,
And Master Goursey, in good faith sir welcome:
And mistress Goursey, I am much in debt,
Unto your kindness that would visit me.
O master Barnes, you put me but in mind,
Of that which I should say: tic we that are
Indebted to your kindness for this cheer:
Which debt that we may repay, I pray lets have,
Sometimes your company, at our homely house.
That mistress Goursey you shall surely have,
Heel be a bold guest I warrant ye,
And boulder too with you then I would have him.
How doe ye mean he will be bold with me?
Why he will trouble you at home forsooth,
Often call in, and ask ye how ye doe:
And sit and that with you all day till night,
And all night too if he might have his will.
I wife indeed, I thank her for her kindness,
She hath made me much good cheer passing that way.
Passing well done of her, she is a kind wench,
I thank ye mistress Goursey for my husband,
And if it hap your husband come our way
A hunting, or such ordinary sports,
Isle doe as much for yours, as you for mine.
Pray doe forsooth, Gods Lord what means the woman,
She speaks it scornfully, I faith I care not,
Things are well spoken, if they be well taken,
What mistress Barnes, is it not time to part?
Whats a clock sir?
Tic but new struck one.
I have some business in the town by three.
Till then lets walk into the Orchard sir.
What can you play at Tables?
Yes, I can.
What, shall we have a game?
And if you please.
I faith content, weal spend an hour so:
Sir fetch the Tables,
I will sir.
Sir Frank, whilst they are playing here,
Weal to the greene to Bowls.
Phillip content, Comes come hither sir,
When our Fathers part, call vs upon the greene,
Phillip come, a rubber and so leave,
Come on.
Sbloud, I doe not like the humour of these spring•s,
the•l spend all their fathers good at 〈◊〉▪ But let
them trowel the bowls upon the greene: He trowel the
bowls in the Buttery, by the leave of God and moister
Barnes: and his men be good fellows so it is, if they be not
let them go sneck up.
So set them down,
Mistress Goursey, how doe you like this game?
Well sir.
Can ye play at it?
A little sir.
Faith so can my wife.
Why then master Barnes, and if you please,
Our wives shall try the quarrel twixt vs two,
And weal look on?
I am content, what woman will you play?
I care not greatly.
Nor I, but that I think sheele play me false.
Isle see she shall not.
Nay sir, she will be sure you shall not see.
You of all men shall not mark her hand,
She hath such close conveyance in her play.
Is she so cunning grown, come, come, lets see.
Yea mistress Barnes, will ye not house your jests,
But let them rome abroad so carelessly?
Faith, if your jealous tongue utter another,
Isle cross ye with a jest, and ye were my mother,
Come shall we play?
I, what shall we play a game?
A pound a game.
How wife?
Faith husband not a farthing less.
It is too much, a shilling were good game.
No, weell be ill housewives once,
You have oft been ill husbands, lets alone.
Wife, will you play so much?
I would be loath to be so frank a gai••ster
As mistress Goursey is, and yet for once,
Isle play a pound a game as well as she.
Go to, you'll have your will.
Come, ther's my stake.
And ther's mine.
Throw for the Dice: Ill luck they are yours.
Master Goursey, who says that gamings bad,
When such good Angels walk twixt every cast?
This is not noble sport, but royal play.
It must be so where royals walk so fast.
Play right I pray.
Why so I doe.
Where stands your man?
In his right pl•ce.
Good faith, I think ye play me foul an Ace,
No wife, she plays ye true.
Peace husband, peace, isle not be judged by you.
Husband master Barnes, pray both go walk.
We cannot play, if standers by doe talk.
Well to your game, we will not trouble ye.
Where stands your man now?
Doth he not stand right?
It stands b•tweene the points.
And thats my spite.
But yet me thinks the dice runs much uneven,
That I throw but dews as and you eleven.
And •et you see that I cast down the hill,
I, I beshrew ye, tic not with my will.
Do ye beshrew me?
No, I beshrew the dice.
That turn you up more at once, then me at twice.
Well, you shall see them turn for you anon.
But I care not for them when your game is done,
My game, what game?
Your game, your game attables.
Well mistress, well, I have red Aesops sables,
And know your morals meaning well enough.
Lo you'll be angry, now hears good stuff,
How now woman, who hath won the game?
No body yet.
Your wife's the fairest for it.
I in your eye.
How do you mean?
He holds you fairer for it then I.
For what forsooth?
Good gamester, for your game.
Well, try it out, it is all but in the hearing.
Nay if it come to bearing, she'll be best.
Why, you're as good a bearer as the rest.
Nay thats not so, you bear one man too many.
Better doe so then bear not any.
B•shrew me, but my wives jests grow too bitter,
Plainer speeches for her were more better,
Malice lies inbowelled in her tongue,
And new hatched hate makes every jest a wrong.
Look ye mistress now I hit ye.
Why I, you never •se to misle a blot,
Especially when it stands so fair to hit.
How mean ye mistress Barnes?
That mistress Gorse's in the hitting vain.
I hot your man.
I, I, my man, my man, but had I known,
I would have had my man stood nearer home.
Why had ye kept your man in his right place,
I should not then have hit him with an as.
Right by the Lord, a plague upon the bones.
And a hot mischief on the cursor too.
How now wife?
Why whats the matter woman?
It is no matter. I am.
I you are.
What am I?
Why thats as you will be ever.
Thats every day as good as Barneses wife.
And better too, then what needs all this trouble?
A single horse is worse then that bears double.
Wife go to, have regard to that you say,
Let not your words pass forth the vierge of reason:
But keep within the bounds of modesty,
For ill report doth like a Bailiff stand,
To pound the straying, and the wit-lost tongue,
And makes it forseit into follies hands,
Well wife, you know tic no honest part,
To entertain such guests with jests and wrongs,
What will the neighbring country vulgar say,
When as they hear that you fell out at dinner?
Forsooth they'll call it a pot quar•ell straight,
The best they'll name it, is a women's jangling,
Go too, be ruled, be ruled.
Gods Lord, be ruled, be ruled
What, think ye I have such a babies wit,
To hane a rods correction for my tongue?
School infancy, I am of age to speak,
And I know when to speak, shall I be child for such a?
What a? nay mistress speak it out,
I scorn your stopped compares, compare not me
To any but your equals, mistress Barnes,
Peace wife be quiet.
O persuade, persuade.
Wife, mistress Goursey, shall I win your thoughts,
To composition of some kind effects?
Wife, if you love your credit leave this st•ife,
And come shake hands, with mistress Goursey here,
Shall I shake hands? let her go shake her heals,
She gets nor hands, nor friendship at my hands,
And so si• while I live I will take heed,
What guests I bid again unto my house.
Impatient woman, will you be so stiff in this absurdnes?
I am impatient now I speak,
But sir Isle tell you more an other time,
Go too, I will not take it as I have done.
Nay, she might stay, I will not long be here
To trouble her: well moister Barnes,
I am sorry that it was our hippos to day,
To have our pleasures parted with this fray,
I am sorry too for all that is amiss,
Especially that you are moved in this,
But be not so, t's but a women's jar,
Their tongues are weapons, words their blows of war,
T'was but a while we buffeted you saw,
And each of vs was willing to withdraw,
There was no harm nor bloodshed you did see:
Tush, fear vs not, for we shall well agree:
I take my leave sir, come kind hearted man,
That speaks his wife so fair, I now and than,
I know you would not for an hundredth pound,
That I should hear your voices churlish sound,
I know you have a far more milder tune
Then peace, be quiet wife, but I have done:
Will ye go home? the door directs the way,
But if you will not, my duty is to stay.
Ha, ha, why here is a right woman, is there not?
They both have dined, yet see what stomachs they have.
Well moister Barnes, we cannot do with all,
Let vs be friends still.
O moister Goursey, the mettell of our minds,
Having the temper of true reason in them,
Affords a better edge of argument,
For the maintain of our familiar loves,
Then the soft leaden wit of women can,
Wherefore with all the parts of neighbour love,
I impart my self to moister Goursey.
And with exchange of love I do receive it,
Then here weel part partners of two cursed wives.
Oh where shall we find a man so blessed that is not,
But come, your business and my home affairs,
Makes me deliver that unfriendly word amongst friends, farewell.
Twenty farewells sir.
But hark ye moister Goursey,
Look ye persuade at home as I will do,
What man, we must not always have them soes.
If I can help it.
God help, God help,
Women are even untoward creatures still.
Come on Frank Goursey, you have good luck
to win the game.
Why tell me, first not good, that never played before
upon your greene.
Tic good, but that it cost me ten good crowns
that makes it worse.
Let it not grieve thee man, come ore to vs,
We will devise some game to make you win
Your money back again sweet Philip.
And that shall be ere long and if I live,
But tell me Francis, what good Horses have ye to hunt
this Summer?
Two or three Jade, or so.
Be they but Jade?
No faith my wag string here
Did founder one the last time that he rid,
The best gray Nag that ever I laid my leg over.
You mean the flea bitten.
Good sir the same.
And was the same the best that ere you rid on?
I was it sir.
I faith it was not sir.
No, where had I one so good?
One of my colour, and a better too.
One of your colour, I ne'er remember him, one of
that colour.
Or of that complexion.
Whats that ye call complexion in a horse.
The colour sir.
Set me a colour on your jest, or I will:
Nay good sir hold your hands.
What, shall we have it?
Why sir, I cannot paint.
Well then, I can.
and I shall find a pe•sill for ye sir.
Then I must find the table if you do.
A whoreson barren wicked •rchen.
Look how you chafe, you would be angry more,
if I should tell it you.
Go to, Isle anger ye and if you do not.
Why sir, the horse that I do mean,
Hath a leg both straight and clean.
That hath nor spain, splint nor flaw.
But is the best that ever ye saw,
A pretierising knee, O knee!
It is as round as round may be,
The full flank makes the buttock round,
This palfrey stands on no ground,
When as my maister's on her back,
If that he once do say but, tick,
And if he prick her, you shall see
Her gallop amain, she is so free,
And if he give her but a nod,
She thinks it is a riding rod:
And if he will have her softly go,
Then she trips it like a Doe,
She comes so easy with the rain,
A twine thread turns her back again,
And truly I did ne'er see yet;
A horse play proudlier on the bit,
My moister with good managing,
Brought her first unto the ring,
He likewise taught herto corvette,
To run and suddenly to set,
Shoe's cunning in the wilde goose race,
Nay shoe's apt to every pace,
And to prove her colour good,
A flea enamourd of her blood,
Digd for channels in her neck,
And there made many a crimson speck,
I think theres none that use to ride,
But can her pleasant trot abide,
She goes •o even upon the way,
She will not stumble in a day,
And when my ma•ster.
What do I?
Nay nothing sir.
O fie Frank fie,
Nay, nay, your reason hath no justice now,
I must needs say, persuade him first to speak,
Then chide him for it: tell me pretty wag,
Where stands his prawncer, in what Inn or stable?
Or hath thy moister put her out to run,
Then in what field, what champion feeds this courser?
This well paste bonnie steed that thou so praise.
Faith sir I think.
Villain, what do ye think?
I think that you sir have been asked by many,
But yet I never heard that ye told any,
Well boy, then I will add one more to many,
A•d ask thy moister where this Jennet feeds:
Come Frank tell me, nay prithee tell me Frank,
My good horse-maister tell me, by this light
I will not steal her from thee: if I do,
Let me beheld a salon to thy love.
No Phillip no.
What, wilt thou were a point but with one tag?
Well Francis well, I see you are a wag.
Swounds where he these timber turners, these trowel
the bowls, these greene men, these.
What, what sir?
These bowlers sir.
Well sir, what say you to Bowlers?
Why I say they cannot be saved.
Your reason sir?
Because they throw away their souls at every mark
Their souls, how mean ye?
Sir he means the soul of our bowl.
Lord how his wit holds bias like a bowl.
Well, which is the B•as?
This next to you.
Nay turn it this way, then the bowl goes true.
Rub, rub.
Why rub?
Why you overcast the mark and miss the way.
Nay boy Ivse to take the fairest of my play.
Dicke Comes me thinks thou art very pleasant.
When gotst thou this merry humour?
In your fathers Seller, the merriest place in th'house.
Then you have been carousing hard,
Yes faith, it is our custom when your fathers men &amp;
we mere.
Thou art very welcome thither Dicke.
By God I thank ye sir, I thank ye sir, by God I have
a quart of Wine for ye sir in any place of the world, there
shall not a serving-man in Barkeshire fight better for ye then
I will do, if you have any quarrel in hand, you shall have
the maidenhead of my new sword: I paid a quarters wa∣ges
sor't by Iesus.
Oh this meat failure Dicke,
How well it is made apparel of his wit,
And brought it into fashion of an honour,
Prethe Dicke Comes but tell me how thou dost?
Faith sir like a poor man at service.
Or serving man.
Indeed so called by the vulgar.
Why where the devil had thou that word?
O sir, you have the most eloquenst ale in all •he
world, our blunt soil affords none such,
Phillip leave talking with this drunken fool,
Say sir whore's my father?
Marry I thank ye •or my ve•• good cheer, O Lord
it is not so much worth, you see I am bold with ye, Indeed
you are not so bold as welcome, I pray ye come oftner,
Truly I shall trouble ye, all these ceremonies are dispatcht
between them, and they are gone.
Are they so?
I before God are they.
And wherefore came not you to call me then?
Because I was loath to change my game,
What game?
You were at one sort of bowls, as I was at another,
Sir, he means the buttery bowls of beer.
By God sir we tickled it.
Why what a swearing keeps this drunken ass,
Can thou not say but swear at every word?
Peace do not mar his humour prithee Frank.
Let him alone, hoe's a springall, he knows not what
belongs to an oath.
Sir, be quiet, or I doe protest.
Come, come, what doe you protest?
By heaven to crack your Crown,
To crack my crown, I lay yea crown of that,
Lay it down and ye dare:
Nay sbloud, isle venture a quarters wages of that,
Crack my crown quoth a?
Wirl ye not be quiet, will ye urge me?
Urge ye with a pox, who urges ye?
You might have said so much to a clown,
O ron that had not been ore the sea to see fashions,
I have I tell ye true, and I know what belongs to a man,
Crack my crown and ye can.
And I can ye rascal. Phi. Hold hair brain hold,
Dost thou not see hes drunk?
Nay let him come,
Though he be my masters son, I am my masters man,
And a man is a man in any ground in England:
Come, and he dare, a comes upon his death,
I will no• budge an inch: no sbloud will not,
Will ye not?
Stay prithee Frank, Comes dost thou hear?
Hear me no hears
Stand away, Isle trust none of you all,
If I have my back against a Cart wheel,
I would not care, if the devil came.
Why ye fool, I am your friend.
Fool on your face, I have a wife,
Shees a whore then.
Shees as honest as Nan Lawson.
Whats she?
One of his whores.
Why hath he so many?
I as many as there be Churches in London.
Why thats an hundred and nine.
Faith he lies a hundred.
Then thou art a witness to nine.
No by God, Isle be witness to none:
Now doe I stand like the George at Colbrooke:
No thou standst like the Bull at S. Albones.
Boy ye lye the horns.
The Bul's bitten, see how he buts.
Comes, Comes, put up, my friend and thou art friends
Isle hear him say so first.
Frank prithee doe, be friends and tell him so,
Go to I am.
Put up sir, and ye be a man put up.
I am easily persuaded boy.
Ah ye mad slave.
Come, come, a couple of whore-masters I found
ye, and so I leave ye.
Lo Frank dost thou not see hes drunk,
That twits me with my disposition?
What disposition?
Nan Lawson, Nan Lawson,
Nay then,
Go to ye wag, tic well,
If ever ye get a wife, I faith Isle tell,
Sir at home we have a Serving-man,
Hes not humord bluntly as Comes is,
Yet his condition makes me often merry,
Isle tell thee sir, hes a fine neat fellow,
A spruce slave, I warrant ye, heel have
His Cruel garters cross about the knee,
His woollen hose, as white as the driven snow,
His shoes dry leather neat, and tied with red •bbins,
A nose-gay bound with laces in his Hat,
Bridelaces sir his hat, and all greene hat.
Greene Co•erlet, for such a grass greene wit,
The goose that graseth on the greene quoth he,
May I eat on, when you shall buried be,
All Proverbs in his speech, hoe's proverb• all.
Why speaks he Proverbs?
Because he would speak truth,
And proverbs you'll confess, are old said sooth.
I like this well, and one day Isle see him,
But shall we part?
Not yet, Isle bring you somewhat on your way,
And as we go, between your boy and you,
Isle know where that Prancer stands at livery.
Come, come you shall not.
I faith I will.
Wife in my mind, to day you were too blame
Although my patience did not blame ye for it:
Me thought the rules of love and neighbourhood,
Did not direct your thoughts, all indirect
Were your proceedings, in the entertain
Of them that I invited to my house.
Nay stay. I doe not chide but counsel wife,
And in the mildest manner that I may,
You need not view me with a servants eye,
Whose vassailes senses tremble at the look
Of his displeased master, O my wife,
You are my self, when self sees fault in self.
Self is sin obstinate, if self amend not,
Indeed I saw a fault in thee my self,
And it hath set a foil upon thy fame,
Not as the foil doth grace the Diamond.
What fault sir did you see in me to day?
O doe not set the organ of thy voice,
On such a grunting key of discontent:
Doe not deform the beauty of thy tongue,
With such misshapen answers, rough wrathful words
Are bastards got by rashness in the thoughts,
Fair demeanours, are Virtues nuptial babes,
The off-spring of the well instructed soul,
O let them call thee mother, then my wife,
So seem not barren of good courtesy.
So, have ye done?
I, and I had done well.
If you would do, what I advise for well.
Whats that?
Which is, that you would be good friends with
mistress Gorse•y.
With mistress Goursey.
I sweet wife.
Not so sweet husband.
Could you but show me any grounded cause.
The grounded cause, I ground because I will not
Your will hath little reason then I think.
Yes sir, my reason equalleth my will.
Lets hear your reason, for your will is great.
Why for I will not.
Is all your reason, for I will not wife.
Now by my soul I held ye for more wise,
Discreet, and of more temperature in sense,
Then in a sullen humour to effect,
That women's will borne common scholar phrase,
Oft have I heard a timely married girl,
That newly left to call her mother mam,
Her father Dad, but yesterday come from,
Thats my good girl, God send thee a good husband,
And now being taught to speak the name of husband,
Will when she would be wanton in her will,
If her husband ask her why, say for I will,
Have I chid men for unmanly choice,
That would not sit their years, have I seen thee
Pupell such greene young things, and with thy counsel,
Tutor their wits, a• dart thou now infected,
With this disease of imperfection,
I blush for thee ashamed at thy shame.
A shame on her, that makes thee rate me so,
O black mouth'drage, thy breath is boy••erou•▪
And thou makst virtue shake at this high storm,
Shees of good report, I know thou know i•.
She is not, nor I know not, but I know
That thou dost love her, there•o•e think her so,
Thou bear with her, because she bears with the•▪
Thou may be ashamed to stand in her defence,
She is a strumpet, and thou art no honest man
To stand in her defence against thy wife,
If I catch her in my walk now by C••kes bones,
Isle scratch out both her eyes.
O Godl
Nay never say O God for the matter,
Thou art the cause, thou bad her to my house,
Only to blear the eyes of Goursey, did not?
But I will▪ send him word I warrant thee,
And ere I sleep to, trust upon it sir.
Methinks this is a mighty fault in her,
I could be angry with her: O if I be so,
I •hall but put a Link unto a Torch,
And so give greater light to see her fault:
Isle rather smother it in melancholy,
Nay, wisdom bids me shun that passion,
Then I will study for a remedy,
I have a daughter now heaven invoke,
She be not of like spirit as her mother,
〈◊〉 sheel be a plague unto her husband,
If that he be no• patient and discreet,
For that I hold the ease of all such trouble,
Well, well, I would my daughter had a husband,
For I would see how she could demean her self,
•n that estate, it may be ill enough,
And so God shall help me, well remembered now,
Frank Goursey is his fathers some and heir,
A youth that in my heart I have good hope on,
My senses say a match, my soul applauds
The motion: O but his land• are great,
Hee will look high why I will strain my self.
To make her dowry equal with his land,
Good faith and it were a match twould be a means,
To make their mothers friends: Isle call my daughter,
To see how she•s disposed to marriage:
Mall, where are ye?
Father, here I am
Where is your mother?
I saw her not forsooth, since you and she
Went walking both together to the garden.
Dost thou hear me girl? I must dispute with thee
Father the question then must not be ha•d,
For I am very weak in argument.
Well, this it is, I say tic good to marry.
And this say I, tic not good to marry.
Were it not good, then all men would not marry
But now they doe.
Marry not all, but it is good to marry.
It is both good and bad, how can this be?
Why it is good to them that marry well,
To them that marry ill, no greater hell.
If thou might marry well, would thou agree?
I cannot tell, heaven must appoint for me.
Wench I am studying forthy good indeed,
My hopes &amp; duty, wish your thoughts good speed
But tell me wench, hast thou a mind to marry:
This question is too hard for bash•ulnes,
And Father, now ye pose my modesty,
I am a maid, and when ye ask me thus,
I like a maid must blush look pale and wan,
And then look pale again, for we change colour,
As our thoughts change, with true faced passion,
Of modest maidenhead, I could adorn me,
And to your question, make a sober curse,
And with clo•e clipped civility be silent,
Or else say no forsooth, or I forsooth,
If I said no forsooth, I lied forsooth,
To lye upon my self were deadly sin,
Therefore I will speak truth and shame the devil,
Father, when first I heard you name a husband,
At that same very name, my spirits quickened,
Dispa••e before had kilt them, they were dead,
Because it was my hap so long to tarry,
I was persuaded I should never marry.
And sitting sowing thus upon the ground,
I fell in trance of meditation,
But coming to my self, O Lord said I,
Shall it be so, must I unmarried dye?
And being angry Father, farther said,
Now by saint Anne, I will not dye a maid,
Good faith before I came to this ripe groath,
I did accuse the labouring time of sloth,
Me thought the year did run but slow about,
For I thought each year ten I was without,
Being fourteen, and toward the other year:
Good Lord thought I, fifteen will ne'er be here,
For I have heard my mother say, that then
Pretty maids, were fit for handsome men,
Fifteen past, s•xeteene and seventeen too,
What, thought I, will not this husband do?
Will no man marry me, have men forsworn,
Such beauty and such youth? shall youth be worn
As rich men's gowns, more with age then use?
Why the• I'let restained fancy loose,
And bad it gaze for pleasure: then love swore me
To doe what ere my mother did before me,
Yet in good faith, I was very loath,
But now it lies in you to save my oath:
If I shall have a husband, get him quickly,
For m•aides that wears Cork shoes, may step awry.
Believe me wench, I doe not apprehend thee,
But for this pleasant answer do commend thee.
I must confess, love doth thee mighty wrong,
But I will see thee have thy right ere long,
I know a young man, whom I hold most fit,
To have thee, both for living and for wit,
I will go write about it presently.
Good father do, O God me thinks I should
Wife it as fine as any woman could:
I could carry a port to he obeyed,
Carry a mastering eye upon my maid,
With minion do your business or Isle make ye,
And to all house authority be take me.
O God would I were married, be my troth,
But if I be not, I swear Isle keep my oath.
How now minion, where have you bin gadding
Forsooth my father called me forth to him.
Your Father, and what said he too ye I pray?
Nothing forsooth.
Nothing that cannot be, something he said.
I something, that as good as nothing was.
Come let me hear, that something nothing then
Nothing but of a husband for me mother.
A husband, th•t was something, but what husband
Nay faith I know not mother, would I did.
I would ye did, I faith are ye so hasty?
Hasty mother, why how old am I?
Too young to marry.
Nay by the mass ye lie
Mother, how old were you when you did marry.
How old so ere I was, yet you shall tarry.
Then the worse for me, hark Mother hark,
The Priest forgets that ere he was a Clarke,
When you were at my years, Isle hold my life,
Your mind was to change maidenhead for wife,
Pardon me mother, I am of your mind,
And by my troth I take it but by kind.
Doe ye hear daughter, you shall stay my leisure
Do you hear mother, would you stay frō pleasure
When ye have mind to it? go to, there's no wrong
Like this, to let maids lye alone so long
Lying alone they muse but in their beds,
How they might loose their long kept maiden heads,
This is the cause there is so many scopes,
For women that are wise, will •ot lead Apes
In hell, I tel ye mother I say true,
Therefore come husband, maiden head adieu.
Well lusty guts, I mean to make ye stay,
And set some rubs in your minds smothest way.
Mother.
How now ••rra, where have ye bi• walking?
Over the meads half way to Milton mother,
To bear my friend Frank Goursey company.
Wher's your blew coat, your sword &amp; buckler sir
Get you such like habit for a serving-man,
If you will weight upon the brat of Goursey.
Mother, that you are moved this make• me wonder,
When I departed I did leave ye friends,
What vndigested •are hath since betided?
Such as almost doth choke thy mother boy.
And sty••es her with the conceit of it,
I am abused my son by Goursey• wife.
By mistress Goursey?
Mistress flourish, you foul strumpet,
Light aloe, short heals, mistress Goursey,
Call her again and thou were better no.
O my dear more have some patience,
I sir, have patience, and see your father
To rifle up the treasure of my love,
And play the spend-thrift upon such an harlot?
This same will make me have patience, will it not?
This same is women's most impatience,
Yet mother I have often heard ye say,
That you have found my father temperate,
And ever f•ee from such affections.
I, till my too much love did glut his thoughts,
And make him seek for chāge,
O change your mind
My father bears more cordial love to you.
Thou least, thou least, for he loves Gourseys wife, not me.
Now I swear mother you are much too blame,
I durst be sworn he loves you as his soul.
Wilt thou be pampered by affection?
Will nature teach thee such wild perjury?
Wilt thou be sworn, I forlorn, careless boy?
And if thou swearst, I say he loves me not.
He loves ye but too well I swear,
Unless ye knew much better how to use him,
Doth he so sir? thou unnatural boy,
Too well say thou, that word shall cost thee somewhat,
O'monstrous, have I brought thee up to this?
Too well, O unkind, wicked and degenerate,
Hast thou the heart to say so of thy mother?
Well, God will plague thee sort, I warrant thee,
Out on thee villa•no, fie upon thee wretch,
Out of my sight, out of my sight I say.
This ayre is pleasant, and doth please me well,
And here I will stay,
Wilt thou stubborn villain?
How now, whats the matter?
Thou set thy son to scoff and mock at me,
First not sufficient I am wronged of thee?
But he must be an agent to abuse me?
Must I be subject to my cradle too? O God, o God amēd it.
Why how now Phillip, is this true my son?
Dear father she is much impatient:
Ne'er let that hand assist me in my need,
If I more said, then that she thought amiss,
To think that you were so licentious given,
And thus much more, when she inferred it more,
I swore an oath you loved her but too well,
In that as guilty I do hold my self,
Now that I come to more considerate trial,
I know my fault, I should have borne with he•,
Blame me for rashness, then not for want of duty.
I do absolve thee, and come hither Phillip,
I have writ a letter unto master Goursey,
And I will tell thee the contents thereof,
But tell me first, think thou Frank Gorse••? loves thee?
If that a man devoted to a man,
Loyal, •eligious, in loves hallowed vows,
If that a man that is soul laboursome,
To workehis own thoughts to his friends delight,
May purchase good opinion with his friend,
Then I may say▪ I have done this so well,
That I may think Frank Goursey loves me well.
Tic well, and I am much deceived in him,
And if he be not sober, wise, and valiant.
I hope my father takes me for thus wise,
I will not glow my self in love to one,
That hath not some desert of virtue in him,
What ere you think of him, believe me Father,
He will be answerable to your thoughts,
In any quality commendable.
Thou chearst my hopes in him, and in good faith,
Thoust made my love complete unto thy friend,
Phillip I love him, and I love him so,
I could afford him a good wife I know.
Father, awife?
Phillip a wife.
I lay my life my sister.
I in good faith.
Then father he shall have her he shall I swear.
How can thou say so knowing not his mind?
All is one for that, I will go to him straight,
Father if you would seek this seven years day,
You could not find a 〈◊〉 match for her,
And he shall have her, I swear he shall,
He were as good be hanged as once deny her, I saith Isle to him
Hairebraine, hairebraine▪ stay,
As yet we do not know his fathers mind,
Why what will master Gorse•y •ay my son,
If we shou•lt •otion it without his knowledge?
Go to, hes a wise and discreet Gentleman,
And that respects from me all honest parts,
Nor shall he fail his expectation,
First I doe mean to make him privy to it,
Phillip this letter is to that effect.
Father, for Gods sake send it quickly then,
Isle call your man, what Hugh, wheres Hugh, there h•.
Phillip if this would prove a match, it were the
only means that could be found, to make thy mother friends
with Mist. You. Phil How a match? Isle warrant ye a match•
My sister's fair, Frank Goursie he is rich,
His dowry too, will be sufficient,
Franke's young, and youth is apt to love,
And by my troth my sisters maiden head
Stands like a game attennis, if the ball
Hit into the hole or hazard, farewell all.
How now, whore's Hugh?
Why what doth this proverbial with vs, why whore's Hugh?
Peace, peace.
Whore's Hugh I say?
Be not so hasty Phillip.
Father let me alone,
I doe it but to make my self some sport,
This formal fool your man speaks nought but proverbs,
And speak men what they can to him, he will answer
With some time, rotten sentence, or old saying,
Such spokes as the ancient of the parish use,
With neighbour tic an old proverb and a true,
Goose giblets are good meat, old sack better then new,
Then says another, neighbour that is true,
And when each man hath drunk his gallon round,
A penny pot, for thats the old mans gallon,
Then do•h he like his lips and stroke his beard,
Thats glowed together with his slavering drops,
Of ye••y ale, and when he scarce can trim,
His gouty fingers, thus he will phillip it,
And with a rotten hem say hey my hearts,
Merry go so••y cock and pie my hearts,
But then their •avenge penny proverb comes,
And that is this: they that will to the wine,
Byr'lady mistress shall lay their penny to mi•e,
This was one of this penny-fathers bastards,
For on my life he was never begot,
Without the consent of some great prouerb-monger.
O ye are a wag.
Well, now unto my business;
Swounds will that mouth thats made of old sed saws,
And nothing else, say nothing to vs now?
O 〈…〉 you must not leap over
the stile before you come at it, haste makes waste, soft fire
makes swear mast, no• too fast for falling, there's no hast to
hang true men.
Father we ha'te, ye see we ha'te, now will I
see if my
memory will serve for some proverbs too. O a painted cloth
were as well worth a 〈◊〉, as a these worth a hilton well,
after my hearty commend•tions, as I was at the making here∣of▪
so it is, that I hope as you speed, so you're sure a swift horse
will tire, but he that trots easily will endure, you have most
learnedly prouerbde it, commending the virtue of patience
or forbearance, but yet you know forbearance is no quittance.
I promise ye maistor Philip you have spoken as true as steel.
Father, theres a proverb well applied.
And it seems unto me, I it seems to me, that you
moister Phillip mock me, do you not know queen mocat mo••∣bitur,
mock age and see how it will prosper?
Why ye whoreson proverb book bound up in folio,
Have ye no other sense to answer me,
But every word a proverb, no other English?
Well, Isle fulfil a proverb on thee straight.
What is it sir?
•e fetch my fist from thine 〈◊〉,
Bear withes he threatens me.
Father that same is the cowards common proverb:,
But come, come sir, tell me where Hugh is?
I may and I will, I need not except I list, you shall
not command me, you glue me neither meat, drink, nor
wages, I am your fathers man, and a man's a man, and a have
but a hose on his head, do not misuse me so, do not, for though
he that is bound must obey, yet he that will not tarry, may
run away so he may.
Peace Nick, Isle see he shall use thee well,
Go to peace sir, here Nick take this let •r,
Carry it to him to whom it is directed.
To whom is it?
Why read it, can thou read?
Forsooth though none of the best yet meanly:
Why dost thou not use it?
Forsooth as use makes perfectness, so seldom seen is
soon forgotten.
Well said, but go, it is to Master Goursey,
Now sir, what proverb have ye to deliver a letter?
What need you to care? who speaks to you? you
may speak when you are spoken to, and keep your wind to
cool your pottage: well, well, you are my masters son &amp;
you look for his land, but they that hope for dead men's
shoes, may hap to go barefoot: take heed, as soon goes the
young sheep to the pot'as the old. I pray God save my May∣sters
life, for seldom comes the better.
O he hath given it me: farewell proverbs.
Farewell frost,
Shall I fling an old shoe after ye?
No, you should say God send fair weather after me,
I mean for good luck.
A good luck any.
Alas poor fool, he uses all his wit,
Phillip in faith this mirth hath cheered thought,
And cussend it of his right play of passion,
Go after Nick, and when thou think hes there,
Go in and urge to that which I have writ,
Isle in these meadows make a circling walk,
And in my meditation conjure so,
As that some send of thought self•eating anger,
Shall by my spells of treason vanish quite
Away, and let me beat fromthee to night.
To night, yes that you shall, but hark ye father,
Look that you my sister waking keep,
For Frank I swear shall kiss her ere I sleep.
I am very d•y with walking ore the greene,
Bu lersome Beer, sir call the Butler.
Nay faith sir, we must have some smith to give the butler
A drench, or cut him in the forehead, for he hath got
A horses disease, namely the staggers, to night hes a good
Huswife, he reels al that he wrought to day, &amp; he were good
Now to play at dice, for he castes excellent well.
How meanst thou, is he drunk?
I cannot tell, but I am sure hee hath more liquor in him
Then a whole dicker of hydes, hes sockt thoroughly I faith.
Well go and call him, bid him bring me drink.
I will si•.
My mother powers and will look merrily,
Neither upon my father nor on me,
He says she fell out with mistress Barnes to day,
Then I am sure they'll no: be quickly friends,
Good Lord what kind of creatures women are?
Their love is lightly won and lightly lost,
And then their hate is deadly and extreme.
He that doth take a wife, betakes himself
To all the cares and troubles of the world,
Now her disquietness doth grieve my father,
Grieves me, and troubles all the house besides,
What, shall I have so no drink? how now a horn?
Belike the drunken slave is fallen a sleep,
And now the boy doth wake him with his horn,
How now sir, wheres the butler?
Mary sir, where he was even now a sleep, but I
waked him, and when he waked, he thought he was in may∣ster
Barnses buttery, for he stretched himself thus: and y•uning
said, Nick, honest Nick fill a fresh bowl of ale, stand to it
Nick and thou be a man of Gods making, stand to it, and
then I winded my horn, and hes horn mad.
Boy hey, ho boy, and thou be a man draw, O here is
a blessed mooneshine God be thanked, boy is not this goodly
weather for barley?
Spoken like a right maulster Hodge, but dost thou
hear• thou art not drunk.
No, I scorn that I faith.
But thy fellow Dicke Comes is mightily drunk.
Drunk, a plague on it, when a man cannot carry his
drink well: sbloud Isle stand to it.
Hold man, see and thou can stand first,
Drunk? hes a beast and he be drunk, theres no man
that is a sober man will be drunk, hes a boy and he be drunk.
No, hes a man as thou art.
Thus tic when a man will not be ruled by his friends,
I bad him keep under the lee, but he kept down the weather
two bows, I told him hee would be taken with a planet, but
the wisest of vs all may fall.
True Hodge.
Whope lend me thy hand Dicke, I am fallen into a Well,
lend me thy hand, I shall be drowned else.
Hold fast by the bucket
Hodge, A rope on it.
I there is a rope on it, but where art thou Hodge?
In a Well, I prithee draw up.
Come give up thy body, wind up, hoist.
I am over head and ears,
In all Hodge, in all.
How loathsome is this beast mans shape to me?
This mould of reason so unreasonable,
Sir, why dost thou trip him down seeing hes drunk?
Because sir I would have drunkards cheap.
How mean ye?
Why they say, that when any thing hath a fall, it is
cheap, and so of drunkards.
Go to help him up, but hark who knocks?
Sir, hears one of Moister Barnsies men with a letter to my
old moister. Fran. Which of them is it?
They call him Nicholas sir.
Go call him in.
By your leave ho, how now young moister how first?
Look ye sir, where your fellow lies,
Hes in a fine taking, is he not?
Whope Hodge, were art thou man, where art thou?
O in a well.
In a well man, nay then thou art deep in understanding,
I once to day you were almost so sir,
Who I, go to young moister, I do not like this humour
in ye 〈…〉 give every man his doe, and give him no
more: say I was in such a case, go to tic the greatest indign|
tion that can be offered to a man: and but a mans more god her
given, you were able to make him sue•e out his hear: blood,
what though-that 〈…〉 he ere or as
some say, cut a feather: what though he be 〈◊〉 misled, band,
or as it were tic no consequent to me: you know i have drunk
all the A••houses in 〈◊〉 dry, and laideth: tappes on the
tables when i had done: 〈◊〉 Isle challenge all the true rob.
pots 〈…〉, to leap up to the 〈◊〉 in a 〈◊〉 of beer,
and if i can not drink it down to my foot ere i leave, and then
set the 〈◊〉 in 〈◊〉 of the house, and then turn a good turn
on the toe on it, let me be counted no bod•e, a•pingler, nay let
me be bound to drink nothing but small beer seven years af∣la,
and I had as 〈…〉.
Peace sir, I must 〈◊〉 with one, Nicholas I think your
name is,
True as the skin between your brows.
Well, how doth my moister?
•orsooth live, and the best doth no better.
Where is the letter he hath sent me?
〈…〉
Tic right as Phillip said, tic a fine soole,
This letter is directed to my father.
Isle carry it to him, Dicke Comes make him drink.
I, Isle make him drunk and he will.
Not so Richard, it is good to be 〈…〉
Well Nicholas, as thou art Nicholas, welcome, but as
thou art Nicholas and a boon companion, ten times welcome,
Nicholas give me thy hand; shall we be 〈◊〉? and wee shall,
say but we shall, and let the first word stand.
Indeed as long 〈◊〉 the 〈◊〉 man 〈…〉,
Anownce of debt will not pay a pound of care?
Nay, a pound of care will not pay anownce of debt.
Well, tic a good horse never stumbles but who lies here?
Tic our Hodge, and I •think he lies a sleep, you made
him drunk at your house to 〈◊〉 •ut Isle pepper so•• of you fort.
I Richard, I know yo••e put a man over the shoes, &amp;
if you can, but hes a fool will take more then will do him good.
Sbloud ye shall take more then will doe ye good,
Or Isle make ye clap under the table.
Nay, I hope, as I have temperance to forbear drink
so have I patience to endure 〈…〉 company doth,
for whē a mā doth to Rome come, he must do as there is done,
Ha my resolved Nick Frol•go•en, fill the po••e
Hostess, swoons you whore, Harry Hooke's a rascal: help
me but carry my fellow Hodge in, and weal crush it I ••ith.
By this I think, the letter is delivered,
And twill be shortly time that I step in,
And woo their favours for my sisters fortune,
And yet I need not, she may doe as well,
But yet not better, as the case doth stand,
Between our mothers it may make the•• friends,
Nay I would swear tha• she would doe as well,
Were she a stranger to 〈…〉
But they are so acquainted, they• ne'er part,
Why she will flout the devil and make blush
The boldest face of man, that ever man saw,
He that hath best opinion 〈…〉 wit,
And hath his brain pan fraught with bitter Jests,
Or of his own, or istolne, or how 〈◊〉,
Let him: stand•e•• so high in his own conceit,
Her wit's a sun, that melts him down like butter,
And makes him sit at table 〈◊〉 wise,
Flat, flat, 〈…〉 a word to say,
Yet sheele not 〈◊〉 him 〈◊〉, but like a tyrant,
Sheele persecute the poor wi•beaten man,
And so be bang hi• with dry 〈◊〉 and scoffs,
When he is down, most cowardly good faith,
As I have pit•ed the poor patient.
〈◊〉 came a Farmers son a wooing to her,
A proper man, well landed too he was,
A man that for his wit need not to ask,
What time a year it were good to sow his Oats,
Nor yet his Barley, no nor when to reap,
To plow his Fallowes, or to 〈◊〉 his Trees,
Well experienced thus each kind of way,
After a two months labour at the most,
And yet it was well he held it out so long,
He left his love, she had so last his lips,
He could say nothing to her, but God be with ye,
Why she, when men have dined and call for you•e,
Will straight ma•netaine jests bitter todisgest,
And then some one will fall to argument,
Who if he over master her with reason,
Then sheele begin to buff• him with mocks,
Well I doe doubt, Frances hath so much spleen,
Theil ne'er agree, but I will moderate.
By this time, tic time I think to enter,
This is the house, shall I knock? no I will not
Waite while one comes out to answer:
Isle in, and let them be as bold with vs.
If that they like her •owry shall be equal,
To your sons wealth or possibility,
It is a means to make our wines good friends,
And to continue friendsh•p twi• to two,
Tic so indeed, I like this motion,
And it hath my consent, because my wife, is sore infected and
hart sick with hate: &amp; I have sought the G•l• of advice, which
only tells me this same potion, to be most sovereign for his
sickness cure.
Here comes my son, conferring with his friend,
France, how do you like your friends discourse?
I know he is persuading to this motion.
Father, as matter that befits a friend,
But yet not me, that am too young to marry.
Nay, if thy mind be forward with thy years,
The time is lost thou t•rriest, trust me boy, This match is a•∣swerable
to thy birth, Her blood and portion give each other
grace: These indented lines promise a sum, And I do like the
value, if it hapthy liking to accord to my consent,
It is a match: wilt thou go see the maid?
Ne'er trust me Father, the shape of marriage,
Which I doe see in others, seem so severe,
I dare not put my youngling liberty,
Under the awe of that instruction,
And yet I grant the limits of free youth
Going astray, are often restrained by that:
But mistress wedlock, to my scholar thoughts,
Will be too cursed I fear, O should she snip,
My pleasure aiming mind, I shall be sad,
And swear, when I did marry I was mad.
But boy, let my experience teach thee this,
Yet in good faith, thou speak not much amiss,
When first thy mothers same to me did come,
Thy grandsire thus, then came to me his son,
And even my words to thee, to me he said,
And as to me thou say, to him I said,
But in a greater huff, and hotter blood,
I tell ye, on youths tip-toes then I stood,
Says he (good faith this was his very say)
When I was young, I was but reasons fool,
And went to wedding, as to wisdoms school:
It taught me much, and much I did forget,
But beaten much by it, I got some wit,
Though I was shackled from an often scout,
Yet I would wanton it when I was out,
It was comfort, old acquaintance then to meet,
Restrained liberty, at•ainde is sweet,
Thus said my Father to thy Father, son
And thou moist doe this to, as I have done.
In faith good counsel Frank, what say thou to it?
Phillip, what should I say?
Why, either I or no.
O but which rather?
Why that which was persuaded by thy father.
Thats I, then I, O should it fall out ill.
Then I, for I am guilty of that ill.
Isle not be guilty, no.
What backward gone?
Phillip, no whit back-ward, that is on.
On then,
O stay.
Tush, there is no good luck in this delay,
Come, come, late comers man are shent.
Heigh ho, I fear I shall repent,
Well, which way Frank?
Why this way.
Can thou tell?
And take upon thee to be my guide to hell,
But which way Father?
That way.
I, you know,
You found the way to sorrow long ago,
Father God boy ye, you have sent your son,
To seek on earth an earthly day of doom,
Where I shall be judged, alack the ruth,
To pe•nonce for the follies of my youth.
Well I must go, but by my troth my mind,
Is not love capable to that kind,
O I have looked upon this mould of men,
As I have done upon a Lyons den,
Praised I have the gallant beast I saw,
Yet wished me no acquaintance with his paw,
And must I now be grated with them, well,
Yet I may hap to prove a Daniell,
And if I doe sure it would make me laugh,
To be among wilde beasts and yet be safe,
Is there a remedy to abate their rage,
Yes many catch them, and put them in a cage,
I but how catch them, marry in your hand,
Carry me forth a burning fire-brand,
For with his sparkling shine, old rumour says,
A fire-brand the swiftest runner frays,
This I may doe, but if it prove not so,
Then man goes out to seek his adjunct woe,
Phillip away, and Father now adieu,
In quest of sorrow I am sent by you.
Return the messenger of joy my son.
Seldom in this world, such a work is done.
Nay, nay, make hast, it will be quickly night.
Why is it not good to woo by candle light.
But if we make not haste theile be a bed.
The better candles out, and curtains spread
I know, though that my sons years be not many.
Yet he hath wit to woo as well as any,
Here comes my wife, I am glad my boy is gone.
Irish came hither, how now wife, how first?
What are ye yet in charity and love with mistress Barnes?
What mistress Barnes, why mistress Barnes I pray
Because she is your neighbour and
And what?
And a jealous slandering spiteful queen she is,
One that would blur my reputation,
With her opprobrious malice if she could,
She wrongs her husband, to abuse my fame,
Tic known that I have lived in honest name,
All my life time, and bin your right true wife,
I entertain no other thought my wife,
And my opinion's sound of your behaviour.
And my behaviour is as sound as it,
But her ill speeches seeks to rot my credit,
And eat it with the worm of hate and malice.
Why then preserve it you by patience.
By patience, would ye have me shame my self,
And cousin my self to bear her injuries:
Not while her eyes be open will I yield,
A word, a letter, a syllables value,
But equal and make even her wrongs to me,
To her again.
Then in good faith wife ye are more to blame.
Am I too blame sir pray what letters this.
There is a dearth of manners in ye wife,
Rudely to snatch it from me, give it me?
You shall not have it, till I have read it.
Give me it then, and I will read it to you?
No, no, it shall not need, I am a scholar
Good enough to read a letter sir,
Gods passion, if she knew but the contents,
Sheele seek to cross this match, she shall not read it.
Wife, give it me, come, come, give it me.
Husband, in very deed you shall not have it.
What will you move me to impatience then?
Tut, tell not me of your impatience,
But since you talk sir of impatience,
You shall not have the letter by this light,
Till I have read it, soul isle burn it first.
Go to, ye move me wife, give me the letter,
In truth I shall grow angry, if you doe not.
Grow to the house top with your anger sir.
Ne'er tell me, I care not thus much for it.
Well, I can bear enough, but not too much,
Come give it me, it were best you be persuaded,
By God ye make me swear, now God forgive me,
Give me I say, and stand not long upon it,
Go to, I am angry at the heart, my very heart,
Hart me no hearts▪ you shall not have it sir,
No you shall not, ne'er look so big,
I will nor be afraid at your great looks,
You shall not have it, no you shall not have it.
Shall I not have it, in truth Isle try that,
Minion Isle have it, shall I not have it, I am loath,
Go too, take pausment, be advised,
Infaith I will, and stand not long upon it,
A woman of your years, I am ashamed,
A couple of so long continuance,
Should thus, Gods foot, I cry God heartily mercy,
Go to, ye vex me, and Isle vex ye for it,
Before I leave ye, I will make ye glad,
To tender it on your knees, hear ye, I will I will,
What worse and worse stomach, 〈◊〉 ye faith,
Shall I be crossed by you in my old age?
And where I should have greatest comfort to,
A 〈◊〉 of you nursle in the devils name,
Go to mistress, by Gods pre•ious dear,
If ye delay.
Lord▪ Lord, why in what a fit,
Are you in husband, so enraged, so moved,
And for so slight a cause, to read a letter,
Did this letter love, contain my death,
Should you deny my sight of it, I would not,
Not see my sorrow, not eschew my danger,
But willingly yield me a patient,
Un•o the doom that your displeasure gave:
Here is the letter, not for that your incensment,
Makes me make offer of it, but your health,
Which anger I doe fear hath crasd.
And viper like hath sucked away the blood,
That wont was to be cheerful in this cheek,
How pale ye look.
Pale, can ye blame me for it, I tell you true,
An easy matter could not thus have moved me,
Well this resignement, and so forth, but woman
This fortnight shall I not forget ye for it.
Ha, ha, I see that roughness can doe somewhat,
I did not think good faith, I could have set,
So sower a face upon it, and to her,
My bed embracer, my right bosom friend,
I would not that she should have seen the letter
As poor a man as I am by my troth
For twenty pound: well I am glad I have it.
Ha, here is a doe about a thing of nothing,
What stomach, ha, tic happy your come down.
Well crafty Fox, Isle hunt ye by my troth,
Deal ye so closely? well I see his drift.
He would not let me see the letter, least
That I should cross the match, and I will cross it.
Dicke Comes?
Forsooth.
Come hither Dicke, thou art a man I lo•e,
And one whom I have much in my regard,
I thank ye for it mistress, I thank ye for it,
Nay heers my hand, I will do very much for thee
If ere thou standst in need of me,
Thou shall not lack, whilst thou hast a day to l•ue.
Money apparel.
And sword and Bucklers.
And sword and Bucklers too my gallant Dick,
So thou wilt use but this in my defence.
This, no faith I have no mind to this, break my
head if this break not if we come to any tough play, nay
mistress I had a sword, I the flower of smithfield for a sword
a right Fox I faith, with that &amp; a man had come over with a
smooth and a sharpe stroke, it would have cried twang, &amp;
then when I had doubled my point, traste my ground, and
had carried my buckler before me like a garden •ut, and
then come in with a cross blow, &amp; over the pick of his
buckler two else long, it would have cried twang, twang,
mettle, mettle: but a dog hath his day, tic gone, and there
are few good ones made now, I see by this dearth of good
swords, that dearth of sword and Buckler fight, begins to
grow out, I am sorry for it, I shall never see good manhood
again, if it be once gone, this poking fight of rapier and
dagger will come up then▪ then a man, a tall man, &amp; a good
sword and buckler man, will be spitted like a Cat or a cun∣ney,
then a boy will be as good as a man, unless the Lord
show mercy unto vs, well, I had as heue be hanged as live
to see that day, well mistress, what shall I do? what shall I do?
Why this brave Dicke,
Thou know that Gourseys wife and I am foes:
Now man me to her house,
And though it be dark Dicke, yet weal have no light,
Least that thy moister should prevent our journey
By seeing our depart: then when we come,
And if that she and I do fall to words,
Set in thy foot and quarrel with her men,
Draw, fight, strike, hurt, but do not kill the slaves,
And make as though thou struckst at a man,
And hit her and thou can, a plague upon her,
She hath misusde me Dicke, wilt thou do this?
Yes mistress I will strike her men, but God forbid,
That ere Dicke Comes should be seen to strike a woman.
Why she is mankind, therefore thou moist strike
her.
Mankind, nay and she have any part of a man, Isle
strike her I warrant.
Thats my good Dicke, thats my sweet Dicke,
Swones who would not be a man of valour to have
such words of a Gentlewoman, one of their words are
more to me then twenty of these russet coats Cheese∣cake;
and buttermakers: well, I thank God I am none
of these cowards, well and a man have any virtue in him,
I see he shall be regarded.
Art thou resolved Dicke? wilt thou do this for
me, and it thou wilt, here is an earnest penny, of that rich
guerdon I do mean to give thee.
An angel mistress let me see, stand you on my left
hand, and let the angel lye on my buckler on my right
hand, for fear of losing, now here stand I to be temp•ed,
they say, every man hath two spirits attending on him, ey∣there
good or bad, now I say a man hath no other spirits but
either his wealth or his wife, now which is the better of
them, why that is as they are used, for use neither of them
well, and they are both nought, but this is a miracle to me,
that gold that is heavy hath the upper, and a woman that
is light doth soonest fall, considering that light things a∣spire,
and heavy things soonest go down, but lea•e these
considerations to sir Iohn, they become a black coat bet∣la
then a blew, well mistress I had no mind to day to
quarrel, but a woman is made to be a mans seducer, you
say quarrel.
Come. There speaks an angel, is it good?
I.
Then I cannot doe amiss, the good angel goes
with me.
Come on my harts, I faith it is ill luck,
To hunt all day and not kill any thing,
What say thou Lady, art thou weary yet?
I must not say so sir.
Although thou art.
And can you blame her to be forth so long,
And see no better sport?
Good faith it was very hard.
No it was not ill.
Because you know it is not good to kill.
Yes venson Lady.
No indeed nor them,
Life is as dear in Dear as tic in men.
But they are kilt for sport.
But thats bad play,
When they are made to sport their lives away.
Tic fine to see the •run.
What out of breath?
They run but ill that run themselves to death,
They might make then less hast &amp; keep their wind.
Why then they see the hounds brings death behind.
Then it were as good for them at first to stay,
As to run long and run their lives away.
I but the sto••est of you all thats here,
Would run from death, and nimbly scud for fear,
Now by my troth I pity those poor elfes.
Well, they have made vs but bad sport to day.
Yes it was my sport to see them scope away.
I wish that I had been at one Bucks fall.
Out thou wood-tyrant thou art worst of all.
A woodman Lady, but no tyrant I.
Yes tyrant-like thou love to see lives dye.
Lady no more, I do not like this luck,
To hunt all day and yet not kill a Buck,
Well, it is late, but yet I swear I will
Stay here all night, but I a Buck will kill.
All night, nay good sir Raph Smith do not so.
Content ye Lady, Will, go fetch my bow,
A berry of fair Roes I saw to day,
Down by the groves, and there isle take my stand,
And shoot at one, God send a lucky hand.
Will ye not then sir Raph go home with me?
No, but my men shall bear thee company.
Sirs man her home, Will bid the Huntmen couple,
And bid them well reward their hounds to night.
Lady farewell, Will hast ye with the Bow,
Isle stay for thee here by the grove below.
I will, but twill be dark I shall not see,
How shall I see ye then?
Why hello to me, and I will answer thee.
Enough, I will.
Farewell.
How willingly dost thou co•sent to go,
To fetch thy moister that same killing bow.
Guilty of death I willing am in this,
Because it was our ill haps to day to miss,
To hun• and not to kill is hunters sorrow,
Come Lady, weel have venson ere tomorrow.
Come Frank now are we hard by the house,
But how now, sad?
No, to study how to woe thy sister.
How man, how to woe her? why no matter how,
I am sure thou wi•t not be ashamed to woe,
Thy cheeks not subject to a childish blush,
Thou hast a better warrant by thy wit,
I know thy oratory can unfold,
Quick invention, plausible discourse,
And set such painted beauty on thy tongue,
As it shall ravish every maiden sense,
For Frank, thou art not like the russet youth
I told thee of, that went to woe a wench,
And being full stuffed up with fallow wit,
And meadow matter, asked the pretty maid,
How they sold corn last market day with them.
Saying: indeed it was very dear wit them:
And do ye hear, he had not need doe so,
For she will Francis throwly try your wit,
Sir sheel bow the mettle of your wits,
And if they crack she will not hold ye currant,
Nay she will way your wits as men may angels,
And if I lack a grain, she will not chanke with ye,
I cannot speak it but in passion,
She is a wicked wench to make a jest,
Aye me how full of flouts and mocks she is?
Some Aquavitae reason to recover,
This sick dis•ourser, soond not prethy Philip,
Tush, tush, I do not think her as thou says,
Perhaps shees opinions darling Phillip:
Wise in repute, the crows bird o my friend,
Some judgements slave themselves to small desert,
And wondernize the birth of common wit,
When their won strangeness do but make that strange,
And their ill errors do but make that good,
And why should men debase to make that good,
Perhaps such admiration wins her wit.
Well, I am glad to hear this bold prepare,
For this encounter, forward hardy Frank,
Yonders the window, with the candle int,
Belike shees putting on her night attire,
I told ye F rank it was late, well I will call her,
Mary softly that my mother may not hear:
Mall, sister Mall.
How now, whose there?
Tic I,
Tic I, who I? I quoth the dog, or what?
A christ cross rowel?
No sweet pinckanie.
O first you wilde oats?
I forsooth wanton.
Well said scape-thrift.
Philip be these your usual best salutes?
This is the harmless chiding of that Dove,
Dove, one of those that draw the Queen of love?
How now? Whose that brother, whose that with ye?
A Gentleman my friend.
Beladie he hath a pure wit.
How means your holy judgment?
O well put in sir.
Up you would say.
Well climbed Gentleman,
I pray sir tell me, do you carte the queen of love?
Not cart her, but couch her in your eye,
And a fit place for gentle love to lye.
I but me thinks you speak without the book,
To place a sower wheel waggon in my look,
Where will you have room to have the coach-man sit?
Nay, that were but small manners, and not fit,
His duty is before you bare to s•and,
Having a lusty whipstocke in his hand.
The place is void, will you provide me one?
And if you please I will supply the room.
But are ye cunning in the Carmans lash?
And can ye whistle well?
Yes I can well direct the coach of love.
Ah cruel carter, would you whip a dove?
Hark ye sister?
Nay, but hark ye brother?
Whose white boy is that same? know ye his mother?
He is a Gentleman of a good house.
Why is his house of gold, is it not made of lyme andS
stone like this?
I mean hes well descended.
God be thanked.
Did he descend some steeple or some ladder?
Well, you will still be cross, I tell ye sister,
This Gentleman by all your friends consent,
Must be your husband.
Nay not all, some sing another note,
My mother will say no, I hold a groat.
But I thought it was somewhat, he would be a carter,
He hath been whipping la•ely some blind bear,
And now he would fe•ke the blind boy here with vs.
Well, do you •ear, you sister, mistress would have
You that do long for somewhat I know what.
My father told me, go too Isle tell all,
If ye be cross, do ye hear me? I hau• labourd
A years work in this afternoon for ye,
Come from your cloister, votary, chase Nun,
Come down and kiss Frank Gourseys mothers son.
Kiss him I pray?
Go to, stale maidenhead▪ come down I say,
You seventeen and upward, come come down,
You'll stay till twenty else for yo 'r wedding gown,
Nun, votary, stale maidenhead, seventeen and up∣ward,
Here be names, what nothing else?
Yes, or a fair built steeple without bells,
Steeple good people, nay another cast.
I, or a well made ship without a mast.
Fie not so big sir, by one part of four.
Why then ye are a boat without an oar,
O well rode wit, but whats your fare I pray?
Your fair self must be my fairest pay.
Nay, and you be so dear, Isle choose another.
Why take your first man wench, and go no further.
Peace Francis, hark ye sister, this I say, you know my
mind, or answer I or nay, Wit &amp; judgment hath resolude
his mind, And he fore•ees what after he shall find,
If such discretion then shall govern you,
Vow love to him, heel do the like to you.
Vow love? who would not love such a comely fea∣ture?
Nor high nor lowe, but of the middle stature,
A middle man thats the best syze indeed,
I like him well, Love grant vs well to speed.
And let me see a woman of that tal•esse,
So slender and of such a middle smallness,
So old enough, and in each part so fit,
So fair, so kind, eudued with so much wit,
Of so much wit as it is held a wonder,
It were pity to keep love and her a sunder,
Therefore go up my joy, call down my bli••e,
Bid her come seal the bargain with a kiss.
Frank, Frank, I come through dangers, death and harms
To make Loves patient with thy seal of arms.
But sister softly, least my mother hear.
Hush then, •um, mouse in cheese, cat is near.
Now in good faith Philip this makes me smile.
That I have wood and won in so small while.
Francis, indeed my sister I dare say,
Was not determined to say thee nay,
For this same tother thing, called maiden-head,
Hangs by so small a hair or spiders thread,
And worn so too with time, it must needs fall,
And like a well lured hawk, she knows her call.
Whist brother whist, my mother heard me tread,
And asked whose there? I would not answer her,
She called a light, and up shees gone to seek me,
There when she finds me not, sheel hither come,
Therefore dispatch, let it be quickly done,
Francis, my l•ues lease I do let to thee,
Date of my life and thine, what say thou to me?
The entering, fine, or income thou must pay,
Are kisses and embrace• every day,
And quarterly I must receive my rent,
You know my mind.
I guess at thy intent,
Thou shalt not miss a minute of thy time.
Why then sweet Francis I am only thine,
Brother bear witness.
Do ye deliver this as your deed?
I do I do,
God send you both good speed, Gods lord my mother
Stend aside and closely too, least that you be espied,
Whose there?
Mother tic I.
You disobedient ruffen, careless wretch,
That said your Father loud me too well,
Isle think on it when thou think I have forgotten it:
Whose with thee else? how now minion you?
With whom? with him? why what make you here sir?
And thus late too, what hath your mother sent ye
To cut my throat, that here you be in waite?
Come from him mistress, and let go his hand,
Will ye not sir?
Stay mistress Barnes, or mother, what ye will,
Shees my wife, and here she shall be still.
How sir your wife? would thou my daugter have
Isle rather have her married to her grave,
Go to be gone, and quickly, or I swear,
Isle have my men beat ye for staying here,
Beat him mother▪ as I am true man,
They were better beat the devil and his dam.
What wilt thou take his part?
To do him good,
And it were to wade hitherto up in blood.
God a mercy Phil, but mother hear me.
Call thou me mother, no thy mothers name
Carries about with it, reproach and shame:
Give me my daughter, ere that she shall wed,
A strumpets son, and have her fomislead,
Isle marry her to a Carter: come I say,
Give me her from thee.
Mather not to day,
Nor yet to morrow, till my lives last morrow,
Make me leave that, which I with leave did borrow,
Here I have borrowed love, isle not deny it,
Thy wedding night's my day, then Isle repay it:
Till then sheele trust me, wench first not so?
And if it be, say I, if nor, say no.
Mother, good mother, hear me O good God,
Now we are even what would you make vs odd?
Now I beseech ye for the love of Christ,
To give me leave once to doe what I list.
I am as you were when you were a maid,
Guess by your self, how long you would have staide,
Might you have had your will, as good begin,
At first as last, it saves vs from much sin,
Lying alone, we muse on things and things,
And in our minds, one thought another brings,
This maids life mother is an idle life,
Therefore Isle be, I, I will be wife,
And mother doe not mistrust my age or power,
I am sufficient, I lack ne'er an thou•e,
I had both wit to grant when he did woe me,
And strength to bear what ere he can doe to me.
Well bold face, but I mean to make you stay,
Go to, come from him, or isle make ye come,
Will ye not come?
Mother, I pray forbear,
This match is for my sister.
Villain tic not,
Nor she shall not be so matched now.
In troth she shall, and your unruly hate,
Shall not rule vs, weal end all this debate,
By this begun devise.
I end what you begun, villains thieves
Give me my daughter, will ye rob me of her?
Help, help, theil rob me here, theil rob me here,
How now, what outcry is here? why how now woman?
Why Gourseys son, consederates with this boy,
This wretch unnatural and undutiful.
Seeks hence to steal my daughter, will you suffer it?
Shall he thats son to my arch-enemy,
Enjoy her, have I brought her up to this?
O God he shall not have her, no he shall not.
I am sorry she knows it, hark ye wi•e,
Let reason moderate your rage a little,
If you examine but his birth and living.
His wit and good behaviour, you will say,
Though that ill hate make your opinion bad,
He doth deserve as good a wife as she
Why will you give consent he shall enjoy her?
I, so that thy mind would agree with mine.
My mind shall ne'er agree to this agreement.
And yet it shall go forward, but who's here?
What, Mistress Goursey, how knew she of this?
Frank, thy mother.
Swones where? a plague upon it,
I think the devil is set to cross this match.
This is the house Dick Comes, &amp; yonders light,
Let vs go near: how now, me thinks I see,
My son stand hand in hand, with Barnes his daughter:
Why how now sir, is this time of night,
For you to be abroad, what have we here?
I hope that love hath not thus coupled you:
Love by my troth mother, Love, she loves me,
And I love her, then we must needs agree.
I but Isle keep her sure enough from thee.
It shall not need, Isle keep him safe enough,
Be sure he shall not graft in such a stock.
What a stock forsooth? as good a stock as thine,
I doe not mean that he shall graft in mine.
Nor shall he mistress, hark boy? you are but mad
To love the branch, that hath a root so bad,
Then Mother, isle graft a Pippin on a Crab.
It will not prove well.
But Isle prove my skill.
Sir but you shall not.
Mothers both I will.
Hark Phillip, send away thy sister straight,
Let Francis meet her where thou shalt appoint,
Let them go several to shun suspicion,
And bid them go to Oxford both this night,
There to morrow say that we will meet them,
And there determine of their marriage.
I will, though it be very late and dark,
My sister will endure it for a husband.
Well then to Carfolkes boy, I mean to meet thē.
Enough, would they would begin to chide,
For I would have them brawling, that mean while,
They nay steal hence, to meet where I oppoint it,
What mother, will you let this match go forward:
Or mistress Goursey will you first agree▪
Shall I agree first?
I why not, come, come.
Come from her son, &amp; if thou love thy mother.
With the like spell, daughter I conjure thee,
Francis, by fair means let me win thee from her,
And I will gild my blessing gentle son,
With store of Angels, I would not have thee,
Check thy good fortune, by this thy cusning choice,
O doe not thrall thy happy liberty,
In such a bondage, if thou'lt be needs bound,
Be then to better worth, this worthless choice
Is not fit for thee.
First not fit for him, wherefore first not fit?
Is he too brave a gentleman I pray,
No tic not fit, she shall not fit his turn,
If she were wise, she would be fitter for
Three times his better, minion go in, or isle make ye,
Isle keep ye safe from him I warrant ye.
Come Francis, come from her.
Mothers, with both hands, shove I hate from love,
That like an ill companion would infect,
The infant mind of our offection,
Within this cradle shall this minutes babe,
Be laid to rest, and thus Isle huge my joy.
Wilt thou be obstinate, thou self wilde boy.
Nay then perforce Isle part ye since ye will not.
Doe ye hear mistress, pray ye give me leave to
talk two or three• cold words with my young Master, hark
ye sir, ye are my Masters son, and so forth, and indeed I
bear ye some good will, partly for his sake, and partly for
your own, and I do hope you do the like to me, I should be
sorry else: I must needs say ye are a y•ng man, and for mine
own part, I have seen the world, &amp; I know what belongs
to causes, &amp; the experience that I have, I thank God I
have travelled for it.
Why how far have ye travelled for it?
From my masters house to the Ale-house.
How sir?
So sir.
Go to I pray, correct you boy, it was ne'er a good
world, since a boy would face a man so,
Go to forward man.
Well sir, so it is, I would not wish ye to marry with∣out
my mistress consent.
And why?
Nay, theres ne'er a why, but there is a wherefore, I
have known some have done the like, &amp; they have danced
a Galliard at Beggars bush for it.
At Beggars bush, here him no more moister, he doth
be daub ye with his dirty speech: doe ye hear sir, how
far stands Beggars bush from your fathers house sir? how
thou whoreson refuge of a Taylor, that were prentice to a tai∣lore
half an age, &amp; because if thou had served ten ages thou
would prove but a botcher, thou leapst frō the shop boa•d
to a Blew coat: doth it become thee to use thy terms so?
well, thou degree aboue a hackney, and ten degrees under a
Page, sow up your lubber lips, or tic not your sword and
Buckler, shall keep my Poniard from your breast.
Do ye hear sir, this is your boy?
How then?
You must breech him for it.
Must I? how if I will not.
Why then tic a fine world, when boys keep boys,
and know not how to use them.
Boy, ye rascal.
Strike him and thou dare.
Strike me, alas he were better strike his father,
Sownes go to, put up your Bodkin.
Mother standby, Isle teach that rascal,
Go to, give me good words, or by Gods dines Isle
buckle ye, for all your bird-spit.
Will ye so sir?
Stay Frank, this pitch of Frenzy will defile thee,
Meddle not with it, thy vnreprooued valour,
Should be high minded: couch it not so low,
Dost hear me? take occasion to slip hence,
But secretly, let not thy mother see thee,
At the backside there is a Cunny greene,
Stay there for me, and Mall and I will come to thee.
Enough, I will: mother you doe me wrong,
To be so peremptory in your command,
And see that rascal to abuse me so.
Rascal, take that and take all, do ye hear sir, I doe
not mean to pocket up this wrong.
I know why that is.
Why?
Because you have ne'er a pocket,
A whip sira, a whip: but sir provide your tools against
to morrow morning tic somewhat dark now indeed, you
know Dawsons close, between the hedge &amp; the pond, tic
good even ground, Isle meet you there, &amp; I do not, call me
cut, and you be a man show your self a man, weal have a
bout or two, and so weal part for that present.
Well sir, well.
Boy, have they appointed to fight?
I Nicholas, wilt not thou go see the fray?
No indeed, even as they brew so let them bake. I
will not thrust my hand into the flame and need not, tic not
good to have an oar in another mans boat, little said is
soon amended, &amp; in little meddling comes great rest, tic
good sleeping in a whole skin, so a man might come home
by weeping cross: no by lady, a friend is not so soon got∣ten
as lost, blessed are the peace-makers, they that strike
with the sword, shall be beaten with the scabbard.
Well said proverbs, ne'er another to that purpose?
Yes I could have said to you sir, take heed is a good reed.
Why to me take heed?
For happy is he whom other men's harms do make to beware.
O beware Frank, slip away Mall,
You know what I told ye, isle hold our mothers both in talk
mean while: Mother and Mistress Barnes, me thinks you
should not stand in hatred so hard one with the other.
Should I not sir should I not hate a harlot,
That robs me of my right, vide boy?
That title I return unto thy teeth,
And spit the name of ha• •t in thy face.
Well tic not time of night to hold out chat,
With such a scold as thou art, therefore now,
Think that I hate thee as I doe the devil.
The devil take thee if thou dost not wretch.
Out upon thee strumpet.
Out upon thee harlot.
Well, I will find a time to be revenged:
Mean time Isle keep my daughter from thy son,
Where are you minion? how now are ye gone.
She went in mother.
Francis where are ye?
He is not here▪ ô then they split away &amp; both to∣gether.
Isle assure ye no, my sister she went in, into the house,
But then sheele out again at the back door,
And meet with him, but I will search about,
All these same fields and paths near to my house,
They are not far I am sure, if I make haste,
O God how went he hence? I did not see him,
It was when Barnes wife did scold with me,
A plague on her, Dick why did not thou look to him?
What should I look for him? no, no, I look not for
him while to morrow morning.
Come go with me to help to look him out,
Alas, I have nor light, nor Link, nor Torch,
Though it be dark, I will take any pains,
To cross this match, I prethy Dick away.
Mistress because I brought ye out, Isle bring ye home
but if I should follow, so hee might have the law on his
side.
Come tic no matter, prithee go with me.
Philip thy mothers gone to seek thy sister.
And in a rage I faith, but who comes here?
Old master Goursey, as I think tic he.
Tic so indeed.
Whose there?
A friend of yours.
What master Barnes did ye not see my wife?
Yes sir I saw her, she was here even now.
I doubted that, that made me come unto you:
But whether is she gone?
To seek your son, who slipped away from her,
To meet with Mall my sister in a place
Where I appointed: and my mother too,
Seek for my sister, so they both are gone,
My mother hath a Torch, mary your wife
Goes darkling up and down, and Comes before her.
I thought that knave was with her, but tic well,
I pray God they may come by ne'er a light,
But both be led a dark dance in the night.
Why is my fellow Dick in the dark with my Mistress.
I pray God they be honest, for there may be much knavery
in the Dark, faith if I were there, I wold have some knavery
with them, good moister will ye carry the torch your self, &amp;
give me leave to play the blind man buff with my mistress,
On that condition thou wilt do thy best,
To keep thy Mistress and thy fellow Dick,
Both from my sister, and thy masters son,
I will entreat thy master let thee go.
O I, I warrant ye, isle have fine tricks to cousin them
Well sir, then go your ways, I give you leave.
O brave, but where about are they?
About our cunny green they surely are, if thou can find them.
O let me alone to grope for cunnies.
Well, now will I to Frank and to my sister,
Stand you two harkening near the cunny greene,
But sure your light in you must not b• seen,
Or else let Nicholas stand a far off with it,
And as his life keep it from mistress Goursey,
Shall this be done?
Phillip it shall,
God be with ye, isle b• gone.
Come on master Goursey, this fame is a means,
To make our wives friends, if they resist not.
T•t sir, howsoever it shall go forward.
Come then let• do, as Philip hath advised.
Here is the place where Philip bid me stay,
Till Francis came, but wherefore did my bother,
Appoint i• here? why in the Cunny borough?
He had some meaning in it I warrant ye,
Well here isle set me down under this tree,
And think upon the matter all alone,
Good Lord what pretty things these Cunnies are,
How finely they do feed till they be fat,
And then what a sweet meat a Cunny is,
And what smooth skins they have, both black and gray,
They say they run more in the night then day,
What is the reason? mark, why in the light,
They see more passengers then in the night,
For harmful men many a hay do set.
And laugh to see them tumble in the net,
And they put ferrets in the holes, fie, fie,
And they go up and down where connies lye,
And they lye still, they have so little wit,
I marvel the Warriner will suffer it,
Nay, nay, they are so bad, that they themselves,
Do give consent to catch these pretty elfes,
How if the Warriner should spy me here?
He would take me for a conny I dare swear,
But when that Francis comes, what will he say?
Look boy there lies a conney in my way:
But soft, a light, whose that? sold my mother,
Nay then all hid, I faith she shall not see me,
Isle play by peep with her behind this tree.
I marvel where this wench doth hide her self
So closely? I have searched in many a bush,
Belike my mother took me for a Thrush,
Shees hid in this same Warren Isle lay money.
Close as a rabbit sucker from an old conney.
O God, I would to God that I could find her,
I would keep her from her loves toys yet.
I so you might, if your daughter had no wit.
What a wild go•le tic, that would have it so young.
A murren take that dissembling tongue,
Ere your calves teeth were out you thought it long.
But minion, yet Isle keep you from the man.
To save a lye mother, say if you can.
Well, now to look for her.
I theres the spite,
What trick shall I now have to scope her light?
Whose there? what minion is it you?
Beshrew her heart, what a fright she put me to,
But I am glad I found her, though I was afraid,
Come on your ways, you are a handsome maid,
Why you forth a doors so late at night?
Why whether go ye? come stand still I say.
No indeed mother, this is my best way.
Tic not the best way, stand by me I tell ye.
No you would catch me mother, o I smell ye.
Will ye not stand still?
No by Lady no.
But I will make ye.
Nay then trip and go.
Mistress, Isle make ye weary ere I have done.
Faith mother then Isle try how you can run,
Will ye?
Yes faith.
Mal. sweet heart, Mal•? what not a word?
A little further, call again.
Why Mal. I prithee speak, why Mal I say?
I know thou art not far, if thou wilt not speak, why mal,
But now I see shees in her merry vain,
To make me call and put me to more pain,
Well, I must bea•• with her, sheel bear with me,
But I will call, least that it be not so,
What Mall? what Mall I say, boy are we right?
Have we not mist the way this same dark night?
Mass it may be so as I am true man,
I have not seen a cunny since I came,
Yet at the Cunny-borow we should meet,
But hark, I hear the trampling of some feet.
It may be so, then therefore lets lye close.
Where art thou Dicke?
Where am I quoth a, mary I may be where any by∣die
will say I am, either in France or at Rome, or at Jerusalem
they may say I am, for I am not able to disprove them, be∣cause
I cannot tell where I am.
O what a blindfold walk have we had Dicke,
To seek my son and yet I cannot find him?
Why then Mistress lets go home.
Why tic so dark we shall not find the way.
I pray God ye may not mother till it be day.
Sbloud take heed mistress here is a tree.
Lead thou the way, and let me hold by thee,
Dick Come•, what difference is there between a blind
man, and he that cannot see?
Peace, a pox on thee.
Swounds some body spake.
Dicke look about,
It may be here we may find them out.
I see the glimpse of some body here,
And ye be a sprite Isle fray the bug bear,
There a goes mistress.
O sir have I spied you?
A plague on the boy, it was he that descried me.
How like a beauteous Lady maskt in black,
Looks that same large circumference of heaven,
The sky that was so fair three hours ago,
Is in three hours become an Ethiope,
And being angry at her beauteous change,
She will not have one of those pearled stars,
To blab her sable metamorphesis,
Tic very dark, I did appoint my sister,
To meet me at the cunny berry below,
And Francis too, but neither can I see,
Belike my mother happened on that place.
And afraid them from it, and they both are now
Wandering about the fields, how shall I find them?
It is so dark, I scarce can see my hand,
Why then Isle hollow for them, no not so,
So will his voice betray him to our mothers,
And if he answer, and bring them where he is.
What shall I then do? it must not be so?
Sbloud it must be so, how else I pray?
Shall I stand gaping here all night till day?
And then ne'er the near, so ho, so ho.
So ho, I come, where are ye? where art thou? h•re.
How now Frank, where hast thou been?
Frank, what Frank? sbloud is sir Raph mad, hears the bow.
I have not been much private with that voice,
Me think Frank Goursy• talk and his doth tell me,
I am mistaken, especially by his bow,
Frank had no bow, well, I will leave this sellow,
And hollow somewhat farther in the fields,
Dost thou hear fellow, I perceive by thee,
That we are both mistaken, I took thee,
For one thou art not, likewise thou took me,
For sir Raph Smith, but sure I am not he,
And so farewell, I must go seek my friend, so ho:
So ho, so ho, nay then sir Raph so whore,
For a whore she was sure, if you had her here
So late, now you are sir Raphe Smith,
Well do ye counterfeit and change your voice,
But yet I know ye, but what should be that Francis?
Belike that Francis cussend him of his wench,
And he conceals himself to find her ou•,
Tic so upon my life, well I will go
And help him ring his peal o• so ho, soho,
A plague on Comes, a plague upon the boy▪
A plague too, not on my mother for an hundredth bound,
It was time to run, and yet I had not thought
My mother could have followed me so close,
Her legs with age I thought had foundered,
She made me quite run through a quickset hedge,
Or she had taken me: well I may say,
I have run through the briers for a wench,
And yet I have her not, the worse luck mine,
Me thought I heard one hollow here about,
I judge it Philip, O the slave will laugh
When as he hears how that my mother scared me,
Well, here Isle stand until I hear him hollow,
And then Isle answer him, he is not far.
my man is hollowing for me up and down,
And yet I cannot meet with him, so ho:
So ho.
Why what a pox were thou so near me man,
And would not speak?
Sbloud ye are very hot.
No sir, I am cold enough with staying here
For •uch a knave as you.
Knave, how now Phillip, art mad, art mad?
Why art not thou my man.
That went to fetch my bow,
Indeed a bow,
Might shoot me ten bows down the weather so,
• your man.
What art thou then?
A man, but whats thy name?
Some call me Raph.
Well said familiar Will, plain Raph I faith,
There calls my man.
But there goes mine away.
And yet Isle hear what this next call will say,
And here Isle tarry till he call again.
So ho.
So ho, where art thou Phillip,
Sblould Phillip,
But now he clad me Francis, this is fine
Why studiest thou? I prethy tell me Philip.
Where the wench is.
Even now he asked me Francis for the wench,
And now he ask me Phillip for the wench,
Well sir Raph. I must needs tell ye now,
Tic not for your credit to be forth,
So late a w•nching in this order
Whats this, so late a winching doth he say?
Indeed tic true, I am thus late a winching,
But I am force to wench without a wench.
Why then you might have tan your bow at first,
And gone and kilde abucke, and not have been
So lo•g a drabbing, and be ne'er the near.
Swounds what a pussell am I in this night,
But yet Isle put this fellow farther,
Dost thou hear man? I am not sir R•ph Smith.
As thou dost think I am, but I did meet him,
Even as thou says in pursuit of a wench.
I met the wench to, and asked for thee,
Saying it was thou that were her love, her dear,
And that sir Raph was not an honest Knight,
To train her thither, and to use her so.
Sbloud my wench, swounds were he ten sir Raphs.
Nay tic 〈◊〉, look to it, and so farewell.
Indeed I do •ove Nan our darie maid,
And hath he train her forth to that intent?
Or for another, I carry his crossebow,
And he doth cross me, shooting in my bow,
What shall I do?
So ho?
So ho,
Francies art thou there?
No here is no Francis, art thou Will my man?
Will fool your man, will gos your man,
My back sir scorns to wear your •very.
Nay sir I mooude but such a question to you,
Had it hath not disparegd you I hope,
It was but mistaking, such a night as this
May well deceive a man, God boy sir.
Gods will tic sir Raph Smith, a virtuous knight,
How gently entertains he my hard answer?
Rude anger made my tongue unmannerly,
I•rye him mercy, well, but all this while,
I cannot find a Francis, Francis ho?
Francis ho▪ o you call Francis now,
How have ye used my Nan? come tell me how?
Thy Nan, what Nan?
I, what Nan now, say, do you not seek a wench?
Yes I do.
Then sir that is she.
Art not thou I met withal before?
Yes sir, and you did counterfeit before,
And said to me you were not sir Raph Smith,
No more I am not, I met sir Raph Smith,
Even now he asked me if I saw his man.
O fine.
Why sir thou art much deceived in me,
Good faith I am not he thou think I am.
What are ye then?
Why one that se•kes one Francis and a wench.
And Francis seeks one Phillip and a wench:
How can thou t•ll?
I met him seeking Philip and a wench,
As I was seeking sir Raph and a wench.
Why then I know the matter, we met cross,
And so we mist, now here we find our loss,
Well, if thou wilt, we two will keep together,
And so we shall meet right with one or other,
I am content, but do you hear me sir?
Did not sir Raph Smith ask ye for a wench?
No I promise thee, nor did he look for any
But thy self, as I could guess.
Why this is strange, but come sir lets away,
I fear that we shall walk here till it be day.
O God I have run so far into the wind, that
I have run my self out of wind, they say a man is near
his end when he lacks breath, and I am at the end of my
race, for I can run no farther then here I be in my breath
bed, not in my death bed.
They say men moil and toil for a poor living, so
I moil and toil, &amp; am living I thank God, in good time
be it spoken, it had been better for me my mistress angel
had been light, for then perhaps it had not lead me into
this darkness, well, the devil never blesses a man better,
when he purses up angels by owlight, I ran through a
hedge to take the boy but I stuck in the ditch, and lost the
boy: swounds a plague on that clod, that Mowl-h•l, that
ditch, or what the devil so ere it were, for a man cannot see
what it was, well, I would not for the prize of my sword &amp;
buck•er, any body should see me in this taking for it would
make me but cut off their legs for laughing at me, well,
down I am, and down I mean to be, because I am wea∣rye,
but to tumble down thus, it was no part of my mea∣ning,
then since I am down, here isle rest me, and no man
shall remove me.
O I have sport in coney I faith, I have almost burst
my self with laughing at mistress Barnes, she was follow∣ing
of her daughter, and I hearing her, put on my fellow
Dickes sword and bucklers voice, &amp; his swounds &amp; sbloud
words, and led her such a dance in the da•ke as it passes,
here she is quoth I, where quo•h she? here quoth I, O it
hath been a brave here &amp; there night, but O what a soft na∣tured
thing the dirt is? how it would endure my hard t•ea∣ding,
and kiss my feet for acquaintance, and how court∣os
and mannerly were the clods, to make me stumble on∣lie
of purpose to entreat me lie down &amp; rest me, but now
and I could find my fellow Dicke, I would play the knave
with him honestly I faith, Well, I will grope in the dark
for him, or isle poke with my staff like a blind man, to pre∣uent
a ditch.
Whose that with a pox?
Who art thou with a pestilence.
Why I am Dick Comes?
What have I found thee Dicke? nay then I am for
ye Dicke, Where are ye Dicke?
What can I tell where I am?
Can ye not tell, come, come ye weight on your
mistreffe well, come on your ways, I have sought you till
I am weary, and called ye till I am hoarse, good Lord what
a iaunt I have had this night, hey ho?
First you mistress that came over me, sbloud it were
a good deed to come over you for this nights work, I can∣not
afford all this pains for an angel I tell ye true a kiss
were not cast away upon a good fellow, that hath deserved
more that way •hen a kiss, if your kindness would afford
it him, What shall I have it mistress?
Fie, fie, I must not kiss my man.
Nay▪ nay, ne'er stand, shall I, shall I, nobody sees,
say but I shall, and isle smack ye soundly I faith.
Away bawdy man, in truth lle tell your moister.
My master, go to, near tell me of my moister, he
may pray for them that may, he is past it, and for mine own
part, I can do somewhat that way I thank God, I am not
now to learn, and tic your part to ha•• your whole desire.
Fie, fie, I am ashamed of you, would you tempt
your mistress to lewdn•sse.
To lewdness, no by my troth theirs no such matter
in it, it is for kindness, &amp; by my trow•h if you like my gentle
offer, you shall have what courteously I can afford ye.
Shall I indeed Dicke? I faith, if I thought no body
would see.
•ush, fe•re not that, swones they must have Cattes eyes then,
Then kiss me Dick.
A kind wench I faith, where are ye mistress?
Here Dick, O I am in the dark, Dick go about,
Nay, isle grope sure, where are ye. Hodge. Here,
A plague on this post, I would the Carpenter had
bin hanged that set it up so, where are ye now?
Here.
Here, o I come, a plague on it, I am in a pond mistress.
Ha, ha, I have led him into a pond, where art thou Dick?
Up to the middle in a pond.
Make a Boat of thy Buckler then, and swim out, are
ye so hot with a pox? would you kiss my mistress, cool
ye there then good Dick Comes, o when he comes forth
the skirts of his blew coat will drop like a paint-house,
O that I could see and not be seen, how he would Spani∣ell
it, and shake himself when he comes out of the pond,
but isle be gone, for now heel fight with a fly, if he but
buzz in his ear.
Hears so hoing with a plague, so hang and ye will
for I have bin almost drowned, a pox of your lips, and ye call
this kissing: ye talk of a drowned Rat, but it was time to
swim like a dog I had bin served like a drowned Cat•else, I
would he h•d•didg his grave that digd the pond, my feet
were foul indeed, but a les•e pale then a pond would have
served my turn to wash them: a man shall be served thus
always, when he follows any of these females but tic my
kind heart that makes me thus forward in kindness unto
them, well God amend them, and make them thankful to
them that would do thē pleasure I am not drunk I would
ye should know it, and yet I have drunk more then will
do me good, for I might have had a Pu•pe set up, w••h as
good March Beer as this was, and ne'er set up an Ale bush'
for the matter: well I am somewhat in wroth I must needs
say, and yet I am not more angry then wise, nor more wise
then angry, but isle fight with the next man I mere, and it
be but for luck sake, and if he love to see him self hurt, let
him bring light with him, isle do it by darkling else by gods
dines, well here will I walk whosoever says nay.
He that worse may must hold the Candle, but my
Moister is not so wise as God might have made him, he is
gone to seek a Hair in a Hens nest, a Need•e in a Boat∣tle
of Ha•e, which is as seldom seen as a black Swan: he
is gone to seek my young Mistress, and I think she is bet∣la
lost then found, for who so ever h•th her, hath but a wet
Eel by the tail•, but they may do as they ••st, the law is in
their own hands, but and they would be rued•y me, they
should set her on the Leland, and b•d the Dwell sp•• her,
beshrew her fingers, she hath made me watch past mine
hour, but Isle watch her a good turn for it.
How, whose that Nicholas? so first come first served,
I am for him: how now proverb, proverb, sbloud howe
now proverb?
My name is Nicholas, Richard: and I k•owe your
meaning, and I hope ye mean no harm: I thank ye I am
the better for your asking.
Where have you been a whoring thus late, ha?
Master Richard the good wife would not seek her
daughter in the Oven unless she had bin there her self, but
good Lord you are knuckle deep in dirt, I warrant when
he was in, he swore Walsingham, &amp; chaft terrible for the
time, look the water drops from you as fast as hops.
What need thou to care, whipper-Ienny, Tripe∣cheeks,
out you fat ass.
Good words cost nought, ill words corrupts good
manners Richard, for a hasty man never wants woe, &amp; I had
thought you had bin my friend, but I see al is not gold that
glisters, ther's falsehood in fellowship, a misuse certus in re cer
ta cernitur, time &amp; truth tries all, &amp; tic an old proverb, &amp;
not so old as true, bought wit is best, I can see day at a little
hole, I know your mind as well as though I were within
you, tic ill halting before a cripple, go to, you seek to quarrel
but be ware of had I wist: so long goes the pot to the water
at length it comes home broken, I know you are as good a
man as ever drew sword, or as was ere girt ina girdle, or as
ere went on Nets leather, or as one sh•l see vpō a summers
day, or as ere looked man in the face, or as ere trod on gods
earth, or as ere broke bread, or drunk drink: but he is pro∣per
that hath proper conditions, but be not like the Cow
that gives a good soap of milk and castes it down with
her heals, I speak plainly, for plain dealing is a Jewel, &amp;
he that uses it shall dye a beggar, well, that happens in an
hour, that happens not in seven years, a man is not so
soon whole as hurt &amp; you should kill a man, you would
kiss hi•: well, I say little, but I think the more, ye• Isle give
him good words, tic good to hold a candle before the de∣uell,
yet by Gods me, Isle take no wrong, if he had a head as
big as Brass, or looked as high as Poules steeple.
Sir, thou Grasshopper, that shalt skip from my sword
as from a Sith, Isle cut thee out in collops &amp; eggs, in sleekes,
in s•ste beef, and fry thee with the fire, I shall strike from
the pike of they Buckler.
I, brig's a good dog, threatened folks live long.
What say ye sir?
Why I say not so much as how do ye.
Doe ye not so sir?
No indeed, what so ere I think, and thought is free.
You whoreson Wafer-cake, by Gods dines isle crush
ye for this.
Give an inch and you'll take an elle, I will not put my
finger in a hole I warrant ye, what man, ne'er crow so fast,
for a blind man may kill a Hare, I have known when •
plain fellow hath hurt a Fencer, so I have: What, a man
may be as slow as a Snail, but as fierce as a Lyon, and he
be moved: Indeed I am patient I must needs say, for pa∣tience
in adversity, brings a man to the three Cranes in the
Ventree.
Do ye hear, set down your Torch, draw, fight, I
am for ye.
And I am for ye too, though it be from this midnight
to the next morn.
Where be your tools?
Within a mile of an oak sir, hoe's a proud horse will
not carry his own provender, I warrant ye.
Now am I in my quarrelling humour, and now can I
say nothing but sownes draw, but isle untruss, &amp; thē have to
it.
Whose there, Boy? honest Boy, well met, where
hast thou bin.
O Hodge, Dicke Comes hath bin as good as a cry
of Hounds, to make a breathed Hair of me, but did thou
see my master?
I met him even now, and he asked me for thee, and
he is gone up and down, whoing like an Owl for thee.
Owl, ye Ass.
Ass, no nor glass, for then it had been Owleglasse,
but whose that boy?
By the mass tic our Comes &amp; Nicholas, &amp; it seems
they are providing to fight.
Then we shall have fine sport, I faith sir, le•s stand
close, and when they have fought about or two, weal run
away with the torch, &amp; leave thē to fight darkling, shall we?
Content, Isle get the Torch, stand close.
So now my back hath room to reach, I doe not love
to be laced in, when I go to lace a rascal, I pray God No∣cholas
prove not a fly: it would do me good to deal with
a good man now, that we might have half a dozen good
smart strokes, ha I have seen the day, I could have danced
in my fight, on, two, three four &amp; five, ou the head of him
six, seven, eight, nine &amp; ten, on the sides of him, &amp; if I went
so far as fifteen, I warrant I showed him a trick of one and
twenty: but I have not sought th•s four days, &amp; I lack a
little practise of my war•e, but I shall make a shift, ha close,
are ye disposed sir?
Yes indeed I •ear no colours, change sides Richard.
Change the gallows, Isle see thee handg first.
Well, I see the fool will not leave his babble for the
Tower of London.
Fool ye Rog, nay then fall to it.
Good goose bite not.
Sbloud how pursey I am, well I see exercise is all, I
must practise my weapons oftner, I must have a goal or
two at •oote-ball, before I come to my right kind, give me
thy hand Nicholas, thou art a better man then I took thee
for, and yet thou art not so good a man as I.
You dwell by• neighbours Richard, that makes ye
praise your self.
Why I hope thou wilt say I am a man.
Yes Isle say so if I should see you hanged.
Hanged ye Rog, nay then have at ye, swoons the
light is gone.
O Lord, it is as dark as Pitch,
Well here Isle lye with my buckler thus, least strike∣ing
up and down at •andall, the rog might hurt me, for I
cannot see to save it, and Isle hold my peace, least my voice
should bring th•m where I am.
Tic good. o have a cloak for the rain, a bad shift
is better then none at all, Isle sit here as if I were as dead as
a door nail.
Hark, theres one holloes.
And theres another.
And every where we come, I here some hello.
And yet it is our haps to meet with none.
I marvel where your Hodge is, and my man?
I and our wives, we cannot meet with them.
Nor with the boy, nor Mall, nor Frank, nor Phillip:
Nor yet with Comes, and yet we ne'er stood still.
Well I am very angry with my wife,
And she shall find I am not pleased with her,
If we meet ne'er so soon, but tic my hap,
She hath had as blind a journey out as we,
Pray God she have, and worse if worse may be.
This is but short lived envy Moister Coursey:
But come, what say ye to my policy?
I faith tic good, and we will practise it,
But sir it must be handled cunningly,
Or all is mart, our wives have subtle heads,
And they will soon perceive a drift devise.
So ho.
So ho.
Whose there?
Heers on or two.
Is Will there?
No, Phillip?
Frank?
No, no.
Was ever man deluded thus like me,
I think some spirit leads me thus amiss:
As I have oftē heard, that some have bin thus in the nights.
But yet this amazes me where ere I come,
Some asks me still for Frank or Phillip,
And none of them can tell me where Will is.
So ho?
So ho.
So ho!
So ho?
Sownes now I here four hollow at the least,
One had a little voice, then thats the wench
My man hath lost, well I will answer all, so ho.
VVhope, whope.
Whose there will?
No sir, honest Hodge: but I pray ye sir did ye not
meet with a boy with a Torch, he is run away from
me a plague on him.
Hey day, from Frank and Phillip to a Torch,
And to a Boy, nay sownes then hap as twill.
Who goes there?
Guess here.
Phillip.
Phillip, no faith, my names Will, ill will, for I was no∣for
worse, I was even now with him, and might have been
still, but that I fell into a ditch and lost him, and now I am
going up and down to seek him.
What would thou do with him.
Why I would have him go with me to my masters.
Whose thy moister?
Why sir Raphe Smith, and thither he promised me he
would come, if he keep his word so tic.
What was he a doing wheat••ou first found him.
Why he holloed for one Francis, and Francis hollod
for him, I hallod for my moister, and my moister for me, but
we mist still meeting contrary, Phillip &amp; Francis with me
&amp; my moister, and I &amp; my moister with Philip and Frank.
Why wherefore is sir Raphe so la•e abroad?
Why he meant to kill a Buck, Isle say so to save his ho∣nestie,
but my Nan was his mark, &amp; when he sent me for
his bow, and when I came, I hollod for him, but I never saw
such luck to miss him, it hath almost made me mad.
Well stay with vs, perhap• sir Raphe and he,
Will come anon, hark I do here one hello.
Is this broad waking in a winters night,
I am broad walking in a winters night:
Broad indeed, because I am abroad,
But these broad fields me thinks are not so broad,
That they may keep me forth of narrow ditches,
Heers a hard world for I can hardly keep my self upright in it,
I am marvelous dutiful, but so ho.
So ho.
Whose there?
Hears will.
What Will, how scapst thou?
What sir?
Nay, not hanging, but drowning,
Were thou in a pond or a ditch?
A pestilence on it, first you Phillip, no faith, I was but
dirty a little, but hears one or two asked for ye.
Who be they man?
Philip, tic I and moister Goursey.
Father, O father I have heard them say.
The days of ignorance are past and done,
But I am sure the nights of ignorance
Are not yet past, for this is one of them,
But wheres my sister?
Why we cannot tell.
VVheres Francis?
Neither saw we him.
Why this is fine.
What neither he, nor I, nor she nor you,
Nor I, nor she, nor you, and I •ill now,
Can meet, could meet, or ne'er I think shall meet,
Cal ye this •oing, no tic Christmas sport of Hob mā blind
All blind, all seek to catch, all miss: but who comes here?
O have I caught ye sir, it was your doing,
That m•de me have this pretty dance to night,
Had not you spo•ke, my mother had not scard me,
But I will swinge ye for it.
Keep the Kings peace,
How? art thou become a Constable?
Why Phillip where hast thou bin all this while?
Why where you were not, but I pray whirs my sister?
Why man I saw her not, but I have sought her as I should seek.
A needle have ye not?
Why you man are the needle that she seeks
To work withal, well Francis do you here,
You must not answer so, that you have sought her,
But have ye found her, faith and if you have,
God give ye joy of that ye found with her,
Fra I saw her not, how could I find her.
Why, could ye miss form Moister Barnses
house unto his Cunnyberry?
Whether I could or no, father I did.
Father I did, well Fr•nke wilt thou believe me,
Thou dost not know how much this same doth grieve me
Shall it be said thou mist so plain away,
When as so fair a wench did for thee stay.
Sownes man.
Sownes man, and if thou had bin blind,
The cunny-borow thou need must find:
I tell thee Francis had it bin my case,
And I had bin a wore in thy place,
I would have laid my head unto the ground,
And scented out my wenches way like a Hound:
I would have crept upon my knees all night,
And h•ue made the flint stones Linckes to give me light,
Nay man I would.
Good Lord what you would doe,
Well we shall see one day how you can woe.
Come, come, we see that we have all bin crossed.
Therefore lets go, and seek them we have lost.
Am I alone? doth not my mother come?
Her torch I see not, which I well might see,
If any way she were coming toward me,
Why then belike shees gone some other way,
And may she go till I bid her turn,
Far shall her way be then, and little fair,
For she hath hindered me of my good turn,
God send her wet and weary ere the turn,
I had been at Oxenford, and to morrow,
Have been releast from all my maidens sorrow.
And tasted joy, had not my mother bin,
God I beseech thee make it her worst sin,
How many maids this night lies in their beds,
And dream that they have lost their maidenheads,
Such dreams, such slumbers I had to enjoyed,
If waking malice had not them destroyed,
A starved man with double death doth dye,
To have the meat might save him in his eye,
And may not have it so am I tormented,
To starve for joy I see yet am prevented,
Well Frank, although thou woedst and quickly won,
Yet shall my love to thee be never done,
Isle run through hedge and ditch, through brakes &amp; briers
To come to thee, sole Lord of my desires,
Short wooing is the best, an hour, not years,
For long debating love is full of fears,
But hey•ke, I hear one tread, o were my brother,
Or Frank, or any man, but not my mother.
O when will this same year of night have end?
Long looked for days sun, when wilt thou ascend?
Let not this these friend misty vale of night,
Encroach on day, and shadow thy fair light,
Whilst thou come tardy from my Thetes bed,
Blushing forth golden hair and glorious red,
O stay not lo•g bright lantern of the day,
To light my mist way feet to my right way?
It is a man, his big voice tells me so,
Much am I not acquainted with it tho,
And yet mine ear sounds true distinguisher,
Boys that I have been more familiar,
With it then now I am, well, I doe judge,
It is not envies felon not of grudge,
Therefore Isle plead acquaintance, hyer his guiding,
And buy of him some place of close abiding,
Till that my mothers malice be expired,
And we may joy in that is long desired, whoses there?
Are ye a maid? no question this is she,
My man doth miss, faith since she lights on me,
I doe not mean till day to let her go,
For what she is my mans love I will know,
Hark ye maid, if maid, are ye so light,
That you can see to wander in the night.
Hark ye true man, if true, I tell you no,
I cannot see at all which way I go.
Fair maid first so, say had ye ne'er a fall,
Fair man not so, no I had none at all.
Could you not stumble on one man I pray?
No, no, such block till now came in my way.
Am I that block sweet tripe, then fall and try.
The grounds too hard, a feather-bed, not I.
Why how and you had met with such a stump?
Why if he had been your height I meant to jump?
Are ye so nimble?
Nimble as a Doe.
Backed in a pie.
Of ye.
Good meat ye know.
Ye hunt sometimes.
I do.
What take ye?
Dear.
You'll ne'er strike rascal?
Yes when ye art there.
Will ye strike me.
Yes, will ye strike again?
No sir, it fits not maids to fight with men.
I wonder wench, how I thy name might know.
Why you may find it in the Christcrosse row.
Be my Schoolemistresse, teach me how to spell it.
No faith, I care not greatly if I tell it,
My name is Marie Ba•nes.
How wench, Mall Barnes?
The very same.
Why this is strange.
I pray sir whats o•ur name?
Why sir Raph Smith doth wonder wench at this
Why whats the cause thou art abroad so late?
What sir Raph Smith, nay then I will disclose,
All the hole cause to him, in him repose,
My hopes, my love, God him I hope did send,
Our loves and both our mothers hates to end,
Gentle sir Raph if you my blush might see,
You then would say I am ashamed to be
Found like a wandering stray by such a knight,
So far from home at such a time of night,
But my excuse is good, love first by fate
Is crossed, controlled, and sundered by fell hate,
Frank Goursey is my love, and he loves me,
But both our mothers hate and disagree,
Our fathers like the match, and wish it don,
And so it had, had not our mothers come,
To Oxford we concluded both to go,
Going to me•te, they came, we parted so,
My mother followed me, but I ran fast,
Thinking who went from hate had need make hast,
Take me she cannot though she still pursue,
But now sweet knight, I do repose on you.
Be you my Orator and plead my right,
And get me one good day for this bad night.
Alas good heart, I pity thy hard hap,
And Isle employ all that I may for thee,
Frank Goursey wench, I doe commend thy choice,
Now I remember I met one Francis
As I did seek my man, then that was he,
And Philip too, 〈◊〉 like that was thy brother, why now I
find how I did loose my self, And wander up &amp; down, mi∣staking
so, Give me thy hand Mall, I will never leave.
Till I have made your mothers friends again,
And purchased to ye both your hearts delight,
And for this same one bad, many a good night,
Twill not be long ere that Aurora will.
Decked in the glory o• a goldon sun,
Open the crystal windows of the East,
To make the earth enamourde of thy face,
When we shall have clear light to see our way,
Come, night being done, expect a happy day.
O what a race this peevish girl hath led me?
How fast I ran and now how weary I am,
I am so out of breath I scarce can speak.
What shall I doe? and cannot overtake her,
It is late and dark, and I am far from home.
May there not thieves lye watching here about,
Intending mischief unto them they meet,
There may, and I am much afraid of them,
Being alone without all company,
I doe repent me of my coming forth,
And yet I do not, they had else been married,
And that I would not for ten times more labour.
But what a winter of cold fear I stole,
Freecing my heart least danger should betide me,
What shall I do to purchase company?
I hear some hollow here about the fields,
Then here Isle set my Torch upon this hill,
Whose light shall Beacon-like conduct them to it,
They that have lost their way seeing a light,
Will come to it, well, here isle lye unseen,
For it may be seen far off in the night,
And look who comes, and choose my company,
Perhaps my daughter may first come to it.
Where am I now? nay where was I ever now,
Nor now, nor then, nor where I shall be, know I,
I think I am going home I may as well
Be going from home, tic so very dark,
I cannot see how to direct a step,
I lost my pursuing of my son,
My son escaped me too, now all alone,
I am enforced to wander up and down,
Barnses wife's abroad pray God that she:
May have as good a dance, nay ten times worse,
Oh but I fear she hath not, she hath light
To see her way, O that some bridge would break
That she might fall into some deep digd ditch,
And either break her bones or drown her self,
I would these mischiefs I could wish to her,
Might light on her, but soft I see a light,
I will go near, tic comfortable,
After this nights sad spirits dulling darkness,
How now? What is it set to keep it self?
A plague ont, is she there?
O how it cheers &amp; quickens up my thoughts,
O that it were the Besseli•kies fell eye,
To poison thee.
I care not if I take it.
Sure none is here to hinder me,
And light me home.
I had rather she were hanged.
Then I should set it there to doe her good.
I faith I will.
I faith you shall not mistress.
Isle venture a burnt finger but Isle have it.
Yet Barnses wife would chafe if that she knew,
That I had this good to get a light.
And so she doth, but praise you luck at parting.
O that it were her light good faith, that she,
Might darkling walk about as well as I.
O how this mads me, that she hath her wish,
How I would laugh to see her trow• about.
Oh, I could cry for anger and for rage.
But who should set it here I marvel a Gods name?
One that will have it from you in the devils name
lle lay my life that it was Barnses son.
No forsooth, it was Barnses wife.
A plague upon her, how she made me start?
Mistress let go the •orch,
No but I will not.
Isle thrust it in thy face then.
But you shall not.
Let go I say.
Let you go, for tic mine.
But my possession says it is none of thine.
Nay, I have hold too,
Well, let go thy hold, or I will spurn thee.
Do, I can spurn thee too.
Can thou?
I that I can.
Why how now woman, how unlike to women,
Are ye both now? come part, come part I say.
Why what immodesty it this in you?
Come part I say, fie, fie.
Fie, fie, she shall not have my torch,
Give me thy torch boy, I will run a tilt,
And burn out both her eyes in my encounter.
Give room and lets have this hat carer.
I say ye shall not, wife go to, tame your thoughts,
That are so mad with fury.
And sweet wife,
Temper you rage with patience, do not be
Subject so much to such misgovernment.
Shall I not sir, when such a strumpet wrongs me?
How, strumpet mistress Barnes, nay I pray hark ye,
I oft indeed have heard you call her so,
And I have thought upon it, why ye should
Twither with name of strumpet,
Do you know any hurt by her, that you term her so?
No on my life, rage only makes her say so,
But I would know whence this same rage should come.
Whirs smoke theres fire, and my heart misgives.
My wives intemperance hath got that name,
And mistress Barnes, I doubt and shrewdly doubt,
And some great cause begets this doubt in me,
Your husband and my wife doth wrong vs both.
How? think ye so, nay master Goursey then
You run indebt to my opinion,
Because you pay not such advised wisdom,
As I think due unto my good conceit.
Then still I fear I shall your debtor prove.
Then I arrest you in the name of love,
Not bale, but present answer to my plea,
And in the Court of reason we will try,
If that good thoughts should believe jealousy,
Why look you mother, this is long of you,
For Gods sake father hark, why these effects
Come still from women's malice, part I pray,
Comes, Will. and Hodge come all and help vs part them,
Father, but hear me speak one word no more:
Father, but hear me speak, the use yourwill.
Cry peace between ye for a little while.
Good husband hear him speak.
Good husband hear him▪
Moister hear him speak, hes a good wise young
stripling, for his years I tel ye, &amp; perhaps may speak wiser
then an elder body, therefore hear him.
Master hear and make an end, you may kill one an∣other
in jest, and be hanged in earnest.
Come let vs hear him, then speak quickly Philip
Thou should have done ere this, speak
Speak
O Lord what haste you make to hurt your selves
Good Phillip use some good persuasions
To make them friends.
Yes, Isle doe what I can,
Father and Master Goursey both attend,
It is presumption in so young a man,
To teach where he might learn or be derect,
Where he hath had direction but in duty.
He may persuade as long as his perswase,
Is backed with reason and a rightful suit,
Physics first rule is this, as I have learned,
Kill the effect by cutting of the cause,
The same effects of ruffin outrages,
Comes by the cause of malice in your wines,
Had not they two bin foes, you had bin friends,
And we had bin at home, and this same war,
In peaceful sleep had ne'er bin dreamt upon,
Mother, and mistress Goursey to make them friends,
Is to be friends your selves, you are the cause,
And these effects proceed you know from you,
Your hates give life unto these killing stri•es,
But dye, and if that 〈◊〉 •ye in you,
Fathers yet stay, O speak, O stay a while,
Francis persuade thy mother moister Goursey,
If that my mother will resolve your minds,
That tic but mere suspect, not common proof,
And if my father swears hes innocent,
As I durst pawn my soul with him he is,
And if your wi•e vow truth and constancy,
Will you be then persuaded?
Phillip, if thy father will remit,
The wounds I gave him, and if these conditions
May be performed, I banish all my wrath.
And if thy mother will but clear me Phillip,
As I am ready to protest I am,
Then master Goursey is my friend again.
Hark mother, now you hear that your desires,
May be accomplished, they •ill both be friends
If you'll perform these articles.
Shall I be friends with such an enemy?
What say you unto my perswase;
I say shees my deadly enemy.
I but she will be your friend if you revolt.
The words I said, what shall I eat a truth?
Why hark ye mother.
Mother what say you?
Why this I say she slandered my good name.
But if she now deny it, tic no defame.
Wh• shall I think her hate will yield so much:
Why? 〈◊〉 it not, her spirit may he such,
why will it be?
Yet stay, I have some hope.
Mother, why mother, why hear ye,
Give me your hand, it is no more but thus,
Tic easy labour to shake hands with her.
A little breath is spent in speaking of fair words,
When wrath hath violent delivered,
What shall we be resolved?
O husband stay,
Stay Moister Goursey, though your wife doth hate me,
And bears unto me malice infinite.
And endless, yet I will respect your safeties,
I would not have you perish by our means,
I must confess, that only suspect,
And no proof else, hath fed my hate to her.
And husband I protest by heaven and earth,
That her suspect is causeless and unjust,
And that I ne'er had such a wild intent,
Harm she imaginde, where as none was meant.
Lo sir, what would ye more?
Yes Phillip this:
That I confirm him in my Innocence,
By this large vniuerse.
By that I swear, isle credit none of you, until I here
Friendship concluded straight between them two,
If I see that they willingly will doe,
Then isle imagine all suspicion ends,
I may be then assured they being friends.
Mother, make full my wish, and be it so.
What shall I sue for friendship to my foe?
No, if she yield will you?
It may be I.
Why this is well, the other I will try,
Come Mistress Goursey, do you first agree?
What shall I yield unto mine enemy?
Why if she will, will you?
Perhaps I will.
Nay then I find this goes forward still:
Mother give me your hand, give me yours to,
Be not so loath, some good thing I must doe,
But lay your Torches by, I like not them,
Come, come, deliver them unto your men,
Give me your hands, so now sir here I stand,
Holding two angry women in my hand,
And I must please them both, I could please tone,
But it is hard when there is two to one,
Especially of women, but tic so,
They shall be pleased whether they will or no,
Which will come first? what both give back, ha, neither?
Why then yond may help that come both together,
So stand still, stand but a little while,
And see how I your angers will beguile,
Well yet there is no hurt, why then let me,
Join these two hands, and see how theil agree,
Peace, peace, they cry, look how they friendly kiss,
Well all this while there is no harm in this,
Are not these two twins? twins should be both alike,
If tone speaks fair, the tother should not strike,
Iesus these warriors will not offer blows,
Why then tic strange that you two should be foes,
O yes, you'll say your weapons are your tongnes,
Touch lip with lip and they are bound from wrongs,
Go to, embrace, and say if you be friends,
That here the angry women's quarrels ends,
Then here it ends, if mistress Barnes say so.
If you say I, I list not to say no.
If they be friends, by promise we agree.
And may this league of friendship ever be.
What say thou Frank, doth not this fall out well?
Yes if my Mall were here, then all were well.
Yonder they be Mall, stay, stand close and stir not
Until I call: God save ye Gentlemen.
What sir Raph Smith, you are a welcome man,
We wondered when we heard you were abroad.
Why sir, how heard ye that I was abroad?
By your man.
My man, where is he?
Here.
O ye are a trusty squire.
It had bin better and he had said, a sure card.
Why sir? Nic, Because it is the Proverb.
Away ye Ass.
An Ass goes a four legs, I go of two •hrist cross.
Hold you tongue.
And make no 〈◊〉
Go to, no more a doe, gentle sir Raphe,
Your man is not in fault for missing you,
For he mistook by vs and we by him.
And I by you, which now I well perceive,
But tell me Gentlemen, what made ye all,
Be from your beds this night, and why thus late
Are your wives walking here about the fields?
Tic strange to see such women of account,
Here, but I ges•e some great occasion,
Faith this occasion sir, women will jar.
And jar they did to day, and so they parted,
We knowing women's malice let alone,
Will Canker like •ate farther in their hearts,
Did seek a sudden cure, and thus it was,
A match between his daughter and my son,
No sooner motioned but it was agreed,
And they no sooner saw but wooed and likte,
They have it sought to cross, and cross it thus.
F•e mistress Barnes and mistress Goursey both,
The greatest sin wherein your souls may sin,
I think is this, in crossing of true love,
Let me persuade ye.
Sir we are persuaded,
And I and mistress Goursey are both friends,
And if my daughter were but found again,
Who now is missing, she had my consent,
To be disposed off to her own content.
I do rejoice, that what I thought to doe,
Ere I begin, I find already done,
Why this will please your friends at Abington,
Frank, if thou seekst that way, there thou shalt find
Her, whom I hold the comfort of thy mind.
He shall not seek me, I will seek him out,
Since of my mothers grant I need not doubt.
Thy mother grants my girl, and she doth pray
To send unto you both a •oyfull day.
Nay mistress Barnes, I wish her better, that those
joyful days may be turned to joyful nights.
Faith tic a pretty wench, and tic pity but she should
have him.
And mistress Mary, when ye go to bed, God send
you good rest, and a peck of Fleas in your nest, every one as
big as Francis.
Well said wisdom, God send thee wise children,
And you more money.
I, so wish I,
Twill be a good while, ere you wish your skinfull
of •let holes.
Frank, hark ye? brother, now your woings done,
The next thing now you do, is for a son:
I prithe, for I faith I should be glad,
To have my self called Nunckle and thou Dad,
Well• •ester, if that Francis play the man,
My mo•her must be Grandam and you Mam,
To if Francis, to it sister, God send ye joy,
Tic fine to sing dansey my own sweet boy.
Well sini•ston
Nay fie, de you jest on.
Well may she prove a happy wife to him.
And may he prove as happy unto her.
Well Gentlemen, good hap betide them both,
Since it was my hap thus hap thus happily to meet,
To be a witness of this sweet contract,
I doe rejoice, wherefore to have this joy
Longer present with me, I do request
That all of you will be my promised guests,
This long nights labour doth desire some rest,
Besides this wished end, therefore I pray,
Let me detain •ye but a dinner time,
Tell me I pray, shall I obtain so much.
Gentle sir Raphe, your curtsy is such,
As may impose command unto vs all,
We will be thankful bold at your request,
I pray sir Raph, what cheer shall we have?
I faith country fare, mutton and Veale,
Perchance a Duck or Goose.
Oh I am sick.
How now Mall, whats the matter?
Father and mother if you needs would know,
He named a Goose, which is my stomachs foe.
Come, come, she is with child of some odiest,
And now shees sick till that she bring it forth,
Aiest quoth you? well brother if it be,
I fear twill prove an earnest unto me,
Goose said ye sir? oh that same very name,
Hath in it much variety of shame,
Of all the birds that ever yet was seen,
I would not have them graze upon this greene,
I hope they will not, for this, crop is poor,
And they may pasture upon greater store.
But yet tic pity that they let them pass,
And like a Common bite the Muses grass,
Yet this I fear if Frank and I should kiss,
Some creeking goose would chide vs with a hiss,
I mean not that goose sings it knows not what.
Tic not that hiss when one says hist come hither,
Nor that same hiss that sets dogs together,
Nor that same hiss that by a fire doth stand,
And hisseth T. or F. upon the hand,
But tic a hiss, and Isle unlace my cote,
For I should sound sure if I heard that note,
And then greene Ginger for the greene goose cries,
Serves not the turn, I turned the white of eyes,
The Rosasolis yet that makes me live,
Is favours that these Gentlemen may give,
But if they be displeased, then pleased am I,
To yield my self a hissing death to dye,
Yet I hope hears none consents to kill,
But kindly take the favour of good will.
If any thing be in the pen to blame,
Then here stand I to blush the writers shame.
If this be bad, he promises a better.
Trust him, and he will prove a right true debtor.

CEase to persuade▪ my loving Protheus;
Home-keeping youth; have ever homely wits,
Were it not affection chains thy tender days
To the sweet glances of thy honoured Love,
I rather would entreat thy company,
To see the wonders of the world abroad,
Then (living dully sluggardiz'd at home)
Wear out thy youth with shapeless idleness.
But since thou love; love still, and thrive therein,
Even as I would, when I to love begin.
Wilt thou be gone? Sweet Valentine ad ew,
Think on thy Protheus, when thou (hap'ly) see
Some rare note-worthy object in thy travail.
With me partaker in thy happiness,
When thou dost meet good hap; and in thy danger,
(If ever danger doe environ thee)
Commend thy grievance to my holy prayers,
For I will be thy beades-man, Valentine.
And on a loue-booke pray for my success?
Upon some book I love, I'll pray for thee.
That's on some shallow Story of deep love,
How young Lender crossed the Hellespont.
That's a deep Story, of a deeper love,
For he was more then ouer-shooes in love.
It is true; for you are ouer-bootes in love,
And yet you never swam the Hellespont.
Over the Boots? nay give me not the Boots.
No, I will not; for it boots thee not.
What?
To be in love; where scorn is bought with groans:
Coy looks, with hart-sore sighs: one fading moments mirth,
With twenty watchful, weary, tedious nights;
If hap'ly won, perhaps a haplesse gain;
If lost, why then a grievous labour won;
How ever: but a folly bought with wit,
Or else a wit, by folly vanquished.
So, by your circumstance, you call me fool.
So, by your circumstance, I fear you'll prove.
It is Love you cavil at, I am not Love.
Love is your master, for he masters you;
And he that is so yoked by a fool,
Me thinks should not be chronicled for wise.
Yet Writers say; as in the sweetest Bud,
The eating Canker dwells; so eating Love
Inhabits in the finest wits of all.
And Writers say; as the most forward Bud
Is eaten by the Canker ere it blow,
Even so by Love, the young, and tender wit
Is turned to folly, blasting in the Bud,
Loosing his verdure, even in the prime,
And all the fair effects of future hopes.
But wherefore waste I time to counsel thee
That art a votary to fond desire?
Once more adieu: my Father at the Road
Expects my coming, there to see me shipped.
And thither will I bring thee Valentine.
Sweet Protheus, no: Now let vs take our leave:
To Millaine let me hear from thee by Letters
Of thy success in love; and what news else
Betides here in absence of thy Friend:
And I likewise will visit thee with mine.
All happiness be chance to thee in Millaine.
As much to you at home: and so farewell.
He after Honour hunts, I after Love;
He leaves his friends, to dignify them more;
I love my self, my friends, and all for love:
Thou Iulia▪ thou hast metamorphis'd me:
Made me neglect my Studies, loose my time;
War with good counsel; set the world at nought;
Made Wit with musing, weak; hart sick with thought.
Sir Protheus: 'saue you: saw you my Master?
But now he parted hence to embark for Millain.
Twenty to one then, he is shipped already,
And I have plaid the Sheep in loosing him.
Indeed a Sheep doth very often stray,
And if the Shepherd be awhile away.
You conclude that my Master is a Shepherd then, and I Sheep?
I doe.
Why then my horns are his horns, whether I wake or sleep.
A silly answer, and fitting well a Sheep.
This proves me still a Sheep.
True: and thy Master a Shepherd.
Nay, that I can deny by a circumstance.
It shall go hard but isle prove it by another.
The Shepherd seeks the Sheep, and not the Sheep the Shepherd; but I seek my Master, and my Master seeks not me: therefore I am no Sheep.
The Sheep for fodder follow the Shepherd, the Shepherd for food follows not the Sheep: thou for wages follow thy Master, thy Master for wages follows not thee: therefore thou art a Sheep.
Such another proof will make me cry baâ.
But dost thou hear: gau'st thou my Letter to Iulia?
I Sir: I (a lost-Mutton) gave your Letter to her (a lac'd-Mutton) and she (a lac'd-Mutton) gave me (a lost-Mutton) nothing for my labour.
Here's too small a Pasture for such store of Muttons.
If the ground be overcharged, you were best stick her.
Nay, in that you are astray: it were best pound you.
Nay Sir, less then a pound shall serve me for car∣rying your Letter.
You mistake; I mean the pound, a Pinfold.
From a pound to a pin? fold it over and over,
It is threefold too little for carrying a letter to your lover
But what said she?
I.
Nod-I, why that's noddy.
You mistook Sir: I say she did nod;
And you ask me if she did nod, and I say I.
And that set together is noddy.
Now you have taken the pains to set it toge∣there, take it for your pains.
No, no, you shall have it for bearing the letter.
Well, I perceive I must be fine to bear with you.
Why Sir, how doe you bear with me?
Marry Sir, the letter very orderly,
Having nothing but the word noddy for my pains.
Beshrew me, but you have a quick wit.
And yet it cannot ouer-take your slow purse.
Come, come, open the matter in brief; what said she.
Open your purse, that the money, and the matter may be both at once delivered.
Well Sir: here is for your pains: what said she?
Truly Sir, I think you'll hardly win her.
Why? coldest thou perceive so much from her?
Sir, I could perceive nothing at all from her;
No, not so much as a ducats for delivering your letter:
And being so hard to me, that brought your mind;
I fear she'll prove as hard to you in telling your mind.
Give her no token but stones, for she's as hard as steel.
What said she, nothing?
No, not so much as take this for thy pains:
To testify your bounty, I thank you, you have cestern'd me;
In requital whereof, henceforth, carry your letters your self; And so Sir, I'll commend you to my Master.
Go, go, be gone, to save your Ship from wrack,
Which cannot perish having thee aboard,
Being destined to a drier death on shore:
I must go send some better Messenger,
I fear my Iulia would not deign my lines,
Receiving them from such a worthless post.
But say Lucetta (now we are alone)
Would thou then counsel me to fall in love?
I Madam, so you stumble not on heedfully.
Of all the fair rest• of Gentlemen,
That every day with par'd• encounter me,
In thy opinion which is worthiest love?
Please you repeat their names, isle show my mind,
According to my shallow simple skill.
What think thou of the fair sir Eglamoure?
As of a Knight, well-spoken, neat, and fine;
But were I you, he never should be mine.
What think thou of the rich Mercatio?
Well of his wealth; but of himself, so, so.
What think thou of the gentle Protheus?
Lord, Lord: to see what folly reigns in vs.
How now? what means this passion at his name?
Pardon dear Madam, it is a passing shame,
That I (unworthy body as I am)
Should censure thus on lovely Gentlemen.
Why not on Protheus, as of all the rest?
Then thus: of many good, I think him best.
Your reason?
I have no other but a women's reason:
I think him so, because I think him so.
And would thou have me cast my love on him?
I: if you thought your love not cast away.
Why he, of all the rest, hath never moved me.
Yet he, of all the rest, I think best loves ye.
His little speaking, shows his love but small.
Fire that's closest kept, burns most of all.
They doe not love, that doe not show their love.
Oh, they love least, that let men know their love.
I would I knew his mind.
Peruse this paper Madam.
To Iulia: say, from whom?
That the Contents will show.
Say, say: who gave it thee?
Sir Valentines page: &amp; sent I think from Protheus;
He would have given it you, but I being in the way,
Did in your name receive it: pardon the fault I pray.
Now (by my modesty) a goodly Broker:
Dare you presume to harbour wanton lines?
To whisper, and conspire against my youth?
Now trust me, it is an office of great worth,
And you an officer fit for the place:
There: take the paper: see it be returned,
Or else return no more into my sight.
To plead for love, deserves more fee, then hate.
Will ye be gon?
That you may ruminate.
And yet I would I had ore-look'd the Letter;
It were a shame to call her back again,
And pray her to a fault, for which I chid her.
What fool is she, that know• I am a Maid.
And would not force the letter to my view?
Since Maids, in modesty, say no, to that,
Which they would have the profferer construe, I.
Fie, fie: how way-ward is this foolish love;
That (like a testy Babe) will scratch the Nurse,
And presently, all humbled kiss the Rod?
How churlishly, I chid Lucetta hence,
When willingly, I would have had her here?
How angrily I taught my brow to frown,
When inward joy enforced my heart to smile?
My penance is, to call Lucetta back
And ask remission, for my folly past.
What hoe: Lucetta.
What would your Ladyship?
Is it near dinner time?
I would it were,
That you might kill your stomach on your meat,
And not upon your Maid.
What is it that you
Took up so gingerly?
Nothing.
Why did thou stoop then?
To take a paper up, that I let fall.
And is that paper nothing?
Nothing concerning me.
Then let it lye, for those that it concerns.
Madam, it will not lye where it concerns,
Unless it have a false Interpreter.
Some love of yours, hath writ to you in Rime.
That I might sing it (Madam) to a tune:
Give me a Note, your Ladyship can set
As little by such toys, as may be possible:
Best sing it to the tune of Light O, Love.
It is too heavy for so light a tune.
Heavy? belike it hath some burden then?
I: and melodious were it, would you sing it,
And why not you?
I cannot reach so high.
Let's see your Song:
How now Minion?
Keep tune there still; so you will sing it out:
And yet me thinks I do not like this tune.
You doe not?
No (Madam) tic too sharpe.
You (Minion) are too saucy.
Nay, now you are too flat;
And mar the concord, with too harsh a descant:
There wants but a Mean to fill your Song.
The mean is dround with you unruly base.
Indeed I bid the base for Protheus.
This babble shall not henceforth trouble me;
Here is a coil with protestation:
Go, get you gone: and let the papers lye:
You would be fingering them, to anger me.
She makes it strāge, but she would be best pleased
To be so angered with another Letter.
Nay, would I were so angered with the same:
Oh hateful hands, to tear such loving words;
Injurious Wasps, to feed on such sweet honey,
And kill the Bees that yield it, with your stings;
Isle kiss each several paper, for amends:
Look, here is writ, kind Iulia: unkind Iulia,
As in revenge of thy ingratitude,
I throw thy name against the bruzing-stones,
Trampling contemptuously on thy disdain.
And here is writ, Love wounded Protheus.
Poor wounded name: my bosom, as a bed,
Shall lodge thee till thy wound be thoroughly healed;
And thus I search it with a sovereign kiss.
But twice, or thrice, was Protheus written down:
Be calm (good wind) blow not a word away,
Till I have found each letter, in the Letter,
Except mine own name: That, some whirlwind bear
Unto a ragged, fearful, hanging Rock,
And throw it thence into the raging Sea.
Lo, here in one line is his name twice writ:
Poor forlorn Protheus, passionate Protheus:
To the sweet Iulia: that isle tear away:
And yet I will not, sith so prettily
He couples it, to his complaining Names;
Thus will I fold them, one upon another;
Now kiss, embrace, contend, doe what you will.
Madam: dinner is ready: and your father stays.
Well, let vs go.
What, shall these papers lye, like Tel-tales here?
If you respect them; best to take them up.
Nay, I was taken up, for laying them down.
Yet here they shall not lye, for catching cold.
I see you have a months mind to them.
I (Madam) you may say what sights you see;
I see things too, although you judge I wink.
Come, come, wilt please you go.
Tell me Panthino, what sad talk was that,
Wherewith my brother held you in the Cloister?
It was of his Nephew Protheus, your Son.
Why? what of him?
He wondered that your Lordship
Would suffer him, to spend his youth at home,
While other men, of slender reputation
Put forth their Sons, to seek preferment out.
Some to the wars, to try their fortune there;
Some, to discover Islands far away:
Some, to the studious Universities;
For any, or for all these exercises,
He said, that Protheus, your son, was meet;
And did request me, to importune you
To let him spend his time no more at home;
Which would be great impeachment to his age,
In having known no travail in his youth.
Nor need thou much importune me to that
Whereon, this month I have bin homering.
I have considered well, his loss of time,
And how he cannot be a perfect man,
Not being tried, and tutored in the world:
Experience is by industry achieved,
And perfected by the swift course of time:
Then tell me, whether were I best to send him?
I think your Lordship is not ignorant
How his companion, youthful Valentine,
Attends the Emperor in his royal Court.
I know it well.
It were good, I think, your Lordship sent him thither,
There shall he practise Tilts, and Tournaments;
Hear sweet discourse, converse with Noble-men,
And be in eye of every Exercise
Worthy his youth, and nobleness of birth.
I like thy counsel: well hast thou advised:
And that thou moist perceive how well I like it,
The execution of it shall make known;
Even with the speediest expedition,
I will dispatch him to the Emperors Court.
To morrow, may it please you, Don Alphonso,
With other Gentlemen of good esteem
Are iournying, to salute the Emperor,
And to commend their service to his will.
Good company: with them shall Protheus go:
And in good time: now will we break with him.
Sweet Love, sweet lines, sweet life,
Here is her hand, the agent of her heart;
Here is her oath for love, her honours pane;
O that our Fathers would applaud our loves
To seal our happiness with their consents.
Oh heavenly Iulia.
How now? What Letter are you reading there?
May it please your Lordship, it is a word or two
Of commendations sent from Valentine;
Delivered by a friend, that came from him.
Lend me the Letter: Let me see what news.
There is no news (my Lord) but that he writes
How happily he lives, how well-beloved,
And daily graced by the Emperor;
Wishing me with him, partner of his fortune.
And how stand you affected to his wish?
As one relying on your Lordships will,
And not depending on his friendly wish.
My will is something sorted with his wish:
Muse not that I thus suddenly proceed;
For what I will, I will, and there an end:
I am resolved, that thou shalt spend some time
With Valentinus, in the Emperors Court:
What maintenance he from his friends receives,
Like exhibition thou shalt have from me,
To morrow be in readiness, to go,
Excuse it not: for I am peremptory.
My Lord I cannot be so soon provided,
Please you deliberate a day or two.
Look what thou want shall be sent after thee:
No more of stay: to morrow thou must go;
Come on Panthino; you shall be employed,
To hasten on his Expedition.
Thus have I shunt the fire, for fear of burning,
And drenched me in the sea, where I am drowned.
I feared to show my Father Iulias Letter,
Least he should take exceptions to my love,
And with the vantage of mine own excuse
Hath he excepted most against my love.
Oh, how this spring of love resembles
The uncertain glory of an April day,
Which now shows all the beauty of the Sun,
And by and by a cloud takes all away.
Sir Protheus, your Fathers call's for you,
He is in hast, therefore I pray you go.
Why this it is: my heart accords thereto,
And yet a thousand times it answer's no.
Sir, your Glove.
Not mine: my Gloves are on.
Why then this may be yours: for this is but one.
Ha? Let me see: I, give it me, it's mine:
Sweet Ornament, that decks a thing divine,
Ah Siluia, Siluia.
Madam Siluia: Madam Siluia.
How now Sirha?
She is not within hearing Sir.
Why sir, who had you call her?
Your worship s•, or else I mistook.
Well: you'll still be too forward.
And yet I was last chidden for being too slow.
Go to, sir, tell me: do you know Madam Siluia?
She that your worship loves?
Why, how know you that I am in love?
Marry by these special marks: first, you have learned (like Sir Protheus) to wreath your Arms like a Male-content: to relish a Loue-song, like a Robin-red-breast: to walk alone like one that had the pestilence: to sigh, like a Schoole-boy that had lost his A. B. C. to weep like a young wench that had buried her Grandam: to fast, like one that takes diet: to watch, like one that fears robbing: to speak puling, like a beggar at Hal∣low-Masse: You were wont, when you laughed, to crow like a cock; when you walked, to walk like one of the Lions: when you fasted, it was presently after dinner: when you looked sadly, it was for want of money: And now you are Metamorphis'd with a Mistress, that when I look on you, I can hardly think you my Master.
Are all these things perceived in me?
They are all perceived without ye.
Without me? they cannot.
Without you? nay, that's certain: for with∣out you were so simple, none else would: but you are so without these follies, that these follies are within you, and shine through you like the water in an Urinal: that not an eye that sees you, but is a Physician to comment on your Malady.
But tell me: dost thou know my Lady Siluia?
She that you gaze on so, as she sits at supper?
Hast thou observed that? even she I mean.
Why sir, I know her not.
Dost thou know her by my gazing on her, and yet know her not?
Is she not hard-fauour'd, sir?
Not so fair (boy) as well favoured.
Sir, I know that well enough.
What dost thou know?
That she is not so fair, as (of you) well-fa∣uourd?
I mean that her beauty is exquisite,
But her favour infinite.
That's because the one is painted, and the o∣there out of all count.
How painted? and how out of count?
Marry sir, so painted to make her fair, that no man counts of her beauty.
How esteem thou me? I account of her beauty.
You never saw her since she was deformed.
How long hath she been deformed?
Ever since you loved her.
I have loved her ever since I saw her,
And still I see her beautiful.
If you love her, you cannot see her.
Why?
Because Love is blind: O that you had mine eyes, or your own eyes had the lights they were wont to have, when you chidde at Sir Protheus, for going un∣garter'd.
What should I see then?
Your own present folly, and her passing de∣formitie: for hee being in love, could not see to garter his hose; and you, being in love, cannot see to put on your hose.
Belike (boy) then you are in love, for last more∣ning
You could not see to wipe my shoes.
True sir: I was in love with my bed, I thank you, you swinged me for my love, which makes me the
bolder to chide you, for yours.
In conclusion, I stand affected to her.
I would you were set, so your affection would cease.
Last night she enjoined me,
To write some lines to one she loves.
And have you?
I have.
Are they not lamely wrote?
No (Boy) but as well as I can do them:
Peace, here she comes.
Oh excellent motion; oh exceeding Puppet:
Now will he interpret to her.
Madam &amp; Mistress, a thousand good-morrows.
Oh, give ye-good-ev'n: heir's a million of manners.
Sir Valentine, and servant, to you two thousand.
He should give her interest: &amp; she gives it him.
As you inioynd me; I have writ your Letter
Unto the secret, nameless friend of yours:
Which I was much unwilling to proceed in,
But for my duty to your Ladyship.
I thank you (gentle Servant) it is very Clerkly-done.
Now trust me (Madam) it came hardly-off:
For being ignorant to whom it goes,
I writ at random, very doubtfully.
Perchance you think too much of so much pains?
No (Madam) so it steed you I will write (Please you command) a thousand times as much: And yet —
A pretty period: well: I guess the sequel;
And yet I will not name it: and yet I care not.
And yet, take this again: and yet I thank you:
Meaning henceforth to trouble you no more.
And yet you will: and yet, another yet.
What means your Ladyship?
Doe you not like it?
Yes, yes: the lines are very quaintly writ,
But (since unwillingly) take them again.
Nay, take them.
Madam, they are for you.
I, I: you writ them Sir, at my request,
But I will none of them: they are for you:
I would have had them writ more movingly:
Please you, Isle write your Ladyship another.
And when it's writ: for my sake read it over,
And if it please you, so: if not: why so:
If it please me, (Madam?) what then?
Why if it please you, take it for your labour;
And so good-morrow Servant.
Oh Jest unseen: inscrutible: invisible,
As a nose on a mans face, or a Weathercock on a steeple:
My Master sues to her: and she hath taught her Suitor,
He being her Pupil, to become her Tutor.
Oh excellent devise, was there ever heard a better?
That my master being scribe,
To himself should write the Letter?
How now Sir?
What are you reasoning with your self?
Nay: I was riming: it is you yt have the reason.
To doe what?
To be a Spokes-man from Madam Siluia.
To whom?
To your self: why, she woes you by a figure.
What figure?
By a Letter, I should say.
Why she hath not writ to me?
What need she,
When she hath made you write to your self?
Why, doe you not perceive the jest?
No, believe me.
No believing you indeed sir:
But did you perceive her earnest?
She gave me none, except an angry word.
Why she hath given you a Letter.
That's the Letter I writ to her friend.
And yt letter hath she delivered, &amp; there an end.
I would it were no worse.
Isle warrant you, it is as well:
For often have you writ to her: and she in modesty,
Or else for want of idle time, could not again reply,
Or fearing else some messēger, yt might her mind discover
Her self hath taught her Love himself, to write unto her lover.
All this I speak in print, for in print I found it.
Why muse you sir, it is dinner time.
I have dyn'd.
I, but hearken sir: though the Chameleon Love can feed on the ayre, I am one that am nourished by my victuals; and would fine have meat: oh bee not like your Mistress, be moved, be moved.
Have patience, gentle Iulia:
I must where is no remedy.
When possibly I can, I will return.
If you turn not: you will return the sooner:
Keep this remembrance for thy Iulia's sake.
Why then we'll make exchange;
Here, take you this.
And seal the bargain with a holy kiss.
Here is my hand, for my true constancy:
And when that hour ore-slips me in the day,
Wherein I sigh not (Iulia) for thy sake,
The next ensuing hour, some foul mischance
Torment me for my Loves forgetfulness:
My father stays my coming: answer not:
The tide is now: nay, not thy tide of tears,
That tide will stay me longer then I should,
Iulia, farewell: what, gon without a word?
I, so true love should doe: it cannot speak,
For truth hath better deeds, then words to grace it.
Sir Protheus: you are staid for.
Go: I come, I come:
Alas, this parting strikes poor Lovers dumb.
Nay, twill bee this hour ere I have done weeping: all the kind of the Lance•, have this very fault: I have received my proportion, like the prodigious
Son, and am going with Sir Protheus to the Imperials Court: I think Crab my dog, be the sourest natured dog that lives: My Mother weeping: my Father wailing: my Sister crying: our Maid howling: our Cat wringing her hands, and all our house in a great perplexity, yet did not this cruel-hearted Cur shed one tear: he is a stone, a very pebble stone, and has no more pity in him then a dog: a Jew would have wept to have seen our parting: why my Grandam having no eyes, look you, wept her self blind at my parting: nay, Isle show you the manner of it. This shoe is my fa∣there: no, this left shoe is my father; no, no, this left shoe is my mother: nay, that cannot bee so neither: yes; it is so, it is so: it hath the worser sole: this shoe with the hole in it, is my mother: and this my father: a veng'ance on it, there it is: Now sir, this staff is my si∣ster: for, look you, she is as white as a lily, and as small as a wand: this hat is Nan our maid: I am the dog: no, the dog is himself, and I am the dog: oh, the dog is me, and I am my self: I; so, so: now come I to my Father; Father, your blessing: now should not the shoe speak a word for weeping: now should I kiss my Father; well, hee weeps on: Now come I to my Mother: Oh that she could speak now, like a would-woman: well, I kiss her: why there it is; heere's my mothers breath up and down: Now come I to my sister; mark the moan she makes: now the dog all this while sheds not a tear: nor speaks a word: but see how I lay the dust with my tears.
Lance, away, away: a Board: thy Master is shipped, and thou art to post after with oars; what's the matter? why weep thou man? away ass, you'll loose the Tide, if you tarry any longer.
It is no matter if the tide were lost, for it is the unkindest Tide, that ever any man tide.
What's the unkindest tide?
Why, he that's tide here, Crab my dog.
Tut, man: I mean thou'lt loose the flood, and in loosing the flood, loose thy voyage, and in loosing thy voyage, loose thy Master, and in loosing thy Master, loose thy service, and in loosing thy service: — why dost thou stop my mouth?
For fear thou should loose thy tongue.
Where should I loose my tongue?
In thy Tale.
In thy Tail.
Loose the Tide, and the voyage, and the Ma∣ster, and the Service, and the tide: why man, if the River were dry, I am able to fill it with my tears: if the wind were down, I could drive the boat with my sighs.
Come: come away man, I was sent to call thee.
Sir: call me what thou dare.
Wilt thou go?
Well, I will go.
Servant.
Mistress.
Master, Sir Thurio frowns on you.
I Boy, it's for love.
Not of you.
Of my Mistress then.
It were good you knocked him.
Servant, you are sad.
Indeed, Madam, I seem so.
Seem you that you are not?
Hap'ly I doe.
So doe Counterfeits.
So doe you.
What seem I that I am not?
Wise.
What instance of the contrary?
Your folly.
And how quoit you my folly?
I quoit it in your Jerkin.
My Jerkin is a doublet.
Well then, Isle double your folly.
How?
What, angry, Sir Thurio, do you change colour?
Give him leave, Madam, he is a kind of Chameleon.
That hath more mind to feed on your blood, then live in your ayre.
You have said Sir.
I Sir, and done too for this time.
I know it well sir, you always end ere you begin.
A fine volley of words, gentlemē, &amp; quickly shot off
It is indeed, Madam, we thank the giver.
Who is that Servant?
Your self (sweet Lady) for you gave the fire,
Sir Thurio borrows his wit from your Ladyships looks,
And spends what he borrows kindly in your company
Sir, if you spend word for word with me, I shall make your wit bankrupt.
I know it well sir: you have an Exchequer of words,
And I think, no other treasure to give your followers:
For it appears by their bare Liveries
That they live by your bare words.
No more, gentlemen, no more:
Here comes my father.
Now, daughter Siluia, you are hard beset.
Sir Valentine, your father is in good health,
What say you to a Letter from your friends
Of much good news?
My Lord, I will be thankful,
To any happy messenger from thence.
Know ye Don Antonio, your Countryman?
I, my good Lord, I know the Gentleman
To be of worth, and worthy estimation,
And not without desert so well reputed.
Hath he not a Son?
I, my good Lord, a Son, that well deserves
The honour, and regard of such a father.
You know him well?
I knew him as my self: for from our Infancy
We have conversed, and spent our hours together,
And though my self have been an idle Truant,
Omitting the sweet benefit of time
To cloth mine age with Angel-like perfection:
Yet hath Sir Protheus (for that's his name)
Made use, and fair advantage of his days:
His years but young, but his experience old:
His head vn-mellowed, but his Judgment ripe;
And in a word (for far behind his worth
Comes all the praises that I now bestow.)
He is complete in feature, and in mind,
With all good grace, to grace a Gentleman.
Beshrew me sir, but if he make this good
He is as worthy for an Empress love,
As meet to be an Emperors Councellor:
Well, Sir: this Gentleman is come to me
With Commendation from great Potentates,
And here he means to spend his time a while,
I think it is no vn-welcome news to you.
Should I have wished a thing, it had been he.
Welcome him then according to his worth:
Siluia, I speak to you, and you Sir Thurio,
For Ʋalentine, I need not cite him to it,
I will send him hither to you presently.
This is the Gentleman I told your Ladyship
Had come along with me, but that his Mistress
Did hold his eyes, locked in her Crystal looks.
Be-like that now she hath enfranchised them
Upon some other pawn for fealty.
Nay sure, I think she holds them prisoners still.
Nay then he should be blind, and being blind
How could he see his way to seek out you?
Why Lady, Love hath twenty pair of eyes.
They say that Love hath not an eye at all.
To see such Lovers, Thurio, as your self,
Upon a homely object, Love can wink.
Have done, have done: here comes ye gentleman.
Welcome, deer Protheus: Mistress, I beseech you
Confirm his welcome, with some special favour.
His worth is warrant for his welcome hither,
If this be he you oft have wished to hear from.
Mistress, it is: sweet Lady, entertain him
To be my fellow-seruant to your Ladyship.
Too low a Mistress for so high a servant.
Not so, sweet Lady, but too mean a servant
To have a look of such a worthy a Mistress.
Leave off discourse of disability:
Sweet Lady, entertain him for your Servant.
My duty will I boast of, nothing else.
And duty never yet did want his meed.
Servant, you are welcome to a worthless Mistress.
Isle die on him that says so but your self.
That you are welcome?
That you are worthless.
Madam, my Lord your father wold speak with you.
I wait upon his pleasure: Come Sir Thurio,
Go with me: once more, new Servant welcome;
Isle leave you to confer of home affairs,
When you have done, we look too hear from you.
We'll both attend upon your Ladyship.
Now tell me: how do al from whence you came?
Your friends are well, &amp; have thē much cōmended.
And how doe yours?
I left them all in health.
How does your Lady? &amp; how thrives your love?
My tales of Love were wont to weary you,
I know you joy not in a Loue-discourse.
I Protheus, but that life is altered now,
I have done penance for contemning Love,
Whose high imperious thoughts have punished me
With bitter fasts, with penitential groans,
With nightly tears, and daily hart-sore sighs,
For in revenge of my contempt of love,
Love hath chased sleep from my enthralled eyes,
And made them watchers of mine own hearts sorrow.
O gentle Protheus, Loue's a mighty Lord,
And hath so humbled me, as I confess
There is no woe to his correction,
Nor to his Service, no such joy on earth:
Now, no discourse, except it be of love:
Now can I break my fast, dine, sup, and sleep,
Upon the very naked name of Love.
Enough; I read your fortune in your eye:
Was this the Idol, that you worship so?
Even She; and is she not a heavenly Saint?
No; But she is an earthly Paragon.
Call her divine.
I will not flatter her.
O flatter me: for Love delights in praises.
When I was sick, you gave me bitter pills,
And I must minister the like to you.
Then speak the truth by her; if not divine,
Yet let her be a principality,
Sovereign to all the Creatures on the earth,
Except my Mistress.
Sweet: except not any,
Except thou wilt except against my Love.
Have I not reason to prefer mine own?
And I will help thee to prefer her to:
She shall be dignified with this high honour,
To bear my Ladies train, left the base earth
Should from her vesture chance to steal a kiss,
And of so great a favour growing proud,
Disdain to root the Sommer-swelling flower,
And make rough winter everlastingly.
Why Ʋalentine, what Bragadisme is this?
Pardon me (Protheus) all I can is nothing,
To her, whose worth, make other worthies nothing;
She is alone.
Then let her alone.
Not for the world: why man, she is mine own,
And I as rich in having such a Jewel
As twenty Seas, if all their sand were pearl,
The water, Nectar, and the Rocks pure gold.
Forgive me that I doe not dream on thee,
Because thou see me dote upon my love:
My foolish Rival that her Father likes
(Only for his possessions are so huge)
Is gone with her along, and I must after,
For Love (thou know is full of jealousy.)
But she loves you?
I, and we are betrothed: nay more, our marriage hour,
With all the cunning manner of our flight
Determined of: how I must climb her window,
The Ladder made of Cords, and all the means
Plotted, and 'greed on for my happiness.
Good Protheus go with me to my chamber,
In these affairs to aid me with thy counsel.
Go on before: I shall enquire you forth:
I must unto the Road, to disembark
Some necessaries, that I needs must use,
And then Isle presently attend you.
Will you make haste?
I will.
Even as one heate, another heate expels,
Or as one nail, by strength drives out another.
So the remembrance of my former Love
Is by a newer object quite forgotten,
It is mine, or Valentines praise?
Her true perfection, or my false transgression?
That makes me reasonless, to reason thus?
She is fair: and so is Iulia that I love,
(That I did love, for now my love is thawed,
Which like a waxen Image against a fire
Bears no impression of the thing it was.)
Me thinks my zeal to Valentine is cold,
And that I love him not as I was wont:
O, but I love his Lady too-too much,
And that's the reason I love him so little.
How shall I dote on her with more advice,
That thus without advice begin to love her?
It is but her picture I have yet beheld,
And that hath dazzled my reasons light:
But when I look on her perfections,
There is no reason, but I shall be blind.
If I can check my erring love, I will,
If not, to compass her Isle use my skill.
Lance, by mine honesty welcome to Padua.
Forswear not thy self, sweet youth, for I am not welcome. I reckon this always, that a man is never undone till hee be hanged, nor never welcome to a place, till some certain shot be paid, and the Hostess say well∣come.
Come-on you mad-cap: Isle to the Ale-house with you presently; where, for one shot of five pence, thou shalt have five thousand welcomes: But sirha, how did thy Master part with Madam Iulia?
Marry after they closed in earnest, they parted very fairly in jest.
But shall she marry him?
No.
How then? shall he marry her?
No, neither.
What, are they broken?
No; they are both as whole as a fish.
Why then, how stands the matter with them?
Marry thus, when it stands well with him, it stands well with her.
What an ass art thou, I understand thee not.
What a block art thou, that thou can not?
My staff understands me?
What thou say?
I, and what I do too: look thee, Isle but lean, and my staff understands me.
It stands under thee indeed.
Why, stand-vnder: and vnder-stand is all one.
But tell me true, will it be a match?
Ask my dog, if he say I, it will: if hee say no, it will: if hee shake his tail, and say nothing, it will.
The conclusion is then, that it will.
Thou shalt never get such a secret from me, but by a parable.
It is well that I get it so: but Lance, how say thou that that my master is become a notable Lover?
I never knew him otherwise.
Then how?
A notable Lubber: as thou report him to bee.
Why, thou whoreson Ass, thou mistake me,
Why Fool, I meant not thee, I meant thy Master.
I tell thee, my Master is become a hot Lover.
Why, I tell thee, I care not, though hee burn himself in Love. If thou wilt go with me to the Ale-house: if not, thou art an Hebrew, a Jew, and not worth the name of a Christian.
Why?
Because thou hast not so much charity in thee as to go to the Ale with a Christian: Wilt thou go?
At thy service.
To leave my Iulia; shall I be forsworn?
To love fair Siluia; shall I be forsworn?
To wrong my friend, I shall be much forsworn.
And even that Power which gave me first my oath
Provokes me to this three-fold perjury.
Love bad me swear, and Love bids me forswear;
O sweet-suggesting Love, if thou hast sinned,
Teach me (thy tempted subject) to excuse it.
At first I did adore a twinkling Star,
But now I worship a celestial Sun:
Vn-heedfull vows may heedfully be broken,
And he wants wit, that wants resolved will,
To learn his wit, to exchange the bad for better;
Fie, fie, unreverend tongue, to call her bad,
Whose sovereignty so oft thou hast preferred,
With twenty thousand soule-confirming oaths.
I cannot leave to love; and yet I doe:
But there I leave to love, where I should love.
Iulia I loose, and Valentine I loose,
If I keep them, I needs must loose my self:
If I loose them, thus find I by their loss,
For Valentine, my self: for Iulia, Siluia.
I to my self am dearer then a friend,
For Love is still most precious in it self,
And Siluia (witness heaven that made her fair)
Shows Iulia but a swarthy Ethiope.
I will forget that Iulia is alive,
Remembering that my Love to her is dead.
And Ʋalentine Isle hold an Enemy,
Aiming at Siluia as a sweeter friend.
I cannot now prove constant to my self,
Without some treachery used to Valentine.
This night he means with a Corded-ladder
To climb celestial Siluia's chamber window,
My self in counsel his competitor.
Now presently Isle give her father notice
Of their disguising and pretended flight:
Who (all enraged) will banish Valentine:
For Thurio he intends shall wed his daughter,
But Valentine being gon, Isle quickly cross
By some sly trick, blunt Thurio's dull proceeding.
Love lend me wings, to make my purpose swift
As thou hast lent me wit, to plot this drift.
Counsel, Lucetta, gentle girl assist me,
And even in kind love, I doe conjure thee,
Who art the Table wherein all my thoughts
Are visibly Character'd, and engraved,
To lesson me, and tell me some good mean
How with my honour I may undertake
A journey to my loving Protheus.
Alas, the way is wearisome and long.
A true-deuoted Pilgrim is not weary
To measure Kingdoms with his feeble steps,
Much less shall she that hath Loves wings to fly,
And when the flight is made to one so dear,
Of such divine perfection as Sir Protheus.
Better forbear, till Protheus make return.
Oh, know you not, his looks are my souls food?
Pity the dearth that I have pined in,
By longing for that food so long a time.
Did thou but know the inly touch of Love,
Thou would as soon go kindle fire with snow
As seek to quench the fire of Love with words.
I doe not seek to quench your Loves hot fire,
But qualify the fires extreme rage,
Lest it should burn aboue the bounds of reason.
The more thou dam'st it up, the more it burns:
The Current that with gentle murmur glides
(Thou know) being stopped, impatiently doth rage:
But when his fair course is not hindered,
He makes sweet music with the enameld stones,
Giving a gentle kiss to every sedge
He ouer-taketh in his pilgrimage.
And so by many winding nookes he strays
With willing sport to the wilde Ocean.
Then let me go, and hinder not my course:
Isle be as patient as a gentle stream,
And make a pastime of each weary step,
Till the last step have brought me to my Love,
And there Isle rest, as after much turmoil
A blessed soul doth in Elizium.
But in what habit will you go along?
Not like a woman, for I would prevent
The loose encounters of lascivious men:
Gentle Lucetta, fit me with such weeds
As may beseem some well reputed Page.
Why then your Ladyship must cut your hair.
No girl, Isle knit it up in silken strings,
With twenty od-conceited true-loue knots:
To be fantastic, may become a youth
Of greater time then I shall show to be.
What fashion (Madam) shall I make your bree∣ches?
That fits as well, as tell me (good my Lord)
What compass will you wear your Farthingale?
Why even what fashion thou best likes (Lucetta.)
You must needs have thē with a codpiece (Ma∣dam)
Out, out, (Lucetta) that will be illfauourd.
A round hose (Madam) now's not worth a pin
Unless you have a codpiece to stick pins on.
Lucetta, as thou love me let me have
What thou think meet, and is most mannerly.
But tell me (wench) how will the world repute me
For undertaking so unstaid a journey?
I fear me it will make me scandalised.
If you think so, then stay at home, and go not.
Nay, that I will not.
Then never dream on Infamy, but go:
If Protheus like your journey, when you come,
No matter who's displeased, when you are gone:
I fear me he will scarce be pleased with all.
That is the least (Lucetta) of my fear:
A thousand oaths, an Ocean of his tears,
And instances of infinite of Love,
Warrant me welcome to my Protheus.
All these are servants to deceitful men.
Base men, that use them to so base effect;
But truer stars did govern Protheus birth,
His words are bonds, his oaths are oracles,
His love sincere, his thoughts immaculate,
His tears, pure messengers, sent from his heart,
His heart, as far from fraud, as heaven from earth.
Pray heaven he prove so when you come to him.
Now, as thou love me, do him not that wrong,
To bear a hard opinion of his truth:
Only deserve my love, by loving him,
And presently go with me to my chamber
To take a note of what I stand in need of,
To furnish me upon my longing journey:
All that is mine I leave at thy dispose,
My goods, my Lands, my reputation,
Only, in lieu thereof, dispatch me hence:
Come; answer not: but to it presently,
I am impatient of my tarriance.
Sir Thurio, give vs leave (I pray) a while,
We have some secrets to confer about.
Now tell me Protheus, what's your will with me?
My gracious Lord, that which I wold discover,
The Law of friendship bids me to conceal,
But when I call to mind your gracious favours
Done to me (undeserving as I am)
My duty pricks me on to utter that
Which else, no worldly good should draw from me:
Know (worthy Prince) Sir Valentine my friend
This night intends to steal away your daughter:
My self am one made privy to the plot.
I know you have determined to bestow her
On Thurio, whom your gentle daughter hates,
And should she thus be stolen away from you,
It would be much vexation to your age.
Thus (for my duties sake) I rather chose
To cross my friend in his intended drift,
Then (by concealing it) heap on your head
A pack of sorrows, which would press you down
(Being vnpreuented) to your timeless grave.
Protheus, I thank thee for thine honest care,
Which to requite, command me while I live.
This love of theirs, my self have often seen,
Happily when they have judged me fast asleep,
And oftentimes have purposed to forbid
Sir Ʋalentine her company, and my Court.
But fearing lest my jealous aim might err,
And so (unworthily) disgrace the man
(A rashness that I ever yet have shunned)
I gave him gentle looks, thereby to find
That which thy self hast now disclosed to me.
And that thou moist perceive my fear of this,
Knowing that tender youth is soon suggested,
I nightly lodge her in an upper Tower,
The key whereof, my self have ever kept:
And thence she cannot be conveyed away.
Know (noble Lord) they have deuis'd a mean
How he her chamber-window will ascend,
And with a Corded-ladder fetch her down:
For which, the youthful Lover now is gone,
And this way comes he with it presently.
Where (if it please you) you may intercept him.
But (good my Lord) doe it so cunningly
That my discovery be not aimed at:
For, love of you, not hate unto my friend,
Hath made me publisher of this pretence.
Upon mine Honour, he shall never know
That I had any light from thee of this.
Adieu, my Lord, Sir Valentine is coming.
Sir Valentine, whether away so fast?
Please it your Grace, there is a Messenger
That stays to bear my Letters to my friends,
And I am going to deliver them.
Be they of much import?
The tenure of them doth but signify
My health, and happy being at your Court.
Nay then no matter: stay with me a while,
I am to break with thee of some affairs
That touch me near: wherein thou must be secret.
It is not unknown to thee, that I have sought
To match my friend Sir Thurio, to my daughter.
I know it well (my Lord) and sure the Match
Were rich and honourable: besides, the gentleman
Is full of Virtue, Bounty, Worth, and Qualities
Beseeming such a Wife, as your fair daughter:
Cannot your Grace win her to fancy him?
No, trust me, She is peevish, sullen, froward,
Proud, disobedient, stubborn, lacking duty,
Neither regarding that she is my child,
Nor fearing me, as if I were her father:
And may I say to thee, this pride of hers
(Upon advice) hath drawn my love from her,
And where I thought the remnant of mine age
Should have been cherished by her child-like duty,
I now am full resolved to take a wife,
And tur• her out, to who will take her in:
Then let her beauty be her wedding dowre:
For me, and my possessions she esteems not.
What would your Grace have me to do in this?
There is a Lady in Verona here
Whom I affect: but she is nice, and coy,
And nought esteems my aged eloquence.
Now therefore would I have thee to my Tutor
(For long agony I have forgot to court,
Besides the fashion of the time is changed)
How, and which way I may bestow my self
To be regarded in her sun-bright eye.
Win her with gifts, if she respect not words,
Dumb Jewels often in their silent kind
More then quick words, doe move a women's mind.
But she did scorn a present that I sent her,
A woman sometime scorns what best cōtents her.
Send her another: never give her ore,
For scorn at first, makes after-loue the more.
If she doe frown, it is not in hate of you,
But rather to beget more love in you.
If she doe chide, it is not to have you gone,
For why, the fools are mad, if left alone.
Take no repulse, what ever she doth say,
For, get you gon, she doth not mean away.
Flatter, and praise, commend, extol their graces:
Though ne'er so black, say they have Angels faces,
That man that hath a tongue, I say is no man,
If with his tongue he cannot win a woman.
But she I mean, is promised by her friends
Unto a youthful Gentleman of worth,
And kept severely from resort of men,
That no man hath access by day to her.
Why then I would resort to her by night.
I, but the doors be locked, and keys kept safe,
That no man hath recourse to her by night.
What letts but one may enter at her window?
Her chamber is aloft, far from the ground,
And built so shelving, that one cannot climb it
Without apparent hazard of his life.
Why then a Ladder quaintly made of Cords
To cast up, with a pair of anchoring hooks,
Would serve to scale another Hero's tower,
So bold Lender would adventure it.
Now as thou art a Gentleman of blood
Advise me, where I may have such a Ladder.
When would you use it? pray sir, tell me that.
This very night; for Love is like a child
That longs for every thing that he can come by.
By seven a clock, isle get you such a Ladder.
But hark thee: I will go to her alone,
How shall I best convey the Ladder thither?
It will be light (my Lord) that you may bear it
Under a cloak, that is of any length.
A cloak as long as thine will serve the turn?
I my good Lord.
Then let me see thy cloak,
Isle get me one of such another length.
Why any cloak will serve the turn (my Lord)
How shall I fashion me to wear a cloak?
I pray thee let me feel thy cloak upon me.
What Letter is this same? what's here? to Siluia?
And here an Engine fit for my proceeding,
Isle be so bold to break the seal for once.
My thoughts do harbour with my Siluia nightly,
And slaves they are to me, that send them flying.
Oh, could their Master come, and go as lightly,
Himself would lodge where (senseless) they are lying.
My Herald Thoughts, in thy pure bosom rest-them,
While I (their King) that thither them importune
Doe curse the grace, that with such grace hath blessed them,
Because my self doe want my servants fortune.
I curse my self, for they are sent by me,
That they should harbour where their Lord should be.
What's here? Siluia, this night I will enfranchise thee.
It is so: and heere's the Ladder for the purpose.
Why Phaeton (for thou art Merops son)
Wilt thou aspire to guide the heavenly Car?
And with thy daring folly burn the world?
Wilt thou reach stars, because they shine on thee?
Go base Intruder, ouer-weening Slave,
Bestow thy fawning smiles on equal mates,
And think my patience, (more then thy desert)
Is privilege for thy departure hence.
Thank me for this, more then for all the favours
Which (all too much) I have bestowed on thee.
But if thou linger in my Territories
Longer then swiftest expedition
Will give thee time to leave our royal Court,
By heaven, my wrath shall far exceed the love
I ever bore my daughter, or thy self.
Be gone, I will not hear thy vain excuse,
But as thou love thy life, make speed from hence.
And why not death, rather then living torment?
To die, is to be banished from my self,
And Siluia is my self: banished from her
Is self from self. A deadly banishment:
What light, is light, if Siluia be not seen?
What joy is joy, if Siluia be not by?
Unless it be to think that she is by
And feed upon the shadow of perfection.
Except I be by Siluia in the night,
There is no music in the Nightingale.
Unless I look on Siluia in the day,
There is no day for me to look upon.
She is my essence, and I leave to be;
If I be not by her fair influence
Fostered, illumined, cherished, kept alive.
I fly not death, to fly his deadly doom,
Tarry I here, I but attend on death,
But fly I hence, I fly away from life.
Run (boy) run, run, and seek him out.
So-hough, Soa hough —
What see thou?
Him we go to find,
There's not a hair on's head, but it is a Valentine.
Valentine?
No.
Who then? his Spirit?
Neither,
What then?
Nothing.
Can nothing speak? Master, shall I strike?
Who would thou strike?
Nothing.
Villain, forbear.
Why Sir, Isle strike nothing: I pray you.
Sirha, I say forbear: friend Valentine, a word.
My ears are stopped, &amp; cannot hear good news,
So much of bad already hath possessed them.
Then in dumb silence will I bury mine,
For they are harsh, vn-tuneable, and bad.
Is Siluia dead?
No, Valentine.
No Valentine indeed, for sacred Siluia,
Hath she forsworn me?
No, Ʋalentine.
No Valentine, if Siluia have forsworn me.
What is your news?
Sir, there is a proclamation, yt you are vanished.
That thou art banished: oh that's the news,
From hence, from Siluia, and from me thy friend.
Oh, I have fed upon this woe already,
And now excess of it will make me surfeit.
Doth Siluia know that I am banished?
I, I: and she hath offered to the doom
(Which vn-reuerst stands in effectual force)
A Sea of melting pearl, which some call tears;
Those at her fathers churlish feet she tendered,
With them upon her knees, her humble self,
Wringing her hands, whose whiteness so became them,
As if but now they waxed pale for woe:
But neither bended knees, pure hands held up,
Sad sighs, deep groans, nor siluer-shedding tears
Could penetrate her vncompassionate Sire;
But Valentine, if he be tan, must die.
Besides, her intercession chafed him so,
When she for thy repeal was suppliant,
That to close prison he commanded her,
With many bitter threats of biding there.
No more: unless the next word that thou speak
Have some malignant power upon my life:
If so: I pray thee breath it in mine ear,
As ending Anthem of my endless dolor.
Cease to lament for that thou can not help,
And study help for that which thou lament,
Time is the Nurse, and breeder of all good;
Here, if thou stay, thou can not see thy love:
Besides, thy staying will abridge thy life:
Hope is a lovers staff, walk hence with that
And manage it, against despairing thoughts:
Thy letters may be here, though thou art hence,
Which, being writ to me, shall be delivered
Even in the milke-white bosom of thy Love.
The time now serves not to expostulate,
Come, Isle convey thee through the City-gate.
And ere I part with thee, confer at large
Of all that may concern thy Loue-affaires:
As thou love Siluia (though not for thy self)
Regard thy danger, and along with me.
I pray thee Lance, and if thou see my Boy
Bid him make haste, and meet me at the North-gate.
Go sirha, find him out: Come Ʋalentine.
Oh my dear Siluia; haplesse Valentine.
I am but a fool, look you, and yet I have the wit to think my Master is a kind of a knave: but that's all one, if he be but one knave: He lives not now that knows me to be in love, yet I am in love, but a Teem of horse shall not pluck that from me: nor who it is I love: and yet it is a woman; but what woman, I will not tell my self: and yet it is a Milke-maid: yet it is not a maid: for she hath had Gossips: yet it is a maid, for she is her Masters maid, and serves for wages. She hath more qualities then a Water-Spaniell, which is much in a bare Christian: Here is the Catalogue of her Condition. Inprimis. She can fetch and carry: why a horse can doe no more; nay, a horse cannot fetch, but only carry, therefore is she better then a Jade. Item. She can milk, look you, a sweet virtue in a maid with clean hands.
How now Signior Lance? what news with your Mastership?
With my Mastership? why, it is at Sea:
Well, your old vice still: mistake the word: what news then in your paper?
The black'st news that ever thou heard.
Why man? how black?
Why, as black as Ink.
Let me read them?
Fie on thee Iolt-head, thou can not read.
Thou lie: I can.
I will try thee: tell me this: who begot thee?
Marry, the son of my Grand-father.
Oh illiterate loiterer▪ it was the son of thy Grand-mother: this proves that thou can not read.
Come fool, come: try me in thy paper.
There: and S. Nicholas be thy speed.
Inprimis she can milk.
I that she can.
Item, she brews good Ale.
And thereof comes the proverb: (Blessing of your heart, you brew good Ale.)
Item, she can sow.
That's as much as to say (Can she so?)
Item she can knit.
What need a man care for a stock with a wench,
When she can knit him a stock?
Item, she can wash and scour.
A special virtue: for then she need not be washed, and scoured.
Item, she can spin.
Then may I set the world on wheels, when she can spin for her living.
Item, she hath many nameless virtues.
That's as much as to say Bastard virtues: that indeed know not their fathers; and therefore have no names.
Here follow her vices.
Close at the heals of her virtues.
Item, she is not to be fasting in respect of her breath.
Well: that fault may be mended with a break∣fast: read on.
Item, she hath a sweet mouth.
That makes amends for her sour breath.
Item, she doth talk in her sleep.
It's no matter for that; so she sleep not in her talk.
Item, she is slow in words.
Oh villain, that set this down among her vices;
To be slow in words, is a women's only virtue:
I pray thee out with it, and place it for her chief virtue.
Item, she is proud.
Out with that too:
It was Eves legacy, and cannot be t'ane from her.
Item, she hath no teeth.
I care not for that neither: because I love crusts.
Item, she is cursed.
Well: the best is, she hath no teeth to bite.
Item, she will often praise her liquor.
If her liquor be good, she shall: if she will not,
I will; for good things should be praised.
Item, she is too liberal.
Of her tongue she cannot; for that's writ down she is slow of: of her purse, she shall not, for that isle keep shut: Now, of another thing she may, and that cannot I help. Well, proceed.
Item, she hath more hair then wit, and more faults then hairs, and more wealth then faults.
Stop there: Isle have her: she was mine, and not mine, twice or thrice in that last Article: rehearse that once more.
Item, she hath more hair then wit.
More hair then wit: it may be isle prove it: The cover of the salt, hides the salt, and therefore it is more then the salt; the hair that covers the wit, is more then the wit; for the greater hides the less: What's next?
And more faults then hairs.
That's monstrous: oh that that were out.
And more wealth then faults.
Why that word makes the faults gracious:
Well, isle have her: and if it be a match, as nothing is impossible.
What then?
Why then, will I tell thee, that thy Master stays for thee at the North gate.
For me?
For thee? I, who art thou? he hath staid for a bet∣la man then thee.
And must I go to him?
Thou must run to him; for thou hast staid so long, that going will scarce serve the turn.
Why did not tell me sooner? pox of your love Letters.
Now will he be swinged for reading my Letter; An unmannerly slave, that will thrust himself into se∣crets: Isle after, to rejoice in the boys correctiō.
Sir Thurio, fear not, but that she will love you
Now Valentine is banished from her sight.
Since his exile she hath despised me most,
Forsworn my company, and railed at me,
That I am desperate of obtaining her.
This weak impress of Love, is as a figure
Trenched in ice, which with an hours hear
Dissolves to water, and doth loose his form.
A little time will melt her frozen thoughts,
And worthless Valentine shall be forgot.
How now sir Protheus, is your countryman
(According to our Proclamation) gon?
Gon, my good Lord.
My daughter takes his going grievously?
A little time (my Lord) will kill that grief.
So I believe: but Thurio thinks not so:
Protheus, the good conceit I hold of thee,
(For thou hast shown some sign of good desert)
Makes me the better to confer with thee.
Longer then I prove loyal to your Grace,
Let me not live, to look upon your Grace.
Thou know how willingly, I would effect
The match between sir Thurio, and my daughter?
I doe my Lord.
And also, I think, thou art not ignorant
How she opposes her against my will?
She did my Lord, when Ʋalentine was here.
I, and peruersly, she perseveres so:
What might we doe to make the girl forget
The love of Valentine, and love sir Thurio?
The best way is, to slander Ʋalentine,
With falsehood, cowardice, and poor descent:
Three things, that women highly hold in hate.
I, but she'll think, that it is spoke in hate.
I, if his enemy deliver it.
Therefore it must with circumstance be spoken
By one, whom she esteems as his friend.
Then you must undertake to slander him.
And that (my Lord) I shall be loath to doe:
It is an ill office for a Gentleman,
Especially against his very friend.
Where your good word cannot advantage him,
Your slander never can damage him;
Therefore the office is indifferent,
Being entreated to it by your friend.
You have prevailed (my Lord) if I can doe it
By ought that I can speak in his dispraise,
She shall not long continue love to him:
But say this weed her love from Valentine,
It follows not that she will love sir Thurio.
Therefore, as you unwind her love from him;
Least it should rauell, and be good to none,
You must provide to bottom it on me:
Which must be done, by praising me as much
As you, in worth dispraise, sir Ʋalentine.
And Protheus, we dare trust you in this kind,
Because we know (on Valentines report)
You are already loves firm votary,
And cannot soon revolt, and change your mind.
Upon this warrant, shall you have access,
Where you, with Siluia, may confer at large.
For she is lumpish, heavy, melancholy,
And (for your friends sake) will be glad of you;
Where you may temper her, by your persuasion,
To hate young Ʋalentine, and love my friend.
As much as I can doe, I will effect:
But you sir Thurio, are not sharpe enough:
You must lay Lime, to tangle her desires
By walefull Sonnets, whose composed Rimes
Should be full fraught with serviceable vows.
I, much is the force of heauen-bred Poesy.
Say that upon the altar of her beauty
You sacrifice your tears, your sighs, your heart:
Write till your ink be dry▪ and with your tears
Moist it again: and frame some feeling line,
That may discover such integrity:
For Orpheus Lute, was strung with Poets sinews,
Whose golden touch could soften steel and stones;
Make Tigers tame, and huge Leuiathans
Forsake vnsounded deeps, to dance on Sands.
After your dire-lamenting Elegies,
Visit by night your Ladies chamber-window
With some sweet Consort; To their Instruments
Tune a deploring dump: the nights dead silence
Will well become such sweet complaining grievance:
This, or else nothing, will inherit her.
This discipline, shows thou hast bin in love.
And thy advice, this night, isle put in practise:
Therefore, sweet Protheus, my direction-giuer,
Let vs into the City presently
To sort some Gentlemen, well skil'd in Music.
I have a Sonnet, that will serve the turn
To give the on-set to thy good advise.
About it Gentlemen.
We'll wait upon your Grace, till after Supper,
And afterword determine our proceedings.
Even now about it, I will pardon you.
Fellows, stand fast: I see a passenger.
If there be ten, shrink not, but down with 'em.
Stand sir, and throw vs that you have about 'ye.
If not: we'll make you sit, and rifle you.
Sir we are undone; these are the Villains
That all the Travellers doe fear so much.
My friends.
That's not so, sir: we are your enemies.
Peace: we'll hear him.
I by my beard will we: for he is a proper man.
Then know that I have little wealth to loose;
A man I am, crossed with adversity:
My riches, are these poor habiliments,
Of which, if you should here disfurnish me,
You take the sum and substance that I have.
Whether travel you?
To Verona.
Whence came you?
From Millaine.
Have you long sojourned there?
Some sixteen months, and longer might have staid,
If crooked fortune had not thwarted me.
What, were you banished thence?
I was.
For what offence?
For that which now torments me to rehearse;
I killed a man, whose death I much repent,
But yet I slew him manfully, in fight,
Without false vantage, or base treachery.
Why ne'er repent it, if it were done so;
But were you banished for so small a fault?
I was, and held me glad of such a doom.
Have you the Tongues?
My youthful travail, therein made me happy,
Or else I often had been often miserable.
By the bare scalp of Robin Hoods fat Fryer,
This fellow were a King, for our wilde faction.
We'll have him: Sirs, a word.
Master, be one of them:
It's an honourable kind of thievery.
Peace villain.
Tell vs this: have you any thing to take to?
Nothing but my fortune.
Know then, that some of vs are Gentlemen,
Such as the fury of ungoverned youth
Thrust from the company of awful men.
My self was from Verona banished,
For practising to steal away a Lady,
And heir and Niece, alide unto the Duke.
And I from Mantua, for a Gentleman,
Who, in my mood, I stabbed unto the heart.
And I, for such like petty crimes as these.
But to the purpose: for we cite our faults,
That they may hold excused our lawless lives;
And partly seeing you are beautified
With goodly shape; and by your own report,
A Linguist, and a man of such perfection,
As we doe in our quality much want.
Indeed because you are a banished man,
Therefore, aboue the rest, we parley to you:
Are you content to be our General?
To make a virtue of necessity,
And live as we doe in this wilderness?
What say thou? wilt thou be of our consort?
Say I, and be the captain of vs all:
We'll doe thee homage, and be ruled by thee,
Love thee, as our Commander, and our King.
But if thou scorn our courtesy, thou die.
Thou shalt not live, to brag what we have of∣fer'd.
I take your offer, and will live with you,
Provided that you do no outrages
On silly women, or poor passengers.
No, we detest such vile base practises.
Come, go with vs, we'll bring thee to our Crews,
And show thee all the Treasure we have got;
Which, with our selves, all rest at thy dispose.
Already have I bin false to Valentine,
And now I must be as unjust to Thurio,
Under the colour of commending him,
I have access my own love to prefer.
But Siluia is too fair, too true, too holy,
To be corrupted with my worthless gifts;
When I protest true loyalty to her,
She twits me with my falsehood to my friend;
When to her beauty I commend my vows,
She bids me think how I have bin forsworn
In breaking faith with Iulia, whom I loved;
And notwithstanding all her sudden quips,
The least whereof would quell a lovers hope:
Yet (Spaniel-like) the more she spurns my love,
The more it grows, and fawns on her still;
But here comes Thurio; now must we to her window,
And give some evening Musique to her ear.
How now, sir Protheus, are you crept before vs?
I gentle Thurio, for you know that love
Will creep in service, where it cannot go.
I, but I hope, Sir, that you love not here.
Sir, but I doe: or else I would be hence.
Who, Siluia?
I, Siluia, for your sake.
I thank you for your own: Now Gentlemen
Let's tune: and too it lustily a while.
Now, my young guest; me thinks your' allyeholly;
I pray you why is it?
Marry (mine Host) because I cannot be merry.
Come, we'll have you merry: isle bring you where you shall hear Musique, and see the Gentleman that you asked for.
But shall I hear him speak.
I that you shall.
That will be Musique.
Hark, hark.
Is he among these?
I: but peace, let's heare'm.
Who is Siluia? what is she?
That all our Swains commend her?
Holy, fair, and wise is she,
The heaven such grace did lend her, that she might admired be.
Is she kind as she is fair?
For beauty lives with kindness:
Love doth to her eyes repair,
To help him of his blindness:
And being helped, inhabits there.
Then to Siluia, let vs sing,
That Siluia is excelling;
She excels each mortal thing
Upon the dull earth dwelling.
To her let vs Garlands bring.
How now? are you sadder then you were before;
How doe you, man? the Music likes you not.
You mistake: the Musician likes me not.
Why, my pretty youth?
He plays false (father.)
How, out of tune on the strings.
Not so: but yet
So false that he grieves my very heart-strings.
You have a quick ear.
I, I would I were deaf: it makes me have a slow heart.
I perceive you delight not in Musique.
Not a whit, when it iars so.
Hark, what fine change is in the Musique.
I: that change is the spite.
You would have them always play but one thing.
I would always have one play but one thing.
But Host, doth this Sir Protheus, that we talk on,
Often resort unto this Gentlewoman?
I tell you what Lance his man told me,
He loved her out of all nick.
Where is Lance?
Gone to seek his dog, which to morrow, by his Masters command, hee must carry for a present to his Lady.
Peace, stand aside, the company parts.
Sir Thurio, fear not you, I will so plead,
That you shall say, my cunning drift excels.
Where meet we?
At Saint Gregories well.
Farewell.
Madam: good even to your Ladyship.
I thank you for your Musique (Gentlemen)
Who is that that spake?
One (Lady) if you knew his pure hearts truth,
You would quickly learn to know him by his voice.
Sir Protheus, as I take it.
Sir Protheus (gentle Lady) and your Servant.
What's your will?
That I may compass yours.
You have your wish: my will is even this,
That presently you hie you home to bed:
Thou subtle, perjured, false, disloyal man:
Think thou I am so shallow, so conceitless,
To be seduced by thy flattery,
That has't deceived so many with thy vows▪
Return, return and make thy love amends:
For me (by this pale queen of night I swear)
I am so far from granting thy request,
That I despise thee, for thy wrongful suite;
And by and by intend to chide my self,
Even for this time I spend in talking to thee.
I grant (sweet love) that I did love a Lady,
But she is dead.
It were false, if I should speak it;
For I am sure she is not buried.
Say that she be: yet Valentine thy friend
Survives; to whom (thy self art witness)
I am betrothed; and art thou not ashamed
To wrong him, with thy importunacy?
I likewise hear that Valentine is dead.
And so suppose am I; for in her grave
Assure thy self, my love is buried.
Sweet Lady, let me take it from the earth.
Go to thy Ladies grave and call hers thence,
Or at the least, in hers, sepulchre thine.
He heard not that.
Madam: if your heart be so obdurate:
Vouchsafe me yet your Picture for my love,
The Picture that is hanging in your chamber:
To that isle speak, to that isle sigh and weep:
For since the substance of your perfect self
Is else devoted, I am but a shadow;
And to your shadow, will I make true love.
If it were a substance you would sure deceive it,
And make it but a shadow, as I am.
I am very loath to be your Idol Sir;
But, since your falsehood shall become you well
To worship shadows, and adore false shapes,
Send to me in the morning, and isle send it:
And so, good rest.
As wretches have ore-night
That wait for execution in the morn.
Host, will you go?
By my hallidome, I was fast asleep.
Pray you, where lies Sir Protheus?
Marry, at my house:
Trust me, I think it is almost day.
Not so: but it hath bin the longest night
That ere I watched, and the most heaviest.
This is the hour that Madam Siluia
Entreated me to call, and know her mind:
Ther's some great matter she'd employ me in.
Madam, Madam.
Who calls?
Your servant, and your friend;
One that attends your Ladyships command.
Sir Eglamore, a thousand times good morrow.
As many (worthy Lady) to your self:
According to your Ladyships impose,
I am thus early come, to know what service
It is your pleasure to command me in.
Oh Eglamoure, thou art a Gentleman:
Think not I flatter (for I swear I doe not)
Valiant, wise, remorse-full, well accomplished.
Thou art not ignorant what dear good will
I bear unto the banished Ʋalentine:
Nor how my father would enforce me marry
Vain Thurio (whom my very soul abhorred.)
Thy self hast loved, and I have heard thee say
No grief did ever come so near thy heart,
As when thy Lady, and thy true-loue did,
Upon whose Grave thou vow'dst pure chastity:
Sir Eglamoure: I would to Valentine
To Mantua, where I hear, he makes abode;
And for the ways are dangerous to pass,
I doe desire thy worthy company,
Upon whose faith and honour, I repose.
Urge not my fathers anger (Eglamoure)
But think upon my grief (a Ladies grief)
And on the justice of my flying hence,
To keep me from a most unholy match,
Which heaven and fortune still rewards with plagues.
I doe desire thee, even from a heart
As full of sorrows, as the Sea of sands,
To bear me company, and go with me:
If not, to hide what I have said to thee,
That I may venture to depart alone.
Madam, I pity much your grievances,
Which, since I know they virtuously are placed,
I give consent to go along with you,
Wreaking as little what betides me,
As much, I wish all good befortune you.
When will you go?
This evening coming.
Where shall I meet you?
At Friar Patrickes Cell,
Where I intend holy Confession.
I will not fail your Ladyship:
Good morrow (gentle Lady.)
Good morrow, kind Sir Eglamoure.
When a mans servant shall play the Cur with him (look you) it goes hard: one that I brought up of a puppy: one that I saved from drowning, when three or four of his blind brothers and sisters went to it: I have taught him (even as one would say precisely, thus I would teach a dog) I was sent to deliver him, as a pre∣sent to Mistress Siluia, from my Master; and I came no sooner into the dining chamber, but he steps me to her Trencher, and steals her Capons-leg: O, it is a foul thing, when a Cur cannot keep himself in all comp∣niece: I would have (as one should say) one that takes up∣on him to be a dog indeed, to be, as it were, a dog at all things. If I had not had more wit then he, to take a fault upon me that he did, I think verily hee had bin hanged for it: sure as I live he had suffered for it: you shall judge: Hee thrusts me himself into the company of three or four gentleman-like-dogs, under the Dukes table: hee had not bin there (bless the mark) a pissing while, but all the chamber smelt him: out with the dog (says one) what cur is that (says another) whip him out (says the third) hang him up (says the Duke.) I having bin ac∣quainted with the smell before, knew it was Crab; and goes me to the fellow that whips the dogs: friend (quoth I) you mean to whip the dog: I marry doe I (quoth he) you doe him the more wrong (quoth I) it was I did the thing you wot of: he makes me no more ado, but whips me out of the chamber: how many Masters would doe this for his Servant? nay, isle be sworn I have sat in the stocks, for puddings he hath stolen, otherwise he had bin executed: I have stood on the Pillory for Geese he hath killed, otherwise he had suffered for it: thou think not of this now: nay, I remember the trick you served me, when I took my leave of Madam Siluia: did
not I bid thee still mark me, and doe as I doe, when did thou see me heave up my leg, and make water against a Gentlewoman's farthingale? did thou ever see me doe such a trick?
Sebastian is thy name: I like thee well,
And will employ thee in some service presently.
In what you please, isle doe what I can.
I hope thou wilt.
How now you whoreson peasant,
Where have you bin these two days loitering?
Marry Sir, I carried Mistress Siluia the dog you bad me.
And what says she to my little Jewel?
Marry she says your dog was a cur, and tells you currish thanks is good enough for such a present.
But she received my dog?
No indeed did she not:
Here have I brought him back again.
What, did thou offer her this from me?
I Sir, the other Squirrel was stolen from me
By the Hangmans boys in the market place,
And then I offered her mine own, who is a dog
As big as ten of yours, &amp; therefore the gift the greater.
Go, get thee hence, and find my dog again,
Or ne'er return again into my sight.
Away, I say: stayest thou to vex me here;
A Slave, that still an end, turns me to shame:
Sebastian, I have entertained thee,
Partly that I have need of such a youth,
That can with some discretion doe my business:
For it is no trusting to yond foolish Lowt;
But chiefly, for thy face, and thy behaviour,
Which (if my Augury deceive me not)
Witness good bringing up, fortune, and truth:
Therefore know thee, for this I entertain thee.
Go presently, and take this Ring with thee,
Deliver it to Madam Siluia;
She loved me well, delivered it to me.
It seems you loved not her, not leave her token:
She is dead belike?
Not so: I think she lives.
Alas.
Why dost thou cry alas?
I cannot choose but pity her.
Wherefore should thou pity her?
Because, me thinks that she loved you as well
As you doe love your Lady Siluia:
She dreams on him, that has forgot her love,
You dote on her, that cares not for your love.
It is pity Love, should be so contrary:
And thinking on it, makes me cry alas.
Well: give her that Ring, and therewithal
This Letter: that's her chamber: Tell my Lady,
I claim the promise for her heavenly Picture:
Your message done, hye home unto my chamber,
Where thou shalt find me sad, and solitary.
How many women would doe such a message?
Alas poor Protheus, thou hast entertained
A Fox, to be the Shepherd of thy Lambs;
Alas, poor fool, why doe I pity him
That with his very heart despises me?
Because he loves her, he despises me,
Because I love him, I must pity him.
This Ring I gave him, when he parted from me,
To bind him to remember my good will:
And now am I (unhappy Messenger)
To plead for that, which I would not obtain;
To carry that, which I would have refused;
To praise his faith, which I would have dispraised.
I am my Masters true confirmed Love,
But cannot be true servant to my Master,
Unless I prove false traitor to my self.
Yet will I woe for him but yet so coldly,
As (heaven it knows) I would not have him speed.
Gentlewoman, good day: I pray you be my mean
To bring me where to speak with Madam Siluia.
What would you with her, if that I be she?
If you be she, I doe entreat your patience
To hear me speak the message I am sent on.
From whom?
From my Master, Sir Protheus, Madam.
Oh: he sends you for a Picture?
I, Madam.
Vrsula, bring my Picture there,
Go, give your Master this: tell him from me,
One Iulia, that his changing thoughts forget
Would better fit his Chamber, then this Shadow.
Madam, please you peruse this Letter;
Pardon me (Madam) I have unadvised
Delivered you a paper that I should not;
This is the Letter to your Ladyship.
I pray thee let me look on that again.
It may not be: good Madam pardon me.
There, hold:
I will not look upon your Masters lines:
I know they are stuffed with protestations,
And full of new-found oaths, which he will break
As easily as I doe tear his paper.
Madam, he sends your Ladyship this Ring.
The more shame for him, that he sends it me;
For I have heard him say a thousand times,
His Iulia gave it him, at his departure:
Though his false finger have profaned the Ring,
Mine shall not doe his Iulia so much wrong.
She thanks you.
What sai'st thou?
I thank you Madam, that you tender her:
Poor Gentlewoman, my Master wrongs her much.
Dost thou know her?
Almost as well as I doe know my self.
To think upon her woes, I doe protest
That I have wept a hundred several times.
Belike she thinks that Protheus hath forsook her?
I think she doth: and that's her cause of sorrow▪
Is she not passing fair?
She hath bin fairer (Madam) then she is,
When she did think my Master loved her well;
She, in my judgment, was as fair as you.
But since she did neglect her looking-glasse,
And threw her Sun-expelling Masque away,
The ayre hath starved the roses in her cheeks,
And pinched the lilly-tincture of her face,
That now she is become as black as I.
How tall was she?
About my stature: for at Pentecost,
When all our Pageants of delight were plaid,
Our youth got me to play the women's part,
And I was trimmed in Madam Iulius gown,
Which served me as fit, by all men's judgements,
As if the garment had bin made for me:
Therefore I know she is about my height,
And at that time I made her weep a good.
For I did play a lamentable part.
(Madam) it was Ariadne, passioning
For Thesus perjury, and unjust flight;
Which I so lively acted with my tears:
That my poor Mistress moved therewithal,
Wept bitterly: and would I might be dead,
If I in thought felt not her very sorrow.
She is beholding to thee (gentle youth)
Alas (poor Lady) desolate, and left;
I weep my self to think upon thy words:
Here youth: there is my purse; I give thee this
For thy sweet Mistress sake, because thou love her. Fare∣well.
And she shall thank you for it, if ere you know her.
A virtuous gentlewoman, mild, and beautiful.
I hope my Masters suit will be but cold,
Since she respects my Mistress love so much.
Alas, how love can trisle with it self:
Here is her Picture: let me see, I think
If I had such a Tyre, this face of mine
Were full as lovely, as is this of hers;
And yet the Painter flattered her a little,
Unless I flatter with my self too much.
Her hair is Aburne, mine is perfect Yellow;
If that be all the difference in his love,
Isle get me such a coloured Periwig:
Her eyes are grey as glass, and so are mine:
I, but her fore-head's low, and mine's as high:
What should it be that he respects in her,
But I can make respective in my self?
If this fond Love, were not a blinded god.
Come shadow, come, and take this shadow up,
For it is thy rival: O thou senseless form.
Thou shalt be worshipped, kissed, loved, and adored;
And were there sense in his Idolatry,
My substance should be statue in thy stead.
Isle use thee kindly, for thy Mistress sake
That used me so: or else by Jove, I vow,
I should have scratched out your vnseeing eyes,
To make my Master out of love with thee.
The Sun begins to guild the western sky,
And now it is about the very hour
That Siluia, at Fryer Patricks Cell should meet me,
She will not fail; for Lovers break not hours,
Unless it be to come before their time,
So much they spur their expedition.
See where she comes: Lady a happy evening.
Amen, Amen: go on (good Eglamoure)
Out at the Postern by the Abbey wall;
I fear I am attended by some Spies.
Fear not: the Forest is not three leagues off,
If we recover that, we are sure enough.
Sir Protheus, what says Siluia to my suit?
Oh Sir, I find her milder then she was,
And yet she takes exceptions at your person.
What? that my leg is too long?
No, that it is too little.
Isle wear a Boot, to make it somewhat ron∣der.
But love will not be spurt to what it loath•.
What says she to my face?
She says it is a fair one.
Nay then the wanton lies: my face is black.
But Pearls are fair; and the old saying is,
Black men are Pearls, in beauteous Ladies eyes.
It is true, such Pearls as put out Ladies eyes,
For I had rather wink, then look on them.
How likes she my discourse?
Ill, when you talk of war.
But well, when I discourse of love and peace.
But better indeed, when you hold you peace.
What says she to my valour?
Oh Sir, she makes no doubt of that.
She needs not, when she knows it cowardice.
What says she to my birth?
That you are well derived.
True: from a Gentleman, to a fool.
Considers she my Possessions?
Oh, I: and pities them.
Wherefore?
That such an Ass should owe them.
That they are out by Lease.
Here comes the Duke.
How now sir Protheus; how now Thurio?
Which of you saw Eglamoure of late?
Not I.
Nor I.
Saw you my daughter?
Neither.
Why then
She's fled unto that peasant, Valentine;
And Eglamoure is in her Company:
It is true: for Friar Laurence met them both
As he, in penance wandered through the Forest:
Him he knew well: and guest that it was she,
But being masked, he was not sure of it.
Besides she did intend Confession
At Patricks Cell this even, and there she was not.
These likelihoods confirm her flight from hence;
Therefore I pray you stand, not to discourse,
But mount you presently, and meet with me
Upon the rising of the Mountain foot
That leads toward Mantua, whether they are fled:
Dispatch (sweet Gentlemen) and follow me.
Why this it is, to be a peevish Girl,
That flies her fortune when it follows her:
Isle after; more to be revenged on Eglamoure,
Then for the love of reck-lesse Siluia.
And I will follow, more for Selves love
Then hate of Eglamoure that goes with her.
And I will follow, more to cross that love
Then hate for Siluia, that is gone for love.
Come, come be patient:
We must bring you to our Captain.
A thousand more mischances then this one
Have learned me how to brooke this patiently.
Come, bring her away.
Where is the Gentleman that was with her?
Being nimble footed, he hath out▪ run vs.
But Moyses and Valerius follow him:
Go thou with her to the West end of the wood,
There is our Captain: We'll follow him that's fled,
The Thicket is beset, he cannot scope.
Come, I must bring you to our Captains cave.
Fear not: he bears an honourable mind,
And will not use a woman lawlessly.
O Valentine: this I endure for thee.
How use doth breed a habit in a man?
This shadowy desert, unfrequented woods
I better brooke then flourishing peopled Towns:
Here can I sit alone, vn-seene of any,
And to the Nightingales complaining Notes
Tune my distrestes, and record my woes.
O thou that dost inhabit in my breast,
Leave not the Mansion so long Tenant-lesse,
Lest growing ruinous, the building fall,
And leave no memory of what it was,
Repair me, with thy presence, Siluia:
Thou gentle Nymph, cherish thy forlorn swain.
What hallowing, and what stir is this to day?
These are my mates, that make their wills their Law,
Have some unhappy passenger in chase;
They love me well: yet I have much to doe
To keep them from uncivil outrages.
Withdraw thee Valentine: who's this comes here?
Madam, this service I have done for you
(Though you respect not aught your servant doth)
To hazard life, and reskew you from him,
That would have forced your honour, and your love,
Vouchsafe me for my meed, but one fair look:
(A smaller boon then this I cannot beg,
And less then this, I am sure you cannot give.)
How like a dream is this? I see, and hear:
Love, lend me patience to forbear a while.
O miserable, unhappy that I am.
Unhappy were you (Madam) ere I came:
But by my coming, I have made you happy.
By thy approach thou make me most unhappy.
And me, when he approaches to your presence
Had I been ceased by a hungry Lion,
I would have been a break-fast to the Beast,
Rather then have false Protheus reskue me:
Oh heaven be judge how I love Valentine,
Whose life's as tender to me as my soul,
And full as much (for more there cannot be)
I doe detest false perjured Protheus:
Therefore be gone, solicit me no more.
What dangerous action, stood it next to death
Would I not undergo, for one calm look:
Oh it is the curse in Love, and still approved
When women cannot love, where they're beloved.
When Protheus cannot love, where he's beloved:
Read over Iulia's heart, (thy first best Love)
For whose dear sake, thou did then rend thy faith
Into a thousand oaths; and all those oaths,
Descended into perjury, to love me,
Thou hast no faith left now, unless you would two,
And that's far worse then none: better have none
Then plural faith, which is too much by one:
Thou Counterfeit, to thy true friend.
In Love,
Who respects friend?
All men but Protheus.
Nay, if the gentle spirit of moving words
Can no way change you to a milder form;
Isle woo you like a Soldier, at arms end,
And love you against the nature of Love: force ye.
Oh heaven.
Isle force thee yield to my desire.
Ruffian: let go that rude uncivil touch,
Thou friend of an ill fashion.
Ʋalentine.
Thou cōmon friend, that's without faith or love,
For such is a friend now: treacherous man,
Thou hast beguiled my hopes; nought but mine eye
Could have persuaded me: now I dare not say
I have one friend alive; thou would disprove me:
Who should be trusted, when ones right hand
Is perjured to the bosom? Protheus
I am sorry I must never trust thee more,
But count the world a stranger for thy sake:
The private wound is deepest: oh time, most accursed:
Amongst all foes that a friend should be the worst?
My shame and guilt confounds me:
Forgive me Valentine: if hearty sorrow
Be a sufficient Ransom for offence,
I tender't here: I doe as truly suffer,
As ere I did commit.
Then I am paid:
And once again, I doe receive thee honest;
Who by Repentance is not satisfied,
Is nor of heaven, nor earth; for these are pleased:
By Penitence the Eternalls wrath's appeased:
And that my love may appear plain and free,
All that was mine, in Siluia, I give thee.
Oh me unhappy.
Look to the Boy.
Why, Boy?
Why wag: how now? what's the matter? look up: speak.
O good sir, my master charged me to deliver a ring to Madam Siluia: wc (out of my neglect) was never done.
Where is that ring? boy?
Here it is▪ this is it.
How? let me see.
Why this is the ring I gave to Iulia.
Oh, cry you mercy sir, I have mistook:
This is the ring you sent to Siluia.
But how came thou by this ring? at my depart
I gave this unto Iulia.
And Iulia her self did give it me,
And Iulia her self hath brought it hither.
How? Iulia?
Behold her, that gave aim to all thy oaths,
And entertained 'em deeply in her heart.
How oft hast thou with perjury cleft the root?
Oh Protheus, let this habit make thee blush.
Be thou ashamed that I have took upon me,
Such an immodest raiment; if shame live
In a disguise of love?
It is the lesser blot modesty finds,
Women to change their shapes, then men their minds.
Then men their minds? tic true: oh heaven, were man
But Constant, he were perfect; that one error
Fills him with faults: makes him run through all the sins;
Inconstancy falls-off, ere it begins:
What is in Siluia's face, but I may spy
More fresh in Iulia's, with a constant eye?
Come, come: a hand from either:
Let me be blessed to make this happy close:
It were pity two such friends should be long foes.
Bear witness (heaven) I have my wish for ever.
And I mine.
A prize: a prize: a prize.
Forbear, forbear I say: It is my Lord the Duke.
Your Grace is welcome to a man disgraced,
Banished Valentine.
Sir Valentine?
Yonder is Siluia: and Siluia's mine.
Thurio give back; or else embrace thy death:
Come not within the measure of my wrath:
Doe not name Siluia thine: if once again,
Ʋerona shall not hold thee: here she stands,
Take but possession of her, with a Touch:
I dare thee, but to breath upon my Love.
Sir Valentine, I care not for her, I:
I hold him but a fool that will endanger
His Body, for a Girl that loves him not:
I claim her not, and therefore she is thine.
The more degenerate and base art thou
To make such means for her, as thou hast done,
And leave her on such slight conditions.
Now, by the honour of my Ancestry,
I doe applaud thy spirit, Valentine,
And think thee worthy of an Empress love:
Know then, I here forget all former griefs,
Cancel all grudge, repeal thee home again,
Plead a new state in thy vn-riual'd merit,
To which I thus subscribe: Sir Ʋalentine,
Thou art a Gentleman, and well derived,
Take thou thy Siluia, for thou hast deserved her.
I thank your Grace, ye gift hath made me happy:
I now beseech you (for your daughters sake)
To grant one Boon that I shall ask of you.
I grant it (for thine own) what ere it be.
These banished men, that I have kept withal,
Are men endued with worthy qualities:
Forgive them what they have committed here,
And let them be recalled from their Exile:
They are reformed, civil, full of good,
And fit for great employment (worthy Lord.)
Thou hast prevailed, I pardon them and thee:
Dispose of them, as thou know their deserts.
Come, let vs go, we will include all jars,
With Triumphs, Mirth, and rare solemnity.
And as we walk along, I dare be bold
With our discourse, to make your Grace to smile.
What think you of this Page (my Lord?)
I think the Boy hath grace in him, he blushes.
I warrant you (my Lord) more grace, then Boy.
What mean you by that saying?
Please you, Isle tell you, as we pass along,
That you will wonder what hath fortunate:
Come Protheus, it is your penance, but to hear
The story of your Loves discovered.
That done, our day of marriage shall be yours,
One Feast, one house, one mutual happiness.

I Come no more to make you laugh, Things now,
That bear a Weighty, and a Serious Brow,
Sad, high, and working, full of State and Woe:
Such Noble Scoenes, as draw the Eye to flow
We now present. Those that can Pity, here
May (if they think it well) let fall a Tear,
The Subject will deserve it. Such as give
Their Money out of hope they may believe,
May here find Truth too. Those that come to see
Only a show or two, and so agree,
The Play may pass: If they be still, and willing,
Isle undertake may see away their shilling
Richly in two short hours. Only they
That come to hear a Merry, Bawdy Play,
A noise of Targets: Or to see a Fellow
In a long Motley Coat, guarded with Yellow,
Will be deceived. For gentle Hearers, know
To rank our chosen Truth with such a show
As Fool, and Fight is, beside forfe•ting
Our own Brains, and the Opinion that we bring
To make that only true, we now intend,
Will leave vs never an understanding Friend.
Therefore, for Goodness sake, and as you are known
The First and Happiest Hearers of the Town,
Be sad, as we would make ye. Th•nkeye see
The very Persons of our Noble Story,
As they were Living: Think you see them Great,
And followed with the general throng, and sweat
Of thousand Friends: Then, in a moment, see
How soon this Mightiness, meets Misery:
And if you can be merry then, Isle say,
A Man may weep upon his Wedding day.
GOod morrow, and well met. How have ye done
Since last we saw in France?
I thank your Grace:
Healthful, and ever since a fresh Admirer
Of what I saw there.
An untimely Ague
Staid me a Prisoner in my Chamber, when
Those Suns of Glory, those two Lights of Men
Met in the vale of Andren.
Twixt Guineas and Arde,
I was then present, saw them salute on Horseback,
Beheld them when they lighted, how they clung
In their Embrace, as they grew together,
Which had they▪
What four Throned ones could have weighed
Such a compounded one?
All the whole time
I was my Chambers Prisoner.
Then you lost
The view of earthly glory: Men might say
Till this time Pomp was single, but now married
To one aboue it self. Each following day
Became the next days master, till the last
Made former Wonders, it's. To day the French,
All Clinquant all in Gold, like Heathen Gods
Shone down the English; and to morrow, they
Made Britain, India: Every man that stood,
Show•d like a Mine▪ Their Dwarfish Pages were
As Cherubins, all gilt: the Madams too,
Not used to toil, did almost sweat to bear
The Pride upon them, that their very labour
Was to them, as a Painting. Now this Mask
Was cried incompareable; and the ensuing night
Made it a Fool, and Beggar. The two Kings
Equal in lustre, were now best, now worst
As presence did present them: Him in eye,
Still him in praise, and being present both,
It was said they saw but one, and no Discerner
Durst wag his Tongue in censure, when these Suns
(For so they phrase 'em) by their Heralds challenged
The Noble Spirits to Arms, they did perform
Beyond thoughts Compass, that former fabulous Story
Being now seen, possible enough, got credit
That Beuis was believed.
Oh you go far.
As I belong to worship, and affect
In Honour, Honesty, the tract of every thing,
Would by a good Discourser loose some life,
Which Actions self, was tongue too.
All was Royal,
To the disposing of it nought rebelled,
Order gave each thing view. The Office did
Distinctly his full Function: who did guide,
I mean who set the Body, and the Limbs
Of this great Sport together?
As you guess:
One certes, that promises no Element
In such a business.
I pray you who, my Lord?
All this was ordered by the good Discretion
Of the right Reverend Cardinal of York.
The devil speed him: No mans Pie is freed
From his Ambitious finger. What had he
To do in these fierce Vanities? I wonder,
That such a Keech can with his very bulk
Take up the Rays of the beneficial Sun,
And keep it from the Earth.
Surely Sir,
There's in him stuff, that putt's him to these ends:
For being not propped by Ancestry, whose grace
Chalks Successors their way; nor called upon
For high feats done to the Crown; neither Allied
To eminent Assistants; but Spider-like
Out of his Selfe-drawing Web. O gives vs note,
The force of his own merit makes his way
A gift that heaven gives for him, which buys
A place next to the King.
I cannot tell
What Heaven hath given him: let some Graver eye
Pierce into that, but I can see his Pride
Peep through each part of him: whence he's he that,
If not from Hell? The Devil is a Niggard,
Or he's given all before, and he begins
A new Hell in himself.
Why the Devil,
Upon this French going out, took he upon him
(Without the privity of the King) t'appoint
Who should attend on him? He makes up the File
Of all the Gentry; for the most part such
To whom as great a Charge, as little Honour
He meant to lay upon: and his own Letter
The Honourable Board of Council, out
Must fetch him in, he Papers.
I do know
Kinsmen of mine, three at the least, that have
By this, so sickened their Estates, that never
They shall abound as formerly.
O many
Have broke their backs with laying Manors on 'em
For this great Journey. What did this vanity
But minister communication of
A most poor issue.
Greeuingly I think,
The Peace between the French and vs, not valewes
The Cost that did conclude it.
Every man,
After the hideous storm that followed, was
A thing Inspired, and not consulting, broke
Into a general Prophecy; That this Tempest
Dashing the Garment of this Peace, aboaded
The sudden breach on it.
Which is budded out,
For France hath flaw'd the League, and hath attached
Our Merchants goods at Bordeaux.
Is it therefore?
The Ambassador is silenced?
Marry is it.
A proper Title of a Peace, and purchased
At a superfluous rate.
Why all this Business
Our Reverend Cardinal carried.
Like it your Grace,
The State takes notice of the private difference
Betwixt you, and the Cardinal. I advise you
(And take it from a heart, that wishes towards you
Honour, and plenteous safety) that you read
The Cardinals Malice, and his Potency
Together; To consider further, that
What his high Hatred would effect, wants not
A Minister in his Power. You know his Nature,
That he's Revengeful; and I know, his Sword
Hath a sharpe edge: It's long, and't may be said
It reaches far, and where twill not extend,
Thither he darts it. Bosom up my counsel,
You'll find it wholesome. Lo, where comes that Rock
That I advice your shunning.
The Duke of Buckinghams Surveyor? Ha?
Whore's his Examination?
Here so please you.
Is he in person, ready?
I, please your Grace.
Well, we shall then know more, &amp; Buckingham
Shall lessen this big look.
This Butchers Cur is venom'd-mouth'd, and I
Have not the power to muzzle him, therefore best
Not wake him in his slumber. A Beggars book,
Out-worths a Nobles blood.
What are you chaff'd?
Ask God for Temp'rance, that's the appliance only
Which your disease requires.
I read in's looks
Matter against me, and his eye reviled
Me as his abject object, at this instant
He bores me with some trick; He's gone to the King:
Isle follow, and out-stare him.
Stay my Lord,
And let your Reason with your Choler question
What it is you go about: to climb steep hills
Requires flow pace at first. Anger is like
A full hot Horse, who being allowed his way
Selfe-mettle tyres him: Not a man in England
Can advise me like you: Be to your self,
As you would to your Friend.
Isle to the King,
And from a mouth of Honour, quite cry down
This Ipswich fellows insolence; or proclaim,
There's difference in no persons.
Be advised;
Heat not a Furnace for your foe so hot
That it do singe your self. We may out-runne
By violent swiftness that which we run at;
And lose by ouer-running: know you not,
The fire that mounts the liquor til't run ore,
In seeming to augment it, wastes it: be advised;
I say again there is no English Soul
More stronger to direct you then your self;
If with the sap of reason you would quench,
Or but allay the fire of passion.
Sir,
I am thankful to you, and Isle go along
By your prescription: but this top-proud fellow,
Whom from the flow of gall I name not, but
From sincere motions, by Intelligence,
And proofs as clear as Founts in July, when
Wee see each grain of gravel; I doe know
To be corrupt and treasonous.
Say not treasonous.
To the King Isle say it, &amp; make my vouch as strong
As shore of Rock: attend. This holy Fox,
Or Wolf, or both (for he is equal rau'nous
As he is subtle, and as prone to mischief,
As able to perform't) his mind, and place
Infecting one another, yea reciprocally,
Only to show his pomp, as well in France,
As here at home, suggests the King our Master
To this last costly Treaty: The interview,
That swallowed so much treasure, and like a glass
Did break in the wrenching.
Faith, and so it did.
Pray give me favour Sir: This cunning Cardinal
The Articles of the Combination drew
As himself pleased; and they were ratified
As he cried thus let be, to as much end,
As give a Crutch to the dead. But our Count-Cardinall
Has done this, and tic well: for worthy Wolsey
(Who cannot err) he did it. Now this follows,
(Which as I take it, is a kind of Puppy
To the old dam Treason) Charles the Emperor,
Under pretence to see the Queen his Aunt,
(For it was indeed his colour, but he came
To whisper Wolsey) here makes visitation,
His fears were that the Interview betwixt
England and France, might through their amity
Breed him some prejudice; for from this League,
Peeped harms that menaced him. Privily
Deals with our Cardinal, and as I troa
Which I doe well; for I am sure the Emperor
Paid ere he promised, whereby his Suit was granted
Ere it was asked. But when the way was made
And paved with gold: the Emperor thus desired,
Tha• he would please to alter the Kings course,
And break the foresaid peace. Let the King know
(As soon he shall by me) that thus the Cardinal
Does buy and sell his Honour as he pleases,
And for his own advantage.
I am sorry
To hear this of him; and could wish he were
Something mistaken in it.
No, not a syllable:
I doe pronounce him in that very shape
He shall appear in proof.
Your Office Sergeant: execute it.
Sir,
My Lord the Duke of Buckingham, and Earl
Of Hertford, Stafford and Northampton, I
Arrest thee of High Treason, in the name
Of our most Sovereign King.
Lo you my Lord,
The net has fallen upon me, I shall perish
Under device, and practise:
I am sorry,
To see you tan from liberty, to look on
The business present. Tic his Highness pleasure
You shall to the Tower.
It will help me nothing
To plead mine Innocence; for that dye is on me
Which makes my whet part, black. The will of Heaven
Be done in this and all things: I obey.
O my Lord Aburgany: Fare you well.
Nay, he must bear you company. The King
Is pleased you shall to the Tower, till you know
How he determines further.
As the Duke said,
The will of Heaven be done, and the Kings pleasure
By me obeyed.
Here is a warrant from
The King, t'attach Lord Mountacute, and the Bodies
Of the Dukes Confessor, Iohn de la Car,
One Gilbert Peck, his Councellor.
So, so;
These are the limbs of the Plot: no more I hope.
A Monk of the Chartreux.
O Michael Hopkins?
He.
My Surveyor is false: The ore-great Cardinal
Hath showed him gold; my life is spand already:
I am the shadow of poor Buckingham,
Whose Figure even this instant Cloud puts on,
By Darkening my clear Sun. My Lords farewell.
My life it self, and the best heart of it,
Thanks you for this great care: I stood in the level
Of a full-charg'd consederacie, and give thanks
To you that choked it. Let be called before vs
That Gentleman of Buckinghams, in person,
Isle hear him his confessions justify,
And point by point the Treasons of his Moister,
He shall again relate.
Nay, we must longer kneel; I am a Suitor.
Arise, and take place by vs; half your Suit
Never name to vs; you have half our power:
The other moity ere you ask is given,
Repeat your will, and take it.
Thank your Majesty
That you would love your self, and in that love
Not vnconsidered leave your Honour, nor
The dignity of your Office; is the point
Of my Petition.
Lady mine proceed.
I am solicited not by a few,
And those of true condition; That your Subjects
Are in great grievance: There have been Commissions
Sent down among 'em, which hath flaw'd the heart
Of all their Loyalties; wherein, although
My good Lord Cardinal, they vent reproaches
Most bitterly on you, as putter on
Of these exactions: yet the King, our Moister
Whose Honour Heaven shield from soil; even he escapes not
Language unmannerly; yea, such which breaks
The sides of loyalty, and almost appears
In loud Rebellion.
Not almost appears,
It doth appear; for, upon these Taxations,
The Clothiers all not able to maintain
The many to them longing, have put off
The Spinsters, Carders, Fullers, Weavers, who
Unfit for other life, compelled by hunger
And lack of other means, in desperate manner
Daring the event too the teeth, are all in uproar,
And danger serves among them.
Taxation?
Wherein? and what Taxation? My Lord Cardinal,
You that are blamed for it alike with vs,
Know you of this Taxation?
Please you Sir,
I know but of a single part in ought
Pertains to the State▪ and front but in that File
Where others tell steps with me.
No, my Lord?
You know no more then others? But you frame
Things that are known alike, which are not wholesome
To those which would not know them, and yet must
Perforce be their acquaintance. These exactions
(Whereof my Sovereign would have note) they are
Most pestilent to the hearing, and to bear 'em,
The Back is Sacrifice to the load; They say
They are deuis'd by you, er else you suffer
Too hard an exclamation.
Still Exaction:
The nature of it, in what kind let's know,
Is this Exaction?
I am much too venturous
In tempting of your patience; but am boldened
Under your promised pardon. The Subjects grief
Comes through Commissions, which compels from each
The sixth part of his Substance, to be levied
Without delay; and the pretence for this
Is named, your wars in France: this makes bold mouths,
Tongues spit their duties out, and cold hearts freeze
Allegiance in them; their curses now
Live where their prayers did: and it's come to pass,
This tractable obedience is a Slave
To each incensed Will: I would your Highness
Would give it quick consideration; for
There is no primer baseness.
By my life,
This is against our pleasure.
And for me,
I have no further gone in this, then by
A single voice, and that not past me, but
By learned approbation of the Judges: If I am
Traduced by ignorant Tongues, which neither know
My faculties nor person, yet will be
The Chronicles of my doing: Let me say,
It is but the fate of Place, and the rough Brake
That Virtue must go through: we must not stint
Our necessary actions, in the fear
To cope malicious Censurers, which ever,
As rau'nous Fishes doe a Vessel follow
That is new trimmed; but benefit no further
Then vainly longing. What we oft doe best,
By sick Interpreters (once weak ones) is
Not ours, or not allowed; what worst, as oft
Hitting a grosser quality, is cried up
For our best Act: if we shall stand still,
In fear our motion will be mocked, or carped at,
We should take root here, where we sit;
Or sit State-Statues only.
Things done well,
And with a care, exempt themselves from fear:
Things done without example, in their issue
Are to be feared. Have you a President
Of this Commission? I believe, not any.
We must not rend our Subjects from our Laws,
And stick them in our Will. Sixth part of each?
A trembling Contribution; why we take
From every Tree, lop, bark, and part of the Timber:
And though we leave it with a root thus hacked,
The Ayre will drink the Sap. To every County
Where this is questioned, send our Letters, with
Free pardon to each man that has denied
The force of this Commission: pray look too't;
I put it to your care.
A word with you.
Let there be Letters writ to every Shire,
Of the Kings grace and pardon: the grieved Commons
Hardly conceive of me. Let it be noised,
That through our Intercession, this Reuokement
And pardon come: I shall anon advise you
Further in the proceeding.
I am sorry, that the Duke of Buckingham
Is run in your displeasure.
It grieves many:
The Gentleman is Learned, and a most rare Speaker,
To Nature none more bound; his training such,
That he may furnish and instruct great Teachers,
And never seek for aid out of himself: yet see,
When these so Noble benefits shall prove
Not well disposed, the mind growing once corrupt,
They turn to vicious forms, ten times more ugly
Then ever they were fair. This man so complete,
Who was enroled amongst wonders; and when we
Almost with ravished listening, could not find
His hour of speech, a minute: He, (my Lady)
Hath into monstrous habits put the Graces
That once were his, and is become as black,
As if besmeared in hell. Sit by Vs, you shall hear
(This was his Gentleman in trust) of him
Things to strike Honour sad. Bid him recount
The fore-recited practises, whereof
We cannot feel too little, hear too much.
Stand forth, &amp; with bold spirit relate what you
Most like a careful Subject have collected
Out of the Duke of Buckingham.
Speak freely.
First, it was usual with him; every day
It would infect his Speech: That if the King
Should without issue dye; he will carry it so
To make the Sceptre his. These very words
I'ue heard him utter to his Son in Law,
Lord Aburgany, to whom by of the he menaced
Revenge upon the Cardinal.
Please your Highness note
This dangerous conception in this point,
Not fronted by his wish to your High person;
His will is most malignant, and it stretches
Beyond you to your friends.
My learned Lord Cardinal,
Deliver all with Charity.
Speak on;
How grounded hee his Title to the Crown
Upon our fail; to this point hast thou heard him,
At any time speak ought?
He was brought to this,
By a vain Prophecy of Nicholas Henton.
What was that Henton?
Sir, a Chartreux Fryer,
His Confessor, who fed him every minute
With words of Sovereignty.
How know thou this?
Not long before your Highness sped to France,
The Duke being at the Rose, within the Parish
Saint Laurence Poultney, did of me demand
What was the speech among the Londoners,
Concerning the French Journey. I replied,
Men fear the French would prove perfidious
To the Kings danger: presently, the Duke
Said, it was the fear indeed, and that he doubted
It would prove the verity of certain words
Spoke by a holy Monk, that oft, says he,
Hath sent to me, wishing me to permit
Iohn de la Car, my Chaplain, a choice hour
To hear from him a matter of some moment:
Whom after under the Commissions Seal,
He solemnly had sworn, that what he spoke
My Chaplain to no Creature living, but
To me, should utter, with demure Confidence,
This pausingly ensued; neither the King, nor's Heirs
(Tell you the Duke) shall prosper, bid him strive
To the love of the Commonalty, the Duke
Shall govern England.
If I know you well,
You were the Dukes Surveyor, and lost your Office
On the complaint of the Tenants; take good heed
You charge not in your spleen a Noble person,
And spoil your nobler Soul; I say, take heed;
Yes, heartily beseech you.
Let him on: Go forward.
On my Soul, Isle speak but truth.
I told my Lord the Duke, by the Devils illusions
The Monk might be deceived, and that it was dangerous
For this to ruminate on this so far, until
It forged him some design, which being believed
It was much like to doe: He answered, Tush,
It can doe me no damage; adding further,
That had the King in his last Sickness failed,
The Cardinals and Sir Thomas Louels heads
Should have gone off.
Ha? What, so rank? Ah, ha,
There's mischief in this man; can thou say further?
I can my Liedge.
Proceed.
Being at Greenwich.
After your Highness had reproved the Duke
About Sir William Blumer.
I remember of such a time, being my sworn ser∣uant,
The Duke retained him his. But on: what hence?
If (quoth he) I for this had been committed,
As to the Tower, I thought; I would have plaid
The Part my Father meant to act upon
The Usurper Richard, who being at Salsbury,
Made suit to come in's presence; which if granted,
(As he made semblance of his duty) would
Have put his knife into him.
A Giant Traitor.
Now Madam, may his Highness live in freedom,
And this man out of Prison.
God mend all.
Ther's something more would out of thee; what say?
After the Duke his Father, with the knife
He stretched him, and with one hand on his dagger,
Another spread on's breast, mounting his eyes,
He did discharge a horrible Oath, whose tenor
Was, were he evil used, he would outgo
His Father, by as much as a performance
Do's an irresolute purpose.
There's his period,
To sheath his knife in vs: he is attached,
Call him to present trial: if he may
Find mercy in the Law, it is his; if none,
Let him not seek it of vs; By day and night
Hoe's Traitor to the height.
Is it possible the spells of France should juggle
Men into such strange mysteries?
New customs,
Though they be never so ridiculous,
(Nay let 'em be unmanly) yet are followed.
As far as I see, all the good our English
Have got by the late Voyage, is but merely
A fit or two of the face, (but they are shrewd ones)
For when they hold 'em, you would swear directly
Their very noses had been Councellors
To Pippin or Clotharius, they keep State so.
They have all new legs,
And lame ones; one would take it,
That never see 'em pace before, the Spain
A Spring-halt rained among 'em.
Death my Lord,
Their clothes are after such a Pagan cut too't,
That sure the have worn out Ch•istendome: how now?
What news, Sir Thomas Louell?
Faith my Lord,
I hear of none but the new Proclamation,
That's clapped upon the Court Gate.
What is it for?
The reformation of our travelled Gallants,
That fill the Court with quarrels, talk, and Taylors.
I'm glad it is there;
Now I would pray our Monsieurs
To think an English Courtier may be wise,
And never see the Lonure.
They must either
(For so run the Conditions) leave those remnants
Of Fool and Feather, that they got in France,
With all their honourable points of ignorance
Pertaining thereunto; as Fights and Fireworks,
Abusing better men then they can be
Out of a foreign wisdom, renouncing clean
The faith they have in Tennis and tall Stockings,
Short blistred Breeches, and those types of Travel;
And understand again like honest men,
Or pack to their old Playfellowes; there, I take it,
They may Cum Praulegio, wee away
The lag end of their lewdness, and be laughed at.
Tic time to give 'em Physic, their diseases
Are grown so catching.
What a loss our Ladies
Will have of these trim vanities?
I marry,
There will be woe indeed Lords, the sly whorsons
Have got a speeding trick to lay down Ladies.
A French Song, and a Fiddle, he's no Fellow.
The Devil fiddle 'em,
I am glad they are going,
For sure there's no converting of 'em: now
An honest Country Lord as I am, beaten
A long time out of play, may bring his plain song,
And have an hour of hearing, and by it Lady
Held currant Music too.
Well said Lord Sands,
Your Colts tooth is not cast yet?
No my Lord,
Nor shall not while I have a stump.
Sir Thomas,
Whither were you a going?
To the Cardinals;
Your Lordship is a guest too.
O, it is true;
This night he makes a Supper, and a great one,
To many Lords and Ladies; there will be
The Beauty of this Kingdom Isle assure you.
That Churchman
Bears a bounteous mind indeed,
A hand as fruitful as the Land that feeds vs,
His dews fall every where.
No doubt hoe's Noble;
He had a black mouth that said other of him.
He may my Lord,
He's wherewithal in him;
Sparing would show a worse sin, then ill Doctrine,
Men of his way, should be most liberal,
They are set here for examples.
True, they are so;
But few now give so great ones:
My Barge stays;
Your Lordship shall along: Come, good Sir Thomas,
We shall be late else, which I would not be,
For I was spoke to, with Sir Henry Guilford
This night to be Comptrollers.
I am your Lordships.
Ladies,
A general welcome from his Grace
Salutes ye all; This Night he dedicates
To fair content, and you: None here he hopes
In all this Noble Bevy, has brought with her
One care abroad: hee would have all as merry:
As first, good Company, good wine, good welcome,
Can make good people.
O my Lord, y' are tardy;
The very thought of this fair Company,
Clapped wings to me.
You are young Sir Harry Guilford▪
Sir Thomas Louell, had the Cardinal
But half my Lay-thoughts in him, some of these
Should find a running Banquet, ere they rested,
I think would better please 'em: by my life,
They are a sweet society of fair ones.
O that your Lordship were but now Confessor,
To one or two of these.
I would I were,
They should find easy penance.
Faith how easy?
As easy as a down bed would afford it.
Sweet Ladies will it please you sit; Sir Harry
Place you that side, Isle take the charge of this:
His Grace is entering. Nay, you must not freeze,
Two women placed together, makes cold weather:
My Lord Sands, you are one will keep 'em waking:
Pray sit between these Ladies.
By my faith,
And thank your Lordship: by your leave sweet Ladies,
If I chance to talk a little wilde, forgive me:
I had it from my Father.
Was he mad Sir?
O, very mad, exceeding mad, in love too;
But he would bite none, just as I doe now,
He would Kiss you Twenty with a breath.
Well said my Lord:
So now y' are fairly seated: Gntlemen,
The penance lies on you; if these fair Ladies
Pass away frowning.
For my little Cure,
Let me alone.
Y' are welcome my fair Guests; that noble Lady
Or Gentleman that is not freely merry
Is not my Friend. This to confirm my welcome,
And to you all good health.
Your Grace is Noble,
Let me have such a Bowl may hold my thanks.
And save me so much talking.
My Lord Sands,
I am beholding to you: cheer your neighbours:
Ladies you are not merry; Gentlemen,
Whose fault is this?
The red wine first must rise
In their fair cheeks my Lord, then wee shall have 'em,
Talk vs to silence.
You are a merry Gamester
My Lord Sands.
Yes, if I make my play:
Heir's to your Ladyship, and pledge it Madam:
For tic to such a thing.
You cannot show me.
I told your Grace, they would talk anon.
What's that?
Look out there, some of ye.
What warlike voice,
And to what end is this? Nay, Ladies, fear not;
By all the laws of War y' are privileged.
How now, what is it?
A noble troupe of Strangers,
For so they seem; the have left their Barge and landed,
And hither make, as great Ambassadors
From foreign Princes.
Good Lord Chamberlain,
Go, give 'em welcome; you can speak the French tongue
And pray receive 'em Nobly, and conduct 'em
Into our presence, where this heaven of beauty
Shall shine at full upon them. Some attend him.
You have now a broken Banquet, but we'll mend it.
A good digestion to you all; and once more
I shower a welcome on ye: welcome all.
A noble Company: what are their pleasures?
Because they speak no English, thus they pried
To tell your Grace: That having heard by fame
Of this so Noble and so fair assembly,
This night to meet here they could doe no less,
(Out of the great respect they bear to beauty)
But leave their Flocks, and under your fair Conduct
Crave leave to view these Ladies, and entreat
An hour of Revels with 'em.
Say, Lord Chamberlain,
They have done my poor house grace:
For which I pay 'em a thousand thanks,
And pray 'em take their pleasures.
The fairest hand I ever touched: O Beauty,
Till now I never knew thee.
My Lord.
Your Grace.
Pray tell 'em thus much from me:
There should be one amongst 'em by his person
More worthy this place then my self, to whom
(If I but knew him) with my love and duty
I would surrender it.
I will my Lord.
What say they?
Such a one, they all confess
There is indeed, which they would have your Grace
Find out, and he will take it.
Let me see then,
By all your good leaves Gentlemen; here Isle make
My royal choice.
Ye have found him Cardinal,
You hold a fair Assembly; you doe well Lord:
You are a Churchman, or Isle tell you Cardinal,
I should judge now unhappily.
I am glad
Your Grace is grown so pleasant.
My Lord Chamberlain,
Prithee come hither, what fair Laddie's that?
An't please your Grace,
Sir Thomas Bullens Daughter, the Viscount Rochford,▪
One of her Highness women.
By Heaven she is a dainty one. Sweet heart,
I were unmannerly to take you out,
And not to kiss you. A health Gentlemen,
Let it go round.
Sir Thomas Louell, is the Banquet ready
In the Privy Chamber?
Yes, my Lord.
Your Grace
I fear, with dancing is a little heated.
I fear too much.
There's fresher ayre my Lord,
In the next Chamber.
Lead in your Ladies every one: Sweet Partner,
I must not yet forsake you: Let's be merry,
Good my Lord Cardinal: I have half a dozen healths,
To drink to these fair Ladies, and a measure
To lead 'em once again, and then let's dream
Who's best in favour. Let the Music knock it.
Whether away so fast?
O, God save ye:
Even to the Hall, to hear what shall become
Of the great Duke of Buckingham.
Isle save you
That labour Sir. Ell's now done but the Ceremony
Of bringing back the Prisoner.
Were you there?
Yes indeed was I.
Pray speak what he's happened.
You may guess quickly what.
Is he found guilty?
Yes truly is he,
And condemned upon it.
I am sorry fort.
So are a number more.
But pray how past it?
Isle tell you in a little. The great Duke
Came to the Bar; where, to his accusations
He pleaded still not guilty, and alleged
Many sharpe reasons to defeat the Law.
The Kings Attorney on the contrary,
Urged on the Examinations, proofs, confessions
Of divers witnesses, which the Duke desired
To him brought vine voce to his face;
At which appeared against him, his Surveyor
Sir Gilbert Peck his Chancellor, and Iohn Car,
Confessor to him, with that Devil Monk,
Hopkins, that made this mischief.
That was hee
That fed him with his Prophecies.
The same,
All these accused him strongly, which •e fine
Would have flung from him; but indeed he could not;
And so his Peers upon this evidence,
Have found him guilty of high Treason. Much
He spoke, and learnedly for life: But all
Was either pitied in him, or forgotten.
After all this, how did he bear himself?
When he was brought again to the Bar, to hear
His Knell rung out, his Judgment, he was stirred
With such an Agony, he sweat extremely,
And something spoke in choler, ill, and hasty:
But he fell to himself again, and sweetly,
In all the rest showed a most Noble patience,
I doe not think he fears death.
Sure he does not,
He never was so womanish, the cause
He may a little grieve at.
Certainly,
The Cardinal is the end of this.
Tic likely,
By all conjectures: First Kildares Attendure;
Then Deputy of Ireland, who removed
Earl Surrey, was sent thither, and in hast too,
Least he should help his Father.
That trick of State
Was a deep envious one,
At his return,
No doubt he will requite it; this is noted
(And generally) who ever the King favours,
The Cardinal instantly will find employment,
And far enough from Court too.
All the Commons
Hate him perniciously, and of my Conscience
Wish him ten faddom deep: This Duke as much
They love and dote on: call him bounteous Buckingham,
The Mirror of all curtsy.
Stay there Sir,
And see the noble ruined man you speak of.
Let's stand close and behold him.
All good people,
You that thus far have come to pity me;
Hear what I say, and then go home and lose me.
I have this day received a Traitors judgment,
And by that name must dye; yet Heaven bear witness,
And if I have a Conscience, let it sink me,
Even as the Axe falls, if I be not faithful.
The Law I bear no malice for my death,
To has done upon the premises, but Justice:
But those that sought it, I could wish more Christians:
(Be what they will) I heartily forgiue'em;
Yet let 'em look they glory not in mischief;
Nor build their evils on the graves of great men;
For then, my guiltless blood must cry against 'em.
For further life in this world I ne'er hope,
Nor will I sue, although the King have mercy•
More then I dare make faults.
You few that loved me,
And dare be bold to weep for Buckingham,
His Noble Friends and Fellows; whom to leave
Is only bitter to him, only dying:
Go with me like good Angels to my end,
And as the long divorce of Steel false on me,
Make of your Prayers one sweet Sacrifice,
And lift my Soul to Heaven.
Lead on a Gods name.
I doe beseech your Grace, for charity
If ever any malice in your heart
Were hid against me, now to forgive me frankly.
Sir Thomas Louell, I as free forgive you
As I would be forgiven: I forgive all.
There cannot be those numberless offences
Against me, that I cannot take peace with:
No black Envy shall make my Grave.
Commend me to his Grace:
And if he speak of Buckingham; pray tell him,
You met him half in Heaven: my vows and prayers
Yet are the Kings; and till my Soul forsake,
Shall cry for blessings on him. May he live
Longer then I have time to tell his years;
Ever beloved and loving, may his Rule be;
And when old Time shall lead him to his end,
Goodness and he, fill up one Monument.
To the water side I must conduct your Grace;
Then give my Charge up to Sir Nicholas Ʋaux,
Who undertakes you to your end.
Prepare there,
The Duke is coming: See the Barge be ready;
And fit it with such furniture as suites
The Greatness of his Person.
Nay, Sir Nicholas,
Let it alone; my State now will but mock me.
When I came hither, I was Lord High Constable,
And Duke of Buckingham: now, poor Edward Bohun;
Yet I am richer then my base Accusers,
That never knew what Truth meant: I now seal it;
And with that blood will make'em one day groan for it.
My noble Father Henry of Buckingham,
Who first raised head against Usurping Richard,
Flying for succour to his Servant Banister,
Being distressed; was by that wretch betrayed,
And without Trial, fell; Gods peace be with him.
Henry the Seventh succeeding, truly pitying
My Fathers loss; like a most Royal Prince
Restored me to my Honours: and out of ruins
Made my Name once more Noble. Now his Son,
Henry the Eight, Life, Honour, Name and all
That made me happy; at one stroke he's taken
For ever from the World. I had my Trial,
And must needs say a Noble one; which makes me
A little happier then my wretched Father:
Yet thus far we are one in Fortunes; both
Fell by our Servants, by those Men we loved most:
A most unnatural and faithless Service.
Heaven he's an end in all: yet, you that hear me,
This from a dying man receive as certain:
Where you are liberal of your loves and Councels,
Be sure you be not loose; for those you make friends,
And give your hearts to; when they once perceive
The least rub in your fortunes, fall away
Like water from ye, never found again
But where they mean to sink ye: all good people
Pray for me, I must now forsake ye; the last hour
Of my long weary life is come upon me:
Farewell; and when you would say something that is sad,
Speak how I fell.
I have done; and God forgive me.
O, this is full of pity; Sir, it calls
I fear, too many curse• on their heads
That were the Authors.
If the Duke be guiltless,
It is full of woe: yet I can give you inkling
Of an ensuing evil, if it fall,
Greater then this.
Good Angels keep it from vs:
What may it be? you doe not doubt my faith Sir?
This Secret is so weighty, twill require
A strong faith to conceal it.
Let me have it:
I doe not talk much.
I am confident;
You shall Sir: Did you not of late days hear
A buzzing of a Separation
Between the King and Katherine?
Yes, but it held not;
For when the King once heard it, out of anger
He sent command to the Lord Mayor straight
To stop the rumour; and allay those tongues
That durst disperse it.
But that slander Sir,
Is found a truth now: for it grows again
Fresher then ever it was; and held for certain
The King will venture at it. Either the Cardinal,
Or some about him near, have out of malice
To the good Queen▪ possessed him with a scruple
That will undo her: To confirm this too,
Cardinal Campeius is arrived, and lately,
As all think for this business.
Tic the Cardinal;
And merely to revenge him on the Emperor,
For not bestowing on him at his asking,
The Archbishopric of Toledo, this is purposed.
I think
You have hit the mark; but is it not cruel,
That she should feel the smart of this: the Cardinal
Will have his will, and she must fall.
It is woeful.
Wee are too open here to argue this:
Let's think in private more.
MY Lord, the Horses your Lordship sent for, with all the care I had, I saw well chosen, ridden, and furnished. They were young and handsome, and of the best breed in the North. When they were ready to set out for London, a man of my Lord Cardinals, b• Commission, and maine power took 'em from me, with this reason: his moister would bee served be∣fore a Subject, if not before the King, which stopped our mouths Sir.
I fear he will indeed; well, let him have them; hee will have all I think.
Well met my Lord Chamberlain.
Good day to both your Graces.
How is the King employed?
I left him private,
Full of sad thoughts and troubles.
What's the cause?
It seems the Marriage with his Brothers Wife
He's crept too near his Conscience.
No, his Conscience
He's crept too near another Lady.
Tic so;
This is the Cardinals doing: The King-Cardinall,
That blind Priest, like the eldest Son of Fortune,
Turns what he list. The King will know him one day.
Pray God he doe,
He will never know himself else.
How holily he works in all his business,
And with what zeal? For now he has cracked the League
Between vs &amp; the Emperor (the Queens great Nephew)
He dives into the Kings Soul, and there scatters
Dangers, doubts, wringing of the Conscience,
Fears, and despairs, and all these for his Marriage.
And out of all these, to restore the King,
He counsels a Divorce, a loss of her
That like a Jewel, he's hung twenty years
About his neck, yet never lost her lustre;
Of her that loves him with that excellence,
That Angels love good men with: Even of her,
That when the greatest stroke of Fortune falls
Will bless the King: and is not this course pious?
Heaven keep me from such council: tic most true
These news are every where, every tongue speaks 'em,
And every true heart weeps for it. All that dare
Look into these affairs, see this maine end,
The French Kings Sister. Heaven will one day open
The Kings eyes, that so long have slept upon
This bold bad man.
And free vs from his slavery.
We had need pray,
And heartily, for our deliverance;
Or this imperious man will work vs all
From Princes into Pages: all men's honours
Lie like one lump before him, to be fashioned
Into what pitch he please.
For me, my Lords,
I love him not, nor fear him, there's my Creed:
As I am made without him, so Isle stand,
If the King please: his Curses and his blessings
Touch me alike: the are breath I not believe in.
I knew him, and I know him: so I leave him
To him that made him proud; the Pope.
Let's in;
And with some other business, put the King
From these sad thoughts, that work too much upon him:
My Lord, you'll bear vs company?
Excuse me,
The King he's sent me otherwhere: Besides
You'll find a most unfit time to disturb him:
Health to your Lordships.
Thanks my good Lord Chamberlain.
How sad he looks; sure he is much afflicted.
Who's there? Ha?
Pray God he be not angry.
Who's there I say? How dare you thrust your selves
Into my private Meditations?
Who am I? Ha?
A gracious King, that pardons all offences
Malice ne'er meant: Our breach of Duty this way▪
Is business of Estate; in which, we come
To know your Royal pleasure.
Ye are too bold:
Go too; Isle make ye know your times of business:
Is this an hour for temporal affairs? Ha?
Who's there? my good Lord Cardinal? O my Wolsey,
The quiet of my wounded Conscience;
Thou art a cure fit for a King; you're welcome
Most learned Reverend Sir, into our Kingdom,
Use vs, and it: My good Lord, have great care,
I be not found a Talker.
Sir, you cannot;
I would your Grace would give vs but an hour
Of private conference.
We are busy; go.
This Priest he's no pride in him?
Not to speak of:
I would not be so sick though for his place:
But this cannot continue.
If it doe, Isle venture one; have at him.
I another.
Your Grace he's given a President of wisdom
Aboue all Princes, in committing freely
Your scruple to the voice• of Christendom:
Who can be angry now? What Envy reach you?
The Spaniard tide by blood and favour to her,
Must now confess, if they have any goodness,
The Trial, just and Noble. All the Clerks,
(I mean the learned ones in Christian Kingdoms)
Have their free voices. Rome (the Nurse of Judgment)
Invited by your Noble self, hath sent
One general Tongue unto vs. This good man,
This just and learned Priest, Cardinal Campeius,
Whom once more, I present unto your Highness.
And once more in mine arms I bid him welcome,
And thank the holy Conclave for their loves,
They have sent me such a Man, I would have wished for.
Your Grace must needs deserve all strangers loves,
You are so Noble: To your Highness hand
I tender my Commission; by whose virtue,
The Court of Rome commanding. You my Lord
Cardinal of York, are joined with me their Servant,
In the unpartial judging of this Business.
Two equal men: The Queen shall be acquain∣ted
Forth with for what you come. Whore's Gardiner?
I know your Majesty, he's always loved her
So dear in heart, not to deny her that
A Woman of less Place might ask by Law;
Scholars allowed freely to argue for her.
I, and the best she shall have; and my favour
To him that doe• best, God forbid else: Cardinal,
Prithee call Gardiner to me, my new Secretary.
I find him a fit fellow.
Give me your hand: much joy &amp; favour to you;
You are the Kings now.
But to be commanded
For ever by your Grace, whose hand he's raised me.
Come hither Gardiner.
My Lord of York, was not one Doctor Pa•e
In this mans place before him?
Yes, he was.
Was he not held a learned man?
Yes surely.
Believe me, there's an ill opinion spread then,
Even of your self Lord Cardinal.
How? of me?
They will not stick to say, you enuide him;
And fearing he would rise (he was so virtuous)
Kept him a foreign man still, which so grieved him,
That he ran mad, and did.
Heavens peace be with him:
That's Christian care enough: for living Murmurers,
There's places of rebuke. He was a Fool;
For he would needs be virtuous. That good Fellow,
If I command him follows my appointment,
I will have none so near else. Learn this Brother,
We live not to be grip'd by meaner persons.
Deliver this with modesty to the Queen.
The most convenient place, that I can think of
For such receipt of Learning, is Black-Fryers:
There ye shall meet about this weighty business.
My Wolsey, see it furnished, O my Lord,
Would it not grieve an able man to leave
So sweet a Bedfellow? But Conscience, Conscience;
O it is a tender place, and I must leave her.
Not for that neither; here's the pang that pinches.
His Highness, having lived so long with her, and she
So good a Lady, that no Tongue could ever
Pronounce dishonour of her; by my life,
She never knew harme-doing: Oh, now after
So many courses of the Sun enthroaned,
Still growing in a Majesty and pomp, the which
To leave, a thousand fold more bitter, then
It is sweet at first to acquire. After this Process.
To give her the avaunt, it is a pity
Would move a Monster.
Hearts of most hard temper
Melt and lament for her.
Oh Gods will, much better
She ne'er had known pomp; though't be temporal,
Yet if that quarrel. Fortune, do divorce
It from the bearer, it is a sufferance, panging
As soul and bodies severing.
Alas poor Lady,
Shoe's a stranger now again.
So much the more
Must pity drop upon her; verily
I swear, tic better to be lowly borne,
And range with humble livers in Content,
Then to be perked up in a glistering grief,
And wear a golden sorrow.
Our content
Is our best having.
By my troth, and Maidenhead,
I would not be a Queen.
Beshrew me, I would,
And venture Maidenhead for it, and so would you
For all this spice of your Hypocrisy:
You that have so fair parts of Woman on you,
Have (too) a Women's heart, which ever yet
Affected Eminence, Wealth, Sovereignty;
Which, to say sooth, are Blessings; and which gifts
(Saving your mincing) the capacity
Of your soft Cheverel Conscience, would receive,
If you might please to stretch it.
Nay, good troth.
Yes troth, &amp; troth; you would not be a Queen?
No, not for all the riches under Heaven.
Tic strange; a three pence bowed would hire me
Old as I am, to Queen it: but I pray you,
What think you of a Duchess? Have you limbs
To bear that load of Title?
No in truth.
Then you are weakly made; pluck off a little,
I would not be a young Count in your way,
For more then blushing comes to: If your back
Cannot vouchsafe this burden, tic too weak
Ever to get a Boy.
How you doe talk;
I swear again, I would not be a Queen,
For all the world:
In faith, for little England
You'd venture an emballing: I my self
Would for Carnarvanshire, although there longed
No more to the Crown but that: Lo, who comes here?
Good morrow Ladies; what were it worth to know
The secret of your conference?
My good Lord,
Not your demand; it values not your asking:
Our Mistress Sorrows we were pitying.
It was a gentle business, and becoming
The action of good women, there is hope
All will be well.
Now I pray God, Amen.
You bear a gentle mind, &amp; heavenly blessings
Follow such Creatures. That you may, fair Lady
Perceive I speak sincerely, and high notes
Tan of your many virtues; the Kings Majesty
Commends his good opinion of you, to you; and
Doe's purpose honour to you no less flowing,
Then Marchioness of Pembrooke; to which Title,
A Thousand pound a year, Annual support,
Out of his Grace, he adds.
I doe not know
What kind of my obedience, I should tender;
More then my All, is Nothing: Nor my Prayers
Are not words duly hallowed; nor my Wishes
More worth, then empty vanities: yet Prayers &amp; Wishes
Are all I can return. Beseech your Lordship,
Vouchsafe to speak my thanks, and my obedience,
As from a blush•ng Handmaid, to his Highness;
Whose health and Royalty I pray for.
Lady;
I shall not fail to approve the fair conceit
The King hath of you. I have perused her well,
Beauty and Honour in her are so mingled,
That they have caught the King: and who knows yet
But from this Lady, may proceed a Gem,
To lighten all this Isle. I'll to the King,
And say I spoke with you.
My honoured Lord.
Why this it is: See, see,
I have been begging sixteen years in Court
(Am yet a Courtier beggarly) nor could
Come pat betwixt too early, and too late
For any suit of pound•: and you, (oh fate)
A very fresh Fish here; fie, fie, fie upon
This compelled fortune: have your mouth filled up,
Before you open it.
This is strange to me.
How tastes it? Is it bitter? Forty pence, no:
There was a Lady once (tic an old Story)
That would not be a Queen, that would she not
For all the mud in Egypt; have you heard it?
Come you are pleasant.
With your Theme, I could
O're-mount the Lark: The Marchioness of Pembrooke?
A thousand pounds a year, for pure respect?
No other obligation? by my Life,
That promises mo thousands: Honours train
Is longer then his fore-skirt; by this time
I know your back will bear a Duchess. Say,
Are you not stronger then you were?
Good Lady,
Make your self mirth with your particular fancy,
And leave me out on it. Would I had no being
If this salute my blood a •ot; it faints me
To think what follows.
The Queen is comfortless, and w•e forgetful
In our long absence: pray doe not deliver,
What here y' have heard to her.
What doe you think me —
Whilst our Commission from Rome is read;
Let silence be commanded.
What's the need?
It hath already publicly been read,
And on all sides the Authority allowed,
You may then spare that time.
Be it so, proceed.
Say, Henry K. of England, come into the Court.
Henry King of England, &amp;c.
Here.
Say, Katherine Queen of England,
Come into the Court.
Katherine Queen of England, &amp;c.
Sir, I desire you do me Right and Justice,
And to bestow your pity on me; for
I am a most poor Woman, and a Stranger,
Borne out of your Dominions: having here
No Judge indifferent, nor no more assurance
Of equal Friendship and Proceeding. Alas Sir:
In what have I offended you? What cause
Hath my behaviour given to your displeasure,
That thus you should proceed to put me off,
And take your good Grace from me? Heaven witness,
I have been to you, a true and humble Wife,
At all times to your will conformable:
Ever in fear to kindle your Dislike,
Yea, subject to your Countenance: Glad, or sorry,
As I saw it inclined? When was the hour
I ever contradicted your Desire?
Or made it not mine too? Or which of your Friends
Have I not strove to love, although I knew
He were mine Enemy? What Friend of mine,
That had to him derived your Anger, did I
Continue in my Liking? Nay, gave notice
He was from thence discharged? Sir, call to mind,
That I have been your Wife, in this Obedience,
Upward of twenty years, and have been blessed
With many Children by you. If in the course
And process of this time, you can report,
And prove it too, against mine Honour, aught;
My bond to Wedlock, or my Love and Duty
Against your Sacred Person; in Gods name
Turn me away: and let the fowl'st Contempt
Shut door upon me, and so give me up
To the sharp'st kind of Justice. Please you, Sir,
The King your Father, was reputed for
A Prince most Prudent; of an excellent
And unmatched Wit, and Judgment. Ferdinand
My Father, King of Spain, was reckoned one
The wisest Prince, that there had reigned, by many
A year before. It is not to be questioned,
That they had gathered a wise Council to them
Of every Realm▪ that did debate this Business,
Who deemed our Marriage lawful. Wherefore I humbly
Beseech you Sir, to spare me, till I may
Be by my Friends in Spain, advised; whose Counsel
I will implore. If not, in the name of God
Your pleasure be fulfilled.
You have here Lady.
(And of your choice) these Reverend Fathers, men
Of singular Integrity, and Learning;
Yea, the elect of the Land, who are assembled
To plead your Cause. It shall be therefore bootless,
That longer you desire the Court, as well
For your own quiet, as to rectify
What is unsettled in the King.
His Grace
Hath spoken well, and justly: Therefore Madam,
It's fit this Royal Session do proceed,
And that (without delay) their Arguments
Be now produced, and heard.
Lord Cardinal, to you I speak.
Your pleasure, Madam.
Sir, I am about to weep; but thinking that
We are a Queen (or long have dreamed so) certain
The daughter of a King, my drops of tears,
Isle turn to sparks of fire.
Be patient yet.
I will, when you are humble; Nay before,
Or God will punish me. I do believe
(Induced by potent Circumstances) that
You are mine Enemy, and make my Challenge,
You shall not be my Judge. For it is you
Have blown this Coal, betwixt my Lord, and me;
(Which Gods dew quench) therefore, I say again,
I utterly abhor; yea, from my Soul
Refuse you for my Judge, whom yet once more
I hold my most malicious Foe, and think not
At all a Friend to truth.
I do profess
You speak not like your self: who ever yet
Have stood to Charity, and displayed the effects
Of disposition gentle, and of wisdom,
Ore-topping women's power. Madam, you do me wrong
I have no Spleen against you, nor injustice
For you, or any: how far I have proceeded,
Or how far further (Shall) is warranted
By a Commission from the Consistory,
Yea, the whole Consistory of Rome. You charge me,
That I have blown this Coal: I do deny it,
The King is present: If it be known to him,
That I gainsay my Deed, how may he wound,
And worthily my Falsehood, yea, as much
As you have done my Truth. If he know
That I am free of your Report, he knows
I am not of your wrong. Therefore in him
It lies to cure me, and the Cure is to
Remove these Thoughts from you. The which before
His Highness shall speak in, I do beseech
You (gracious Madam) to vnthinke your speaking,
And to say so no more.
My Lord, my Lord,
I am a simple woman, much too weak
To oppose your cunning. Y' are meek, &amp; humble-mouth'd
You sign your Place, and Calling, in full seeming,
With Meekness and Humility: but your Heart
Is crammed with Arrogance, Spleen, and Pride.
You have by Fortune, and his Highness favours,
Gone slightly o'er lowe steppes, and now are mounted
Where Powers are your Retainers, and your words
(Domestics to you) serve your will, is it please
Your self pronounce their Office. I must tell you,
You tender more your persons Honour, then
Your high profession Spiritual. That again
I do refuse you for my Judge, and here
Before you all, Appeal unto the Pope,
To bring my whole Cause before his Holiness,
And to be judged by him.
The Queen is obstinate,
Stubborn to Justice, apt to accuse it, and
Disdainful to be tried by it; tic not well.
Shoe's going away.
Call her again.
Katherine▪ Q of England, come into the Court.
Ʋsh. Madam, you are called back.
What need you note it? pray you keep your way,
When you are called return. Now the Lord help,
They vex me past my patience, pray you pass on;
I will not tarry: no, nor ever more
Upon this business my appearance make,
In any of their Courts.
Go thy ways Kate,
That man in the world, who shall report he he's
A better Wife, let him in nought be trusted,
For speaking false in that; thou art alone
(If thy rare qualities, sweet gentleness,
Thy meekness Saint-like, Wife-like Government,
Obeying in commanding, and thy parts
Sovereign and Piousels, could speak thee out)
The Queen of earthly Queens: Shoe's Noble borne;
And like her true Nobility, she he's
Carried her self towards me.
Most gracious Sir,
In humblest manner I require your Highness,
That it shall please you to declare in hearing
Of all these ears (for where I am robed and bound,
There must I be unloosed, although not there
At once, and fully satisfied) whether ever I
Did broach this business to your Highness, or
Laid any scruple in your way which might
Induce you to the question on it: or ever
Have to you, but with thanks to God for such
A Royal Lady, spake one, the least word that might
Be to the prejudice of her present State,
Or touch of her good Person?
My Lord Cardinal,
I doe excuse you; yea, upon mine Honour,
I free you from it: You are not to be taught
That you have many enemies, that know not
Why they are so; but like to Village Cures,
Bark when their fellows doe. By some of these
The Queen is put in anger; y' are excused:
But will you be more iustifi'de? You ever
Have wished the sleeping of this business, never desired
It to be stirred; but oft have hindered, oft
The passages made toward it; on my Honour,
I speak my good Lord Cardinal, to this point;
And thus far clear him.
Now, what moved me too't,
I will be bold with time and your attention:
Then mark the inducement. Thus it came; give heed too't:
My Conscience first received a tenderness,
Scruple, and prick, on certain Speeches uttered
By the Bishop of Bayon, then French Ambassador,
Who had been hither sent on the debating
And Marriage twixt the Duke of Orleans, and
Our Daughter Mary: In the Progress of this business,
Ere a determinate resolution, hee
(I mean the Bishop) did require a respite,
Wherein he might the King his Lord advertise,
Whether our Daughter were legitimate,
Respecting this our Marriage with the Dowager,
Sometimes our Brothers Wife. This respite shook
The bosom of my Conscience, entered me;
Yea, with a spitting power, and made to tremble
The region of my Breast, which forced such way,
That many mazed considerings, did throng
And pressed in with this Caution. First, me thought
I stood not in the smile of Heaven, who had
Commanded Nature, that my Ladies womb
If it conceived a male-child by me, should
Doe no more Offices of life too't; then
The Grave does to the dead: For her Male Issue,
Or died where they were made, ot shortly after
This world had aired them. Hence I took a thought,
This was a Judgment on me, that my Kingdom
(Well worthy the best Heir of the World) should not
Be gladded in it by me. Then follows, that
I weighed the danger which my Realms stood in
By this my Issues fail, and that gave to me
Many a groaning throw: thus hulling in
The wild Sea of my Conscience, I did steer
Toward this remedy, whereupon we are
Now present here together: that's to say,
I meant to rectify my Conscience, which
I then did feel full sick, and yet not well,
By all the Reverend Fathers of the Land,
And Doctors learned. First I began in private,
With you my Lord of Lincoln; you remember
How under my oppression I did reeke
When I first moved you.
Very well my Liedge.
I have spoke long, be pleased your self to say
How far you satisfied me.
So please your Highness,
The question did at first so stagger me,
Bearing a State of mighty moment in it,
And consequence of dread, that I committed
The daringst Counsel which I had to doubt,
And did entreat your Highness to this course,
Which you are running here.
I then moved you,
My Lord of Canterbury, and got your leave
To make this present Summons vnsolicited.
I left no Reverend Person in this Court;
But by particular consent proceeded
Under your hands and Seals; therefore go on,
For no dislike in the world against the person
Of the good Queen; but the sharpe thorny points
Of my alleged reasons, drives this forward:
Prove but our Marriage lawful, by my Life
And Kingly Dignity, we are contented
To wear our mortal State to come, with her,
(Katherine our Queen) before the primest Creature
That's Parragon'd of the World
So please your Highness,
The Queen being absent, it is a needful fitness,
That we adiourne this Court till further day;
Mean while, must be an earnest motion
Made to the Queen to call back her Appeal
She intends unto his Holiness.
I may perceive
These Cardinals trifle with me: I abhor
This dilatory sloth, and tricks of Rome.
My learned and well-beloved Servant Cranmer,
Prithee return, with thy approach: I know,
My comfort comes along: break up the Court;
I say, set on.
Take thy Lute wench,
My Soul grows sad with troubles,
Sing, and disperse 'em if thou can: leave working:
ORpheus with his Lute made Trees,
And the Mountain tops that freeze,
Bow themselves when he did sing.
To his Music, Plants and Flowers
Ever sprung; as Sun and Showers,
There had made a lasting Spring.
Every thing that heard him play,
Even the Billows of the Sea,
Hung their heads, &amp; then lay by.
In sweet Music is such Art,
Killing care, &amp; grief of heart,
Fall asleep, or hearing dye.
How now?
And't please your Grace, the two great Cardinals
Wait in the presence.
Would they speak with me?
They wild me say so Madam.
Pray their Graces
To come near: what can be their business
With me, a poor weak woman, fallen from favour?
I doe not like their coming; now I think on it,
They should bee good men, their affairs as righteous:
But all Hoods, make not Monks.
Peace to your Highness.
Your Graces find me here part of a Housewife,
(I would be all) against the worst may happen:
What are your pleasures with me, reverent Lords?
May it please you Noble Madam, to withdraw
Into your private Chamber; we shall give you
The full cause of our coming.
Speak it here.
There's nothing I have done yet of my Conscience
Deserves a Corner: would all other Women
Could speak this with as free a Soul as I doe.
My Lords, I care not (so much I am happy
Aboue a number) if my actions
Were tri'de by every tongue, every eye saw 'em,
Envy and base opinion set against 'em,
I know my life so even. If your business
Seek me out, and that way I am Wife in;
Out with it boldly: Truth loves open dealing.
Tanta est ergo te mantis integritas Regina serenissima.
O good my Lord, no Latin;
I am not such a Truant since my coming,
As not to know the Language I have lived in:
A strange Tongue makes my cause more strange, suspiti∣os:
Pray speak in English; here are some will thank you,
If you speak truth, for their poor Mistress sake;
Believe me she he's had much wrong. Lord Cardinal,
The willing'st sin I ever yet committed,
May be absolved in English.
Noble Lady,
I am sorry my integrity should breed,
(And service to his Majesty and you)
So deep suspicion, where all faith was meant;
We come not by the way of Accusation,
To taint that honour every good Tongue blesses;
Nor to betray you any way to sorrow;
You have too much good Lady: But to know
How you stand minded in the weighty difference
Between the King and you, and to deliver
(Like free and honest men) our just opinions,
And comforts to our cause.
Most honoured Madam,
My Lord of York, out of his Noble nature,
Zeal and obedience he still bore your Grace,
Forgetting (like a good man) your late Censure
Both of his truth and him (which was too far)
Offers, as I doe, in a sign of peace,
His Service, and his Counsel.
To betray me.
My Lords, I thank you both for your good wills,
Ye speak like honest men, (pray God ye prove so)
But how to make ye suddenly an Answer
In such a point of weight, so near mine Honour,
(More near my Life I fear) with my weak wit;
And to such men of gravity and learning;
In truth I know not. I was set at work,
Among my Maids, full little (God knows) looking
Either for such men, or such business;
For her sake that I have been, for I feel
The last fit of my Greatness; good your Graces
Let me have time and Council for my Cause:
Alas, I am a Woman frendlesse, hopeless.
Madam,
You wrong the Kings love with these fears,
Your hopes and friends are infinite.
In England,
But little for my profit can you think Lords,
That any English man dare give me Council?
Or be a known friend against his Highness pleasure,
(Though he be grown so desperate to be honest)
And live a Subject? Nay forsooth, my Friends,
They that must weigh out my afflictions,
They that my trust must grow to, live not here,
They are (as all my other comforts) far hence
In mine own Country Lords.
I would your Grace
Would leave your griefs, and take my Counsel.
How Sir?
Put your maine cause into the Kings protection,
Hoe's loving and most gracious. Twill be much,
Both for your Honour better, and your Cause:
For if the trial of the Law o'er take ye,
You'll part away disgraced.
He tells you rightly.
Ye tell me what ye wish for both, my ruin:
Is this your Christian Council? Out upon ye.
Heaven is aboue all yet; there sits a Judge.
That no King can corrupt.
Your rage mistakes vs.
The more shame for ye; holy men I thought ye,
Upon my Soul two reverend Cardinal Virtues:
But Cardinal Sins, and hollow hearts I fear ye:
Mend 'em for shame my Lords: Is this your comfort?
The Cordial that ye bring a wretched Lady?
A woman lost among ye, laugh't at, scorned?
I will not wish ye half my miseries,
I have more Charity. But say I warned ye;
Take heed, for heavens sake take heed, least at once
The burden of my sorrows, fall upon ye.
Madam, this is a mere distraction,
You turn the good we offer, into envy.
Ye turn me into nothing. Woe upon ye,
And all such false Professors. Would you have me
(If you have any Justice, any Pity,
If ye be any thing but Churchmens habits)
Put my sick cause into his hands, that hates me?
Alas, he's banished me his Bed already,
His Love, too long ago. I am old my Lords,
And all the Fellowship I hold now with him
Is only my Obedience. What can happen
To me, aboue this wretchedness? All your Studies
Make me a Curse, like this.
Your fears are worse.
Have I lived thus long (let me speak my self,
Since Virtue finds no friends) a Wife, a true one?
A Woman (I dare say without Vainglory)
Never yet branded with Suspicion?
Have I, with all my full Affections
Still met the King? Loved him next Heaven? Obeyed him?
Bin (out of fondness) superstitious to him?
Almost forgot my Prayers to content him?
And am I thus rewarded? It is not well Lords.
Bring me a constant woman to her Husband,
One that ne'er dreamed a Joy, beyond his pleasure;
And to that Woman (when she has done most)
Yet will I add an Honour; a great Patience.
Madam, you wander from the good
We aim at.
My Lord,
I dare not make my self so guilty,
To give up willingly that Noble Title
Your Master wed me to: nothing but death
Shall ever divorce my Dignities.
Pray hear me.
Would I had never trod this English Earth,
Or felt the Flatteries that grow upon it:
Ye have Angels Faces; but Heaven knows your hearts.
What will become of me now, wretched Lady?
I am the most unhappy Woman living.
Alas (poor Wenches) where are now your Fortunes?
Shipwrecked upon a Kingdom, where no Pity,
No Friends, no Hope, no Kindred weep for me?
Almost no Grave allowed me? Like the Lily
That once was Mistress of the Field, and flourished,
Isle hang my head, and perish.
If your Grace
Could but be brought to know, our Ends are honest,
Youl'd feel more comfort. Why should we (good Lady)
Upon what cause wrong you? Alas, our Places,
The way of our Profession is against it;
We are to Cure such sorrows, not to sow 'em.
For Goodness sake, consider what you do,
How you may hurt your self: I, utterly
Grow from the Kings Acquaintance, by this Carriage.
The hearts of Princes kiss Obedience,
So much they love it. But to stubborn Spirits,
They swell and grow, as terrible as storms.
I know you have a Gentle, Noble temper,
A Soul as even as a Calm; Pray think vs,
Those we profess, Peace-makers, Friends, and Servants.
Madam, you'll find it so:
You wrong your Virtues
With these weak Women's fears. A Noble Spirit
As yours was, put into you, ever casts
Such doubts as false Coin from it. The King loves you,
Beware you loose it not: For vs (if you please
To trust vs in your business) we are ready
To use our utmost Studies, in your service.
Do what ye will, my Lords:
And pray forgive me;
If I have used my self unmannerly,
You know I am a Woman, lacking wit
To make a seemly answer to such persons.
Pray do my service to his Majesty,
He he's my heart yet, and shall have my Prayers
While I shall have my life. Come reverend Fathers,
Bestow your Councels on me. She now begs
That little thought when she set footing here,
She should have bought her Dignities so dear.
If you will now unite in your Complaints,
And force them with a Constancy, the Cardinal
Cannot stand under them. If you omit
The offer of this time, I cannot promise,
But that you shall sustain more new disgraces,
With these you bear already.
I am joyful
To meet the least occasion, that may give me
Remembrance of my Father-in-Law, the Duke,
To be revenged on him.
Which of the Peers
Have vncontemn'd gone by him, or at least
Strangely neglected? When did he regard
The stamp of Nobleness in any person
Out of himself?
My Lords, you speak your pleasures:
What he deserves of you and me, I know:
What we can do to him (though now the time
Gives way to vs) I much fear. If you cannot
Bar his access to the King, never attempt
Any thing on him: for he hath a Witchcraft
Over the King in's Tongue.
O fear him not,
His spell in that is out: the King hath found
Matter against him, that for ever mars
The Honey of his Language. No, he's settled
(Not to come off) in his displeasure.
Sir,
I should be glad to hear such News as this
Once every hour.
Believe it, this is true.
In the Divorce, his contrary proceedings
Are all unfolded: wherein he appears,
As I would wish mine Enemy.
How came
His practises to light?
Most strangely.
O how? how?
The Cardinals Letters to the Pope miscarried,
And came to the eye of the King, wherein was read
How that the Cardinal did entreat his Holiness
To stay the Judgment of the Divorce; for if
It did take place, I do (quoth he) perceive
My King is tangled in affection, to
A Creature of the Queens, Lady Anne Bullen.
He's the King this?
Believe it.
Will this work?
The King in this perceives him, how he coasts
And hedges his own way. But in this point,
All his tricks founder, and he brings his Physic
After his Patients death; the King already
Hath married the fair Lady.
Would he had.
May you be happy in your wish my Lord,
For I profess you have it.
Now all my joy
Trace the Conjunction.
My Amen too't.
All men's.
There's order given for her Coronation:
Marry this is yet but young, and may be left
To some ears unrecounted. But my Lords
She is a gallant Creature, and complete
In mind and feature. I persuade me, from her
Will fall some blessing to this Land, which shall
In it be memorised.
But will the King
Digest this Letter of the Cardinals?
The Lord forbid.
Marry Amen.
No, no:
There be more Wasps that buzz about his Nose,
Will make this sting the sooner. Cardinal Campeius,
Is stolen away to Rome, hath 'tane no leave,
He's left the cause of the King vnhandled, and
Is posted as the Agent of our Cardinal,
To second all his plot. I do assure you,
The King cried Ha, at this.
Now God incense him,
And let him cry Ha, louder.
But my Lord
When returns Cranmer?
He is returned in his Opinions, which
Have satisfied the King for his Divorce,
Together with all famous Colleges
Almost in Christendom: shortly (I believe)
His second Marriage shall be published, and
Her Coronation▪ Katherine no more
Shall be called Queen, but Princess Dowager,
And Widow to Prince Arthur.
This same Cranmer's
A worthy Fellow, and hath tan much pain
In the Kings business.
He he's, and we shall see him
For it an Arch-byshop.
So I hear.
It is so.
The Cardinal.
Observe, observe, hoe's moody.
The Packet Cromwell,
Gived you the King?
To his own hand, in's Bed-chamber.
Looked he of the inside of the Paper?
Presently
He did vnseale them, and the first he viewed,
He did it with a Serious mind: a heed
Was in his countenance. You he bad
Attend him here this Morning.
Is he ready to come abroad?
I think by this he is.
Leave me a while.
It shall be to the Duchess of Alanson,
The French Kings Sister; He shall marry her.
Anne Bullen? No: Isle no Anne Bullens for him,
There's more in it then fair Visage. Bullen?
No, we'll no Bullens: Speedily I wish
To hear from Rome. The Marchioness of Penbroke?
He's discontented.
Maybe he hears the King
Does whet his Anger to him.
Sharpe enough,
Lord for thy Justice.
The late Queens Gentlewoman?
A Knights Daughter
To be her Mistress Mistress? The Queens, Queen?
This Candle burns not clear, it is I must snuff it,
Then out it goes. What though I know her virtuous
And well deserving? yet I know her for
A spleeny Lutheran, and not wholesome to
Our cause, that she should lye in the bosom of
Our hard ruled King. Again, there is sprung up
An Heretic, an Arch-one; Cranmer, one
Hath crawled into the favour of the King,
And is his Oracle.
He is vexed at something.
I would it were something yt would fret the string,
The Master-cord on's heart.
The King, the King.
What piles of wealth hath he accumulated
To his own portion? And what expense by' the hour
Seems to flow from him? How, in the name of Thrift
Does he rake this together? Now my Lords,
Saw you the Cardinal?
My Lord, we have
Stood here observing him. Some strange Commotion
Is in his brain: He bites his lip, and starts,
Stops on a sudden, looks upon the ground,
Then lays his finger on his Temple: straight
Springs out into fast gate, then stops again,
Strikes his breast hard, and anon, he casts
His eye against the Moon: in most strange Postures
We have seen him set himself.
It may well be,
There is a mutiny in's mind. This morning,
Papers of State he sent me, to peruse
As I required: and wot you what I found
There (on my Conscience put unwittingly)
Forsooth an Inuentory, thus importing
The several parcels of his Plate his Treasure,
Rich Stuffs and Ornaments of Household, which
I find at such proud Rate, that it out-speakes
Possession of a Subject.
It's Heavens will,
Some Spirit put this paper in the Packet,
To bless your eye withal.
If we did think
His Contemplation w•re aboue the earth,
And fixed on Spiritual object, he should still
Dwell in his Musings, but I am afraid
His Thinkings are below the Moon, not worth
His serious considering.
Heaven forgive me,
Ever God bless your Highness.
Good my Lord,
You are full of Heavenly stuff, and bear the Inuentory
Of your best Graces, in your mind; the which
You were now running o'er: you have scarce time
To steal from Spiritual leisure, a brief span
To keep your earthly Audit, sure in that
I deem you an ill Husband, and am gald
To have you therein my Companion.
Sir,
For Holy Offices I have a time; a time
To think upon the part of business, which
I bear in the State: and Nature does require
Her times of preservation, which perforce
I her frail son, amongst my Brethren mortal,
Must give my tendance to.
You have said well.
And ever may your Highness yoke together,
(As I will lend you cause) my doing well,
With my well saying.
It is well said again,
And it is a kind of good deed to say well,
And yet words are no deeds. My Father loved you,
He said he did, and with his deed did Crown
His word upon you. Since I had my Office,
I have kept you next my Heart, have not alone
Employed you where high Profits might come home,
But par'd my present Hauings, to bestow
My Bounties upon you.
What should this mean?
The Lord increase this business.
Have I not made you
The prime man of the State? I pray you tell me.
If what I now pronounce, you have found true▪
And if you may confess it, say withal
If you are bound to vs, or no. What say you?
My Sovereign, I confess your Royal graces
Showered on me daily, have been more then could
My studied purposes requite, which went
Beyond all mans endeavours. My endeavours,
Have ever come too short of my Desires,
Yet filled with my Abilities: Mine own ends
Have been mine so, that evermore they pointed
To the good of your most Sacred Person, and
The profit of the State. For your great Graces
Heaped upon me (poor Vndeseruer) I
Can nothing render but Allegiant thanks,
My Prayers to heaven for you; my Loyalty
Which ever he's, and ever shall be growing,
Till death (that Winter) kill it.
Fairly answered:
A Loyal, and obedient Subject is
Therein illustrated, the Honour of it
Does pay the Act of it, as in the contrary
The foulness is the punishment. I presume,
That as my hand he's opened Bounty to you,
My heart dropped Love, my power rained Honour, more
On you, then any: So your Hand, and Heart,
Your Brain, and every Function of your power,
Should, notwithstanding that your bond of duty,
As it were in Loves particular, be more
To me your Friend, then any.
I do profess,
That for your Highness good, I ever laboured
More then mine own: that am, have, and will be
(Though all the world should crack their duty to you,
And throw it from their Soul, though perils did
Abound, as thick as thought could make 'em, and
Appear in forms more horrid) yet my Duty,
As doth a Rock against the chiding Flood,
Should the approach of this wilde River break,
And stand unshaken yours.
It is Nobly spoken:
Take notice Lords, he he's a Loyal breast,
For you have seen him open it. Read o'er this,
And after this, and then to Breakfast with
What appetite you have.
What should this mean?
What sudden Anger's this? How have I reaped it?
He parted Frowning from me, as if Ruin
Leaped from his Eyes. So looks the chafed Lyon
Upon the daring Huntsman that has galled him:
Then makes him nothing. I must read this paper:
I fear the Story of his Anger. It is so:
This paper he's undone me: It is the Account
Of all that world of Wealth I have drawn together
For mine own ends, (Indeed to gain the Popedome,
And fee my Friends in Rome.) O Negligence!
Fit for a Fool to fall by: What cross Devil
Made me put this maine Secret in the Packet
I sent the King? Is there no way to cure this?
No new device to beat this from his Brains?
I know twill stir him strongly; yet I know
A way, if it take right, in spite of Fortune
Will bring me off again. What's this? To the Pope?
The Letter (as I live) with all the Business
I writ too's Holiness. Nay then, farewell:
I have touched the highest point of all my Greatness,
And from that full Meridian of my Glory,
I haste now to my Setting. I shall fall
Like a bright exhalation in the Evening,
And no man see me more.
Hear the Kings pleasure Cardinal,
Who commands you
To render up the Great Seal presently
Into our hands, and to Confine your self
To Asher-house, my Lord of Winchesters,
Till you hear further from his Highness.
Stay:
Whore's your Commission? Lords, words cannot carry
Authority so weighty.
Who dare cross 'em,
Bearing the Kings will from his mouth expressly?
Till I find more then will, or words to do it,
(I mean your malice) know, Officious Lords,
I dare, and must deny it. Now I feel
Of what course Mettle ye are molded, Envy,
How eagerly ye follow my Disgraces
As if it fed ye, and how sleek and wanton
Ye appear in every thing may bring my ruin?
Follow your envious courses, men of Malice;
You have Christian warrant for 'em, and no doubt
In time will find their fit Rewards. That Seal
You ask with such a Violence, the King
(Mine, and your Master) with his own hand, gave me:
Bad me enjoy it, with the Place, and Honours
During my life; and to confirm his Goodness,
Ti'de it by Letters Patents. Now, who'll take it?
The King that gave it.
It must be himself then.
Thou art a proud Traitor, Priest.
Proud Lord, thou lie:
Within these forty hours, Surrey durst better
Have burnt that Tongue, then said so.
Thy Ambition
(Thou Scarlet sin) robbed this bewailing Land
Of Noble Buckingham, my Father-in-Law,
The heads of all thy Brother-Cardinals,
(With thee, and all thy best parts bound together)
Weighed not a hair of his. Plague of your policy,
You sent me Deputy for Ireland,
Far from his succour; from the King, from all
That might have mercy on the fault, thou gau'st him:
Whilst your great Goodness, out of holy pity,
Absolved him with an Axe.
This, and all else
This talking Lord can lay upon my credit,
I answer, is most false. The Duke by Law
Found his deserts. How innocent I was
From any private malice in his end,
His Noble Jury, and foul Cause can witness.
If I loved many words, Lord, I should tell you,
You have as little Honesty, as Honour,
That in the way of Loyalty, and Truth,
Toward the King, my ever Royal Master,
Dare mate a sounder man then Surrie can be,
And all that love his follies.
By my Soul,
Your long Coat (Priest) protects you,
Thou should feel
My Sword in the life blood of thee else. My Lords,
Can ye endure to hear this Arrogance?
And from this Fellow? If we live thus tamely,
To be thus Iaded by a piece of Scarlet,
Farewell Nobility: let his Grace go forward,
And dare vs with his Cap, like Larks.
All Goodness
Is poison to thy Stomach.
Yes, that goodness
Of gleaning all the Lands wealth into one,
Into your own hands (Cardinal) by Extortion:
The goodness of your intercepted Packets
You writ to 'th Pope, against the King: your goodness
Since you provoke me, shall be most notorious.
My Lord of Norfolk, as you are truly Noble,
As you respect the common good, the State
Of our despised Nobility, our Issues,
(Whom if he live, will scarce be Gentlemen)
Produce the grand sum of his sins, the Articles
Collected from his life. Isle startle you
Worse then the Sacring Bell, when the browne Wench
Lay kissing in your Arms, Lord Cardinal.
How much me thinks, I could despise this man,
But that I am bound in Charity against it.
Those Articles, my Lord, are in the Kings hand:
But thus much, they are foul ones.
So much fairer
And spotless, shall mine Innocence arise,
When the King knows my Truth.
This cannot save you:
I thank my Memory, I yet remember
Some of these Articles, and out they shall.
Now, if you can blush, and cry guilty Cardinal,
You'll show a little Honesty.
Speak on Sir,
I dare your worst Objections: If I blush,
It is to see a Nobleman want manners.
I had rather want those, then my head;
Have at you.
First, that without the Kings assent or knowledge,
You wrought to be a Legate, by which power
You maimed the Jurisdiction of all Bishops.
Then, That in all you writ to Rome, or else
To Foreign Princes, Ego &amp; Rex mouse
Was still inscribed: in which you brought the King
To be your Servant.
Then, that without the knowledge
Either of King or Council, when you went
Ambassador to the Emperor, you made bold
To carry into Flanders, the Great Seal.
Item, You sent a large Commission
To Gregory de Cassado, to conclude
Without the Kings will, or the States allowance,
A League between his Highness, and Ferrari.
That out of mere Ambition, you have cause
Your holy-Hat to be stamped on the Kings Coin.
Then, That you have sent innumerable substance,
(By what means got, I leave to your own conscience)
To furnish Rome, and to prepare the ways
You have for Dignities, to the mere undoing
Of all the Kingdom. Many more there are,
Which since they are of you, and odious,
I will not taint my mouth with.
O my Lord,
Press not a falling man too far: it is Virtue:
His faults lye open to the Laws, let •em
(Not you) correct him. My heart weeps to see him
So little, of his great Self.
I forgive him.
Lord Cardinal, the Kings further pleasure is,
Because all those things you have done of late
By your power Legatiue within this Kingdom,
Fall into' the compass of a Praemunire;
That therefore such a Writ be sued against you,
To forfeit all your Goods, Lands, Tenements,
Castles, and whatsoever, and to be
Out of the Kings protection. This is my Charge.
And so we'll leave you to your Meditations
How to live better. For your stubborn answer
About the giving back the Great Seal to vs,
The King shall know it, and (no doubt) shall thank you.
So fare you well, my little good Lord Cardinal.
So farewell, to the little good you bear me.
Farewell? A long farewell to all my Greatness.
This is the state of Man; to day he puts forth
The tender Leaves of hopes, to morrow Blossoms,
And bears his blushing Honours thick upon him:
The third day, comes a Frost; a killing Frost,
And when he thinks, good easy man, full surely
His Greatness is a ripening, nippes his root,
And then he false as I do. I have ventured
Like little wanton Boys that swim on bladders:
This many Summers in a Sea of Glory,
But far beyond my depth: my high-blowne Pride
At length broke under me, and now he's left me
Weary, and old with Service, to the mercy
Of a rude stream, that must for ever hide me.
Vain pomp, and glory of this World, I hate ye▪
I feel my heart new opened. Oh how wretched
Is that poor man, that hangs on Princes favours?
There is betwixt that smile we would aspire too,
That sweet Aspect of Princes, and their ruin,
More pangs, and fears then wars, or women have;
And when he falls, he falls like Lucifer,
Never to hope again.
Why how now Cromwell?
I have no power to speak Sir.
What, amazed
At my misfortunes? Can thy Spirit wonder
A great man should decline. Nay, and you weep
I am fallen indeed.
How does your Grace.
Why well:
Never so truly happy, my good Cromwell,
I know my self now, and I feel within me,
A peace aboue all earthly Dignities,
A still, and quiet Conscience. The King he's cured me,
I humbly thank his Grace: and from these shoulders
These ruined Pillars, out of pity, taken
A load, would sink a Navy, (too much Honour.)
O it is a burden Cromwell, it is a burden
Too heavy for a man, that hopes for Heaven.
I am glad your Grace,
He's made that right use of it.
I hope I have:
I am able now (me thinks)
(Out of a Fortitude of Soul, I feel)
To endure more Miseries, and greater far
Then my Weake-hearted Enemies, dare offer.
What News abroad?
The heaviest, and the worst,
Is your displeasure with the King.
God bless him.
The next is, that Sir Thomas Moore is chosen Lord Chancellor, in your place.
That's somewhat sudden.
But he's a Learned man. May he continue
Long in his Highness favour, and do Justice
For Truths-sake, and his Conscience; that his bones,
When he he's run his course, and sleeps in Blessings,
May have a Tomb of Orphants tears wept on him.
What more?
That Cranmer is returned with welcome;
Installed Lord Arch-byshop of Canterbury.
That's News indeed.
Last, that the Lady Anne,
Whom the King hath in secrecy long married,
This day was viewed in open, as his Queen,
Going to Chapel: and the voice is now
Only about her Coronation.
There was the weight that pulled me down.
O Cromwell,
The King he's gone beyond me: All my Glories
In that one woman, I have lost for ever.
No Sun, shall ever usher forth mine Honours,
Or gilde again the Noble Troops that weighted
Upon my smiles. Go get thee from me Cromwell,
I am a poor fallen man, unworthy now
To be thy Lord, and Master. Seek the King
(That Sun, I pray may never set) I have told him,
What, and how true thou art; he will advance thee:
Some little memory of me, will stir him
(I know his Noble Nature) not to let
Thy hopeful service perish too. Good Cromwell
Neglect him not; make use now, and provide
For thine own future safety.
O my Lord,
Must I then leave you? Must I needs forgo
So good, so Noble, and so true a Master?
Bear witness, all that have not hearts of Iron,
With what a sorrow Cromwell leaves his Lord.
The King shall have my service; but my prayers
For ever, and for ever shall be yours.
Cromwell, I did not think to shed a tear
In all my Miseries: But thou hast forced me
(Out of thy honest truth) to play the Woman.
Let's dry our eyes: And thus far hear me Cromwell,
And when I am forgotten, as I shall be,
And sleep in dull cold Marble, where no mention
Of me, more must be heard of: Say I taught thee;
Say Wolsey, that once trod the ways of Glory,
And sounded all the Depths, and Shoals of Honour,
Found thee a way (out of his wrack) to rise in:
A sure, and safe one, though thy Master mist it.
Mark but my Fall, and that that Ruined me:
Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away Ambition,
By that sin fell the Angels: how can man then
(The Image of his Maker) hope to win by it?
Love thy self last, cherish those hearts that hate thee;
Corruption wins not more then Honesty.
Still in thy right hand, carry gentle Peace
To silence envious Tongues. Be just, and fear not;
Let all the ends thou aim at, be thy Countries,
Thy Gods, and Truths. Then if thou fall (O Cromwell)
Thou fall a blessed Martyr.
Serve the King: And prithee lead me in:
There take an Inuentory of all I have,
To the last penny, it is the Kings. My Robe,
And my Integrity to Heaven, is all,
I dare now call mine own. O Cromwell, Cromwell,
Had I but served my God, with half the Zeal
I served my King: he would not in mine Age
Have left me naked to mine Enemies.
Good Sir, have patience.
So I have. Farewell
The Hopes of Court, my Hopes in Heaven do dwell.
Y' are well met once again.
So are you.
You come to take your stand here, and behold
The Lady Anne, pass from her Coronation.
It is all my business. At our last encounter,
The Duke of Buckingham came from his Trial.
It is very true. But that time offered sorrow,
This general joy.
It is well: The Citizens
I am sure have shown at full their Royal minds,
As let 'em have their rights, they are ever forward
In Celebration of this day with Shows,
Pageants, and Sights of Honour.
Never greater,
Not Isle assure you better taken Sir.
May I be bold to ask what that contains,
That Paper in your hand.
Yes, it is the List
Of those that claim their Offices this day,
By custom of the Coronation.
The Duke of Suffolk is the first, and claims
To be high Steward; Next the Duke of Norfolk,
He to be Earl Marshall: you may read the rest.
I thank you Sir: Had I not known those customs,
I should have been beholding to your Paper:
But I beseech you, what's become of Katherine
The Princess Dowager? How goes her business?
That I can tell you too. The Archbishop
Of Canterbury, accompanied with other
Learned, and Reverend Fathers of his Order,
Held a late Court at Du•stable; six miles off
From Ampthill, where the Princess lay, to which
She was often cited by them, but appeared not:
And to be short, for not Appearance, and
The Kings late Scruple, by the maine assent
Of all these Learned men, she was divorced,
And the late Marriage made of none effect:
Since which, she was removed to Kymmal•on,
Where she remains now sick.
Alas good Lady.
The Trumpets sound: Stand close,
The Queen is coming.
A lively Flourish of Trumpets.
Then, two Judges.
Lord Chancellor, with Purse and Mace before him.
Choristers singing.
Mayor of London, bearing the Mace. Then Garter, in his Coat of Arms, and on his head he wore a Gilt Copper Crown.
Marquess Dorset, bearing a Sceptre of Gold, on his head, a Demi Coronall of Gold. With him, the Earl of Surrey, bearing the Rod of Silver with the Dove, Crowned with an Earls Coronet. Collars of Esses.
Duke of Suffolk, in his Robe of Estate, his Coronet on his head, bearing a long white Wand, as High Steward. With him, the Duke of Norfolk, with the Rod of Marshalship, a Coronet on his head. Collars of Esses.
A Canopy, borne by four of the Cinque-Ports, under it the Queen in her Robe, in her hair, richly adorned with Pearl, Crowned. On each side her, the Bishops of London, and Winchester.
The Old Duchess of Norfolk, in a Coronall of Gold, wrought with Flowers bearing the Queens Train.
Certain Ladies or Countesses, with plain Circlets of Gold, without Flowers.
A Royal Train believe me: These I know:
Who's that that bears the Sceptre?
Marquess Dorset,
And that the Earl of Surrey, with the Rod.
A bold brave Gentleman. That should bee
The Duke of Suffolk.
It is the same: high Steward.
And that my Lord of Norfolk?
Yes.
Heaven bless thee,
Thou hast the sweetest face I ever looked on.
Sir, as I have a Soul, she is an Angel;
Our King has all the Indies in his Arms,
And more, and richer, when he strains that Lady,
I cannot blame his Conscience.
They that bear
The Cloth of Honour over her, are four Barons
Of the Cinque Ports.
Those men are happy,
And so are all, are near her.
I take it, she that carries up the Train,
Is that old Noble Lady, Duchess of Norfolk.
It is, and all the rest are Countesses.
Their Coronets say so. These are Stars indeed,
And sometimes falling ones.
No more of that.
God save you Sir. Where have you bin broiling?
Among the crowed in the Abbey, where a finger
Could not be wedged in more: I am stifled
With the mere rankness of their joy.
You saw the Ceremony?
That I did.
How was it?
Well worth the seeing.
Good Sir, speak it to vs?
As well as I am able. The rich stream
Of Lords, and Ladies, having brought the Queen
To a prepared place in the Queen•e, fell off
A distance from her; while her Grace sate down
To rest a while, some half an hour, or so,
In a rich Chair of State, opposing freely
The Beauty of her Person to the People.
Believe me Sir, she is the goodliest Woman
That ever lay by man: which when the people
Had the full view of, such a noise arose,
As the shrouds make at Sea, in a stiff Tempest,
As loud, and to as many Tunes. Hats▪ Cloaks,
(Doublets, I think) flew up, and had their Faces
Bin loose, this day they had been lost. Such joy
I never saw before. Great bellied women,
That had not half a week to go, like Rams
In the old time of War, would shake the press
And make 'em reel before 'em. No man living
Could say this is my wife there, all were woven
So strangely in one piece.
But what followed?
At length, her Grace rose, and with modest paces
Came to the Altar, where she kneeled, and Saint-like
Cast her fair eyes to Heaven, and prayed devoutly.
Then rose again, and bowed her to the people:
When by the Arch-byshop of Canterbury,
She had all the Royal makings of a Queen;
As holy Oil, Edward Confessors Crown,
The Rod, and Bird of Peace, and all such Emblems
Laid Nobly on her: which performed, the Quire
With all the choicest Music of the Kingdom,
Together sung Te Deum. So she parted,
And with the same full State paced back again
To Yorke-Place, where the Feast is held.
Sir,
You must no more call it Yorke-place that's past:
For since the Cardinal fell, that Titles lost,
It is now the Kings, and called White-Hall.
I know it:
But it is so lately altered, that the old name
Is fresh about me.
What two Reverend Bishops
Were those that went on each side of the Queen?
Stokeley and Gardiner, the one of Winchester,
Newly preferred from the Kings Secretary:
The other London.
He of Winchester
Is held no great good lover of the Archbishops,
The virtuous Cranmer.
All the Land knows that:
How ever, yet there is no great breach, when it comes
Cranmer will find a Friend will not shrink from him.
Who may that be, I pray you.
Thomas Cromwell,
A man in much esteem with the King, and truly
A worthy Friend. The King he's made him
Master of the Jewel House,
And one already of the Privy Council.
He will deserve more.
Yes without all doubt.
Come Gentlemen▪ ye shall go my way
Which is to th Court, and there ye shall be my Guests:
Something I can command. As I walk thither,
Isle tell ye more.
You may command vs Sir.
How do's your Grace?
O Griffith, sick to death:
My Legs like laden Branches bow to the Earth,
Willing to leave their burden: Reach a Chair,
So now (me thinks) I feel a little ease.
Did thou not tell me Griffith, as thou lead me,
That the great Child of Honour, Cardinal Wolsey
Was dead?
Yes Madam: but I thank your Grace
Out of the pain you suffered, gave no ear too't.
Prithee good Griffith, tell me how he dyed▪
If well, he stepped before me happily
For my example.
Well, the voice goes Madam,
For after the stout Earl Northumberland
Arrested him at Yo•ke, and brought him forward
As a man sorely tainted, to his Answer,
He fell sick suddenly, and grew so ill
He could not sit his Mule.
Alas poor man▪
At last, with easy Rodes, he came to Leicester,
Lodged in the Abbey; where the reverend Abbot
With all his Covent, honourably received him;
To whom he gave these words. O Father Abbot,
An old man, broken with the storms of State,
Is come to lay his weary bones among ye▪
Give him a little earth for Charity.
So went to bed; where eagerly his sickness
Pursued him still, and three nights after this,
About the hour of eight, which he himself
Foretold should be his last, full of Repentance,
Continual Meditations, Tears, and Sorrows,
He gave his Honours to the world again,
His blessed part to Heaven, and slept in peace.
So may he rest,
His Faults lye gently on him:
Yet thus far Griffith, give me leave to speak him,
And yet with Charity. He was a man
Of an unbounded stomach, ever ranking
Himself with Princes. One that by suggestion
Tied all the Kingdom. Symonie, was fair play,
His own Opinion was his Law. In the presence
He would say untruths, and be ever double
Both in his words, and meaning. He was never
(But where he meant to Ruin) pitiful.
His Promises, were as he then was, Mighty:
But his performance, as he is now, Nothing:
Of his own body he was ill, and gave
The Clergy ill example.
Noble Madam:
Men's evil manners, live in Brass, their Virtues
We write in Water. May it please your Highness
To hear me speak his good now?
Yes good Griffith,
I were malicious else.
This Cardinal,
Though from an humble Stock, undoubtedly
Was fashioned to much Honour. From his Cradle
He was a Scholar, and a ripe, and good one:
Exceeding wise, fair spoken, and persuading:
Lofty, and sour to them that loved him not:
But, to those men that sought him, sweet as Summer.
And though he were unsatisfied in getting,
(Which was a sin) yet in bestowing, Madam,
He was most Princely: Ever witness for him
Those twins of Learning, that he raised in you,
Ipswich and Oxford: one of which, fell with him,
Unwilling to out-liue the good that did it.
The other (though unfinished) yet so Famous,
So excellent in Art, and still so rising,
That Christendom shall ever speak his Virtue.
His Overthrow, heaped Happiness upon him:
For then, and not till then, he felt himself,
And found the Blessedness of being little▪
And to add greater Honours to his Age
Then man could give him; he dyed, fearing God.
After my death, I wish no other Herald,
No other speaker of my living Actions,
To keep mine Honour, from Corruption,
But such an honest Chronicler as Griffith.
Whom I most hated Living, thou hast made me
With thy Religious Truth, and Modesty,
(Now in his Ashes) Honour: Peace be with him.
Patience, be near me still, and set me lower.
I have not long to trouble thee. Good Griffith,
Cause the Musicians play me that sad note
I named my Knell; whilst I sit meditating
On that Celestial Harmony I go too.
She is asleep: Good wench, let's sit down quiet,
For fear we wake her. Softly, gentle Patience.
Spirits of peace, where are ye? Are ye all gone?
And leave me here in wretchedness, behind ye?
Madam, we are here.
It is not you I call for,
Saw ye none enter since I slept?
None Madam.
No? Saw you not even now a blessed Troop
Inuit me to a Banquet, whose bright faces
Cast thousand beams upon me, like the Sun?
They promised me eternal Happiness,
And brought me Garlands (Griffith) which I feel
I am not worthy yet to wear: I shall assuredly.
I am most joyful Madam, such good dreams
Possess your Fancy.
Bid the Music leave,
They are harsh and heavy to me.
Do you note
How much her Grace is altered on the sudden?
How long her face is drawn? How pale she looks,
And of an earthy cold? Mark her eyes?
She is going Wench. Pray, pray.
Heaven comfort her.
And't like your Grace—
You are a saucy Fellow,
Deserve we no more Reverence?
You are too blame,
Knowing she will not loose her wonted Greatness
To use so rude behaviour. Go too, kneel.
I humbly do entreat your Highness pardon,
My hast made me unmannerly. There is staying
A Gentleman sent from the King, to see you.
Admit him entrance Griffith. But this Fellow
Let me ne'er see again.
If my sight fail not,
You should be Lord Ambassador from the Emperor,
My Royal Nephew, and your name Capuchius.
Madam the same. Your Servant.
O my Lord,
The Times and Titles now are altered strangely
With me, since first you knew me.
But I pray you,
What is your pleasure with me?
Noble Lady,
First mine own service to your Grace, the next
The Kings request, that I would visit you,
Who grieves much for your weakness, and by me
Sends you his Princely Commendations,
And heartily entreats you take good comfort.
O my good Lord, that comfort comes too late,
It is like a Pardon after Execution;
That gentle Physic given in time, had cured me:
But now I am past all Comforts here, but Prayers.
How does his Highness?
Madam, in good health.
So may he ever do, and ever flourish,
When I shall dwell with Worms, and my poor name
Banished the Kingdom. Patience, is that Letter
I cause you write, yet sent away?
No Madam.
Sir, I most humbly pray you to deliver
This to my Lord the King.
Most willing Madam.
In which I have commended to his goodness
The Model of our chaste loves: his young daughter,
The dews of Heaven fall thick in Blessings on her,
Beseeching him to give her virtuous breeding.
She is young, and of a Noble modest Nature,
I hope she will deserve well; and a little
To love her for her Mothers sake, that loved him,
Heaven knows how dearly.
My next poor Petition,
Is, that his Noble Grace would have some pity
Upon my wretched women, that so long
Have followed both my Fortunes, faithfully,
Of which there is not one, I dare avow
(And now I should not lye) but will deserve
For Virtue, and true Beauty of the Soul,
For honesty, and decent Carriage
A right good Husband (let him be a Noble)
And sure those men are happy that shall have 'em.
The last is for my men, they are the poorest,
(But poverty could never draw 'em from me)
That they may have their wages, duly paid 'em,
And something over to remember me by.
If Heaven had pleased to have given me longer life
And able means, we had not parted thus.
These are the whole Contents, and good my Lord,
By that you love the dearest in this world,
As you wish Christian peace to souls departed,
Stand these poor peoples Friend, and urge the King
To do me this last right.
By Heaven I will,
Or let me loose the fashion of a man.
I thank you honest Lord. Remember me
In all humility unto his Highness:
Say his long trouble now is passing
Out of this world. Tell him in death I blessed him
(For so I will) mine eyes grow dim. Farewell
My Lord. Griffith farewell. Nay Patience,
Vou must not leave me yet. I must to bed,
Call in more women. When I am dead, good Wench,
Let me be used with Honour; strew me over
With Maiden Flowers, that all the world may know
I was a chaste Wife, to my Grave: Embalm me,
Then lay me forth (although vnqueen'd) yet like
A Queen, and Daughter to a King enter me.
I can no more.
It's one a clock Boy, is it not.
It hath struck.
These should be hours for necessities,
Not for delights: Times to repair our Nature
With comforting repose, and not for vs
To waste these times. Good hour of night Sir Thomas:
Whether so late?
Came you from the King, my Lord?
I did Sir Thomas, and left him at Primero
With the Duke of Suffolk.
I must to him too
Before he go to bed. Isle take my leave.
Not yet Sir Thomas Louell: what's the matter?
It seems you are in hast: and if there be
No great offence belongs too't, give your Friend
Some touch of your late business: Affairs that walk
(As they say Spirits do) at midnight, have
In them a wilder Nature, then the business
That seeks dispatch by day.
My Lord, I love you;
And durst commend a secret to your ear
Much weightier then this work. The Queens in Labour
They say in great Extremity, and feared
She'll with the Labour, end.
The fruit she goes with
I pray for heartily, that it may find
Good time, and live: but for the Stock Sir Thomas,
I wish it grubbed up now.
Me thinks I could
Cry the Amen, and yet my Conscience says
Shoe's a good Creature, and sweet-Ladie do's
Deserve our better wishes.
But Sir, Sir,
Hear me Sir Thomas, y' are a Gentleman
Of mine own way. I know you Wise, Religious,
And let me tell you, it will ne'er be well,
Twill not Sir Thomas Louell, tak't of me,
Till Cranmer, Cromwell, her two hands, and she
Sleep in their Graves.
Now Sir, you speak of two
The most remarked in the Kingdom: as for Cromwell,
Beside that of the Iewell-House, is made Master
Of the Rolls, and the Kings Secretary. Further Sir,
Stands in the gap and Trade of more Preferments,
With which the Lime will load him. The Archbishop
Is the Kings hand, and tongue, and who dare speak
One syllable against him?
Yes, yes, Sir Thomas,
There are that Date, and I my self have ventured
To speak my mind of him: and indeed this day,
Sir (I may tell it you) I think I have
Incensed the Lords of the Council, that he is
(For so I know he is, they know he is)
A most arch-heretic, a Pestilence
That does infect the Land: with which, they moved
Have broken with the King, who hath so far
Given care to our Complaint, of his great Grace,
And Princely Care, fore-seeing those fell Mischiefs,
Our Reasons laid before him, hath commanded
To morrow Morning to the Council Board
He be convented. He's a rank weed Sir Thomas,
And we must root him out. From your Affairs
I hinder you too long: Good night, Sir Thomas.
Many good nights, my Lord, I rest your servant.
Charles, I will play no more to night,
My minds not on it, you are too hard for me.
Sir, I did never win of you before.
But little Charles,
Nor shall not when my Fancies on my play.
Now Louel, from the Queen what is the News.
I could not personally deliver to her
What you commanded me, but by her woman,
I sent your Message, who returned her thanks
In the greatest hum•se, and desired your Highness
Most heartily to pr• 〈◊〉▪
What say 〈◊〉 Ha?
To pray for her? When• 〈◊〉 •e crying out?
So said her woman, and that her suffrance made
Almost each pang, a death.
Alas good Lady.
God safely quit her of her Burden, and
With gentle Travail, to the gladding of
Your Highness with an Heir.
It is midnight Charles,
Prithee to bed, and in thy Prayers remember
The estate of my poor Queen. Leave me alone▪
For I must think of that, which company
Would not be friendly too.
I wish your Highness
A quiet night, and my good Mistress will
Remember in my Prayers.
Charles good night.
Well Sir, what follows?
Sir, I have brought my Lord the Arch-byshop,
As you commanded me.
Ha? Canterbury?
I my good Lord.
It is true: where is he Denny?
He attends your Highness pleasure.
Bring him to Vs.
This is about that, which the Bishop spake,
I am happily come hither.
Avoid the Gallery.
Ha? I have said. Be gone.
What?
I am fearful: Wherefore frowns he thus?
It is his Aspect of Terror. Ell's not well.
How now my Lord?
You do desire to know wherefore
I sent for you.
It is my duty
To attend your Highness pleasure.
Pray you arise
My good and gracious Lord of Canterbury:
Come, you and I must walk a turn together:
I have News to tell you.
Come, come, give me your hand.
Ah my good Lord, I grieve at what I speak,
And am right sorry to repeat what follows.
I have, and most unwillingly of late
Heard many grievous. I do say my Lord
Grievous complaints of you; which being considered,
Have moved Vs, and our Council, that you shall
This Morning come before vs, where I know
You cannot with such freedom purge your self,
But that till further Trial, in those Charges
Which will require your Answer, you must take
Your patience to you, and be well contented
To make your house our Tower: you, a Brother of vs
It fits we thus proceed, or else no witness
Would come against you.
I humbly thank your Highness,
And am right glad to catch this good occasion
Most thoroughly to be winnowed, where my Chafe
And Corn shall fly asunder. For I know
There's none stands under more calumnious tongues,
Then I my self, poor man.
Stand up, good Canterbury,
Thy Truth, and thy Integrity is rooted
In vs thy Friend. Give me thy hand, stand up,
Prithee let's walk. Now by my Holydame,
What manner of man are you? My Lord, I looked
You would have given me your Petition, that
I should have tan some pains, to bring together
Your self, and your Accusers, and to have heard you
Without endurance further.
Most dread Liege,
The good I stand on, is my Truth and Honesty:
If they shall fail, I with mine Enemies
Will triumph o'er my person, which I weigh not,
Being of those Virtues vacant. I fear nothing
What can be said against me.
Know you not
How your state stands in the world, with the whole world?
Your Enemies are many, and not small; their practises
Must bear the same proportion, and not ever
The Justice and the Truth of the question carries
The dew of the Verdict with it; at what case
Might corrupt minds procure, Knaves as corrupt
To swear against you: Such things have been done.
You are Potently opposed, and with a Malice
Of as great Size. Wean you of better luck,
I mean in perjured Witness, then your Master,
Whose Minister you are, whiles here he lived
Upon this naughty Earth? Go too, go too,
You take a Precepit for no leap of danger,
And woe your own destruction.
God, and your Majesty
Protect mine innocence, or I fall into
The trap is laid for me.
Be of good cheer,
They shall no more prevail, then we give way too:
Keep comfort to you, and this Morning see
You do appear before them. If they shall chance
In charging you with matters, to commit you:
The best persuasions to the contrary
Fail not to use, and with what vehemence
The occasion shall instruct you. If entreaties
Will render you no remedy, this Ring
Deliver them, and your Appeal to vs
There make before them. Look, the goodman weeps:
He's honest on mine Honour. Gods blessed Mother,
I swear he is true-hearted, and a soul
None better in my Kingdom. Get you gone,
And do as I have bid you.
He he's strangled his Language in his tears.
Come back: what mean you?
Isle not come back, the tidings that I bring
Will make my boldness, manners. Now good Angels
Fly o'er thy Royal head, and shade thy person
Under their blessed wings.
Now by thy looks
I guess thy Message. Is the Queen delivered?
Say I, and of a boy.
I, I my Liege,
And of a lovely Boy: the God of heaven
Both now, and ever bless her: It is a Girl
Promises Boys hereafter. Sir, your Queen
Desires your Visitation, and to be
Acquainted with this stranger; it is as like you,
As Cherry, is to Cherry.
Louell.
Sir.
Give her an hundred Marks.
Isle to the Queen.
An hundred Marks? By this light, Isle ha more.
An ordinary Groom is for such payment.
I will have more, or scold it out of him.
Said I for this, the Girl was like to him? Isle
Have more, or else vnsay't: and now, while it is hot,
Isle put it to the issue.
I hope I am not too late, and yet the Gentleman
That was sent to me from the Council, prayed me
To make great hast. All fast? What means this? Hoe?
Who waits there? Sure you know me?
Yes, my Lord:
But yet I cannot help you.
Why?
Your Grace must weight till you be called for.
So.
This is a Peer of Malice: I am glad
I came this way so happily. The King
Shall understand it presently.
It is Buts.
The Kings Physician, as he past along
How earnestly he cast his eyes upon me:
Pray heaven he sound not my disgrace: for certain
This is of purpose laid by some that hate me,
(God turn their hearts, I never sought their malice)
To quench mine Honour; they would shame to make me
Wait else at door: a fellow Councellor
Among Boys, Grooms, and Lackeys.
But their pleasures
Must be fulfilled, and I attend with patience.
Isle show your Grace the strangest fight.
What's that Buts?
I think your Highness saw this many a day.
Body a me: where is it?
There my Lord:
The high promotion of his Grace of Canterbury,
Who holds his State at door amongst Purseuants,
Pages, and Foot-boyes.
Ha? It is he indeed.
Is this the Honour they doe one another?
It is well there's one aboue 'em yet; I had thought
They had parted so much honesty among 'em,
At least good manners; as not thus to suffer
A man of his Place, and so near our favour
To dance attendance on their Lordships pleasures,
And at the door too, like a Post with Packets:
By holy Mary (Butts) there's knavery;
Let 'em alone, and draw the Curtain close:
We shall hear more anon.
Speak to the business, M. Secretary;
Why are we met in Council?
Please your Honours,
The chief cause concerns his Grace of Canterbury.
He's he had knowledge of it?
Yes.
Who waits there?
Without my Noble Lords?
Yes.
My Lord Archbishop:
And he's done half an hour to know your pleasures.
Let him come in.
Your Grace may enter now.
My good Lord Archbishop, I'm very sorry
To sit here at this present, and behold
That Chair stand empty: But we all are men
In our own natures frail, and capable
Of our flesh, few are Angels; out of which frailty
And want of wisdom, you that best should teach vs,
Have misdemean'd your self, and not a little:
Toward the King first, then his Laws, in filling
The whole Realm, by your teaching &amp; your Chaplains
(For so we are informed) with new opinions,
Divers and dangerous; which are Heresies;
And not reformed, may prove pernicious.
Which Reformation must be sudden too
My Noble Lords; for those that tame wild Horses,
Pace 'em not in their hands to make 'em gentle;
But stop their mouths with stubborn Bits &amp; spur 'em,
Till they obey the manage. If we suffer
Out of our easiness and childish pity
To one mans Honour, this contagious sickness;
Farewell all Physic: and what follows then?
Commotions, vprores, with a general Taint
Of the whole State; as of late days our neighbours,
The upper Germany can dearly witness:
Yet freshly pitied in our memories.
My good Lords; Hitherto, in all the Progress
Both of my Life and Office, I have laboured,
And with no little study, that my teaching
And the strong course of my Authority,
Might-goe one way, and safely; and the end
Was ever to doe well: nor is there living,
(I speak it with a single heart, my Lords)
A man that more detests, more stirs against,
Both in his private Conscience, and his place,
Desacers of a public peace then I doe:
Pray Heaven the King may never find a heart
With less Allegiance in it. Men that make
Envy, and crooked malice, nourishment;
Dare bite the best. I doe beseech your Lordships,
That in this case of Justice, my Accusers,
Be what they will, may stand forth face to face,
And freely urge against me.
Nay, my Lord,
That cannot be; you are a Counsellor,
And by that virtue no man dare accuse you.
My Lord, because we have business of more mo∣meant,
We will be short with you. It is his Highness pleasure
And our consent, for better trial of you,
From hence you be committed to the Tower,
Where being but a private man again,
You shall know many dare accuse you boldly,
More then (I fear) you are provided for.
Ah my good Lord of Winchester: I thank you,
You are always my good Friend, if your will pass,
I shall both find your Lordship, Judge and Juror,
You are so merciful. I see your end,
It is my undoing. Love and meekness, Lord
Become a Churchman, better then Ambition:
Win straying Souls with modesty again,
Cast none away: That I shall clear my self,
Lay all the weight ye can upon my patience,
I make as little doubt as you doe conscience,
In doing daily wrongs. I could say more,
But reverence to your calling, makes me modest.
My Lord, my Lord, you are a Sectary,
That's the plain truth; your painted gloss discovers
To men that understand you, words and weakness.
My Lord of Winchester, y' are a little,
By your good favour, too sharpe; Men so Noble,
How ever faultly, yet should find respect
For what they have been: it is a cruelty,
To load a falling man.
Good M. Secretary,
I cry your Honour mercy; you may worst
Of all this Table say so.
Why my Lord?
Doe not I know you for a Favourer
Of this new Sect? ye are not sound.
Not sound?
Not sound I say.
Would you were half so honest:
Men's prayers then would seek you, not their fears.
I shall remember this bold Language.
Doe.
Remember your bold life too.
This is too much;
Forbear for shame my Lords.
I have done.
And I.
Then thus for you my Lord, it stands agreed
I take it, by all voices: That forthwith,
You be conveyed to the Tower a Prisoner;
There to remain till the Kings further pleasure
Be known unto vs: are you all agreed Lords.
And by that verte no man dare accuse you.
And by that virtue no man dare accuse you.
We are.
Is there no other way of mercy,
But I must needs to the Tower my Lords?
What other,
Would you expect? You are strangely troublesome:
Let some of the Guard be ready there.
For me?
Must I go like a Traitor thither?
Receive him,
And see him safe in the Tower.
Stay good my Lords,
I have a little yet to say. Look there my Lords,
By virtue of that Ring, I take my cause
Out of the gripes of cruel men, and give it
To a most Noble Judge, the King my Moister.
This is the Kings Ring.
It is no counterfeit.
'Ts the right Ring, by Heaven: I told ye all,
When we first put this dangerous stone a rolling,
'Twold fall upon our selves.
Doe you think my Lords
The King will suffer but the little finger
Of this man to be vexed?
Tic now too certain;
How much more is his Life in value with him?
Would I were fairly out on it.
My mind gave me,
In seeking tales and Informations
Against this man, whose honesty the Devil
And his Disciples only envy at,
Ye blew the fire that burns ye: now have at ye.
Dread Sovereign,
How much are we bound to Heaven,
In daily thanks; that gave vs such a Prince;
Not only good and wise, but most religious:
One that in all obedience, makes the Church
The chief aim of his Honour, and to strengthen
That holy duty out of dear respect,
His Royal self in Judgment comes to hear
The cause betwixt her, and this great offender.
You were ever good at sudden Commendations,
Bishop of Winchester. But know I come not
To hear such flattery now, and in my presence
They are too thin, and base to hide offences,
To me you cannot reach. You play the Spaniel,
And think with wagging of your tongue to win me:
But whatsoere thou take me for; I'm sure
Thou hast a cruel Nature and a bloody.
Good man sit down: Now let me see the proudest
Hee, that dares most, but wag his finger at thee.
By all that's holy, he had better starve,
Then but once think his place becomes thee not.
May it please your Grace;—
No Sir, it doe's not please me,
I had thought, I had had men of some understanding,
And wisdom of my Council; but I find none:
Was it discretion Lords, to let this man,
This good man (few of you deserve that Title)
This honest man, wait like a lousy Foot-boy
At Chamber door? and one, as great as you are?
Why, what a shame was this? Did my Commission
Bid ye so far forget your selves? I gave ye
Power, as he was a Counsellour to try him,
Not as a Groom: There's some of ye, I see,
More out of Malice then Integrity,
Would try him to the utmost, had ye mean,
Which ye shall never have while I live.
Thus far
My most dread Sovereign, may it like your Grace,
To let my tongue excuse all. What was purposed
Concerning his Imprisonment, was rather
(If there be faith in men) meant for his Trial,
And fair purgation to the world then malice,
I'm sure in me.
Well, well my Lords respect him,
Take him, and use him well; hoe's worthy of it.
I will say thus much for him, if a Prince
May be beholding to a Subject; I
Am for his love and service, so to him.
Make memo more ado, but all embrace him;
Be friends for shame my Lords: My Lord of Canterbury
I have a Suite which you must not deny me.
That is, a fair young Maid that yet wants Baptism,
You must be Godfather, and answer for her.
The greatest Monarch now alive may glory
In such an honour: how may I deserve it,
That am a poor and humble Subject to you?
Come, come my Lord, you'd spare your spoons; You shall have two noble Partners with you: the old Duchess of Norfolk, and Lady Marquess Dorset? will these please you?
Once more my Lord of Winchester, I charge you
Embrace, and love this man.
With a true heart,
And Brother; love I doe it.
And let Heaven
Witness how dear, I hold this Confirmation.
Good Man, those joyful tears show thy true hearts,
The common voice I see is verified
Of thee, which says thus: Doe my Lord of Canterbury
A shrewd turn, and hoe's your friend for ever:
Come Lords, we trifle time away: I long
To have this young one made a Christian.
As I have made ye one Lords, one remain:
So I grow stronger, you more Honour gain.
You'll leave your noise anon ye▪ Rascals: doe you take the Court for Parish Garden: ye rude Slaves, leave your gaping:
Good M. Porter I belong to the Larder.
Belong to the Gallows, and be hanged ye Rogue: Is this a place to roar in? Fetch me a dozen Crab-tree staves, and strong ones; these are but switches to 'em: Isle scratch your heads; you must be seeing Christenings? Do you look for Ale, and Cakes here, you rude Raskalls?
Pray Sir be patient; it is as much impossible,
Unless wee sweep 'em from the door with Cannons,
To scatter 'em, as it is to make 'em sleep
On May-day Morning, which will never be:
We may as well push against Powles as stir 'em.
How got they in, and be hanged?
Alas I know not, how gets the Tide in?
As much as one sound Cudgel of four foot,
(You see the poor remainder) could distribute,
I made no spare Sir.
You did nothing Sir.
I am not Simpson, nor Sir Guy, nor Colebrand,
To mow 'em down before me: but if I spared any
That had a head to hit, either young or old,
He or she, Cuckold or Cuckold-maker:
Let me ne'er hope to see a Chine again,
And that I would not for a Cow, God save her.
Do you hear M. Porter?
I shall be with you presently, good M. Puppy,
Keep the door close Sirha.
What would you have me doe?
What should you doe,
But knock 'em down by the dozens? Is this More fields to muster in? Or have wee some strange Indian with the great Tool, come to Court, the women so besiege vs? Bless me, what a fry of Fornication is at door? On my Christian Conscience this one Christening will beget a thousand, here will bee Father, God-father, and all to∣gether.
The Spoons will be the bigger Sir: There is a fellow somewhat near the door, he should be a Brasi∣er by his face, for of my conscience twenty of the Dog-dayes now reign in's Nose; all that stand about him are under the Line, they need no other penance: that Fire-Drake did I hit three times on the head, and three times was his Nose discharged against me; hee stands there like a Morter-piece to blow vs. There was a Habberda∣shers Wife of small wit, near him, that railed upon me, till her pinck'd porringer fell off her head, for kindling such a combustion in the State. I mist the Meteor once, and hit that Woman, who cried out Clubs, when I might see from far, some forty Truncheoners draw to her succour, which were the hope of the Strond where she was quartered; they fell on, I made good my place; at length they came to the broom staff to me, I defied 'em still, when suddenly a File of Boys behind 'em, loose shot, delivered such a shower of Pebbles, that I was fine to draw mine Honour in, and let 'em win the Work, the Devil was amongst 'em I think surely.
These are the youths that thunder at a Playhouse, and fight for bitten Apples, that no Audience but the tribulation of Tower Hill, or the Limbs of Limehouse, their dear Brothers are able to endure. I have some of 'em in Limbo Patrum, and there they are like to dance these three days; besides the running Banquet of two Beadles, that is to come.
Mercy of me: what a Multitude are here?
They grow still too; from all Parts they are coming,
As if we kept a Fair here? Where are these Porters?
These lazy knaves? Y' have made a fine hand fellows?
Theres a trim rabble let in: are all these
Your faithful friends of the Suburbs? We shall have
Great store of room no doubt, left for the Ladies,
When they pass back from the Christening?
And't please your Honour,
We are but men; and what so many may doe,
Not being torn a pieces, we have done:
An Army cannot rule 'em.
As I live,
If the King blame me for it; Isle lay ye all
By the heals, and suddenly: and on your heads
Clap round Fines for neglect: y' are lazy knaves,
And here ye lye baiting of Bombards, when
Ye should doe Service. Hark the Trumpets sound,
The are come already from the Christening,
Go break among the press, and find away out
To let the Troop pass fairly; or Isle find
A Marshallsey, shall hold ye play these two Months.
Make way there, for the Princess.
You great fellow,
Stand close up, or Isle make your head ache.
You in the Chamblet, get up of the rail,
Isle peck you o'er the pales esse.
Heaven
From thy endless goodness, send prosperous life,
Long and ever happy, to the high and Mighty
Princess of England Elizabeth.
And to your Royal Grace, &amp; the good Queen,
My Noble Partners, and my self thus pray
All comfort, joy in this most gracious Lady,
Heaven ever laid up to make Parents happy,
May hourly fall upon ye.
Thank you good Lord Archbishop:
What is her Name?
Elizabeth.
Stand up Lord,
With this Kiss, take my Blessing: God protect thee,
Into whose hand, I give thy Life.
Amen.
My Noble Gossips, y' have been too Prodigal;
I thank ye heartily: So shall this Lady,
When she he's so much English.
Let me speak Sir,
For Heaven now bids me; and the words I utter,
Let none think Flattery; for they'll find 'em Truth.
This Royal Infant, Heaven still move about her;
Though in her Cradle; yet now promises
Upon this Land a thousand thousand Blessings,
Which Time shall bring to ripeness: She shall be,
(But few now living can behold that goodness)
A Pattern to all Princes living with her,
And all that shall succeed: Saba was never
More covetous of Wisdom, and fair Virtue
Then this pure Soul shall be. All Princely Graces
That mould up such a mighty Piece as this is,
With all the Virtues that attend the good,
Shall still be doubled on her. Truth shall Nurse her,
Holy and Heavenly thoughts still Counsel her:
She shall be loved and feared. Her own shall bless her;
Her Foes shake like a Field of beaten Corn,
And hang their heads with sorrow:
Good grows with her.
In her days, Every Man shall eat in safety,
Under h•s own Vine what he plants; and sing
The merry Songs of Peace to all his Neighbours.
God shall be truly known, and those about her,
From her shall read the perfect way of Honour,
And by those claim their greatness; not by Blood.
Nor shall this peace sleep with her: But as when
The Bird of Wonder dyes, the Maiden Phoenix,
Her Ashes new create another Heir,
As great in admiration as her self.
So shall she leave her Blessedness to One,
(When Heaven shall call her from this cloud of darkness)
Who, from the sacred Ashes of her Honour
Shall Star-like rise, as great in fame as she was,
And so stand fixed. Peace, Plenty, Love, Truth, Terror,
That were the Servants to this chosen Infant,
Shall then be his, and like a Vine grow to him;
Where ever the bright Sun of Heaven shall shine,
His Honour, and the greatness of his Name,
Shall be, and make new Nations. He shall flourish,
And like a Mountain Cedar, reach his branches,
To all the Plains about him: Our Childrens Children
Shall see this, and bless Heaven.
Thou speak wonders.
She shall be to the happiness of England,
An aged Princess; many days shall see her,
And yet no day without a deed to Crown it.
Would I had known no more: But she must dye,
She must, the Saints must have her; yet a Virgin,
A most unspotted Lily shall she pass
To the ground, and all the World shall morn her.
O Lord Archbishop
Thou hast made me now a man, never before
This happy Child, did I get any thing.
This Oracle of comfort, he's so pleased me,
That when I am in Heaven, I shall desire
To see what this Child does, and praise my Maker.
I thank ye all. To you my good Lord Mayor,
And you good Brethren, I am much beholding:
I have received much Honour by your presence,
And ye shall find me thankful. Lead the way Lords,
Ye must all see the Queen, and she must thank ye,
She will be sick else. This day, no man think
'Has business at his house; for all shall stay:
This Little-One shall make it Holy-day.
Tic ten to one, this Play can never please
All that are here: Some come to take their case,
And sleep an Act or two; but those we fear
W' have frighted with our Tumpets: so it is clear,
They'll say tic nought. Others to hear the City
Abused extremely, and to cry that's witty,
Which wee have not done neither; that I fear
All the expected good w' are like to hear.
For this Play at this time, is only in
The merciful construction of good women,
For such a one we showed em: If they smile,
And say twill doe; I know within a while,
All the best men are ours; for it is ill hap,
If they hold, when their Ladies bid 'em clap.

ARe you then travelling to the temple of Eliza?
Even to her temple are my feeble limbs travel∣ling. Some cal her Pandora: some Gloriana, some Cynthia: some Delphaebe, some Astray: all by several names to express several loves: Yet all those names make but one celestial body, as all those loves meet to create but one soul.
I am one of her own country, and we adore her by the name of Eliza.
Blessed name, happy country: Your Eliza makes your land Elizium: but what doe you offer?
That which all true Subjects should: when I was young, an Armed hand; now I am crooked, an upright heart: But what offer you?
That which all strangers doe: two eyes struck blind with admiration: Two lips (proud to sound her glory:) Two hands held up full of prayers and praises: What not, that may express love? what not, that may make her beloved?
How long first since you last beheld her?
A just year: yet that year hath seemed to me but one day, because her glory hath been my hourly contemplation, and yet that year hath seemed to me more then twice seven years, because so long I have been absent from her. Come therefore, good father, lets go faster, least we come too late: for see, the Tapers of the night are already lighted, and stand brightly bur∣ning in their starry Candlesticks: See howe gloriously the Moon shines upon vs.
Peace fool: tremble, and kneel: The Moon say thou?
Our eyes are dazzled by Elizaes beams,
See (if at least thou dare see) where she sits:
This is the great Panthaeon of our Goddess,
And all those faces which thine eyes thought stars,
Are Nymphs attending on her deity.
Prithee begin, for I want power to speak.
No, no, speak thou, I want words to begin.
Alack what shall I doe? come thou with me,
And weepst now thou behold this Majesty?
Great land-lady of hearts, pardon me.
Blame not mine eyes, good father, in these tears.
My pure love shines, as thine doth in thy fears:
I weep for joy to see so many heads
Of prudent Ladies, clothed in the livery
Of siluer-handed age, for serving you,
Whilst in your eyes youths glory doth renew:
I weep for joy to see the Sun look old,
To see the Moon mad at her often change,
To see the Stars only by night to shine,
Whilst you are still bright, still one, still divine:
I weep for joy to see the world decay,
Yet see Eliza flourishing like May:
O pardon me your Pilgrim, I have measurd
Many a mile to find you: and have brought,
Old Fortunatus and his family,
With other Cipnots (my poor country men)
To pay a whole years tribute: O vouchsafe,
Dread Queen of Fairies, with your gracious eyes,
T'accept theirs and our humble sacrifice.
Now isle beg for thee too: and yet I need not:
Her sacred hand hath evermore been known,
As soon held out to strangers as her own.
Thou doest encourage me: Isle fetch them in,
They have no princely gifts, we are all poor,
Our offerings are true hearts, who can wish more?
OF Loves sweet war, our timorous Muse doth sing,
And to the bosom of each gentle dear,
Offence her Artless tunes, borne on the wing
Of sacred Poesy. A benumbing fear,
(That your nice souls, cloyed with delicious sounds,
Will loath her lowly notes) makes her pull in
Her fainting pinions, and her spirit confounds
Before the weak voice of her song begin.
Yet since within the circle of each eye,
(Being like so many Suns in his round Sphere)
No wrinkle yet is seen, sheele dare to fly,
Borne up with hopes, that as you oft do rear
With your fair hands, those who would else sink down,
So some will deign to smile, where all might frown:
And for this small Circumference must stand,
For the imagind Sur-face of much land,
Of many kingdoms, and since many a mile,
Should here be measurd out: our muse entreats,
Your thoughts to help poor Art, and to allow,
That I may serve as Chorus to her sconces,
She begs your pardon, for sheele send me forth,
Not when the laws of Poesy doe call,
But as the story needs, your gracious eye
Gives life to Fortunatus history.
SD, ho, ho, ho, ho.
within, Ho, ho, ho, ho,
There boy.
There boy.
And thou be a goodfellow, tel me how thou call this wood.
This wood.
I this wood, &amp; which is my best way out
Best way out.
Ha, ha, ha, thats true, my best way out, is my best way out, but how that out will come in, by this Maggot I know not, I see by this we are all worms meat: well, I am very poor and very patient, Pati•••e is a virtue: would I were not virtuous, thats to say, not poor, but full of vice, (thats to say, full of chinckes) Ha, ha, so I am, for I am so full of chinckes, that a Horse with one eye may look through and through me, I have sighed long, and that makes me win∣die: I have fasted long, and that makes me chaste, marie I have prayed little, and that makes me I still dance in this coniu∣ring circle: I have wandered long, and that makes me weary; but for my weariness, anon Isle lie down, in stead of fasting isle féede upon Nuts, and in stead of sighing will laugh and bee lean, Sir, Echo.
Sir Echo.
Here is a Nut.
Here is a Nut.
Crack it.
Crack it.
Hang thy self.
Hang thy self.
You are a knave, a knave.
A knave, a knave,
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
Why so, two fools laugh at one another, I at my little tattle gimmal echo, and she at me. Shortly there will créepe out in print some filthy book of the old boar wan∣dring Knight, meaning me: would I were that book, for then I should be sure to créepe out from hence: I should bee a good soldier, for I traverse my ground rarely, marry I sée nei∣there enemy nor friends, but Popiniayes, and Squirrels, and Apes, and Owls, and Daws, and Wagtailes, and the spite is that none of these grasse-eaters can speak my language, but this fool that mocks me, and swears to have the last word (in spite of my téeth) I, and she shall have it because she is a wo∣man, which kind of cattle are indéede all Echo, nothing but tongue, and are like the great bell of S. Michaels in Cyprus, that kéepes most rumbling when men would most sléepe.
a pox on thée for mocking me.
a pox on thée for mocking me.
Why so, Snip snap, this war is at an end, but this wilderness is world without end, to sée how travel can transform: my teeth are turned into Nut crackers, a thousand to one I break out shortly, for I am full of nothing, but wax∣ing kernels, my tongue speaks no language but an Almond for Parrot, and crack me this Nut: If I hop thrée days more up and down this cage of Coockooes nests, I shall turn wilde man sure, and be hired to throw Squibs among the Cōminal∣tie upon some terrible day. In the mean time to tell truth here will I lie. Farewell fool.
farewell fool.
Are not these comfortable words to a wise man? All hail Signior trée, by your lean isle sléepe under your leaves, I pray bow to me, and isle bend to you, for your back and my brows must, I doubt, have a game or two at Noddy err I wake again: down great heart, down. Hey, ho, well, well.
Fortune smiles, cry holiday,
Dimples on her chéekes doe dwell,
Fortune frowns, cry wellada,
Her love is heaven, her hate is hell:
Since heaven and hell obey her power,
Tremble when her eyes doe lower,
Since heaven and hell her power obey,
When shée smiles, cry holy day.
Holy-day with joy we cry
And bend, and bend and merrily,
Sing Hymns to Fortunes deity,
Sing Hymns to Fortunes deity.
Let vs sing, merrily, merrily, merrily,
With our song let heaven resound,
Fortunes hands our heads have crowned,
Let vs sing merrily, merrily, merrily.
Accursed Quéene of chance, what had we done,
Who having sometimes like young Phaetons,
Rid in the burnished Chariot of the Sun,
And sometimes béene thy minions, when thy fingers
Weaned wanton loue-nets in our curled hair,
And with swéete juggling kisses warmed our chéekes:
Oh how have we offended thy proud eyes,
That thus we should be spurnd and trod upon,
Whilst those infected limbs of the sick world,
Are fixed by thée for stars in that bright Sphere,
Where in our Sun like Radiance did appear.
Accursed Quéene of chance, damned forceresse.
Most powr'full Quéene of chance dread soueraignnesse.
No more▪ curse on: your cries to me are Music,
And fill the sacred roundure of mine ears,
With tunes more swéete then moving of the Spheres:
Curse on: on our celestial brows doe sit
Un numbered 〈◊〉, which then leaps from their throne,
When they sée Peasants dance and Monarchs groan.
Behold you not this Globe, this golden bowl,
This toy called world at our Imperial féete?
This world is Fortunes ball wherewith she sports.
Sometimes I strike it up into the ayre,
And then create I Emperors and kings:
Sometimes I spurn it: at which spurn crawls out
That wild beast multitude: curse on you fools,
Tic I that tumble Princes from their thrones,
And gild false brows with glittering diadems,
Tic I that tread on necks of Conquerors,
And when like Semi-gods they have béene drawn,
In Ivory Chariots to the capitol,
Circled about with wonder of all eyes,
The shouts of every tongue, love of all hearts,
Being swollen wit their own greatness, I have pricked
The bladder of their pride, and made them die,
As water bubbles (without memory)
I thrust base cowards into Honours chair,
Whilst the true spirited Soldier stands by
Bare headed, and all bare, whilst, at his skarres
They scoff, that ne'er durst view the face of wars.
I set an Idéots cap on virtues head,
Turn learning out of doors, clothe wit in rags,
And paint ten thousand Images of Lame,
In gaudy silken colours▪ on the backs
Of Mules and Asses I make asses ride,
Only for sport, to see the Apish world
Worship such beasts with sound idolatry.
This Fortune does, and when this is done,
She sits and smiles to hear some curse her name,
And some with adoration crown her fame.
True center of this wide circumference,
Sacred commandress of the destinies,
Our tongues shall only sound thy excellence.
Thy excellence our tongues shall only sound.
Thou painted strumpet, that with honied smiles,
Openest the gates of heaven and cry, Come in,
Whose glories being séene, thou with one frown,
(In pride) lower then hell tumblest vs down.
Ever for ever will we ban thy name.
How swéete your howlings relish in mine ears?
Stand by; now rise, behold, here lies a wretch,
To vex your souls, this beggar isle advance
Beyond the sway of thought, take instruments,
And let the raptures of choice Harmony,
Through the hollow windings of his ear,
Carry their sacred sounds, &amp; wake each sense,
To stand amazed at our bright Eminence.
Oh, how am I transported? Is this earth?
Or blessed Elizium?
Fortunatus, rise.
Dread Goddess, how should such a wretch as I
Be known to such a glorious deity?
Oh pardon me: for to this place I come,
Lead by my fate, not folly; in this wood
With weary sorrow have I wandered,
And thrée times séene the sweating Sun take rest,
And thrée times frantic Cynthia naked ride,
About the rusty highways of the skies
Stuck full of burning Stars, which lent her light
To Court her Negro paramour grim night.
This travel now expires: yet from this circle,
Where I and these with fairy troops abide,
Thou can not stir, unless I be thy guide.
I the worlds Empress am Fortune my name,
This hand hath written in thick leaves of stéele,
An everlasting book of changelesse Fate.
Showing whoo's happy, who unfortunate.
I feuerie name (dread Quéene) be there writ down.
I am sure mine stands in Characters of black,
Though happiness her self lie in my name,
I am sorrows heir, and eldest son to shame.
No, we are sons to shame, and sorrows heirs.
Thou shalt be one of Fortunes minions:
Behold these four chained like Tartarian slaves,
These I created Emperors and Kings,
And these are now my basest underlings:
This sometimes was a Germane Emperor,
Henry the fifth, who being first deposed,
Was after thrust into a dungeon,
And thus in silver chains shall rot to death.
This Frederick Barbarossa Emperor
Of Almaine once: but by Pope Alexander
Now spurned and trod on when he takes his horse,
And in these fetters shall he die his slave.
This wretch once wore the diadem of France,
(Lewes the méeke) but through his childrens pride,
Thus have I caused him to be famished,
Here stands the very soul of misery
Poor Basazet old Turkish Emperor,
And once the greatest Monarch in the East;
Fortune her self is said to view thy fall,
And grieves to sée thée glad to like up crommes
At the proud féete of that great Scithian swain,
Fortunes best minion, warlike Tamberlaine:
Yet must thou in a cage of Iron be drawn
In triumph at his héeles, and there in grief
Dash out thy brains.
Oh miserable me.
No tears can melt the heart of destiny:
These have I rained and exalted those:
These hands have conquered Spain, these brows fill up
The golden circle of rich Portugal.
Uiriat a Monarch now, but borne a shepherd.
This Primislaus (a Bohemian king)
Last day a Carter: this Monk Gregory
Now lifted to the Papal dignity,
Wretches, why gnaw you not your fingers off,
And tear your tongues out, séeing your selves trod down,
And this Duch-Botcher wearing Munsters crown?
Iohn Leyden borne in Holland poor and base,
Now rich in Empery and Fortunes grace.
As these I have aduaunc'd, so will I this▪
Six gifts I spend upon mortality,
Wisdom, strength, health, beauty, long life, and riches,
Out of my bounty: one of these is thine,
Choose then which likes thée best.
Oh most divine:
Give me but leave to borrow wonders eye,
To look (amazed) at thy bright majesty,
Wisdom, strength, health, beauty, long life and riches,
Before thy soul (at this déepe Lottery)
Draw forth her prize, ordained by destiny,
Know that here is no recanting a first choice.
Choose then discréetly (for the laws of Fate,
Being graven in stéele, must stand inviolate)
Daughters of Jove and the unblemished night,
Most righteous Parce, guide my Genius right,
Wisdom, strength, health, beauty, long life, and riches.
Stay, Fortunatus, once more hear me speak,
If thou kiss wisdoms chéeke and make her thine,
Shéele breath into thy lips divinity,
And thou (like Phebus) shalt speak Oracle,
Thy heauen-inspired soul, on wisdoms •••ngs,
Shall fly up to the Parliament of Jove,
And read the Statutes of eternity,
And sée whats past, and learn what is to come.
If thou lay claim to strength, Armies shall quake,
To see thée frown: as Kings at mine doe lie,
So shall thy féete trample on Empery;
Make Health thine object, thou shalt be strong proof,
Against the deep searching darts of surfeiting.
Be ever merry, ever revelling,
Wish but for beauty, and within thine eyes,
Two naked Cupids amorousty shall swim,
And on thy chéekes isle mix such white and red,
That Jove shall turn away young Ganimede,
And with immortal arms shall circle thée.
Are thy desires long life? thy vital thread
Shall be stretched out, thou shalt behold the change
Of Monarchies, and sée those children die,
Whose great great Graundsires now in cradles lie.
If through Golds sacred hunger thou dost pine,
Those gilded wantons which in swarms doe run,
To warm their slender bodies in the sun,
Shall stand for number of those golden piles,
Which in rich pride shall swell before thy féete,
As those are; so shall these be infinite.
Awaken then thy souls best faculties,
And gladly kiss this bounteous hand of Fate,
Which strives to bless thy name of Fortunate.
Old man, take héede, her smiles will murder thée
Old man, shéele crown thée with felicity.
Oh, whither am I wrapped beyond my self?
More violent conflicts fight in e'rie thought,
Than his whose fatal choice Troys downfall wrought.
Shall I contract my self to wisdoms love?
Then I lose riches: And a wiseman poor,
Is like a sacred book thats never read,
To himself he lives, and to all else séemes dead.
This age thinks better of a gilded fool,
Then of a thréed bare Saint in wisdoms school.
I will be strong: then I refuse long life,
And though mine arm should conquer twenty worlds,
Theres a lean fellow beats all conquerors:
The greatest strength expires with loss of breath.
The mightiest (in one minute) stoop to death.
Then take long life, or Health: should I doe so,
I might grow ugly, and that tedious Scroll
Of Months and years, much misery may enrol:
Therefore isle beg for beauty; yet I will not,
The fairest chéeke hath oftentimes a soul
Leprous as sin it self; then hell more foul.
The wisdom of this world is Idiotism,
Strength a weak réede: Health sickness enemy,
(And it at length will have the victory.)
Beauty is but a painting, and long life
Is a long journey in December gon,
Tedious and full of tribulation.
Therefore dread sacred Empress make me rich,
My choice is store of gold; the rich are wise.
He that upon his bark rich garments wears,
Is wise, though on his head grow Midas ears.
Gold is the strength, the sinews of the world,
The Health, the soul, the beauty most divine,
A mask of Gold hides all deformities;
Gold is heavens physic, lifes restorative,
Oh therefore make me rich: Not as the wretch,
That only serves lean banquets to his eye,
Has Gold, yet starves: is famished in his store:
No, let me ever spend, be never poor.
Thy latest words confine thy destiny,
Thou shalt spend ever, and be never poor:
For proof receive this purse: with it this virtue,
Still when thou thrusts thy hand into the same,
Thou shalt draw forth ten pieces of bright gold,
Currant in any Realm where then thou breathe;
If thou can dribble out the Sea by drops,
Then shalt thou want: but that can ne'er be don.
Nor this grow empty.
Thanks, great deity.
The virtue ends when thou and thy sons end,
This path leads thée to Cyprus, get thée hence;
Farewell, vain covetous fool, thou wilt repent,
That for the love of dross thou hast despised
Wisdoms divine embrace, she would hane borne thée
On the rich wings of immortality;
But now go dwell with cares and quickly die.
We dwell with cares, yet cannot quickly die.
But now go dwell with cares and quickly die? How quickly? if I die to morrow, isle be merry to day: if next day, isle be merry to morrow: go dwell with cares? Where dwells care? Hum ha, in what house dwells care, yt I may choose an honester neighbor? In princes courts? No, among fair La∣dies, neither, theres no care dwells with them: but care how to be most gallant. Among gallants thē? Fie, fie, no: care is afraid sure of a guilt Rapier, the sent of Musk is her prison. Tobac∣co chokes her, rich attire presses her to death. Princes, fair Ladies and gallants, have amongst you then, for this wet¦eide wench Care dwells with wretches: they are wretches that féele want, I shall féele none if I be never poor, therefore care I cashier you my company. I wonder what blind Gos∣sip this minx is that is so prodigal, she should be a good one by her open dealing: her name's Fortune: Its no matter what she is, so she does as she says. Thou shalt spend ever, and bee no∣for poor: Mass, yet I féele nothing here to make me rich, here is no swéete Music with her silver sound. Try déeper▪ h• G•d be here: Ha, ha, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10, good, just ten. Its gold sure, its so heavy, try again, 1, 2, &amp;c. Good a∣gain, just ten, and just ten. Ha, ha, ha, this is rare a leather mint, admirable: an Indian mine in a Lambs skin, mira∣culous: Isle fill thré or four bags full for my sons, but kéepe this for my self. If that lean tawny face Tobacconist death, that turns all into smoke, must turn me so quickly in∣to
ashes, yet I will not morn in ashes, but in Music, hey old lad be merry. Here is riches, wisdom, strength, health, beau∣tie, &amp; long life. (If I die not quickly, swéete purse I kiss thée, Fortune, I adore thée, Care, I despise thée, death, I defy thée.
S'hart, why how now: two knights of the post?
I, master, and wee are both forsworn, as all such wooden knights be, for we both took an oath (mary it was not corporal) you may sée by our chéekes, that we would not fast twenty four hours to amend, and we have tasted no meat since the clock told two dozen.
That lacks not much of twenty four, but I wonder when that half faced Moon of thine will be at the full.
The next quarter, not this, whē the sign is in Taurus.
Ho thats to say, when thou eat'st bull beef. But Shadow, what day is to day?
Fasting day.
What day was yesterday?
Fasting day too.
Will tomorrow be so too?
I, and next day too
That will be rare, you slave:
For a lean diet makes a fat wit.
I had rather be a fool &amp; wear a fat pair of chéekes.
Now am I prouder of this poverty, which I know is mine own, then a waiting gentlewoman is, of a frizzled groatesworth of hair, that never grew on her head: Sirrha Shadow, now we can all thrée swear like puritans at one bare word: this want makes vs like good bowlers, we are able to rub out and shift in every place.
Thats not so, we have shifted our selves in no place this thrée months: marry, we rub out in every corner, but here follows no amendment either of life or of livery.
Why, brother Ampedo, art thou not yet tired with
riding post? Come, come, light from this logger-headed Jade, and walk a foot, and talk with your poor friends.
Nay by my troth he is like me; if his belly be emp∣tie, his heart is full.
The famine of Gold gnaws his covetous sto∣macke, more then the want of good victuals: Thou hast looked very devilishly ever since the good Angel left thée: come, come, leave this broad brim fashions, because the world frowns up∣on thée, wilt not thou smile upon vs?
Did but the bitterness of mine own fortunes
Infect my taste, I could paint ore my chéekes
With ruddy-coloured smiles: tic not the want
Of costly diet or desire of gold,
Enforce this rupture in my wounded breast.
Oh no, our Father (if he live) doth lie.
Under the Iron foot of misery,
And (as a Dove gript in a Falcons claw)
There pant'th for life being most assured of death.
Brother, for him my soul thus languishes.
Tic not for my old Master that I languish.
I am not enamoured of this painted Idol,
This strumpet world; for her most beauteous looks
Are poysned baits, hung upon golden hooks,
When fools doe swim in wealth, her Cynthian beams
Will wantonly dance on the silver streams:
But when this squinteide age sées virtue poor,
And by a little spark sits shivering,
Begging at all, relieved at no mans door,
She miles on her (as the Sun shines on fire)
To kill that little heate, and with her frown
Is proud, that she can tread poor virtue down:
Therefore her wrinkled brow makes not mine sour,
Her gifts are toys, and I deride her power.
Tic not the crab-trée faced world neither that makes mine sour
Her gifts toys: well brother virtue, we have let slip the ripe plucking of those toys so long, that wee flourish like
Apple trées in September, (which having the falling sickness) bear neither fruit nor leaves.
Nay by my troth, master, none flourish in these withering times, but Ancient bearers and trumpettors.
Shadow, when thou proves a substance, then the trée of virtue and honesty, and such fruit of heaven shall flourish upon earth.
True, or when the Sun shines at midnight, or women fly, and yet they are light enough.
It was never merry world with vs, since purses and bags were invented, for now men set lime twigs to catch wealth: And gold, which rises like the sun out of the East Indies, to shine upon every one, is like a Conte taken napping in a Pursenet, and suffers his glistering yellow face deity to be lapped up in Lambskins, as if the innocence of those leather prisons, should dispense with the Cheverel consci∣ences of the Iron hearted Jailers.
Snudges may well be called Jailers: for if a poor wretch steal but into a debt of ten pound, they lead him straight to execution.
Doth it not vex thée, Shadow, to stalk up and down Cyprus, and to méete the out-side of a man, lapped all in Damask, his head and beard as white as milk, only with conjuring in the snowy circles of the field Argent, and his nose as red as Scarlet, only with kissing the ruddy lips of Angels, and such an Image to wear on his thumb, thrée men's livings in the shape of a seal King, whilst my brother virtue here,
And you his brother Vice.
Most true, my little lean Iniquity, whilst wee thrée, if we should starve, cannot borrow five shillings of him neither in word nor déede: does not this vex thée, Shadow?
Not me; it vexes me no more to sée such a picture, then to sée an Ass laden with riches, because I know when hee can bear no longer, he must leave his burden to some other be ast.
Art not thou mad, to see money on Goldsmiths
stalls, and none in our purses?
It mads not me, I thank the destinies.
By my poverty, and thats but a thréed-bare oath, I am more then mad, to see silks and veluets, lie crowding together in Mercers shops, as in prisons, only for fear of the smell of wax (they cannot abide to see a man made out of wax) for these Satin commodities have such smooth consci∣ences, that theile have no man give his word for them, or stand bound for their coming forth, but vow to lie till they rot in those shop Counters, except Monsteur money bail them. Shadow, I am out of my little wits to sée this.
So is not Shadow: I am out of my wits, to sée fat gluttons feed all day long, whilst I that am lean, fast every day: I am out of my wits, to sée our Famag•sty fools, turn half a shop of wares into a suite of gay apparel, only to make other Idiots laugh, and wisemen to cry who's the fool now? I am mad, to sée Soldiers beg, and cowards brave: I am mad, to sée Scholars in the Brokers shop, and Dunces in the Mercers: I am mad, to see men that have no more fashion in them then poor Shadow, yet must leap thrice a day into thrée orders of fashions: I am mad, to sée many things, but horne-mad, that my mouth féeles nothing.
Why, now shadow, I sée thou hast a substance:
I am glad to sée thée thus mad.
The sons of Fortunatus had not wont,
Thus to rapine at others happiness:
But fools have always this loose garment wore,
Being poor themselves, they wish all others poor,
Fie, brother Andelocia, hate this madness,
Turn your eyes inward, and behold your soul,
That wants more then your body: burnish that
With glittering Virtue: and make Idiots grieve,
So see your beauteous mind in wisdom shine,
As you at their rich poverty rapine.
Peace, good virtue, Shad here comes another Shadow
It should be a Chameleon: for he is all in colours.
Oh, tic my Father, With these tears of joy,
My love and duty greet your fair return:
A double gladness hath refreshed my soul;
One, that you live, and one, to sée your fate
Looks freshly howsoever poor in state.
My father Fortunatus, &amp; thus brave?
Tic no wonder to sée a man brave, but a wonder how he comes brave.
Dear Andelocia and son Ampedo,
And my poor servant Shadow: plume your spirits
With light-wingd mirth: for Fortunatus hand
Can now power golden showers into their laps,
That sometimes scorned him for his want of gold.
Boys, I am rich, and you shall ne'er be poor;
We are gold, spend gold, we all in gold will féede,
Now is your father Fortunate indéede.
Father, be not angry, if I set open the windows of my mind: I doubt for all your bragging, you'll prove like most of our gallants in Famagosta, that have a rich outside, &amp; a beggarly inside, and like Mules wear gay trappings, and good Velvet foote-clothes on their backs, yet champ on the Iron bit of penury, I mean, want coin: You gild our ears with a talk of Gold, but I pray dazzle our eyes with the majesty of it.
First will I wake your senses with the sound
Of golds swéete music: tell me what you hear?
Believe me, Sir, I hear not any thing.
Ha, ha, ha. S hart, I thought as much, if I hear any jingling, but of the purse strings yt go flip, flap, flip, flap, flip, flap, would I were turned into a flip-flap, and sold to the Butchers.
Shadow: Isle try thine ears, hark dost rattle?
Yes, like thrée blew Beans in a blew bladder, rat∣tle bladder, rattle: your purse is like my belly, the ones with∣out money, the other without meat.
Bid your eyes blame the error of your ears:
You misbeléeuing Pagans, sée, here is gold,
Ten golden pieces: take them, Ampedo.
Hold, Andelocia, here are ten for thée.
Shadow, theres one for thée, provide thée food.
Stay, boy: hold, Shad. here are ten for thée.
Ten master? then defiance to Fortune, &amp; a Fig for famine.
Now tell me, wags, hath my purse gold or no?
Wee the wags have gold, Father; but I think theres not one Angel more wagging in this sacred Temple; why this is rare: Saddow, five will serve thy turn, give me the other five.
Nay, soft master, liberality dyed long ago: I sée some rich beggars are never well, but when they be craving: My ten Ducats are like my ten fingers, they will not ieo∣pard a joint for you: I am yours, and these are mine if I part from them, I shall never have part of them.
Father, if heaven have blessed you once again,
Let not an open hand disperse that store;
Which gone, lifes gone: for all tread down the poor.
Peace, Ampedo: talk not of poverty,
Disdain, my boys, to kiss the tawny cheeks
Of lean necessity: make not inquiry,
How I came rich: I am rich, let that suffice;
There are sour leathern bags trust full of gold:
Those spent, isle fill you more: go lads, be gallant:
Shine in the stréetes of Cyprus like two stars,
And make them bow their knées that once did spurn you;
For to effect such wonders gold can turn you:
Brave it in Famagosta, or else where,
Isle travel to the Turkish Emperor:
And then isle revel it with Proctor Iohn,
Or banquet with great Cham of Tartarie,
And try what frolic Court the Sultan kéepes;
Isle leave you presently: tear off these rags.
Glitter, my boys like Angels, that the world
May (whilst our life in pleasures circle comes)
Wonder at Fortunatus and his sons.
Come, Shadow: now wée'le feast it royalty.
Doe, master, but take héede of beggary.
You ministers of Virtue, Vice, and Fortune,
Tear off this upper garment of the earth,
And in her naked bosom stick these trées.
How many kingdoms have I measured,
Only to find a Climate apt to cherish
These withering branches? but no ground can prove
So happy, (ay me) none doe virtue love;
Isle, try this soil; if here I likewise fade,
To heaven isle fly, from whence I took my birth,
And tel the Gods, I am banished from the earth.
Virtue, I am sworn they foe: if there thou plant,
Here opposite to thine, my trée shall flourish,
And (as the running wood-bind) spread her arms,
To choke thy withering boughs in their embrace,
Isle drive thee from this world: were Virtue fled,
Vice as an Angel should be honoured.
Servants of this bright devil &amp; that poor Saint.
Apply your talk whilst you are labouring:
To make your pains séeme short our priest shall sing.
Virtues branches wither, virtue pines,
O pity, pity, and alack the time,
Vice doth flourish, Vice in glory shines,
Her gilded boughs aboue the Cedar clime.
Vice hath golden cheeks, O pity, pity,
She in every land doth monarchize.
Virtue is exiled from every City,
Virtue is a fool, Vice only wise.
O pity, pity, Virtue wéeping dies.
Vice laughs to see her faint (alack the time)
This sinckes: with painted wings the other flies,
Alack that best should fall, and bad should clime,
O pity, pity, pity, morn, not sing,
Vice is a Saint, Virtue an vnderling.
Vice doth flourish, Vice in glory shines,
Virtues branches wither, Virtue pines.
Flourish or wither, Fortune cares not which,
In eiders fall or height our Eminence
Shines equal to the Sun: the Queen of chance
Both virtuous souls and vicious doth advance.
These shadows of your selves shall (like your selves,)
Strive to make men enamoured of their beauties,
This grove shall be our temple; and henceforth
Be consecrated to our deities.
How few will come and knéele at virtues shrine?
This contents virtue, that she is called divine.
Poor Virtue, Fortune grieves to see thy looks
Want cunning to entice: Why hang these leaves,
As loose as Antumnes hair (which every wind,
In mockery blows from his rotten brows?)
Why like a drunkard art thou pointed at?
Why is this Motley-scorne set on thy head?
Why stands thy Court wide open, but none in it?
Why are the Crystal pavements of thy temple,
Not worn, not trod upon: All is for this,
Because thy pride is to wear base attire,
Because thine eyes flame not with amorous fire.
Virtue is fairest in a poor array.
Poor fool, tic not this badge of purity,
Nor Sibi sapit, (painted on thy breast,)
Allures mortality to seek thy love.
No: now the great whéele of thy Globe hath run,
And met his first point of creation.
On Crutches went this world but yesterday,
Now it lies bed-rid; and is grown so old,
That its grown young, for tic a child again,
A childish soul it hath, tic a méere fool:
And sooles and children are well pleased with toys:
So must this world, with shows it must be pleased.
Then Virtue, buy a golden face like Vice,
And hang thy bosom full of silver Moons,
To tell the credulous world, As those increase,
As the bright Moon swells in her pearled Sphere,
So wealth and pleasures them to heaven shall rear.
Virtue abhors to wear a borrowed face.
Why hast thou borrowed then that Idiots hood?
Fools placed it on my head that knew me not,
And I am proud to wear the scorn of fools.
Morn in that pride &amp; die; all the world hates thée.
Not all, isle wander once more through the world:
Wisdom I know hath with her blessed wings
Fied to some bosom: if I méete that breast,
There isle erect my temple, and there rest.
Fortune nor Vice, shall then ere have the power,
(By their loose eyes) to entice my Paramour;
Then will I cast off this de formitie,
And shine in glory, and triumph to sée
You conquered at my féete, that tread on me.
Virtue begins to quarrel: Vice, farewell.
Stay, Fortune, whilst within this Grove we dwell,
If my Angelical and Saint-like form
Can win some amorous fool to wanton here,
And taste the fruit of this alluring trée,
Thus shall his saucy brows adorned bée,
To make vs laugh.
It will be rare: adieu.
Foul hel-bred fiend, Virtue shall strive with you,
If any be enamoured of thine eyes,
Their love must néedes beget deformities.
Men are transformed to beasts, feasting with sin;
But if (in spite of thée) their souls I win,
To taste this fruit, though thou disguise their head,
Their shapes shall be re-metamorphosed.
I dare thée doe thy worst.
My best isle try.
Fortune shall judge who wins the sovereignty.
The world to the circumference of heaven,
Is as a small point in Geometry,
Whose greatness is so little, that a less
Cannot be made: into that narrow room,
Your quick imaginations we must charm,
To turn that world: and (turned) again to part it
Into large kingdoms, and within one moment,
To carry Fortunatus on the wings
Of active thought, many a thousand miles.
Suppose then since you last beheld him here,
That you have sailed with him upon the seas,
And leapt with him upon the Asian shores,
Béene feasted with him in the Tartars palace,
And all the Courts of each Barbarian kings:
From whence (being called by some unlucky star,)
(For happiness never continues long)
Help me to bring him back to Arragon;
Where for his pride (Riches make all men proud)
On a slight quarrel, by a covetous Earl,
Fortune's dear minion is imprisoned:
There think you see him sit with folded arms,
Tears dropping down his cheeks, his white hairs torn,
His legs in rusty fetters, and his tongue
Bitterly cursing that his squint-eide soul
Did not make choice of wisedome's sacred love;
Fortune (to triumph in inconstancy),
From prison bailes him; (liberty is wild)
For being set free, he like a lusty eagle,
Cuts with his venturous feathers through the sky,
And lights not till he finds the Turkish court.
Thither transport your eyes, and there behold him,
Revelling with the Emperor of the East;
From whence (through fear) for safeguard of his life,
(Flying into the arms of ugly night,)
Suppose you see him brought to Babylon;
And that the Sun (clothed all in fire) hath rid
One quarter of his hot celestial way
With the bright morning, and that in this instant,
He and the Sultan meet, but what they say,
Listen you, the talk of Kings none dare bewray.
Art thou that Fortunatus, whose great name,
Being carried in the Chariot of the winds,
Has silt the Courts of all our Asian Kings,
With love and envy, whose dear presence ties
The eyes of admiration to thine eyes?
Art thou that Jove that in a shower of gold
Appearedst before the Turkish Emperor?
I am that Fortunatus, mighty Sultan.
Where is that purse which threw abroad such treasure?
I gave it to the Turkish Soliman,
A second I bestowed on Proctor Iohn,
A third the great Tartarian Cham received:
For with these Monarchs have I banqueted,
And rid with them in triumph through their courts,
In crystal Chariots drawn by Unicorns.
England, France, Spain, and wealthy Belgia,
And all the rest of Europs blessed daughters,
Have made my covetous eye rich in the embrace
Of their celestial beauties; now I come
To see the glory of fair Babylon.
Is Fortunatus wel-come to the Sultan?
For I am like the Sun, if Jove once chide,
My gilded brows from amorous bevan I hide.
Most welcome; and most happy are mine arms
In circling such an earthly deity:
But will not Fortunatus make me blessed
By sight of such a purse?
Ere I depart,
The Sultan shall receive one at my hands:
For I must spend some time in framing it,
And then some time to breathe that virtuous spirit
Into the heart thereof, all which is don
By a most sacred inspiration.
Wel-come, most welcome, to the Soldans court;
Stay here, and be the King of Babylon,
Stay here, and I will more amaze thine eyes
With wondrous sights, then can all Asia.
Behold you tower, there stands mine Armourie,
In which are Corsiets forged of beaten gold,
To arm ten hundred thousand fighting men,
Whose glittering sqaudrons when the Sun beholds,
They seem like to ten hundred thousand Ioves,
When Jove on the proud back of thunder rides,
Trapt all in lightning flames: there can I show thee
The ball of gold that set all Troy on fire;
There shalt thou sée the scarf of Cupids mother,
Snatched from the soft moist Ivory of her arm,
To wrap about Atones wounded thigh;
There shalt thou sée a whéele of Titans care,
Which dropped from heaven when Phaeton fired the world:
Isle give thée (if thou wilt) two silver Dooues
Composed by Magic to divide the ayre,
Who (as they fly) shall play their silver wings,
And give strange music to the Elements,
Isle give thée else the fan of Proserpine,
Which in reward (for a sweet Thracian song,)
The black-browd Empress three•• to Mopheus,
Being come to fetch Euridice from hell.
Hath ever mortal eye beheld these wonders?
Thine shall behold them, and make choice of any,
So thou wilt give the Sultan such a purse.
By Fortunes blessed hand (who christened me,)
The mighty Sultan shall have such a purse,
Provided I may sée these prizelesse wonders.
Leave vs alone: never was mortal ear
Acquainted with the virtue of a Jewel,
Which now isle show, (out-valuing all the rest.)
It is impossible.
Behold this Casket,—
Fettered in golden chains, the Lock pure gold,
The key of sollide gold, which my self kéepe,
And here is the treasure thats contained in it.
A course felt Hat? is this the precious Jewel?
Isle not exchange this, for ten Diadems.
On pain of death, none listen to our talk.
What néedes this solemn conjuration?
O, yes, for none shall understand the worth
Of this inestimable ornament,
But you: and yet not you, but that you swear
By her white hand, that lent you such a name,
To leave a wondrous purse in Babylon.
〈…〉 I will not violate,
But now un•• 〈…〉 of this Hat.
I 〈…〉; if they doe, they die.
None lis••• 〈…〉 what néedes this jealousy?
You sée tic 〈◊〉 in show; did I want Jewels,
Gold could beget them, but the wide worlds wealth
Buys not this Hat; this clapped upon my head,
I (only with a wish) am through the ayre,
Transported in a moment over Seas,
And over lands to any secrete place;
By this I steal to every Princes court,
And hear their private councels and prevent
All dangers which to Babylon are meant.
By help of this I oft sée armies join,
Though when the dreadful Aluarado sounds,
I am distant from the place a thousand leagues,
Oh, had I such a purse and such a Hat,
The Sultan were, of all, most fortunate.
Oh, had I such a Hat, then were I brave.
Wheres he that made it?
Dead, and the whole world
Yields not a workman that can frame the like.
No does? by what trick shall I make this mine?
Me thinks, me thinks, when you are borne o'er Seas,
And over lands, the heaviness thereof
Should weigh you down, drown you, or break your neck.
No, tic more light then any Hat beside:
Your hand shall peise it.
Oh, tic wondrous heavy.
Fie, ya're deceived: try it upon your head,
Would I were now in Cyprus with my sons.
Stay, Fortunatus▪ stay, I am undone.
Treason, Lords, treason, get me wings, isle fly
After this damned Traitor through the ayre.
Who wrongs the mighty king of Babylon?
This Fortunatus, this fend wrongs your king.
Locke the Court gates, where is the devil hid?
No gates no grates of Iron imprison him,
Like a Magician breaks he through the clouds;
Bearing my soul with him, for that Iewellgon,
I am dead, and all is dross in Babylon.
Fly after him, tic vain, on the winds wings,
Héele ride through all the Courts of earthly kings.
What is the Jewel that your grace hath lost?
He dies that troubles me: call me not king;
For isle consume my life in sorrowing.
Shadow? what have I lost to day at dice?
More then you will win again in a month.
Why sir, how much comes it to?
It comes to nothing, Sir, for you have lost your wits, and when a mans wests are lost, the man is like twenty pounds worth of Tobacco, which mounts into th'aire, and proves nothing but one thing.
And what thing is that, you Ass?
Marry sir, that he is an ass that melts so much money in smoke.
It were a charitable déed to hang thée a smoking.
I should never make good bacon, because I am not fat.
Isle be sworn thy wit is lean.
Its happy I have a lean wit: but master, you have none; for when your money slipped away, that went after it, and ever since you have béene mad, here com's your brother; borrow a dram of him.
If his be not mouldy: for men's wits in these days, A're like the Cuckoo, bald once a year and that makes Met∣ley so dear, and fools so good cheap.
Brother, all hail.
Theres a rattling salutation.
You must lend me some more money: Nay never
look so strange, and you will come off, so: if you will bar me from square play, doe: come come, when the old travel∣ler my Father comes home, like a young Ape, full of fantas∣tick tricks, or a painted Parrot stuck full of outlandish feathers, haele lead the world in a string, and then (like a hot shot) Isle charge and discharge all.
I would be loath, master, to sée that day: for he leads the world in a string that goes to hanging.
Take héede I turn not that head into the world, and lead you so?
Brother wilt be? Hay any ends of Gold or Silver?
Thus wanton revelling bréedes beggary.
Brother, it were better that you still lived poor.
Want would make wisdom rich: but when your Coffers
Swell to the brim, then riot sets up sails,
And like a desperate vnskild Mariner
Drives your unsteady fortunes on the point
Of wrack inevitable; of all the wealth,
Left (by our Father, when he left vs last)
This little is vnspent, and this being wasted,
Your riot ends; therefore consume it all,
Isle live; or dying, find some burial.
Thanks for my crowns.
Shadow, I am villainous hungry, to hear one of the seven wise Masters talk thus emptily.
I am a villain, master, if I am not hungry.
Because isle save this gold, sir Shadow, wéele féede our selves with Paradoxes.
Oh rare: what meat's that?
Meat, you gull: tic no meat: a dish of Paradoxes is a feast of strange opinion, tic an ordinary that our greatest gallants haunt nowadays, because they would be held for Statesmen.
I shall never fill my belly with opinions.
In despite of sway-bellies, gluttons, &amp; swéet mouthed Epicures, Isle have thée maintain a Paradox in commendations of hun∣ger.
I shall never have the stomach to do it.
Séest thou this Crusadd? do it, &amp; turn this into a feast
Covetousness and lechery are two devils, they'll tempt a man to wade through déepe matters: Isle do it though good cheer cōspire my death, for speaking treason against her.
Fall to it then with a full mouth.
Oh famine, inspire me with thy miserable reasons. I begin, master.
O miserable invocation.
Silence.
Theres no man but loves one o l these thrée-beastes, a Horse, a Hound, or a Whore; the Horse by his goodwill, has his head ever in the manger; the Whore with your ill will has her hand ever in your purse; and a hungry Dog eats dirty puddings.
This is profound, forward: the conclusion of this now.
The conclusion is plain: For since all men love one of these thrée monsters, being such terrible eaters, therefore all men love hunger.
A very lean argument.
I can make it no fatter.
Procéede, good Shadow; this fats me.
Hunger is made of Gun-powder.
Give fire to that opinion.
Stand by, lest it blow you up: hunger is made of Gun-powder, or Gun-powder of hunger; for they both eat through stone walls; hunger is a grindstone, it sharpens wit, hunger is fuller of love then Cupped, for it makes a man eat himself; hunger was the first that ever opened a Cooks shop; Cooks the first that ever made sauce; sauce being lickerish, lickes up good meat; good meat preserves life: Hunger therefore preserves life.
By my consent thou should still live by hunger.
Not so, hunger makes no man mortal: hunger is an excellent Physician: for hee dares kill any body: hunger is one of the seven liberal sciences.
O learned? Which of the seven?
Music, for shéele make a man leap at a crust: but, as few care for her six sisters, so none love to dance af∣la her pipe: Hunger, master, is hungry and covetous, there∣fore the Crusades.
But hast thou no sharper reasons then this?
Yes one: the dagger in Cyprus had never stabbed out such six penny pipes, but for hunger.
Why, you dolt, these pies are but in their minority.
My belly and my purse have been twenty times at daggers drawing, with parting the little urchins.
Peace, Idiot, peace, my Father is returned.
Touch me not, boys, I am nothing but ayre, let none speak to me, till you have marked me well.
Now speak your mind.
Villain, why hast thou chalked my Fathers back?
Only to mark him, &amp; to try what colour air is of.
Regard him not, Ampedo: Andelocia, Shadow: view me, am I as you are, or am I transformed?
I thought travel would turn my father, mad man or fool.
How should you be transformed I see no change.
If your wits be not planet stricken, if your brains lie in their right place, you are well enough; for your body is little mended by you fetching figures.
Me thinks, father, you look as you did, only your face is more withered.
Thats not my fault, age is like love, it cannot be hid.
Or like Gun-powder a fire, or like a fool, or like a young no vice new come to his lands; for all these will show of what house they come: now sir, you may amplify.
Shadow, turn thy tongue to a shadow, be silent: Boys be proud, your Father hath the whole world in this compass, I am all felicity, up to the brummes. In a minute am I come from Babylon, I have béene this half hour in Famagosta.
How? in a minute, father? Ha, ha, I sée travellers must lie.
Tic their destiny: the Fates doe so conspire.
I have cut through the ayre like a Falcon; I would have it séeme strange to you.
So it does, Sir.
But tic true: I would not have you believe it neither
No more we doe not, Sir.
But tic miraculous &amp; true: desire to sée you, brought me to Cyprus; isle leave you more Gold, and go visit more Countries.
Leave vs gold enough, and wéele make all Countries come visit vs.
The frosty hand of age now nips your blood,
And strowes her snowle flowers upon your head,
And give you warning that within few years,
Death néedes must marry you: those short lines minutes,
That dribble out your life, must néedes be spent,
In peace not travel: rest in Cyprus then.
Could you survey ten worlds, yet you must die;
And bitter is the swéete thats reaped thereby.
Faith father, what pleasure have you met by wall∣king your stations?
What pleasure, boy? I have reveled with kings, danced with Quéenes, dallied with Ladies, worn strange attires, séene fantastic••s, conversed with humorists, béene ravished with divine raptures of Doric, Lidian and Phrigi∣an harmonies, I have spent the day in triumphs, and the night in banquesting.
Oh rare: this was heavenly.
Me thinks t'was horrible.
He that would not be an Arabian Phoenix to burn in these swéete fires, let him live like an Owl for the world to wonder at.
Why, brother, are not all these vanities:
Uanities? Ampedo, thy soul is made of lead, too dull, too ponderous to mount up to the incomprehensible glo∣rye, that travel lifts men to.
My old masters soul is Cork and feathers, and
being so light doth easily mount up.
Swéeten mine ears, good father, with some more.
When in the warmth of mine own countries arms
We yawned like sluggards, when this small Horizon
Imprisoned up my body, then mine eyes
Worshipped these clouds as brightest; but, my boys,
The glistering beams which doe abroad appear,
(In other heavens) fire is not half so clear.
Why, sir, are there other heavens in other countries?
Peace, interrupt him not upon thy life.
For still in all the Regions I have séene,
I scorned to crowd among the muddy throng
Of the rank multitude, whose thickened breath,
Like to condensed Fogs doe choke that beauty,
Which else would dwell in every kingdoms chéeke.
No, I still boldly stepped into their Courts,
For there to live tic rare, O tic divine;
There shall you sée faces Angelical,
There shall you see troops of chaste Goddesses,
Whose star-like eyes have power, (might they still shine)
To make night day, and day more crystalline.
Néere these you shall behold great Heroes,
White headed Councellors and Jovial spirits,
Standing like fiery Cherubins to guard
The Monarch, who in God-like glory sits.
In midst of these, as if this deity
Had with a look created a new world;
The standers by, being the fair workmanship.
Oh how my soul is rapt to a third heaven.
Isle travel sure, and live with none but kings.
Then Shadow must die among knaves; and yet why so? in a bunch of Cards, knaves waite upon the kings.
When I turn king, then shalt thou waite on me.
Well, theres nothing impossible: a dog has his day, and so have you.
But tell me, father, have you in all courts
Beheld such glory, so majestic?
In all perfection? no way blemished?
In some Courts shall you see ambition
Sit piecing Dedalus old waxen wings,
But being clapped on, and they about to fly,
Even when their hopes are busied in the clouds,
They melt against the Sun of majesty,
And down they tumble to destruction:
For since the heavens strong arms teach kings to stand,
Angels are placed about their glorious throne,
To guard it from the strokes of Traitrous hands.
By travel, boys, I have seen all these things,
Fantastic complement stalks up and down,
Tricked in outlandish Feathers, all his words,
His looks, his oaths, are all ridiculous,
All apish, childish, and Italianate.
I know a medicine for that malady.
By travel, boys, I have seen all these things.
And these are sights for none, but gods &amp; kings.
Yes, and for Christen creatures, if they be not blind.
In these two hands doe I gripe all the world.
This leather purse, and this bald woollen Hat
Make me a Monarch: here is my Crown and Sceptre.
In progress will I now go through the world.
Isle crack your shoulders, boys, with bags of gold
Ere I depart; on Fortune's wings I ride,
And now sit in the height of humane pride.
Now, fool, thou least; where thy proud feet doe tread
These shall throw down thy cold &amp; breathless head.
O sacred deity, what sin is done
That deaths Iron fist should wrestle with thy son?
Thou art no sonnne of Fortune, but her slave:
Thy Cedar hath aspired to his full height.
Thy Sun like glory hath advanced herself
Into the top of prides Meridian,
And down amain it comes. From beggary
I plumed thee like an Ostrich, like that Ostrich
Thou hast eaten Metals, and abused my gifts,
Hast plaid the Ruffian, wasted that in riots,
Which as a blessing I bestowed on thee.
Forgive me, I will be more provident.
No, endless follies follow endless wealth.
Thou had thy fancy, I must have thy fate,
Which is, to die when the art most fortunate.
This ink thread thy ugly sins have spun,
Black life, black death: faster that it were don.
Oh, let me live, but till I can redeem.
The destinies deny thee longer life.
I am but now lifted to happiness.
And now take I must pride to cast thee down.
Had thou chosen wisdom, this black had been white,
And deaths sterne brow could not thy soul affright.
Take this again; give wisdom to my sons.
No, fool, it is now too late; as death strikes thee,
So shall their ends sudden and wxetched bee.
Ioves daughters (righteous destinies) make haste,
His life hath wasteful been, and let it waste.
Why the pox doest thou sweat so?
For anger to see any of Gods Creatures have such filthy faces as these Semsters had that went hence.
Semsters? why, you ass, they are destinies.
Indeed, if it be ones destiny to have a filthy face, I know no remedy but to go maskt and cry, Woe worth the Fates.
Why droopes my father? these are only shadows,
Raised by the malice of some enemy,
To fright your life, o'er which they have no power.
Shadows? I defy their kindred.
O Ampedo, I faint▪ help me, my sons.
Shadow, I pray thee run and call more help.
If that desperate Don Dego death hath tan up the Cudgels once, here is never a Fencer in Cyprus dare take my old masters part.
Run, villain, call more help.
Bid him thank the destinies for this.
Let him shrincke down, &amp; die between your arms,
Help comes in vain. No hand can conquer Fate,
This instant is the last of my lifes date.
This Goddess (if at least she be a goddess)
Names her self Fortune: wandering in a wood,
Half famished, her I met. I have, quoth she,
Six gifts to spend upon mortality,
Wisdom, strength health, beauty, long life and riches,
Out of my bounty one of these is thine.
What benefit did from your choice arise?
Listen, my sons: In this small compass lies,
Infinite treasure: this she gave to me,
And gave to this, this virtue, Take (quoth she)
So often as from hence thou drowsed thy hand,
Ten golden pieces of that kingdoms coin,
Where ever thou liu'st, which plenteous sure shall last,
After thy death, till thy sons lives doe waste.
Father, your choice was care, the gift divine.
It had been so, if riches had been mine.
But hath this golden virtue never failed?
Never.
O admirable; heare's a fire
Hath power to thaw the very heart of death,
And give stones life, by this most sacred death,
See brother, here is all India in my hand.
Inherit you (my Sons) that golden land.
This Hat I brought away from Babylon,
I robbed the Sultan of it, tic a prize
Worth twenty Empires. In this Jewel lies.
How, father? Jewel? call you this a Jewel? It's course Wool, a bald fashion, and greasy to the brim; I have bought a better Felt for a French crown forty times: Of what virtuous block is this Hat, I pray?
Set it upon thy head, and with a wish,
Thou in the moment on the winds swift wings,
Shalt be transported into any place.
A wishing Hat, and a golden mine?
O Andelocia, Ampedo, now death
Sounds his third sommons: I must hence: these Jewels
To both I doe bequeath; divide them not,
But use them equally; never bewray
What virtues are in them; for if you doe,
Much shame, much grief, much danger follows you.
Peruse this book: farewell: behold in me
The rotten strength of proud mortality.
His soul is wandering to the Elizium shades.
The flower thats fresh at noon, at Sun-set fades. Brother, close you down his eyes, because you were his el∣dest; and with them close up your tears, whilst I (as all yon∣ger brothers doe) shift for my self: let vs morn, because hes dead, but morn the less, because he cannot revive: the honour we can doe him, is to bury him royally, lets about it then, for isle not melt my self to death with scalding sighs, nor drop my soul out at mine eyes, were my father an Em∣perour.
Hence, hence, thou stop'st the tide of my true tears. True grief is dumb, though it hath open ears.
Yet God send my grief a tongue, that I may have good utterance for it: Sob on, brother mine, whilst you sigh there, isle sit &amp; read what Story my father has written here.
I can get none, I can find none: where are you, master? Have I tan you napping? and you too? I sée sorrows eye-lids are made of a Dor-mouse skin, they seldom open, or of a misers purse, that's always shut: So ho, master.
Shadow, why how now? whats the matter?
I can get none Sir, tic impossible.
What is impossible? what can not get?
No help for my old master.
Hast thou béene all this while calling for help?
Yes sir: he scorned all Famagosta when he was in his huffing, and now hee lies puffing for wind, they say they scorn him.
The poison of their scorn infects not him;
He wants no help. Sée where he breathless lies:
Brother, to what place have you borne his body?
I bear it? I touched it not.
Nor I: a leaden slumber pressed mine eyes.
Whether it were lead or latin that haspt down those winking casements, I know not, but I found you both snorting.
And in that sléepe (me thought) I heard the tunes
Of sullen passions apt for Funerals,
And saw my Fathers lifeless body borne
By Satyrs: O I fear that deity
Hath stolen him hence, that Snudge his destiny.
I fear hées risen again, did not thou méete him?
I sir? doe you think this white and red durst have kissed my swéete chéekes, if they had séene a ghost? But, master, if the destinies, or Fortune, or the Fates, or the Fairies have stolen him, never indite them for the Felony: for by this means the charges of a Tomb is saved, and you being his heirs, may doe as many rich Executors doe, put that money in your purses, and give out he dyed a beggar.
Away, you Rogue, my Father die a beggar?
Isle build a Tomb for him of massy Gold.
Me thinks, master, it were better to let the memory
of him shine in his own virtues (if hée had any) than in Ala∣blaster.
I shall mangle that Alabaster face, you whore son virtuous vice.
He has a Marble heart, that can mangle a face of Alabaster.
Brother, come, come, morn not, our Father is but slept to agrée with Charon for his boat hire to Elizium. Sée, here is a Story of all his travels; this book shall come out with a new Addition: Isle tread after my Fathers steps; isle go measure the world, therefore lets share these Jewels, take this or this.
Will you then violate our Fathers Will?
A puritan? kéepe a dead mans Will? Indéed in the old time, when men were buried in soft Church-yardes, that their Ghosts might rise, it was good but, brother, now they are imprisoned in strong Brick and Marble, they are fast: fear not: away, these are fooleries, gulleries, trump∣ries; here is this or this, or I am gon with both.
Doe as you please, the sin shall not be mine.
Fools call those things profane, that are divine.
Are you content to wear the Jewels by turns? Isle have the purse for a yéere, you the Hat, and as much gold, as you'll ask; &amp; when my pursourship ends, isle resign, and cap you.
I am content to bear all discontents.
I should serve this bearing Ass rarely now, if I should load him, but I will not, though conscience bee (like Physic) seldom used, (for so it does least hurt) yet isle take a dram of it: this for him, and some gold: this for me: for ha∣uing this mint about me, I shall want no wishing Cap: gold is an Eagle, that can fly to any place, and like death, that dares enter all places.
Shadow, wilt thou travel with me?
I shall never sadge with ye humour because I cannot lie.
Thou dolt, weal visit all the kings courts in ye world.
So we may, and return dolts home, but what shall we learn by travail?
Fashions.
Thats a beastly disease: me thinks its better stay∣ing in your own country.
How? In mine own country? like a Cage-birde and see nothing?
Nothing? yes you may see things enough, for what can you see abroad that is not at home? The same Sun calls you up in the morning, and the same man in the Moon lights you to bed at night, our fields are as greene as theirs in summer, and their frosts will nip vs more in winter: Our birds sing as sweetly &amp; our women are as fair: In other countries you shall have one drink to you, whilst you kiss your hand, and duck, heel poison you: I confess you shall meet more fools, and asses, and knaves abroad then at home (yet God be thanked we have pretty store of all) but for Punckes, wee put them down.
Prepare thy spirits, for thou shalt go with me,
To England shall our stars direct our course,
Thither the prince of Cyprus (our kings son)
Is gon to see the lovely Agripyne,
Shadow, weal gaze upon that English dame,
And try what virtue gold has to inflame.
First to my brother, then away lets fly,
Shadow must be a Courtier ere he die.
If I must, the Fates shall bee served: I have seen many clowns Courtiers, then why not Shadow? Fortune, I am for thee.
Be gone: leave that with me, and leave me to my self, if the king ask for me, swear to him I am sick, and thou shalt not lie, pray thee leave me.
I am gon, Sir.
This music makes me but more out of tune O, Agripyna.
Gentle friend, no more.
Thou says love is a madness, hate it then,
Even for the names sake.
O, I love that madness,
Even for the names sake.
Let me tame this frenzy,
By telling thee thou art a prisoner here,
By telling thee shees daughter to a king,
By telling thee the king of Cyprus son
Shines like a Sun between her looks and thine,
Whilst thou seem but a star to Agripyne:
He loves her.
If he doe: why so doe I.
Love is ambitious and loves majesty.
Dear friend, thou art deceiuued, loves voice doth sing As sweetly in a beggar as a king.
Dear friend, thou art deceived: O bid thy soul
Lift up her intellectual eyes to heaven,
And (in this ample book of wonders) read,
Of what celestial mold, what sacred essence,
Her self is formed, the search whereof will drive
Sounds musical among the earring spirits,
And in sweet tune set that which none inherits.
Isle gaze on heaven if Agripyne be there:
If not: Fa, La, la, Sol, la, &amp;c.
O, call this madness in, see from the windows
Of every eye Derision thrusts out cheeks,
Wrinkled with Idiot laughter; every finger
Is like a Dart shot from the hand of scorn,
By which thy name is hurt, thine honour torn.
Laugh they at me, sweet Galloway?
Even at thee.
Ha, ha, I laugh at them, are not they mad,
That let my true true sorrow make them glad?
I dance and sing only to anger grief,
That in that anger, he might smite life down
With his Iron fist: good heart, it seems then,
They laugh to see grief kill me: O, fond men,
You laugh at others tears, when others smile,
You tear your selves in pieces: vile, vile, vile,
Ha, ha, when I behold a swarm of fools,
Crowding together to be counted wise,
I laugh because sweet Agripine's not there,
But weep because she is not any where,
And weep because whether she be or not,
My love was ever and is still forgot: forgot, forgot, forgot.
Draw back this stream, why should my Orleans morn?
Look yonder, Galloway, doest thou see that Sun?
Nay good friend, stare upon it, mark it well,
Ere he be two hours elder, all that glory
Is banished heaven, and then (for grief) this sky,
That's now so jocund, will morn all in black,
And shall not Orleans morn? Alack, alack,
O, what a Savage tyranny it were,
T'inforce care, laugh and woe: not shed a tear?
Dead is my love, I am buried in her scorn,
That is my Sun-set, and shall I not morn?
Yes by my troth I will.
Dear friend forbear,
Beauty (like sorrow) dwells every where.
Race out this strong Idea of her face,
As fair as hers shines in any place.
Thou art a Traitor to that white and red,
Which sitting on hex cheeks (being Cupids throne)
Is my hearts sovereign: O when she is dead,
This wonder (Beauty) shall be found in none.
Now Agripyne's not mine, I vow to be
In love with nothing but deformity.
O fair Deformity, I muse all eyes
Are not enamord of thee: thou did never
Murder men's hearts, or let them pine like wax,
Melting against the Sun of thy destiny,
Thou art a faithful nurse to Chastity,
Thy beauty is not like to Agripynes,
For cares, and age, and sickness hers deface,
But thine's eternal: O Deformity,
Thy fairness is not like to Agripynes,
For (dread) her beauty will no beauty have,
But thy face looks most lovely in the grave.
See where they come together hand in hand.
O, watch sweet Galloway, when their hands doe part, Between them, shalt thou find my murdered heart.
By this then it seems a thing impossible, to know when an English Lady loves truly.
Not so, for when her soul steals into her heart, and her heart leaps up to her eyes, and her eyes drop into her hands, then if she say, Here is my hand, shees your own, else never.
Here is a pair of your prisoners, lets try their opinion.
My kind prisoners well encountered, the Prince of Cyprus here and my self have been wrangling about a question of love: My Lord of Orleans, you look lean, and likest a lover; Whether is it more torment to love a Lady and never enjoy her, or always to enjoy a Lady, whom you cannot choose but hate?
To hold her ever in mine arms whom I loath in my heart, were some plague, yet the punishment were no more then to be enjoined to keep poison in my hand, yet never to taste it.
But say you should be compelled to swallow ye poison.
Then a speedy death would end a speeding misery: But to love a Lady and never enjoy her, oh it is not death, but worse then damnation; Tic hell, tic.
No more, no more, good Orleans, nay then I see my prisoner is in love too.
Me thinks, soldiers cannot fall into the fashion of love.
Me thinks, a Soldier is the most faithful lover of all men else: for his affection stands not upon complement: his wooing is plain home-spun stuff: theres no outlandish thread in it, no Rhetoric: a Soldier casts no figures to get his mistress heart, his love is like his valour in the field, when he pays downright blows.
True, Madam, but would you receive such payment?
No, but I mean, I love a Soldier best, for his plain dealing.
Thats as good as the first.
Be it so, that goodness I like: for what Lady can abide to love a Spruce silken face Courtier, that stands every morning two or three hours learning how to look by his Glass, how to speak by his Glass, how to sigh by his glass, how to court his Mistress by his Glass. I would wish him no other plague, but to have a Mistress as brittle as glass.
And that were as bad as the horn plague.
Are any lovers possessed with this madness?
What madmen are not possessed with this love? yet by my troth, wee poor women doe but smile in our sleeves to see all this foppery: yet we all desire to see our lovers attired gallantly, to hear them sing sweetly, to be∣hold them dance comely and such like; but this apish monkey fashion of effeminate niceness, out upon it: Oh, I hate it worse then to bee counted a scold.
Indeed men are most regarded, when they least regard themselves.
And women most honoured, when they show most mercy to their lovers.
But first not a miserable tyranny, to see a Lady triumph in the passions of a soul languishing through her cruelty?
Me thinks it is.
Me thinks tic more then tyranny.
So think not I: for as there is no reason to hate any that love vs, so it were madness to love all that doe not hate vs: women are created beautiful, only because men should woo them: for it were miserable tyranny to enjoin poor women to woo men: I would not hear of a woman in love for my fathers kingdom.
I never heard of any woman that hated love.
Nor I: but we had all rather die then confess wee love; our glory is to hear men sigh whilst we smile, to kill them with a frown, to strike them dead with a sharpe eye, to make you this day wear a feather, and to morrow a sick night-cap: Oh, why this is rare, there's a certain deity in this, when a Lady by the Magic of her looks, can turn a man into twenty shapes.
Sweet friend, she speaks this but to torture me.
Isle teach thee how to plague her: love her not.
Poor Orleans, how lamentably he looks: if hee stay, heel make me surely love him for pure pity. I must send him hence, for of all sorts of love. I hate the French: I pray thee, sweet prisoner, entreat Lord Longauile to come to me presently.
I will: and esteem myself more then happy, that you will employ me.
Watch him, watch him for Gods sake, if hee sigh not or look not back.
He does both: but what mystery lies in this?
Nay, no mystery, tic as plain as Cupids fore∣head: why this is as it should be: And esteem my self more then happy, that you will employ me: my French prisoner is in love over head and ears.
Its wonder how he scopes drowning.
With whom think you?
With his keeper, for a good wager: Ah, how glad is he to obey? And how proud am I to command in this Em∣per of affection? Over him and such Spungy-liuerd youths, (that lie soaking in love) I triumph more with mine eye,
then ever he did over a Soldier with his sword. First not a gallant victory for me to subdue my Fathers enemy with a look? Prince of Cyprus, you were best take heed, how you encounter an English Lady.
God bless me from loving any of you, if all bee so cruel.
God bless me from suffering you to love me, if you be not so formable.
Will you command me any service, as you have done Orleans:
No other service but this, that (as Orleans) you love me, for no other reason, but that I may torment you.
I will: conditionally, that in all company I may call you my tormentor.
You shall: conditionally, that you never beg for mercy. Come, my Lord of Galloway.
Come, sweet Madam.
The Ruby-colourd portals of her speech
Were closed by mercy: but upon her eye,
(Attired in frowns) sat murdering cruelty.
Shees angry, that I durst so high aspire.
O, she disdains that any strangers breast
Should be a Temple for her deity:
Shees full of beauty, full of bitterness.
Till now, I did not dally with loves fire:
And when I thought to try his flames indeed,
I burnt me even to cinders: O, my stars,
Why from my native shore did your beams guide me,
To make me dote on her that doth deride me?
Hold him in this mind, sweet Cupped, I conjure thee. O, what music these hey-hoes make? I was about to cast my little little self into a great love trance for him, fearing his hart had been flint: but since I see tic pure virgin wax, he shall melt his belly full: for now I know how to temper him.
Never beg mercy? yet be my tormentor.
I hope she heard me not: doubtless she did:
And now will she insult upon my passions,
And vex my constant love with mockeries.
Nay, then isle be mine own Physician,
And our face love, and make her think that I
Mournd thus, because I saw her standing by.
What news, my Lord of Cornwall?
This fair Prince,
One of your Countrymen, is come to Court,
A lusty gallant brave in Cyprus Isle,
With fifty bard Horses prancing at his heals,
Backed by as many strong limbed Cypriots.
All whom he keeps in pay: whose offred service,
Our king with Arms of gladness hath embraced.
Borne in the Isle of Cyprus? whats his name?
His servants call him Fortunatus son.
Rich Fortunatus son? Is he arrived?
This he bestowed on me.
And this on me.
And this bounteous hand enforced me take.
I prize this Jewel at a hundred Marks,
Yet would he needs bestow this gift on me.
My Lords, whose hand hath been thus prodigal?
Your countrymen my Lord, a Cypriot.
The gallant sure is all compact of gold,
To every Lady hath he given rich Jewels,
And sent to every servant in the Court
Twenty fair English Angels.
This is rare.
My Lords, prepare your selves for revelling,
Tic the kings pleasure that this day he spent
In royal pastimes, that this golden Lord,
(For so all that behold him, christen him)
May taste the pleasures of our English court.
Here comes the gallant, shining like the Sun.
For these your royal favours done to me,
(Being a poor stranger) my best powers shall preue,
By Acts of worth, the soundness of my love.
Herein your love shall best set out it self,
By staying with vs: if our English Isle
Hold any object welcome to your eyes,
Doe but make choice, and claim it as your prize.
I thank your grace: would he durst kéepe his word,
I know what I would claim: Tush, man, be bold,
Were shée a Saint, shée may be won with gold.
Tic strange I must confess, but in this pride,
His Father Fortunatus (if he live)
Consumes his life in Cyprus: still he spends,
And still his Coffers with abundance swell,
But how he gets these riches none can tell.
Hold him in talk: come hither, Agripyne.
But what enticed young Andelociaes soul
To wander hither?
That which did allure,
My sovereigns son, the wonder of the place.
This curious heap of wonders, (which an Empress
Gave him) he gave me, and by Uenus hand,
The warlike Amorato néedes would swear,
Hee left his country Cyprus for my love.
If by the sovereign Magic of thine eye,
Thou can enchant his looks to kéepe the circles
Of thy fair chéekes, be bold to try thy charms,
Féede him with hopes, and find the royal vein,
That leads this Cypriot to his golden mine.
Here's Music spent in vain, Lords, fall to dancing.
My fair tormentor, will you lend a hand?
Isle try this strangers cunning in a dance.
My cunning is but small, yet whoo'le not prove
To shame himself for such a Ladies love?
These Cypriots are the devils that torture me.
He courts her, and shée smiles, but I am borne,
To be her beauties slave, and her loves scorn.
I shall never have the face to ask the question twice.
Whats the reason? Cowardliness or pride?
Neither: but tic the fashion of vs Cypriots, both men and women, to yéeld at first assault, and we expect others should doe the like.
Its a sign, that either your women are very black, &amp; are glad to be sped, or your men very fond, &amp; will take no denial.
Indéede our Ladies are not so fair as you.
But your men more venturous at a breach then you, or else they are all dastardly soldiers.
Hee that fights under these swéete colours, &amp; yet turns coward, let him bee shot to death with the terrible are∣rows of fair Ladies eyes.
Nay Insultado, you must not deny vs.
My Corocon es muy peseta, my Enema muy a∣tormentada,
Espagnoll, no haze musica in Tiara Inglesa.
Swéete Insultado let vs sée you dance.
I have heard the Spanish dance is full of state.
Verdict Signor: la dense spagnola, es muy alto,
Maiestica, y para Monarcas: vuestra Inglesa,
Baxa, Fantastica, y muy humilde.
Doth my Spanish prisoner deny to dance? Hee has sworn to me by the cross of his pure Toledo, to bee my servant: by that oath (my Castilian prisoner) I conjure you to show your cunning, though all your body bee not frée, I am sure your héeles are at liberty.
Nolo quire country desire: vuestra oio haze con∣questo a su prisionero: Oyes, la pauyne Hispanola, sea vuestra musica y grauidad, y maiestad: Pay, dadime Tobacco, Ton•a my capa, e my espada. Mas alto, Mas alto: Desuiaios, Desuia∣ios, Companieros, Mas alto, Mas alto.
Thanks, Insultado.
Tic most excellent.
The Spaniards dance, is as his déedes bee, full of pride.
The day grows old, &amp; what remains vnspent,
Shall be consumed in banquets, Agripyne,
Leave vs a while, if Andelocia please,
Go bear our beauteous daughter company.
Fortune I thank thée: now thou smile on me.
This Cipriot bears a gallāt princely mind.
My Lord, of what birth is your country-man?
Think not, swéete Prince, that I propound this question,
To wrong you in your love to Agripyne:
Our favours grace him to an other end.
Nor let the wings of your affection droop,
Because shée séemes to shun loves gentle lure.
Believe it on our word, her beauties prize
Only shall yéeld a conquest to your eyes.
But tell me whats this Fortunatus son?
Of honourable blood, and more renownd
In foreign kingdoms (whither his proud spirit,
Plumed with ambitious feathers, caries him)
Then in his native Country. but last day,
The father and the sons were through their riots,
Poor and disdained of all, but now they glister,
More bright than Midas: if some damned fiend
Fed not his bags, this golden pride would end.
His pride wéele somewhat tame, &amp; curb the head
Of his rebellious prodigality:
He hath invited vs, and all our Péeres,
To feast with him tomorrow, his provision,
I understand may entertain thrée kings.
But Lincoln, let our Subjects secretly
Be charged on pain of life that not a man
Sell any kind of Fuel to his servants.
This policy shall clip his golden wings,
And teach his pride what tic to strive with kings.
Withdraw a while:
None filled his hands with Gold, for we set spies,
To watch who fed his prodigality:
He hung the Marble bosom of our Court,
As thick with glistering Spangles of pure gold,
As ere the spring hath slucke the earth with flowers.
Unless he melt himself to liquid gold,
Or be some God, some devil, or can transport
A mint about him, (by enchanted power)
He cannot rain such showers: with his own hands
He threw more wealth abroad in every stréete,
Then could be thrust into a Chariot:
Hées a Magician sure, and to some fiend,
His soul (by infernal covenants) has he sold,
Always to swim up to the chin in gold.
Be what he can be, if those doting fires,
Wherein he burns for Agripinaes love,
Want power to melt from him this endless Mine,
Then (like a slave) wéele chain him in our Tower,
Where tortures shall compel his sweating hands
To cast rich heaps into our treasorie.
I have found the sacred spring that never abc.
Leave vs:
But isle not show it your majesty,
Till you have sworn by Englands royal crown,
To let me kéepe it.
By my Crown I swear,
None but fair Agripyne the Gem shall wear.
Then is this mine: sée, Father, here's the fire,
Whose gilded beams still burn, this is the Sun,
That ever shines, the tree that never dies,
Here grows the Garden of Hesperides,
The out-side mocks you, makes you think tic poor,
But entering it, you find eternal store.
Art sure of this? How did thou drive it out?
Fear not his waking yet, I made him drink
That soporiferous Juice which was composed,
To make the Quéene (my Mother) relish sléepe,
When her last sickness sommond her to heaven.
He sléepes profoundly: when his amorous eyes
Had singde their wings in Cupids wanton flames,
I set him all on fire, and promised love:
In pride whereof, he drew me forth this purse,
And swore, by this he multiplied his gold.
I tried and found it true: and secretly
Commanded Music with her silver tongue,
To chime soft lullabies into his soul,
And whilst my fingers wantond with his hair,
(T'intice the sléepie Juice to charm his eyes)
In all points was there made a purse, like his,
Which counterfeit is hung in place of this.
More then a second kingdom hast thou won.
Leave him, that when he wakes he may suspect,
Some else has robbed him, come déere Agripyne,
If this strange purse his sacred virtues hold,
Wéele circle England with a wast of Gold.
These English occupiers are mad Troians: let a man pay them never so much, theile give him nothing but the bag. Since my master created me steward over his fifty
men, and his one and fifty horse, I have rid over much busi∣ness, yet never was gald, I thank the destinies: Music? O delicate warble: O these Courtiers are most swéete trium∣phoned creatures. Seignior, Sir: Monsieur: swéete Seignior; this is the language of ye accomplishment: O delicious strings: these heavenly wyre-drawers have stretched my master even out at length: yet at length he must wake: master?
Wake me not yet, my gentle Agripyne.
One word Sir, for the billets, and I vanish.
Theres heaven in these times: throw the musicians Abounteous largess of thrée hundred Angels.
Why sir, I have but ten pound left.
Ha, Shadow? whore's the Princess Agripyne?
I am not Apollo, I cannot reveal.
Was not the princess here, when thou came in?
Here was no Princess but my princely self.
In faith?
No in faith, Sir.
Where are you hid? where stand you wantoning? Not here? gone in faith? have you given me the slip? well, tic but an amorous trick and so I embrace it: my horse, Shadow, how fare my horse?
Upon the best Oats my vnderiteward can buy.
I mean, are they lusty, sprightly, gallant, wantō, fiery?
They are as all horses are, Caterpillars to the Com∣mon¦wealth, they are ever munching: but Sir, for these billets, and these faggots and bauins?
S'hart what billets, what faggots? doest make me a Woodmonger?
No swéete Seignior, but you have bid the King and his Péeres to dinner, and he has commanded that no Wood∣monger sell you a stick of wood, and that no Collier shall co∣sen you of your measure, but must tie up the mouth of their Sackes, least their Coals kindle your choler.
First possible? first true, or hast thou learnt of the Eng∣lish gallants to gull?
Hées a gul that would be taught by such gulls.
Not a stick of wood? Some child of envy has bust this stratagem into the kings ear, of purpose to disgrace me: I have invited his majesty, and though it cost me a Million, isle feast him: Shadow, thou shalt hire a hundred or two of Carts, with them post to all the Grocers in London, buy up all the Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmegs, Licorish and all other spices, that have any strong heart, and with them make fires to pre∣pare our Cookery:
Ere Fortunatus son look red with shame,
Héele dress a Kings feast in a spiced flame.
This diuice, Sir, will bee somewhat a kin to Lady Pride, twill ask cost.
Fetch twenty Porters, isle laid all with gold.
First, master, fill these bags.
Come then, hold up, how now? tricks, new crochets, Madam Fortune? Dry as an Eele-skin? Shadow, take thou my Gold out.
Why Sir, here's none in.
Ha, let me see: O here is a bastard chéeke,
I sée now tic not mine: tic counterfeit,
Tic so: slave thou hast robbed thy master.
Not of a penny, I have béene as true a steward.
Vengeance on thée and on thy stewardship.
Yet wherefore curse I thée? thy leaden soul
Had never power to mount up to the knowledge
Of the rich mystery closed in my purse.
Oh no, isle curse my self, mine eyes isle curse,
They have betrayed me, I will curse my tongue,
That hath betrayed me: Isle curse Agripyne,
Shée hath betrayed me: Sirens cease to sing,
Your charms have tan effect, for now I sée,
All your enchantments were, to cousin me.
What shall I doe with this ten pound, Sir?
Go buy with it a Chain and hang thy self.
Now think I on my Fathers prophecy.
Tell none (quoth he) the virtue, if you doe,
Much shame, much grief, much danger follows you.
With tears I credit his divinity.
O fingers, were you upright Justices,
You would tear out mine eyes: had not they gazed
On the frail colour of a painted chéeke,
None had betrayed me: henceforth isle defy
All beauty, and will call a lovely eye,
A Sun whose scorching beams burn up our joys,
Or turn them black like Ethiopians.
O women, wherefore are you borne men's woe,
Why are your faces framed Angelical?
Your hearts of spunges, soft and smooth in show,
But touched, with poison they doe ouer-flow.
Had sacred wisdom béene my Fathers Fate,
He had died happy, I lived fortunate.
Shadow, be are this to beauteous Agripyne,
With it this message, tell her, isle reprove
Her covetous sin the less, because for gold,
I sée that most men's souls too cheap are sold.
Shall I buy these spices to day or to morrow▪
To morrow? I, to morrow thou shalt buy them,
To morrow tell the Princess I will love her,
To morrow tell the king, isle banquet him,
To morrow, Shadow, will I give thée gold,
To morrow pride goes bare and lust acold.
To morrow will the rich man féede the poor.
And vice to morrow virtue will adore,
To morrow beggars shall be crowned kings,
This No-time, morrowes-time, no swéetnes sings:
I pray thée hence: bear that to Agripyne.
Isle go hence, because you send me: but isle go wée∣ping hence, for grief that I must turn villain as many doe, and leave you when you are up to the ears in adversity.
Shée hath robbed me, and now isle play the thief,
Isle steal from hence to Cyprus, for black shame.
Here (through my riots) brands my lofty name.
Isle sell this pride for help to bear me thither,
So pride and beggary shall walk together:
This world is but a School of villainy,
Therefore isle rob my brother, (not of gold,
Nor of his virtues, virtue none will steal:)
But (if I can,) isle steal his wishing Hat.
And with that, wandering round about the world,
Isle search all corners to find misery,
And where shée dwells, isle dwell, languish and die.
Gentles, if ere you have beheld the passions,
The combats of his soul who being a king,
By some usurping hand hath béene deposde
From all his royalties: even such a soul,
Such eyes, such heart swollen big with sighs and tears,
The star-crost son of Fortunatus wears.
The thoughts crowned him a Monarch in the morn,
Yet now hées bandied by the Seas in scorn,
From wave to wave: his golden treasures spoil
Makes him in desperate language to entreat,
The winds to spend their fury on his life:
But they (being mild in tyranny) or scorning
To triumph in a wretches funeral,
Toss him to Cyprus. O what treachery
Cannot this Serpent gold entice vs to?
He robs his brother of the Souldans prize,
And having got his wish (the wishing Hat)
He does not (as he would) séeke misery,
But hopes by that to win his purse again,
And in that Hope from Cyprus is he fled.
If your swift thoughts clap on their wonted wings,
In Genoway may you take this fugitive,
Where having cozened many Jewellers,
To England back he comes, step but to court,
And there (disguised) you find him bargoning
For Jewels with the beauteous Agripyne,
Who wearing at her side the virtuous purse,
He clasps her in his arms, and as a Raven,
Griping the tender-hearted Nightingale,
So flies he with her, (wishing) in the ayre,
To be transported to some wilderness:
Imagine this the place: sée here they come.
Since they themselves have tongues, mine shall be dumb.
What devil art thou that affrightst me thus,
Haling a Princess from her fathers court,
To spoil her in this savage wilderness?
Indéed the devil and the pick-purse should always fly together, (for they are sworn brothers:) but Madam Covetousness, I am neither a devil as you cal me, nor a Jewel∣lers as I call my self, no, nor a Juggler, yet ere you and I part, wéele have some legerdemain together: do you know me?
I am betrayed: this is the Cypriot.
Forgive me, it was not I that changed thy purse,
But Athelstane my Father, send me home,
And here is thy purse again: here are thy Jewels,
And I in satisfaction of all wrongs.
Talk not you of satisfaction, this is some recom∣pence that I have you, tic not the purse I regard: put if off, and isle mince it as small as pie meat: the purse? hang the purse: were that gon, I can make another, and another, &amp; another, I and another: tic not the purse I care for, but the purser: you, I you. First not a shame that a kings daughter, a fair Lady, a Lady not for Lords, but for Monarchs, should for gold sell her love, and when shée has her own asking, and that there stands nothing betwéene, then to cheat your swéete heart? O fie, fie, a shée cony-catcher? You must be dealt soundly with.
Enjoin what pains thou wilt, &amp; isle endure them, so thou wilt send me to my fathers court.
Nay gods lid, you're not gon so: set your heart at rest, for I have set up my rest, that except you can run swifter then a Hart, home you go not: what pains shall I lay upon
you? Let me sée: I could serve you now but a slippery touch: I could get a young King or two, or three of you, and then send you home, and bid their grand-sire king nurse them: I could pepper you, but I will not.
O, doe not violate my chastity.
No, why I tell you I am not given to the flesh, though I savor (in your nose) a little of the devil, I could run away else, and starve you here.
If I must die, doom me some easier death.
Or transform you (because you love picking) into a Squirrel, and make you pick out a poor living here among the Nut trees: but I will not neither.
What will my gentle Andelocia doe?
Oh, now you come to your old bias of cogging.
I pray thée Andelocia, let me go:
Send me to England, and by heaven I swear,
Thou from all kings on earth my love shalt bear.
Shall I in faith?
In faith, in faith thou shalt.
Here, god a mercy: now thou shalt not go.
Oh God.
Nay doe you hear Lady? cry not you're best: no nor curse me not: if you think but a crabbed thought of me, the spirit that carried you in mine arms through the ayre, will tell me all: therefore set your Sunday face vpont. Since you'll love me, isle love you, isle marry you, and lie with you, and be∣get little Jugglers: marie home you get not: England you'll say is yours: but Agripyne, love me, and I will make the whole world thine.
I care not for the world, thou murdrest me,
Betwéene my sorrow, and the scalding Sun
I faint, and quickly will my life be done,
My mouth is like a Furnace, and dry heate
Drinks up my blood. Oh God, my heart will burst,
I die, unless some moisture quench my thirst.
S'hart now I am worse then ere I was before:
For half the world I would not have her die.
Here is neither spring nor ditch, nor rain, nor dew,
Nor bread, nor drink: my lovely Agripyne,
Be comforted, sée here are Apple trées.
Clime up for Gods sake, reach me some of them.
Look up, which of these Apples likes thée best?
This hath a withered face, tic some swéete fruit.
Not that, my sorrows are too sour already.
Come hither, here are Apples like gold.
O, I for Gods sake, gather some of these.
Ay me, would God I were at home again.
Stand farther, least I chance to fall on thée.
Oh here be rare Apples, rare red-cheekt Apples, that cry come
kiss me▪ Apples, hold your peace, isle teach you to cry.
O England, shall I ne'er behold thée more?
Agripyna, tic a most Sugared delicious taste in ones mouth, but when tic down, tic as bitter as gall.
Yet gather some of them. Oh, that a Princess
Should pine for food: were I at home again,
I should disdain to stand thus and complain.
Here is one Apple that grows highest, Agripyna, &amp; I could reach that, isle come down.
Make hast, for the hot Sun doth scald my chéekes.
The sun kiss thée? hold, catch, put on my Hat, I will have yonder highest Apple, though I die for it.
I had not wont be Sun-burnt, wretched mée.
O England, would I were again in thée.
Swounds Agripyna, stay, O I am undone,
Swéete Agripyna, if thou hearst my voice,
Take pity of me, and return again▪
Shée flies like lightning: O she hears me not,
I wish my self into a wilderness,
And now I shall turn wilde: here I shall famish,
Here die, here cursing dye, here raving die,
And thus will wound my breast, and rent mine hair.
What hills of Flint are grown upon my brows?
O me, two forked horns, I am turned beast,
I have abused two blessings, wealth and knowledge,
Wealth in my purse, and knowledge in my Hat,
By which being borne into the Courts of kings,
I might have séene the wondrous works of Jove,
Acquirde Experience, Learning, Wisdom, Truth,
But I in wilderness tottred out my youth,
And therefore must turn wild: must be a beast,
An ugly beast: my body horns must bear,
Because my soul deformity doth wear.
Lives none within this wood? If none but I
Live here (thanks heaven) for here none else shall die.
Sée where my new-turnd devil has built his hell.
Virtue, who conquers now? the fool is tan.
O sléepie sin.
Swéete tunes wake him again.
Vice sets too heavy on his drowsy soul,
Music swéete concord cannot pierce his ear.
Sing and amongst your Songs, mix bitter scorn.
Those that tear Virtue, must by Vice be torn.
Virtue stand aside: the fool is caught,
Laugh to sée him, laugh aloud to wake him,
Follies nets are wide, and neatly wrought,
Mock his horns, and laugh to sée Vice take him.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, laugh, laugh in scorn,
Who's yt fool? the fool, he wears a horn.
Virtue stād aside, mock him, mock him, mock him
Laugh aloud to sée him, call him fool.
Error gave him suck, now sorrows rock him,
Send the riotous beast to madness school.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, laugh, laugh in scorn,
Who's the fool? the fool, he wears a horn.
Virtue stand aside: your school hee hates.
Laugh aloud to sée him, mock, mock, mock him.
Vanity and hell kéepe open gates,
Hées in, and a new nurse (Despair) must rock him.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, laugh, laugh in scorn,
Fool, fool, fool, fool, fool, wear still the horn.
O me, what hell is this? fiends, tempt me not.
Thou glorious devil hence. Oh now I sée,
This fruit is thine, thou hat deformed mée:
Idiot avoid, thy gifts I loath to taste.
Away: since I am entered madness School,
As good to be a beast, as be a fool.
Away, why tempt you me? some powerful grace
Come and redéeme me from this hideous place.
To her hath Andelocia (all his life)
Sworn fealty, would thou forsake her now?
Whose blessed tongue names Andelocia?
Hers, who (attended on by destinies)
Shortened thy Fathers life, and lengthens thine.
O sacred Quéene of chance, now thorten mine,
Else let thy deity take off this shame.
Woo her, t'was shée that set it on thy head.
Shée laughs to sée me metamorphosed.
Woo me and isle take off this ugly scorn.
Woo me, and isle clap on another horn.
I am beset with anguish, shame and death.
O bid the Fates work fast, and stop my breath.
No Andelecia, thou must live to sée
Worse torments (for thy follies) light on thée.
This golden trée, which did thine eyes entice,
Was planted here by Vice: lo, here stands Vice:
How often hast thou sued to win her grace?
Till now, I never did behold her face.
Thou did behold her at thy fathers death,
When thou in scorn did violate his will,
Thou did behold her, when thy strecht-out arm
Caught at the highest bough, the loftiest vice,
The fairest Apple, but the foulest price.
Thou did behold her, when thy lickerish eye
Fed on the beauty of fair Agripyne,
Because th'adst gold, thou thoughtst al women thine,
When look thou off from her? for they whose souls
Still revel in the nights of vanity,
On the fair chéekes of Vice still fix their eye.
Because her face doth shine, and all her bosom
Bears silver Moons, thou wast enamord of her.
But had thou upward looked, and séene these shames,
Or viewed her round about, and in this glass
Séene Idiots faces, heads of devils and hell,
And read this ha, ha, he, this merry story,
Thou would have loathd her: where, by loving her,
Thou bear this face, and worst this ugly head,
And if shée once can bring thée to this place,
Loud sounds these ha, ha, he, shéele laugh apace.
O, re-transforme me to a glorious shape,
And I will learn how I may love to hate her.
I cannot re-transforme thée, woo this woman.
This woman? wretched is my state, when I,
To find out wisdom, to a fool must fly.
Fool, cléere thine eyes, this is bright Arete,
This is poor Virtue, care not how the world
Doth crown her head, the world laughs her to scorn,
Yet Sibi sapit, Virtue knows her worth.
Run after her, shéele give thée these and these
Crowns and Bay-garlands: (honours victories:)
Serve her, and shée will fetch thée pay from heaven,
Or give thée some bright office in the stars.
Immortal Arete, Virtue divine,
O smile on me, and I will still be thine.
Smile thou on me, and I will still be thine:
Though I am jealous of thy Apostasy,
Isle entertain thée: here, come taste this trée,
Here's Physic for thy sick deformity.
Tic bitter: this fruit I shall ne'er digest.
Try once again, the bitterness soon dies.
Mines swéete, taste mine.
But being down tic sour,
And mine being down has a delicious taste.
The path that leads to Virtues court is narrow,
Thorny and up a hill, a bitter journey
But being gon through, you find all heavenly swéetes,
The entrance is all flinty, but at th'end,
To towers of pearl and crystal you ascend.
O delicate, O sweet Ambrosian relish,
And sée, my ugliness drops from my brows,
Thanks beauteous Arete: O had I now
My Hat and purse again, how I would shine,
And gild my soul with none but thoughts divine.
That shall be tried, take fruit from both these trées,
By help of them, win both thy purse and Hat,
I will instruct thée how, for on my wings
To England shalt thou ride; thy virtuous brother
Is (with that Shadow who attends on thée,)
In London, there isle set thée presently.
But if thou lose our favours once again,
To taste her swéetes, those swéetes must prove thy bane.
Vice, who shall now be crowned with victory?
Shée that triumphs at last, and that must I.
Lincoln, how set thou her at liberty?
No other prison held her but your court,
There (in her chamber) hath shée hid her self
These two days, only to shake off that fear,
Which her late violent rapture cast upon her.
Where hath the beauteous Agripyna béen?
In heaven or hell, in or without the world,
I know not which, for as I oft have seen
(When angry Thamesis hath curled her lockes,)
A whirlwind come, and from her frizeld brows,
Snatch up a handful of those sweaty pearls,
That stood upon her forehead, which awhile,
Being by the boisterous wind hung in the ayre,
At length hath flung them down and raised a storm.
Even with such fury was I wherryed up,
And by such force held prisoner in the clouds,
And thrown by such a tempest down again.
Some soul is damned in hell for this black déede.
I have the purse safe, and anon your grace
Shall hear this wondrous history at full.
Tel me, tormentor, shall fair Agripyne,
Without more difference be now christend mine?
My choice must be my Fathers fair consent.
Then shall thy choice end in this Cyprus prince.
Before the Sun shall six times more arise,
His royal marriage will we solemnise.
Proclaim this honoured match, come Agripyne,
I am glad you are here, more glad the purse is mine.
Buy any Apples, féene Apples of Tamasco, féene Tamasio peepeins: péeps feign, buy Tamasco péepins.
Damasco apples? good my Lord Montrosse,
Call yonder fellows.
Sir Coster-monger.
Who calls: péeps of Tamasco, féene péeps: I sat tic de swéetest apple in de world, tic better den de Pomewater, or apple Iohn.
By my trat Madam, tic réet Tamasco péepins, look here else.
I dare not say, as de Irishman my countrymen say, taste de goodness of de fruit: No fayt tic farie téere mistress, by Saint Patrickes hand tic téere Tamasco apple.
The fairest fruit that ever I beheld,
Damasco apples, wherefore are they good?
What is your price of half a score of these?
Half a score, half a score? dat is doos many master.
I, I, ten, half a score, thats five and five.
Féeue and feeue? By my trat and as Créeze save me la, I cannot tell, wat be de price of feeue and feeue, but tic trée crown for one Péepin, dat is the préez if you take em.
I fat, tic no less for Tamasco.
Thrée crowns for one? what wondrous virtues have they?
O, tic féene Tamasco apple, and shall make you a great teale wise, and make you no fool, and make feign me∣more.
And make dis fish be more fair and amiable, and make dis eyes look always lovely, and make all de court &amp; country burn in desire to kiss di none swéete countenance.
Apples to make a Lady beautiful?
Madam thats excellent.
These Irishmen,
Some say, are great dissemblers, and I fear,
These two the badge of their own country wear.
By my trat, and by Saint Patrickes hand, and as Créez save me la, tic no dissembler: de Irish man now and den cut di countrie-mans throat, but yet in fayt hee love di countrymen, tic no dissembler: dis féene Tamasco apple can make di swéete countenance, but I can take no less but thrée crowns for one, I wear out my naked legs and my foots, and my tods, and run hitter and didder to Tamasco for them.
As Créez save me la, hee speaks true: Péeps feign,
Isle try what power lies in Damasco fruit.
Here are ten crowns for thrée, So fare you well.
Lord Longauyle, buy some.
I buy? not I:
Hang them, they are toys, come Madam, let vs go.
Saint Patrick and Saint Peter, and all de holy Angels look upon dat fish and make it fair.
Ha, ha, ha, shées sped, I warrant.
Peace, Shadow, buy any péepins, buy.
Péeps féene, féene Tamasco apples.
Came not Lord Longauyle to buy some fruit?
No fat, master, here came no Lords nor Ladies, but di none swéete self.
Tic well, say nothing, here is six crowns for two: You say the virtues are to make one strong.
Yes fat and make sweet countenance &amp; strong too.
Tic excellent, here: farewell, if these prove,
Isle conquer men by strength, women by love.
Ha, ha, ha, why this is rare.
Peace, master, here comes another fool.
Péeps féene, buy any péepes of Tamasco?
Did not the Lord Montrosse return to you?
No fat, swéete master, no Lord did turn to vs: Péepes féene.
I am glad of it: here are nine crowns for thée: What are the virtues besides making fair?
O, twill make thée wondrous wise.
And dow shall bee no more a fool, but swéete face and wise.
Tic rare, farewell▪ I never yet durst woo.
None loves me: now isle try what these can doe.
Ha, ha, ha. So, this is admirable, Shadow, here end my torments in Saint Patrickes Purgatory, but thine shall continue longer.
Did I not clap on a good false Irish face?
It became thée rarely.
Yet thats lamentable, that a false face should be∣come any man.
Thou art a gull, tic all the fashion now, which fashion because wéele kéepe, step thou abroad, let not the world want fools: whilst thou art commencing thy knavery there, isle procéede Doctor Dodipoll here: that done, thou Shadow
and I will fat our selves to behold the transformation of these fools: go fly.
I fear nothing, but that whilst wee strive to make others fools, we shall wear the Coxcombs our selves, Pips fine &amp;c.
S'hart, here's my brother whom I have abused:
His presence makes me blush, it strikes me dead,
To think how I am metamorphosed.
Féene paepins of Tamasco &amp;c.
For shame cast off this Mask.
Whiled thou buy any pips?
Mock me no longer
With idle apparitions: many a land
Have I with weary féete and a sick soul
Measurd, to find thée; and when thou art found,
My greatest grief is, that thou art not lost:
Yet lost thou art, thy fame, thy wealth are lost,
Thy wits are lost, and thou hast in their stead,
With shame and cares, and misery crowned thy head.
That Shadow that pursues thée, filled mine ears
With sad relation of thy wretchedness,
Where is the purse, and where my wishing Hat?
Where? and where? are you created Constable, you stand so much upon Intergatories? the purse is gone, let that fret you, and the Hat is gone, let that mad you: I run thus through all trades to ouer-take them, if you'll bee quiet, follow me, and help, if not, fly from me, and hang your self: wilt thou buy any pippins?
O, how I grieve, to sée him thus transformed?
Yet from the circles of my jealous eyes,
He shall not start, till he have re-possest
Those virtuous Jewels, which found once again,
More cause they ne'er shall give me to complain.
Their worth shall be consumed in murdering flames,
And end my grief, his riot, and our shames.
In spite of sorcery try once again,
Try once more in contempt of all damned spells.
Your majesty fights with no mortal power.
Shame and not conquest, hangs upon his strife.
O, touch me not, you add but pain to pain,
The more you cut, the more they grow again.
Is there no art to conjure down this scorn?
I, ne'er knew Physic yet against the horn.
Sée, prince of Cyprus, thy fair Agripyne
Hath turn her beauty to deformity.
Then I defy thee, Love, vain hopes, adieu,
You have mocked me long; in scorn isle now mock you.
I came to sée how the Lord Longauyle
Was turned into a monster, and I find
And object, which both strikes me dumb and blind.
To morrow should have béene our marriage morn,
But now my bride is shame, thy bridegroom scorn.
O tell me yet, is there no Art, no charms,
No desperate Physic for this desperate wound?
Al means are tried, but no means can be found.
Then England, farewell: haplesse maid, thy stars,
Through spiteful influence set our hearts at wars.
I am infor'st to leave thee, and resign
My love to grief.
All grief to Agripyne.
Adieu I would say more, had I a tongue
Able to help his master: mighty king,
I humbly take my leave, to Cyprus I,
My fathers Son, must all such shame defy.
So doth not Orleans, I defy all those,
That love not Agripyne, and him defy,
That dares but 〈◊〉 her half so well as I.
O pardon me, I have in sorrows Jail,
Béene long tormented, long this mangled bosom
Hath bled, and never durst expose her wounds,
Till now, till now, when at thy beauteous feet,
I offer love and life, O cast an eye
Of mercy on me, this deformed face
Cannot affright my soul from loving thée.
Talk not of love, good Orleans, but of hate.
What sentence will my love pronounce on me?
Will Orleans then be mad▪ O gentle friend.
O gentle, gentle friend I am not mad:
Hées mad, whose eyes on painted cheeks doe dote,
O Galloway; such read beauties book by rote.
Hes mad, that pines for want of a gay flower,
Which saves when grief doth blast, or sickness lower,
Which heate doth wither, and white ages frost
Nips dead: such fairness, when tic found, tic lost,
I am not mad, for loving Agripyne,
My love looks on her eyes, with eyes divine,
I dote on the rich brightness of her mind,
That sacred beauty strikes all other blind,
O make me happy then, since my desires
Are set a burning by loves purest fires.
So thou wilt bear her far from England sight,
Enjoy thy wishes.
Locke me in some cave,
Where staring wonders eye shall not be guilty
To my abhorred looks, and I will die
To thée, as full of love as misery.
I am amazed and mad, some speckled soul
Lies pound for this in Hell, without redemption,
Some fiend deludes vs all.
O unjust Fates,
Why doe you hide from vs this mystery?
My Lord Montrosse, how long have your brows worn
This fashion? these two feather-springs of horn?
An Irish kern sold me Damasco apples,
Some two hours since, and (like credulous fool)
Hee swearing to me that they had this power,
To make me strong in body, rich in mind,
I did believe his words, tasted his fruit,
And since have béene attired in this disquize.
I fear that villain hath beguiled me too.
Nay before God he has not consent you,
You have it soundly.
Me he made believe,
One apple of Damasco would inspire
By thoughts with wisdom, and upon my chéekes
Would cast such beauty, that each Ladies eye,
Which looked on me, should love me presently.
Desire to look more fair, makes me more soul,
Those apples did entice my wandering eye,
To be enamord of deformity.
This proves that true, which oft I have heard in schools,
Those that would séeme most wise doe turn most fools.
Here's your best hope, nene néedes to hide his face,
For horned foreheads swarm in every place.
Now Chester, what Physicians hast thou found?
Many, my liege, but none that have true skill
To tame such wilde diseases: yet here's one,
A Doctor and a Frenchman, whom report
Of Agripynes grief hath drawn to court.
Cure her, and Englands treasorie shall stand,
As frée for thée to use, as rain from heaven.
Cure me and to thy Coffers I will send,
More gold from Scotland then thy life can spend.
Cure Longauile, and all his wealth is thine.
He Monsieur Long-villaine gre tanck you: Gre tanck your mashestie a great teale artely by my trat: where be dis Madam Princeza dat be so mush torment? O I eshu: one, 2: an trée, 4 &amp; 5, seez horn Ha, ha, ha, pardon moi prea wid al mine art, for by my trat, me can no point shose but laugh,
Ha, ha, ha▪ to mark how like trée bul-beggera, they stand. Oh, by my trat and fat, di diuela be whoreson, scurme, paltry, ill sauore knave to mock de Madam, and gentill-home so: Ha, ha, ha, ha.
This Doctor comes to mock your majesty.
No by my trat la, but me loua much much merry∣mant: Come Madam, prea-artely stand still, and letta me s•eel your dis horn, O tic pretty horn, dis be facile, easy for pull de vey but Madame dis O he grand, grand horn, diffi∣cill, and very deep, tic pertious, a grand Laroone. But Ma∣dam, prea be patient, we shall take it off vell.
Thrc• have we pard them off, but with fresh pain, In compass of a thought they rise again.
Its true, tic no easy metre, to pull horn off, tic easy for pull on, but hard for pull off, some horn bee so good fellow, hee will still inhabit in de mans pate, but tic all one for tat, I shall snap away all dis: Madam trust dis down into your little belly.
Father, I am in fear to taste his physic.
First let him work experiments on those.
Isle sauce you for your infidelity.
In no place can I spy my wishing Hat.
Thou learned Frenchman, try thy skill on me,
More ugly then I am, I cannot be.
Cure me, and Montrosse wealth shall all be thine.
Tic all one for dat: shall doe presently; Madam, prea mark me: Monsieur, shamp dis in your two shaps, so, now Monsieur Long-villaine, dis so: now dis, fear noting, tic eshelent medicine: so, now cram dis into your guts, and belly: So, now snap away dis whoreson four diuela; Ha, ha, Is no point good?
This is most strange.
Wast painful Longauyle?
Ease took them off, and there remains no pain.
O try thy sacred Physic on me.
No by my trat, tic no possibla, tic no possibla, al de metre, all de ting, all de substance, all de medicine, be among
his and his belly▪ tic no possibla, till me prepare more.
Prepare it then, and thou shalt have more gold From Englands Coffers, then thy life can wast.
I mush buy many costly tings dat grow in Ara∣bia, in Asia, and America, by my trat tic no possibla, till ano∣der time, no point.
There's nothing in the world, but may for gold
Be bought in England, hold your lap isle rain
A shower of Angels.
Fie, fie, fie, fie, you no credit le dockature? Ha, but vel, tic all one for tat: tic no mattera for gold: Uel, vel, vel, vel, vel, me have some more, prea say noting, shall bee presently prepare for your horns.
She has my purse, and yonder lies my Hat,
Work brains, and once more make me fortunate.
Uel, vel, vel, vel, be patient Madam, presently, presently, be patient, me have two, trée, four and five medicines for de horn: presently Madam, stand you der, prea wid all mine art, stand you all der: and say noting, so: nor look noting dis vey: so, presently, ppesently Madam, snip dis horn off wid de rushes &amp; anoder ting by and by, by and by, by and by, prea look none dis vey, and say noting.
Let no man speak, or look, upon his life.
Doctor, none here shall rob thée of thy skill.
So, taka dis hand: wink now prea artely wid your two nyes: why so.
Would I were with my brother Ainpedo.
Help, Father, help, I am hurried hence perforce.
Draw weapons, wheres the princess, follow him,
Stay the French Doctor, stay the Doctor there.
Cornwall and some other run out, and enter presently.
Stay him, sh'art who dare stay him? tic the devil
In likeness of a Frenchman, of a Doctor.
Look how a rascal kite having swept up
A Chicken in his claws, so flies this hell-hound
In the air with Agripyne in his arms.
Count every man upon his swiftest horse.
Fly several ways, he cannot bear her far.
These paths weal beat.
And this way shall be mine.
This way, my Liege, isle ride.
And this way I:
No matter which way, to séeke misery.
I can ride no way, to out-runne my shame.
Yes, Longauile, lets gallop after too,
Doubtless this Doctor was that Irish devil,
That consent vs, the medicine which he gave vs,
Tasted like his Damasco villainy.
To horse, to horse, if we can catch this fiend,
Our forked shame shall in his heart blood end.
O how this mads me, that all tongues in scorn,
Which way so ere I ride, cry, Ware the horn.
O gentle Andelocia pity me,
Take off this infamy, or take my life.
Your life? you think then that I am a true Doc∣tor indéede, that tie up my lining in the knots of winding shéetes: your life? no, kéepe your life, but deliver your purse: you know the theifes salutation, Stand &amp; deliver. So, this is mine, and these yours: Isle teach you to live by the sweat of other men's brows.
And to strive to be fairer then God made her.
Right, Shadow: therefore vanish, you have made me turn Juggler, and cry hey-passe, but your horns shall not repose.
O gentle Andelocia.
Andelocia is a Nettle: if you touch him gently, héele sting you.
Or a rose, if you pull his swéete stalk, héele prick you.
Therefore not a word, go, trudge to your Father: sigh not for your purse, money may be got by you, as well as by the little Welsh woman in Cyprus, that had but one horn in her head, you have two; and perhaps you shall cast both: as
you use me, mark those words well, as you use me, nay, you're best fly, isle not endure one word more. Yet stay too, be∣cause you entreat me so gently, and that isle make some a∣mends to your Father, although I care not for any King in Christendom, yet hold you, take this Apple, eat it as you go to court, and your horns shall play the cowards and fall from you.
O gentle Andelocia.
Nay away, not a word.
Ha, ha, ha, &amp;c. Ware horns.
Why doest thou laugh, Shadow?
To see what a horn plague follows coueteousnesse and pride.
Brother, what mysteries lie in all this?
Tricks, Ampedo, tricks, devises, and mad He∣rogliphickes, mirth, mirth, and melody. O, there's more mu∣sick in this, then all the Gammoth ares, and Sol fa Res, in the world; here's the purse, and here's the Hat: because you shall be sure isle not start, wear you this, you know his ver∣tu; if danger beset you, fly &amp; away: A sort of broken-shind limping legedd Jade run hobbling to séeke vs: Shadow, wéele for all this have one fit of mirth more, to make vs laugh and be fat.
And when we are fat, master, wéele doe as all glut∣tons doe, laugh and lie down.
Hie thée to my chamber, make ready my richest attire, isle to Court presently.
Isle go to Court in this attire, for apparel is but the shadow of a man, but shadow is the substance of his ap∣apparel.
Away, away, and méete me presently.
I had more néede to cry, away to thée.
Away, away with this wilde lunacy,
Away with riots.
Away with your purity, brother, you're an Ass, why doth this purse spit out gold but to be spent? why lives a man in this world, to dwell in the Suburbs of it, as you doe? Away foreign simplicity, away: are not eyes made to sée fair
Ladies: hearts to love them? tongues to court them, &amp; hands to féele them? Out you Stock, you stone, you logs end: Are not legs made to dance, and shall mine limp up and down the world after your cloth-stockin-héeles? you have the Hat, keep it, anon isle visit your virtuous countenance again, a∣dew, pleasure is my swéete mistress, I wear her love in my Hat, and her soul in my heart: I have sworn to bee merry, and in spite of Fortune and the blacke-browd destinies, isle never be sad.
Go, fool, in spite of mirth, thou shalt be sad.
Isle bury half thy pleasures in a grave
Of hungry flames, this fire I did ordain
To burn both purse and Hat: as this doth perish,
So shall the other: count what good and bad
They both have wrought, the good is to the ill,
As a small Pebble to a mighty hill.
Thy glory and thy mischiefs here shall burn,
Good gifts abused to mans confusion turn.
This is his brother; Soldiers, bind his arms.
Bind arms and legs, and hale the fiend a way.
Unciuill: wherefore must I taste your spite?
Art thou not one of Fortunatus sons?
I am, but he did never doe you wrong.
The devil thy brother has, villain, look here.
Where is the beauteous purse and wishing Hat?
My brother Andelocia has the purse,
This way heel come anon to pass to court,
Alas, that sin should make men's hearts so bold,
To kill their souls for the base thirst of gold.
The wishing Hat is burnt.
Burnt? Soldiers bind him.
Tortures shall wring both hat and purse from you,
Villain, isle be revenged for that base scorn,
Thy hell-hound brother clapped upon my head.
And so will Longauyle.
Away with him.
Drag him to yonder tower, there shackle him,
And in a pair of Stocks, locke up his héeles,
And bid your wishing Cap deliver you.
Give vs the purse and Hat, wéele set thée frée,
Else rot to death and starve.
Oh tyranny, you néed not scorn the badge which you did bear:
Beasts would you be, though horns you did not wear.
Drag hence the cur: come noble Longauyle,
One's sure, and were the other fiend as fast,
Their pride should cost their lives: their purse and Hat
Shall be both ours, wéele share them equally.
That will be some amends for arming me.
Peace, Longauyle, yonder the gallant comes.
You're well encountered.
Thanks, Lord Longauyle.
The king expects your presence at the court.
And thither am I going.
Pips fine, fine apples of Tamasco, ha, ha, ha.
Were thou that Irishman that consent vs?
Pips fine, ha, ha, ha, no not I: not Shadow.
Were not your Apples delicate and rare?
The worst that ere you sold; Sirs, bind him fast.
What, will you murder me? help, help, some help.
Help, help, help.
Follow that Dog, and stop his balling throat.
Villains, what means this barbarous treachery?
We mean to be revenged for our disgrace.
And stop the golden current of thy wast.
Murder, they murder me, O call for help.
Thy voice is spent in vain, come, come, this purse,
This wel-spring of your prodigality.
Are you appointed by the king to this?
No, no, rise, spurn him up: know you who's this?
My brother Ampedo? Alas, what fate
Hath made thy virtues so unfortunate?
Thy riot and the wrong of these two Lords,
Who (causeless) thus do starve me in this prison.
Strive not you're best, villains, lift in his legs.
Traitors to honour, what doe you intend?
That riot shall in wretchedness have end.
Question thy brother with what cost hées fed,
And so assure thou shalt be banqueted.
In want, in misery, in woe and care,
Poor Ampedo his fill hath surfeited:
My want is famine, bolts my misery,
My care and woe should be thy portion.
Give me that portion, for I have a heart
Shall spend it fréely, and make bankrupt
The proudest woe that ever wet mans eye.
Care with a mischief? wherefore should I care?
Have I rid side by side by mighty kings,
Yet be thus bridled now? Isle tear these fetters.
Murder, cry murder, Ampedo, aloud.
To bear this scorn our Fortunes are too proud.
O folly, thou hast power to make flesh glad,
When the rich soul in wretchedness is clad.
Peace, fool, am not I Fortunes minion?
These bands are but one wrincle of her frown,
This is her Evening mask, her next morns eye
Shall ouer-shine the Sun in majesty.
But this sad night will make an end of me.
Brother, farewell, grief, famine, sorrow, want,
Have made an end of wretched Ampedo.
Where is the wishing Hat?
Consumed in fire.
Accursed be those hands that did destroy it,
That would redéeme vs, did we now enjoy it.
Wanton farewell, I faint, deaths frozen hand
Congeals lifes little River in my breast.
No man before his end is truly blessed.
O miserable, miserable soul.
Thus a foul life makes death to look more foul.
Thus shall this golden purse divided be,
One day for you, another day for me.
Of days anon, say, what determine you,
Shall they have liberty, or shall they die?
Die sure: and sée, I think the elder's dead.
I, murderers, he is dead. O sacred wisdom,
Had Fortunatus béene enamoured
Of thy celestial beauty, his two sons
Had shined like two bright Suns.
Pull hard, Montrosse.
Come you to strangle me? are you the hangman?
Hell-hounds you're damned for this impiety.
Fortune, forgive me, I deserve thy hate,
My self have made myself a reprobate:
Virtue, forgive me, for I have transgressed
Against thy laws, my vows are quite forgot,
And therefore shame is fallen to my sins lot.
Riches and knowledge are two gifts divine.
They that abuse them both as I have done,
To shame, to beggary, to hell must run.
O conscience hold thy sting, cease to afflict me.
Be quick, tormentors, I desire to die.
No death is equal to my misery.
Cyprus, vain world, and Vanity farewell.
Who builds his heaven on earth, is sure of hell.
He's dead: in some déepe vault lets throw their bodies.
First let vs sée the purse, Lord Longauyle.
Here tic, by this wéele fill this tower with gold.
Frenchman, this purse is counterfeit.
Thou lie.
Scot, thou hast consent me, give me the right,
Else shall thy bosom be my weapons grave.
Villain, thou shalt not rob me of my due.
Lay hands upon the murderers, strike them down.
Surrender up this purse, for this is mine.
I•e these two devils, of some powers divine?
O, see, sée, O my two masters, poor Shadows substances; what shall I doe? whose body shall Shadow now follow?
Peace, Idiot, thou shalt find rich heaps of fools,
That will be proud to entertain a Shadow.
I charm thy babbling lips from troubling me.
You need not hold them, sée, I smite them down
Lower then hell: base souls, sink to your heaven.
I doe arrest you both my prisoners.
Stand not amazed, you gods of earth, at this,
Shée that arrested these two fools is Vice,
They have broke Virtues laws, Vice is her serfeant,
Her Jailer and her executioner.
Look on those Cypriots, Fortunatus sons,
They and their Father were my minions,
My name is Fortune.
O dread deity.
Knéele not to me: if Fortune list to frown,
You néed not fall down, for shaele spurn you down▪
Arise, but fools, on you isle triumph thus.
What have gained by being covetous?
This prodigal purse did Fortunes bounteous hand
Bestow on them, their riots made them poor,
And set those marks of miserable death,
On all their pride, the famine of base gold
Hath made your souls to murders hands be sold,
Only to be called rich But Idiots sée
The virtues to be fled, Fortune hath caused it so,
Those that will all devour, must all forgo.
Most sacred Goddess.
Peace, you slatterer.
Thy tongue but heaps more vengeance on thy head.
Fortune is angry with thée, in thée burns
A greedy covetous fire; in Agripyne
Pride like a Monarch revels, and those sins
Have lead you blind-fold to your former shames,
But Virtue pardond you, and so doth Fortune.
All thanks to both your sacred deities,
As for these Mettall-eaters, these base thieves,
Who rather then they would be counted poor,
Will dig through hell for gold, you were forgiven
By Virtues general pardon; her broad seal
Gave you your lives, when shée took off your horns.
Yet having scarce one foot out of the Jail,
You tempt damnation by more desperate means,
You both are mortal, and your pains shall ring
Through both your ears, to terrify your souls▪
As please the Judgment of this mortal king.
Fair Empress of the world, since you resign
Your power to me, this sentence shall be mine,
Thou shalt be tortured on a whéele to death,
Thou with wild horses shalt be quartered.
Ha, ha, weak Judge, weak judgment, I reverse
That sentence, for they are my prisoners,
Embalm the bodies of those Cypriots,
And honour them with princely burial,
For those doe as you please, but for these two,
I kiss you both, I love you, you're my minions,
Untie their hands, Vice doth reprive you both,
I set you frée.
Thanks, gracious deity.
Be gon, but you in liberty shall find
More bondage then in chains, fools, get you hence,
Both wander with tormented conscience.
O horrid Judgment, thats the hell in déede.
Come, come, our death ne'er ends if conscience bléede.
O miserable, miserable men.
Fortune triumphs at this, yet to appear,
All like my self, that which from those I took,
King Athelstane I will vestow on thée,
And in it the old virtue I infuse:
But, king, take héede how thou my gifts doest use.
England shall ne'er be poor, it England strive,
Rather by virtue, then by wealth to thrive.
Virtue? alas good soul, shée hides her head.
What envious tongue said, Virtue hides her head?
Shée that will drive thée into banishment.
Shée that hath conquers thée; how dare thou come,
Thus tricked in gaudy Feathers, and thus guarded,
Which crowned kings and Muses, when thy foe
Hath trod thus on thee, and now triumphs so?
Whore's virtuous Ampedo? See, hées her slave,
For following thée this recompense they have.
Is Ampedo her stane? Why thats my glory.
The Idiots cap I once wore on my head,
Did figure him, those that (like him) doe muffle
Virtue in clouds, and care not how shée shine,
Isle make their glory like to his decline:
He made no use of me, but like a miser,
Locked up his wealth in rusty bars of sloth:
His face was beautiful, but wore a mask,
And in the worlds eyes seemed a Blackamoor.
So perish they that so keep virtue poor.
Thou art a fool to strive, I am more strong,
And greater then thy self, then Virtue fly,
And hide thy face, yield me the vict•••rye.
Is Vice higher then Virtue: thats my glory,
The higher that thou art, thou art more horrid,
The world will love me for my comeliness.
Thine own self loves thy self: why on the heads
Of Agripyne, Montresse and Longauyle,
(English, Scot, French) did Vice clap ugly horns,
But to approve that English, French and Scot,
And all the world else, kneel and honour Vice,
But in no Country, Virtue is of price?
Yes, in all Countries Virtue is of price.
In every kingdom some diviner breast
Is more enamord of me then the rest.
Have English, Scot, and French bowd knees to thee?
Why thats my glory too, for by their shame,
Men will abhor thee and adore my name.
Fortune, thou art too weak, Vice you are a fool,
To fight with me, I suffered you awhile,
T'ecclips my brightness, but I now will shine,
And make you swear your beauty's base to mine.
Thou art too insolent, see here's a court
Of mortal Judges, lets by them be tried,
Which of vs three shall most be deified.
I am content.
And I.
So am not I.
My Judge shall be your sacred deity.
O miserable me, I am undone.
O stop the horrid monster.
Let her run.
Fortune, who conquers now?
Virtue, I see,
Thou wilt triumph both over her and me.
Empress of heaven and earth.
Why doe you mock me?
Kneel not to me, to her transfer your eyes,
There sits the Queen of Chance, I bend my knees,
Lower then yours: dread goddess, tic most meet,
That Fortune fall down at thy conquering feet.
Thou sacred Empress that commandst the Fates,
Forgive what I have to thy handmaid don,
And at thy Chariot wheels Fortune shall run,
And be thy captive and to thee resign
All powers which heavens large Patent have made mine.
Fortune you are vanquished: sarred deity,
O now pronounce who wins the victory,
And yet that sentence needs not, since alone,
Your virtuous presence Vice hath ouer-throwne,
Yet to confirm the conquest on your side,
Look but on Fortunatus and his sons
Of all the wealth those gallants did possess,
Only poor Shadow is left comfortless,
Their glorye's faded and their golden pride.
Only poor Shadow tells how poor they died.
All that they had, or mortal men can have,
Sends only but a Shadow from the grave.
Virtue alone lives still, and lives in you,
I am a counterfeit. you are the true,
I am a Shadow, at your feet I fall,
Begging for these, and these, my self and all.
All these that thus doe kneel before your eyes,
Are shadows like my self, dred Nymph it lies
In you to make vs substances. O doe it,
Virtue I am sure you love, she woes you to it.
I read a verdict in your Sun-like eyes,
And this it is: Virtue the victory.
All loudly cry, Virtue the victory.
Virtue the victory: for joy of this,
Those self same himnes which you to Fortune sung
Let them be now in Virtues honour rung▪
Virtue smiles: cry holiday,
Dimples on her cheeks doe dwell,
Virtue frowns, cry wellada,
Her love is Heaven, her hate is Hell.
Since heaven and hell obey her power,
Tremble when her eyes doe lower.
Since heaven and hell her power obey,
Where she smiles, cry holiday,
Holiday with joy we cry,
And bend, and bend, and merrily,
Sing hymns to virtues deity:
Sing hymns to Virtues deity.
NAy stay, poor pilgrims, when I entered first
The circle of this bright celestial Sphere,
I wept for joy, now I could weep for fear.
I fear we all like mortal men shall prove
Weak (not in love) but in expressing love.
Let every one beg once more on his knee,
One pardon for himself, and one for me,
For I intie'd you hither: O dear Goddess,
Breathe life in our nombd spirits with one smile,
And from this cold earth, we with lively souls
Shall rise like men (new-borne) &amp; make heaven sound
With Hymns sung to thy name, and prayers that we
May once a year so oft enjoy this sight,
Till these yōg boys change their curled locks to white,
And when gray-winged Age sits on their heads,
That so their children may supply their Steads,
And that heavens great Arithmetician,
(Who in the Scales of Number ways the world)
May still to forty two, and one year more,
And still add one to one, that went before,
And multiply four tennes by many a ten:
To this I cry Amen.
Amen, Amen.
Good night (dear mistress) those that wish thee harm,
Thus let them stoop under destructions arm.
Amen, Amen, Amen.

AS wretrhes in a storm (expecting day)
With trembling hands and eyes cast up to heaven,
Make Prayers the anchor of their conquered hopes,
So we (dear Goddess) wonder of all eyes,
Your meanest bassalls (through mistrust and fear,
To uncke into the bottom of disgrace,
By our impersit pastimes) prostrate thus
On bended knees, our sails of hope do strike,
Dreading the bitter storms of your dislike.
Since then (unhappy men) our hap is such,
That to our selves our selves no help can bring,
But néedes must perish, if your saint-like cares
(Locking the temple where all mercy sits)
Refuse the tribute of our begging tongues.
Oh grant (bright mirror of true Chastity)
From those life-breathing stars your sun-like eyes,
One gracious smile: for your celestial breath
Must send vs life, or sentence vs to death.
MY Lord Mayor, you have sundry times
Feasted my self, and many Courtiers more,
Seldom, or never can we be so kind,
To make requital of your courtesy:
But leaving this, I hear my cousin Lacie
Is much affected to your daughter Rose.
True my good Lord, and she loves him so well, That I mislike her boldness in the chase.
Why my lord Mayor, think you it then a shame, To join a Lacie with an Otleys name?
Too mean is my poor girl for his high birth,
Poor Citizens must not with Courtiers wed,
Who will in silks, and gay apparel spend
More in one year, then I am worth by far,
Therefore your honour néede not doubt my girl.
Take héede my Lord, advise you what you do,
A barrier undressed lives not in the world,
Then is my cousin, for Isle tel you what,
Tic now almost a year since he requested
To travel countries for experience,
I furnished him with coin, bills of exchange,
Letters of credit, men to waite on him,
Solicited my friends in Italy
Well to respect him: but to sée the end:
Scant had he journeyed through half Germanie,
But all his coin was spent, his men cast off,
His bills imbezeld, and my jolly cos,
Ashamed to show his bankerupt presence here,
Became a Shoemaker in Wittenberg,
A goodly science for a gentleman
Of such descent: now judge the rest by this.
Suppose your daughter have a thousand pound,
He did consume me more in one half year,
And make him heir to all the wealth you have,
One twelve moneth's rioting will waste it all,
Then seek (my Lord) some honest Citizen
To wed your daughter to.
I thank your Lordship,
Well Fore, I understand your subtlety,
As for your nephew, let your lordships eye
But watch his actions, and you néede not fear,
For I have my daughter far enough,
And yet your cousin Rowland might do well
Now he hath learned an occupation,
And yet I scorn to call him son in law.
I but I have a better trade for him,
I thank his grace he hath appointed him,
Chief colonel of all those companies
Mustered in London, and the shires about,
To serve his highness in those wars of France:
Sée where he comes: Louel what news with you?
My Lord of Lincoln, tic his highness will,
That presently your cousin ship for France
With all his powers, he would not for a million,
But they should land at Déepe within four days.
Go certify his grace it shall be done:
Now cousin Lacie, in what forwardness
Are all your companies?
All well prepared,
The men of Hertfordshire lie at Mile end,
Suffolk, and Essex, train in Tuttle fields,
The Londoners, and those of Middlesex,
All gallantly prepared in Finsbury,
With frolic spirits, long for their parting hour.
They have their impressed, coats, and furniture,
And if it please your cousin Lacie come
To the Guild Hall, he shall receive his pay,
And twenty pounds besides my brethren
Will fréely give him, to approve our loves
We bear unto my Lord your uncle here.
I thank your honour.
Thanks my good Lord Mayor.
At the Guild Hal we will expect your coming,
To approve your loves to me? no subtlety
Nephew: that twenty pound he doth bestow,
For joy to rid you from his daughter Rose:
But cousins both, now here are none but friends,
I would not have you cast an amorous eye
Upon so mean a project, as the love
Of a gay wanton painted citizen,
I know this churl, even in the height of scorn,
Doth hate the mixture of his blood with thine,
I pray thée do thou so, remember cos,
What honourable fortunes wait on thée,
Increase the kings love which so brightly shines,
And gilds thy hopes, I have no heir but thée:
And yet not thée, if with a wayward spirit,
Thou start from the true bias of my love.
My Lord, I will (for honour (not desire
Of land or livings) or to be your heir)
So guide my actions in pursuit of France,
As shall add glory to the Laces name.
Cos, for those words here is thirty Portuguese
And Nephew Askew, there's a few for you,
Fair Honour in her loftrest eminence
Stays in France for you till you fetch her thence,
Then Nephews, clap swift wings on your designs,
Be gone, be gone, make haste to the Guild Hall,
There presently Isle méete you, do not stay,
Where honour becomes, shame attends delay.
How gladly would your uncle have you gone?
True cos, but Isle ore-reach his policies,
I have some serious business for thrée days,
Which nothing but my presence can dispatch,
You therefore cousin with the companies
Shall hasse to Dover, there Isle méete with you,
Or if I stay past my prefixed time,
Away for France, weal meet in Normandy,
The twenty pounds my Lord Mayor gives to me
You shall receive, and these ten portuguese,
Part of mine uncles thirty, gentle cos,
Have care to our great charge, I know your wisdom
Hath tried it self in higher consequence.
Cos, al my self am yours, yet have this care,
To lodge in London with al secrecy,
Our uncle Lincoln hath (besides his own)
Many a jealous eye, that in your face
Stares only to watch means for your disgrace.
Stay cousin, who be these?
Leave whining, leave whining, away with this whimpring, this pewling, these blubbering tears, and these wet eyes, Isle get thy husband discharged, I warrant thee swéete Iane: go to.
Master, here be the captains.
Peace Hodge, hushed ye knave, hushed.
Here be the cavaliers, and the coronels, moister.
Peace Firk, peace my fine Firk, stand by with your pishery pasherie, away, I am a man of the best presence, Isle speak to them and they were Popes, gentlemen, cap∣taines, colonels, commanders: brave men, brave leaders, may it please you to give me audience, I am Simon Eyre, the mad Shoomaster of Towerstréete, this wench with the mealy mouth that will never tire, is my wife I can tel you, here is Hodge my man, and my foreman, here is Firk my fine firking journeyman, and this is blubbered Iane, al we come to be suitors for this honest Raf kéepe him at home, and as I am a true shoemaker, and a gentleman of the Gentle Craft, buy spurs your self, and Isle find ye boots these seven yéeres.
Seven years husband?
Peace Midriff, peace, I know what I do, peace.
Truly master cormorant, you shall do God good ser∣vice to let Raf and his wife stay together, shées a young new married woman, if you take her husband away from her a night, you undo her, she may beg in the day time, for hées as good a workman at a prick &amp; an awl, as any is in our trade.
O let him stay, else I shall be undone.
I truly, she shall be laid atone side like a pair of old shoes else, and be occupied for no use.
Truly my friends, it lies not in my power,
The Londoners are pressed, paid, and set forth
By the Lord Mayor, I cannot change a man.
Why then you were as good be a corporal, as a colonel, if you cannot discharge one good fellow, and I tell you true, I think you doe more then you can answer, to prosy a man within a year and a day of his marriage.
Well said melancholy Hodge, gramercy my fine foreman.
Truly gentlemen, it were il done, for such as you, to stand so stiffly against a poor young wife: considering her case, she is new married, but let that pass: I pray deal not roughly with her, her husband is a young man and but newly entered, but let that pass.
Away with your pisherie pasherie, your pols and your edipolls, peace Midaffe, silence Cisly Bumtrincket, let your head speak.
Yea and the horns too, master.
Too soon, my fine Firk, too soon: peace scoundrels, see you this man? Captains, you will not release him, well let him go, hée's a proper shot, let him vanish, peace Iane, dry up thy tears, theile make his powder darkish, take him brave men, Hector of Troy was an hackney to him, Hercules and Termagant scoundrels, Prince Arthurs Round table, by the Lord of Lutgate, ne'er fed such a tall, such a dapper swordman: by the life of Pharo, a brave reason∣lute swordman, peace Iane, I say no more, mad knaves.
Sée, see Hodge, how my moister raves in come∣dation of Raf.
Raph, thart a gull by this hand, and thou goosed.
I am glad (good master Ayre) it is my hap
To méete so resolute a soldier.
Trust me, for your report, and love to him,
A common flight regard shall not respect him.
Is thy name Raph?
Yes sir.
Give me thy hand,
Thou shalt not want, as I am a gentleman:
Woman, be patient, God (no doubt) will send
Thy husband safe again, but he must go,
His countries quarrel says, it shall be so.
Thart a gull by my stirrup, if thou dost not go, I will not have thée strike thy gimblet into these weak bessels, prick thine enemies Raf.
My lord, your uncle on the Tower hill,
Stays with the lord Mayor, and the Aldermen,
And doth request you with al spéede you may
To hasten thither.
Cousin, lets go.
Dodger run you before, tel them we come,
This Dodger is mine uncles parasite,
The arrantst varlet that e re breathed on earth,
He sets more discord in a noble house,
By one days broching of his pickethanke fales,
Then can be salu'd again in twenty years,
And he (I fear) shall go with vs to France,
To pry into our actions.
Therefore cos,
It shall behoove you to be circumspect,
Fear not good cousin: Raph, hie to your colours.
I must, because theres no remedy,
But gentle moister and my loving dame,
As you have always béene a friend to me,
So in mine absence think upon my wife.
Alas my Raph.
She cannot speak for wéeping.
Peace you cracked groats, you mustard tokens, dis∣quiet not the brave soldier, go thy ways Raph.
I I, you bid him go, what shall I do when he is gone?
Why be doing with me, or my fellow Hodge, be not idle.
Let me sée thy hand Iane, this fine hand, this white hand, these pretty fingers must spin, must card, must work, work you bombast cotten-candle-queane, work for your living with a pox to you: hold thée Raph, here is five sixpences for thée, fight for the honour of the Gentle Craft, for the gen∣tlemen Shoemakers, the courageous Cordwainers, the flow∣er of S. Martins, the mad knaves of Bedlam, Fléetstréete, Towerstréete, and white Chapel, crack me the crowns of the French knaves, a pore on them, crack them, fight, by the lord of Ludgate, fight my fine boy.
Here Raf, here's thrée two pence, two carry into France, the third shall wash our souls at parting (for sorrow is dry) for my sake, Firk the Basa mon cues.
Raph, I am heavy at parting, but here is a shil∣ling for thée, God send thée to cram thy slops with French crowns, and thy enemies bellies with bullets.
I thank you moister, and I thank you all:
Now gentle wife, my loving lovely Iane,
Rich men at parting, give their wives rich gifts,
Jewels and rings, to grace their lilly hands,
Thou know our trade makes rings for women's héeles:
Here take this pair of shoes cut out by Hodge,
Sticht by my fellow Firk, seemed by my self,
Made up and pinckt, with letters for thy name,
Wear them my déere Iane, for thy husbands sake,
And every morning when thou pull'st them on,
Remember me, and pray for my return,
Make much of them, for I have made them so,
That I can know them from a thousand mo.
Here sit thou down upon this flowery bank,
And make a garland for thy Laces head,
These pinks, these roses, and these violets,
These blushing gilliflowers, these marigolds,
The fair embroidery of his coronet,
Carry not half such beauty in their chéekes,
As the swéete countnaunce of my Lacy doth.
O my most unkind father! O my stars!
Why lowrde you so at my nativity,
To make me love, yet live robbed of my love?
Here as a théefe am I imprisoned
(For my déere Laces sake) within those walls,
Which by my fathers cost were builded up
For better purposes: here must I languish
For him that doth as much lament (I know)
Mine absence, as for him I pine in woe.
Good morrow young Mistress, I am sure you make that garland for me, against I shall be Lady of the Har∣uest.
Sibil, what news at London?
Noue but good: my lord Mayor your father, and moister Philpot your uncle, and moister Scot your cousin, and mistress Frigbottom by Doctors Commons, doe all (by my troth) send you most hearty commendations.
Did Lacy send kind gréetings to his love?
O yes, out of cry, by my troth, I scant knew him, here a wore scarf, and here a scarf, here a bunch of feathers,
and here precious stones and jewels, and a pair of garters: O monstrous like one of our yellow silk curtains, at home here in Old-ford house, here in moister Bellymounts cham∣ber, I stood at our door in Cornehill, looked at him, he at me indeed, spake to him, but he not to me, not a word, mary guy thought I with a wanion, he passt by me as proud, mary foh, are you grown humorous thought I? and so shut the door, and in I came.
O Sibill, how dest thou my Lacy wrong?
My Rowland is as gentle as a lamb,
No dove was ever half so mild as he.
Mild? yea, as a bushel of stamped crabs, he looked up∣on me as sour as veriuice: go thy ways thought I, thou moist be much in my gaskins, but nothing in my nether∣stocks: this is your fault mistress, to love him that loves not you, he thinks scorn to do as he's done to, but if I were as you, Id cry, go by Ieronimo, go by, Id set mine old debts against my new driblets, and the hares foot against the goose giblets, for if ever I sigh when sléepe I should take, pray God I may loose my mayden-head when I wake.
Will my love leave me then and go to France?
I know not that, but I am sure I see him stalk before the soldiers, by my troth he is a proper man, but he is proper that proper doth, let him go snicke-vp young mi∣stress.
Get thée to London, and learn perfectly,
Whether my Lacy go to France, or no:
Do this, and I will give thée for thy pains,
My cambric apron, and my romish gloves,
My purple stockings, and a stomacher,
Say, wilt thou do this Sibil for my sake?
Will I quoth a? at whose suite? by my troth yes, Isle go, a cambric apron, gloves, a pair of purple stockings,
and a stomacher, Isle sweat in purple mistress for you, isle take any thing that comes a Gods name, O rich, a Cambric a∣prone; faith then have at up tails all, Isle go, Iiggy, Ieggy to London, and be here in a trice young mistress.
Do so good Sibill, mean time wretched I
Will sit and sigh for his lost company.
How many shapes have gods and kings devised,
Thereby to compass their desired loves?
It is no shame for Rowland Lacy then,
To clothe his cunning with the Gentle Craft,
That thus disguised, I may unknown possess,
The only happy presence of my Rose:
For her have I forsook my charge in France,
Incurd the Kings displeasure, and stirred up
Rough hatred in mine uncle Lincolnes breast:
O love, how powerful art thou, that can change
High birth to bareness, and a noble mind,
To the mean semblance of a shoemaker?
But thus it must be: for her cruel father,
Hating the single union of our souls,
Hath secretly conveyed my Rose from London,
To bar me of her presence, but I trust
Fortune and this disguise will further me
Once more to view her beauty, gain her sight.
Here in Towerstréete, with Ayre the shoemaker,
Mean I a while to work, I know the trade,
I learned it when I was in Wittenberge:
Then cheer thy hoping sprites, be not dismayed,
Thou can not want, do fortune what she can,
The Gentle Craft is living for a man.
Where be these boys, these girls, these drabs,
these scoundrels, they wallow in the fat brewisse of my boū∣tie, and I locke up the crumbs of my table, yet will not rise to see my walks cleansed: come out you powder-beefe-queanes, what Nan, what Madge-mumble-crust, come out you fat Midriffe-swag, belly-whores, and swéepe me these kennels, that the noisome stench offend not the nose of my neigh∣bours: what Firk I say, what Hodge? open my shop win∣dowes, what Firk I say.
O master, first you that speak bandog and bedlam this morning, I was in a dream, and mused what mad man was got into the street so early, have you drunk this morning that your throat is so clear?
Ah well said Firk, well said Firk, to work my fine knave, to work, wash thy face, and thou t be more blessed.
Let them wash my face that will eat it, good my∣ster send for a sowce wife, if you'll have my face cleaner.
Away sloven, avaunt scoundrel, good morrow Hodge, good morrow my fine foreman.
O moister, good morrow, yare an early stirrer, hears a fair morning, good morrow Firk, I could have slept this hour, héeres a brave day towards.
O haste to work my fine foreman, haste to work.
Moister I am dry as dust, to hear my fellow To∣ger talk of fair weather, let vs pray for good leather, and let clowns and plowboyes, and those that work in the fields, pray for brave days, wee work in a dry shop, what care I if it rain?
How now dame Margery, can you sée to rise? trip and go, call up the drabs your maids.
See to rise? I hope tic time enough, tic early enough for any woman to be séene abroad, I marvel how many wives in Towerstréet are up so soon? Gods me, tic not noon,
here is a yowling.
Peace Margerie, peace, wheres Cisty Bumtrin∣ket your maid? she has a privy fault, she fartes in her sleep, call the queen up, if my men want shooethréed, isle swinge her in a stirrup.
Yet thats but a dry beating, here is still a sign of drought.
Der was even bore van Gelderland, Frolic ū byen,
He was else drunk he cold nyet stand, vpsolce se byen,
Tap eons de canneken drink scheue manikin.
Moister, for my life yonders a brother of the Gen∣tle Craft, if he bear not saint Hughes bones, Isle forfeit my bones, hées some vplandish workman, hire him good master, that I may learn some gibble, gabble, twill make vs work the faster.
Peace Firk, a hard world, let him pass, let him vanish, we have journeymen enough, peace my fine Firk.
Nay, nay, y are best follow your mans council, you shall sée what will come on t: we have not men enough, but we must entertain every butter-boxe: but let that pass.
Dame, fore God if my moister follow your coun∣sell, héele consume little béefe, he shall be glad of men and hee can catch them.
I that he shall.
Fore God a proper man, and I warrant a fine workman: moister farewell, dame adieu, if such a man as he cannot find work, Hodge is not for you.
Stay my fine Hodge.
Faith, and your foreman go, dame you must take a journey to séeke a new iorneyman, if Roger remove, Firk follows, if S. Hughs bones shall not be set a work, I may prick mine awl in the walls, and go play: fare ye well ma∣ster, God buy dame.
Carry my fine Hodge, my brisk foreman, stay Firk, peace pudding broth, by the lord of Ludgate I love my men as my life, peace you gallimafrie, Hodge if he want work Isle hire him, one of you to him, stay, he comes to vs.
Eoeden dach master, end v vro oak.
Nayis if I should speak after him without drink∣ing, I should choke, and you friend Oak are you of the Gentle Craft?
Yaw yaw, Ik bin den skomawker.
Den skomaker quoth a, and hark you skomaker, have you al your tools, a good rubbing pin, a good stopper, a good dresser, your four sorts of awles and your two balls of wax, your paring knife, your hand and thumb-leathers, and good S. Hughs bones to smooth up your work.
Yaw yaw be niet for veard, Ik hob all de dingen, voour mack shoes groot and clean.
Ha ha good moister hire him, héele make me laugh so that I shall work more in mirth, then I can in earnest.
I care ye friend, have ye any skill in the mystery of Cordwainers?
Ik wéet niet wat you seg each vestaw you niet.
Why thus man, Each verste v niet quoth a.
Yaw, yaw, yaw, ec can dat well done.
Yaw, yaw, he speaks yawing like a Jack daw, that gapes to be fed with chéese curdes, O héele give a villa∣nous pull at a Can of double Béere, but Hodge and I have the vantage, we must drink first, because wee are the eldest journeyman.
What is thy name?
Hans, Hans, Meulter.
Give me thy hand, the art welcome, Hodge enter∣taine him, Firk bid him welcome, come Hans, run wife, bid your maids, your Crullibubs, make ready my fine men's breakefasts: to him Hodge.
Hans, you are welcome, use thy self friendly, for we are good fellows, if not thou shalt be fought with, were thou bigger then a Giant.
Yea and drunk with, were thou Gargantua, my moister keeps no cowards, I tel thee: hee, boy, bring him an heele-blocke, heers a new journeyman.
Oich wersto, you Each moet even halue dozen Cans betaelen: here boy nempt dis skilling, tap eons fréelicke.
Quick snipper snapper, away Firk, scour thy throat, thou shalt wash it with Casulian liquor, come my last of the fiues, give me a Can, have to
thée Hans, here Hodge, here Firk, drink you mad Gréeks, and work like true Troians, and pray for Simon Eyre the Shoemaker: here Hans, and you are welcome.
Lo dame you would have lost a good fellow that will teach vs to laugh, this béere came hopping in well.
Simon it is almost seven.
Is it so dame clapper dudgeon, is it seven a clock, and my men's breakfast not ready? trip and go you soused cunger, away, come you mad Hiperboreans, follow me Hodge, follow me Hans, come after my fine Firk, to work, to work a while and then to breakfast.
Soft, yaw, yaw, good Hans, though my master have no more wit, but to call you before me, I am not so foolish to go behind you, I being the elder journeyman.
Cousin, beat every brake, the game's not far,
This may with winged féete he fled from death,
Whilst the pursuing hounds scenting his steps:
Find out his high way to destruction,
Besides, the millers boy told me even now,
He saw him take sail, and he hallowed him,
Affirming him so embossed,
That long he could not hold.
If it be so,
Tic best we trace these meadows by old Ford.
How now boy, wheres the déere? speak, saw thou him?
O, yea I saw him scope through a hedge, and then over a ditch, then at my Lord Majors pale, over he skipped me and in he went me, and holla the hunters cried, and there boy there boy, but there he is a mine honesty.
Boy God emery, cousin lets away,
I hope we shall find better sport to day.
Why Sibill wilt thou prove a forester?
Upon some no, forester, go by: no faith mistress, the dear came running into the barn through the orchard, and over the pale, I wot well, I looked as pale as a new chéese to sée him, but whip says goodman pinne-close, up with his fiaile, and our Nick with a prong, and down he fell, and they upon him, and I upon them, by my troth we had such sport, and in the end we ended him, his throat we cut, flayed him, vnhornd him, and my lord Mayor shall eat of him anon when he comes.
Hark hark, the hunters come, you're best take héed
Theyle have a saying to you for this deed.
God save you fair ladies.
Ladies, O gross!
Came not a buck this way?
No, but two Does.
And which way went they? faith wéel hunt at those
At those? upon some no: when, can you tell?
Upon some, I.
Good Lord!
Wounds then farewell.
Boy, which way went he?
This way sir he ran.
This way he ran indéede, fair mistress Rose,
Our game was lately in your orchard séene.
Can you advise which way he took his flight?
Follow your nose, his horns will guide you right.
Thart a mad wench.
O rich!
Trust me, not I,
It is not like the wild forest déere,
Would come so near to places of resort,
You are deceived, he fled some other way.
Which way my suger-candie, can you show?
Come up good honnisops, upon some, no.
Why doe you stay, and not pursue your game?
Isle hold my life their hunting nags be lame.
A déere, more dear is found within this place.
But not the déere (sir) which you had in chase.
I chased the déere, but this déere chaceth me.
The strangest hunting that ever I see,
But wheres your park?
Tic here: O stay.
Impale me, and then I will not stray.
They wrangle wench, we are more kind then they
What kind of hart is that (déere hart) you séeke?
A hart, dear hart.
Who ever saw the like?
To loose your heart, is it possible you can?
My heart is lost.
Alack good gentleman.
This poor lost hart would I with you might find.
You by such luck might prove your hart a hind.
Why Luck had horns, so have I heard some say.
Now God and't be his will send Luck into your way.
What M. Hammon, welcome to old Ford.
Gods pittikins, hands off sir, héers my Lord.
I hear you had ill luck, and lost your game.
Tic true my Lord.
I am sorry for the same.
What gentleman is this?
My brother in law.
Y are welcome both, sith Fortune offers you
Into my hands, you shall not part from hence,
Until you have refreshed your wearied limbs:
Go Sibel cover the board, you shall be guest
To no good cheer, but even a hunters feast.
I thank your Lordship: cousin, on my life
For our lost venisou, I shall find a wife.
In gentlemen, Isle not be absent long.
This Hammon is a proper gentleman,
A citizen by birth, fairly elide,
How fit an husband were he for my girl?
Well, I will in, and do the best I can,
To match my daughter to this gentléman.
Ec sal you wat seggen Hans, dis skip dat come from Candy is al wol, by gots sacrament, van sugar, civet,
almonds, cambric, end alle dingen thousand thousand ding, nempt it Hans, nempt it voz v master, daer be de bills van laden, your master Simon Eyre sal have good copen, wat seggen you Hans?
Wat seggen de reggen de copen, slopen, laugh Hodge laugh.
Mine leaver brother Firk, bringt master Eyre lot den sign un swannekin, daer sal you find dis skipper end me, wat seggen you brother Firk? doot it Hodge, come skip∣per.
Bring him quoth. you, héers no knavery, to bring me master to buy a ship, worth the lading of 2 or 3 hūdred thou∣sand pounds, alas thats nothing, a trifle, a babble Hodge.
The truth is Firk, that the merchant owner of the ship dares not show his head, and therefore this skipper that deals for him, for the love he bears to Hans, offers my ma∣ster Eyre a bargain in the commodities, he shall have a rea∣sonable day of payment, he may sell the wares by that time, and be an huge gainer himself.
Yea, but can my fellow Hans lend my master twen∣tie porpentines as an earnest penny.
Portegues thou would say, here they be Firk, hark, they gingle in my pocket like S. Mary Queries bells.
Mum, here comes my dame and my moister, shéele scold on my life, for loitering this Monday, but al's one, let them al say what they can, Monday's our holiday.
You sing sir sauce, but I beshrew your heart,
I fear for this your singing we shall smart.
Smart for me dame, why dame, why?
Moister I hope yowle not suffer my dame to take down your journeymen.
If she take me down, Isle take her up, yea and take
her down too, a button, hole lower.
Peace Firk, not I Hodge, by the life of Pharao, by the Lord of Ludgate, by this beard, every hair whereof I value at a kings ransom, she shall not meddle with you, peace you bumbast-cotten-candle Queen, away queen of Clubs, quarrel not with me and my men, with me and my fine Firk, Isle firk you if you do.
Yea, yea man, you may use me as you please: but let that pass.
Let it pass, let it vanish away: peace, am I not Si∣mon Eyre? are not these my brave men? brave shoemakers, all gentlemen of the gentle craft? prince am I none, yet am I nobly borne, as béeing the sole son of a Shooma∣kerr, away rubbish, vanish, melt, melt like kitchen stuff.
Yea, yea, tic well, I must be called rubbish, kitchen stuff, for a sort of knaves.
Nay dame, you shall not wéepe and wail in woe for me: master Isle stay no longer, here's a vennentorie of my shop tools: adieu master, Hodge farewell.
Nay stay Firk, thou shalt not go alone.
I pray let them go, there be mo maids then maw∣kin, more men then Hodge, and more fools then Firk.
Fools? nails if I tarry now, I would my guts might be turned to shoo-thread.
And if I stay, I pray God I may be turned to a Turk, and set in Finsbury for boys to shoot at: come Firk.
Stay my fine knaves, you arms of my trade, you pillars of my professiō. What, shall a tittle tattles words make you forsake Simon Eyre? avaunt kitchinstuffe, rip you brown bread tannikin, out of my sight, move me not, have not I tan you from selling tripes in Eastcheape, and set you in my shop, and made you hail fellow with
Simon Eyre the shoemaker? and now do you deal thus with my Journeymen? Look you powder béefe queen on the face of Hodge, heers a face for a Lord.
And heers a face for any Lady in Christendom.
Rip you chitterling, avaunt boy, bid the tipster of the Bores head fill me a dozen Cannes of béere for my jour∣neymen.
A dozen Cans? O brave, Hodge now Isle stay.
And the knave fills any more then two, he pays for them: a dozen Cans of béere for my journeymen, hear you mad Mesopotamians, wash your livers with this liquor, where be the odd ten? no more Madge, no more, well said, drink &amp; to work: what work dost thou Hodge? what work?
I am a making a pair of shoes for my Lord Ma∣iors daughter, mistress Rose.
And I a pair of shoes for Sybill my Lords maid, I deal with her.
Sybil? fie, defile not thy fine workmanly fingers with the féete of Kitchinstuffe, and basting ladies, Ladies of the Court, fine Ladies, my lads, commit their feet to our ap∣parelling, put gross work to Hans; yarke and seam, yarke and seam.
For yarking &amp; seaming let me alone, &amp; I come toot.
Well moister, al this is from the bias, do you re∣member the ship my fellow Hans told you of, the Skipper and he are both drinking at the swan? here be the Portigues to give earnest, if you go through with it, you can not choose but be a Lord at least.
Nay dame, if my master prone not a Lord, and you a Lady, hang me.
Yea like enough, if you may loiter and tipple thus.
Tipple dame? no, we have béene bargaining with Skellum Skanderbag: can you Dutch spreaken for a ship of
silk Cyprus, laden with sugar Candy.
Peace Firk, silence tittle tattle: Hodge, Isle go through with it, héers a seal ring, and I have sent for a guarded gown, and a damask Cassock, see where it comes, look here Maggie, help me Firk, apparreline Hodge, silk and satin you mad Philistines, silk and satin.
Ha, ha, my moister will be as proud as a dog in a doublet, al in beaten damask and velvet.
Softly Firk, for rearing of the nap, and wearing thread-bare my garments: how dost thou like me Firk? how do I look, my fine Hodge?
Why now you look like your selfmaster, I war∣rant you, ther's few in the city, but will give you the wall, and come upon you with the right worshipful.
Nails my master looks like a thred-bare cloak new turned, and dressed: Lord, Lord, to see what good raiment both? dame, dame, are you not enamoured?
How say thou Maggie, am I not brisk? am I not fine?
Fine? by my troth sweet hart very fine: by my troth I never likte thée so well in my life swéete heart. But let that pass, I warrant there be many women in the city have not such handsome husbands, but only for their apparel, but let that pass too.
Gotten day master, dis be de skipper dat hob de skip van merchandise de commodity ben good, nempt it ma∣ster, nempt it.
Godamercy Hans, welcome skipper, where lies this ship of merchandise?
De skip ben in rouere: dor be van Sugar, Civet, Almonds, Cambric, and a thousand thousand tings, gotz sacrament, nempt it master, yo sal hob good copen.
To him moister, O swéete moister, O swéet wares, prunes, almons, suger-candy, carrat roots, turnips, O brave fatting meat, let not a man buy a nutmeg but your self.
Peace Firk, come Skipper, Isle go abroad with you, Hans have you made him drink?
Yaw, yaw, it hob veale ge drunk.
Come Hans follow me: Skipper, thou shalt have my countenance in the City.
Yaw hob veale ge drunk, quoth a: they may well be called butter-boxes, when they drink fat veale, and thick bear too: but come dame, I hope you'll chide vs no more.
No faith Firk, no party Hodge, I do féele honour créepe upon me, and which is more, a certain rising in my flesh, but let that pass.
Rising in your flesh do you feel say you? I you may be with child, but why should not my moister féele a rising in his flesh, having a gown and a gold ring on, but you are such a shrew, youl'e soon pull him down.
Ha, ha, prethée peace, thou make my worship laugh, but let that pass: come Isle go in Hodge, prethée go before me, Firk follow me.
Firk doth follow, Hodge pass out in state.
How now good Dodger, whats the news in France?
My Lord, upon the eightéene day of May,
The French and English were prepared to fight,
Each side with eager fury gave the sign
Of a most hot encounter, five long hours
Both armies fought together: at the length,
The lot of victory fell on our sides,
Twelve thousand of the Frenchmen that day did,
Four thousand English, and no man of name,
But Captain Hyam, and young Ardington,
Two gallant Gentlemen, I knew them well.
But Dodger, prethée tell me in this fight,
How did my cozen Lacie bear himself?
My Lord, your cousin Lacie was not there.
Not there? Dog. No, my good Lord.
Sure thou mistake,
I saw him shipped, and a thousand eyes beside
Were witnesses of the farewells which he gave,
When I with wéeping eyes bid him adieu:
Dodger take héede.
My Lord I am advised,
That what I spake is true: to prove it so,
His cousin Askew that supplied his place,
Sent me for him from France, that secretly
He might convey himself hither.
First even so.
Dares he so carelessly venture his life,
Upon the indignation of a King?
Hath he despised my love, and spurned those favours,
Which I with prodigal hand powered on his head?
He shall repent his rashness with his soul,
Since of my love he makes no estimate,
Isle make him wish he had not known my hate,
Thou hast no other news?
None else, my Lord.
None worse I know thou hast: procure the king
To crown his giddy brows with ample honours,
Send him chéefe Colonel, and all my hope
Thus to be dashed? but tic in vain to grieve,
One evil cannot a worse relieve:
Upon my life I have found out his plot,
That old dog Love that fawnd upon him so,
Love to that puling girl, his fair cheeked Rose,
The Lord Majors daughter hath distracted him,
And in the fire of that loves lunacy,
Hath he burnt up himself, comsum'd his credit,
Lost the kings love, yea and I fear, his life,
Only to get a wanton to his wife:
Dodger, it is so.
I fear so, my good Lord.
It is so, nay sure it cannot be,
I am at my wits end Dodger.
Yea my Lord.
Thou art acquainted with my Nephews haunts,
Spend this gold for thy pains, go seek him out,
Watch at my Lord Majors (there if he live)
Dodger, thou shalt be sure to méete with him:
Prethée be diligent. Lacie thy name
Lived once in honour, now dead in shame:
Be circumspect.
I warrant you my Lord.
Good moister Scot, I have been bold with you,
To be a witness to a wedding knot,
Betwixt young moister Hammon and my daughter,
O stand aside, see where the lovers come.
Can it be possible you love me so?
No, no, within those eie-bals I espy,
Apparent likelihoods of flattery,
Pray now let go my hand.
Sweet mistress Rose,
Misconstrue not my words, nor misconceive
Of my affection, whose devoted soul
Swears that I love thée dearer then my heart.
As dear as your own heart? I judge it right.
Men love their hearts best when they are out of sight.
I love you, by this hand.
Yet hands off now:
If flesh be frail, how weak and frail's your vow?
Then by my life I swear.
Then do not brawl,
One quarrel loses wife and life and all,
Is not your meaning thus?
In faith you jest.
Love loves to sport, therefore leave love you're best.
What? square they moister Scot?
Sir, never doubt,
Lovers are quickly in, and quickly out.
Swéet Rose, be not so strange in fancying me,
Nay never turn aside, shun not my sight,
I am not grown so fond, to fond my love
On any that shall quit it with disdain,
If you will love me, so, if not, farewell.
Why how now lovers, are you both agréede?
Yes faith my Lord.
Tic well, give me your hand, give me yours daughter.
How now, both pull back, what means this, girl?
I mean to live a maid.
But not to die one, pause ere that be said.
Will you still cross me? still be obstinate?
Nay chide her not my Lord for doing well,
If she can live an happy virgins life,
Tic far more blessed then to be a wife.
Say sir I cannot, I have made a vow,
Who ever be my husband, tic not you.
Your tongue is quick, but M. Hamond know,
I bade you welcome to another end.
What, would you have me pull, &amp; pine, and pray,
With lovely lady mistress of my heart,
Pardon your servant, and the rimer play,
Railing on Cupped, and his tyrants dart,
Or that I undertake some martial spoil,
Wearing your glove at turney, and at tilt,
And tel how many gallauts I unhorsed,
Swéete, will this pleasure you?
Yea, when wilt begin?
What louerimes man? fie on that deadly sin.
If you will have her, Isle make her agrée.
Enforced love is worse then hate to me,
There is a wench kéepes shop in the old change,
To her will I, it is not wealth I séeke,
I have enough, and will prefer her love
Before the world: my good lord Mayor adieu,
Old love for me, I have no luck with new.
Now mammet you have well behau'd your self,
But you shall curse your coins if I live,
Whose within there? sée you connay your mistress
Straight to th'old Forde, Isle kéepe you straight enough,
Fore God I would have sworn the puling girl,
Would willingly accepted Hammons love,
But banish him my thoughts, go minion in,
Now tel me master Scot would you have thought,
That master Simon Eyre the shoemaker,
Had béene of wealth to buy such merchandise?
It was well my Lord, your honour, and my self,
Grew partners with him for your bills of lading,
Show that Eyres gains in one commodity,
Rise at the least to full thrée thousand pound,
Besides like gain in other merchandise.
Well he shall spend some of his thousands now
For I have sent for him to the Guild Hal,
Sée where he comes: good morrow master Eyre.
Poor Simon Eyre, my Lord, your shoemaker.
Well well, it likes your self to term you so,
Now M. Dodger, whats the news with you?
Id gladly speak in private to your honour.
You shall, you shall: master Eyre, and M. Scot,
I have some business with this gentleman,
I pray let me entreat you to walk before
To the Guild Hal, Isle follow presently,
Master Eyre, I hope ere noon to call you Sheriff.
I would not care (my Lord) if you might cal me king of Spain, come master Scot.
Now moister Dodger, whats the news you bring?
The Earl of Lincoln by me gréets your lordship
And earnestly requests you (if you can)
Inform him where his Nephew Lacie kéepes.
Is not his Nephew Lacie now in France?
No I assure your lordship, but disguised Lurks here in London.
London? first even so?
It may be, but upon my faith and soul,
I know not where he lives, or whether he lives,
So tel my Lord of Lincoln, lurch in London?
Well master Dodger, you perhaps may start him,
Be but the means to ris him into France,
Isle give you a dozen angels for your pains,
So much I love his honour, hate his Nephew,
And prethée so inform thy lord from me.
I take my leave.
Farewell good master Dodger.
Lacie in London? I dare pawn my life,
My daughter knows thereof, and for that cause,
Denied young M. Hammon in his love,
Well I am glad I sent her to old Forde,
Gods lord tic late, to Guild Hall I must hie,
I know my brethren stay my company.
Thou goosed too fast for me Roger.
I forsooth.
I pray thée run (doe you hear) run to Guild Hall, and learn if my husband master Eyre will take that worshipful vocation of M. Sheriff upon him, hie thée good Firk.
Take it? well I go, and he should not take it, Firk swears to forswear him, yes forsooth I go to Guild Hall.
Nay when? thou art too compendious, and tedious.
O rare, your excellence is full of eloquence, how like a new cart whéele my dame speaks, and she looks like an old musty ale-bottle going to scalding.
Nay when? thou wilt make me melancholy.
God forbid your worship should fall into that hue∣more, I run.
Let me see now Roger and Hans.
I forsooth dame (mistress I should say) but the old term so sticks to the roof of my mouth, I can hardly lick it off.
Even what thou wilt good Roger, dame is a fair name for any honest christian, but let that pass, how dost thou Hans?
Mée tanck you vro.
Well Hans and Roger you sée God hath blessed your master, and party if ever he comes to be M. Sheriff of London (as we are al mortal) you shall sée I will have some odd thing or other in a corner for you: I will not be your
back friend, but let that pass, Hans pray thée tie my shoe.
Yaw it sal vro.
Roger, thou know the length of my foot, as it is none of the biggest, so I thank God it is handsome enough, prethée let me have a pair of shoes made, cork good Roger, wooden héele too.
You shall.
Art thou acquainted with never a fardingale-ma∣kerr, nor a French-hoode maker, I must enlarge my bumine, ha ha, how shall I look in a hood I wonder? party oddly I think.
As a cat out of a pillory, very well I warrant you mistress.
Indéede all flesh is grass, and Roger, can thou tel where I may buy a good hair?
Yes forsooth, at the poulterers in Gracious stréet.
Thou art an ungracious wag, party, I mean a false hair for my periwig.
Why mistress, the next time I cut my beard, you shall have the shauings of it, but they are all true hairs.
It is very hot, I must get me a fan or else a mask.
So you had néede, to hide your wicked face.
Fie upon it, how costly this world's calling is, per∣die, but that it is one of the wonderful works of God, I would not deal with it: is not Firk come yet? Hans bée not so sad, let it pass and vanish, as my husbands worship says.
Ec bin vrolicke, lot sée you so.
Mistress, will you drink a pipe of Tobacco?
O fie upon it Roger, party, these silthie Tobacco pipes are the most idle slavering bibles that ever I felt: out upon it, God bless vs, men look not like men that use thē.
What fellow Raf? Mistress look here, Ions husband, why how, lame? Hans make much of him, hées a brother of our trade, a good workman, and a tall soul∣dier.
You be welcome brother.
Pardie I knew him not, how dost thou good Raf? I am glad to sée thée well.
I would God you saw me dame as well,
As when I went from London into France.
Trust me I am sorry Raf to sée thée impotent, Lord how the wars have made him Sunburned: the left leg is net well it was a fair gift of God the infirmity took not hold a little higher, considering thou came from France: but let that pass.
I am glad to sée you well, and I rejoice
To hear that God hath blessed my master so
Since my departure.
Yea truly Raf, I thank my maker: but let that pass.
And sir Raf, what news, what news in France?
Tel me good Roger first, what news in England?
Haw does my Iane? when did thou sée my wife?
Where lives my poor heart? shéel be poor indéed
Now I want limbs to get whereon to féed.
Limbs? hast thou not hands man? thou shalt no∣for sée a shoemaker want bread, though he have but thrée fin∣gers on a hand.
Yet all this while I hear not of my Iane.
O Raf your wife, party we know not whats become of her: she was here a while, and because she was married grew more stately then became her, I checked her, and so forth, away she flung, never returned, nor said bih
nor bah: and Raf you know call me, call thée. And so as I tell ye. Roger is not Firk come yet?
No forsooth.
And so indeed we heard not of her, but I hear shée lives in London: but let that pass. If she had wanted, she might have opened her case to me or my husband, or to any of my men, I am sure theres not any of them party, but would have done her good to his power. Hans look if Firk be come.
Yaw it sal vro.
And so as I said: but Raf, why dost thou wéepe? thou know that naked wee came out of our mothers womb, and naked we must return, and therefore thank God for al things.
No faith Iane is a stranger héere, but Raf pull up a good heart, I know thou hast one, thy wife man, is in London, one told mée hée saw her a while ago ve∣rye brave and neat, wéele ferret her out, and London hold her.
Alas, poor soul, hées overcome with sorrow, he does but as I doe, weep for the loss of any good thing: but Raf, get thee in, call for some meat and drink, thou shalt find me worshipful towards thée.
I thank you dame, siuce I want limbs and lands,
Isle to God, my good friends, and to these my hands.
Run good Hans, O Hodge, O mistress, Hodge. heave up thine ears, mistress smug up your looks, on
with your best apparel, my moister is chosen, my master is called nay condemned by the cry of the country to be sheriff of the City, for this famous year now to come: and time now being, a great many men in black gowns were asked for their voices, and their hands, and my master had al their fists about his ears presently, and they cried I, I, I, I, and so I came away, wherefore without all other grieve, I doe salute you mistress shrive.
Yaw, my master is de groot man, de shrive.
Did not I tell you mistress? now I may boldly say, good morrow to your worship.
Good morrow good Roger, I thank you my good people all. Firk, hold up thy hand, héer's a thrée-peny péece for thy tidings.
Tic but thrée half pence, I think: yes, tic thrée pence, I smell the Rose.
But mistress, be ruled by me, and doe not speak so pulingly.
Tic her worship speaks so, and not she, no faith mistress, speak me in the old key, too it Firk, there good Firk, ply your business Hodge, Hodge, with a full mouth: Isle fill your bellies with good cheer till they cry twang.
See mine leaver brother, héer count my master.
Welcome home moister shrive, I pray God con∣tinue you in health and wealth.
See here my Maggie, a chain, a gold chain for Simon Eyre, I shall make thee a Lady, heir's a French hood for thee, on with it, on with it, dress thy brows with this flap of a shoulder of mutton, to make thée look lovely: where be my fine men? Roger, Isle make over my shop and tools to thee: Firk, thou shalt be the foreman: Hans, thou shalt
have an hundred for twenty, bee as mad knaves as your moister Simon Eyre hath bin, &amp; you shall live to be Sheriues of London: how dost thou like me Margerie? Prince am I none, yet am I princely borne, Firk, Hodge, and Hans.
I forsooth, what says your worship mistress Sheriff?
Worship and honour you Babilonion knaves, for the Gentle Craft: but I forgot my self, I am bidden by my Lord Mayor to ••ner to old Ford, hes gone before, I must after: come Hodge, on with your trinkets: now my true 〈◊〉, my fine Firk, my dapper Hodge, my honest Hans, some device, some odd crochets, some morris, or such like, for the honour of the gentle shooemakers, meet me at old Ford, you know my mind: come Madge, away shut up the shop knaves, and make holiday.
O rare, O brave, come Hodge, follow me Hans,
Wéele be with them for a morris dance.
Trust me you are as welcome to old Ford, as I my self.
Truly I thank your Lordship.
Would our bad chéere were worth the thanks you give.
Good chéere my Lord Mayor, fine chéere, a fine house, fine walls, all fine and neat.
Now by my troth Isle tel thée moister Eyre,
It does me good and al my brethren,
That such a madcap fellow as thy self
Is entered into our society.
I but my Lord, hee must learn now to put on gravity.
Peace Maggie, a fig for gravity, when I go to Guild∣hal in my scarlet gown, Isle look as demurely as a saint, and
speak as gravely as a Justice of peace, but now I am here at old Ford, at my good Lord Majors house, let it go by, vanish Maggie, Isle be merry, away with flip flap, these fooleries, these gulleries: what honey? prince am I none, yet am I princly borne: what says my Lord Mayor?
Ha, ha, ha, I had rather then a thousand pound,
I had an heart but half so light as yours.
Why what should I do my Lord? a pound of care pays not a dram of debt: hum, lets be merry whiles we are young, old age, sack and sugar will steal upon vs ere we be aware.
Its well done mistress Eyre, pray give good counsel to my daughter.
I hope mistress Rose will have the grace to take no∣thing thats bad.
Pray God she do, for in faith mistress Eyre,
I would bestow upon that peevish girl
A thousand Marks more then I mean to give her,
Upon condition shéed be ruled by me,
The Ape still crosses me: there came of late,
A proper Gentleman of fair revenues,
Whom gladly I would call son in law:
But my fine cockney would have none of him.
You'll prove a cockscomb for it ere you die,
A courtier, or no man must please your eye.
Be ruled swéete Rose, you are ripe for a man: marry not with a boy, that has no more hair on his face then thou hast on thy chéekes: a courtier, wash, go by, stand not upon pisherie pasherie: those silken fellows are but painted Ima∣ges, outsides, outsides Rose, their inner linings are torn: no my fine mouse, marry me with a Gentleman Grocer like my Lord Mayor your Father, a Grocer is a swéete trade, Plums, Plums: had I a son or Daughter should marry
out of the generation and blood of the shoe-makers, he should pack: what, the Gentle trade is a living for a man through Europe, through the world.
What noise is this?
O my Lord Mayor, a true of good fellows that for love to your honour, are come hither with a morrisdance, come in my Mesopotamians chéerely.
Moister Eyre, are al these shoe-makers?
Al Cordwainers my good Lord Mayor.
How like my Lacie looks yond shoemaker.
O that I durst but speak unto my love!
Sibil, go fetch some wine to make these drink,
You are al welcome.
We thank your Lordship.
For his sake whose fair shape thou representst, Good friend I drink to thée.
It be dank good frister.
I see mistress Rose you do not want judge∣meant, you have drunk to the properest man I kéepe.
Here bee some have done their parts to be as proper as he.
Well, urgent business calls me back to London:
Good fellows, first go in and taste our cheer,
And to make merry as you homeward go,
Spend these two angels in beer at Stratford Bow.
To these two (my mad lads) Simon Eyre ads an∣other,
then chéerely Firk, tickle it Haunce, and al for the honour of shoemakers.
Come moister Eyre, lets have your company.
Sibil What shall I do?
Why whats the matter?
That Haunce the shoemaker is my love Lacie,
Disguised in that attire to find me out,
How should I find the means to speak with him?
What mistress, never fear, I dare venture my my∣denhead to nothing, and thats great odds, that Haunce the Dutchman when we come to London, shall not only sée and speak with you, but in spite of al your Fathers policies, steal you away and marry you, will not this please you?
Do this, and ever be assured of my love.
Away then and follow your father to London, left
your absence cause him to suspect something:
To morrow if my counsel be obeyed,
Isle bind you prentice to the gentle trade.
Yonders the shop, and there my fair love sits,
Shées fair and lovely, but she is not mine,
O would she were, thrice have I courted her,
Thrice hath my hand béene moistened with her hand,
Whilst my poor famished eyes do féed on that
Which made them famish: I am unfortunate,
I still love one, yet no body loves me,
I muse in other men what women sée,
That I so want? fine mistress Rose was coy,
And this too curious, oh no, she is chaste,
And for the thinks me wanton, she denies
〈◊〉 cheer my cold heart with her sunny eyes:
How prettily she works, oh pretty hand!
Oh happy work, it doth me good to stand
〈◊〉 to sée her, thus I oft have stood,
In frosty evenings, a light burning by her,
Enduring biting cold, only to eye her,
One only look hath séem'd as rich to me
As a kings crown, such is loves lunacy:
Muffeled Isle pass along, and by that try
Whether she know me.
Sir, what first you buy?
What first you lack sir? calico, or lawn,
Fine cambric shirts, or bands, what will you buy?
That which thou wilt not sell, faith yet Isle try:
How do you sell this handkercher?
Good cheap.
And how these ruffs?
Cheap too.
And how this band?
Cheap too.
All cheap, how sell you then this hand?
My hands are not to be sold.
To be given then: nay faith I come to buy.
But none knows when.
Good swéete, leave work a little while, lets play.
I cannot live by keeping holiday.
Isle pay you for the time which shall be lost.
With me you shall not be at so much cost.
Look how you wound this cloth, so you wound me.
It may be so.
Tic so.
What remedy?
Nay faith you are too coy.
Let go my hand.
I will do any task of your command,
I would let go this beauty, were I not
In mind to disobey you by a power
That controls kings: I love you.
So, now part.
With hands I may, but never with my heart,
In faith I love you.
I believe you doe.
Shall a true love in me bréede hate in you?
I hate you not.
Then you must love.
I doe, what are you better now? I love not you,
All this I hope is but a women's fray,
That means, come to me, when she cries, away:
In earnest mistress I do not jest,
A true chaste love hath entered in my breast,
In love you dearly as I love my life,
I love you as a husband loves a wife.
That, and no other love my love requires,
Thy wealth I know is little, my desires
Thirst not for gold, swéete beauteous Iane whats mine,
Shall (if thou make my self thine) all be thine,
Say, judge, what is thy sentence, life or death?
Mercy or cruelty lies in thy breath.
Good sir, I do believe you love me well:
For tic a séely conquest, séely pride,
For one like you (I mean a gentleman)
To boast, that by his love tricks he hath brought,
Such and such women to his amorous lure:
I think you do not so, yet many doe,
And make it even a very trade to woo,
I could be coy, as many women be,
Féede you with sunne-shine smiles, and wanton looks,
But I detest witchcraft, say that I
Doe constantly believe you, constant have.
Why dost thou not beléeue me?
I believe you,
But yet good sir, because I will not gréeue you,
With hopes to taste fruit, which will never fall,
In simple truth this is the sum of all
My husband lives, at least I hope he lives,
Pressed was he to these bitter wars in France,
Bitter they are to me by wanting him,
I have but one heart, and that hearts his due,
How can I then bestow the same on you?
Whilst he lives, his I live, be it ne'er so poor,
And rather be his wife, then a kings whore.
Chaste and dear woman, I will not abuse thée,
Although it cost my life, if thou refuse me,
Thy husband pressed for France, what was his name?
Raf Damport.
Damport, here is a letter sent
From France to me, from a dear friend of mine,
A gentleman of place, here he doth write,
Their names that have bin slain in every fight.
I hope deaths scroll contains not my loves name
Cannot you read?
I can.
Beruse the same,
To my remembrance such a name I read
Amongst the rest: sée here.
Aye me, hées dead:
Hées dead, if this be true my dear hearts slain.
Have patience, dear love.
Hence, hence.
Nay swéete Iane,
Make not poor sorrow proud with these rich tears,
I morn thy husbands death because thou mournst.
That bil is forgde; tic signed by forgery.
Isle bring thée letters sent besides to many
Carrying the like report: Iane tic too true,
Come, wéepe not: mourning though it rise from love
Helps not the mourned, yet hurts them that morn.
For Gods sake leave me.
Whither dost thou turn?
Forget the déede, love them that are alive,
His love is faded, try how mine will thrive.
Tic now no time for me to think on love,
Tic now best time for you to think on love, because your love lives not.
Though he be dead, my love to him shall not be buried:
For Gods sake leave me to my self alone.
I would kill my soul to leave thée drowned in moan:
Answer me to my suit, and I am gone,
Say to me, yea, or no.
No.
Then farewell, one farewell will not serve, I come again, come dry these wet chéekes, tel me faith sweet Iane, yea, or no, once more.
Once more I say no, once more be gone I pray, else will I go.
Nay then I will grow rude by this white hand,
Until you change that cold no, here isle stand,
Till by your hard heart
Nay, for Gods love peace,
My sorrows by your presence more increase,
Not that you thus are present, but al grief
Desires to be alone, therefore in brief
Thus much I say, and saying bid adieu,
If ever I wed man it shall be you.
Oh blessed voice, dear Iane Isle urge no more,
Thy breath hath made me rich.
Death makes me poor.
Hey down, a down, down derie.
Well said my hearts, ply your work to day, we loytred yesterday, to it pell mel, that we may live to be Lord Majors, or Aldermen at least.
Hey down a down derie.
Well said in faith, how say thou Hans, doth not Firk tickle it?
Yaw master.
Not so neither, my organ pipe squeakes this more∣ning for want of licoring: hey down a down derie.
Forward Firk, tow best un jolly yongster horrid I me∣ster it bid yo cut me un pair vāpres for master ieffres boots.
Thou shalt Haims.
Master.
How now, boy?
Pray, now you are in the cutting vain, cut mée out a pair of counterfeits, or else my work will not pass currant, hey down a down.
Tell me sirs, are my cousin M. Priscillaes shoes done?
Your cousin? no moister, one of your aunts, hang her, let them alone.
I am in hand with them, she gave charge that none
but I should doe them for her. 〈…〉
Thou do for her? then 〈…〉 that she loves not: Raf, thou n〈…〉 in faith I would have yearkt and 〈…〉 down a down derry, this géere w〈…〉
How say thou Firk? were 〈…〉 Ford?
How merry? why our buttocks went Iiggy iog∣go like a quagmire: well sir Roger Oatemeale, if I thought all meal of that nature, I would eat nothing but bag put∣dings.
Of all good fortunes, my fellow Hance had the best.
Tic true, because mistress Rose drank to him.
Well, well, work apace, they say seven of the Al∣aldermen be dead, or very sick.
I care not, Isle be none.
No nor I, but then my M. Eyre will come quickly to be L. Mayor.
Whoop, yonder comes Sibil.
Sibil, welcome in faith, and how dost thou mad wench?
Sib whore, welcome to London.
Godamercy sweet Firk: good Lord Hodge, what a delicious shop you have got, you tickle it in faith.
God a mercy Sibil for our good chéere at old Ford.
That you shall have Raf.
Nay by the mass, we had tickling chéere Sibil, and how the plague dost thou and mistress Rose, and my L. Mayor? I put the women in first.
Well Godamercy: but Gods me, I forget my self, wheres Haunce the Fleming?
Hark butter-boxe, vow you must yely out some spreken.
〈…〉od gon Frister.
〈…〉me to my young mistress, to pull
〈…〉le fro, var ben your mistress?
〈…〉 our London house in Cornewaile
〈…〉 serve her turn but Hans?
〈…〉 come Hans, I stand upon néedles.
Why then Sibil, take héede of pricking.
For that let me alone, I have a trick in my bud∣get, come Hans.
Yaw, yaw, ic sall méete yo gane.
Go Hans, make haste again: come, who lacks work?
I moister, for I lack my breakfast, tic munching time, and past
First so? why then leave work Raph, to breakfast, boy look to the tools, come Raph, come Firk.
Let me sée now, the sign of the last in Towerstréet, mas yonders the house: what haw, whose within?
Who calls there, what want you sir?
Marry I would have a pair of shoes made for a Gentlewoman against to morrow morning, what can you do them?
Yes sir, you shall have them, but what lengths her foot?
Why you must make them in all parts like this shoe, but at any hand fail not to do them, for the Gentle∣woman is to be married very early in the morning.
How? by this shoe must it be made? by this, are you sure sir by this?
How, by this am I sure, by this? art thou in thy wits? I tell thée I must have a pair of shoes, dost thou mark me? a pair of shoes, two shoes, made by this very shoe, this same shoe, against to morrow morning by four a clock, dost understand me, can thou do it?
Yes sir, yes, I, I, I can do it, by this shoe you say: I should know this shoe, yes sir, yes, by this shoe, I can do t, four a clock, well, whither shall I bring them?
To the sign of the golden ball in Watlingstréete, enquire for one moister Hamon a gentleman, my moister.
Yea sir, by this shoe you say.
I say moister Hammon at the golden ball, hée's the Bridegroom, and those shoes are for his bride.
They shall be done by this shoe: well, well, Moister Hammon at the golden shoe, I would say the golden Ball, very well, very well, but I pray you sir where must moister Hammon be married?
At Saint Faiths Church under Paules: but whats that to thée? prithee dispatch those shoes, and so farewell.
By this shoe said he, how am I amazed
At this strange accident? upon my life,
This was the very shoe I gave my wife
When I was pressed for France, since when alas,
I never could hear of her: it is the same,
And Hammons Bride no other but my Iane.
Snails Raph thou hast lost thy part of thrée pots, a countrymen of mine gave me to breakfast.
I care not, I have found a better thing.
A thing? away, is it a mans thing, or a women's thing?
Firk, dost thou know this shoe?
No by my troth, neither doth that know me? I have no acquaintance with it, tic a méere stranger to me.
Why then I do, this shoe I durst be sworn
Once covered the instep of my Iane:
This is her size, her breadth, thus trod my love,
These true love knots I pricked, I hold my life,
By this old shoe I shall find out my wife.
Ha ha old shoo, that were new, how a murren came this ague fit of foolishness upon thee?
Thus Firk, even now here came a serving-man,
By this shoe would he have a new pair made
Against to morrow morning for his mistress,
Thats to be married to a Gentleman,
And why may not this be my swéete Iane?
And why moist not thou be my swéete Ass? ha, ha.
Well, laugh, and spare not: but the truth is this.
Against to morrow morning Isle provide,
A lusty crew of honest shoemakers,
To watch the going of the bride to church,
If she prove Iane, Isle take her in despite,
From Hammon and the devil, were he by,
If it be not my Iane, what remedy?
Hereof am I sure, I shall live till I die,
Although I never with a woman lie.
Thou he with a woman to build nothing but Crepe∣ple-gates! Well, God sends fools fortune, and it may be he may light upon his matrimony by such a device, for wed∣ding and hanging goes by destiny.
How happy am I by embracing thée,
Oh I did fear such cross mishaps did reign,
That I should never see my Rose again.
Swéete Lacie, since fair Opportunity
Offers her self to further our escape,
Let not too ouer-fond estéeme of me
Hinder that happy hour, invent the means,
And Rose will follow thée through all the world.
Oh how I surfeit with excess of joy,
Made happy by thy rich perfection,
But since thou poised sweet interest to my hopes,
Redoubling love on love, let me once more,
Like to a bold faced debtor crave of thée,
This night to steal abroad, and at Eyres house,
Who now by death of certain Aldermen,
Is Mayor of London, and my master once,
Méete thou thy Lacie where in spite of change,
Your fathers anger, and mine uncles hate,
Our happy nuptials will me consummate.
Oh God, what will you doe mistress? shift for your self, your father is at hand, hées coming, hées coming, master Lacie hide your self in my mistress, for Gods sake shift for your selves.
Your father come, swéete Rose, what shall I doe?
Where shall I hide me? how shall I escape?
A man and want wit in extremity,
Come, come, be Hans still, play the shoemaker,
Pull on my shoe.
Mas, and thats well remembered.
Here comes your father.
Forware metresse, tic un good skow, it sal vel dute, or ye sal neit betallen.
Oh God it pinches me, what will you do?
Your fathers presence pinches, not the shoo.
Well done, fit my daughter well, and she shall please thee well.
Yaw, yaw, ec weit dat well, for ware tic un good shoo, tic go meet van neits leither, se ener mine here.
I do beléeue it, whats the news with you?
Please you, the Earl of Lincoln at the gate is newly lighted, and would speak with you.
The Earl of Lincoln come speak with me?
Well, well, I know his errand: daughter Rose,
Send hence your shoemaker, dispatch, have done:
Sib, make things handsome: sir boy follow me.
Mine uncle come, oh what may this portend?
Swéete Rose, this of our love threatens an end.
Be not dismayed at this what ere befall,
Rose is thine own, to witness I speak truth,
Where thou appoints the place Isle méete with thée,
I will not fix a day to follow thée,
But presently steal hence, do not reply.
Love which gave strength to bear my fathers hate,
Shall now add wings to further our escape.
Beléeue me, on my credit I speak truth,
Since first your nephew Lacie went to France,
I have not seen him. It séemd strange to me,
When Dodger told me that he staide behind,
Neglecting the hie charge the King imposed.
Trust me (sir Roger Otly) I did think
Your counsel had given head to this attempt,
Drawn to it by the love he bears your child.
Here I did hope to find him in your house,
But now I sée mine error, and confess
My judgment wronged you by conceiving so.
Lodge in my house, say you? trust me my Lord,
I love your Nephew Lacie too too dearly
So much to wrong his honour, and he hath done so,
That first gave him advise to stay from France.
To witness I speak truth, I let you know
How careful I have been to kéepe my daughter
Frée from all conference, or spéech of him,
Not that I scorn your Nephew, but in love
I bear your honour, least your noble blood,
Should by my mean worth be dishonoured.
How far the churls tongue wanders from his hart,
Well, well sir Roger Otley I beléeue you,
With more then many thanks for the kind love,
So much you séeme to bear me: but my Lord,
Let me request your help to séeke my Nephew,
Whom if I find, Isle straight embark for France,
So shall my Rose be frée, your thoughts at rest,
And much care die which now dies in my breast.
Oh Lord, help for Gods sake, my mistress, oh my young mistress.
Where is thy mistress? whats become of her?
Shées gone, shées fled.
Gone? whither is she fled?
I know not forsooth, shées fled out of doors with Hans the Shoemaker, I saw them scud, scud, scud, apace, apace.
Which way? what Iohn, where be my men? which way?
I know not, and it please your worship.
Fled with a shoemaker, can this be true?
Oh Lord sir, as true as Gods in heaven.
Her love turned shoemaker? I am glad of this.
A fleming butter bore, a shoemaker,
Will she forget her birth? requite my care
With such ingratitude? skornd she young Hammon,
To love a honnikin, a néedie knave?
Well let her fly, Isle not fly after her,
Let her starve if she will, shées none of mine.
Be not so cruel sir.
I am glad shées escaped.
Isle not account of her as of my child:
Was there no better object for her eyes,
But a foul drunken lubber, swill belly,
A shoemaker, thats brave.
Yea forsooth, tic a very brave shoe, and as fit as a padding.
How now, what knave is this, from whence com∣mest thou?
No knave sir, I am Firk the shoemaker, lusty To∣gers chief lusty iorneyman, and I come hither to take up the pretty leg of sweet mistress Rose, and thus hoping your worship is in as good health as I was at the making hereof, I bid you farewell, yours Firk.
Stay stay sir knave.
Come hither shoemaker.
Tic happy the knave is put before the shoemaker, or else I would not have vouchsafed to come back to you, I am moved, for I stir.
My Lord, this villain calls vs knaves by craft.
Then tic by the Gentle Craft, and to cal one knave gently, is no harm: sit your worship merry: Sib your young mistress Isle so bob then, now my moister M. Eyre is Lord Mayor of London.
Tell me sir, whose man are you?
I am glad to see your worship so merry, I have no maw to this gear, no stomach as yet to a red petticoat.
He means not sir to woo you to his maid,
But only doth demand whose man you are.
I sing now to the tune of Rogero▪ Roger my fellow is now my master.
Sir, know thou one Hans a shoemaker?
Hans shoemaker, oh yes, stay, yes I have him, I tel you what, I speak it in secret, mistress Rose, and he are by this time: no not so, but shortly are to come over one another with, Can you dance the shaking of the shéetes? it is that Hans, Isle so gull these diggers.
Know thou then where he is?
Yes forsooth, yea marry.
Can thou in sadness?
No forsooth, no marry.
Tell me good honest fellow where he is,
And thou shalt see what Isle bestow of thee.
Honest fellow, no sir, not so sir, my profession is the Gentle Craft, I care not for séeing, I love feeling, let me feel it here, aurium tenus, ten pieces of gold, genuum tenus, ten pieces of silver, and then Firk is your man in a new pair of strechers.
Here is an Angel, part of thy reward,
Which I will give thée, tell me where he is.
No point: shall I betray my brother? no, shall I prove Iudas to Hans? no, shall I cry treason to my corporation? no, I shall be firkt and yerkt then, but give me your angel, your angel shall tel you.
Doe so good fellow, tic no hurt to thée.
Send simpering Sib away.
Huswife, get you in.
Pitchers have ears, and maids have wide mouths: but for Hans prance, upon my word to morrow morning, he and young mistress Rose go to this géere, they shall be married together, by this rush, or else turn Firk to a firkin of butter to tanne leather withal.
But art thou sure of this?
Am I sure that Paules stéeple is a handful higher then London stone? or that the pissing conduit leaks nothing but pure mother Bunch? am I sure I am lusty Firk, Gods nails doe you think I am so base to gull you?
Where are they married? dost thou know the church?
I never go to church, but I know the name of it, it is a swearing church, stay a while, tic: I by the mas, no, no, tic I by my troth, no nor that, tic I by my faith, that that, tic I by my Faiths church under Paules cross, there they shall be knit like a pair of stockings in matrimony, there theile be in cony.
Upon my life, my Nephew Lacie walks
In the disguise of this Dutch shoemaker.
Yes forsooth.
Doth he not honest fellow?
No forsooth, I think Hans is no body, but Hans no spirit.
My mind misgives me now tic so indéede.
My cousin speaks the language, knows the trade.
Let me request your company my Lord,
Your honourable presence may, no doubt,
Refrain their head-strong rashness, when my self
Going alone perchance may be oreborne,
Shall I request this favour?
This, or what else.
Then you must rise betimes, for they mean to fall to their hey pass, and repose, pindy pantie, which hand will you have, very early.
My care shall every way equal their haste,
This night accept your lodging in my house,
The earlier shall we stir, and at Saint Faiths
Prevent this giddy hare-braind nuptial,
This traffic of hot love shall yéeld cold gains,
They ban our loves, and wéele forbid their baines.
At Saint Faiths church thou say.
Yes, by their troth.
Be secret on thy life.
Yes, when I kiss your wife, ha, ha, here is no craft in the Gentle Craft, I came hither of purpose with shoes to sir Rogers worship, whilst Rose his daughter be coniecatcht by Hans: soft now, these two gulles will be at Saint Faiths church to morrow morning, to take master Bridegroom, and mistress Bride napping, and they in the mean time shall chop up the matter at the Sauoy: but the best sport is, sir Roger Otly will find my fellow lame, Refs wife going
to marry a gentleman, and then heel stop her in stéede of his daughter; oh brave, there will be fine tickling sport: •••t now, what have I to doe? oh I know now a mess of shoemakers meat at the wool sack in I vie lane, to cozen my gentleman of lame Refs wife, thats true, alack, alack girls, hold out tack, for now smocks for this tumbling shall go to wrack.
This is the morning then, stay my bully my ho∣nest Hans, is it not?
This is the morning that must make vs two hap∣pie, or miserable, therefore if you
Away with these iffes and ands Hans, and these et caeteraes, by mine honour Rowland Lacie none but the king shall wrong thée: come, fear nothing, am not I Simon Eyre? Is not Simon Eyre Lord mayor of London? fear nothing Rose, let them al say what they can, dainty come thou to me: laugh thou?
Good my lord, stand her friend in what thing you may.
Why my swéete lady Madgy, think you Simon Eyre can forget his fine dutch Journeyman? No vah. Fie I scorn it, it shall never be cast in my teeth, that I was un∣thankeful. Lady Madgy, thou had never covered thy Sa∣racens head with this french flap, nor laden thy bum with this farthingale, tic trash, trumpery, vanity, Simon Eyre had never walked in a red petticoat, nor wore a chain of gold, but for my fine Iourneymans portigues, and shall I leave him? No: Prince am I none, yet bear a princely mind.
My Lord, tic time for vs to part from hence.
Lady Madgy, lady Madgy, take two or thrée of my pie-crust eaters, my buffe-ierkin varlets, that doe walk in black gowns at Simon Eyres héeles, take them good la∣die Madgy, trip and go, my browne Quéene uf Parry∣wigs, with my delicate Rose, and my jolly Rowland to the Sauoy, see them linked, countenance the marriage, and when it is done, cling, cling together, you •amborow Turtle Doves, Isle bear you out, come to Simon Eyre, come dwell with me Hans, thou shalt eat mined pies, and marchpane. Rose, away cricket, trip and go, my Lady Madgy to the Sauoy, Hans, wed, and to bed, kiss and away, go, vanish.
Farewell my lord.
Make haste sweet love.
Shéede fine the deed were done.
Come my swéete Rose, faster than Déere wéele run.
Go, vanish, vanish, avaunt I say: by the lord of Ludgate, its a mad life to be a lord Mayor, its a stir∣ring life, a fine life, a velvet life, a careful life. Well Simon Eyre, yet set a good face on it, in the honour of saint Hugh. Soft, the king this day comes to dine with me, to see my new buildings, his majesty is welcome, he shall have good chéere, delicate cheer, princely cheer. This day my fe∣low prentices of London come to dine with me too, they shall have fine cheer, gentlemanlike cheer. I promised the mad Cappidosians, when we all served at the Conduit together, that if ever I came to be Mayor of London, I would feast them al, and Isle doot, Isle doot by the life of Pharaoh, by this beard Simon Eire will be no flincher. Besides, I have procured, that upon
every Shrouetuesday, at the sound of the pancake bell: my fine dapper Allyrian lads, shall clap up their shop windows, and away, this is the day, and this day they shall doot, they shall doot: boys, that day are you frée, let masters care, and prentices shall pray for Simon Eyre.
Come Raf, stand to it Firk: my masters, as we are the brave bloods of the shooemakers, heirs apparent to saint Hugh, and perpetual benefactors to all good fellows▪ thou shalt have no wrong, were Hammon a king of spades, he should not delve in thy close without thy sufferance: but tell me Raf, art thou sure tic thy wife?
Am I sure this is Firk? This morning when I strokte on her shoes, I looked upon her, and she upon me, and sighed, asked me if ever I knew one Raf. Yes said I: for his sake said she (tears standing in her eyes) and for thou art somewhat like him, spend this péece of gold: I took it: my lame leg, and my travel beyond sea made me unknown, all is one for that, I know shées mine.
Did she give thée this gold? O glorious glittering gold; shées thine own, tic thy wife, and she loves thée, for Isle stand toot, theres no woman will give gold to any man, but she thinks better of him than she thinks of them she gives silver to: and for Hamon, neither Hamon nor Hang∣man shall wrong thée in London: Is not òur old moister Eire lord Mayor? Speak my hearts.
Yes, and Hamon shall know it to his cost.
Peace my bullies, yonder they come.
Stand toot my hearts, Firk, let me speak first.
No Raf, let me: Hammon, whither away so early?
Unmannerly rude slave, whats that to thée?
To him sir? yes sir, and to me, and others: good mo∣row Iane, how dost thou? good Lord, how the world is champion∣general with you, God be thanked.
Villains, hands off, howe dare you touch my love?
villains? down with them, cry clubs for prentices.
How, my hearts touch her Hamon? yea and more than that, wéele carry her away with vs. My masters and gentlemen, never draw your bird spittes, shooemakers are steel to the back, men every inch of them, al spirit.
Well, and what of all this?
Isle show you: Iane, dost thou know this man? tic Raf I can tell thee: nay, tic he in faith, though he be lamde by the wars, yet look not strange, but run to him, fold him about the neck and kiss him.
Lives then my husband? oh God let me go,
Let me embrace my Raf.
What means my Iane?
Nay, what meant yon to tell me he was slain?
Pardon me dear love for being misled,
It was rumord here in London thou were dead.
Thou séest he lives: Lass, go pack home with him: now M. Hamon, wheres your mistress your wife?
Swounds M. fight for her, will you thus lose her?
Down with that creature, clubs, down with him.
Hold, hold.
Hold fool, sirs he shall do no wrong,
Will my Iane leave me thus, and break her faith?
Yea sir, she must sir, she shall sir, what then? mend it.
Hark fellow Raf, follow my counsel, set the wench in the midst, and let her choose her man, and let her be his woman.
Whom should I choose? whom should my thoughts affect?
But him whom heaven hath made to be my love,
Thou art my husband and these humble wéedes,
Makes thée more beautiful then all his wealth,
Therefore I will but put off his attire,
Returning it into the owners hand,
And after ever be thy constant wife.
Not a rag Iane, the law's on our side, he that sows in another mans ground forsets his harvest, get thée home Raf, follow him Iane, he shall not have so much as a buck point from thée.
Stand to that Raf, the appurtenances are thine own, Hammon, look not at her.
O swounds no.
Blew coat be quiet, wéele give you a new livery else, wéele make Shrove Tuesday Saint Georges day for you: look not Hammon, lear not, Isle Firk you, for thy head now, one glance, one shéepes eye, any thing at her, touch not a rag, least I and my brethren beat you to clouts.
Come master Hammon, theres no striving here.
Good fellows, hear me speak: and honest Raf,
Whom I have injured most by loving Iane,
Mark what I offer thée: here in fair gold
Is twenty pound, Isle give it for thy Iane,
If this content thée not, thou shalt have more.
Sell not thy wife Raf, make her not a whore.
Say, wilt thou fréely cease thy claim in her,
And let her be my wife?
No, do not Raf.
Sir Hammon Hammon, dost thou think a Shoemaker is so base, to bee a bawd to his own wife for commodity, take thy gold, choke with it, were
I not lame, I would make thée eat thy words.
A shoemaker sell his flesh and blood, oh indignity!
Sir, take up your pelf, and be packing.
I will not touch one penny, but in lieu
Of that great wrong I offered thy Iane,
To Iane and thée I give that twenty pound,
Since I have failed of her, during my life
I vow no woman else shall be my wife:
Farewell good fellows of the Gentle trade,
Your mornings mirth my mourning day hath made.
Touch the gold creature if you dare, ya're best be trudging: here Iane take thou it, now lets home my hearts.
Stay, who comes here? Iane, on again with thy mask.
Yonders the lying varlet mocked vs so.
Come hither sir.
I sir, I am sir, you mean me, do you not?
Where is my Nephew married?
Is he married? God give him joy, I am glad of it: they have a fair day, and the sign is in a good planet, Mars in Venus.
Villain, thou toldst, me that my daughter Rose,
This morning should be married at Saint Faiths,
We have watched there these thrée hours at the least,
Yet sée we no such thing.
Truly I am sorry for it, a Bride's a pretty thing.
Come to the purpose, yonder's the Bride and Bridegroom you look for I hope: though you be Lords, you are not to bar, by your authority, men from women, are you?
Sée sée my daughters maskt.
True, and my Nephew.
To hide his guilt, counterfeits him lame.
Yea truly god help the poor couple, they are lame and blind.
Isle ease her blindness.
Isle his lameness cure.
Lie down sirs, and laugh, my fellow Raf is taken for Rowland Lacy, and Iane for mistress damask rose, this is al my knavery.
What, have I found you minion?
O base wretch,
Nay hide thy face, the horror of thy guilt,
Can hardly be washed off: where are thy powers?
What vattels have you made? O yes I see
Thou foughtst with Shame, and shame hath conquered thée.
This lameness will not serve.
Unmask your self.
Lead home your daughter.
Take your Nephew hence.
Hence, swounds, what mean you? are you mad? I hope you cannot enforce my wife from me, wheres Hamon?
Your wife.
What Hammon?
Yea my wife, and therefore the proudest of you that lays hands on her first, Isle lay my crutch cross his pate.
To him lame Raf, here is brave sport.
Rose call you her? why her name is Iane, look here else, do you know her now?
Is this your daughter?
No, nor this your nephew:
My Lord of Lincoln, we are both abused
By this base crafty varlet.
Yea forsooth no varlet, forsooth no base, forsooth I am but mean, no crattie neither, but of the Gentle Craft.
Where is my daughter Rose? where is my child?
Where is my nephew Lacie married?
Why here is good laid mutton as I promised you.
Villain, Isle have thée punished for this wrong.
Punish the iornyman villain, but not the journey∣man shoemaker.
My Lord I come to bring unwelcome news,
Your Nephew Lacie, and your daughter Rose,
Early this morning wedded at the Sauoy,
None being present but the Lady Mairesse:
Besides I learnt among the officers,
The Lord Mayor vows to stand in their defence,
Against any that shall seek to cross the match.
Dares Eyre the shoemaker uphold the deed?
Yes sir, shoemakers dare stand in a women's quarrel I warrant you, as deep as another, and deeper too.
Besides, his grace, to day dines with the Mayor,
Who on his knées humbly intends to fall,
And beg a pardon for your Nephews fault.
But Isle prevent him come sir Roger Oteley,
The king will doe vs justice in this cause,
How ere their hands have made them man and wife,
I will disioyne the match, or loose my life.
Adieu monsieur Dodger, farewell fools, ha ha, Oh if they had staide I would have so lambde them with ••outs, O heart, my codpéece point is ready to fly in péeces every time I think upon mistress Rose, but let that pass, as my Lady Mairesse says.
This matter is answered: come Raf, home with thy wife, come my fine shoemakers, lets to our masters the new lord Mayor and there swagger this shrove Tuesday, isle promise you wine enough, for Madge kéepes the seller.
O rare! Madge is a good wench.
And Isle promise you meat enough, for simpering
Susan kéepes the larder, Isle lead you to victuals my brave soldiers, follow your captain, O brave, hark, hark.
The Pancake bell rings, the pancake bell, tri-lill my hearts.
Oh brave, oh swéete bell, O delicate pancakes, o∣pen the doors my hearts, and shut up the windows, kéepe in the house, let out the pancakes: oh rare my hearts, lets march together for the honour of saint Hugh to the great new hall in Gracious street corner, which our Moister the new lord Mayor hath built.
O the crew of good fellows that will dine at my lord, Majors cost to day!
By the lord, my lord Mayor is a most brave man, how shall prentices be bound to pray for him, and the honour of the gentlemen shoemakers? lets feed and be fat with my lords bounty.
O musical be still! O Hodge, O my brethren! theres chéere for the heavens, venson pastimes walk up and down piping hot, like sergeants, beef and brews comes mar∣ching in dry fattes, fritters and pancakes comes trowling in in whéele barrowes, hens and oranges hopping in pore∣ters baskets, colloppes and eggs in scuttles, and tartes and custards comes quavering in in malt shovels.
Whoop, look here, look here.
How now mad lads, whither away so fast?
Whither, why to the great new hall, know you not why? The lord Mayor hath bidden all the prentices in London to breakfast this morning.
Oh brave shoemaker, oh brave lord of incomprehen∣sible good fellowship, whoo, hark you, the pancake bell rings.
Nay more my hearts, every Shrouetuesday is our yéere of Jubilee: and when the pancake bell rings, we are as free as my lord Mayor, we may shut up our shops, and make holiday: Isle have it called, Saint Hughes Holiday.
Agreed, agreed, Saint Hughes Holiday.
And this shall continue for ever.
Oh brave! come come my hearts, away, away.
O eternal credit to vs of the gentle Craft, march fair my hearts, oh rare.
Is our lord Mayor of London such a gallant?
One of the merriest madcaps in your land,
Your Grace will think, when you behold the man,
Hées rather a wilde ruffin than a Mayor:
Yet thus much Isle ensure your majesty,
In al his actions that concern his state,
He is as serious, provident, and wise,
As full of gravity amongst the grave,
As any mayor hath been these many years.
I am with child till I behold this half cap,
But all my doubt is, when we come in presence,
His madness will be dashed clean out of countenance.
It may be so, my Liege.
Which to prevent,
Let some one give him notice, tic our pleasure,
That he put on his wonted merriment:
Set forward.
On before.
Come my fine Hodge, my jolly gentlemen shooema∣cares, soft, where be these Cannibals, these varlets my off∣cers, let them al walk and waite upon my brethren, for my meaning is, that none but shoemakers, none but the livery
of my Company shall in their satin hoods waite upon the trencher of my sovereign.
O my Lord, it will be rare.
No more Firk, come lively, let your fellow prone∣tises want no cheer, let wine be plentiful as béere, and beer as water, hang these penny pinching fathers, that cram wealth in innocent lamb skins, rip knaves, anaunt, look to my guests
My Lord, we are at our wits end for room, those hundred tables will not feast the fourth part of them.
Then cover me those hundred tables again, and again, till all my jolly prentices be feasted: avoid Hodge, run Raf, frisk about my numble Firk, carouse me fa∣dome healths to the honour of the shoemakers: do they drink lively Hodge? do they tickle it Firk?
Tickle it? some of them have taken their liquor stan∣ding so long, that they can stand no longer: but for meat, they would eat it and they had it.
Want they meat? wheres this swag-belly, this greasy kitchinstuffe cooke, call the varlet to me: want meat! Firk, Hodge, lame Raf, run my tall men, beleager the shambles, beggar al East-Cheape, serve me whole oxen in chargers, and let sheep whine upon the tables like pigs for want of good fellows to eat them. Want meat! vanish Firk, avaunt Hodge.
Your lordship mistakes my man Firk, he means their bellies want meat, not the boards, for they have drunk so much they can eat nothing.
Where is my Lord.
How now lady Madgy.
The kings most excellent majesty is new come, hée sends me for thy honour: one of his most worshipful Péeres,
bade me tel thou must be merry, and so forth: but let that pass.
Is my Sovereign come? vanish my tall shooma∣cares, my nimble brethren, look to my guests the prentices: yet stay a little, how now Hans, how looks my little Rose?
Let me request you to remember me,
I know your honour easily may obtain,
Frée pardon of the king for me and Rose,
And reconcile me to my uncles grace.
Have done my good Hans, my honest iorneyman, look chéerely, Isle fall upon both my knees till they be as hard as horn, but Isle get thy pardon.
Good my Lord have a care what you speak to his grace.
Away you I slington whitepot, hence you hap∣perarse, you barley pudding full of magots, you broyld carbo∣nato, avaunt, avaunt, avoid Mephostophilus: shall Simon Eyre leave to speak of you Lady Madge? vanish mother Miniuer cap, vanish, go, trip and go, meddle with your partlets, and your pishery pasherie, your flewes and your whirligigs, go, rub, out of mine alley: Simon Eyre knows how to speak to a Pope, to Sultan Soliman, to Tambur∣lain and he were here: and shall I melt? shall I droop before my Sovereign? no, come my Lady Madge, follow me Hans, about your business my frolic frée-booters: Firk, frisk about, and about, and about, for the honour of mad Si∣mon Eyre Lord Mayor of London.
Hey for the honour of the shoemakers.
Well Lacie though the fact was very foul,
Of your renolting from our kingly love,
And your own duty, yet we pardon you,
Rise both, and mistress Lacie, thank my Lord Mayor
For your young bridegroom here.
So my déere liege, Simon Eyre and my brethren the gentlemen shoemakers shall set your swéete majesties image, cheek by jowl by Saint Hugh, for this honour you have done poor Simon Eyre, I beséeth your grace pardon my rude behaviour, I am a handicrafts man, yet my heart is without craft, I would be sorry at my soul, that my boldness should offend my king.
Nay, I pray thée good lord Mayor, be even as merry as if thou were among thy shoemakers, It does me good to see thee in this humour.
Say thou me so my swéete Dioclesian? then hump, Prince am I none, yet am I princely borne, by the Lord of Ludgate my Liege, Isle be as merry as a pie.
Tel me infaith mad Eyre, how old thou art.
My Liege a very boy, a stripling, a yonker, you sée not a white hair on my head, not a gray in this beard, every hair I assure thy majesty that sticks in this beard, Simon Eyre values at the king of Babilons ransom, Tama Chams beard was a rubbing brush toot: yet Isle shave it off, and stuff tennis balls with it to please my bully king.
But all this while I do not know your age.
My liege, I am six and fifty year old, yet I can cry hump, with a sound heart for the honour of Saint Hugh: mark this old wench, my king, I danced the shaking of the sheets with her six and their∣tie years ago, and yet I hope to get two or three young Lord Majors ere I die: I am lusty still, Simon Eyre still: care, and cold lodging brings white hairs. My swéete Majesty, let care vanish, cast it upon thy Nobles, it will make thée look always young like Apollo, and cry hump: Prince am I none, yet am
I princely borne.
Ha ha: say Cornwall, did thou ever sée his like?
Not I, my Lord.
Lincoln, what news with you?
My gracious Lord, have care unto your self,
For there are traitors here.
Traitors, where? who?
Traitors in my house? God forbid, where be my of∣ficers? Isle spend my soul ere my king féele harm.
Where is the traitor? Lincoln.
Here he stands.
Cornwall, lay hold on Lacie: Lincoln, speak:
What can thou lay unto thy Nephews charge?
This my dear liege: your grace to doe me honour,
Heaped on the head of this degenerous boy,
Desertlesse favours, you made choice of him,
To be commander over powers in France,
But he.
Good Lincoln pry thée pause a while,
Even in thine eyes I read what thou would speak,
I know how Lacie did neglect our love,
Ran himself déepely (in the highest degrée)
Into vile treason.
Is he not a traitor?
Lincoln, he was: now have we pardned him,
It was not a base want of true valors fire,
That held him out of France, but loves desire.
I will not bear his shame upon my back.
Nor shalt thou Lincoln, I forgive you both.
Then (good my liege) forbid the boy to wed
One, whose mean birth will much disgrace his bed.
Are they not married?
No my Liege.
We are.
Shall I divorce them then? O be it far,
That any hand on earth should dare untie,
The sacred knot knit by Gods majesty,
I would not for my crown disioyne their hands,
That are conioynd in holy nuptial bands,
How say thou Lacy? would thou loose thy Rose?
Not for all Indians wealth, my sovereign.
But Rose I am sure her Lacie would forgo.
If Rose were asked that question, shed say, no.
You hear them Lincoln.
Yea my liege, I do.
Yet can thou find ith heart to part these two?
Who séeks, besides you, to divorce these lovers?
I do (my gracious Lord) I am her father.
Sir Roger Oteley, our last Mayor I think,
The same my liege.
Would you offend Loves laws?
Well, you shall have your wills, you sue to me,
To prohibit the match: Soft, let me sée,
You both are married, Lacie, art thou not?
I am, dread Sovereign.
Then upon thy life,
I charge thée, not to call this woman wife.
I thank your grace.
O my most gracious Lord!
Nay Rose, never woo me, I tel you true,
Although as yet I am a bachelor,
Yet I beléèue I shall not marry you.
Can you divide the body from the soul,
Yet make the body live?
Yea, so profound?
I cannot Rose, but you I must divide:
Fair maid, this bridegroom cannot be your bride.
Are you pleased Lincoln? Oteley, are you pleased?
Yes my Lord.
Then must my heart be eased,
For credit me, my conscience lives in pain,
Till these whom I deuorcde be joined again:
Lacy, give me thy hand, Rose, lend me thine.
Be what you would be: kiss now: so, thats fine,
At night (lovers) to bed: now let me sée,
Which of you all mislikes this harmony?
Will you then take from me my child perforce?
Why tell me Oteley, shines not Laces name,
As bright in the worlds eye, as the gay beams
Of any citizen?
Yea but my gracious Lord,
I do mislike the match far more than he,
Her blood is too too base.
no more,
Dost thou not know, that love respects no blood?
Cares not for difference of birth, or state,
The maid is young, well borne, fair, virtuous,
A worthy bride for any gentleman:
Besides, your nephew for her sake did stoop
To bare necessity: and as I hear,
Forgetting honours, and all courtly pleasures,
To gain her love, became a shoemaker.
As for the honour which he lost in France,
Thus I redéeme it: Lacie, knéele thée down,
Arise sir Rowland Lacie: tell me now,
Tell me in earnest Oteley, can thou chide?
Séeing thy Rose a lady and a bride.
I am content with what your Grace hath done.
And I my liege, since theres no remedy.
Come on then, at shake hands, Isle have you friends,
Where there is much love, all discord ends,
What says my mad Lord Mayor to all this love?
O my liege, this honour you have done to my fine journeyman here, Rowland Lacie, and all these favours which you have shown to me this day in my poor house, will make Simon Eyre live longer by one dozen of warm summers more then he should.
Nay, my mad Lord Mayor (that shall be thy name)
If any grace of mine can length thy life,
One honour more Isle doe thee, that new building,
Which at thy cost in Cornehill is erected,
Shall take a name from vs, wéele have it called,
The Leaden hall, because in digging it,
You found the lead that covers the same.
I thank your Majesty.
God bless your Grace.
Lincoln, a word with you.
How now my mad knaves? Peace, speak softly, yonder is the king.
With the old troupe which there we kéepe in pay,
We will incorporate a new supply:
Before one summer more pass ore my head,
France shall repent England was injured.
What are all those?
All shoemakers, my Liege,
Sometimes my fellows, in their companies
I siude as merry as an empror.
My mad lord Mayor, are all these shoemakers?
All Shooemakers, my Liege, all gentlemen of the Gentle Craft, true Troians, courageous Cordwainers, they all knéele to the shrine of holy saint Hugh.
God save your majesty all shoemakers
Mad Simon, would they any thing with vs?
Mum mad knaves, not a word, Isle doot, I warrant you. They are all beggars, my Liege, all for themselves: and I for them all, on both my knées do entreat, that for the ho∣nor of poor Simon Eyre, and the good of his brethren these mad knaves, your Grace would vouchsafe some privilege to my new Leden hall, that it may be lawful for vs to buy and sell leather there two days a wéeke.
Mad Simon, I grant your suite, you shall have patent
To hold two market days in Leden hall,
Mondays and Fridays, those shall be the times:
Will this content you?
Iesus bless your Grace.
In the name of these my poor brethren shoemakers, I most humbly thank your Grace. But before I rise, sée∣ing you are in the Giving vain, and we in the Begging, grant Simon Eyre one boon more.
What is it my Lord Mayor?
Vouchsafe to taste of a poor banquet that stands swéetely waiting for your sweet presence.
I shall undo thee Eyre, only with feasts,
Already have I béene too troublesome,
Say, have I not?
O my dear king, Simon Eyre was taken unawares upon a day of shrouing which I promised long ago to the prone tises of London: for andt please your Highness, in time past
I bare the water tanker 〈◊〉 my coat
Sits not a whit the world 〈◊〉 my back:
And then upon a morning some mad boys,
It was Shrouetuesday éeune as tic now,
Gave me my breakfast, and I swore then by the stopple of my tankerd, if ever I came to be Lord Mayor of London, I would feast al the prentices, This day (my liege) I did it, and the slaves had an hundred tables five times covered, they are gone home and vanished: yet add more honour to the Gentle Trade, taste of Eyres banquet, Simon's happy made.
Eyre, I will taste of thy banquet, and will say,
I have not met more pleasure on a day,
Friends of the Gentle Craft, thanks to you al,
Thanks my kind Lady Mairesse for our théere,
Come Lords, a white lets revel it at home,
When all our sports, and banquetings are dome,
Wars most right wrongs which frenchmen have begun.

GOod my Liege.
Dear Sovereign.
Why do you keep the Sword of Justice back
From cutting off so foul a blasted branch?
Oh let your milder sense censure this Fate,
And cast her not away in hate of spleen.
Consider Sir, she is your only Child, your Kingdoms Heir, your Countries future Hope, and she may live
To be a Strumpet, sir: Do not vex my soul with extol∣tion of a thing so vile. Is it possible a Lady of her Birth should stain her Royal Race with beastly lust, and mix the blood of Kings with a base issue? Was it for this you were so long mewed up within your private Chamber? Was it for this we gave so strict a charge to have your tedious Sickness looked unto? But our examples shall be such on thee, as all the world shall take a warning by. What man, or devil in the shape of man was he, that durst presume for to pollute thee? Either confess him, or by all our gods Isle plague thy body with continual tortures; that being done, I will devise a death, that time to come shall never pattern it.
There's not the smallest torture while I live
That shall afflict, or touch her tender body.
What Traitor-slave dares interrupt the passage of our will? Cut him in pieces.
Oh, hold your hands; for mercy let him live,
And twenty pieces within my bosom give.
Death? Now it is probable, He lay my life this Groom is Father to the Strumpets Brat.
A Guard there: seize him, make the Slave confess;
And if he will not, kill him instantly.
Villains, unhand me, Isle reveal the truth, I will not die in base obscurity. Pheander, know I am not what I seem (an ab∣jest Groom) but Royal as thy self: My name is Radagon, son to thy Enemy, Cicillia's King; this thirteen months I have conti∣nued here, in hope for to obtain what now I have, my Ariadnes love. It is I am Father to this Princely Boy, and Isle maintain't even with the utmost hazard of my life.
Thy life, base Lecher, that is the smallest satisfaction that thou can render for thy foul Transgression. And were it not against the Law of Arms and Nature, these hands should sacrifice your guilty souls; and with your bloods wash the foul stain from off our Royal House. As for the Brat, his brains shall be dashed out, no base remembrance shall be left of him, Isle have my will effected instantly.
Dear Sovereign, let Pity plead this Case, and Natu∣ral Love reclaim your high displeasure. The Babe is guiltless of the Fact committed, and She is all the children that you have, then for your Countries cause, and Kingdoms good, be pleased to take her to your grace again.
Besides my Liege, it is known that Radagon
Is by his Noble Birth, a worthy Lord,
Princely descended, of a Royal Stock,
Although not Heir apparent to a Crown;
Then since their hearts have sympathised in one,
Confirm with love this happy Union.
This hand shall be his Priest that dares again presume to speak for her. What worse disgrace did ever King sustain, than I by this luxurious couple have? But you shall see our Clemency is such, that we will mildlier sentence their wild Fact, than they themselves can look for, or deserve. Take them asunder, and attend our Doom.
Before you speak, vouchsafe to hear me, Sir:
It is not for my self I bend my knee,
Nor will I crave the least forgiveness,
But for your Daughter; Do but set her free,
And let me feel the worst of Tyranny.
The like Submission do I make for him.
Stop her mouth, we never more intend to hear her speak: I would not have a Token of Remembrance, that ever I did bear the Name of Father. For you, lascivious Sir, on pain of death we charge you leave our Kingdom instantly: two days we limit you for your departure; which time expired, it is death to tread upon our Thracian Bounds.
But Huswife, as for you,
You with your Brat, we'll send afloat the Main,
There to be left, never to Land again:
And that your Copes-mate may be sure to loose
The chief content of his desired Bliss,
You shall be guarded from our Kingdoms Confines,
And put to Sea, with several Winds and Tides,
That ye may never more enjoy each other:
She in a small Boat without Man or Oar,
Shall to the mercy of the Waves be left.
He in a Pinnace without Sail or Pilot,
Shall be dragged forth some five leagues from the shore,
And there be drenched in the vast Ocean.
You hear your Doom, which shall for ever stand irrevocable.
Make no reply: Go strumpet, get thee hence,
No sin so vile as Disobedience.
A heavy, bitter Sentence! when for Love we must be banished from our Native right: Had his high Rage but suffered me to speak, I could have my Chastity as clear, as is the unspot∣ted Lamb of Innocence.
Alas, good Lady: Now on my faith I do believe as much, Isle back return unto his Majesty, and urge him to recall his heavy Doom.
Oh no, I would not for the world, believe me sir,
Endanger you in such an Embassy.
Let him persist, the Heavens hath ever sent,
A Tower of strength to guard the innocent.
Oh Radagon, we two shall never meet,
Until we tread upon the higher Frame.
Farewell, Dear Love. Poor Babe, thy wretched Birth▪
Makes us to part eternally on earth.
My life, my soul, all my felicity,
Is in a trice divided from my sight!
No matter now what ere become of me,
All earthly joys are lost in loosing thee.
Come, I must know your cause of Discontent.
I know it is your love to urge thus far, and it is my love thus to conceal it from you: should I relate my cause of Sorrow to you, and you seeking my remedy, should wound your self, think what a Cursive it would prove to me. And yet I wonder you conceive it not; if you consider truly your own state, you'll find our cause of grief to be alike.
You have found a pretty way to silence me, but twill not serve, indeed it will not, sir, because I know you do dissemble with me. The strongest Allegation that ye have, is that you sor∣row for a Fathers death, and that I know is feigned; for since that time my self have heard you, in your Roundelays more fro∣lick far than any of the Swains; and in your pastimes on the Ho∣lidays strive to surpass the activist of us all, therefore that cannot serve you for Excuse; And for your flocks, I'm sure they thrive as well as any shepherds do upon the plain, that makes me won∣der, and importunate to know the cause that might procure this sadness.
Since nothing but the Truth will satisfy,
Take it in a word, brother: I am in Love.
Ha, ha, what's that?
A god which many thousands do adore.
A Fable that fond fools gives credit too: I that have bin a Shepherd all my life, and ne'er trained up to School as thou hast bin, would scorn to be deluded by a Fiction, a thing that's no∣thing but inconstancy. Did never hear the Invective that I made?
No, nor desire it now.
Yes, prithee mark it,
Isle tell thee my opinion now of Love.
Love is a Law, a Discord of such force,
That twixt our Sense and Reason makes divorce.
Love 's a Desire, that to obtain betime,
We loose an Age of Years plucked from our prime.
Love is a thing to which we soon consent,
As soon refuse, but sooner far repent.
Then what must women be that are the cause,
That Love hath life? that Lovers feel such laws?
They 'r like the Winds upon Lapanthaes shore,
That still are changing. Oh then love no more.
A women's Love is like that Syrian Flower,
That buds, and spreads, and withers in an hour.
See Orpheus, you have drawn Listners.
What, dost make beasts of 'em?
Come son, let's make haste to fold up our flocks,
I fear we shall have a foul Evening.
I think so too Father, for there's a strong wind risen in the back door. S'nails! yonder's Mr. Titterus the merry Shep∣herd, and the old fool my father would pass by; we'll have a Fit of Mirth before we part.
Hoise a Gods-name, cannot the Puppy see?
Hardly sir, for he has been troubled with sore eyes this nine days.
Muscod, come hither, what shall I give thee to put my brother Pallemon from his dumps?
I do not know what you'll give me, but promise what you will, I'm sure to be paid if, I meddle with him: he's the strangest humoured man now of late that ever I met withal; he was ready to lay his Hook o'er my pate t'other morning, for giving him the time of the day. But upon one condition Isle venture a knock this once.
What's your condition?
Marry, that you would give me a delicate Song to court my Wench withal; but it must be a good one, for women are grown so musical now adays, they care not a pin for a Song un∣less it be well pricked.
Oh, I have one a purpose: hark, shalt hear it.
Nothing shall serve, but what I have prefixed.
Isle pluck the Moon from forth the Starry Throne,
And place thee there to light the lower Orb;
And if stern Pluto offer to embrace thee,
Isle pitch him head-long into Phlegeton.
Phebus defend me! Oh, I fear he's mad.
Or if thou'lt live, and be the Shepherds Queen, Isle fetch Senessa frown the Down of Swans to be thy handmaid; the Phry∣gain Boy that Jove so doted on, shall be thy Page, and serve thee on his knee: Thou shalt be guarded round with Jolly Swains, such-as was Luno's Love on Latma's hill: Thy Music shall sir∣pass the Argo's tamer. If this content thee not, Isle dive into the bottom of the Deep, and fetch thee Bracelets of the Orient Pearl, the Treasure of the Sea shall all be thine.
He's stark mad! some power withhold him here,
Until I find some place to shelter me.
Art thou gone in haste?
Isle not forsake thee;
Run thou ne'er so fast,
Isle o'retake thee:
Or the Dales, or the Downs,
through the green Meadows,
From the fields through the towns, to the dimshadows.
All along the Plain,
to the low Fountains,
Up and down again
from the high Mountains:
Echo then, shall again
tell her I follow,
And the Floods to the Woods,
carry my holla, holla, ce, la, ho, ho, hue
This storm is o'er, but now a greater storm is to be fear∣ed, that is, your Censures of this History. From cruel shipwreck you have here beheld the preservation of these banished Princes, who being put to sea in Mastless Boats, with several Winds and
Tides were driven back to the same Coast that they were banished from; which understanding, lest they should be known, they change their Names and Habits, and persuade the silly shepherds they are Foreigners: in several Cottages remote from Court these Lovers live, thinking each other dead. The sighs, the tears, the passions that were spent on either side, we could describe to you,
But time hath barred us: This is all you see
That he hath lent us for our History.
I doubt we hardly shall conclude so soon:
But if you please to like our Authors Pen,
We will beguile Time, and turn his Glass again.
GOod Gods, be merciful.
Oh, oh, oh.
Some Power defend us from this noisome Sickness. Stand: who's that, the Wind?
Keep distance then. Oh my Lord, is it you? this is a fearful Visitation, the people as they walk, drop down in heaps.
Retire and keep the wind, here comes another.
Oh, oh, falls dead.
Mercy, he's dead!
Who is it?
I cannot well discern him, but I think it is the Lord Leonardo: Yes, it is he.
A fearful rest receive him, he was virtuous.
My Lord, I would fain exchange some private words with you, I think you are clear.
Upon my life I am.
Let's walk together then.
Alas poor Niece, cruel unnatural Father, a Falleris, a smiling Tyrant, to use his Daughter with such cruelty: Bless me, I fear I have taken the Infection.
It is Sophos the Kings Brother come to Court.
I heard some speak, keep off what ever you be:
Who is it, Pallation? whore's the King my Brother?
In his Bed-chamber.
Tell him I am here.
I shall my Lord. Some there remove the body.
No, it shall lye,
Himself shall see in what a state we live:
His Daughter's murdered, banished I should say,
And the Cicillian Prince, both innocent.
A little insant perished, the Gods know
As lawfully begot as he or I.
Nay, never stare, it is true: the Gods
Are not displeased without cause.
Heyda! Is this a time for Music?
And so it is indeed; for every one
Is ready to kick up his heels.
Oh, oh, oh. I marry sir, here's music fits the time.
What horrid shrieks and clamours fills our ears?
Are groans sit Music for a Princes Court?
It is Music fit for Princes that delight in devisish Dan∣ces: Look sir, behold here's one hath danced himself quite out of breath: here's good Leonardo gone, your Daughter's dead, poor Niece, with tears I speak it, and your Land infected with a Plague incurable, your Court, and it was not wont to be the Court-disease: what should occasion this but——would I durst speak what I suspect: suspect, said I? nay what is truth, for that's beyond suspicion. Read that, then guess the cause of our in∣flictions.
Ha, ha, ha, ha. This was a subtle and shrewd Device to shadow Treachery, was it not my Lords? Having wrapped Treason in a poisoned paper, delivers it to us to take the infection.
By the blessed Sun it is false, I am no Traitor, as loyal as the truest Subject here; yet there is poison in it of power and strength to make a Fathers heart to swell and burst at the recital of such Tyranny. Thy Daughter's chaste, a Royal spotless Prin∣cess, she here doth vow, and call the Gods to witness, she ne'er admitted him unto her bed, until the Nuptial Rites were cele∣brate; yet Tyrant-like thou put her unto sea, not suffering her
to plead her innocence, where she and her poor Babe did suffer death.
Dissembling hypocrite, art not ashamed to lay such shall∣low baits to catch a Crown? Observe what a discovered way he treads, thinking her dead, which all you know she justly merit∣ed, has forged this Letter, to turn your hearts with seeming pity to dispossess us, and be King himself: But you whose hearts have ever yet bin loyal, know how to censure of such Treachery with true discretion. Pray ye use him kindly, let him not feel too many cruel tortures, he is our Brother, though he have transgressed the Law of Gods and Nature, we are loath to punish with too much severity.
Ha, ha, ha. Now give me leave to laugh, devouring Crockodile, dost think I fear to die? Let death fright those that fear to die for ever: let me behold him in his ugliest shape, he's then most lovely; if I did fear, I'd ne'er have uttered this, it was to clear thy Daughters innocence, and blaze thy infamy unto the world, for this I did it: if for this I die, I die for truth, live with eternity.
Take him aside until we call for him.
Do not touch me, slaves, I scorn to run.
Your council Lords what we best to do,
You see his guilt apparently appears:
We dare not call a Public Consultation
For fear of the Infection, unto you
We will refer the manner of his death.
Here seat your selves, and every man set down
His several Censure; which when we survey,
We will give our Sentence, either Life or Death.
I think this be the Land of Golgotha, inhabited by none but by the dead, except some airy shadows, and they 'r si∣lent, the streets are strewed with breathless carcases, as it was in Rome when Marius Silla warred. All that do see me, shun me like the Plague, and shut their doors, sure I am not infectious. Entering the Court, the Guard stood gazing at me, and gave me
free access into the Palace, without demanding whence, or what I came for; the strangeness of their looks and fearful action, makes me imagine that I am transformed: would I could meet but with a Water-spring, to see if I retain my wonted shape. This should be near the Presence: what are these? they should be Lawyers, they are not dumb I'm sure.
What's he?
Some stranger.
How came he in the Guard?
They speak, Isle try if they can hear.
Keep back, who are you? The cause of your ap∣proach so near the King?
Your out-sides speak you noble. Know my Lords, the Cause of my arrival in this Land, is in the search of Princely Radagon, now Son and Heir to the Scicilian King; if ever you did hear of such a Prince, let not fore-passed hate extinguish him, but glad an aged Father with a Son, who now is all the i will∣drone he hath left. They shake their heads and weep: Good Gods I fear they have taken away his life by tyranny.
What stranger's that? what makes him in our Court?
What, are you dumb? Why do you not resolve us?
He is a Subject to Cicillias King, and comes in search of banished Radagon.
How, banished?
I sir, banished. And it was too mild a satisfaction for the base wrongs that I sustained by him: in a small Boat hopeless of help or life, he was put forth to sea by our Command. This you may tell your King, and so be gone.
You could not be so unmerciful, to use a virtuous Prince so cruelly: you durst not so transgress the Law of Kings, to murder him, although your Enemy. I know no cause of his did merit it, but the stern hate of ancient Enmity.
How dare you sir, capitulate the Cause? Go, bid your Master come himself to know, and then perchance we may re∣solve it him.
Be sure he will, thou cruel Homicide, and ask the Cause in such a thundering Language, will make both thee and all that hear it, tremble.
We will answer him as loud, sir, fear it not.
But to our first Affairs: what is your Censure? is Life or Death the Sentence we must give?
Mine is his Life, my Liege.
And so is mine.
Mine is his life, but not his liberty.
Why not his death as well? His fact is Treason.
Suspected, but not proved; therefore it is fit he should be kept close Prisoner, till we hear how the rude multitude do stand affected, for he was deeply seated in their hearts.
We are resolved, let him be straight brought forth,
We will use him with what clemency we may;
I know the Gods, whom Kings should imitate,
Have placed us here to rule, not overthrow.
Justice shall hand in hand with mercy go.
We speak before a King, but now a brother;
If you will yet confess your Guilt and Cause.
That moved you first unto this Forgery,
We may perhaps forgive you; otherwise
There is no other favour but to die.
Ha, ha, ha, to die! I do not think I shall be made so happy, for death's the honest mans felicity, there is no favour that I crave but death; in living here I shall more torments find, but being dead, there ends my misery.
If you will yet confess, we will have mercy.
Mercy, on whom, for what? You are deceived,
It is a thing not in thy power to give.
Mercy's immortal, and to humane eyes
Is never seen till fleshly passion dies.
It seems then sir, you do desire to die?
With full consent, for life's a loathsome vale of misery.
In which thou still shalt live: thy life we give, but doom thee to perpetual banishment: we limit you no time, therefore dispatch. See that he instan•lie depart the Court.
Dost think Isle stay, by all our gods thy Crown and King∣doom shall not hire me to it. Tyrant fare vel, if ever I do return, cities that now stand, shall be heaps of stone.
This foggy Cloud dispersed, I hold it fit some post to the Delphos to the Oracle, to know what shall ensue these Thunder∣claps that threaten such distraction, we our self will see you fur∣nisht
for the Offering. Whom shall we send? Cleanthes? No: you two prepare for your departure presently. What though he was our Brother? it is not fit mistrustful men should live within our Court: what is it to be a King, and stand in awe?
Those that entreat, and may command with fear,
Are fitter to climb up than tarry here.
Stirring so early, Partner, then I see you'll prove a weal∣thy shepherd; watchfulness is the chief star within our Calendar: it were vain to ask you how you affect this life, your forwardness expresses that you like it.
Who can dislike a peaceful happiness? Methinks I never proved a sweeter happiness; in every corner here Content sits smiling: the Mountain tops I make my Morning-walks, the eve∣ning-shades my recreation, and when Nights Queen puts on her gorgeous Robe, I take delight to gaze upon the stars, in which methinks I read Philosophy; and by the Astronomical Aspects I search out Natures secrets, the chief means for the preventing my Lambs prejudice. I tell-you sir, I find in being a shepherd, what many Kings want in their Royalties.
I joy in your content, yet wonder sir, you do frequent such melancholy Walks; I have observed your passions many times, and seen you sit sole companied with thought, as if your passions were your Comforters, I fear some foolish female has entrapped you.
Not any sir, believe it, that's a thing
I thank my stars I ne'er did estimate.
Love that imparadizeth some, to me
Is hell it self, if hell on earth there be.
Blessed be the hour that ever I met with thee,
Not love a woman? have I a second self?
Oh happy, happy man, not love a woman!
I do not yet, assure you.
Nor ever do, if you do love your self; of all things in the world take heed of 'em: I have a brother mad forsooth, for Love. But that I had a mother, I could wish that there were no such things as women are. We shall have such a hoyting here anon, you'll wonder at it. It is Pan's Holiday, the chiefest Festival
the shepherds keep, it is held upon this Green.
I thought as much, belike then that's the cause.
This place is so bedecked and strewn with flowers.
The very same: they come, observe the custom.
Titterus! well met, you are the welcomest man I see to day, the wenches were afraid you'd not have come, and then our Roundelays had all bin spoiled.
Sir, you may thank this man: pray bid him welcome, he's a stranger here.
What Countrey-man?
Scicillia gave me life, on whose fair Promontories I have lived this many years, till Covet to see change, brought me to Thrice, which I affect so well, I would continue.
And welcome.
Welcome,
You're very heartily welcome.
Son, set down thy Hook, and shake it lustily,
Win me the Garland, and I promise thee
Isle give thee two fat Wethers to make merry.
Oh, when I was a young man, I'd a tickled it.
I warrant ye father, for the Cast of the Leg,
The standing Caper, or the Placket Jump,
Let me alone, Isle firk 'em up in faith.
Sir, you'll make one? Nay, no excuse shall serve,
We know you can, and will not be denied.
I shall but shame our Countrymen▪ Will you?
Who I? And it were not to observe the Ceremony,
They should not have me here. I must do somewhat.
Come, you're well matched, strike Music and begin,
We two will sit as Judges.
Nay, you must not refuse it, it is deserved, you have it with a general consent, this shall confirm't.
And this.
And this.
I thank you.
Come, spread the Cloth, and bring away the Meat:
So, so, sit down. Daughter attend the Queen,
It may be thy turn next.
That's a good boy.
NOw does Jolly Janus greet your Merriment;
For since the Worlds Creation,
I never changed my fashion,
It is good enough to fence the Cold:
My Hatchet serves to cut my firing yearly,
My Bowl preserves the Juice of Grape and Barley:
Fire, Wine, and Strong Beer, makes me live so long here,
To give the merry New-year a welcome in.
All the potent Powers of Plenty wait upon
You that intend to be frolic to day:
To Bacchus I commend ye, and Ceres eke attend ye,
To keep encroaching Cares away.
That Boreus blasts may never blow to harm you,
Nor Hymens frosts, but give you cause to warm you.
Old Father Janevere, drinks a Health to all here,
To give the merry New-year a welcome in.
Good Janivere depart: Another time
We will bid thee welcome as befits thy years,
But now our Flocks are young, and should they feel
But the smallest breath from thee sent in a storm,
They would go near to perish, Prithee leave us.
Since you desire my absence,
I will depart this Green,
Tho loath to leave the presence
of such a lovely Queen,
Whose Beauty like the Sun,
melts all my frost away.
And now in stead of Winter,
behold a youthful May.
Titterus? Welcome.
I come, I come, I come.
I go, I go, I go.
Oh hide me from him.
Puff, they are blown away with a Whirlwind:
Thanks gentle Eolus, you have left my Love upon a lofty Pine.
Yes, I shall pine, for I'm like to get no Victuals whilst he is here.
That's not her voice: no, now I see her plain,
It is an Owl in an Ivy-bush.
I'm glad he takes me for an Owl: now if I could but cry like one, ta wit, ta woe.
Oh it is my Love, she says I come to woo, it is true;
Come down, dear Love; or stay, I come to thee.
No, no, no, I come, I come down to thee.
He'll break my neck, if he get up once.
Alas poor heart, how pale and black she looks,
I think she's almost starved, she's black in the mouth!
See, here's a Banquet; come sit down my Love.
I'm glad a this, we shall feed again.
Yet stay: now I remember, those that are kept from vi∣ctuals a long time, must not be cloyed too much for fear they sir∣feit.
I warrant you my Love, I will not feed.
No, do not feed.
Yes, yes, a little.
No, it is dangerous, we will first to sea, and purge the blood that dimns thy rosie cheeks.
Lets fill our bellies, and we shall purge the better.
It is not good to purge on a full stomach.
Come we will embark us in this hollow Tree,
And sail to Jericho. Music, shall we dance?
I, I, we will dance to Jericho.
Know sacred Goddess, these are sent
From fertile Thrice, whose discontent
By noisome Sickness is increased:
But how, or when it shall be ceased,
Their King Pheander craves resolve,
The reason of his Countries grief,
And when they shall regain relief?
The ileful gods with full consent,
Have plagued the Thracian Continent,
Their Court and Country woe shall sing
For the Transgression of their King;
Who against all Right and Piety,
Hath quite expelled pure Chastity:
But for the time when Plagues shall end,
This Schedule to the King I send,
Wherein at large is full expressed
When all your woe shall be redressed.
Content shall keep in Town and Field,
When Neptune from his Waves shall yield
A Thracian Wonder; and as when
It shall be proved amongst Thracian men
That Lambs have Lions to their Guides,
And Seas have neither Ebbs nor Tides;
Then shall a Shepherd from the Plain,
Restore your Health and Crown again.
The Oracle pronounces still obscure;
But what is writ, is truth most sure.
Tho ne'er so hard to you it seem,
Time will make clear what you misdeem.
But we that time shall never live to see.
What Thracian Wonder can the Sea waves yield?
Lambs ne'er will have stern Lions for their guide:
Or when will Seas leave off their Ebbs and Tides?
Never, oh never.
Then ne'er shall Thrice be blessed.
But we will bear this Problem to the King,
And let him know that for his tyranny,
His Subjects suffer this calamity.
Minion, take heed, turn not my proffered Love
By peevishness and folly, to disdain; for if thou dost,
You'll turn me out of all, I know it is the sequel of your words, which I unhappy wreteh must undergo: were every Lamb increased unto a Flock, and every Flock to thousands mule∣tiplied, I must not love you.
You must not?
And worse, I must for ever hate you, if you name but Love again: I must ungrateful be for all the courtesies you have bestowed. Love, or the thought of it, to me is like the Talon of a soaring Hawk striking a silly Dove, it murders me.
So, you are sensible of your own grief, but no other pity,
I am wounded too, but you feel it not.
Where are you wounded, sir?
Even at the heart: I'm wounded for thy Love.
If I could see it bleed, I should believ't.
You would, I thank you heartily for that.
Sure sir, I think you would not fear a wound, cold and decaying nature has made you strike-free, you have no blood to die with, you're now buried in your skins Sear-cloth, and would you warm that monumental Robe at Loves fire in your grave?
Scorned and abused, it is long of Menalchus, go with that hand preserved thee from the wrack of the devouring Billows, that ravenous and merciless assembly of salt Drops, that charity∣ble hand that long hath been the tender Foster-father to thy wants, with that hand now I turn thee off: turn thou thy face no more to any house of mine, Isle burn them all ever they shall co∣ver thee. Thou were my joy, but this thy scornful spite,
Has made me hate where I took most delight.
My sweet Eusanius,
It is his Loss makes me unfortunate, that weighty grief
Followed by mercies, yet were thou the chief;
Where ever thou art, Fate in spite send me hither,
Tho in the arms of Death we meet together.
I loved a Lass, alas my folly, was full of her coy disdaining,
I courted her thus: what shall I sweet Dolly do for thy dear Loves obtaining?
At length I did dally so long with my Dolly, that Dolly for all her faining,
Had got such a mountain above her valler, that Dolly came home complaining.
Oh misery, misery! which way should I turn from thee?
Ha? there's a foolish Lover upon my life, a female heigho in faith: Alas poor heart, why dost thou sit dejected, pretty soul, he is a hard hearted stubborn Clown I warrant him, what ever he is; but I hold him the wiser man for it though: will he not do, filthy churl as he is? poor heart, would I had a heart could pity thee.
What ever you are, sir, my miseries have not deserved your scorn; I do beseech you leave me with my sorrows, for I desire no other company.
Ha? a good face in faith, a special good face, fine Babies in her eyes, those lips speak now methinks, and say, Come kiss me. How now Titterus! the singing Satire against all women, the Madrigal-maker against good faces, Beauties Despiser, are you in contemplation now? I must not turn my tale sure from Shep∣herds Roundelays to Epithilamiums, and Sonnets, and Io's, and Heighos? this were odd if I should, and yet by my troth I think I must for ought I can perceive; that thievish god Cupped that uses to steal hearts, affections, and sighs out of men's bosoms, is now crept into mine, and spite of my proud heart makes me confess, that
Love's a lovely Lad, his bringing up is Beauty,
Who loves him not is mad; for I must pay him duty now I'm sad.
Hail to those sweet eyes, that shine celestial wonder,
From thence do flames arise burns my poor heart asunder, now it fries.
Sir, you are rustic, and no generous spirit to make Calamity your merry Theme. Beseech you leave me.
Cupped sets a Crown upon those lovely Tresses;
Oh spoil not with a frown what he so sweetly dresses.
Isle sit down.
You'll force me then to rise, and fly your folly;
Yet why should you have power to banish me
From this free spreading Air, that I may claim
For mine as well as yours? but it is no matter,
Take this place to ye, where ever you force me go,
I shall keep still my sad Companion, Wo.
Nay then have at you in Prose, if Meter be no Meter for you, you must not leave me thus; And as even till this hour I hated women, and therefore must needs be the honester man, I will not stay you for any ill, by my hook and troth la: And now do not I know what to say to her neither, but you have a good Face, white Neck, a dainty Cheek, soft Hand, and I love you: if my Nurse had ever taught me better language, I could afford it you.
That very word will feather my slow feet, and make me fly from you. I hate all love, and am in love with nought but hate and scorn, sorrows and griefs, I am exposed to them, tur∣ned from a Charity that fed me once, to naked poverty, thrust in∣to the mouth of Fortunes battery, to stand all malice that she can shoot at mortal.
What heart could be so cruel? hand so ungentle?
Old Antimon's, till this hour courteous,
Now most unkind and spiteful.
Why then, has Love and Hate mistaken their Quivers to day? He that was courteous to women is now turned unkind, and I that ever halted am struck most pitifully in love with 'em. Here, take all the store I have to defend thee from common no∣cessities, to feed and lodge: I will be thus bountiful, though I never have better of thee while I live, and I am sorry I am no better furnished; if thou remain in these fields, Isle lend thee enough to stock thee with a Flock, and give thee day enough for
payment too. He that should have said I would a bin thus boun∣tiful to day morning, I would have said by this time he had bin a witch. Fare thee well, I have some strange meditations, that I desire to be alone my self now, some of 'em must out again howsoever.
Whither shall I go to escape away from folly?
For now there's love I know, or else'cis melancholy. heigh, heigho.
Yonder lies the Snow, but my heart cannot melt it:
Love shoots from his how, and my poor heart hath felt it. heigh, heigho.
WHat news from Delphos? what says the Oracle?
Wherefore is Thrice thus pestered with these plagues?
My Liege, we have performed your dread Com∣mand, yet not command so much, as our desire did make our te∣dious travels to seem short, until we heard Apollo's ireful Doom; but then.
What then? nay quick, go on I say, we long to hear the Oracles Decree.
Having pronounced the gods were all displeased
With woeful Thrice, she said our sorrows spring
Was caused by the Transgressions of our King,
Who against the Law of Equity and Right
Had from his sight abandoned Chastity.
But for the time when Plagues and Woes shall end,
Deliver this unto your Thracian King:
Till this be full accomplished, it is in vain
Ever to hope, or seek redress again.
reads. Content shall keep in town and field,
When Neptune from his waves, &amp;c.
Pish, these moral Mysteries are incredulous, nor can they con∣tradict the will of Kings: Comets portend at first blaze, but take
effect within the bosom of the destinies, so Oracles at Delphos, though foretold, are shaped and finished in your Councel-house; and yet I charge you both upon your lives, let not the commons understand so much, lest several censures raise a Mutiny: It is death to show a discontented brow, but smooth your over-bur∣thened grief with smiles, there's no disaster that afflicts a Clime but it contains some limitation.
Lets wait the time, and with domestic care,
Strive to maintain those Honours we have won.
Lets stand upon our guard, I fear some Treason.
Speak Villains quickly, what means this noise?
My duty, mighty King, made me presume
To press thus boldly to your Highness presence,
To bid you make prevention against your foes,
They are in number numberless to tell.
And as I guess are of Cicillia.
What Trumpet's this? is it our enemy?
One from the enemy.
Quickly the News, that we may give an Answer.
My Royal Master, the Cicillian King.
We know your Message sir, in that one word:
In naming him we understand the Cause.
Desires to parley with your Majesty.
We will parley in no language, but in Steel:
This shall maintain the Justice I have done,
Against my Daughter, and base Radagon;
Whose hateful name when I but think upon, adds vigour to my heart to take Revenge. Be gone, and tell your King for his pre∣sumption, we will lash him from our Land with iron rods, and drag him at our stirrup through the streets.
Prepare for battle, when this Answer's known.
We will meet him in the mid-way: say we come.
Your Grace were better parley with the foe, and take a Truce, my Liege, for certain days; let your pretence be search of Radagon, which proposition they'll consent unto, then have we time to fortify our Land, and muster stronger powers to make resistance; for as we are, we are but a handful to a multitude.
Were they ten times as many, and we fewer, they should
not rest one night within our Bounds, till I have sated my revenge in blood: Have we so many foreign Conquests won, and shall we fear a Broil in our own Land? our powers shall march and issue forth the Towns, Armies shall grapple, and the earth shall groan to bear the burden of Wars horror.
Come let's on; base Fear's the brand of slaves,
They that die nobly, shall have honoured graves.
Did he receive our Message with such scorn?
With such a barbarous and proud disdain, he scarce would suffer me to utter it; but bid me back return, and tell your Grace he'd lash you from his Land with whips of Steel, and when he had taken you Prisoner hand to hand, he'd drag you at his stirrups through the streers.
I'm glad they are so valiant: then they come.
The voice of Arm, Arm, hurried through the Court as swift as Lightning, and their clattering Arms put on in haste, made such a horrid noise, as if a voice had issued from the Clouds, and all the way pursued me; methinks my ears still tingle with the sound.
Courage Cicilians, let this be your honour, they are no Cowards that you fight withal; for they have been approved in foreign Lands.
Let'em be what they will, we stand prepared, if they be bold, we are as resolute; if valiant, we undaunted and resolved. Let it be seen which of our swords this day carves dee∣pest wounds upon the breast of Thrice.
In equal balance since our fortunes lye,
Let each man strive to conquer, vanquished die.
I like your forward spirits, and commend'em: in all our Troops I cannot spy a man whom I mislike or dread; and for my part, as you have seen a burning Taper fall and burn most bright when it begins to fade, so shall you see me in declining Age. Methinks I cannot hear their Drums to thunder, nor their hoarse brazen pipes breath forth a sound, to publish their defiance.
Does not that Echo issue from the town?
These are no braving Tones.
Yet nearer, nearer still.
Beat up our Drums, and drown their Hornets sound.
How now, what are these?
Mummers my Lord, I think. Set down your Drums, we will play for all your Crowns; I am sure you know me, you have too much cause.
Behold great Sir, my Ensigns folded up, my Drums un∣braced, and all those instruments that should encourage War, quite put to silence; there's not a hand in all our warlike Host that's armed for opposition or defence.
Is this the man would lash us from his Land with whips of Steel?
Where are the horses, to whose curled Tails we must be bound and dragged along the streets?
Can you, my Lord, bear these injurious brands?
This would put life in statues carved with hands,
Much more encourage Cowards; we that late
Persuaded you to peace, upon our knees
Entreat you to command your Ensigns wave,
And by our ancient Honours, which our foes
Cannot without a blushing cheek deny,
We will make'em know they do defy their Victors.
He forfeits his Allegiance that again presumes to motion War: I wish my sorrows shadows, but alas they are too real, too essential, they dwell not in the face and outward brow, but have their hahitation here within, where they torment me, and shall ever till I behold Cicilia's Son secured, and my fair Daughter fast closed in my arms, those two poor innocent and spotless souls whom my remorseless rage and tyranny hath sold to all afflictions
Speak Pheander, are not-those passions merely counter∣feit? Do they proceed from Fear and Cowardice, that thus thou fold'st thy warlike Ensigns up, and without stroke of battle give the day? Or which I rather deem, from Policy and Matchevil∣lian cunning?
Neither Prince: but mere repentance for my late mis∣deed, which is so heinous in the eyes of Heaven, it seems beyond
their pardon; therefore now in expiation of that horrid act, and to inflict due penance on my self, all Regal ornaments of State put off Awe and Command that wait on Majesty. I henceforth vow a lasting Pilgrimage, either to bring the Prince thy Son alive, and tender him to safety in thine arms withal, with her fair Beau∣tie in rich Thrice, robed of so rare a Jewel; Or if dead, end the remainder of my afflicted hours in exile and forsaken solitude, in deserts scare discovered.
A sad Vow.
To make which good, to thee Cicillia's King, in part of recompense to thy great wrongs, I here resign all State and Em∣per up, my Crown, my Sceptre▪ and Majestic Orb, until the Truce prefixed be quite expired; And charge you all on your Al∣legiance, Lords, that you the Faith and Homage sworn to me, pay to this King in all just Loyalty. This Pilgrims weed be now my Robe of State, no other gay Trim will Pheander wear; my Sword, the Sword of Justice born before now, is now no better than a Palmers Staff, by which I will do justice on my self in humble pe∣nonce; and in stead of Gold, and Cups of hollowed Pearl, in which I used to quaff deep Healths of rich Pomegranate Wine, this Scallop shall be now my Drinking cup to sip cold water. I am now, Cicillia, a man reformed; for lo I die to State,
Live only to Devotion. Lords adieu,
These are my arms you Kingdom to pursue.
I hear your Princes mind, and hope his vows are out of his mere zeal and penitence which I accept, will you accord with him, and promise your true Fealties to us?
L. As we to him were, we are now to you, as loyal and as faithful, it was his pleasure, and we submit to both, acknow∣lodging his wrongs to you, and take them at the best, far above all forgiveness.
L. You cannot boast of any Conquest won,
To gain a kingdom, and loose such a Son.
This to us is a full satisfaction, and my Lords, we know how to require your gratitude, the Regency by him assigned to us we in our bounty reassign to you, be your own Lords, excepting still the fealty due to your Sovereign at his back return, in whose forced absence should you use our aid, we shall be your Protector.
Noble in all his Arts is Scicilly.
Billet our Soldiers in such Neighboring-towns, where Victual and best Harbour may be had; withal Proclaim not the least violence be done to any Thracian, they are ours now, tho under your command. Here was a happy War fought without blows, yet no dishonour in it, he that endures such War within, can be no coward sure.
In all designs this still must be confessed,
He that himself subdues, conquers the best.
Whore's Sophos?
Here my Lord.
Has our command been well effected that we gave in charge?
Great King, it has.
Our purse and people are at thy dispose, leave an army of the stoutest men Africa affords: we love thee, thou art honest. In Africa the Moors are only known, and never yet searched part of Christendom; nor do we levy Arms against their Religion, but like a Prince and Royal Justicer, to patron Right, and supplant Tyranny.
We are in this as Gods, and in like care,
Should punish Ignomy, and Virtue spare.
They gave a partial measure that subscribed Africa within so small and strict a limit, making great Europe boundless. Royal Sir, give me but leave to go with Sophos to the Thracian Wars, that I may speak your Fame unto the world, and where you are but heard of, make you famous. If ever Fame or Valour crown my youth with the least Honours, all my services Isle dedi∣cate to you and my fair Mistress, Wonder of her Sex, whose beau∣tie shines like to a Star amongst so many clouds of her own Na∣tion. Lillia Guida's name shall be as much in Christendom, as Greekish Hellen's was. God sir, speak for me.
'Thad bin my first request, but that I feared
It would offend your Mistress: she being pleased,
Upon my knee I do entreat for you.
To show my willingness. Isle be the third my self, and humbly crave it may not be denied; I do not love to be attend∣ed on in a wrought Night-cap, obeyed with quilted calves, give me a man that Agues cannot quake, nor fire tremble. Pardon me Princely Father, it is your spirit speaks, I am your own, and by that privilege become your Suitor.
Our Daughter has prevailed, Sophos your ear.
To give encouragement unto thy hopes, receive this fa∣for; may it prove a charm unto thy arm, and double puissance add unto thy strength, when any danger's extant.
This it was that I long since suspected, this shall prove his tragic Fate, and ruin to her love.
You grace me beyond merit; while I live I will make known your honours, rank your name amongst the bravest Dames of Christendom; and when I view this Scarf, it will infuse un∣daunted vigour, make me overcome impossibilities, there easy to desire.
Treason, did say?
Against your Majesty, dishonour of your fair and beau∣tuous Child, their motions, gestures, looks, and conference I have observed and watched with jealous eyes, and find 'em all corrupt. Lack, my Liege, behold before your face their amorous fire breaks forth into bright flames, is it not apparent? his suit to leave the Court, her seconding his Treason with a Boon and Fa∣for too. You thought it was his desire to go to Wars, believe it not, there's no such man in him: It is some secret Plot they have contrived to fly away. Prevent it speedily.
Thou hast infused a spirit into my breast I never yet did feel: strange impudence! Ambition never heard of in a Peasant! A slave that neither knows his birth nor breeding, should thus presume for to seduce a Princess! Hence with that Traitor, let him have a death as horrid as his crime.
How's this?
A Traitor?
I Traitor: Traitor, sirrah.
Sirrah, you lie, this shall maintain't against thee or any dares affirm this Title. Mount us, great King, upon some softy spire, where is but room for two, place him amidst an host in this
just Cause to clear my honour, and her innocence: Isle pierce tho∣rough armed Guards, and make my way through Halberds, Pikes, and deadly killing shot, break through many Battles, sally tho∣rough whole Squadrons, and make him like a confused lump that ne'er had form. Guard me you sacred Powers, lest I forget time, presence, place, and on this ugly slave commit an out-rage.
Kill, and stop his fury: insolent boy, how dares thy violence offer it self in blows, and we in presence? Had we no other cause, this were enough to take away thy Life. Away with him.
Stay yet, dear sir, as ever I deserved grace at your hand, hear me first speak: Behold him bow to you, that in your Cause hath made great Kings to kneel, and tender you submission; for my sake let him not suffer death, it is undeserved, I will engage all that I have on earth that he is loyal; let not false surmise, suspect, and jealousy beget belief to wrong your Princely thoughts. In killing him, you make me guilty, and a murderer; for I first brought him hither, to my hands he did commit his life, being a child, when on the Plain of Thrice I took him up, let him not loose it at a holy Altar, and Princes Courts are such, and should maintain as divine Privilege as Sanctuary:
For Kings that circle in themselves with death,
Poison the Air in which themselves draw breath.
Blessed be that Orator: Gracious Father.
Let her not speak, her words confirm suspect: bear her away unto her private chamber, there let her be confined a prisoner, till we determine further.
It shall be done.
Sophost, his life is thine, but not his freedom.
Durance? Worse then death.
No banishment save Africa; make all the world thine own.
The Kings all mercy.
Isle Proclaim as much.
I but my Lord, what safety for my life, which he so much hath threatened?
I scorn to touch thy life, thou timorous slave,
But Traitors are all Cowards: Fare thee well,
And my deer Foster-father, wanting whom
I loose my better part; Thus they thrive,
That cannot flatter Kings, feel death alive.
Nay Sophos, be not sad, it is thy pretended good that we pursue, the Girl was wanton, and the Boy was young, and Love is kindled by desire as soon in one poor minute as an age of time: we banished him that she might fancy thee, whom we in∣tend shall have her, it is true as we are royal, if you please for to accept of her.
It is an honour that I shall never merit, to spouse a
Princes of her exellency;
For I have nothing worthy her affection,
She cannot give consent to love a man,
That's banished from his Land and native soil:
I have no titles for to honour her,
And that's a thing that women most affect.
Sir, you inherit virtue, that's a thing no mortal can restore, all other State we will invest you with, the crown of Thrice shall be your own, or cost ten thousand lives, our sable▪ Ensigns never yet before displayed beyond the Mediterean Sea, shall now be seen to fly, men have livers there pale as their faces, and when we appear, will frighted run from such a Golden soil; our home-bred fear have end, foreign soes must be our conquest now.
Come my best Sophos, ever the next moon spring,
My child shall call thee husband, Thrice her King.
COntent shall keep in town and field, &amp;c.
I know not in what sense to apprehend it,
So intricate this matter seems to me;
Yet in these latter lines I read a comfort.
Then shall a shepherd from the plains,
Restore your Health and Crown again.
There is a sign of truth already past, for when Apollo did pro∣nounce this doom, I was a king, and did enjoy my Crown, and I must be deposed before restored. But then the man, I there's the doubt of all, for ever since I took this Pilgrims habit, I have wan∣dered up and down to find this shepherd; wandered indeed, for in the search of him I have lost my self, fiting upon the plain, I saw a face of such surpassing beauty, that Jove and Nature should they both contend, to make a shape of their mixed purity, could not invent a sky-born form so beautiful as she, be she a more∣tall, and a shepherdess, her beauty may become a Princes Court. Why may not I wedding this shepherds Queen, beget an heir that may restore my Crown? Isle lay my life the Oracle meant so, the stars from earthly humours gain their light, our humours from their lights possess their powers: but now the means for to obtain this prize, Isle send a private messenger to Court, to bid Pallatio with a well Armed-troop, at such a certain hour-to meet me here, and lie in secret ambush about the house.
I will conceal my self, and watch a time,
To bear away this Wonder of our Clime.
Oh stay, oh turn, oh pity me, that sighs, that sues for love of thee,
Oh lack I never loved before, if you deny, Isle ne'er love more.
No hope no help, then wretched I, must loose, must lack, must pine, and die,
Since you neglect when I implore,
Farewell hard, Isle ne'er love more,
Here's a sight gives a fresh wound unto my love-sick heart, to think a man that was reputed wise, should loose himself in a Dedalion maze, and run mad for a woman, woman that's the cause, it is indeed happy remembrance in searching out his wound, I have cured my self, shall I see my brother wits caught in a purse-net, and run my head into the same noose, then count
me for a Woodcock; no, I am now the man I was, and will still say,
There is not any wise man, that fancy can a woman,
Then never turn your eyes on a thing that is so common;
For be they foul or fair,
They tempting devils are, since they first fell,
They that love do live in Hell, and therefore men beware.
What a distraction's this? was ever seen so strange a dotage, not in him alone, but it is in general? that did not grief usurp too much upon a heart suppressed, it were mirth would move to laughter.
This is no Louse sure, I know him not,
Yet I mistrust the hanging of his head,
Isle note him further; it is a handsome fellow.
This habit is most frequent in this place, Isle were it for fashion sake, 'tmay be a means to gain a sight of the fair Shep∣herdess, whose beauty fills the Clime with wonderment.
Alas poor man, he's troubled too in mind,
Would I could over-hear him: how he stands!
I know not where to lye, and it grows late, I have not since I entered on these Plains, seen any creature that has humane sense. A woman first! good luck and be thy will.
Why kneel you, sir?
Not to ask blessing, Sweet,
That were a foul disgrace unto a Virgin.
For ought you know I am a Mother, sit.
Would you were mine. Please you, Isle make you one.
I thank your love sir, but I am one already.
Then my suit's at an end; yet one word more.
What is it, sit? I'm in haste.
No more but this, nay in your ears, lest you mis-construe me.
So close and privately, then I perceive I have been too neglectful, shallow fool! that having had such opportunity, so long continuance, place, and privacy, durst never utter thy af∣fections. When I beheld her first I fancied her, and more because she favoured my dead wife, whose memory I still mourn: but since
she's gone, rather then loose regeneration, I could wed with her; she's fair, and may be honest, though the world deem 'em Con∣trarieties: I'm seen, and must go on.
Menalchus! you come as wished for: here's a stranger, Sir, that wants reposure, will you for my sake allow him enter∣tain; the night draws on, and it were unhospitable to deny him, you shall command as great a curtsy.
I doubt it not. To me y' are welcome sir, such homely Cates as a poor Cottage yields, you shall be sure to taste. Shep∣herds in this comes nearest to the Gods; for they allow the small∣lest hospitality, witness when Bawcis feasted Jupiter:
For that Isle interrupt you, you shall both before you part from hence, taste of our cheer. Whence is that aged man? pray question him, let him not go before he have relief.
Come nearer, father, it is a great wonder to see a Pilgrim wander in these parts. What Countrey-man?
A Roman, gentle sir, one that hath vowed in weary pile∣grimage, to spend the poor remainder of his days; to such you know all places are alike.
How long have you continued in this Land?
But a small time.
You have not seen the Court?
Not yet, fair sir.
What should we do at Court? we have a King knows no Religion, heathens, infidels inhabit there; the poor live most secure, for as they know no good, they fear no ill: but we must not decipher. Come sit down.
Fair Mistress.
Good sir sit, this is my place. Menalchus seat you. Fie, fie, complement.
Here's no variety, but such as it is, if you can feed, y' are welcome, shepherds fare.
We thank you.
Sir, fall to, y' are sad methinks.
Not sad, but somewhat grieved to think report should scandalise so sweet a Continent, not only Foreigners, but Thra∣cians born, hate and abhor the Clime and Government, saying, it is infectious, and your King a mis-believing Tyrant, infamous.
Where heard you this?
All Thrice proclaims as much.
I cannot tell: but trust me sir, it is thought it was a cruel deed, not like a King, much less a Father, having but one child to banish her, and for so small a fault.
What was the offence?
A customary thing, I cannot well appropriate a name.
Is it so slight? and do you shame to utter't?
Your presence must excuse me, otherwise
I should have found a Title.
Then Isle speak. It was so heinous, and so wild a fact, the King could not in justice pardon it, it was a disgrace to him, shame to her Sex, dishonour to her self and Progeny. What gre∣la infamy unto a King, than for to blot his name with bastardy?
You speak well in the defence of Virtue, Sweet; but if such defaults should be so punished, we should have but few wo∣men in our kingdom: Admit the Princess in her wanton blood committed such an error, do but think what frailty is, the baits, nay more, it is thought that they were man and wife; if it were so, he could be little better than a Tyrant.
A Tyrant, nay á villain, murderer. Pray pardon me, I must and will have leave to speak my conscience, should I see the King, I'd tell him to his face he were a Tyrant. Say she did err, he was the cause on it, not suffering her to wed where she did love: What may his Subjects think, he being dead for want of Issue, they shall servile be to Turks and Infidels, if worse than he can any where be found?
Dotard forbear, thou hast already spoke more than thy life can ever satisfy. If that the King had known they had bin married, questionless he would have been more merciful; but that rests in suspicion, his sentence was pronounced as they were guilty, not as man and wife, and then what punishment can be too great? his supposed ill was so much lenity, to live had been to die a lingering death, for reputation is the life of honour, and that once lost, the Mother hates the child, curses the man she did commix withal, and like a shame-fac'd Felon, seeks to shun the face of every one that knows her guilt.
Admiredst of all women, now I see
There is much Virtue lives in poverty.
And yet methinks the mothers shame, is not to be com∣pared
unto the injury the child sustains; for she receives her sorrows by consent, but the poor infant guiltless of the fact, grown to maturity, shall bear the brand of Bastard by his birth, be dispossessed of all inheritance due to the Seed that's sown in holy wedlock; if a curse belong unto the issue of base lusts, it is given to the child for to bestow on those that did beget him, sure I think who ever he was that wronged so fair a Dame, as your Kings Daughter, could be no true Prince, but some base upstart that deluded her, under a fained title.
Slave thou lie.
Had you ever a Mother sir?
I cannot tell. Unhand me.
For my sake,  or if there be a woman in the world whom you affect, in her name I conjure ye let my tears assuage your just moved anger, it will discredit me, endanger you, if you should strike him here, Isle give you reason.
This is some fallery, it cannot be.
Now by my holy vow what I prescribe I will approve, I know you love this woman, the revelation of Celestial Orbs, the Aspects and influence of heavenly planets do direct my skill, by Palmistry and Physiognomy. I have declared to kings accidents past, portents to come, and told to what event present designs should run, what should I make experiments of Art on him that not believes it?
Troth I do.
Then reconcile your self unto this man, let him by no means use to visit her, for in the hour of his nativity, some powerful working star was in conjunction with too forward Venus, take him from her, and all the Auxillary heavenly helps, that may give Physic to a Love-sick heart, Isle invoke to be benevolent, and ever too morrow sun, she shall be yours.
See sir, he comes towards you.
Sir, for my rash offence I'm sorry.
What would ye more good sir?
If you desire a further satisfaction, you shall have it.
How?
Thus.
It is accepted.
This device took well. Now to my plot.
I fear you are not friends yet.
Who not we, why should you think so? look you, we embrace, shake hands, nay more, we will be bed-fellows, and early in the morn revisit you.
Where lies the palmer? Gone, and take no leave.
Oh fear not him, he is provided for. Come sir, take leave and part.
Good rest to both, there is a fire kindled in my breast, I have not felt a flame this twenty years, betwixt these two, I stand in a dilemma, not knowing which to fancy or forsake, so equal my heart doth stand affected.
That's she, Isle not be seen.
I am resolved, since from them both I am freed thus,
Isle conclude he that first speaks shall speed.
That's I.
I.
Help, help.
It is in vain to call.
Oh would this hour might be my Funeral.
A Glass, a glass, a glass, Isle trust my face no more in the fair water, it is not bright enough to show me in my smugness, reach a glass.
A Looking-glass?
A Looking-glass I say.
You shall sir presently, there's one stands under my bed.
Why that's a Jordan, fool.
So much the better father, it is but making water in it, and then you may behold your sweet Physiognomy in the clear streams of the river Jordan.
I smell twill be a match.
If you smell a match, take heed of your nose, for a little thing will set it a fire.
How sits my suit? is it not spruce and neat?
A most impertinent suit, I assure you.
She cannot choose but love me now, I'm sure old Mono∣phone ne'er courted in such clothes, were it not best I should leave off some part of this my bravery, lest appearing suddenly in this bright splendour, the wenches overcome, and ravished with my sight, fall at dissention, and so go bi'th ears about me.
It was well remembered, that in any case look you put off some of those glittering Weeds, until you see your Mistress, all the Maids will be stark mad to see you; do but mark when they behold you, how they'll fight for you, you'll hardly scope their fin∣gers I'm afraid.
I, say thou so? here do thou wear 'em then,
And give 'em me when Mariana comes.
Yes marry will I, if you can, overtake me,
Isle court her first my self. Father, farewell.
Nay, but.
I shoot at no such Butts. Father, farewell.
Oh villain, slave, I have sold half my Flocks.
To buy these Clothes, and now am cheated.
See if the Rogue has not sent company to laugh at me: if Titte∣rus should see me in this shape, he would make a Ballad on it. Isle after him, and if I catch the Rascal, Isle say nothing.
Yet Beauty of these fields be less obdure,
And stay his laboring brains of that great toil
In which it travels for thee.
Love a mad-man?
If he be mad, it is you have made him so.
Can you not fancy your own workmanship?
Will you not cure him whom you helped to kill?
Were his hurts made in the body, I have helping herbs and such choice simples, as should cure his wounds; no shepher∣dess knows better than my self how to restore him.
But where that Herb or Science can ye find,
That hath the virtue to restore the mind?
Mind; he minded you too much, the more fool he,
That man's mad that minds any of you all;
For you are, let me see,
Foolish, idle toys. that Nature gave unto us,
But to curb our joys, and only to undo us;
For since Lucretias fall, there are none chaste at all:
Or if perchance there be, one in an Empory,
Some other malady makes her far worse than she.
Out upon ye all.
'I were too much to tell the follies that attend ye,
He must love you well that can but discommend ye;
For your deserts are such, man cannot rayl too much:
Nor is the world so blind, but it may eas'ly find,
The body or mind tainted in woman kind.
Oh, the devil take you all.
Have you now done?
Done? 'Sfoot, if I could find words enough, and bad enough, I'd rail at you all till tomorrow morning.
If ye should, Isle have the last word.
I have been silent yet, vex me no more:
For if I once begin, Isle make thee mad too,
And send thy Wits a wool-gathering,
After thy brothers.
What the devil are these women made of?
Do not think I would surcease my suit,
But for this interruption.
Is there no valley, nor no mountains top
Free from these Clamours? You see we are intercepted:
But for these, this should have been the place.
Let's watch a fitter time, and spy a place of more con∣veniency.
It is agreed: All friends.
Till then.
Think you I meant otherwise?
No.
Well then.
Oh father, well overtaken.
It is well you are returned sir, I was coming,
I was even coming for you? How now, what are these?
Receive this stranger to your fellowship,
A partner and a brother, that desires a life retired
And if my genius prompts me not amiss,
He will deserve our Loves.
However sir, to me he's welcome,
Chiefly for your sake my love I tender.
Pray know this man, this is the jovailest shepherd in all Thrice.
His Aspect speaks for him. Sir, I desire to be known
Better to you, and you fair Dame, whose beauty adds more
Lustre to these fields, then all that summer Flora can produce.
And these plains much honoured by your presence.
Receive a welcome too of Antimon.
And I his son Sir, welcome good partner;
Nay good sir, I crave less of your curtsy,
And more of your acquaintance.
Since we are met by chance so luckily,
Let us proceed unto our countries pastimes,
To give this courteous stranger entertain.
I, good father, Let's not loose our sports in any case:
Whom shall we crave to call upon the Queen.
That office shall be mine, stay my return:
Now if the Palmer do but keep his word,
I shall enjoy what I so long have wished.
Ha, what sad object's this? How came thou wounded?
Sure some sheep has bit him.
Speak how came thou hurt?
In rescue of our Queen, basely surprised.
Surprised? by whom?
By Thrice his King, who Pilgrim-like wrapped in a russet weed, taking advantage when she was alone, has with a private ambush, stole her hence.
To the Court-gates let us pursue the Ravisher, his Court and all the powers that he can raise, shall not protect him. Plague upon his craft: Is this his skill in Physiognomy? Worthy friend, let me but call you so, and let our strife be buried in our loves: The Cause removed, let the effect thus die: and as our hands, so let our hearts unite to take revenge on this injurious king.
Sir, what is yet scarce man, my heart shall ripen,
Isle stretch beyond my years and power of strength,
But Isle assist you in this enterprise:
Let's muster all the shepherds to our aid,
And fetch her back per force.
In the mean time, be it your charge to cure this
Wounded Swain, that sought to rescue her.
Isle use my best of skill.
Old as I am,
Isle go along, and let my Mistress know,
The King of Thrice makes Antimon his foe.
If I light on him handsomely, Isle have a bout with him at Quarter-staff.
One thing let me entreat, to draw my frantic brother to the field, inform him it is Serena is stolen hence, to prove if either terror of the Wars, his Mistress loss, or sight of death and blood, can win him to his wits.
Persuaded well.
What's he will take that charge?
Marry that will I, let me alone with him,
Isle put it in his pate, I cannot say his brains,
Because he has none: Isle fetch him presently.
Whom shall we make our General, and Leader of this Rabble?
Who but your self shall we impose so great a Charge upon?
Rather bestow it on this noble youth.
That warlike Charge would not become my years,
I shall be proud to be your Soldier, sir.
Give me my Arms, Isle fetch her back again.
Give you more Legs, you'll ne'er o'retake her else.
Isle leap into the Saddle of the Moon,
And tie two Stars unto my heels, like Spurs;
Isle make my warlike Lance of a Sun-beam,
And mounted on some strange Bucephalus,
Thus will I overthrow my Enemy.
This it is to keep mad-men company, that has not the wit to know his friends from his foes; but we shall have your brains beat in again.
Sirrah, take the Moon, and place it me upon the Axle∣tree, Isle mount on horse-back straight.
The Moon's not up yet, sir, some three hours hence you shall be sure to have her.
How know you that, sir?
Well enough sir, it is a shepherd that keeps her,
And he's called The Man in the Moon.
Isle fetch a sheep-skin then to make a Drum,
Ta, ra, ranta, ra, tan, tara, ran tan.
He has possessed him well, let him go on.
Now courage, Fellow-soldiers, and let's try
To fetch her back, or in her quarrel die.
Is it possible the number of the Swains
Should be so many?
Full five hundred strong.
What's their pretence?
That's yet unknown, my Lord, unless it be to have their Queen again.
How should they know it was we that stole her thence?
Belike the Swains that sought to rescue her, heard some one name the King; no other cause could give intelligence, it was done so private.
What should we fear? Let's meet 'em in the field,
Were their Force trebled o'er, when we appear
They'll fly like Hares that fear the Lions frowns.
How might we do for to behold the Rebels?
They lye so low entrenched beyond the hill that fronts the Castle-gate, that no Prospect about the house can yield the least survey.
Let's Parley with 'em then, so we may hear what they pretend, and view their Regiment.
Here is a Herald to the same effect arrived at Court.
Go, bring him in, we will hear what brave Defiance they have sent.
Now sir, the Prologue to this bloody Tragedy.
I am a Herald, come to tell the King,
That he has done a most mischievous thing:
We had but one fair Ewe amongst our Lambs,
And he has stolen her, with his wolfish Rams;
For which our Shepherds vow by force of Arms,
To fetch her back, kill all, but do no harm:
But if you'll set her free, they bid me say,
They'll take her home, and so make Holiday.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
It seems they are not angry at my words, because they laugh, I feared they'd draw their swords.
Tell 'em we render thanks for their good mirth,
And would entreat a Parley, if they'll come
And meet us here under the Castle-wall.
You would entreat 'em fairly for to come?
I thought as much. Go you along with him, and tell their General what you heard us say.
I shall. Come, show me to your General.
Will you in person parley with the Rout?
Why not?
It is dangerous, for fear the Swains,
Not knowing what belongs to Law of Arms,
Being once crossed, should offer violence.
It is well advised: Pastatio bid our Guard
Be near our person, bring up all our Troops
Close to the Gates, that if occasion serve,
They may at unawares make issue forth,
And cut off all the Reár. See it performed,
I have a trick new crept into my brain,
And if my Policy deceive me not,
Shall bring these several bodies to one head,
And crown all my Designs with full event.
They are coming, keep your Ranks.
Which is the General?
This.
We would exchange some private words with him.
You are deceived; I better understand
The Name and Honour of a General,
Than to disgrace it against the Law of Arms;
Though we are not so expert as those men
That daily practice 'em, yet you shall find
We will make a shift to right our injuries.
'S death! where learnt he this Discipline?
Are Shepherds now become such Martialists?
I see I must dissemble.
If you have ought to say, speak publickl
No private Protestations, Bribes, nor Fears,
Have power to convert our Resolutions.
We need not to capitulate our Wrongs,
They are too apparent. Let us see our Queen,
And if she have received the smallest wrong,
A general ruin shall overspread the Land;
We will fire thy Castles, burn up all thy Towns,
And make a Desolation of thy people:
You cannot be so shallow, as to think I took her with a lustful appetite? This honoured Badge proclaims that lust is past. Our seizing her was motive to your good, if you conceive it. List, and Isle explain it: Within our Land our foes are resi∣dent, Scicilla's King, under whose Government these many years you have been Servitors. The reason this: When he did first in∣vade, we found our self too weak to make resistance, and under show of satisfaction we did resign to him our Dignity, pretending search of Radagon his son; which he accepted, and did back return to Scicillia, leaving Deputy to Govern here. And though Pallatio bore the name of Rule, it was by his per∣mission. Do but weigh the servile yoke of foreign Govern∣meant, what danger may ensue, what privilege you loose in Thrice, if we be dispossessed, the time of Truce expired, and he's returned to take possession? For without his son, our Crown and Kingdom both are forfeited into his hands; which yet we may prevent, if you'll agree to join your Force with ours, and back expulse him. We will not only grant your Queen her liberty, but we will enlarge your former Privilege; give you choice of State, Honour, and Dignity, make you Lords and Knights, and in remembrance of the Shepherds Wars, add a new Festival; which at your charge shall yearly be performed. Consider on it.
Happy Position! thanks great Justicer,
Occasion puts revenge into my hand,
To think that I should be so fortunate,
To be Commander of a Band of men,
To war against my father, blessed Event.
What's your reply?
Good General, consent,
I have a foolish desire to be a Lord.
And what shall I be?
You shall be a Lord too, and if you'll be quiet,
There are a great many mad Lords.
What answer do you give?
Were it in me
To give an answer, you should soon prevail,
But it is a General voice; for my own part
My service, and my self I offer to you.
And so do I.
And I.
So do we all.
A King that's thus held up can never fall.
Draw all your force within the Castle Walls,
It is large and spacious, and will well contain um.
This night we will feast, to morrow shall be seen
Your loves to us.
Ours to the shepherds Queen.
IS all our Army in a readiness,
prepared for battle if occasion serve?
They are, my Lord.
This day our truce takes end, the king returned,
And we expect our Sons delivery.
Pray heaven it be so happy, but I fear
A worse intent, for all the way he comes
The Commons rise, shepherds and silly Swains
That never were inured to carry swords,
Take A rms and follow him.
What's that to us?
Did he not make a vow ne'er to return,
Until he found my Son? may be he comes
For to invest us King, and offer sacrifice
Unto the Gods, and so conclude this weary Pilgrimage.
You speak, my Liege, as you your self would do,
But he that dared to banish 'em,
Think you he fears to violate an oath?
It is ill to trust a reconciled foe,
Be still in readiness, you do not know
How soon he may assault us.
Thou speak but well, it is good to doubt the worst,
We may in our belief be too secure;
As King's forbidden to condemn the just,
So Kings for safety must not blame mistrust.
Why is this haste?
To bid you haste to Arms,
The foe comes on, the Sentinels fall off,
The Scouts are posting up and down the Plain,
To fetch in all the stragglers. Thraces King
Has break his vow, and seeks by force of Arms
For to expulse you.
Will ye yet give credit
To a Tyrants oath?
By you bright Sphere I vow, and if there be
A greater punishment for perjury
Reigning on earth, then is the conscience sting,
I will inflict it on this perjured man.
You spirits resolute against fear and death,
You that have hither to maintained your being
In equal power, like Rivals to the Gods,
Now show your Valour, let us not debate
Our wrongs like women; for the wrath of Kings
Is like an angry Cloud, swollen big with fire,
Soft charge. that speaks revenge in thunder; hark they charge.
Beat a defiance See, the signal's given,
Who dies in this just cause, shall live in heaven.
The shepherds give the first assault, and beat off some of the Scicillian Lords.
The fury of this Boy will overthrow
All my Designs; twice since the Fight begun,
In spite of my best A•t, he has unhorsed
My Royal Father, and the last Career
Drew blood from his shrunk veins, yet the good old man,
Like to an aged Oak that long hath stood,
Endangers all that seeks to cut him down;
He does not bear that fearful Policy,
That many use to fight in base disguise,
But has a White Flag carried before him,
Which does signify the justice of his Cause, is innocence;
Or as a mark, as if a man should say,
I am the Butt you aim at, shoot at me.
The greatest Conquest I have won this day,
Hath been the preservation of his Life,
With hazard of mine own: In my pursuit,
Thinking to place him in his Court of Guard,
I followed him so far, that I was forced
To make retire, for to recover breath.
Why do you sound a Retreat? the Day is ours,
See, here's their King, I knew him by his Ensign,
Which I seized in spite of all opposed.
Here General, to your hands I do commit him.
Carry Thraces King this as a ransom for the Shepherds Queen.
Hark, the fight renews, one hour more makes a full Conquest, and Isle ne'er give o'er till it be finished.
But that no fame or credit can be got to conquer Age,
I'd scorn for to present another prisoner.
Aged as I am, had I a sword I'd scorn as much to be subdued by thee.
That shall be tried. Here, take your Arms again.
Art thou in earnest then? Come on in faith. How now?
What means this, wilt thou not fight with me?
Yes sir, that I will, with you Isle fight,
But never fight against you. See the man
That thrice this day preserved you from your foe,
And the last time I bore you off from death,
I that man am now your Champion, do not question why?
But rest assured, for you Isle live and die.
What Coward's that began this fearful cry? Is not the day likely to be our own? Have I not taken their King Prisoner, seized his white Flag, and by our Generals hand sent him unto Pheander?
But he's revolted, and has set him free,
And we have ne'er a General to lead us.
Oh Villain, Traitor, Coward, were he my father I should call him so: fly from his Colours. Courage, fellow Swains, let us not blot the Honour we have won. Want of a General, Isle supply that place, rather than loose so fair a Victory.
No, Isle be General.
I, I, and so you shall, and Isle be Commander over you. We should be led like Wilde-geese then in faith: Wilde-geese, nay Woodcocks rather; for your Wilde-geese keep their Wings, their Front, their Rear, and have a Leader too.
I, I, you are the man.
Follow then, come.
Sound a Retreat, it is impossible to win the day,
These Shepherds fight like devils: I saw a man born on our Lan∣ces points quite from the earth, yet when he came to ground he fought again, as if his strength had bin invincible.
Hark how the proud foe with triumphant voice
Proclaims unto the world her Victory.
Hark how Scicillia with triumphant voice
Proclaims unto the world his Victory.
Scicillia?
I, Scicillia. Sophos, brother to the Thracian King, is with Alcade King of the Affricans, come to assist you.
Give 'em entertain with all the Royal Pomp our State can yield.
He shall have Soldiers welcome, that's the best.
To give a Welcome fitting to the State of Affrick's King, Sophos, and this fair Dame, whose Beauty all the Western World admires, were to neglect a greater happiness; for by your aid fair Victory sits crowned, pluming her golden wings up∣on our Crest, let us not beat her back by detraction.
Royal Sir, we come to fight, and not to feast; yet for this might we will repose our selves, our Troops are weary, and our beatuous Child rests indisposed of; Let her have a Guard of Demi Negros, called from either part, and let her Lodgings be place next our own, that's all we do desire.
Which we'll perform.
Let the Retreat we heard at our approach, call back your powers, and early in the morn when as the daring enemy comes on; thinking to prey upon a yielding foe.
Our forces shall confound 'em, Thrice shall know Retreat. Sophos is here, come to perform his vow.
Upon 'em, upon 'em, upon 'em, they fly, they fly, they fly.
I, I, they run away.
I am glad they are retreated, had they stood, his lack of sense had bin his loss of life, how ever he scopes it yet, come now retire.
Isle have my Love first.
So ho, ho boys.
What noise is that? are you a fouler, sir?
I know what belongs to a retreat sir, I was the first man took flight, and lured off the rest as well as I could.
Then y are an Engineer?
An admirable fellow Pallemon, hold him in talk whilst I run for Cerena, and use my best persuasions to procure her gen∣tle patience, his deep wounds to cure.
Come then grave Nestor to the Council Table, nay, you shall see that I can speak to you.
And you shall hear that I can answer you.
You say you are a Falconer?
Or a Fowler, which you please.
What think you, Nestor, if we limed our Pikes, as you your Twigs, and set 'em in the way just as the Army flies? Do you not think they would hang fast by the wings?
Yes, if they do not leave their wings behind 'em,
And fly away with their legs.
May they do so?
Faith I sir, 't has been the Cowards fashion time out of mind.
Or Father, shall's cast into the Air a gorgeless Falcon, that mounting the bleak Region, till she spy my beautuous Love Serena, then souse down, and snatch her from the Army. Joves bird the Eagle, in her Talons bore his Darling Ganimed to his pa∣lace so. Speak Nestor, is it possible or no?
Very easy sir, if women be made of such light Stuff, as they say they are; besides, no Falcon but dares venture upon a Ring-tale, and what's a woman else?
Then as stern Pirrhus did old Priam take, or stay,
As cruel Narrow with his Mother did,
Isle rip thy bowels out, then fling thee
Like a gorgeless Falcon in the Air;
But first Isle tie these bells unto thy legs,
That I may know which way to follow thee.
Nay, and you begin to meddle with my legs,
Isle show you as fair a pair of heels,
As ever you saw in your life.
Nay, fly me not, my fair Angelica.
Put up thy Bilbow then, my mad Orlando.
Thy hand shall be the scabbard, there it is:
I yield me to thy mercy, Alexander;
Yet save my life, great Caesar.
As we are Alexander, we will save thy life.
Come sit at Caesars feet. So, so, now Isle
Deal well enough with you.
Prithee have more remorse, if not for Love,
For love of Life, help to redress his wounds;
Remember it is for you he came thus hurt,
Take pity on his smart.
Had I like power to restore his sense, as to re-cure his wounds, upon the earth I would leave no means unthought, un∣sought for, but I'd apply't for his Recovery.
This is the tyranny we men endure,
Women can make us mad, but none can cure.
Oh may I prove the first, upon my knees,
If ever a poor Virgins Prayers were heard,
Grant the fruition of my suit may prove
A saving health both to his Life and Love.
Nay, and you go about it with such willingness,
Twill come to a good end sure:
The whilst you dress his wounds, Isle sit and sing,
And invoke the Gods to pity him.
Fair Apollo, whose bright beams
Cheers all the world below:
The Birds that sing, the Plants that spring,
The Herbs and Flowers that grow.
Oh lend thy aid to a Swain sore oppressed,
That his mind soon may find the delight that sense admits;
And by a Maid let his harms be redressed,
That no pain do remain in his mind to offend his wits.
His blood returns, rub his Pulses o'er the fire,
His Looks prescribe an Alteration.
Would I could hear him speak a wise word once.
Either the earth, or else my head turns round.
Lass, my poor brother.
Peace, disturb him not.
And yet methinks I do not feel such pains as I was wont to endure. Ha, sure I should know! Speak, are not you my Love?
He knows her, I, it is she.
And you my brother?
True.
And what am I?
A fool.
But you are no mad-man now? I'm sure. He that can distinguish a fool from a woman, is a wise man believe it.
Pallemon see, since it hath pleased the Gods, in pity of
thy youth, to grant thysence, Serena grants her love, and at thy feet craves pardon for her cruel injury.
More welcome now then ever, my Serena.
Love that is often crossed, at length obtained,
Is sweeter far than pleasure eas'ly gained.
But what shall I do now? I'm gone in the Common-law, and if a Jury of women go upon me, I'm sure to be cast. I think I had best to appeal to the men first, and make them my Orb∣trators.
Oh no, no, no, make your peace with the women first, what ever you do; for if they take the matter in hand, your men are ne'er able to stand long in a Case against them.
Then first to you whom I have wronged so much,
And next, to all that's here.
Forgive me, oh forgive me my cruel disdain,
Never poor Lover endured such pain,
As I will in my skill, your praises to tell,
And never sing other, till death rings my Knell.
Therefore no man hate a woman, for now you may prove
It lies in their powers to restore Life and Love.
Therefore no man hate a woman, for now you may prove
It lies in their power to restore Life and Love.
The honour of thy overthrow, brave Moor, is due to great Pheander King of Thrice; but thy Crowns ransom does belong to me.
Take Life and all, it is not worth the keeping,
Without Addition of a Victory.
To be a Peasants prisoner! Cursed Fate!
Why should a King be so unfortunate?
Unhappy chance! Came I to Thrice for this, to loose both Life and Honour in the Land that gave me Life? and by a Brother too? Black destiny!
Some post unto Phe∣ander; and glad his ears with this our Victory.
Why come ye on so slowly? renew the fight, our King is taken prisoner by that slave, that by his falling off lost
the last Battle.
Pheander taken?
That's some comfort yet, I hope Scicillia will not ran∣some him, till he consent unto our Liberty.
And if he should, he were unworthy to be termed a King.
Why then let's summon 'em unto a Parley,
First offer to exchange our Prisoners,
And then begin the bloody Fight again.
Summon a Parley then.
Look here Scicillia, since by chance of war our Thracian King is taken prisoner, to ransom him we will deliver back into your hands the great Alcade, Sophos, and this White moor.
Three prisoners for one, detain 'em still, Isle not be ran∣som'd at so dear a rate.
And if thou should, I scorn it should be so;
For look what Ransom Scicillia sets down,
Isle pay it trebly o'er to ransom us.
We will take no Ransom, but will set you free by force of Arms.
Bear back the prisoners, and renew the Fight.
Stay, dare thou that seem so forward, hand to hand, in single opposition end this Strife?
Oh were these Kings but pleased it should be so,
How soon would we decide this difference?
What says Alcade? if he be so content,
Isle gladly put my Right upon his sword.
The like will I upon my Champion, whose unmatched va∣lore has been well approved.
I like his fair Aspect, and give consent.
May thou prove happy in this Enterprise.
Isle loose my life, or gain your liberty.
The like will I, or set Pheander free.
Then till the Champions be in readiness, let the Condi∣tions be concluded on. Pallatio, draw the Articles for us.
And you for us, if we be overcome, Pheander is to have his liberty, and we depart this land, resigning back all interest due by his permission, and never seek revenge for our lost Son: this as we are Royal, we will consent unto.
If Thrice be overcome, he shall surrender all his dig∣nity
into our hands, which Sophos shall enjoy which our fair daughter, paying Cicilly a yearly tribute; and your Soldiers pay since their abode in Thrice, shall be discharged from our Ex∣checquer.
This Isle add besides, because by us Cicillia lost a Sor, who ever shall enjoy the Crown of Thrice shall once a year, clad in his pilgrims weeds, offer sacrifice unto the Gods, and lay his Crown down at Cicillias feet.
And Sophos vows to offer up his life,
A ransom for this beautuous African,
If we be vanquished by our enemy.
There's Scicillias hand.
And mine.
There Alcade.
And mine?
And Sophos joined in one.
A happy end crown this Contention.
Beseech your Graces, since this difference is to be ended by a shepherds hand, to let our Queen be set at liberty, to see the Champion that must fight for her.
Go fetch her forth: And now I call to mind the Oracle, that said a shepherd should restore my Crown; sure one of these will prove that happy man.
The Trumpet sounds again, let's take our seats, and see who shall obtain the victory.
Nay altogether now, till the last stroke make a division.
Oh the shepherds Queen!
A lovely Dame! sit by our Daughters side.
The Combatants will take encouragement from your fair eyes: hark, now they come.
Now Boy, thrust home, it is for a Lady.
Courage fellow Swain.
The Champions are prepared, sound to the fight:
I for my King.
I for my Countries right fight.
So, recover breath.
What means that strange Device upon their shields? it is something sure concerns the Oracle, God Neptune riding on the Waves of the Sea, Isle question them to know the meaning on it.
Come Sir.
What means the King of Thrice?
To ask a question ever they fight again.
Then speak aloud, we will have no whispering.
I prithee tell me, it is to thee I speak: what heinous wrongs hast thou received from us, or good from these, that thou alone should prove the chiefest Champion for our Enemy?
So psease these Kings vouchsafe me audience, I shall tell you.
Speak freely.
In brief Pheander, I am nor subject unto him, nor you, more then the duty of a Son allows, tho this rude transmigration of my hair, bars me your knowledge, with the change of time, yet here behold the banished Radagon.
My Son?
My husband?
Shame and my Joy so struggle in my breast, I shall dis∣solve to air: Oh my dear child!
Can it be possible that we should live so long together, and not know each other?
I knew Menalchus, but not Radagon.
I Mariana, not my beautuous wife: But what's become of my Eusanius, had I my child again, my Joy were full.
Alas I lost him fourteen years ago, keeping my flocks upon the plain of Thrice.
This greater tide of Joy overcomes the less, and will not suffer me as yet to mourn.
Pray speak those Words again, where did you loose him? on the Plains of Thrice?
Indeed I did, just fourteen years ago.
The time, the place, how habitat, and then.
In a small coat made of a Panthers skin, a Garland on his head, and in his hand a hook made of a Cane.
The very same, the time, the place, the habit, all things just as you describe to me; that child, I being banished from my native soil, found sporting in the Plains, and that's the child I carried with me into Africa.
Was that the child you brought into the Court? when adverse fate had I to banish him?
Far worser fate had I to loose my love.
That child, so found so lost,
Brought up in Africa, and banished thence,
Should be my self.
Eusanius? I'tis he.
Oh my deer child.
Are you my Mother? This my father then?
Is this my Warlike Grand-childe?
What wonder's this?
Now is the Oracle confirmed at full.
Here is the Wonder being wrecked at sea,
Which Neptune from his Waves cast up again.
These are the Lions that did guide the Lambs,
Living as Shepherds, being Princes born.
And these the Seas, whose-equal valour neither Ebbs nor Tides,
But makes a stand, striving for Victory;
Their shields proclaim as much, whose Figure is
Neptune commanding of the rugged Waves.
And this the happy Shepherd from the Plain,
Whose sight restores me all my joys again.
Radagon, thou shalt wear Scicillia's Crown.
Pheanders too, which is too small a satisfaction for the great wrongs he hath sustained by us.
Do not impose more Cares upon my head,
Until my joys be fully finished.
Good Father keep your Crown, and govern still,
And let me frolic with my beautuous Bride:
And for Pheanders Crown, let me entreat
My Uncle Sophos, Partner in our Wars,
May, if he survive, be King of Thrice.
With all my heart; and for these harmless Shepherds,
Whose loves have bin Co-partners in our wars, once every year
They shall be seasted in our Roy•l Palace,
And still this day be kept as Holiday
In the remembrance of the Shepherds Queen.
'T would ask an Age of Time to explicate all our de∣lights. Eusanius, take our Child, with her our Royal Crown of Africa. Thy pardon Sophos, for we promised thee.
I willingly resign my interest, Sir.
One forty days we will hold a Festival
Within the Court of Thrice before we part.
When was there such a Wonder ever seen?
Forty years banished, and live still a QUEEN!

AS lately lifting up the leaves of worthy writers works,
Wherein the Noble acts and deeds of many hidden lurks,
Our Author he hath found the Glass of glory shining bright,
Wherein their lives are to be seen, which honour did delight,
To be a Lantern unto those which daily do desire,
Apollos Garland by desert, in time for to aspire,
Wherein the froward chances oft, of Fortune you shall see,
Wherein the cheerful countenance, of good successes bee:
Wherein true Lovers finds joy, with huge heaps of care,
Wherein as well as famous facts 〈◊〉 place•are:
Wherein the just reward of both, is manifestly shown,
That virtue from the root of vice, might openly be known.
And doubting nought right Courteous all, in your accustomed wont
And gentle ears, our Author he, is pressed to bide the brunt
Of bablers tongues, to whom he thinks, as frustrate• all his toil,
As peerless taste to filthy Swine, which in the mire doth moil.
Well, what he hath done for your delight, he gave not me in charge,
The Actors come, who shall express the same to you at large.
As to the weary wādring wights, whom weltering waives 〈◊〉,
No greater joy of joys may be, then when from out the Ocean
They may behold the Altitude of Billows to abate,
For to observe the Longitude of Seas in former rate.
And having then the latitude of Sea-roome for to pass,
Their joy is greater through the grief, then erst before it was.
So likewise I Clamydes, Prince of Swania Noble soil,
Bringing my Bark to Denmark here, to bide the bitter broil:
And beating blows of Billows high, while raging storms did last,
My griefs was greater then might be, but tempests overpassed,
Such gentle calms ensued hath, as makes my joys more
Through terror of the former fear, then erst it was before.
So that I sit in safety, as Sea-man under shrouds,
When he perceives the storms be past, through vanquishing of Clouds.
For why, the doubtful care that drove me off, in danger to prevail,
Is dashed through bearing lesser brain, and keeping under sail:
So that I have through travel long, at last possessed the place
Whereas my Bark in harbour safe, doth pleasures great embrace:
And hath such license limited, as heart can seem to ask,
To go and come, of custom free, or any other task.
I mean by Iuliana she, that blaze of beauties breeding,
And for her noble gifts of grace, all other dames exceeding:
She hath from bondage set me free, and freed, yet still bound
To her, aboue all other Dames that lives upon the ground:
For had not she been merciful, my ship had rushed on Rocks,
And so decayed amids the storms, through force of clubbish knocks:
But when she saw the danger great, where subject I did stand,
In bringing of my silly Bark, full fraught from out my land,
She like a meek and modest Dame, what should I else say more?
Did me permit with full consent, to land upon her shore:
Upon true promise that I would, here faithful still remain,
And that perform which she had vowed, for those that should obtain
Her princely person to possess, which thing to know I stay,
And then adventurously for her, to pass upon my way.
Lo where she comes, ah peerless Dame, my Iuliana dear.
My Clamydes, of troth Sir Prince, to make you stay thus here,
I profer too much injury, thats doubtless on my part,
But let it no occasion give, to breed within your hart
Mistrust that I should forge or fine, with you my Love in ought.
No Lady, touching you, in me doth lodge no such a thought,
But thanks for your great courtesy that would so friendly here
In midst of misery receive, a foreign stranger mere:
But Lady say, what is your will, that it I may perstand?
Sir Prince, upon a vow, who spowseth me, must needsly take in hand
The flying Serpent for to sley, which in the Forest is,
That of strange marvels bears name, which Serpent doth not mis
By daily use from every coast, that is adjacent there,
To fetch a Virgin maid or wife, or else some Lady fair,
To feed his hungry paunch withal, if case he can them take,
His nature lo it only is, of women spoil to make:
Which thing no doubt, did daunt me much, and made me vow indeed,
Who should espouse me for his wife, should bring to me his head:
Whereto my father willingly, did give his like consent,
Lo Sir Clamydes, now you know what is my whole intent:
And if you will as I have said, for me this travel take,
That I am yours, with heart and mind, your full account do make.
Ah Lady, if case these travels should surmount, the travels whereby came
Unto the worthies of the world, such noble brute and fame,
Yea though the dangers should surpass stout Hercules his toil,
Who fearing nought the dogged feend, sterne Serbarus did foil.
Take here my hand, if life and limb the living Gods do lend,
To purchase thee, the dearest drop of blood my heart shall spend.
And therefore Lady lincke with me, thy loyal heart for aye,
For I am thine till fates untwine, of vital life the stay:
Protesting here if Gods assist, the Serpent for to kill.
Then shalt thou of all women win, the hey•t and great good will,
And me possess for spowsed wife, who in election am
To have the Crown of Denmark here, as heir unto the same.
For why, no children hath my fire besides me, but one other,
And he indeed is heir before, for that he is my brother.
And Clyomon so hight his name, but where he doth remain,
Unto my Parents is unknown, for once he did obtain
Their good wills for to go abroad, a while to spend his days,
In purchasing through active deeds, both honour, laud and praise,
Whereby he might deserve to have the order of a Knight,
But this omitting unto thee, Clamydes here I plight
My faith and troth, if what is said by me thou dost perform.
If not, be sure O Lady with my life, I never will return.
Then as thou seem in thine attire, a Virgins Knight to be,
Take thou this Shield likewise of white, and bear thy name by me,
The white Knight of the Silver Shield, to elevate thy praise.
O Lady as your pleasure is, I shall at all assays
Endeavour my good will to win, if Mars do send me might,
Such honour as your grace with joy, shall welcome home your Knight.
Then farewell my dear Clamydes, the gods direct thy way,
And grant that with the Serpents head, behold thy face I may.
You shall not need to doubt thereof, O faithful Dame so true,
And humbly kissing here thy hand, I bid thy Grace adieu.
Ah happy time and blissful day, wherein by fate I find
Such friendly favours as is food, to feed both heart and mind:
To Suauia soil I swiftly will prepare my foot-steps right,
There of my father to receive the order of a Knight:
And afterwards address my self in hope of honours Crown,
Both Tiger fell and Monster fierce, by dint for to drive down.
The flying Serpent soon shall feel, how boldly I dare vaunt me,
And if that Hydras head she had, yet dread should never daunt me.
If murdering Minataure, a man might count this ugly beast,
Yet for to win a Lady such, I do account it least
Of travels toil to take in hand, and therefore farewell care,
For hope of honour sends me forth, amongst warlike wights to share.
Come on good fellow follow me, that I may understand
Of whence thou art, thus travelling here in a foreign land:
Come why dost thou not leave loitering there, and follow after me▪
Ah I am in ant shall please you.
In, why where art thou in?
Faith in a dirty Ditch with a woman, so beraide, as it's pity to see.
Well, I see thou art a merry •ōpanion, I shall like better of thy cōpany:
But I pray thee come away.
If I get out one of my legs as fast as I may
Ha lo, A my buttock, the very foundation thereof doth break,
Ha lo, once again, I am as fast, as though I had frozen here a week.
Why how now, whither runst thou, art thou foolish in thy mind
But to fetch one of my legs ant shall please, that I have left in the
mire behind.
One of thy legs, why look man, both thy legs thou hast,
It is but one of thy boots thou hast lost, thy labour thou doest wast.
But one of my boots, Iesu, I had such a wrench with the fall,
That I assure, I did think one of my legs had gone withal.
Well let that pass, and tell me what thou art, and what is thy name?
And from whence thou came, and whither thy journey thou doest frame,
That I have met thee by the way, thus travelling in this sort?
What you have requested, ant shall please, I am able to report,
What I am by my nature each wight shall perceive
That frequented my company, by the learning I have.
I am the son of Appollo, and from his high seat I came,
But whither I go, it skils not, for knowledge is my name:
And who so hath knowledge, what 〈◊〉 he to care
Which way the wind blow, his way to prepare.
And art thou knowledge, of troth I am glad that I have met with thee.
I am knowledge, and have as good skill in a woman as any man
whatsoever he bee.
For this I am certain of let me but lie with her all night,
And Isle tell you in the morning, whither she is maid, wife, or spright:
And as for other matters, speaking of languishes, or any other thing,
I am able to serve ant shall please, ant were great Alexander the King.
Of troth, then for thy excellence▪ I will thee gladly entertain,
If in case that with me thou wilt promise to remain.
Nay ant shall please ye, I am like to a woman, say nay and take it,
When a gentleman proffers entertainment, I were a fool to forsake it.
Well knowledge, then sith thou art content my servant to bee,
And endued with noble qualities, thy personage I see,
Thou having perfect knowledge, how thy self to behave:
I will send thee of mine arrant, but haste thither I crave:
For here I will stay thy coming again.
Declare your pleasure sir, and whither I shall go, and then the case
is plain.
Nay of no great importance, but being here in Sua•in
And near unto the Court, I would have thee to take thy way
Thither with all speed, because I would hear
If any shows or triumphs be towards, else would I not come there,
For only upon feats of arms, is all my delight.
If I had known so much before, serve that serve will, I would have
served no martial Knight.
Well sir, to accomplish your will, to the court I will by,
And what news is there stirting, bring word by and by.
Do so good knowledge, and here in place thy coming I will stay:
For nothing doth delight me more▪ then to hear of martial play,
Can food unto the hungry corps, because of greater joy,
Then for the haughty heart to hear, which doth it self employ,
Through martial excercises much to win the brute of Fame,
Where mates do meet which there unto their fancies seems to fra••:
Can music more the pensive heart o• daunted mind delight,
Can comfort more the careful corps and over palled spright,
Rejoice then sound of Trumpet doth each warlike wight allure,
And Drum and Fyfe unto the fight doth noble hearts procure,
To see in sunder shivered, the Lance that leads the way,
And worthy knights vnbeauered, in field amidst the fray,
To hear the rattling Cannons roar, and Hills on Helmets ring,
To see the soldiers swarm on heaps, where valiant hearts doth bring
The cowardly crew into the case of careful Captives band,
Where ancients brave displayed be, and won by force of hand.
What wight would not as well delight as this to hear and see,
Betake himself in like affairs a fellow mate to bee,
With Clyomon to Denmark King the only son and heir.
Who of the Golden Shield as now, the knightly name doth bear
In every land since that I foiled the worthy Knight of Fame,
Sir Samuel before the King, and Prince of martial game.
Alexander called the Great, which when he did behold,
He gave to me in recompense, this Shield of glittering Gold:
Requesting for to know my name, the which shall not be shown
To any Kite, unless by force he make it to be known.
For so I vowed to Denmark King, my fathers grace when I
First got his leave, that I abroad my force and strength might try.
And so I have my self behau'd, in City, Town and field,
That never yet did fall reproach, to the Knight of the Golden Shield.
Gods ames, where are you, where are you? and you bee a man
come away.
Why what is the matter knowledge to tell thy arrand stay.
Stay, what talk you of staying, why then all the sight will be past,
Clamides the Kings son shall be dubbed Knight in all hast.
Ah knowledge, then come indeed, and good pastime thou shalt see,
For I will take the honour from him, that dubbed I may bee.
Upon a courageous stomach, come let vs haste thither.
Lead you the way and isle follow, weal be both made knights to∣gender,
Ah sirrah, is my moister so lusty, or dares he be so bold?
It is no marvel then, if he bear a Shield of Gold.
But by your patience if he continue in this business, farewell moister than,
For I promise you, I entend not very long to be his man:
Although under the title of knowledge my name I do fine,
Subtle Shift I am called, that is most plain.
And as it is my name, so it is my nature also,
To play the shifting knave wheresoever I go.
Well, after him I will, but soft now, if my moister chance to be lost
And any man examine me, in telling his name I am as wise as a post.
What a villain was I, that ere he went, could not ask it?
Well, its no great matter, I am but half bound, I may serve whom I will yet.
Come Clamides thou our son, thy Fathers talk attend,
Since thou art pressed thy youthful days in prowess for to spend:
And doest of vs the order ask, of knighthood for to have,
We know thy deeds deserves the same, and that which thou doest crave
Thou shalt possess: but first my son, know thou thy fathers charge,
And what to knighthood doth belong, thine honour to enlarge:
Unto what end a knight is made, that likewise thou maiste know,
And bear the same in mind also, that honour thine may flow
Amongst the worthies of the world, to thy immortal fame:
Know thou therefore Clamydes dear, to have a knightly name
Is first aboue all other things his God for to adore,
In truth according to the laws prescribde to him before.
Secondly, that he be true unto his Lord and king.
Thirdly, that he keep his faith and troth in every thing.
And then before all other things that else we can commend,
That he be always ready pressed, his country to defend:
The Widow poor, and fatherless, or Innocent bearing blame,
To see their cause redressed right, a faithful knight must frame:
In truth he always must be 〈…〉
That will receive a knightly name, his honour to enlarge.
O Father this your gracious counsel given to me your only so•no,
Shall not be in oblivion cast 〈…〉 be run:
What way doth win 〈◊〉 Honours 〈◊〉▪ those paths 〈◊〉 steppes
shall tra•e
And those that to 〈◊〉 doth lead, which 〈◊〉 deface
True Honour in her Regal seat▪ I shall detest for aye,
And be as utter enemy, to them both night and day▪
By flying force of flickring fame▪ 〈◊〉 grace shall understand▪
Of my behaviour noble sire, in 〈…〉 lands
And if you 〈◊〉 by true report 〈…〉
Of wilfulness contrary this, your 〈…〉 charge:
Let ignomy to my reproach in ste•d of 〈◊〉 fame.
Sound through the earth and 〈◊〉 Skies the strained blast of sham•.
Whereby within Obliuions Tomb, my deeds shall be detained,
Where otherwise of memory 〈◊〉 I might have 〈◊〉.
So that the den of darksomenesse shall 〈…〉 my chest,
Where worthy deed• prefers each wight, with honour to be blessed.
Well 〈…〉 right,
That here thou may receive of me the order of a Knight.
Now prepare 〈◊〉 self, or 〈…〉
Content thy self knowledge for i•• quickly 〈…〉.
The Noble orders of a Knight, 〈…〉
We give through due 〈…〉 that thou bee,
Both Valiant, Wise, and Hardy.
Away now 〈…〉 be take •arty.
Ah stout attempt of 〈…〉 my son,
The Knight-hood 〈…〉
Ah Clamydes how art thou be rest of honour here?
Was like presumption ever seen, that one a stranger mere,
Should come in presence of a Prince, and tempt as he hath done,
To take the Knight-hood thus away, from him who is his son?
Ah father, how am I perplexed, till I revenged be,
Upon the wretch which here hath 〈◊〉, the honour th•• from me?
Was ever any one deceived of Knight hood so before?
Well Clamydes, my Lords return, stay till we do know more.
O King the knight is fled and gone, pursue•e prevails nought,
But here his slave we taken have, to tell why this he wrought.
Ah cruel grudge that grieves my ghost, shall he escape me so▪
Shall he with honour from my son, without disturbance go?
Ah Catiffe thou, declare his name, and why he ventured here:
Or death shall be thy 〈◊〉 su•e, by all the Gods I swear.
Ah 〈…〉 p••as you, I know neither 〈…〉 country nor 〈◊〉.
What, what sir, are not you his servants will you deny the same▪
Nay then you are a dissembling knave, I know very well.
Ant shall please your Grace, even the very troth I shall tell,
I should have been his servant when we met tog•there;
Which was not full three hours before we came hither.
Well what is his name, and of what 〈…〉▪
That cannot I ••ll 〈◊〉 shall please you, you never saw servant to
such care:
To know his Masters name, neither in Town nor Field,
And what he was he would tell, but the Knight of the Golden Shield.
Well Clamides mark my charge, what I to thee sh•ll say,
Prepare thy self for to pursue that Traitor on his way:
Which hath thine honour re•t from thee, and either by force of hand
Or love, his name and native soil, see that thou understand,
That I may know for what in•ent, he bare this grudge to thee,
Else see thou 〈◊〉 doest return again to visit me:
For this impo•ts him for to be, of valiant heart and mind:
And therefore do pursue thy foe•, until thou doest him find.
To know his name and what he is, or as I said before,
Do never view thy father I, in presence any more.
Well father, •ith it is your charge, and precept given to me,
And more for mine own honours sake, I frankly do agree
To undertake the enterprise, his name to understand,
Or never else to show my face again in Sue••• land.
Wherefore I humbly do desire, the order to receive,
Of Knighthood, which my sole desire hath ever been to have:
It is the name and mean, whereby true honour is achieved:
Let me not then O father dear, thereof be now deprived.
Sith that mine honour cowardly was stolen by Caitiff• he,
And not by dinted dastards deed, O father lost by me.
Well Cla•••es, then kneel down, here in our Nobles sight,
We give to thee that art our son, the order of a Knight:
But as thou wilt our favour win, accomplish my desire.
Else never to your royal Court, O father isle retire.
Well, then 〈◊〉 Cla•ides dear, the Gods thine ayder be:
But come my Lords, to have his hire, that Ca•••ffe bring with me.
Alas not shall please you, I am knowledge, and no evil did pretend,
Set me at liberty, it was the knight that did offend.
O father, sith that he is knowledge, I beseech your grace set him free,
For in these affairs, he shall waite and tend on me:
If he will protest, to be true to me ever.
Ah Noble Cla•ydes, hears my hand, isle deceive you never.
Well then father, I beseech your Grace grant that I may have him.
Well Cla•ydes, I am content, sith thou my son doest crave him.
Receive him therefore at my hands. My Lords come lets depart.
We ready are to waite on you O King, with willing hart.
Well knowledge, do prepare thy self, for here I do protest,
My fathers precepts to fulfil, no day nor night to rest
From toilsome travel, till I have revenged my cause aright,
On him who of the golden Shield, now bears name of knight:
Who of mine honour hath me robbed, in such a cowardly sort,
As for to be of noble heart, it doth him not import.
But knowledge, to me thy service 〈◊〉 thou must with loyal hart profess.
Use me that all other will•ins may take ensample by me, if I digress.
Well then come follow speedily, that him pursue we may.
Keep you before ant shall please you, for I mind not to stay.
Ah sirrah Shift, thou wast driven to thy shifts now indeed,
I dreamd bfore, that untowardly I should speed:
And yet it is better luck then I looked to have:
But as the proverb saith, good fortune ever happens to the veryest knave.
And yet I could not escape with my moister, do what I can,
Well by this bargain he hath lost his new Serving-man,
But if Clamydes overtake him now, what buffets will there be,
Unless it be four miles off the fray, there will be no standing for me.
Well after him I will, but howsoever my moister speed,
To shift for my self I am fully decreed.
After many invincible victories, and conquests great a•chiued,
I Alexander with sound of Fame, in safety am arrived
Upon my borders long wished for, of Macedonia soil,
And all the world subject have, through force of warlike toil,
O Mars I lawd thy sacred name, and for this safe return,
To Pallas Temple will I wend, and sacrifices burn
To thee, Bellona and the rest, that warlike wights do guide,
Who for King Alexander did, such good success provide.
Who bows not now unto my beck, my force who doth not fear?
Who doth not of my conquests great, throughout the world hear?
What King as to his sovereign Lord, doth now not bow his knee?
What Prince doth reign upon the earth, which yields not unto me
Due homage for his Regal Mace? What country is at liberty?
What Dukedom, Island or Province else, to me now are not tributary?
What Fort of Force, or Castle strong, have I not battered down?
What Prince is he, that now by me, his Princely seat and Crown
Doth not acknowledge for to hold, not one the world throughout,
But of King Alexanders power they all do stand in doubt?
They fear as Fowls that hovering fly, from out the Fawco•s way,
As Lamb the Lyon, so my power, the stoutest do obey.
In field who hath not felt my force, where battering blows abound?
King or 〈◊〉, who hath not 〈◊〉 his 〈◊〉 to me on ground,
And yet Alexander▪ what art th•• thou art a mortal wight,
For all that 〈…〉 lust g•t or won by 〈◊〉 in fight.
Acknowledging thy state ô King, to be at thou hast said,
The Gods no doubt as they have been, will be thy shield and aid
In all attempts thou takst in hand, 〈◊〉 no glory vain
Thou seek, but acknowledging thy victories and gain,
Through the providence of sacred Gods to happen unto thee,
For vain is trust, that in himself, man doth repose we see:
And therefore 〈◊〉 these victories which thou ô King hast got,
Should blind 〈◊〉 eyes with 〈◊〉 thy, noble fame to blot,
Let that victorious Prince his 〈◊〉, of 〈◊〉 thy fire,
To acknowledge still thy state O King, thy noble heart inspire,
Who afterall his victories 〈…〉 obtained,
Least that the great felicity of that which she had gained,
Should cause him 〈◊〉 himself, 〈…〉 did provide,
Which came unto hi• chamber door, and every morning cried
Philip, thou art a mortal m•n, this practise of thy sire,
A midst all these thy victories, thy servant doth desire.
O Alexander that 〈…〉 print within thy mind,
And then no doubt as father did, thou 〈◊〉 sweet shall find.
My Lords, your 〈◊〉 doubtless I esteem, and with great
thanks 〈◊〉▪
I do require 〈…〉 this is plain,
All 〈…〉: and since the Gods divine,
To vs 〈…〉 this 〈◊〉 doth assign,
To have in our subjection the world for most part,
We will at this 〈…〉 , with 〈◊〉 zeal of hart,
In 〈…〉 gods, such sacrifices make,
Of thankfulness 〈◊〉 our success, as they in p••t shall take
The same, 〈…〉 from 〈◊〉:
Come 〈…〉, to accomplish our intent.
We 〈…〉 King, to follow thee with victory.
〈…〉 Drums and Trumpets both, that we may march
triumphantly.
Now Clyomon a knight thou art, though some perhaps may say,
Thou cowardly came to Clamydes, and stole his right away:
No, no, it was no cowardly part, to come in presence of a king,
And in the face of all his Court, to do so worthy a thing.
Amidst the mates that martial be, and sterne knights of his hall,
To take the knighthood from their Prince, even •••ger of them all.
It gives a guerdon of goodwill, to make my glory glance,
When warlike wights shall hear thereof, my fame they will advance:
And where I was pretended late, to Denmark king my sire,
His royal grace to see, homeward to retire,
Now is my purpose altered by brute of late report.
And where fame rests to be had, thither Clyomon will resort:
For as I understand by fame, that worthy Prince of might,
The conqueror of conquerors, who Alexander hight,
Returning is to Macedon, from many a bloody broil,
And there to keep his royal Court, now after weary toil,
Which makes the mind of Clyomon, with joys to be clad,
For there I know of martial mates, is company to be had.
Adiu therefore, both Denmark king and Suania Prince beside,
To Alexanders Court I will, the Gods my journey guide.
Come knowledge here he is, nay stay thou cowardly knight,
That like a dastard came, to steal away my right.
What, what, you rail sir princkocks Prince, me coward for to call.
Ant shall please you •e is a coward, he would have hired me,
Amidst your fathers hall.
To have done it for him, being himself in such stay
That scarcely he durst, before your presence appear.
Why how now knowledge, what forsake thy moister so soon?
Nay moister was, but not moister is, with you I have done.
Well for what intent can thou, my honour to steal away?
That I took ought from thee, I utterly deny.
Did not thou take the honour, which my father to me gave?
Of that thou had not, I could thee not deprave.
Did not thou take away my knighthood from me?
No, for I had it before it was given unto thee:
And having it before thee, what Argument can thou make,
That ever from thee the same I did take?
Thats true, he received the blow before at you it came,
And therefore he took it not from you, because you had not the same.
Well, what hight thy name, let me that understand,
And wherefore thou trauailedst here in my fathers land
So boldly to attempt in his Court such a thing?
The bolder the attempt is, more fame it doth bring:
But what my name is desire thou to know?
Nay he hath stolen sheep I think, for he is ashamed his name for to
show.
What thy name is, I would gladly perstand:
Nay that shall never none know, unless by force of hand
He vanquish me in fight, such a vow have I made,
And therefore to combat with me, thy self do persuade,
If thou wilt know my name.
Well, I accord to the same.
Nay then God be with you, if you be at that point I am gone.
If you be of the fighters disposition, isle leave you alone.
Why stay knowledge, although I fight, thou shalt not be molested.
Ant shall please you, this fear hath made me beray my self,
with a Proynstone that was not digested.
Well Clamydes stay thy self, and mark my sayings here:
And do not think I speak this same, for that thy force I fear,
But that more honour may redound, unto the victors part,
Wilt thou here give thy hand to me, withouten fraud of hart
Upon the faith which to a knight doth rightly appertain,
And by the loyalty of a knight, isle swear to thee again,
For to observe my promise just, which is if thou agree,
The fifteenth day next following, to meet Sir Prince with me,
Before King Alexanders grace, in Macedonia soil,
Who all the world subject hath, through force of warlike toil:
For hee is chief of chivalry, and king of Martial mates,
And to his royal Court thou know, repair all estates.
Give me thy hand upon thy faith, of promise not to fail.
And here is mine to thee again, if Fortunes froward gail,
Resist me not, the day forespoke to meet sir Prince with thee,
Before that king to try our strengths, say if thou doest agree,
For triple honour will it be, to him that gets the victory,
Before so worthy a Prince as hee, and Nobles all so publicly,
Where otherwise if in this place we should attempt the same,
Of the honour that were got thereby, but small would be the fame.
Well Sir knight, here is my hand, isle meet in place forespoke.
And by the loyalty of a knight, isle not my words revoke.
Till then adieu; isle keep my day.
And I, if fates do not gainsay.
What is he gone, and did take no leave of me?
Iesu so unmannerly a Gentleman did any man see,
But now my Lord which way will you travel declare?
Sith I have fifteen days respit my self to prepare,
My Ladies charge for to fulfil, behold I do entend.
Your Lady ant shall please you, why who is your Lady, may a man
be so bold as ask and not offend▪
Iuliana daughter to the King of Denmark lo is she,
Whose knight I am, and from her hands this shield was given to me,
In sign and token of good will, whose noble grace to gain,
I have protested in her cause for to omit no pain
Nor travail, till I have subdued the flying Serpents force,
Which in the Forest of Marvels is, who takes no remorse
Of women• kind, but doth devour all such as are a stray,
So that no one dares go abroad, nor wander forth the way.
And sith I have yet fifteen days, my self for to prepare,
To meet the Knight of the Golden Shield, my heart is void of care.
I will unto the Forest wend, sith it is in my way,
And for my Iulianas sake, that cruel Serpent slay.
What are you a mad man, will you wilfully be slain?
If you go into that Forest, you will never come out again.
Why so knowledge, dost thou think the Serpent I fear?
No, but do you not know of Bryan sance foy, the chāpion dwells there
A cowardly knight knowledge is he, and dares fight with no
man.
Ah a noble match, couple him and me together than:
Yea, but although he dares not fight, and Enchanter he is,
And whosoever comes in that Forest, to enchant he doth not mis.
Tush, tush, I fear him not knowledge, and therefore come away.
Well seeing you are so wilful, go you before isle not stay.
Ah sirrah, now I know all my masters mind, the which I did not before,
He adventured for a Lady, well I say no more:
But to escape the enchantments of Bryan Sance foy,
Thats Bryan without faith, I have devised a noble toy:
For he and I am both of one consanguinity,
The veryest cowardly villain that ever was borne, thats of a certainty.
Isle fight with no man, no more will Bryan, thats plain:
But by his enchantments, he puts many to great pain.
And in a Forest of strange marvels doth he keep,
Altogether by enchantments to bring men a sleep,
Till he have wrought his will of them, to Bryan straight will I,
And of my masters coming to the Forest inform him privily,
So shall I win his favour, and subtle Shift in the end,
Thou shalt escape his enchantment, for he will be thy friend:
Well unknown to my moister, for mine own safeguard this will I do,
And now like a subtle shifting knave, after him isle go.
Of Brian sance foe who hath not heard? not for his valiant acts,
But well I know throughout the world, doth ring his cowardly facts.
What tho I pray all are not borne to be God Mars his men,
To toy with dainty dames in courts, should be no cop•smites then.
If all were given to chi•al•ie, then Venus might go weep,
For any Court in Venery, that she were like to keep.
But shall I frame then mine excuse, by serving Venus she,
When I am known throughout the world, faint hearted for to be?
No, no, alas, it will not serve, for many a knight in love,
Most valiant hearts no doubt they have, and knightly prowess prove,
To get their Ladies loyal hearts, but I in Ʋenus yoke,
Am forced for want of valiancy, my freedom to provoke:
Bearing the name and port of knight, enchantments for to use,
Wherewith full many a worthy wight, most cowardly I abuse:
As witnesses the number now, which in my Castle lye,
Who if they were at liberty, in arms I durst not try.
The feeblest there though he unarmed, so is my courage daunted,
When as I see the glittering arms, whereby each Knight is vented.
But how I vanquish these same Knights, is wonderful to see,
And Knights that ventured for her love, whom I do love they bee.
Thats Iuliana, daughter to the King of Denmarks grace,
Whose beauty is the cause that I do haunt or keep this place.
For that no wight may her possess, unless by vow decreed,
He bring and do present to her the flying Serpents head.
Which many hath attempt to do, but none yet could him slay,
No afterword hence back again, for me could pass away:
For that through my enchantments lo, which here this forest keep,
So soon as I did look on them, they straight were in a sleep.
Then presently I them unarmed, and to my Castle brought,
And there in prison they do lye, not knowing what was wrought.
Lo thus I range the woods to see who doth the Serpent slay,
That by enchantment I may take the head from him away:
And it present unto the Dame, as though I were her Knight,
Well here comes one, isle shroud my self, for sure I will not fight.
Gogs blood where might I meet with that cowardly knave Bryansance foy?
I could tell him such a tale now as would make his hart leap for joy.
Well yonder I have espied one, whatsoever he be.
Nay gogs blood isle be gone, he shall not fight with me,
But by enchantment isle be even with him by and by.
A ant shall please you, isle fight with no man, never come so ny.
Why what art thou declare? whither dost thou run?
Even the cowardly est villain ant shall please you that lives under the sun.
What of my fraternity, doest thou not know Bryan sance foy?
What moister Bryan, Iesu how my hart doth leap for joy
That I have met with you, who ever had better luck?
But touch me not.
Wherefore?
A lest you enchant me into the likeness of a buck.
Tush, tush, I warrant thee, but what art thou declare?
Knowledge and it shall please you, who hither doth repair
To tell you good news.
Good news? what are they knowledge express?
A Knight hath slain the flying Serpent.
Tush it is not so.
It is most true that I do confess.
Ah what hight his name Knowledge? let me that understand.
Clamydes the White Knight, son to the King of Sway land,
Who for Iuliana, daughter to the King of Denmarks grace,
Did take the attempt in hand, now you know the whole case.
Ah happy news of glad somnesse unto my daunted mind,
Now for to win my Ladies love, good fortune is assigned:
For though she be Clamydes, right won worthily indeed,
Yet will I sure possess that Dame, by giving of the head.
But Knowledge where about declare, doth that Clamydes rest?
Even hard by in the Forest here where he slew the beast
I left him, and to seek you did hye:
But let vs go further into the woods, you shall meet him by and by.
Well Knowledge for thy pains take this as some reward,
And if thou wilt abide with me, be sure isle thee regard
Aboue all others of my men, besides isle give to thee
A thing, that from enchantments aye, preserved shalt thou be.
Then here is my hand, isle be your servant ever:
And seeing thou art a coward as well as I, isle forsake thee never.
But come let vs go Clamydes to meet.
Keep on your way and isle follow, I trust if he meet him, heel
take him to his feet.
Gogs blood was ever seen such a iolt-headed villain as he,
To be so afraid of such a faint-hart knave as I am to see?
Of the fraternity quoth you? b••lady its a notable brood:
Well Shift these chinks doth thy hart some good:
And isle close with Bryan till I have gotten the thing
That he hath promised me, and then isle be with him to bring.
Well, such shifting knaves as I am, the ambodexter must play,
And for commodity serve every man, whatsoever the world say,
Well after Bryan I will, and close with him awhile,
But as well as Clamydes, in the end isle him beguile.
Ah happy day my deadly foe submitted hath to death,
Lo here the hand, lo here the sword that stopped the vital breath:
Lo here the head that shall possess my Iulianas dear,
The Knight of the golden Shield his force, what need I now to fear:
Since I by force subdued have this Serpent fierce of might,
Who vanquished hath as I have heard, full many a worthy Knight.
Which for to win my Ladies love, their lives have venterd here,
Besides that cowardly Bryan which the faithless shield doth bear:
A number keeps as I have heard, as captives in his hold,
Whom he hath by enchantment got, and not through courage bold.
Shall such defamed dastards, dard by Knights, thus bear their name?
Shall such as are without all faith, live to impair our fame?
Shall valiant harts by cowardly charm, be kept in captives thrall?
Shall Knights live subject to a wretch which hath no hart at all?
Nay first Clamydes claim to thee fell Atrapos his stroke,
Ere thou doest see such worthy Knights to bear the heavy yoke,
Of cowardly Bryan without faith, his charms let daunt not thee,
And for his force thou need not fear, the Gods thy shield will be.
Well, to meet the Knight of the golden Shield, yet ten days space I have,
And to set free these worthy Knights, but rest a while I crave.
Here in this place near to this fort, for that I weary am
With travel, since from killing of the Serpent late I came:
Lo here a while I mind to rest, and Bryan then subdue,
And then to Alexanders court, to keep my promise true.
Come Knowledge, for here he lies laid weary on the ground:
Nay, isle not come in his sight, if you would give me a thousand pound.
For he is the terriblest Knight of any you have heard spoke,
Heel beat a hundredth such as you and I am down at one stroke.
Tush, fear thou nought at al, I have charmed him, and he is fast asleep,
Lying near unto the Castle here which I do keep.
And ten days in this sleep I have charmed him to remain,
Before nature shall overcome it, that he might wake again.
In the mean season, lo behold the Serpents head isle take away,
His shield and his apparel, this done, then will I convey
His body into prison, with other his companions to lye,
Whose strengths, ah knowledge, I durst never attempt to try.
Ah handle him softly, or else you will cause him to awake:
Tush, tush, not if all the noise in the world I were able to make,
Till ten days be expired, the charm will not leave him,
And then I am sure he will marvel who did thus deceive him:
So now he is stripped, stay thou here for a season,
And isle go fetch two of my servants to cary him into prison.
Well do so moister Bryan, and for your coming isle stay,
Gogs blood what a villain am I my moister to betray.
Nay sure isle awake him if it be possible ere they carry him to jail:
Moister, what moister, awake man, what moister, ah it will not prevail.
Am not I worthy to be hanged, was ever seen such a deceitful knave?
What villainy was in me, when unto Bryan understanding I gave
Of my masters being in this forest, but much I muse indeed
What he means to do with my masters apparel, his shield and the head?
Well, seeing it is through my villainy, my moister is at this drift,
Yet when he is in prison, Shift shall not be void of a shift
To get him away, but if it ever come to his ear
That I was the occasion of it, heel hang me thats clear.
Well here comes Bryan, isle cloak with him if I may,
To have the keeping of my moister in prison night and day.
Come sirs take up this body, and cary it into the appointed place,
And there let it lye, for as yet he shall sleep ten days space.
How say you moister Bryan, shall I of him have the guard?
By my troth policy, thy good will to reward
In hope of thy just service, content I agree
For to resign the keeping of this same Knight unto thee.
But give me thy hand that thou wilt deceive me never:
Here is my hand, charm, enchant, make a spider catcher of me, if I
be false to you ever.
Well then come follow after me, and the guard of him thou sha•
have.
A thousand thanks I give you, this is all the promotion I crave:
Ah sirrah, little knows Bryan, that Clamydes my moister is,
But to set him free from prison I entend not to mis:
Yet still in my mind, I can do no other but muse,
What practise with my masters apparel and shell he will use:
Well, seeing I have played the crafty knave with the one, isle play it with
the other:
Subtle Shift for advantage, will deceive his own brother.
Ah set me to shore sirs, in what country so ever we bee.
Well hail out the Cockboate, seeing so sick we do him see,
Strike sail, cast Anchors, till we have rigd our Ship again,
For never were we in such storms before, thats plain.
Ah Boateswaine, gramercies for thy setting me to shore.
Truly Gentlemen we were never in the like tempests before.
What country is this wherein now we be?
Sure the Isle of strange Marshes, as our moister told to me.
How far is it from Macedonia, can thou declare?
More then twenty days sailing, and if the weather were fair.
Ah cruel hap of Fortunes spite, which signed this luck to me:
What Palace Boateswaine is this same, can thou declare, we see?
There King Patranius keeps his Court, so far as I do guess,
And by this train of Ladies here, I sure can judge no less.
Well Boateswaine, theres for thy pains, and here upon the shore
Isle lie to rest my weary bones, of thee I crave no more.
My Lords, come will it please you walk abroad to take the plea∣sant
ayre?
According to our wonted use, in fields both fresh and fair,
My Ladies here I know right well, will not gainsay the same.
Nor we sure for to pleasure you, Neronis noble Dame.
Yes yes, men they love entreaty much, before they will be won,
No Princes that hath women's natures been, since first the world
begun.
So you say.
We boldly may,
Under correction of your grace.
Well, will it please you forth to trace,
That when we have of fragrant fields, the dulcet fumes obtained,
We may unto the Sea side go, whereas is to be gained,
More stranger sights among Neptunes waives, in seeing Ships to sail,
Which pass here by my fathers shore, with merry western gail.
We shall your highness lead the way to fields erst spoke before.
Do so, and as we do return weal come hard by the shore.
What greater grief can grow to gripe, the heart of grieved wight,
Then thus to see fell Fortune she, to hold his state in spite.
Ah cruel chance, ah luckless lot, to me poor wretch assigned,
Was ever seen such contraries, by fraudulent Goddess blind.
To any one save only I, imparted for to be,
To animate the mind of any man, did ever Fortune she
Show forth her self so cruel bent, as thus to keep me back,
From pointed place by weather driven, my sorrows more to sack,
Ah fatal hap, herein alas, what further shall I say?
Since I am forced for to break, mine oath and pointed day.
Before King Alexanders grace, Clamydes will be there:
And I through Fortunes cruel spite, oppressed with sickness here:
For now within two days it is that we should meet together,
Woe worth the wind and raging storms, alas that brought me hither.
Now will Clamides me accuse, a faithless knight to be,
And eke report, that cowardliness did dant the heart of me.
The worthy praise that I have won, through fame shall be defaced,
The name of the Knight of the Golden Shield, alas shall be defaced:
Before that noble Prince of might, whereas Clamydes he
Will show himself in Combat wise, for to exclaim on me,
For breaking of my pointed day, and Clyomon to thy grief,
Now art thou in a country strange, clean void of all relief:
Oppressed with sickness through the rage of stormy blasts and cold,
Ah death come with thy direful Mace, for longer to unfold
My sorrows here it boots not yet Clyomon do stay,
The Ladies lo, comes towards thee, that walked the other way.
Come fair dames, sith that we have in fragrant fields obtained,
Of dulcet flowers the pleasant smell, and that these knights disdained
Not to bear vs company, our walk more large to make,
Here by the sea of surging waives, our home return weal make.
My Lords therefore do keep your way.
As it please your grace, we shall obey,
But behold Madame, what woeful wight, here in our way before,
As seems very sick to me, doth lie upon the shore.
My Lords, lets know the cause of grief, whereof he is oppressed:
That if he be a knight, it may by some means be redressed.
Fair sir well met, why lie you here▪ what is your cause of grief?
O Lady, sickness by the Sea, hath me oppressed in brief.
Of truth my Lords, his countenance betrays him for to bee,
In health, of valiant heart and mind, and eke of hye degree.
It doth no less then so import, O Princes as you say.
Of whence are you? or whats your name? you wander forth this
way.
Of small valor O Lady fair, alas my name it is,
And for not telling of the same, hath brought me unto this.
Why, for what cause sir Knight, should you not express your name?
Because O Lady I have vowed, contrary to the same.
But where I travel Lady fair, in City, Town or field,
I am called, and do bear by name, the knight of the Golden Shield.
Are you that knight of the Goldē shield, of whom such fame doth go?
I am that self same knight fair dame, as here my Shield doth shoe.
Ah worthy then of help indeed, my Lords assist I pray,
And to my lodging in the court, see that you him convey,
For certainly within my mind, his state is much deplored,
But do despair in nought sir knight, for you shall be restored,
If Physic may your grief redress, for I Neronis lo,
Daughter to Patranius king, for that which fame doth shoe,
Upon your acts, will be your friend, as after you shall prove.
In doing so, you shall have need of mighty love aboue.
O Princes, if I ever be to health restored again,
Your faithful servant day and night, I vow here to remain.
Well my Lords, come after me, do bring him I require:
We shall O Princes willingly accomplish your desire.
Ah sirrah, now is the ten days full expired, wherein Clamydes he,
Shall wake out of his charmed sleep, as shortly you shall see:
But here I have what I desired, his Shield, his coat and head,
To Denmark will I straight prepare, and there present with speed,
The same to Iulianas grace, as in Clamydes name,
Whereby I am assured I shall enjoy that noble Dame.
For why Clamydes he is safe, for ever being free,
And unto knowledge is he left, here guarded for to bee:
But no man knows of my pretents, no whither I am gone,
For secretly from Castle I, have stolen this night alone
In this order as you see, in the attire of a noble knight,
〈◊〉 yet poor Bryan, still thy heart holds courage in despite.
Well, yet the old proverb to disprove, I purpose to begin,
Which always saith, that cowardly hearts, fair Ladies never win.
Shall I not Iulianas win, and who hath a cowardlyer hart,
Yet for 〈◊〉 brag and boast it out, isle will none take my part.
For I can sooke both grim and fierce, as though I were of might,
And yet three Frog• out of a bush, my heart did so affright,
That I fell dead almost therewith, well cowardly as I am,
Farewell, Forest for now I will in knight Clamydes name,
To 〈◊〉 to present this head, to Iuliana bright,
Who shall cowardly dastard •ed, in steed of a worthy knight.
Be your leave I came up so early this morning that I cannot
see my way,
I am sure its scarce yet in the break of the day.
But you muse I am sure wherefore these weapons I bring,
Well, listen unto my tale, and you shall know every thing.
Because I played the shifting knave, to save my self from harm,
And by my procurement, my moister was brought in this charm.
The ten days are exspir'd, and this morning he shall awake,
And now like a crafty knave, to the prison my way will I take,
With these same weapons, as though I would fight to set him free,
Which will give occasion that he shall mistrust, there was no deceit in me.
And having the charge of him, here under Bryan sance foy,
Isle open the prison doors, and make as though I did employ
To do it by force, through good will, and only for his sake,
Then shall Clamydes being at liberty, the weapons of me take,
And set upon Bryan and all his men▪ now that they are a sleep,
And so be revenged, for that he did him keep
By charm in this order, so shall they both deceived be,
And yet upon neither part mistrust towards me.
Well, near to the prison isle draw, to see if he be awake,
Hark, hark, this same is he, that his lamentation doth make.
Ah fatal hap, where am I wretch, in what distressed case,
Be reft of Tyro, head and shield, not knowing in what place
My body is, ah heavenly gods, was ere such strangeness seen:
What do I dream? or am I still within the forest greene?
Dream? no, no, alas I dream not I, my senses all do fail,
The strangeness of this cruel hap, doth make my hart to quail.
Clamydes ah by fortune she, what froward luck and fate
Most cruelly assigned is, unto thy noble state.
Where should I be, or in what place hath destiny assigned
My sly corps for want of food and comfort to be pind.
Ah farewell hope of purchasing my lady, since is lost,
The Serpents head whereby I should possess that jewel most.
Ah farewell hope of honour eke, now shall I break my day
Before king Alexanders grace, whereon my faith doth stay.
And shall I be found a faithless Knight, fie on fell fortune she,
Which hath her wheel of froward chance, thus whirled back on me.
Ah farewell King of Sway land, ah farewell Denmark dame,
Farewell thou Knight of the golden Shield, to thee shall rest all fame.
To me this direful destiny, to thee I know renown,
To me the blast of ignomy, to thee dame honours crown.
Ah hateful hap, what shall I say, I see the gods hath signed
Through cruelty my careful corps, in prison to be pined.
And nought alas amates me so, but that I know not where I am,
Nor how into this doleful place my woeful body came.
Alas good Clamydes, in what an admiration is he,
Not knowing in what place his body should be.
Who names poor Clamydes there? reply to him again,
Ant shall please you I am your servant Knowledge, which in a
thousand woes for you remain.
Ah Knowledge where am I declare and be brief.
Where are you? faith even in the Castle of that false thief
Bryan sance foy, against whom to fight and set you free,
Look out at the window, behold I have brought tools with me.
Ah Knowledge, then cowardly that caitiff did me charm.
Yea, or else he could never have done you any harm,
But be of good cheer, for such a shift I have made,
That the keys of the prison I have got, your self persuade:
Wherewith this morning I am come to set you free,
And as they lye in their beds, you may murder Bryan and his men, and set
all other at liberty.
Ah Knowledge, this hath me bound to be thy friend for ever:
A true servant you may see will deceive his moister never.
So the doors are open, now come and follow after me.
Ah heavens, in what case my self do I see:
But speak Knowledge, can thou tell how long have I been here?
These ten days full, and sleeping still, this sentence is most clear.
Alas, then this same is the day the which appointed was
By the Knight of the golden Shield to me, that combat ours should pass
Before king Alexanders grace, and there I know he is,
Ah cruel Fortune why should thou thus wrest my chance amiss:
Knowing I do but honour seek, and thou doest me defame,
In that contrary mine expect, thou all things seeks to frame.
The faith and loyalty of a knight thou cause me to break,
Ah hateful dame, why should thou thus thy fury on me wreak,
Now will king Alexander judge the thing in me to bee,
The which since first I arms could bear, no wight did ever see.
But knowledge give from thee to me, those weapons that I may
Upon that Bryan be revenged, which cowardly did betray
Me of my things, and here from thrall all other knights set free,
Whom he by charm did bring in bale, as erst he did by me.
Come, into his lodging will I go, and challenge him and his.
Do so, and to follow I will not mis.
Ah sir, here was a shift according to my nature and condition,
And a thousand shifts more I have, to put my self out of suspicion.
But it doth me good to think how that cowardly knave Bryan sance foy
Shall be taken in the snare, my hart doth even leap for joy.
Hark, hark, my moister is amongst them, but let him shift as he can,
For not to deal with a dog, he shall have help of his man.
Come, come sir Knights, for so unfortunate was never none as I,
That I should joy that is my joy, the heavens themselves deny.
That cowardly wretch that kept you here, and did me so deceive,
Is fled away and hath the Shield, the which my Lady gave
To me in token of her love, the Serpents head like case,
For which this mine adventure was, to win her noble grace.
And sure that same th'occasion was, why we aduentred hither.
Well, sith I have you delivered, when as you please together
Each one into his native soil his journey do prepare,
For though that I have broke my day as erst I did declare,
Through this most cowardly catifes charms, in meeting of the Knight,
Which of the golden Shield bears name, to know else what he hight:
I will to Alexanders court, and if that thence he be,
Yet will I seek to find him out, least he impute to me
Some cause of cowardliness to be, and therefore sir Knights depart,
As to my self I wish to you with fervent zeal of hart:
Yet if that any one of you do meet this Knight by way
What was the cause of this my let, let him perstand I pray.
We shall not misle ô noble Knight, to accomplish this your will.
Well then adieu fit Knights each one, the gods protect you still.
What knowledge ho, where art thou man? come forth that hence we may.
Where am I? faith breaking open of chests here within,
for isle have the spoil of all away.
Tush, tush, I pray thee come that hence we may, no riches thou
shalt lack.
I come now with as much money as I am able to carry
of my back.
A there was never poor ass so laden, but how now,
that cowardly Bryan have you slain?
And your Shield, the Serpents head, and coat, have you again?
Ah no knowledge, the knights that here were captives kept,
they are by me at liberty,
But that false Bryan this same night, is fled away for certainty.
And hath all things he took from me, conveyed where none doth know.
O the bones of me, how will you then do for the Serpents head to
Iuliana to show?
I have no other hope alas, but only that her grace
Will credit give unto my words, when as I show my case
How they were lost, but first •re I unto that dame return,
He seek the knight of the golden Shield, whereas he doth sojourn,
To accomplish what my father wild, and therefore come away.
Well, keep on before, for I mind not to stay.
A fura, the crafts knave, the better luck, thats plain,
I have such a deal of substance here, where Bryans men are slain,
That is passes. O that I had while for to stay,
I could ••de a hundredth cuts full of kitchen st••ffe away.
Well, its not best to cary too long behind, left my moister ouer-go,
And then some knave knowing of my money, a piece of cosonage shoe.
How cast that tree but withered be
That wants sap to moist the root?
How can that Vine but waste and pine,
Whose plants are trodden under foot?
How can that spray but soon decay,
That is with wild weeds overgrown?
How can that wight in ought delight
Which shows, and hath no good will shown?
Or else how can that heart alas,
But die by whom each joy doth pass?
Neronis, ah I am the Tree, which wants sap to moist the root.
Neronis, ah I am the vine, whose Plants are trodden under foot.
I am the spray which doth decay, and is with wild weeds overgrown,
I am the wight without delight, which shows, and hath no good will shown.
Mine is the heart by whom alas, each pleasant joy doth pass,
Mine is the heart which vades away, as doth the flower or grass.
In wanting sap to moist the root, is joys that made me glad,
And plants being trodden under foot, is pleasures that was had.
I am the spray which doth decay, whom cares have overgrown,
But stay Neronis, thou say thou show, and hath no good will shown:
Why so I do, how can I tell, Neronis force no cruelty
Thou feast thy knight endued is, with all good gifts of curtsy:
And doth Neronis love indeed, to whom love doth she yield,
Even to that noble brute of fame, the knight of the golden Shield.
Ah woeful Dame, thou know not thou, of what degree he is,
Of noble blood his gesters show, I am assured of this.
Why belike he is some runagate that will not show his name,
Ah why should I this allegate, he is of noble fame.
Why dost thou not express thy love, to him Neronis then?
Because shamefastness and womanhood, bids vs not seek to men.
Ah careful Dame lo thus I stand, as it were one in a trance,
And lacks boldness for to speak, which should my words advance.
The knight of the Golden Shield it is, to whom a thrall I am,
Whom I to health restored have, since that to court he cam.
And now he is pressed to pass again, upon his weary way,
Unto the Court of Alexander, yet hath he broke his day,
As he to me the whole expressed, ah sight that doth me grieve,
Lo where he comes to pass away, of me to take his leave.
Who hath more cause to praise the Gods, then I whose state de∣plored?
Through physic and Neronis help, to health am now restored:
Whose fervent thrall I am become, yet urgent causes doth
Constrain me for to keep it close, and not to put in proof
What I might do to win her love, as first my oath and vow,
In keeping of my name unknown, which she will not allow,
If I should seem to break my mind, being a Princes borne,
To yield her love to one unknown, I know sheele think it scorn?
Besides here longer in this Court, alas I may not stay,
Although that with Clamydes he, I have not kept my day:
Least this he should suppose in me, for cowardliness of hart,
To seek him out elsewhere, I will from out this Land depart.
Yet though unto Neronis she, I may not show my mind,
A faithful heart when I am gone, with her I leave behind.
Whose bountiousnesse I here have felt, but since I may not stay,
I will to take my leave of her, before I pass away.
Lo where she walks, O Princess well met, why are you here so sad?
Good cause I have, since pleasures pass, the which should make me glad.
What you should mean, O Princess dear, hereby I do not know.
Then listen to my talk a while, Sir Knight and I will show.
If case you will reaunswere me, my question to obsolue,
The which propound within my mind, doth oftentimes renolue.
I will O Princes answer you as aptly as I may.
Well then Sir Knight, apply your cares, and listen what I say:
A ship that storms had tossed long, amidst the mounting waives,
Where harbour none was to be had, fell Fortune so depraves:
Through ill success that ship of hope, that Ancors hold doth fail,
Yet at the last shees driven to land, with broken Mast and sail:
And through the force of furious wind, and Billows bouncing blows,
She is a simple shipwreck made, in every point God knows.
Now this same ship by chance being found, the finders take such pain,
That fit to sail upon the Seas, they rig her up again.
And where she was through storms sore shook, they make her whole &amp; soūd
Now answer me directly here, upon this my propound.
If this same ship thus rent and torn, being brought in former rate,
Should not supply the finders true to profit his estate
In what she might.
Herein a right,
I will O Princess as I may, directly answer you.
This ship thus found, I put the case it hath an owner now,
Which owner shall sufficiently content the finders charge:
And have again to serve his use, his ship, his boat or barge.
The ship then cannot serve the turn of finders, this is plain,
If case the owner do content, or pay him for his pain:
But otherwise if none lay claim, nor seem that ship to stay,
Then is it requisite it should, the finders pains repay:
For such endeavour as it is to serve for his behoof.
What owner truly that it hath, I have no certain proof.
Then can I not define thereof, but thus I wish it were,
That you would me accept to be, that ship O Lady fair:
And you the finder, then it should be needless for to move,
If I the ship, of duty ought to serve at your behoove.
Thou art the ship O worthy Knight, so shivered found by me.
And owner have I none dear dame, I yield me whole to thee:
For as this ship I must confess, that was a shipwreck made,
Thou hast restored me unto health, whom sickness caused to vade,
For which I yield O Princess dear, at pleasure thine to be,
If your grace, O noble Dame, will so accept of me.
If case I will, what have you shown?
Because I am to you unknown.
Your fame imports what you be.
You may your pleasure say of me.
What I have said due proof do show.
Well Lady deate, to thee I owe
More service then of duty I am able to profess,
For that thou did preserve my life amidst my deep distress:
But at this time I may not stay, O Lady here with thee,
Thou know the cause, but this I vow within three score days to bee,
If destiny restrain me not, at Court with thee again,
Protesting whilst that life doth last, thine faithful to remain.
And is there then no remedy, but needs you will depart?
No Princess for a certainty, but here I leave my hart,
In gage with thee till my return, which as I said shall be:
Well, sith no persuasion may prevail, this Jewel take of me,
And keep it always formy sake.
Of it a dear account isle make, yet let vs part dear Dame with joy,
And to do the same I will my self employ.
Well now adi•u till thy return, the Gods thy journey guide.
And happily in absence mine, for thee dear Dame provide:
Ah Clyomon let dolours di•, drive daunts from out thy mind,
Since in the sight of Fortune now, such favour, thou dost find,
As for to have the love of her whom thou did sooner judge.
Would have denied thy loyalty, and against thy good will grudge,
But that I may here keep my day, you sacred Gods provide,
Most happy fate unto my state, and thus my journey guide:
The which I tempt to take in hand Clamydes for to meet:
That the whole cause of my first let, to him I may repeat.
So shall I seem for to excuse my self in way of right,
And not be counted of my foe, a false pe•iured Knight.
Where deep desire hath taken root, my Lords alas you see,
How that persuasion 〈◊〉 not, if contrary it be▪
Unto the first expo•••d hope, where fancy hath take place,
And vain it is for to withdraw, by counsel in that case:
The mind who with affection is, to one only thing affected,
The which may not till dint of death, from them be sure rejected:
You know my Lords through fame, what force of love hath taken place,
Within my breast as touching now Neronis noble grace,
Daughter to Patranius King, who doth the Sceptre sway:
And in the Isle of Marshes eke, bear rule now at this day.
Through love of daughter his, nay sorrows daily grow,
And daily do loves do me daunt, foe• that alas I show
Such Friendship whereas favour none, is to be found again:
And yet from o•• my careful mind, nought may her love restrain.
I sent to crave her of 〈◊〉 he answered me with nay:
But shall I not provide by force to fetch her thence away?
Yes, yes, my Lords, and therefore let your aids be pressed with mine,
For I will sure Neronis have, or else my days isle pine.
For King Patranius and his power, I hold of small account,
To win his daughter to my spouse, amids his men isle mount.
Most worthy Prince, this rash attempt, I hold not for the best,
For sure Patranius power is great, and not to be suppressed.
For why, the isle enuirond is, with sea on every side,
And landing place lo is there none, whereas you may have tide
To set your men from ship to shore, but by one only way,
And in that place a garrison great, he keeps at this day.
So that if you should bring your power, your travel werein vain,
That is not certainly the way, Neronis for to gain.
But this your grace may do indeed, and so I count it best,
To be in all points with a Ship, most like a Merchant pressed:
And sail with such as you think best, all dressed in Merchants guise,
And for to get her to your Ship, some secret mean devise,
By showing of strange Merchandies, or other such like thing,
Lo this is best advise I can, Thrassellus Lord and King.
And certainly as you have said, my Lord it is the way,
Wherefore ô King, do prosecute the same without delay.
Of truth my Lords this your advise doth for our purpose frame,
Come therefore let vs hence depart, to put in ur the same
With present speed, for Merchant-wise my self will thither sail:
This is the way if any be, of purpose to prevail.
Sir Knight, of truth this fortune was most luckily assigned,
That we should meet in travel thus, for thereby to my mind
You have a castle of comfort brought, in that you have me told,
Clamydes our appointed day, no more then I did hold.
No certis sir he kept not day, the cause I have expressed,
Through that enchanter Bryans charms, he came full sore distressed:
Yet fortune favoured so his state, that through his help all wee
Which captives were through cowardly craft, from bondage were set free:
And at our parting willed vs, if any with you met,
We should inform you with the truth what was his only let.
Well, know you where he abides now, sir Knight I crave
of courtesy?
No questionless I know not I, to say it of a certainty.
Well then adieu sir Knight with thanks, I let you on your way:
Unto the gods I you commit, nought else I have to say.
A sir, now the huge heaps of cares that lodged in my mind
Is skaled from their nestling place, and pleasures passage find.
For that as well as Clyomon, Clamydes broke his day,
Upon which news my passage now in seeking him isle stay:
And to Neronis back again, my joyful journey make,
Least that she should in absence mine, some cause of sorrow take.
And now all dumps of deadly dole, that daunted knightly breast,
A due, since salve of solace sweet, hath sorrows all suppressed.
For that Clamydes cannot brag, nor me accuse in ought,
Unto the gods of destinies, that thus our fates hath brought
In equal balance to be weighed, due praises shall I send,
That thus to way each cause aright, their eyes to earth did bend.
Well, to keep my day with Lady now, I mind not to be slack,
Wherefore unto Patranius court, isle dress my journey back.
But stay, me thinks I Rumour hear throughout this land to ring,
I will attend his talk, to know what tidings he doth bring.
Ye rolling Clouds give Rumour room, both ayre and earth below,
By sea and land, that every ear may understand and know,
What woeful hap is chanced now within the isle of late,
Which of strange Marshes bears name, unto the noblest state.
Neronis daughter to the King, by the King of Norway he,
Within a ship of Merchandise, conveyed away is she.
The King with sorrow for her sake, hath to death resignd,
And having left his Queen with child, to guide the realm behind.
Mustantius brother to the King, from her the Crown would take,
But till she be delivered, the Lords did order make,
That they before King Alexander, thither coming should appeal,
And he by whom they hold the Crown, therein should rightly deal
For either part, lo this to tell, I Rumour have in charge,
And through all lands I do pretend, to publish it at large.
Ah woeful Rumour ranging thus, what tidings do I hear,
Hath that false King of Norway stolen my love and Lady dear?
Ah hart, ah hand, ah head and mind, and every sense beside,
To serve your masters turn in need, do every one provide.
For till that I revenged be upon that wretched king,
And have again my Lady dear, and her from Norway bring,
I vow this body takes no rest, ah fortune fickle dame,
That can make glad and so soon sad, a Knight of worthy fame.
But what should I delay the time, now that my dear is go••?
Avails ought to ease my grief, to make this pensive mon••
No, no, wherefore come courage to my hart, and happy hands prepare,
For of that wretched King I will wreak all my sorrow and care.
And maugre all the might he may, be able for to make,
By force of arms my lady I, from him and his will take.
Come knowledge, thou art much to blame, thus for to lode thy self
To make thee on thy way diseased, with carrying of that pelf.
But now take courage unto thee, for to that isle I will,
Which of strange Marshes called is, for fame declares still
The Knight of the golden Shield is there, and in the court abides,
Thither will I him to meet, whatsoever me betides:
And know his name, as thou can tell my father charged me,
Or else no more his princely court nor person for to see.
Come therefore, that unto that isle we may our journey take,
And afterwards having met with him, our viage for to make
To Denmark to my Lady there, to show her all my case,
And then to Sway if her I have, unto my fathers grace.
Nay but ant shall please you, are you sure the Knight of the golden
Shield in the isle of strange Marshes is?
I was informed credibly, I warrant thee we shall not mis.
Then keep on your way, isle follow as fast as I can,
Faith he even means to make a martris of poor Shift his man.
And I am so tied to this bag of gold I got at Bryan sance foyes,
That I tell you where this is, there all my joy is:
But I am so weary, sometimes with riding, sometimes with running,
And other times going a foot:
That when I came to my lodging at night, to bring me a woman it is no boo•e.
And such care I take for this pelf least I should it lose,
That where I come, that it is gold, for my life I dare not disclose.
Well after my moister I must, hears nothing still but running and riding:
But isle give him the slip sure, if I once come where I may have quiet biding.
As 〈◊〉 •he Hound, as Lamb the Wolf, as foul the Fawcons dint,
So do I fly fro• tyrant he, whose heart more hard then flint
Hath sacked on me such huge heaps of seaceles sorrows here,
That sure it is intolerable, the torments that I bear:
Neronis, ah who knows thee, a Princes to be borne,
Since fatal Gods so frowardly, thy fortune doth adorn:
Neronis, ah who knows her, in painful Pages show?
But no good Lady will me blame, which of my case doth know:
But rather when they hear the truth, wherefore I am disguised,
Thaile say it is an honest shift, the which I have devised:
Since I have given my faith and troth to such a brute of fame,
As is the knight of the Golden Shield, and tyrants seeks to frame
Their engines to detract our vows, as the king of Norway hath,
Who of all Princes living now, I find devoid of faith:
For like a wolf in lambs skin clad, he comes with his aide,
All Merchant like to fathers Court, and ginneth to persuade
That he had precious jewels bought, which in his ship did lye,
Whereof he wild me take my choice, if case I would them buy:
Then I mistrusting no deceit, with handmaids one or two
With this deceitful Merchant then unto the ship did go.
No sooner were we under hatch, but up they hoist their sail,
And having then to serve their turn, a merry Western gail:
We were lashed out from the haven, lo a dozen leagues and more,
When still I thought the Bark had been, at anchor by the shore:
But being brought by Norway here, not long in Court I was,
But that to get from thence away, I brought this feat to pass:
For making semblance unto him as though I did him love,
He gave me liberty, or ought that served for my behove:
And having liberty, I wrought by such a secret slight,
That in this tyre like to a page, I escaped away by night.
But ah I fear that by pursuit, he will me overtake,
Well here entered one, to whom some sure for service I will make.
Gos bone turn in that sheep there and you be good fellows,
Iesu how cham beraid•,
Chaue a cur here, an a were my fellow, cha must him conswade,
And yet an cha should kiss, look you of the arse, cha must run my self, an i will,
An cha should ent•eat him with my cap in my hand, ha wad stand still.
But tic a world to see what merry lives we shepherds lead,
Why where Gentlemen and we get once a thorne bush over our head,
We may sleep with our vaces against the zone, an were hogs
Bath our selves, stretch out our legs ant were a cennell of dogs:
And then at night when maids come to milkin, the games begin,
But I may say to you my nabor, Hogs maid had a clap, well let thē laugh that win.
Chaue but one daughter, but chould not for forty pence she were so sped,
Cha may say to you, she looks every night to go to bed:
But tic no matter, the whores be so whiskish when their under a bush,
That their never satisfied, till their bellies be flush.
Well cha must abroad about my flocks, least the fengeance wolves catch a lamb:
For by my cursen zoul•, thale steal an cha stand by, there not a word of the dam▪
Well to scope the pursuit of the king, of this same shepherd here,
Suspicion wholly to avoid, for service isle enquire:
Well met good father, for your use, a servant do you lack?
What you will not flout an old man you courtnold Jack?
No truly father I flout you not, what I ask I would have.
Gos bones they leest, serve a shepherd an be so brave?
You courtnoll crackropes, wot be hanged, you do nothing now and then
But come up and down the country, thus to flout poor men.
Go too goodman boy, chaue no zeruis for no such flouting Jacks as you be
Father I think as I speak, upon my faith and troth believe me
I will willingly serve you, if in case you will take me.
Doest not inocke?
No truly father.
Then come with me, by gos bones i will never vorsake thee.
Whow bones of my zoule, tho wilt be y• bravest shepherds boy in our town,
Thous go to church in this coat, beuore Madge a sunday in her gray gown.
Good lord how our church-wardens will look vpō thee, bones of god zeest,
There will be more looking at thee, then our sir Iohn the parish priest.
Why every body will ask whose boy thart, an cha cātel the this by the way,
Thou shalt have al the varest wenches of our town in the veelds for to play.
Theres nabour Nychols daughter, a jolly smug whore with vat checks,
And nabour Hodges maid, meddle not with her, she hath eaten set leekes.
But theres Frumptons wench in the freeze scake, it will do thee good to see
What canuosing is at the milking time, between her and me.
And those wenches will love thee bonnomablely in every place,
But do not val in with them in any kind of case.
Tush, you shall not need to fear me, I can be merry with measure
as well as they:
Well then come follow after me, and home i will lead thee the way.
Alas poor simple Shepherd, by this Princes may see,
That like man, like talk, in every degree.
My Lords pursue her speedel•, she cannot far be gone,
And lo himself to seek her out, your King he will be one.
Ah fraudulent dame, how hath she glozd, from me to get away?
With sugared words how hath she fed, my senses night and day?
Professing love with outward shows, and inwardly her hart
To practise such a deep deceit, whereby she might depart
From out my court so suddenly, when I did wholly judge
She loved me most entirely, and not against me grudge.
She made such signs by outward shows, I blame not wit and policy,
But here I may exclaim and say, fie, fie, on women's subtlety.
Well well my Lords, no time delay, pursue her with all speed,
And I this forest will seek out my self, as is decreed,
With aide of such as are behind, and will come unto me:
We shall no• slake what here in charge to vs is giuē by thee.
Ah subtle Neronis, how hast thou me vexed?
Through thy crafty dealings how am I perplexed?
Did ever any win a dame, and lose her in such sort?
The maladies are marvelous, the which I do support
Through her deceit, but forth I will my company to meet,
If ever she be caught again, I will her so entreat,
That others all shall warning take, by such a subtle dame,
How that a Prince for to delude, such engines they do frame.
Nay Traitor stay, and take with thee that mortal blow or stroke
The which shall cause thy wretched corps this life for to revoke.
It joys me at the hart that I have met thee in this place.
What varlet dare thou be so bold, with words in such a case,
For to upbraid thy Lord and King? what art thou soon declare?
My Lord and King, I thee defy, and in despite I dare
Thee for to say thou art no Prince, for thou a Traitor art,
And what reward is due therefore, to thee I shall impart.
Thou braggest all too boldly still, what hight thy name express?
What hight my name thou shalt not know, no will I it confess:
But for that thou my Lady stole from fathers court away,
Isle sure revenge that traitorous fact upon thy flesh this day.
Since I have met so luckily with thee here all alone,
Although as I do understand, from thee she now is gone,
Yet therefore do defend thy self, for here I thee assail,
Alas poor boy, think thou against me to prevail?
Ah heavens, Thrasellus he is slain, ye Gods his ghost receive,
Now hast thou justice for thy fact, as thy desert doth crave:
But ah alas poor Clyomon, though thou thy foe hast slain,
Such grievous wounds thou hast received, as doth increase thy pain.
Unless I have some speedy help, my life must neatly wast,
And then as well as traitor false, my corps of death shall taste.
Ah my Neronis where art thou? ah where art thou become?
For thy sweet sake thy Knight shall here receive his vital doom.
Lo here all gored in blood thy faithful Knight doth lye,
For thee, ah faithful dame, thy Knight for lack of help shall dye.
For thee, ah here thy Clyomon, his mortal stroke hath tan,
For thee, ah these same hands of his, the Norway King hath slain.
Ah bleeding wounds from ionger talk my foltring tong doth stay,
And if I have not speedy help, my life doth wast away.
A plage on thee for a cur, A ha, driven me sheep aboue from the flock:
A thief, art not ashamed? isle beat thee like a stock:
And cha been azeeking here, aboue voure miles and more:
But chill tell you what, chaue the bravest lad of Jack the courtnoll, that ever
was zeene beuore.
A, the whorcop is plagely well loved in our town,
An you had zeene go to Church beuore Madge my wife in her holy day gown,
You would have blessed your zelues t'aue seen it, she wēt even cheke by ioule
With our head controms wife, brother to my nabour Nycholl,
You know ha dwells by moister Justice, over the water on the other side
of the hill,
Cham sure you know it, between my nabour Filchers varme house, and
the wind-mill.
But an you did see how Ione Ienkin, and Gilian Giffrey loves my boy Jack,
Why it is maruelation to see, Ione did so bast Gillians back,
That by Gos bones I laughed till cha be pissed my zelfe, when cha zaw it,
All the maids in town valls out for my boy, but and the young man know it
Thale be so ielisom over them, that cham in doubt
Each shall not keep Jack my boy till seven years go about.
Well, cham ne'er the near for my sheep, chaue sought it this voure mile,
But chill home, and send Jack forth to seek it another while.
But bones of God man stay, Iesu whather wilt? when what meanst lye here?
Ah good father help me.
Nay who there, by your leave, chill not come near.
What another? bones of me, he is either kilt or dead?
Nay varewell forty pence, year a knave, gos death a doth bleed.
I bleed indeed father, so grieuo•s my wounds bee,
That if I have not speedy help, long life is not in m•e.
Why what art thou? or how chanced thou came in this case?
Ah father, that dead corps which thou see there in place,
He was a Knight, and mine enemy, whom here I have slain,
And I a Gentleman, whom he hath wounded with marvelous pain.
Now thou know the truth, good father show some courtesy
To stop my bleeding wounds, that I may find some remedy,
My life to preserve, if possible I may▪
Well he are you gentleman, chould have you know this by the way,
Cham but father Coryn the shepherd, cham no surringer I,
But chill do what cha can for you, cha were loath to see you die.
Lo how say you by this, have cha done you any ease?
Father thy willingness of a certainty, doth me much please:
But good father lend me thy helping hand once again.
To bury this same Knight whom here I have slain,
Although he was to me a most deadly enemy,
Yet to leave his body unburied, were great cr•eltie.
Bones of God man, our Priest dwells too far away.
Well, then for want of a Priest, the Priests part I will play:
Therefore father, help me to lay his body aright:
For I will bestow a hearse of him, because he was a Knight:
If thou wilt go to a Cottage hereby, and fetch such things as I lack.
That chill Gentleman, and by and by return back.
But Clyomon pluck up thy heart, with courage once again,
And I will set over his dead Coa•se in sign of victory,
My Golden Shield and Sword, but wi•• the point hanging down,
As one conquered and lost his renown.
Writing likewise thereupon, that all passengers may see,
That the false King of Norway, here lies slain• by me.
Lo Gentleman, cha brought such things, as are requisite for the same:
Then good father help me, the Hearse for to frame.
Chat chall Gentleman, in the best order that cha may:
O that our Parish Priest were here, that you might hear him say,
For by gos bones, an there be any noise in the Church, in the midst of his
prayers heel swear.
A he loves hunting a life, would to God you were acquainted with him a
while,
And as for a woman, well chill say nothing, but cha know whom hee did
beguile.
Well father Coryn let that pass, wee have nothing to do withal,
And now that this is done, come reward thy pain I shall.
There is part of a recompense, thy good will to requite.
By my troth cha thank you, cham bound to pray for you day and night.
And now i will euē home, &amp; send Jack my boy this sheep to seek out:
Tell me father e•e thou goosed, did thou not see a Lady wandering
here about?
A Lady, no good void gentleman, cha zaw none cha tel you plane:
Well then farewell father, gramercies for thy pain.
Ah Narrow•is where thou art, or where thou doest abide,
Thy Clyomon to seek thee out shall rest no time nor tide:
Thy foe here lies slain on ground, and living is thy friend,
Whose travel •il he see thy face, shall never have an end.
My Ensign here I leave behind, these verses writ shall yield
A true report of traitor slain, by the knight of the golden shield.
And as unknown to any wight, to travel I betake,
Until I may her find, whose sight my hart may joyful make.
Iesu what a gazing do you make at me, to see me in a gown?
Do you not know after travel, men being in Court or in Town,
And specially such as is of any reputation, they must use this guise,
Which signifies a fool to be sage, grave, and of counsel wise.
But where are we think you now, that Shift is so brave?
Not running to seek the knight of the golden shield, an other office I have:
For coming here to the court, of strange Marshes so named,
Where King Alexander in his own person lies, that Prince mightily famed
Between Mustantius brother to the late king deceased
And the Queen, through King Alexander, a strife was appeased:
But how or which way I think you do not know,
Well then give ear to my tale, and the truth I will show:
The old King being dead, through sorrow for Neronis,
Whom we do hear, Lover to the Knight of the Golden Shield is.
The Queen being with child, the sceptre asked to sway,
But Mustantius the Kings brother, he did it deny.
Whereof great contention grew, amongst the Nobles on either side,
But being by them agreed the judgment to abide
Of King Alexander the great, who then was coming hither,
At his arrival to the Court, they all were called together.
The matter being heard, this sentence was given,
That either party should have a Champion to combat them between:
That which Champion were overcome, the other should sway,
And to be soughten after that time, the sixteen day.
Now my moister Clamydes coming hither, for Mustantius will he bee,
But upon the Queens side, to venture none can we see:
And yet she makes proclamation through every land:
To give great gift; to any that will take the combat in hand.
Well within ten days is the time, and king Alexander hee
Stays till the day appointed, the trial to see:
And if none came at the day for the Queen to fight,
Then without travel to my moister, Mustantius hath his right.
But to see all things in a readiness, against thappointed day:
Like a shifting knave for advantage, to Court Isle take my way.
The painful paths, the weary ways, the travels and ill fare,
That simple feet, to Princes seem, in practise very rare,
As I poor Dame, whose pensive heart, no pleasure can delight,
Since that my state so cruelly, fell Fortune holds in spite.
Ah poor Neronis in thy hand, is this a seemly show,
Who should in Court thy Lute supply, where pleasures erst did flow?
Is this an instrument for thee to guide a shepherds flock?
That art a Princes by thy birth, and borne of noble stock.
May mind from mourning more refrain•, to think on former state?
May heart from sighing eke abstain, to see this simple rate?
May eyes from down distilling tears, when thus a love I am,
Resistance make, but must they not, through ceaseless sorrows frame
A River of bedewed drops, for to distill my face?
Ah heavens when you are revenged enough, then look upon my case:
For till I hear some news alas upon my loving Knight,
I dare not leave this loathsome life, for fear of greater spite:
And now as did my moister will, as sheep that is a stray
I must go seek her out again, by wild and weary way.
Ah woeful sight; what is al•s, with these mine eyes beheld,
That to my loving Knight belongd, I view the Golden Shield:
Ah heavens, this Hearse doth signify my, Knight is slain,
Ah death no longer do delay, but rid the lives of twain:
Heart, hand, and every• •ence prepare, unto the Hearse, draw no:
And thereupon submit your selves, disdain not for to die
With him that was your mistress joy, her life and death like case,
And well I know in seeking me, he did his end embrace.
That cruel wretch that Norway King this cursed deed hath dunne,
But now to cut that ling•••g thread, that Lashes lo•g hath spun,
The sword of this my lo•ing knight, behold I here do take,
Of this my woeful corps alas, • final end to make:
Yet ere I strike that deadly stroke that shall my life deprave,
Ye muses aid me to the Gods, for mercy first to crave.
Well now you heavens 〈◊〉 my ghost, my corps I leave behind,
To be enclosed with his in earth, by those that shall it find.
Stay, stay thy stroke, thou woeful Dame, what wilt thou thus dis∣pair?
Behold to let this wilful fact, I Providence prepaire
To thee, from seat of ••ghtie love, look hereupon again,
Read, that if case thou can it ••de, and see if he be slain
Whom thou doest love.
Ah heavens aboue.
All land and prais• and ho 〈◊〉 due to you I here do render,
That would vouchsafe your handmaid here, in woeful state to tender▪
But by these same Verses do I find, my faithful knight doth live,
Whose ••nd unto my deadly foe, the mortal stroke did give:
Whose cursed carlcasse lo it is, which here on ground doth lie,
Ah honour due for this I yield, to mighty Jove on hie.
Well, let desperation die in thee, I may not here remain,
But be assured, that thou shalt ere long thy knight attain.
And for their prouid•nce divine, the Gods aboue isle praise,
And show their works so wonderful, unto their laud always.
Well, sith that the gods by providence hath signed unto me
Such comfort sweet in my distress, my Knight again to see,
Farewell all feeding Shepherds flocks, unseemly for my state,
To seek my love I will set forth, in hope of friendly fate.
But first to Shepherds house I will, my pages tyre to take,
And afterwards depart from thence, my journey for to make.
Long have I sought but all in vain, for neither far nor near
Of my Neronis woeful dame, by no means can I hear.
Did ever fortune violate two lovers in such sort?
The griefs ah are intolerable, the which I do support
For want of her, but hope somewhat reui•es my pensive hart,
And doth to me some sudden cause of comfort now impart
Through news I hear, as I abroad in weary travel went,
How that the Queen her mother hath her proclamations sent
Through every land, to get a Knight to combat on her side,
Against Mustantius, Duke and Lord, to have a matter tried:
And now the day is very nigh, as I do understand,
In hope to meet my Lady there I will into that land:
And for her mother undertake the combat for to try,
Yea though the other Hector were, I would him not deny
What soever he be, but ere I go, a golden Shield isle have,
Although unknown, I will come in, as doth my Knighthood crave:
But covered will I keep my Shield, because isle not be known,
If case my Lady be in place, till I have prowess shown.
Well, to have my Shield in readiness, I will no time delay,
And then to combat for the Queen, I straight will take my way.
Ah weary paces that I walk, with steps unsteady still,
Of all the gripes of grisly griefs, Neronis hath her fill.
And yet amids these miseries, which were my first mishaps,
By brute I hear such news alas, as more and more inwraps
My wretched corps with thousand woes, more then I may support,
So that I am to be compared unto the scaled fort,
Which doth so long as men and might, and sustenance prevail,
Give to the enemies repulse, that comes to assail•
But when assistance gins to fail, and strength of foes increase,
They forced are through battering blows, the same for to release.
So likewise I so long as hope, my comfort did remain,
The grisly griefs that me assailed, I did repulse again:
But now that hope begins to fail, and griefs anew do rise,
I must of force yield up the Forte, I can no way devise
To keep the same, the Forte I mean, it is the weary corse,
Which sorrows daily do assail, and siege without remorse:
And now to make my griefs the more, report alas hath told,
How that my fathers aged bones, is shrined up in mold,
Since Norway king did me betray, and that my mother she,
Through Duke Mustantius, uncle mine, in great distress to bee:
For swaying of the Septer there, what should I herein say?
Now that I cannot find my knight, I would at combat day
Be gladly there, if case I could with some good moister meet,
That as his Page in these affairs, would seem me to entreat:
And in good time, here comes one, he seems a knight to be,
Isle profer service, if in case, he will accept of me.
Well, now as one unknown, I will go combat for the Queen:
Who can bewray me, since my Shield is not for to be seen?
But stay, who do I here espy? of truth a proper Boy,
If case he do a moister lack, he shall sustain no no:
For why in these affairs, he may stand me in passing steed.
Well, I see to pass upon my way, this Gentleman's decreed,
To him I will submit my self, in service for to be,
If case he can his fancy frame, to like so well on me.
Well met sir knight upon your way.
My Boy gramercies, but to me say,
Into what country is thy journey dight?
Towards the strange Marsh, of truth Sir Knight.
And thither am I going, high Jove be my guide.
Would Gods I were worthy to be your Page by your side.
My Page my boy, why what is thy name? that let me hear.
Sir Knight, by name I am called Cur Dicier.
Cur Dicier, what heart of Steel, now certis my boy:
I am a Gentleman, and do entertain thee with joy:
And to the strange Marshes am I going, the Queen to defend,
Come therefore, for without more saying, with me thou shalt wend.
As diligent to do my duty as any in this land:
Ah Fortune, how favourably my friend doth she stand:
For thus no man knowing mine estate nor degree,
May I pass safely, a Page as you see.
Even as the Owl that hides her head, in hollow tree till night,
And dares not while sir Phoebus shines, attempt abroad in flight:
So likewise I as Buzzard bold, while cheerful day is seen,
Am forced with Owl to hide my self, amongst the Ivy greene:
And dares not with the seely Snail, from cabin show my head,
Till Vesper I behold aloft, in skies begin to spread:
And then as Owl that flies abroad when other fowls do rest,
I creep out of my drowsy den, when summous hath suppressed
The head of every valiant heart, lo thus I shroud the day,
And travel as the Owl by night upon my wished way:
The which hath made more tedious my journey, by half part,
But blame not Bryan, blame alas, his cowardly catiffes hart:
Which dares not show it self by day, for fear of worthy wights,
For none can travel openly, to escape the venturous Knights,
Unless he have a noble mind, and eke a valiant hart,
The which I will not brag upon, I assure you for my part:
For if the courage were in me, the which in other is,
I doubtless had enjoyed the wight whom I do love ere this.
Well, I have not long to travel now, to Denmark I draw no,
Bearing knight Clamydes name, yet Bryan sance foy am I.
But though I do usurp his name, his shield or ensign here,
Yet can I not usurp his heart, still Bryans heart I bear:
Well, I force not that, he is safe enough, and Bryan as I am,
I will unto the Court, whereas I shall enjoy that dame.
Room there for a reckoning, see I beseech you if thale stand out of the way,
Iesu, Iesu, why do you not know that this is the day
That the combat must pass for Mustantius and the Queen?
But to fight upon her side as yet no Champion is seen.
And Duke Mustantius he smiles in his sleeve, because he doth see
That neither for love nor rewards, any one her Champion will be.
Ant were not but that my moister the other Champion is,
To fight for the Queen my self, I surely would not mis.
Alas good Lady, she and her child is like to lose all the land,
Because none will come in, in her defence for to stand.
For where she was in election, if any Champion had come
To rule till she was delivered, and have the Princes room:
Now shall Duke Mustantius be sure the Sceptre to sway,
If that none do come in to fight in her cause this day.
And King Alexander all this while hath he stayed the trial to see,
Well here they come, room there for the King, here is such thrusting of
women as it grieves me.
O Alexander lo behold, before thy royal grace
My Champion here at pointed day I do present in place.
Well sir Duke in your defence is he content to be?
Yea wo•thy Prince, not fearing who encounter shall with me:
Although he were with H•rcul•s of equal power and might,
Yet in the cause of this same Duke, I challenge him the fight.
I like your courage well sir Knight: what shall we call your name?
Clamydes, son to the Sue•ian King, O Prince so hight the same.
Now certainly I am right glad Clamydes for to see,
Such valiant courage to remain within the mind of thee.
Well Lady, according to the order tan herein, what do you say,
Have you your Champion in like case, now ready at the day?
No sure ô King no Champion I, have for to aid my cause,
Unless twill please your noble grace on further day to pause.
For I have sent throughout this Isle, and every foreign land,
But none as yet hath proffered, to take the same in hand.
No, I am more sorry certainly, your chance to see so ill,
But day deferred cannot be, unless Mustantius will,
For that his Champion ready here, in place he doth present,
And who so missed at this day, should loose by full consent
Of either part, the title right, and sway of regal Mace,
To this was your consentment given, as well as his in place,
And therefore without his assent, we cannot refer the day?
Ant shall please your grace, herein try Mustantius what he will say.
How say you Mustantius, are you content the day to defer?
Your Grace will not will me I trust, for then from law you err:
And having not her Champion here, according to decree,
There rests nought for her to loose, the Crown belongs to me.
Nay ant shall please your grace, rather then she shall it lose,
I my self will be her Champion for half a dozen blows.
Wilt thou? then by full congo to the Challenger there stands.
Nay soft, of sufferance comes ease, though I cannot rule my
tongue, isle rule my hands.
Well noble Alexander, sith that she wants her Champion as
you see,
By greement of your royal grace, the Crown belongs to me.
Nay Mustantius, she shall have law, wherefore to sound begin,
To see if that in three hours space no Champion will come in.
Of truth Madam I sorry am, none will thy cause maintain,
Well, according to the law of Arms, yet Trumpet sound again.
What, and is there none will take in hand, to Combat for the Queen?
Faith I think it must be I must do the deed, for none yet is seen.
O King let pity plead for me, here in your gracious sight,
And for so slender cause as this deprive me not of right:
Consider once I had to spouse a Prince of worthy fame,
Though now blind Fortune spurn at me, her spite I needs must blame,
And though I am bereft O King, both of my child and mate,
Your Grace some greement may procure, consider of my state,
And suffer not a Widow Queen with wrong oppressed so,
But pity the young Infants case, wherewith O King I go:
And though I suffer wrong, let that find favour in your sight.
Why Lady I respect you both, and sure would if I might
Entreat Mustantius there unto, some such good order frame,
Your strife should cease, and yet each one well pleased with the same.
I know your grace may him persuade, as reason wills no less.
Well, Sir Mustantius, then your mind to me in brief express,
Will you unto such order stand here limited by me,
Without deferring longer time, say on if you agree?
In hope your grace my state will way, I give my glad consent.
And for to end all discord say, Madame, are you content?
Yea noble King.
Well then before my nobles all, give ear unto the King,
For swaying of the sword and Mace all discord to beat down,
The child when it is borne, we elect to wear the Crown.
And till that time Mustantius, you of lands and living here,
Like equal part in every point, with this the Queen shall share:
But to the child when it is borne, if Gods grant it to live,
The kingdom whole in every part, as title we do give.
But yet Mustantius, we will yield this recompense to you,
You shall receive five thousand Crowns for yearly pension due,
To maintain your estate, while you here live and do remain,
And after let the whole belong unto the Crown again.
Now say your minds if you agree?
I would the like choice were put to me.
I for my part O Noble King therewith am well content:
Well better half then nought at all, I likewise give consent.
Renowned King and most of fame, before thy royal grace,
The Queen to aid, I do present my person here in place.
You come too late in faith Sir knight, the hour and time is past.
Your hour I am not to respect, I entered with the blast.
What Prince•x is it you, are come to combat for the Queen?
Good Fortune now, I hope ere long your courage shall be seen.
And sure I count my hap as good, to meet with you Sir knight,
Come according to your promise made, prepare your self to fight.
I knew you well enough sir, although your shield were hid from
me.
Now you shall feel me as well as know me, if hand and hart agree.
Stay, stay Sir knights, I charge you not in combat to proceed,
For why the quarrel ended is, and the parties are agreed:
And therefore we discharge you both, the combat to refrain:
The heavens therefore O noble King, thy happy shield remain.
O King although we be discharged for this contention now,
Betwixt vs twain there rests yet a combat made by vow:
Which should be fought before your Grace: and since we here be met,
To judge twixt vs for victory, let me your Grace entreat.
For what occasion is your strifes sir knights, first let me know?
The truth thereof renowned king thy servant he shall show:
What time O king, as I should take of Suauia king my sier,
The noble orders of a Knight, which long I did desire:
This knight a stranger comes to court, and at that present day,
In cowardly wise he comes by stealth, and takes from me away
The honour that I should have had, for which my father he,
Did of his blessing give in charge, O noble king to me,
That I should know his name, that thus bereaved me of my right
The which he will not show, unless he be subdued in fight:
Whereto we either plighted faith, that I should know his name,
If that before thy Grace O King, my force in fight could frame,
To vanquish him, now having met thus happily together,
Though they are greed, our combat rest, decreed ere we came hither.
Are you that knight that did subdue Sir Samuel in field,
For which you had in recompense of vs, that Golden Shield?
I am that knight renowned Prince, whose name is yet unknown,
And since I foiled Sir Samuel, some prowess I have shown.
Then as I guess, you are that Knight by that same shield you bear
Which sometime was restored to health within our Palace here?
By Neronis our daughter she betrayed by Norway king.
I am that knight indeed O Queen, whom she to health did bring▪
Whose servant ever I am bound wheresoever that she be,
Whose enemy O Queen is slain pursuing her, by me.
Know you not where she abides, Sir knight to vs declare?
No certis would to Gods I did, she should not live in care,
But escaped from the Norway king, I am assured she is.
Well her absence was her fathers death, which turned to bale my
(blis.
And till I find her out again, my toil no end shall have
Alas he is nigh enough to her, small toil the space doth crave.
Well Sir knights, since that you have declared before me here,
The cause of this the grudge which you to each other bear:
I wish you both a while to pause, and to my words attend,
If Reason rest with you, be sure Knights, this quarrel I will end,
Without the shedding any blood betwixt you here in sight:
Clamydes, way you are nobly borne, and will you then sir Knight,
Go hazard life so desperately▪ I charge you both refrain,
Since for so small a cause, the st••fe doth grow betwixt you twain:
And let him know your name sir knight, and so your malice end:
I have vowed to the contrary, which vow I must defend.
Well though so it be that you ha•e vowed, your name shall not be known:
Yet not detracting this your vow, your country may be shown,
And of what stock by birth you bee:
But Lady he is dashed now I see.
Indeed this hath astond me much, I cannot but confess,
My country and my birth, my state, which plainly will express
My name, for that unto them all my state is not known,
Sir knight, of our demand from you again, what answer shall be shown▪
Of Denmark noble Prince I am, and son unto the king:
Why then sir Chomon hight your name, as rare report doth ring?
It doth indeed so hight my name, O Prince of high renown,
I am the Prince of Denmarkes son, and heir unto the Crown.
And are you son to Denmark king? then do embrace your friend,
Within whose heart here towards you, all malice makes an end:
Who with your sister linked is, in love with loyal hart:
And for her sake, and for thine own, like friendship I impart.
Well sir knights, since friendship rests, where rancor did remain,
And that you are such friends become, I certain am right fine,
In hope you will continue still, you shall to Court repair,
And remain if that you please awhile, to rest you there
Till time you have decreed which way your journey you will frame▪
We yield you thanks, beseeching Jove still to augment your fame.
Well, come my Clyomon let vs pass, and as we journey by way,
My most misfortunes unto thee I wholly will bewray
What happened in my last affairs, and for thy sisters sake.
Well then Coeur d'acer come and waite, your journey you shall take,
And seeing thou art prepared, and hast all things in readiness,
Hast thee before to Denmark with speediness,
And tell the King and the Queen that Clyomon their son
In health and happy state to their court doth return,
But in no wise to Iuliana say any thing of me.
I will not show one word amiss contrary your decree.
Well then my Clyomon, to take our leave to court let vs repare:
As your friend and companion Clamydes every where.
Oh heavens! is this my loving knight whom I h••e served so lōg▪
Now have I tried his faithful hart, oh so my joys doth throng,
To think how fortune favours me, Nerones now be glad,
And praise the gods, thy journey now, such good success hath had.
To Denmark will I hast with joy my message to declare,
And tell the King how that his son doth homeward now repair.
And more to make my joys abound, fortune could never frame
A finer mean to serve my turn, then this, for by the same
I may unto the Queen declare my state in secret wise,
As by the way I will recount how best I can devise.
Now pack Nerones like a page, hast hence lest thou be spied,
And tell thy masters message there, the gods my journey guide.
Come Lady Queen, and daughter eke, my Iuliana dear,
We muse that of your Knight as yet no news again you hear,
Which did adventure for your love the Serpent to subdue.
O father, the sending of that worthy knight my woeful hart doth rue,
For that alas the furious force of his outrageous might,
As I have heard subdued hath full many a worthy knight.
And this last night O father past, my mind was troubled sore,
Me thought in dream I saw a Knight not known to me before,
Which did present to me the head of that same monster slain,
But my Clamydes still in voice me thought I heard complain,
As one bereft of all his joy, now what this dream doth signify,
My simple skill will not suffice the truth thereof to specify.
But sore I fear to contraries, the expect thereof will hap,
Which will in huge calamities my woeful corps bewrap:
For sending of so worthy a Prince, as was Clamydes he,
To sup his dire destruction there, for wretched love of me.
Tush daughter these but fancies be, which run within your mind:
Let them for to suppress your joys, no place of harbour find.
O Princes let no dollors dant, behold your Knight in place:
Ah happy sight, do I behold my knight Clamydes face?
Well, I have at last through •rauell long, achieved my journeys end,
Though Bryan, yet Clamydes name, I stoutly must defend.
Ah happy sight, the King and Queen with daughter in like case
I do behold, to them I will present my self in place:
The mighty Gods renowned King, thy princely state maintain:
Sir Clamydes, most welcome sure you are to court again.
O Princes lo my promise here performed thou moist see,
The Serpents head by me subdued I do present to thee,
Before thy fathers royal grace:
My Cl•mydes do embrace.
Thy Iuliana, whose hart thou hast till vital race be run•
Sith for her sake so venturously this deed by thee was done.
Ah welcome home my faithful Knight:
Gramerces noble Lady bright.
Well Iuliana in our court your lover cause to stay,
For all our Nobles we will send, against your nuptial day.
Go cary him to take his rest:
I shall obey your graces hest.
Come my Clamydes go with me, in court your rest to take:
I thank you Lady, now I see account of me you make.
Well my Queen, sith daughter ours hath chosen such a make,
The terror of whose valiant hart may cause our foes to quake,
Come let vs presently depart, and as we did decree,
For all our nobles will we send, their nuptials for to see.
As pleases thee, thy Lady Queen O king is well agreed.
May it please your graces to arest, for lo with posting speed
A messenger doth enter place:
Then will we stay to know the case.
The mighty powers renowned Prince preserve your state for ay,
Messenger thou art welcome, what hast thou to say?
Sir Clyomon your noble son, knight of the golden Shield,
Who for his valiant victories in Town and eke in field
Is famed through the world, to your court doth now return,
And hath sent me before to Court, your grace for to inform.
Ah messenger declare, is this of truth the which that thou hast told▪
It is most true O Noble king, you may thereof be bold.
Ah joy of joys surpassing all, what joy is this to me?
My Clyomon in Court to have, the nuptial for to see,
Of Iuliana sister his, oh so I joy in mind.
My boy where is thy moister speak, what is he far behind:
Declare with speed, for these my eyes do long his face to view:
Oh Queen this day he will be here, tic truth I tell to you.
But noble Queen let pardon here my bold attempt excuse,
And for to hear a simple boy in secret not refuse.
Who hath strange tidings from your son to tell unto your grace.
Behold my Lord where as I guess, some strangers enter place:
I hope my Clyomon be not far, Oh joy, I see his face.
Come Knowledge, come forward, why art thou always slack?
Get you to Court, brush up our apparel, untruss your pack:
Go seek out my Page, bid him come to me with all speed you can:
Go seek out, fetch, bring he•e, gogs ounds, what am I, a dog or a man▪
I were better be a hangman, and live so like a drudge:
Since your new man came to you, I must pack, I must trudge.
How stands thou knave? why gets thou not away?
Now, now sir, you are so hasty now, I know not what to say.
O noble Prince, the Gods aboue preserve thy royal grace:
How joyful is my heart dear son, to view again thy face?
And I as joyful in the view of parents happy plight,
Whom sacred gods long time maintain in honour day and night.
But this my friend O father dear, even as my self entreat,
Whose nobleness when time shall serve to you he shall repeat.
If case my son he be thy friend, with hart I thee embrace:
With loyal hart in humble wise, I thank your noble grace.
My Clyomon declare my son in thine adventures late,
What hath bin wrought by fortune most to advance thy noble state?
O father, the greatest joy of all the joys which was to one assigned
Since first I left your noble court by cruel fortune blind,
Is now bereft from me away, through her accursed fate,
So that I rather find she doth envy my noble state,
Then seek for to advance the same, so that I boldly may
Express she never gave so much, but more she took away.
And that which I have lost by her, and her accursed ire,
From travel will I never cease, until I may aspire
Unto the view thereof oh King, wherein is all my joy.
Why how hath fortune wrought to thee this care and great annoy?
O father unto me the heavenly powers assigned a noble dame,
With whom to live in happy life, my hart did wholly frame.
But not long did that glasing sty••e, give light unto mine eyes,
But this fell fortune gins to frown, which every state despise,
And takes away through cankered have that happy light from me,
In which I fixed had my hope, a blessed state to see:
And daughter to the King she was, which of strange Marshes hight,
Bearing brute each where, to be dame Beauties darling bright:
Right heir unto dame Virtues grace, dame Natures pattern true,
Dame Prudence scholar for her wit, dame Venus for her hue.
Diana for her dainty life, Suzanne being sad,
Sage S•ha for her soberness, mild Marpha being glad.
And if I should reentre make, amongst the Muses nine,
My Lady lacked no kind of art, which man may well define
Amongst those dainty dames to be, then let all judge that hear,
If that my cause it be not just, for which this pensive cheer
Fell fortune forces me to make.
Yet Clyomon good counsel take.
Let not the loss of the Lady thine so pinch thy hart with grief,
That nothing may unto thy mind give comfort or relief:
What man there Ladies are enough, although that she be gone,
Then leave to wail the want of her, cease off to make this moan.
No father, never seem for to persuade, for as is said before,
What travel I have had for her, it shall be triple more,
Until I meet with her again.
Well Clyomon, a while refrain,
And let me here my woes recount before your fathers grace,
But let me crave, your sister may be sent for into place.
O King vouchsafe I may demand a simple bound,
Although a stranger, yet I hope such favour may be found,
The thing is this, that you will send for Iuliana hither,
Your daughter fair, that we may talk a word or twain together.
For what, let me know sir knight, do you her fight desire?
The cause pretends no harm my Liege, why he doth this require.
My Lord go bid our daughter come and speak with me straight way.
I shall my Liege in every point, your mind herein obey.
Oh father this is Clamydes, and son to Sway• King.
Who formy sister ventured life, the serpents head to bring:
With whom I met in travel mine, but more whad did befall,
To work his woe when as she comes, your grace shall know it all.
My son you are deceived much, I you assure in this,
The person whom you term him for, in court already is.
No father I am not deceived, this is Clamydes sure.
Well my son do cease a while such talk to put in ur:
For lo thy sister enters place, which soon the doubt shall end.
Then for to show my name to her, I surely do pretend,
My Iuliana noble Dame, Clamydes do embrace,
Who many a bitter brunt hath bode, since that he saw thy face.
Avaunt dissembling wretch, what credit can thou yield?
Wher's the serpents head thou brought, where is my glittering Shield?
Tush, tush sir knight, you counterfeit, you would Clamydes be,
But want of these bewrays you quite, and shows you are not he,
O Princes do not me disdain, I certain am your knight:
What art thou frantic foolish man▪ avaunt from out my sight.
If thou art he, then show my shield, and bring the Serpents head:
O Princess hear me show my case, by Fortune fell decreed.
I am your Knight and when I had subdued the monster fell,
Through weary fight and travel great as Knowledge here can tell:
I laid me down to rest a space within the Forest, where
One Bryan than Sance foy hight, who with cowardly usage there,
By chanting cha•me, brought me a sleep, then did he take from me
The Serpents head, my coat and shield, the which you gave to me:
And left me in his prison lo still sleeping as I was.
Lo Lady thus I lost those things the which to me you gave,
But certainly I am your Knight, •nd he who did deprave
The flying Serpent of his life according as you willed,
That who so won your love by him, the same should be fulfilled.
Alas poor knight, how simply have you framed •his excuse▪
The name of such a noble knight to usurp and eke abuse.
No si•te you are decay•ed, this is Clamydes sure:
No brother, then you are deceived, such tales to put in ur:
For my Clamyd•s is in Court, who did present to me,
In white attire the Serpents head and Shield, as yet to see.
That shall I quickly understand, O king permit I may
Have conference a while with him, whom as your grace doth say,
Presents Clamydes, for to be before your royal grace:
Behold no whit ag•st to show himself, where he doth enter place.
Ah traitor, art thou he that doth my name and state abuse?
Sir knight you are too bold in presence here, such talk against him
for to use.
Wherefore doest thou upbraid me thus, thou varlet do declare?
No varlet he, to call him so, sit knight you are too blame:
Would thou perstand for what intent such talk I here do frame?
Because I know thou doest usurp my state and noble name.
Who art thou, or whats thy name? can swear quickly make:
I am Clamydes, whose name to bear, thou here doest undertake.
Art thou Clamydes? vaunt thou false usurper of my state,
Avoid this place, or death shall be thy most accursed fate.
How dare thou enterprise to take my name thus unto thee?
Nay rather, how dare thou attempt to usurp the name of me?
You lie Sir Knight, he doth not so, against him you have it done.
Sister you are deceived, my friend here is Clamydes Prince, the King
of Suauias son.
Nay Brother, neither you nor he can me deceive herein.
O King bow down thy princely ears, and listen what I say,
To prove my self the wight I am before your royal grace,
And to disprove this faithless Knight which here I find in place,
For to usurp my name so much, the combat will I try:
For before I will mine honour loose, I rather choose to die.
I like well your determined mind, but how say you sir knight?
Nay by his ounds isle gage my gown he dares not fight:
By gogs blood I shall be slain now, if the Combat I deny,
And not for the ears of my head with him I dare try.
Sir knight why do you not reanswere make in trial of your name?
I will O King, if case he dare in combat try the same.
Well then go to prepare yourselves, each one his weapons take:
Good father let it not be so, restrain them for my sake.
I may not here behold my Knight in danger for to be,
With such a one who doth usurp his name to purchase me:
I speak not this for that I fear his force or strength in fight,
But that I will not have him deal with such a desperate wight.
Nay sure, there is no better way then that which is decreed,
And therefore for to end their strife the combat shall proceed:
Sir knights prepare your selves, the truth thereof to try.
I ready am, no cowarly heart shall cause me to deny.
Nay isle never stand the trial of it, my heart to fight doth faint:
Therefore isle take me to my legs, seeing my honour I must attained.
Why whither runs Clamydes? Sir knight seem to stay him:
Nay it is Clamydes O King that doth fray him.
Nay come sir come, for the combat we will try:
Ah no my heart is done, to be Clamydes I deny.
Why how now Clamydes, how chance you do the combat here thus
shun?
Oh King grant pardon unto me, the thing I have begun
I must deny, for I am not Clamides, this is plain:
Though greatly to my shame, I must my words revoke again:
I am no other then the knight, whom they Sance Foy call,
This is Clamydes, the fear of whom, my daunted mind doth pall.
Is this Clamydes? ah worthy Knight, then do forgive thy deefe,
And welcome eke ten thousand times unto thy Lady here.
Ah my Iuliana bright, whats past I do forgive,
For well I see thou constant art, and whilst that I do live,
For this, my firmed faith in thee for ever isle repose.
O father now I do deny that wretch, and do amongst my foes
Recount him for this treason wrought.
Well Knowledge, take him unto thee, and for the small regard
The which he had to valiant Knights, this shall be his reward,
S•th he by charms, his cruelty in cowardly manner wrought,
On Knights, who as Clamydes did, the crown of honour fought,
And traitorously did them betray, in prison for to keep,
The fruits of such like cruelty, himself by vs shall reap:
By due desert therefore I charge to prison him convey,
There for to lye perpetually unto his dying day.
Oh King be merciful, and show some favour in this case:
Nay, never think that at my hands thou shalt find any grace.
ah most welcome thou, our daughter to enjoy,
The heavens be praisd that this hath wrought, to foil all future no.
I thank your Grace, that you thus so well esteem of me.
What is all things finished, and every man eased?
Is the pageant packed up, and all parties pleased?
Hath each Lord his Lady, and each Lady her love?
Why Knowledge, what meanst thou those motions to move?
You were best stay a while, and then you shall know,
For the Queen her self comes, the motion to show.
You sent me if you remember, to seek out your page,
But I cannot find him, I went whisling &amp; calling through the court in such a rage:
At the last very scacely in at a chamber I did pry,
Where the Queen with other Ladies very busy I did spy:
Decking up a strange Lady very gallant and gay,
To bring her here in presence, as in court I heard say.
A strange Lady Knowledge of whence is she can thou tell me?
Not I ant shall please you, but anon you shall see.
For lo where the Lady with your mother doth come:
Then straightway my duty to her grace shall be done.
The mighty Gods preserve your state, O Queen, and mother dear,
Hoping your blessing I have had, though absent many a year.
My Clyomon, thy sight my son doth make thy aged mother glad,
Whose absence long and many a year, hath made thy pensive parents sad.
And more to let thee know my son, that I do love and tender thee,
I have here for thy welcome home, a present which isle give to thee.
This Lady though she be unknown, refuse her not, for sure her state
Deserves a Princes son to wed, and therefore take her for thy more.
O noble Queen and mother dear, I thank you for your great good will,
But I am otherwise bestowed, and sure I must my oath fulfil.
And so I mind if gods to fore on such decree I mean to pause,
For sure I must of force deny, my noble father knows the cause.
Indeed my Queen this much he told, he loved a Lady since he went,
Who hath his hart and ever shall, and none but her to love he'is bent.
So did I say, and so I will, no beauties blaze, no glistening wight,
Can cause me to forget her love, to whom my faith I first did plight.
Why are you so straight laced sir Knight, to cast a Lady off so coy?
Turn once again and look on me, perhaps my sight may bring you joy.
Bring joy to me? alas which way? no Ladies looks cā make me glad:
Then were my recōpence but small, to quit my pain for you I had.
Wherefore sir knight do way my words, set not so light the love I show,
But when you have bethought your self, you will recant and turn I know.
My Clyomon refuse her not, she is and must thy Lady be:
If otherwise my mind be bent, I trust your grace will pardon me.
Well then I see tic time to speak, sir knight let me one questiō crave,
Say on your mind. Where is that Lady now become, to whom your plighted
faith you gave?
Nay if I could absolve that doubt, then were my mind at ease:
Were you not brought to health by her, whē you came sick once of y• seas?
Yea sure I must cōfesse a truth, she did restore my health to me,
For which good deed I rest her own, in hope one day her face to see.
But did you not promise her to return, to see her at a certain day,
And ere you came that to perform, the Norway King stole her away?
And so your Lady there you lost:
All this I grant, but to his cost.
For stealing her against her will, this hand of mine bereft his life.
Now sure sir knight you 〈◊〉 him well, to reach him know an other 〈◊〉 wife:
But yet once more sir Knight reply, the trwh I c•an to understand,
In Forest once, who gave you drink, whereas you stood with sword in hād,
〈◊〉 least some had you pursued for sl•ying of your enemy?
That did a silly shepherds boy, which there I took my Page to be.
And what is of that Page become, rema••• he with you, yea or no?
I sent him hither ere I came, because the King and Queen should know,
That I in health returned was, but since, I never saw him.
And sure he stands not far from hence, though now you do not know him.
〈…〉 from hence, where might he be?
Of 〈◊〉 Sir Knight, my self am he:
I bought your 〈◊〉 the King, as here the Queen can testify:
I gave you drink in Forest sure, when you with drought were like to die.
I found you once upon the shore full sick, when as you came from seas,
I bought you home to fathers Court, I sought al means your mind to pleas,
And 〈◊〉 was that all this while 〈◊〉 weighted like a Page on thee:
〈◊〉 hoping for to 〈…〉 might discover me.
And so by 〈◊〉 at last I did, I thank your mothers noble grace:
〈…〉 me courteously, when I had told her all my case.
And now 〈◊〉 suffice my dear, I am Neronis whom you see,
Wh• 〈…〉 gone, before and since I met with thee.
〈…〉 fight, O words more worth then gold,
〈◊〉, O my 〈…〉 arm• I here unfold,
To clasp thy 〈◊〉 corps withal, twice welcome to thy knight.
And I enioyfull am no doubt, my Clyomon of thy happy sight.
〈◊〉 my assured friend, lo how Dame Fortune favours me,
This is 〈◊〉 my 〈◊〉 love, whose face so long I wished to see.
My Clyomon, I am erg••d as you your self to see this day:
Well daughter though a stranger yet, welcome to Court as I may say.
And Lady as welcome unto me, as if thou were mine only child.
For this your gracious courtesy, I thank you noble Princes mild.
Though strange and unacquainted yet, do make account you welcome are,
Your 〈◊〉 day as well as mine, I know my father will prepare.
Yes we are pressed your nuptial day with daughter ours to see,
As well as Clyomons our son, with this his Lady fair:
Come therefore to our Court, that we the same may soon prepare.
For we are pressed throughout our land, for all our Peers to send:
Thy pleasure most renowned King, thy servants shall attend.

