The speech of a Ghost, one of the old Kings of Ormus.
HOV Monster horrible! under whose ugly doom,
Down in Eternities perpe∣tuall night,
Mans temporal sins bear torments infinite:
For change of desolation, must I come
To tempt the earth, and to profane the light;
From mournful silence, where pain dares not roar
With liberty; to multiply it more,
Nor from the loathsome puddle Acheron,
Made foul with common sins, whose filthy dampes
Feed Lethes sink, forgetting all but moan:
Nor from that foul infernal shadowed Lamp,
Which lights Sisiphus to roll his stone:
These be but bodies plagues, the skirts of hell;
I come from whence deaths seat doth death excel.
A place there is upon no centre placed,
Deep under depths, as far as is the sky
Aboue the earth; dark, infinitely spaced:
Pluto the King, the Kingdom, misery.
The Crystal may Gods glorious seat resemble;
Horror it self these horrors but dissemble.
Privation would reign there, by God not made;
But creature of vncreated sin,
Whose being is all beings to invade,
To have no ending though it did begin:
And so of past, things present, and to come,
To give depriving, not tormenting doom,
But horror, in the understanding mixed;
And memory, by Eternities seal wrought;
Unto the bodies of the evil fixed,
And into reason by our passion brought,
Here racked, torn, and exiled from unity;
Though come from nothing, must for ever be.
The sins that enter here are capital:
Atheism, where creatures their Creator lose;
Unthankful Pride, nature, and graces fall;
Mate of Mankind, in Man unnatural;
Hypocrites, which bodies leave, and shadows chose.
The persons, either Kings by fortune blessed,
Or men by nature made Kings of the rest.
Here Tyrants that corrupt authority,
Councilled out of the fears of wickedness,
Cunning in mischief, proud in cruelty,
Are furies made, to plague the weaker ghosts,
Whose souls, enticing pleasure only lost.
The weaker Kings, whose more inconstant vice
Their States unto their humours made a prey;
For suffering more then Kings to Tyrannise,
Are damned; though here to be, yet not to stay:
For back they go, to tempt with every sin,
As easiest it the world may enter in.
My self sometimes was such; Ormus my state.
I bare the name; yet did my Bashes reign:
Trusts to few windows are unfortunate;
For Subjects growing full is Princes wane.
Lo; all misdeeds procure their own misfit;
For by my trusted Bashes was I slain:
Now sent to tear down my posterity,
That have their sins inheritance from me.
My first charge is, the ruin of mine own,
Hell keeping knowledge still of earthlinesse,
None coming there but spirits overgrown,
And more embodied into wickedness:
The body by the spirit living ever;
The spirit in the body joying never:
In heaven perchance no such affections be;
Those Angell-soules in flesh imprisoned,
Like strangers living in Mortality,
Still more, and more, themselves enspirited,
Refining Nature to Eternity;
By being maids in earths adulterous bed:
And idly forget all here below,
Where we our parents, but to plague them, know.
My next charge is, from this dark Regiment
With wiles to scourge this age effeminate;
Not open force, or humours violent:
Time fashions minds, minds manners, manners fate.
Here rage gives place, wit must rule ill intent.
Proud honour being an ill for this State
Too strong; slight, must mislead the innocent;
Craft, the corrupt. For though none dare be just,
Yet coward ill, with care, grow wicked must.
This present King, weak both in good, and ill;
Loving his trust, and trusting but his guess,
Shall perish in his own faiths wantonness;
Betrayed by Alaham, whom he knew ill,
Yet to beware lacks active constantnesse,
A destiny of well-beleeuing wit,
That hath not strength of judgment joined with it.
Alaham his son; fond of the fathers Throne,
Desire his idol; liberty his might,
As overborne with error infinite,
Shall find that fate all secret faults can hit:
For he, that for himself would ruin all,
Shall perish in his craft unnatural.
Hala his wife; diverse, and strong in lust,
Liberal out of selfe-loue, of error proud;
When shameless craft, and rage have served her turn,
In prides vainglorious martyrdom shall burn.
Zophi the eldest Son; whose reason is
With frailty drowned, and silliness consus'd;
Borne but to live, and yet denied this,
(So well knows power what spirits may be abused)
Becomes the prey of factious crafty wit,
Which stirs that ruin up, which ruins it.
Caine Bash (like the clouds, who live in ayre,
Th'orbe of natures constant inconstancy)
Now fame, now shame shall in his fortune bear;
His vice, and virtue still in infancy:
Change for his wisdom; and chance for his ends;
Harmed by his hopes, and ruined by his friends.
Mahomet, with honour fine would change the tide
Of times corrupt; here stopping violence,
There contermining craft, and pleading right;
But reason sworn in general to sense
Makes honour, bondage; justice, an offence:
Till liberty, that fair deceiving light,
Turns mischief to an humour popular,
Where good men caught in nets of duty are.
Caelica (because in flesh no seeds are sown
Of heavenly grace, but they must bring up weeds)
Death in her fathers murder she affects,
Seduced by glory; whose excess still feeds
It self, upon the barren steepes of moan.
For humane wit wants power to divide,
Whereby affections into error slide.
Heli the priest; who teaching from without,
Corrupted faith, bound under laws of might;
Not feeling God, yet blowing him about,
In every shape, and likeness, but the right;
Seeking the world; finds change there joined with chance,
To ruin those whom error would advance.
Now mark your charge! Each fury work his part,
In senseless webs of mischief overthwart.
You are not now to work on private thoughts,
One instant is your time to alter all;
Corruption universal must be wrought:
Impossible to you is natural.
Plots, and effects together must be brought;
Mischief, and shame, at once must spring, and fall.
Use more than power of man to bring forth that,
Which (it is meant) all men shall wonder at.
Craft! Go thou forth, work honour into lust.
Malice! Sow in selfe-loue unworthiness.
Fear! Make it safe for no man to be just.
Wrong! Be thou clothed in powers comeliness.
Wit! Play with faith; take glory in mistrust;
Let duty, and Religion go by guess.
Furies! Stir you up war; which follow must,
When all things are corrupt with doubleness.
From vice to vice let error multiply.
With uncouth sins, murders, adulteries,
Incorporate all kinds of iniquity.
Translate the State to foreign Tyrannies.
Keep down the best, and let the worst have power,
That war, and hell may all at once devour.
ALAHAM, HELI.
Thou coward soul! Why standst thou doubting now?
Why to, and fro? The dice of chance are cast:
Counsels of law, of shame, of love, are past.
Think what the worst have done; what they enjoy,
That pluck down States to put up private laws,
Whom fame ennobles while she would destroy.
Honour hath many wings: Chance hath no books:
Who follow, tread but where men trod before;
Who give example still are something more.
Bear witness yet ye good, and evil spirits!
Who in the ayre invisibly do dwell;
That these strange paths I walk of ugliness,
Are forced by threatening gulfs of treachery,
Nourished by States, and Times injurious.
Nor is it sin, which men for safety choose;
Nor hath it shame, which men are forced to use.
What be these agonies indefinite?
These sudden changes, secret, violent,
Both argue evil luck, and ill intent.
That which I most did hate, and least did fear,
Is fallen: Nature cares not for native blood.
I wickedly must doe, or mischief bear;
I must no more be, or no more be good.
How grows this change? Reveal this secret work:
Both cures, and wounds doe oft together lurcke.
Heli! you know the time when this frail King,
Languished, and wantoned in a powerful throne,
Sent to the gods to learn what should befall,
Having but peace; and wealth to doubt withal.
Their answer was: My fathers eldest son
Must be a sacrifice for this Estate,
And with his blood wash out the doom of fate.
The Bashes, swollen by use of ruling Kings,
Presume on God: and what by Gods decree
Was death; by theirs must only exile be.
And proud again with this unjust success,
A second error on the first they build;
And he that lives against the heavenly doom,
Must now not live, but reign: yet only reign,
To put down me they fear, for him they scorn.
Is innocence to no other borne?
And must my right, and Royal blood abide
Traitors, to be my Lords; the dead, my King?
Is honour to so many masters tied?
Shall I not live, except I scorned live?
Well: where the choice is left to kill, or dye;
The best Estates doe but in hazard lie.
It is rashness to commit our right to chance.
It is madness at the worst to fear mischance.
Unfold this factious cloudy mystery;
What cannot help, yet will experience be.
The days be fresh, when all the world in hate
With Mahomets supreme authority,
The Bashes idly lived; no form of State
Observed; no Counsels held; no Majesty;
Weak spirits did corrupt; the strong did cast;
Worth withered up; craft only was in trust;
The Court a farm; strange, ominous, ill sign,
When public States to priuatenesse incline.
Such was my fathers frail simplicity,
As wanting judgment how to stand alone;
He (passion-ledd) could love, and trust but one.
The world saw all was nought; yet I saw fear
Would, while it murmured, mischief counsels keep;
So blind are men, or with respects a sleep.
Envy wrought more in me, and made me know,
This passion in the King (which did advance
Mahomet aboue the reach of overthrow)
Had counter-passions, change, inconstancy,
For wit, and malice, possibility.
I stirred the King with envies of his slave;
For great Estates enlarge not little harts.
My charge suspicious, which no answer have;
Power still concluding all in evil part.
With Kings not strong in virtue, nor in vice,
I knew truth was like pillars built on ice.
Factions besides I in the Bashes moved,
And in their divers wits my malice cast,
Conspiracy with good success I proved:
For Kings are easily led away with many,
That hearing all, want strength to judge of any,
Thus we exiled him with pretence of State,
Whom (it is true) I for my self did hate.
But now, when Mahomet was banished hence,
His fellow Bässha's, fond of Government,
To rule their Prince with his name they intend,
And ruin heirs, yet seem successions friends.
For while I by my brothers exile stood,
They hide their minds to undermine the more;
And much to me in pity things they leave,
That craft in good apparel might deceive.
Their craft, and power against you thus combui'd
How could you shun? or work the Bashes so,
As they might leave to seek your overthrow?
I found their craft, and made my good of all.
Some I did win, the rest I did disgrace,
Even binding them by what they gave to me:
So great the scopes of brave ambition be.
Nor staid I here; but as a man in doubt
To trust this tickle art of men too far,
Where many wits to one kept subject are:
I forthwith sought on fewer heads to lay
This wardshippe of the King effeminate.
A far less servile course for me, that meant
To steal in change into this Government.
This made me think of Caine, whose spirits I saw
Officious were, already entered grace,
Pleasant, and fit to multiply a place.
The scruple that divided him, and me,
Was fear he did too much possess my wife:
With private scorn I weighed with public ends;
And saw, who will not see, needs no amends.
For he, to hide his fault, straight puts on faith,
And care of me; a badge of servile lust,
Which ever injure those it pleases must.
In him I did accept the sacrifice
Of ruling him, that ruled this waving mass:
Who cannot bear, what can he bring to pass?
Now though by him the present state I gained,
Yet to my after-ends this gave no aid:
For their foundations only were, by fame,
On peoples loves, and wonders to be laid.
How little Princes favours help the same
They know, that mark what feet men go withal,
Who while they rise in grace, in credit fall.
The people then it was that I must seek,
A future, not a present use of power;
Not strength established, but a strength to change;
To all, but only those who work it, strange.
With this Coins place had no Affinity;
It presage being of a Kingdoms fall,
When Kings trust any one to govern all.
His nature less, for it Monarchal was,
Sharpe, narrow-humor'd, only fit to rise
By that, which people hate, Crowne-flatteries.
Since nature therefore cannot change her face,
To think one fit, for all were foolishness,
To force an instrument experience fears,
Since wit may take of each the fruit it bears.
Of Mahomet I then bethought my self,
Whose absence pity had. And as in sects,
The present errors doe prepare a place
For masked change, to show her pleasing face:
So did the hate of present Government
Forget his faults, as they forget their wounds.
I saw that he alone did fit my ends;
Occasion mother is of truest friends.
My ends were not to broil the present State,
Norleaue obedience in my fathers days;
But after he was dead, to dispossess
My brother, whom the heavens did depress.
Chance wrought me good: lest it should work me fear,
I meant to go beyond the ways of spite,
Both stay, and win the world with Mahomet:
For who can stir are fittest means to let.
My father I did move, removed, and sped,
Fear made him pitiful, and folly kind,
In passions Orb most patient to be led;
Each argument begat another mind;
Doubt had no memory, offence was dead,
Distress seemed safety, likelinesse did bind:
For in these captive wits, borne to be thrall,
Who sees one thought beyond them, sees all.
Mahomet returns: But whether deeply shrin'd,
Within the hollow abstracts of his heart,
His malice lay; or that ambitious kind
Be easy, for it self, from all to part;
Respect to me, and honour, laid behind;
Finding this King to be but humours art,
He takes his soul, and miracles he shows;
Restores the lost, the established overthrows.
My elder brother, whom the Gods fore-spake
Laws had deprived, exiled, and men forgot,
He straight calls home; and dares to undertake
That which audacity believes not.
Ah! Error of good meaning, apt to trust,
For want of ill enough, I perish must.
And am I borne for duties sacrifice,
To watch for change of times, or Gods revenge?
Is patience scorn, and hazard yet unwise?
No, No: Confusion reigns; despair is it,
That now makes chance a God; and danger, wit.
Inflamed, distract, confused, put out of fear
I am.
Visions I feel of better hopes arise.
Malice, and rage, whose heats had barrenness,
Are, with ambition of revenge, made wise.
Birth, chance, occasion, right, good fortunes be
To some: and wrong can all these be to me?
Alaham! I grant these trials be severe:
But know; temptation is misfortunes spy,
To work in resolution change, or fear:
Attend your fathers death; still hold you there;
Before to undermine a Monarchy
Is hard. Besides, judge you your own intent:
For such your brother is in this to you,
As you before unto your brother were;
He hath his own, and you live out of fear.
Who measures hopes, and losses by the truth,
Goes ever naked in this world of might:
Mine be the Crown: my brothers be the right.
Will you exceed his mischief whom you blame?
When evil strives, the worst have greatest name.
Goodness is only at the greatest best.
Those mischiefs prosper that exceed the rest.
Thou art but one: for all a sufferer be.
That one is more than all the world to me.
Faults to the State all private faults exceed.
My wounds then heal, when all the earth doth bleed.
Let father move thee: Pity thou the State.
Father descending kindness signifies:
Our State is there, where our well-being lies.
Fame ever lives, and ever will defame:
The ruin of thy father; and his Crown.
They ever prosper whom the world doth blame;
Shame sees not climbing up, but falling down.
Yet fear thy self, if fame thou doest not fear;
Revenge falls heavy, when God doth forbear.
Men only giddy be that be aboue,
And will look down to doubts, when they be there.
Shall name of King overthrow a Kings Estate?
Hath public good no friend? Shall private fear
Of one weak man make all unfortunate?
No, No, dear Heli! I Gods Champion am;
And will my father for a while depose,
Lest he the Kingdom, we the Church doe lose.
Alaham! If hands you on your father lay
For private ends, and make the Church your stayres,
By which you clime your own ambitious way;
Your glory will be short, and full of fears:
Since nothing for the Church is done amiss;
And nothing well done that against her is.
So be the God eternal my belief;
As I my father from his State depose,
Only for fear the Church should honour lose.
But Heli! Judge not things with common eyes;
The Church it is one link of Government,
Of noblest Kings the noblest instrument.
For while Kings sacred keep her mysteries,
She keeps the world to Kings obedient;
Giving the body to obey the spirit,
So carrying power up to infinite.
But here with vs, the discipline is stained;
Form lost; truth scandalised with novelty;
Louingnesse with craft; and faith with Atheism.
Honour, and zeal, with curiosity;
The worst best used; shame carrying honours face,
And Innovation king in every place.
Down must these ruins to be set upright;
Misfortune pieced grows more unfortunate;
And parents Laws must yield to Laws of State.
Then see the means: For though the end were good,
Yet for a private man to change a State,
With Monarchs sleights to alter Monarchy,
Seems hard, if not impossible, to me.
Impossible is but the faith of fear;
To make hope easy fetch belief elsewhere.
Yet lest these sparks raked up in hollow hearts,
Should spread, and burn before their fury show;
Keep on the course which you have used to go.
Preach you with fiery tongue, distinguish might,
Tyrants from Kings; duties in question bring
Twixt God, and man; where power infinite
Compared, makes finite power a scornful thing.
Safely so craft may with the truth give light,
To judge of Crowns without enammelling;
And bring contempt upon the Monarchs State;
Where straight unhallowed power hath peoples hate.
Glance at Prerogatives indefinite,
Tax customs, wars, and Laws all gathering;
Censure Kings faults, their spies, and favourites;
Holiness hath a privilege to sting.
Men be not wise; bitterness from zeal of spirit,
Is hardly judged; the envy of a King
Makes people like reproof of Majesty;
Where God seems great in Priests audacity.
Thus keep a good: For be he true, or no,
Mixed faith so works on mans idolatry,
That minds, in bonds; bodies, delight in woe.
Religion carrying men aboue respect:
For what thing else can stand in self neglect?
And when men's minds thus tuned, and tempted are
To change, with arguments against present times,
Then hope awakes, and mans ambition climes.
What hope can blot the fear of Princes power?
Taxes, and scorns of Bashes government,
Which under Kings make present times still sour;
Hope leads the ill, and they the innocent.
These hopes are poor: For fear is with thē mixed.
All fears are weak, where any hope is fixed.
Dissolve (tic true) you may with envy, fear,
Craft, treachery, contempt, neglect;
Not build: these sands will no foundation bear:
These engines are to ruin, not erect.
Will you a father, can you a King throw down?
Or suffer that the Christians wear his Crown
The Christians with what faith, or policy,
Can you call in? Such remedies are ill:
For what they conquer, that enjoy they will.
Besides, the force lies in Caine Bashes hands,
In Mahomet wealth, law, and government:
What way to them?
My wife, their mutual trust.
These Bashes with themselves she shall betray;
Arts of revenge are written down in lust.
What cannot women doe with wit, and play?
Who would bestow his wife in works of shame?
They that think ought more dear than honest name.
Good fortune doth in humours market sit,
And those that buy, must sell all else for it.
The shame is sure; the good in hazard lies.
Such stairs they clime, that unto fortune rise.
Opinion reigns without, and truth within:
Who others please, against themselves must sin. 
You spirits then grown subtle by your age!
Not you that doe inhabit Paradise,
Whose constant joys most unacquainted be
With all affections, that should make you wise!
No: I invoke that black eternity,
As apt to put in action, as devise!
Help me, that have to doe with Princes power,
To pluck down King, with Kings authority;
And make men slaves, with show of liberty.
Free hope from evil luck, revenge from fear;
Ruin, and change adorn you every where.
MAHOMET: ALAHAM.
MY Lord! So oft alone, pulls down the heart
To thoughts, and courses far unmeet for it.
Princes must show themselves in open sight;
Men joy in them that doe in men delight.
Triumphs of common peace, sacrifice, thanks, praise,
Prepared are,
To solemnise this universal joy,
Wherein your self the greatest part enjoy.
If change were currant in Eternity,
As here amongst vs in this mortal sphere,
Passion might hope for counterpassion there.
My brothers doom decreed was from aboue:
Truth varies not: Gods pleasure constant is:
Time present shows not all that is amiss.
Joy opens minds, and envy shuts them in:
God, by your brothers life, adiournes our sin.
When God speaks unto men, and they expound,
Truth easily scopes, all threatened woes seem light;
Misprision ever gives misfortune might:
For power is proud till it look down to fear,
Though only safe, by ever looking there.
Besides; if fates be past, what means this star,
Whose glorious tail threatens vnglorious days,
Fear unto Kings, and to the State a war?
What mean these bloody showers? These darkened rays
Of Sun, and Moon, which still eclipsed are?
Are all signs chance? For if the stars can work,
These signs that threaten prove their bodies lurk.
What added is in honour to the Crown,
Or what increase of Empire to the King;
That exiles are called home to put me down?
Strange innovation some increase should bring.
Kings fondly else tempt God, and trust to chance,
Where change, and hazard nothing doe advance.
Your brothers fault was only Princes fear;
One ill example hurts to many were.
Gods law it was, whereby he was deprived;
My elder brothers right, was but the law.
Change in Estates is like unto a steep,
Which, but it self, can nothing constant keep.
It is no chance to give the elder place.
The wounds are new that present right deface.
The second borne are not borne to the Crown.
Hope, which our God sets up, dare man pull down?
Alaham! Our Gods decree did not exile
Thy brother: It was heavenly mystery,
Which faction construed to impiety.
When I returned, I saw foundations laid
In Princes faults, for Bashes tyranny;
Who keeping both the Princes heirs alive,
The one exiled, the other envious,
Would make each plague to other; both, to vs.
I wrought, and overcame the Princes hate,
Restored his son, and in his son the State.
And wast thou then called into grace by me,
To be the mean that I should ruined be?
No Mahomet: That Labyrinth thy heart,
Artisan of craft, great Empire of deceit,
The plague of all inferiors, and the bait;
In Princes frailty shall not drown this State.
Sense and thy wrongs alike be general;
A Princes power cannot protect them all.
When flattery gives scope to tyrannise,
Extremes then from extremities doe rise.
The giddy head that sees with daz'led sight,
Imagines all the world to turn about:
And rage, which to your self makes you seem great,
Is less to me, than if you did entreat.
Who truth doe only but to hate it know,
They nothing fear, but only to be good:
Unthankfulness is ever valiant so.
To them God thankless seems, not thank∣less is,
That sacrifice for leave to doe amiss.
If wrongfully you had not banished me;
To whom could my return thank-worthy be?
Our gods seemed wroth; and fame spake strangely ill.
That sure my Wife did worse than dote of thee;
This was dishonour, wrong, and loss to me.
Yet I distract with good belief and fear,
Detest her could not; love forbade it me:
Love her I did not, for mistrust was there;
While I suspected her, I hated thee.
At length ('t is true) I got thee banished;
If not revenge, at least security:
Till humorous Time, that blots to print again,
Showed me in Halo's thoughts Caine Bassha's name.
I called thee home; and though I scorn still bear
By fame, who when she lies, recanteth not,
Yet I forgave the shame, and pardoned fear;
Brought thee good luck, where good turns are forgot.
And is it a return of that you owe,
For you to work your Patrones overthrow?
Alaham! Put off this fruitless peevishness
Of expectation, lost in ill desires.
For you, in witness of my thankful heart,
The Government of old Ormus I got;
And by possession mans hope loses not.
Alaham! Besides, judge both your thoughts, and State:
Kings children are no Kings; Authority
Goes not by blood; she sets another rate:
Use, is her kin; Grace, her affinity.
Then look not on desires earnestness;
Impossible is easy there, wishes effect,
The future great, the present ever less:
Comparison still carrying up the eye
To make all that we have but misery.
Care, bought with blood; and fear, with treachery;
Danger, with wrong; and shame, with venturing;
Uncertain hopes, and certain misery,
The fortunes be of haste to be a King.
O God! what's this? Mine inward spirits shake;
Senses doe leave their work; thoughts are confused;
Horror and glory now possession take;
New visions to my darkness are infused:
Like Delpho's maid, I find a mighty work;
My heart with more than it self doth resolve;
What I think, speak, or doe, is not mine own.
I feel what made me wish my brothers fall,
And find what mischief gets, it goes withal.
His safety now, I see, my safety is;
And honour you, that have procured this.
A blessed work, if it be wrought within.
It is no work: it is a heavenly bliss,
Which perfect be, as soon as they begin.
Spite! (thou Impostume of aspiring hearts,
Whose nature is, that if the bag remain,
The wicked humours straight will fill again)
I will lay open thee, and all thy arts:
It is no shame to say we were amiss,
Since man doth take his name of that he is.
Thy life is sought: Nay more, thy death is sworn.
By whom?
By them that hate, be∣cause they love.
And eiders kindness doe in mischief prove.
What is my fault?
That thou of fault are free.
What his reward?
Their love that ma∣lice thee.
Where lies my hope?
To kill, or to be killed.
A wicked choice, where mischief is the best.
Is their delight in shedding guiltless blood?
What moves the wicked else to hate the good?
Who be the men?
I to my self am free;
But faith forbids to tell what others be.
Disperse these clouds: Secrecy is evils friend;
Neutrality hath never noble end.
Tell me their names, that I my foes may know,
And you, with honour, from ill friendship go.
I witness take of these light-bearing stars,
Wherein the dooms are laid of mans desires;
No lack of hope, or power, to conceal;
Remorse alone doth them, and me reveal.
My wife hath compassed Caine so cunningly
As he hath sworn you, by his hand, shall dye.
Uncredible it is to think men never change;
To think they alter easily, is as strange.
Upon what grounds should this strange malice move?
Upon what grounds doe men begin to love?
What moved Caine?
That which I may not see:
For they love well that doe in hate agree.
Are truth and friendship but ambitious traps,
To feed desire with all that she can get?
Are words, and good turns but hearts counterfeit?
When enemies bid enemies take heed,
They trust not them, and yet they will beware;
For disadvantage grows of little care.
Resolve to die; or else resolve to fear.
Good Angels still protect the innocent:
Hell would have all, if harm were ill intent.
Mischief still hides her self from them she hits
In hopes, and fears of vnresoluing wits.
I well know Caine: his nature to excess
Of good, or ill, is forced by industry:
In others spite lies his impiety.
Appease your wife: for that must lie in you.
Call up the dead; for that is less to doe.
A women's hate is ever dipped in blood,
And doth exile all counsels that be good.
Reason and truth shall plead to her for me.
The eyes of rage it self doe only see:
And truth serves unto rage, but for a glass
To deck her self in, and bring spite to pass.
Reason to rage is like hands to a sore,
Whose often stroking makes the anguish more.
Impossible all counsel doth refuse.
Let Caine be killed: and then my wife accuse.
My heart shall first take counsel with my fate:
If it foretell the worst, it teaches feat;
If it divines no ill, how can it hate?
If what shall fall it feels not; I must bear.
The time grows on: The King (I know) makes haste
To sacrifice to God: For common joys
Are made much dearer by the sorrows past.
WE that are made to guard good men, and bind the ill,
See both miscarried here below, against our power, and will.
As if the earth, and hers, were to the worst left free,
And we made subject, by their curse, to deaths black Co∣lone.
Yet is our Maker strong, and we his first Creation,
Whereas the state of that dark Quire is merely our privy∣tion.
Whence doth this odds then grow, which seems to master all;
Since we are more than nature is, they much less, by their fall?
Are we not diligent, or is the good not wise?
Shows Truth less glorious in the earth, than her ill pi∣cture Lies?
Then Audit vs in gross; at least we equal be:
And if in minutes men seek out true inequality,
Compare words with the life, Eternity with time,
Insulting pride with humble love, pure innocence with crime:
And if these in their natures equally be weighed,
The one lives ever building up, what others have decayed.
So that to make and mar, is our true difference;
To mar, expressing finite power; to make, omnipotence.
The object then it is, from whence this odds doth grow,
By which the ill o'reweighs the good in every thing be∣low.
And what is that but Man? A crazed soul, vnfix'd;
Made good, yet fallen, not to extremes, but to a mean betwixt:
Where (like a cloud) with winds he tossed is here, and there,
We kindling good hope in his flesh; they quenching it with fear.
We with our abstract forms, and substance bodiless,
Image by glances into him our glories, their distress.
And in prospective Maps make ill far off appear,
Lest it should work with too great power, when it ap∣proacheth near.
Beauties again of Truth (which those ill spirits conceal)
With Optike glasses we reflect on man to kindle zeal.
But whether idle man, exceeding orders frame,
(As out of heaven justly cast) must Vulcan-like go lame;
Or that those evil spirits so dazzle humane eyes,
As they think foul forbidden things more beautiful, more wise;
Wee see, though they want power to change our real frame,
Yet in the world they strive to gain, by changing of our name:
Calling the Goodness, weak; Patience, a lack of sense,
Or seeming not to feel, because it dares make no defence.
True Piety in Man, which upward doth appeal,
They doe deride, as argument of little strength, much zeal.
And as the Painters art, by deeping colours there,
Here sleighting o'er, and finely casting shadows every where,
Makes from a flat, a face show off, as if embossed;
In which the form, not matter, is the sum of all his cost:
So take these Fairies from, or add unto our mean,
With arts fine casting shadows, till they seem to change vs clean;
And make a picture which they covet should excel;
And which yet, to be like, must lose the life of doing well.
This image is their wit, and so their Deity,
Which though not keeping one shape long, in all would worshipped be.
In precept, doctrine, rite, and discipline agreed,
That, but prosperity on earth, there is no living Creed:
Out of which fatal guide Alaham now undertakes
The ruin of his King, and father, for ambitions sake;
Against the laws of Nations, power, and native blood;
As if the uttermost of ill a Sceptre could make good.
But mark how Vice still makes example her own fate;
For with like mischief Hala shakes both him, and his Estate.
He in his fathers bowels seeks an earthly Throne;
Whence she supplants his heirs again with bastards of her own.
He makes wrong triumph over right, and innocence;
She makes her lust religions lord, confusion her defence.
Thus, as that Tyrant who cut off the Statues head,
Which bare the name of Iupiter Olympian christened;
Even by this scornful act to what was God in name,
Taught people to encroch upon the sacred Monarch-frame:
So while the o'reswoll'n pride of this Mahumetan,
By wounding of his Princely race, plays false with God and man;
He in it doth disperse those clouds of reverence,
Which between man, and Monarchs Seat keep sweet intelligence;
And while he would be lord of order, nature, right,
Brings in disorder, that devouring enemy of might,
Which with her many hands vnweaues what time had wrought,
And proves, what power obtains by wrong, is ever dearly bought.
So that our grief and joy is in this Tragedy,
To see the ill, amongst her own, act vnprosperity;
The corn fall to the ground, the chafe in siues remain,
Which of the corn was once, and yet cannot be corn a∣gain.
But as their ancient mates the sudden-kindled Winds,
Broken out of the watery clouds, wherein they were en∣shrin'd;
Afflict the sturdy Ok, are heavy to the Reed;
And equally spend out thēselues with good or evil speed:
So of these windy spirits, which wander in the ayre,
By their malignity to blast, both what is foul, and fair;
Whether they prosper doe, or fail in their intent,
Their ugliness disclosed is, their violence is spent:
While we uphold the world, and were we all but one,
By Legions of those Angels cursed, could not be oucr∣thrown'd.
Yet among stories, as the Authors win no praise,
Which truly write; but they who time with flatteries doe please:
So in mans muddy soul, the mean doth not content,
Nor equally the two extremes; but that which fits his bent.
This makes some soar, and burn; some stoop, and wet their wings;
And some again commit excess, even in indifferent things.
For who maintains one vice to multiply another,
Incestuously begets more heirs upon his own first mother.
And in Venerian acts, as Concubine, and wife,
Only express that difference which pictures do from life;
The act being all in one, and but the same in all,
Save that the bondage of the vice delights to enthral:
So in mans choice, suppose this ends indifferent:
The good, and ill, like equal ways; yet will the worst content.
HALA alone.
I will no more smother confusedly
This inward war, where modesty and shame
Would subject sense to duties Tyranny:
Wronged with doubt I live; a wife to lust,
A stranger both to honour, love, and trust.
My friends despised, my servants made my spies;
No way, but by betraying me, to rise.
Is this the only right of womanhood?
Then know base Men, in whom all love is lost,
That wit moves wit; power, fear; fear, hate;
No farther bondage hath a wives estate.
While Mahomet, that faithless hypocrite,
Canker of love, All-ill in one, that man
Showed love to me;
Alaham was wroth, an husbands honour touched,
He vile, I worse: the eyes of Jealousy
Seeing her own disease in him, and me.
But since this wretch, with his aspiring craft,
To Alaham hath falsely sold my shame,
My injuries and dishonours are his fame:
And shall this traffike of ambition thrive,
And bury vs in modesty alive?
No Caine: For thy example I resolve
To study spite, and practise cruelty:
Scorn else will grow their sport, our falls their fame,
That glory to deceive, and joy in shame.
But what means this? Alaham hastes to the Crown;
He tries, moves, breaks all that will not be bowed;
Those only stand which help his father down.
Wife is a private name: Ambitions ways
Lie not within the bounds ofloue, but use:
When things are ripe, I must be overthrown.
And shall I lose my self in idle lust?
Each Vassal is as gre• as Queens in it.
Princes have strength, they err for Empire must.
What fear I then? Eame that is great, is good:
Hazard all men behold with reverent eyes;
And must we only in remorse be wise?
No, no: My heart, and State doe more embrace:
Purple shall hide my lust, a Crown my shame:
Passion with passions hath such unity,
As one must ever be another frame.
Beyond the truth I am in loving Caine:
The monuments of lust are secrecy,
Suspicion, shame, remorse, adversity,
If Caine be King; the ways to that are change,
Wrong, hazard, care, ruin, confusion, blood;
Poor thoughts, that fear, or rest, have never good.
My partie's strong: I build upon the vice,
Question the yoke of Princes, husband, law;
My good success breaks all the links of awe.
Then Chance! be thou my friend: Desire! my guide.
My heart extended is to great attempts,
Which, if they speed, eternize shall my fame;
If not, it is glory to excel in shame.
Lo where my Husband comes! Now reason must
Disguise these passions, lest I lose my end;
Who hides his mind is to himself a friend.
Hala, Alaham.
King of my self! Redeemer of our fame!
What secret clouds doe overcast your heart?
Counsel, and time doe both work one effect,
And either cure, or clear what we suspect.
My wounds can have no cure; my fears have cast
Nature, and truth into afflictions moulds;
The works of time, and counsel both are past.
When hearts once from themselves are run astray,
Chance must their guide be, violence their way.
Chance is not cast in moulds, like other Arts,
Her counsels but the hope of rashness be;
Advice did never any man betray:
If truth be lucky, counsel is the way.
If counsel be the guide of undertaking,
Our powers best with our own wits doe agree,
Where both the means, and ends together be.
Who trusts his passion multiplies his care;
All pains within, all cures without vs are.
If you captived be I speak withal,
Then from my passion into yours I fall.
My state of mind, good will, and homage is;
My being, reverence; my end, your will;
Selfe-loue it self pays tribute unto this.
If love have power to leave, and break her vow;
How can I trust to that you promise now?
If love change not; how can I trust, and know,
That you love Mahomet, my overthrow?
His place deferu'd respect, his virtue praise;
Our freedom, not inhibited by you,
Found many things indifferent to doe.
Forbidding is the prison of the thought,
A violence which on themselves they draw,
That inwardly of nothing stand in awe.
But mark the end: he first despises thee,
Then triumphs in thy once forsaken love;
Proclaims deceit to be thy state of mind,
Vncompetible, unpossible to find.
So as if I should rule this glorious Throne,
You ruling me (as he assumes you doe)
The State and I at once were overthrown.
Good nature then (I see) is not the art,
With which a women's honour safe may go
Through hollow seas of mans dissembling heart.
His faithlessness yet doth this good to me,
That I may freely hate all men, but thee.
Hate is the band of fury in the heart,
Without revenge, no more but sense of smart.
Hate is the print of injury violent,
Only in ruin, and revenge content.
Revenges, in your sex, dishonour be;
And in your strength, impossibility.
Impatience only doth with God make war.
Fury finds arms; wrong hath ill destiny;
While God is, it is baseness to despair:
For right more credit hath than power there.
Yet God, and kings use wisdom in their might,
Reward, and grace doe from their own hands part;
They others use for instruments of spite.
Whom can we use? Since he we hate is great,
And we disgraced: Who hazard will his State
With him, that for his own good must entreat?
Aspirers are not void of rival hate:
If any envy him, or love our right,
Revenge lies there; their lives desire Art.
Of God I ask it; and in men will move,
As much as can be wrought with hope, or love.
But men uncertain are, blown here, and there,
With love, remorse, fears which in frailty live;
Who need forgiveness, easily doe forgive.
The heart which feels, most lively can express
Revenge, that picture of his guiltiness.
Ruin, the power (not art) of Princes is:
Caine is engaged as deep as we in this.
The wounds are mine; to me belongs revenge;
Sense my adviser is; you Sir, my end:
What needs a women's passion more to friend?
Mischief! now claim thy due. Malice! fear not,
To offer all thy sleights to wicked wits;
Ruin lights not amiss where ere it hits.
My engines work, care is already past;
My hopes arise out of these Bashes blood:
If both, my wish; if either dye, my good.
Hala! Good fortunes are together linked;
Thy faith stirs up new light within my mind:
Behold, the Throne descends to take me up.
Antiquity, in her vnenuied womb,
Now offers vs the fatal president
Of sixteen Kings, my Predecessors, all
Blinded, and then deposed by Bashes hand:
So tickely unworthiness doth stand.
Doth wit, and courage only rest in slaves?
Hath hazard ought more horrible than scorn?
Have I occasions sure, and shall I stay
To give all, but my misery, away?
No Hala, No: Thy dowry shall be fame;
Thy stile, a Crown; thy prospect, reverence:
The East shall doe thee honour in my name.
Out shall my fathers, and my brothers eyes;
Authority is only for the wise.
But since these mighty works have many parts,
And I but one, which one cannot doe all;
Isle send thee Caine: keep firm upon your strengths.
Beauty, and honour, natures Scepters be,
And have on men's desires authority.
Now Hala, seek thy sex; lend scorn'e thy wit,
To work new patterns of Revenges in.
Let rage despise to feed on private blood;
Her honour lies aboue, where danger is,
In Thrones of Kings, in universal woe.
Work that which Alaham may envy at,
And men wish theirs, that Ill it self may tremble.
Monstrous, incredible, too great for words.
Keep close, and add to fury with restraint;
Doe not break forth until thou break all.
Is Wrong so proud? Shall Man once dare to fashion
A Women's ruin, in a women's passion?
Husband! most odious name: scorn of subjection.
Is love to women but your rage of thoughts?
Are your desires let blood by your enjoying? Ah fools!
We see your lusts relent, you see not ours;
And from that change advantage hath her powers.
But on: Still use thy craft: Thy strength lies there.
Ignorance, that sometimes makes the hypocrite,
Wants never mischief; though it oft want fear:
For while thou think faith made to answer wit,
Observe the justice that doth follow it.
Caine, Mahomet, and me thou hat'st alike,
For unlike cause, and crafty ways dost take,
That each may ruined be for others sake.
Shall I, for thee, hazard Coins life I love?
And weigh down my affection with my hate?
Can highest thoughts have any thing aboue?
Ah! but perchance my safety in the blood
Of Mahomet doth rest, the good of Caine:
Then were it loss to make occasion vain.
And shall I look but only to be safe?
Can Injury and Malice add no more?
Ah coward sex! faint, shallow Passion
Far from me be: A work that no age dares
Allow, yet none conceal, I must attempt.
Fury! then spur thy self, embedlam wit;
Poison my thoughts, to make my reason see
Pleasure in cruelty, Glory, in spite:
Rage to exceed examples doth delight.
Thoughts! doe you blush? To Alaham what's ill?
His death? Obarren wit, and sandy rage!
No marble pillars, no enamells rich,
Buried in silence, worn away with age,
Are furies that no greater plagues devise:
Horrors they be that have eternities.
What saith my heart? Grow millions out of one?
Doth passion leave her infancy by use?
And shall I, by the death of Mahomet,
More skill, at least more cruelty beget?
Then let him die. But can I venture Caine,
And leave misfortune power over love?
Triumphs to Alaham, if both be slain?
Ah sleepy Sex! how slow is their progression,
That would exactly measure infinite,
By tender fears, or minutes of delight?
Then Hala, leave this circle of selfe-loue.
Begin; go on: hate must stride over fear. Who are secure,
And nothing venture, all things must endure.
For Alaham, that traitors overthrow,
My rage is yet too young to work upon:
What to resolve of him I dare not think,
Till this great frame, wherein our fortunes lie,
Be surer linked unto prosperity.
Then shall occasion horrors strange devise;
Fools only lose their ends to tyrannise.
Caine Bash, Hala.
Princess of me! I find care in your face,
Woe smothered up; I came to know your will;
Nothing which you command me can be ill.
That which I least did fear is fallen on me,
Wrong and mishap; which needing others love,
Makes them unlovely that unhappy be.
From Kings themselves when fortune turns her face;
Then need they most, yet least may use their own.
So dearly Mans unthankfulnesse is known.
What is the cause that makes you thus accuse
The world of faults, your self of inward fear?
The little faith which all the world doth use;
The injuries which strength of heart must bear:
Euui'd of all, if it be set aboue;
If humble, then too low for men to love.
Doe not forsake your self: For they that doe,
Offend, and teach the world to leave them too.
Mortal our God shall be; the truth shall lie;
Darkness shall see her self; fame lose her voice;
Ever I will leave my love, or my love you:
Afflictions wounds affection doe renew.
Perchance you love both those I hate, and me;
Affections then against affection be.
Perchance a vow, good turns, and good belief
Are mists between your love, and my relief.
You know I love: speak plain, and doe not fear,
That reason other is than kindness there.
Then hear: and if my judgment you disprove,
You shall have cause to think I trust, and love.
Mahomet the faulty is, his faults be these:
Envious of thee, to my love treacherous;
The King must lose his sight, his Crown, his Son:
This wickedness hath Mahomet begun.
O hell! and is thy seat in fleshly hearts?
Be mans ill thoughts his own ill spirits become?
I well can think that Mahomet aspires;
For love of greatness may with goodness go:
But cannot think that he our death conspires.
Perchance he seeks to doe your brother Right,
Which makes our own desires to doe vs spite.
Mischief that may be helped, is hard to know;
And danger going on still multiplies.
Let care as fast then add unto her eyes.
Where harm hath many wings, care arms too late:
Hasty attempts make chance precipitate.
What shall I doe?
Go forward in thy fear:
Danger doth give thee choice to doe, or bear.
My love of him, and truth, doe make me loath
To think them wronged: And shall I wrong them both?
The good belief of mankind is a sea
Where honour drowns, iniquity goes free;
Whose thoughts (like sails) for every weather be.
With shaking thoughts no hands can draw a∣right:
True hearts, to doe vnnobly, have no spirit.
The fear of some, is guilt with honesty;
Others, with love; thine, with false nobleness.
Yet think not (Coward) wit can hide the shame
Of hearts, which while they dare not strike for fear,
Would make it virtue in them to forbear.
No Caine: In men we women, when we love,
Ask faith, and heart. Our selves have fear, and wit.
In love how can thy soul, and mine agree?
I seek revenge, thou preach piety.
More easy motions gentle hearts receive:
His fault was great; yet you may have redress
In State, and honour, without such excess.
Excess the reason is, and mean of love;
And in the same excess is malice joyed:
I would be safe, and yet have him destroyed.
If leave, or left the fate of kindness be,
By his example, what becomes of me?
If blind to all, but to it self, be love;
Whence doe your vows, or whence this question move?
Since the true state of true affection is
Wonder, at others worth; Faith, without hire;
Vnwearied Pain; vnrecompens'd Desire.
Great hearts thus given away, in prison are;
Their strength, their bands; and good belief, their smart:
Love never severs reason from the heart.
My shame again then unto me impart;
Restore my faith; and I doe render thee
Those faithless vows, which thou hast made to me.
For since, I see, the sponge hearts of men
Their hollows gladly fill with women's love,
And nothing yield to them uncrushed again:
What nature works it is folly to complain.
Mahomet, that wretch, hath done me injury;
He left my love, and he my life hath sought:
Caine! Line at ease; fame is an idle breath;
My body is enough twixt thee, and death.
Distract I am: my reason (like a cloud,
Before a winters storm) rides here, and there:
Like reeds, my thoughts are straight and crooked too;
With divers breaths, which divers passions blow.
Against the stream of truth must love still go?
Resolved I am that Mahomet shall die.
Shame spake this word: danger appears not yet;
Time, like a med'cine, will assuage this pain,
And fear perchance bring back good will again.
It is not I that live in me, but you;
Whose will hath fashioned all my thoughts anew.
Then on: When thoughts unite all care is ceased;
The heart, vnfetter'd and the hope increased.
Out of his death I see occasion borne,
To greater power than needs to cover scorn.
For he the Justice rules, you rule the War;
His death divided powers will unite:
And in a broken course where dangers be,
Only the Crown can put off misery.
Far be it off, our hopes should be so vain.
Our secret love already tempted God,
To war him more with infidelity,
Would hasten vengeance, and make sharpe his rod.
God made strict laws for virtues exercise,
An idle word, a wish transgresses them:
Yet in a Throne remorse hath glorious eyes.
Alaham doth undermine the present State:
When he corrupted hath the peoples faith,
Thou hast the sword: authority makes way,
Her hand is next when Crowns become a prey.
We God and man will first try with the death
Of Mahomet: If that doe pass for good,
Hope easily makes occasion understood.
The end agreed, the meanc is yet in doubt.
By sword.
That will be easy to descry;
Danger to miss; and hard to doe without.
By poison then; whereof though doubts may grow,
What one alone may doe, is hard to know.
It often fails: For instruments are base;
Slaves have too slavish hearts; a Bashes name
Is like a superstitious hallowed place.
Men must be forced, or wise that force the same.
By these two hands, that will not fail their heart,
It shall be wrought.
If poison miss, the sword shall compass it:
When chances often scope, at last they hit.
Fortune, and Love! Both Gods of humane might,
You like adventure, see it rightly placed:
You live in kindness, see it not disgraced:
What I have vowed, both God, and Nature hate;
My heart misgives; my soul doth prophecy,
That evil thoughts procure an evil fate.
But ah! my love I gave, and it gave me.
The choice is past: Thoughts now must think to doe
Not what I freely am, but forced unto.
Mahomet; Caine.
Who ever have observed the work of spirits
May see how easily men slide down to ill.
The world hath strange examples, false delights,
Which make our senses nets to catch our will.
Who then with men for every fault falls out,
Must hate himself, and all the world about.
Behold! the man I speak of doth appear:
Retire aside, stand close, mark what succeeds:
His own destruction, or else mine he breeds.
Caine! what is it, that thus your mind distracts?
Counsels of honour alter not the face;
Hearts only think with pain of doubtful acts.
In care they live that must for many care;
And such the best, and greatest ever are.
They purchase care unto themselves, that know
The weight of care; and yet will it embrace.
If care be grievous, why usurp you so?
I live but to obey the Princes will.
That is, to cherish Prince in their ill:
For they must flatter good, and evil too,
That under Princes all alone will doe.
As sweetest vapors covet to the sky:
So faith, and duty after Princes run;
Ill nature never canindure a Sun.
Flattery so like in all to duty shows,
But finelier dressed in diligence, and care,
As Kings best plea'sd, that most deceived, are.
Harsh spirit hates them, that do not hate with it,
Miscensures all the world to seem severe;
Binds honesty and truth to have no wit;
These ill-fac'd virtues not of nature be,
But peevishness, true honours enemy.
A just, severe, and universal care
Of people, shorn by Princes favourites,
To spies of Tyranny unpleasing is;
Which ever, like ambitious Adamants,
So fast from people draw to Princes States,
As in the end they must draw up their hares.
Caine! then take heed of your selfe-seeking plot,
Engrossing offices, aspiring all;
For it offends even those it touches not.
Nor is it only this that hazards you;
Ill never goes alone, if fame say true.
Is fame to censure vs that live aboue,
And must sell justice, if we purchase love?
Fame is the peoples voice, to tell their grief,
Appealing from inferiors to the chief.
If falsely you, and Hala, fame abuse;
Infamy for nothing men unwisely choose:
If fame speak truth, which you would not have known,
Grieve to deserve, but not to bear your own.
What doe I, that the world can well reprove?
Unjustly suffer, or unjustly love.
Suffer I doe; for infamy is there,
Where either malice, envy is, or fear.
Love I confess I doe; And what is it,
But natures tax, laid upon good intent,
For right, and honour unto excellent?
Reason must judge of love, not love of it;
Else shall love ground of every mischief be:
For murder, theft, adultery, and spite,
Are but love of revenge, and others right.
Ah Caine! my heart is racked with inward grief,
Justice hath party there, and so hath love:
They both have wounds, and yet they both have life;
The one suppressing what the other moves.
I will speak plain: Hala, thou dost abuse,
And stayn'st the Princes line with servile lust:
Wherein proud courage, matched with guiltiness,
Adds wrong to wrong; and to or'e-build complaint,
Affects that greatness which makes faults seem less.
Caine! weigh thy course: " Ambitions gilded spheres
" Are like to painted hells, which please the eyes,
" Even while they show the heart where horror lies.
Her gilded Throne built on the ruin is
Of Fame, of true Religion, and of Law:
The labor's great that all the world must draw.
The second place, which with this King you hold,
Yields fear vnfearfull, greatness well secured:
Who stand, or fall with Kings, stand well assured.
Where men that wrongfully aspire a Crown,
While they look upward ever tumble down.
Besides, thy bloody plots discovered be
To work my death; did not the Powers aboue
Restrain both ill men's malice, and their love.
Let this bear witness: No false prophets know,
The time, or manner of their overthrow.
Nay let thy life, in his power thou would kill,
Prove, God gives seldom good success to ill.
Behold! Even Natures just accusing spies
Now make thy face blush forth thy guiltiness;
Remorse begets strange contrarieties:
Confusions war of good, and ill, I see,
At once contending for the victory.
But Caine! hold fast these sparks, they be of truth.
These smokes will pass, and light appear again;
Shame past, is honour; Error is virtues book,
Where knowledge doth aboue temptation look:
What ugly music inward discords make?
Thoughts laid asleep of long doe now appear;
Even half my power conjures me for his sake.
What's this? Me hinkes I feel my shame grow dear.
Hate of my self, and desolation breed,
Where joy, and pleasure I was wont to feed.
Who lose their evils, lose their own despair;
Out of which loss new hopes of honour rise,
To show the world desire with better eyes.
What can I hope? My fruit of better wit
Is but to know I sayl'd for lack of it.
Shame is in that I leave, and that I doe:
The fault is only mine; and only I,
A sacrifice unto you all, will die.
Favour thy self: Passions are desperate,
And tempt with uncouth woe, as well as joy.
It evil is that glories to destroy;
Her, and her counsels kill, and I agree;
For she is foe alike to thee, and me.
That is destroy my self; and I consent:
For all any thoughts to thee were evil bent.
Caine! credit not those visions of the ill.
Faults are in flesh, as motes be in the Sun,
Where light doth show each little thing amiss.
Presumption, and despair live opposite,
As times false glasses, wherein frailties see,
Their faults too great, or else too little be.
But judge the man from whom these motions grow.
Alaham ambitious is, light, violent;
His end but to surprise his fathers state:
Unto which end, no lets there are but we;
Who won, removed, or ruined must be.
He first tried me with rival jealousy,
Showing me hope, and honour in the start:
Besides revenge, by thy death offering me,
Of our divided powers an unity.
But I stood firm. While he no whit dismayed,
Tempts thee more strongly, whom he hates more;
Resolved who ever kills, shall killed be:
So much the faithless joy in cruelty.
" Mischief o'reflowes my thoughts; &amp; like a sea,
" Devours the dews, the rain, the snow, the springs,
" And all their sweetness to his saltness brings.
How should I ground a faith, that faithless know
My self to be? Or why should he mistrust,
On whom the worst that can befall is just?
Who live distrusting, yet have time to friend;
But who mistrusting die, make haste to go
To that infernal Monarchy of fear,
Where worse things come to pass, than doubted were.
Mahomet! Thou hast overcome: I yield, by thee
To hold my life, as sentence of my fall;
Thy words example, no life natural.
Yet grant me thus-much more; to keep thee close,
Till I thy death to Alaham impart;
Conceit it self doth ease a broken heart.
Grant me again, while secretly I live,
You guard your self from Alahams treachery;
Lest you have harm; he, joy; I, infamy.
Behold my state! bound to my enemies;
Of friends in doubt. To me even good, and ill,
The one despair, the other cowardice.
Hala I love: O word beyond the right,
On which is built that false thought, Liberty,
Which makes great hearts in greatest ills delight.
I sought her love through all the arts of lust;
Where will, is faith; and honour, Tyranny;
Mischief, affections proof; and shame, her trust.
Hard, back from ill, the way to goodness is,
By scorn, remorse, patience, and broken heart,
Impossible to them that doe amiss.
Then on: walk in this path of death, or shame;
Alaham is false, or Mahomet, or I;
Resolved I am, that one of vs shall die.
Malice. Craft. Pride. Corrupt rea∣son. Evil Spirit.
Whence grows this fatal stay of our pro∣gression?
Who have no friends are deaf to intercession?
What can withstand our power? Our ends are evil;
And so need fear no let from any Devil.
We diverse are in works, though not in ends;
And thereby every Fury finds some friends.
Besides, we ouer-act, and therein foil
The ruin of Mankind, wherein we toil.
Give me one instance: wherein doe we fail?
In that we mankind unto fame entail.
That breaks Religions bounds, and makes him ours,
By forming his God out of his own powers:
For if by Conscience he did leave, or take;
On that smooth face we could no wrinkle make.
Yet fame keeps outward order, and supports:
For shame and honour are strong humane forts.
Whereas Confusion is an engine fit
For vs, at once to swallow man with it.
Nay Craft! it is thy faint hypocrisy,
That mankind is so long protected by.
Thy often changes many times appease
Those Furies, which would else destroy at ease.
Fie Malice! It is you that vs deceive,
Who but with violence only can bereave.
For which you find not many natures fit,
And so add little to our Throne by it.
Where I pass thorough all the orbs of vice,
And form in each mould Natures prejudice.
The Christian Church from me is not exempt;
Laws have by me both honour and contempt;
By me the War upholds her reputation;
And lust, which leaves no certain generation;
Envy, that hates all difference of degree;
And selfe-loue, which hath no affinity;
Even you, without me, cannot prosper well:
I am the mould, and Majesty of hell.
Craft, peace! thou cutest every thread so thin,
As it destroys thy works ere they begin.
Thy cobwebs, like the Astrologers thin line,
Fit for discourse, for use are ouer-fine.
Thy state is nothing else but change and fear,
Weeds that no fruit, but fading blossoms bear,
Clothed with pied colours of hypocrisy,
Which like to all is, yet can nothing be.
In you no soul finds stayres to rise withal,
Descent to craft, change, fear, being natural.
When I propound in gross, you minutes play,
Which is the cause our Tragic works thus stay.
My wheels go on at once, thine restless pause;
Of little works, with much ado, the cause.
You even in Hala sometimes breed remorse,
At least a doubt that evil hath no force.
Thou make Caine in undertaking slow,
Who must, to serve thy turn, like goodness show:
Those Scenes still tedious are, those Acts too long,
Where thy vnresolute Images be strong.
For while you fear your true tormentor, Shame,
I swallow all at once, with honours name.
Then glory not: since where thy links excel,
There we enlarge not, but contract our hell.
Peace you base Subalterns! and strive no more,
That but the Carriers be of my rich store.
Perchance you think me the object of you all,
And so no Fury, but the Furies thrall:
Where I give form, and stuff to make you worse,
And so become your Lord, and not your Nurse.
I break the banks of duty, honour, faith;
And subject am to no power, but to death:
Charge me; I grant, Delays grow out of wit:
And are not all your false webs wrought by it?
To time I have respect, to person, place;
I cross my self to give my own acts grace.
I am Base to you all, and so the chief,
Equal with truth, where I find good belief.
I bear the weight of fear, the rage of lust,
With selfe-loue, envy, malice, left in trust.
I calm Mans windy pride, distempered rage,
Giving to each a shape for every age.
Wrong I attire in purple robes of might,
That State may help it to be infinite.
And who is fitter here to rule you all,
Than I, that give you being, by my fall?
Know therefore all you shadow-louing Spirits!
Who have no being, but in mans demerits,
That infinite desires, and finite power,
At once, can never all mankind devour.
Though men be all ours, and all we but one;
The vice yet cannot build, or stand alone.
Be it mans weakness that doth interrupt,
Or some power else that cannot be corrupt;
Or be there what there may be else aboue,
Which may, and will maintain her own by love:
Yet have we scope enough to mar this State;
And to the ever being, what is late?
As men in your names image ugliness,
To check beloved childrens wantonness,
When they would have them doe things, or for bear;
And call you when they know you are not there:
So I enammell your deformity,
Making all your excesses like to me.
And that you may believe this to be true;
We are not like: For what am I, but you?
Reason! You mar our Mart, by coveting
Not to be equal with vs, but our King.
For though you now like Roman Augurs be,
Who, but your staff, have no true mystery;
Yet doe you strive to rule, add, or diminish;
And idly so protract what we could finish.
Else how could Alaham, or Hala stay
So long; from making to our ends a way?
Lusts open face this Age will easily bear,
And hope here currant is to all, but fear.
Wrong needs no veil, where times doe tyrannise;
And what, but lack of heart, is then unwise;
Age hath descried those toys to be but name,
Which in the worlds youth did bear real fame;
Justice, Religion, Honour, Humbleness;
Shadows, which not well mixed, make beauty less.
They help to smother, not enlarge our fire,
By putting painted masks on mans desire;
And give time to vnactiue Theory,
Which rage it self would not doe, were it free.
So that we, Circe-like, change men to beasts,
Which beasts turn men again: Too base a crest
For vs, that would quite banish doing well;
And so at once change heaven and earth, to hell.
In which course, who doth well observe each part,
Shall find mankind to have so strange a heart;
As being all ill, yet no one ill serves
To work him to that mischief he deserves:
Fear, hope, desire, love, courage being mixed
So nicely in him, as none can be fixed.
Which is our glory: as for every state
To have a Tempter fitted, and a fate.
A fear in Great men still, to lose their might;
And in the mean, ambition infinite;
Truth, in the witty held but as a notion;
Honour, the Old mans God; the Youths promotion.
All which opposing powers, yet doe agree
To work corruption in humanity.
Then on: This time is ours: What need we haste?
Since till time ends, our reign is sure to last.
ALAHAM alone.
I march aboue the wits, and hearts of men;
Chance at my feet, and power in my hand.
Now King indeed. Obedience doth become
Men, that can strength by wisdom overcome.
It honour was, even worthy more than Crowns,
To pass the Bashes in adventuring:
They were possessed, I dispossessed of all,
But liberty to live, or dye a thrall.
Truth was in vain; no piecing up with might
For me I saw; I had too good a cause:
Counsel is slow, each minute infinite,
When resolution to her ripeness draws.
I saw corruption was the way to rise,
And with that shot I pierced their tyrannies.
Their guard I did corrupt. Base servile spirits,
(I knew) lacked wit to see, or heart to bear
Temptation: For desire is infinite
In them, that wanting honour cannot fear.
Trial is made: The King I doe possess:
My right is more; why should my hope be less?
And am I King? And doe my foes still live?
Can wounded Greatness slumber in a Throne?
Or that be glory which I feel alone?
No, No: Let rigour speak, which all men hear:
Life, is the work of Nature; death, of Kings:
Ruin it is, that reputation brings.
My Guard is strong; their first employment is
The murder of those men my father trusts;
Not all; for that were cruelty, not wit:
Some simple being, some indifferent sp'rits:
Their ends, and honours being but delights.
Others ambitious, rash, and violent,
No inward strength of nature: or of grace;
Of present power the noblest instruments.
Transform, and use: wit virtue doth exceed:
For it is all, or none, as men have need.
Only my care is how the Plot should prove,
Which for the Bashes now in ambush lies:
My wife hath art and rage, which jointly move
Her head-strong spirits unto cruelties.
But if her craft serve not to pluck them down,
The sword wants not pretences for the Crown.
My friends, and Mates! (You! upon whom I lay
My life, and honour, with this State, in trust)
Be resolute; For scruple doth betray;
Since all great works have great examples must.
Take Assem, Zeraphus, and Velladoune:
Blood asks blood: with ravine they did spoil
The people first; and now betray the Crown.
Revenge your parents, Countrymen, and kin:
Blood here is just, true honour, and no sin.
The cankered Calchas, scourge of Tyrannies,
Great master of deceit, Artisan of spoil,
The spy of faults, and spring of subsidies;
Naked deliver him into the Sea,
To plague those faults it cannot wash away.
The rest to bonds, who though they want no spite,
Their frailty yet for innocence shall stand.
All else exile. Obey in every thing:
They happy are that serve a rising King.
Caine, Alaham.
Placed in a Throne? Guarded? Adored? and Crowned?
What means this change? These signs of Ma∣jest?
Goodness gets not so soon a great Estate:
Mischiefe's foul way to Sovereignty:
This secret haste is sure: all is imbound.
What shall I do? Hold on the course I meant? Why not?
The death of Mahomet will still content.
Thy will is done; and Mahomet is slain.
My mind misgave it self; my thoughts did fear;
Yet knew I they of nothing guilty were.
By fate, or malice is the Bash slain?
By fate I think: for Justice fatal is,
As Gods bequest to them that doe amiss.
By sudden death, by thunder, lightning, fire,
Or by what other anger of the sky?
I pray thee show how Mahomet did die.
By these hands that owe service to the State,
And by his blood have made it fortunate.
What execration did he dying use
Against this violence of broken faith;
Which wounds good souls more than the bodies death?
In falling down, these only words he spake:
" Help people! help: My death your bondage brings:
" Behold! these wounds receive I for your sake;
" Reward of them that friend you under Kings.
" Vile Caine! that (like the Axe) dost go about,
" To cut thy self an helue to wear thee out.
Most wicked act! Could neither faith, nor law,
Reverence of State, remorse of doing ill,
The pains of justice, nor the hopes withdraw
Thy raging hand?
And dost thou think the world can suffer this;
That thou should glory to have done amiss?
Is thy desire grown wanton in her joy?
Or dost thou seem to say thy wishes nay,
More kindly in the end with them to play?
By fires of hell, which burn, and have no light;
By those foul spirits which ill men only see;
I swear thy death shall Mahomets requite.
Unto the world although I guilty be;
I did thy will: let me be clear to thee.
In vain I should command his death by sleights,
That placed am upon the fathers seat,
Where power can easilier doe things, than entreat.
The State of Kings is large; yet lacks in this,
That easy each thing, but not lawful is.
Besides, you then a second brother were;
Nor knew I, when this plot we did devise,
You should see clearer by your fathers eyes.
Rumour, complaints, and scornful thoughts of power,
Are ways of private hearts, that from below
Misiudge those higher powers, they doe not know.
But now borne up into a Princes Throne,
Beneath I see that world of discontent,
Where error teaches use of punishment.
Away with him. Entreaty is in vain:
Thy death to him is due, whom thou hast slain.
" Ah fearful friendships with superior powers!
" Whose two parts, they themselves, and their Estates,
" Divide, or join like nets; and be the snare,
" Where love, and fear to power entrapped are.
Alaham! aduow thy deed.
To constant wickedness men honour bear,
Where truth it self hath injury by fear.
I say; Let him be slain. His fault is this,
That Mahomet most traitorously he slew.
Stay Sir! I say that he still living is,
And my confession of my self untrue.
Traitor unto thy self! and false to me!
What riddles of contempt, and wick ness
Are these, which of thy self confessed be?
If Mahomet be dead; then shalt thou die:
For murder of thy friend deserves no less.
If Mahomet do live; yet shalt thou die:
For if no murder, scorn thou dost confess.
Away with him.
Hala. Alaham.
What tumult's this my Lord?
The play of Chance,
Which without mischief nothing can advance.
Yet good Sir! tell me what this tumult is.
The fall of him whose heart hath done amiss.
His name, and crime (sweet Lord) I long to know.
Report of mischief doth infect the heart,
And wisdom bids they should in silence go;
For nature feels every bodies smart.
Women, belike, are still in infancy.
That must not fear, or provocation see.
The glass of horror is not fact, but fear:
Opinion is a Tyrant every where.
If I shall tell you what you long to know,
What boots it? If you think it is not so.
What leads your reason, leads my reason too,
That all your words conceine in kindness doe.
The man that was, and is not now, is he
That never was the man he seemed to be.
Caine: What need more to show? with him are dead
His fault, and our goodwills to him mislead.
What hear I now? O false and weak estate
Of good belief! Wherein shall peace be found?
Since Gods be not, and mankind made to hate.
Caine dead? Even Caine, whom now we loved best,
In instants both grown wicked, and oppressed?
Caine slain by you! Hath Caine deserved this?
O God! Like strange his crime, and killing is.
Perchance not dead my Lord! how was he slain?
By sword.
Wounds let forth spirits, yet live again.
Nay, dead he is. These eyes did see his breath
Bear all his spirits into the world of death.
Necessity, that from infernal night
Fatally linked art unto the skies!
Bear thee we cannot, yet we bear thee must.
Now hopes appear: even now my heart resolves
Revenge; and silence is the way to it.
Did he confess his fault? What spake he last?
Ah Mahomet! whose hopes were on me placed.
Hasty belief (my Lord) hath hasty deeds,
And with their wounds, oft truth, and wisdom bleeds.
When wickedness is ripe, a minute shows
What chance the dice of Innocence throws.
Pardon me Lord! Good thoughts doe live aboue;
In highest region of unfeigned love:
Doubt and revenge, Nature hath placed below
Meaning the space should make the passage slow.
God, meaning we should rule, and you obey,
Gave men clear sight, and women good affection:
In vs, not in your selves, lies your election.
My Lord! It is true: Our frail, and weak Estate
Doth labour in excess: A women's heart
Still in the fever is of love, or hate.
Hardly the love which I did be are to Caine,
Could think he erred; much less approve him slain.
But now his falls approved by heavenly doom,
Our loss in him foretells our gain to come.
Then Sir! Take care his death be not in vain.
Your silly Sire is blind; if he were dead,
This reeling State by you might stand again:
True joy is only hope put out of sear,
And honour hides error every where.
A form the world expects in worldly things:
Caine was a man, a Bash, and our friend;
Sepulture, as a man; honour, to his estate;
Tears doe become a guilty friendships end:
Excess of honour, done to them that die,
Makes living men see our humanity.
Besides, thought-feeding rumour forth will go,
And occupy unquiet peoples spirits,
While in this pile for Caine you may bestow
Their blinded weakness, which with-hold your right.
People doe power, not persons apprehend;
Strength shows like truth; Mankind loves policy:
Defended Kings, but not revenged be.
Envy will rise, and both ways fall on vs;
Either as having slain an innocent,
Or highly erred by burying treason thus.
In penal justice silence best contents.
Rumour must needs be borne of doing minds:
Envy is but the smoke of low estate,
Ascending still against the fortunate.
I fear the carriage: it hath many parts.
And Hazards courses may find ouerthwarts.
My shame is equally engaged with yours.
Intents ill carried are that men may know;
When things are done, let rumour freely go.
Great works doe oft yield grievous accidents,
Which stir up peoples rage beyond intents.
People are superstitious, caught with shows:
To power why doe they else their freedom give,
But that in others pomp these shadows live?
O blessed yoke! that under reason draws
The pleasant load of well-vnited love:
Thy counsel (as mine own) I doe approve.
Then send the Priest. To me bequeath the rest.
For superstition hides ill meaning best.
Hala: Nutrix.
And is he gone? Rage then vnprisoned be!
I like thee well! While Alaham was there,
Thou then did use thy violence on me.
Now prey abroad; swell aboue all respect;
Fear nothing, if notorious thou wilt reign:
Thy glories shine, when every one complain.
What now? A child? And dost thou idly walk
The beaten paths of common cruelty?
A judge, and no revenger then am I,
If thou no more than his offences be.
While Caine did live thou though of more than this:
Shall death, desire, hope, fame, and fortunes lost
Such fading Trophies have?
Can thankfulness abound? And shall offence
Not feel, Revenge hath her magnificence?
Rage! now thou art aboue the Orb of doubt,
Where danger dangerlesse appears to thee;
Divine (I pray thee) what shall fall to me?
Must I be slain?
Monstrous I know, this women's nature is.
The worst she still; her self she now exceeds,
That dares scarce trust her self with that she breeds.
Well! now I feel thee rise, when I admire:
When hills have clouds, let all the valleys fear.
Scorn thou to make examples out of him?
Hast thou found out his children? They are mine,
Proud horror! Dost thou choose the innocent?
False conqueror of nature! dost thou move
A women's spite to spoil a mothers love?
Rage! shall we strive which shall give other place?
Hala! suppress; you need not kindle Rage.
Well! On. So that (like ruin) I may fall,
And ruin him; take children, me, and all.
Hala! distract? have senses lost their use?
Is there a third that trafficked abuse?
I bring you piety, duty, reason, love,
Water, to quench these flames that passions move.
Throw on enough. No Sea can quench this flame;
And then, what cannot quench doth but inflame.
For whom doe you this sumptuous storm pre∣pare?
For whom are wives estates enjoined to care?
Is malice currant where respect is due?
Power doth what likes in her inferiors move;
As we are sassed, so pay we; hate, or love.
What fault in him moved these effects in you?
Thoughts are too strict, much less can words contain;
The venom of his malice is too deep
For any power, but Revenge to keep.
Then Rage is lost: For there is nought in man,
That equal pain with such offences can.
Be that the gage. Mans senses barren were,
If they could apprehend, but what they feel.
Ills doe with place (like Numbers) multiply:
The living, dead, malice, affection, fear,
My womb, and I doe his affliction bear.
Will you destroy your own?
My own are his.
Infamous act!
Rage doth but now begin.
Can thou doe worse?
Else to my self I sin
Life is too short; horror exceeds not faith,
That cannot plague offences after death.
Ah! Calm this storm; these ugly torrents shun.
Of Rage, which drown thy self, and all besides.
Furies! no more irregularly run,
But arted: Teach confusion to divide.
If kind be disinherited in thee,
Yet have compassion of this Orphan State.
That is the work, which men shall wonder at:
For while his ruined are, yet mine shall reign;
His heirs, but yet true issue unto Caine.
These works on Princes ruins must be built.
For my revenge no baser blood is spilt.
What force can Princes forces ouer-beare?
That force, which makes their pride it cannot fear.
How enters malice where there is mistrust?
With tribute into State: to Kings with lust.
What way to these?
Prosperity, success.
These add more power:
So much suss∣pect the less.
What can you add?
Presents, obedience, praise:
They need not knock to enter in that please.
Flatteries are plain.
To Kings that see their ill.
Kings jealous are.
Of truth, not of their will.
Usurpers fear.
Worth, not humility.
Kings errors are our Agents in their hearts;
Their private passions wound their public States;
Time hath her arguments, and place her Arts.
This day he doth consummate all his joy:
Glory now at the Full is not suspicious;
And what adds to his pomp shall him destroy.
A Crown, and Mantle of most curious work
I have prepared, even with Egyptian skill;
And poison him in pleasing him I will.
My spirits fail.
Till Alahams ills doe tremble,
Horror is faint; Rage doth but Rage resemble.
Depart; keep secret, and be not dismayed:
Imperfect works cannot their glories show;
This goodly World did from a Chaos grow.
Now Caine! For whose revenge I only live,
Inspire thy ghost, to multiply in me
More sense, to make my senses more enraged;
More love, to make loves losses more in thee;
Double my wit beyond my strength engaged;
Open all lights of possibility;
Let grief, which yet keeps company with death,
Break forth, and poison all things with her breath.
Priest. Hala.
Madame! whom men obey, and God doth hear:
What zeal, remorse, or charity doth move
Your heart? The King leaves all things to your love.
Caine, who of late did live to both vs dear,
It is true, did fail; and for his fault is slain:
Our hearts are eased, as having lost their fear,
The rites of humane duties yet remain.
A Kings beloved he was; sometimes our friend;
Which must appear in honour of his end.
Such royal Piles, as for the Princely race
Are made a sacrifice unto the sky,
In honour of that God, which gave them place:
Such sumptuous Piles make: But more cost bestow;
Because both just Revenge, and Love they show.
Summon the Mufti, and Soothsayers all,
The Persian Magi, Christian Starre-Diuines,
The first, to sing alike his faith, and fall;
The last, to tell how higher power inclines.
In short; Revenge, and Love shine in those fires;
Power on all pomp that magnifies desires:
As if at once by cross mortality,
The Prince, and Princely line were dead in one;
Let mourning and devotion to the sky
Be offred up in pomp, and public moan.
Magnificence is Princely mystery;
All great Estates by great expense are known.
Prepare excess: Let no cost be forgot;
It makes men wonder, though they honour not.
Music to fix the wandering spirits race,
And sweeten Envies thoughts in unity;
That sorrow and devotion may have place,
Remorse and pity flow, and multiply.
Lights of all kinds the light of day shut out;
For darkness so enammeld is devout.
Unhappy state of Priesthood here below,
Who have to doe with curious Atheism,
With sin in flesh, and in the Church with schism.
Our office is an holy mystery,
To teach Kings, God; and every Subject, King;
How one obedience doth another bring.
But what boots truth to flesh, or laws to might?
Belief a wonder is, Obedience woe.
And shall we Priests, that under Princes live,
Strive in our selves with vice, abroad with might?
And like the hands which winnow rich men's gain,
Grow poor in all, but only woe, and pain?
No, No: The eyes of Priests look ever low,
To find the key of power, that is aboue;
When that is found, all faults beneath we know;
But Majesty hides faults, as well as love.
And though these rites of Princely funeral,
By laws divine, should not profaned be,
With less, than with descents of Majesty;
Yet Caine! more Princely, by thy Princes grace,
Shall be thy tomb, than ever Princes was.
A Dialogue; of Good, and Evil Spirits.
What is your scope vain Ghosts? would you o'rebuild the sky?
Were not men's Many tongues, and minds their Babel-destinie?
Your beings discords are; and what can they create,
But disproportion, which is still the fairest mark of fate?
Are you afraid poor Souls? Else why doe you descend
To question, or confer with vs, to whom you are no friends?
Who fear their own Estates doe commonly first speak,
As they again put goodness on, who find their party weak.
We doe but what we did, which is increase our might;
And as on earth, so in the ayre; cry down your borrowed light.
What can you win of vs, that must be as we were?
Whereas you, exiles out of heaven, can hope for nothing there.
We, that were as you are, know well what you can be;
Where you, that never were like vs, what can you in vs see?
That you have first destroyed your selves, and are ordained
To scourge, curse, and corrupt that earth, which you boast to have gained.
Why did not you defend that which was once your own?
Between vs two, the odds of worth, by odds of power is known.
Besides, Map clearly out your infinite extent,
Even in the infancy of time, when much was innocent;
Could this world then yield ought to envy, or desire,
Where pride of courage made men fall, and baseness raised them higher?
Where they that would be great, to be so, must be least?
And where to bear, and suffer wrong, was virtues na∣tiue crest?
Mans skin, was then his silk; the worlds wild fruit, his food;
His wisdom, poor simplicity; his Trophies inward good.
No Majesty, for power; nor glories, for mans worth;
Nor any end, but (as the plants) to bring each other forth.
Temples, and vessels fit for outward sacrifice,
As they came in, so go they out, with that which you count Vice.
The Priesthood few, and poor; No Throne, but open ayre:
For that which you call good, allows of nothing that is fair.
No Pyramid raised up aboue the force of Thunder,
Nor Babel-walles by Greatness built, for Littleness a won∣der.
No Conquest testifying wit, with courage mixed;
As wheels whereon the world must run, and never can be fixed.
No Arts, or Characters to read the great God in;
Nor stories of acts done; for these all entered with the sin.
A lasy calm, wherein each fool a pilot is:
The glory of the skilful shines, where men may go amiss.
Till we came in, there was no trial of your might,
And since we were; in men, your selves presume of little right.
Then cease to blast the earth with your abstracted dreams
And strive no more to carry men against affections streams.
Nay rather tempt, and prove, if long life make them wise,
That must, to have their beauties seen, put out all fleshly eyes.
Or when they be no more, Eternal then to be,
Neglect the joy, and glorious use of times felicity.
Cast out these thinne-weau'd lines, and catch some little flies;
The greater spirits, which are ours, feel not these nimble •yes.
In Alaham for instance, plead your power, or right;
Entice him from a mortal Crown, with your Crown in∣finite.
Prove if he will forbear unnatural Parricide,
To see who in the sea of humours shall the Sceptre guide.
Try if proud Hala will forget the death of Caine,
And reconciled, in duty, with her own Lord live, and reign.
Move Celica, that spirit reputed for your own,
To see if she, to save her life, would have her fame un∣known.
Work Zophi (that poor soul) though blind, to leave his breath:
We only make things cheap, or dear, as Lords of life, and death.
Lastly, persuade the King to live, and save his Crown;
And all the world shall see we raise, and wee pull Princes down.
So that your beings here are but a tincture cast
(Like crests upon the Egypt Pharos) to disguise, not last.
Besides; take from the world that which you reckon Sin;
And she must be, as at the first, for ever to begin.
A glorious, spacious womb framed to contain but one;
Since he, that in it will be yours, is sure to be alone.
Keep therefore where you are; descend not, but ascend:
For, underneath the Sun, be sure no brave State is your friend.
What have you won by this, but that cursed under Sin,
You make, and mar; throw down, and raise; as ever to begin?
Like Meteors in the ayre, you blaze but to burn out,
And change your shapes (like Phantom'd clouds) to leave weak eyes in doubt.
Not truth, but truth-like grounds is that you work upon,
Varying in all but this, that you can never long be one,
Then play here with your art; false miracles devise;
Deceive, and be deceived still; be foolish, and seem wise;
In peace erect your Thrones; your delicacy spread,
The flowers of time corrupt soon spring, and are as quickly dead.
Let war, which (tempest-like) all with it self o'er∣throws,
Make of this diverse world a stage for blood-enammeld shows.
Successively both these yet this fate follow will,
That all their glories be no more than change from ill, to ill.
So as with peace, or war, if you adorn one realm,
In both, through other Climes again, you run with barren stream.
Rest no where therefore, but still wander, as you doe,
And restless be they, as you are, that shall receive you too.
Give Alaham more scope to multiply his error,
With parents blood adorn his Throne; more guilt still adds more terror.
Let Halo's wicked heart (for all ill births a womb)
By violence of passion, make for many vices room.
Let ill example in to stain the Christian Nation;
The same excess destroys at last, which first gave reputation.
Conspire against the truth, you have an easy foe:
For in the world all that are hers can never currant go.
Under the next good, shadow your deformed excess;
Yet shall your masked arts, and horns, your cloven feet ex∣press.
Whereby your beauties be so prized among your own;
As they will blush for yours, by name, or nature to be known.
Again, take all the world, if it one soul content;
Then freely let Mankind believe you are omnipotent.
But if your Legions here doe in their glories rave,
Tormented while they live on earth, and much more in the grave;
If to be nothing be the best that could be fall;
Your subtle Orbs, to real beings, then must needs be thrall.
And so prove to the good but like those showers of rain,
Which, while they wet the husbandman, yet multiply his gain.
King. Celica.
Celica! thou only child, whom I repent
Not yet to have begot! thy work is vain:
Thou run'st against my Destinies intent.
Fear not my fall; the steep is fairest plain,
And error safest guide unto his end,
Who nothing but mischance can have to friend.
We parents are but Natures nursery,
When our succession springs then ripe to fall;
Privation unto age is natural.
Age there is also in a Princes State,
Which is contempt, grown of misgovernment;
Where love of change begets Princes hate:
For hopes must wither, or grow violent,
If fortune bind desires to one Estate.
Then mark: Blind, as a Man: Scorned, as a King:
A Fathers kindness loathed, and desolate:
Life without joy, or light: what can it bring,
But inward horror unto outward hate?
O safety! thou art then a hateful thing,
When childrens death assures the fathers State.
No; Safe I am not, though my son were slain,
My frailty would beget such sons again.
Besides, if fatal be the heavens will,
Ripening adds more force to destiny,
Whose iron wheels stay not on fleshly wit,
But headlong run down steep Necessity.
And as in danger, we doe catch at it
That comes to help; and unadvisedly
Oft doe our friends to our misfortune knit:
So with the harm of those who would vs good,
Is Destiny impossibly withstood.
Celica then cease; importune me no more:
My son, my age, the state where things are now
Require my death. Who would consent to live,
Where love cannot revenge, nor truth forgive?
Though fear see nothing but extremity,
Yet danger is no deep sea, but a Ford,
Where they that yield can only drowned be.
In wrongs, and wounds, Sir, you are to remiss.
To Thrones a passive nature fatal is.
Occasion to my son hath turned her face;
My inward wants all outward strengths betray;
And so make that impossible I may.
Yet live:
Live for the State.
Whose ruins glasses are,
Wherein see errors of my self I must,
And hold my life of danger, shame, and care.
When fear propounds, with loss men ever choose,
Nothing is left me, but my self, to lose.
And is it nothing then to lose the State?
Where chance is ripe, there counsel comes too late:
Celica! by all thou ow'st the Gods, and me,
I doe conjure thee; Leave me to my chance.
What's past was errors way; the truth it is,
Wherein I wretch can only go amiss.
" If Nature saw no cause of sudden ends,
" She; that but one way made to draw our breath,
" Would not have left so many doors to death.
Yet Sir! if weakness be not such a sand,
As neither wrong, nor counsel can manure;
Choose, and resolve what death you will endure.
This sword, thy hands, may offer up my breath,
And plague my lifes remissness in my death.
Unto that duty if these hands be borne,
I must think God, and Truth, but names of scorn.
Again, this justice were, if life were loved;
Now merely grace; since death doth, but forgive
A life to you, which is a death to live.
Pain must displease that satisfies offence.
Chance hath left death no more to spoil, but sense.
Then sword! doe Justice office thorough me;
I offer more than that he hates to thee.
Ah! Stay thy hand. My State no equal hath,
And much more matchless my strange vices be:
One kind of death becomes not thee, and me.
Kings plagues by chance, or destiny should fall;
Headlong he perish must that ruins all.
No cliff, or rock is so precipitate,
But down it eyes can lead the blind a way;
Without me live, or with me dye you may.
Celica! and wilt thou Alaham exceed?
His cruelty is death, you torments use;
He takes my Crown, you take my self from me;
A Prince of this fallen Empire let me be.
Then be a King, no Tyrant of thy self:
Be; and be what you will: what nature lent
Is still in hers, and not our government.
If disobedience, and obedience both
Still doe me hurt; in what strange state am I?
But hold thy course: It well becomes my blood,
To doe their parents mischief with their good.
Yet Sir! hark to the poor oppressed tears,
The just men's moan, that suffer by your fall;
A Princes charge is to protect them all.
And shall it nothing be that I am yours?
The world without, my heart within doth know,
I never had unkind, irreverent powers.
If thus you yield to Alahams treachery;
He ruins you; it is you, Sir, ruin me.
Celica! Call up the dead; awake the blind;
Turn back the time; bid winds tell whence they come;
As vainly strength speaks to a broken mind.
Fly from me Celica! hate all I doe:
Misfortunes have in blood successions too.
Will you doe that which Alaham can not?
He hath no good: you have no ill, but he:
This Marre-right yeelding's honours Tyranny.
Have I not done amiss? Am I not ill,
That ruined have a Kings authority?
And not one King alone; since Princes all
Feel part of those scorns, whereby one doth fall.
Treason against me cannot treason be:
All laws have lost authority in me.
" The laws of power chained to men's humours be.
" The good have conscience; the ill (like instruments)
" Are, in the hands of wise authority,
" Moved, divided, used, or laid down;
" Still, with desire, kept subject to a Crown.
" Stir up all States, all spirits: hope, and fear;
Wrong, and revenge, are currant every where.
Put down my son: For that must be the way;
A fathers shame, a Princes Tyranny:
The Sceptre ever shall misiudged be.
Let them fear rumour that doe work amiss;
Blood, torments, death, horrors of Cruelty,
Have time, and place. Look through these skins of fear,
Which still persuade the better side to bear.
And since thy son thus traitorously conspires,
Let him not prey on all thy race, and thee:
Keep ill example from posterity.
Danger is come: and must I now unarm?
And let in hope to weaken resolution?
Passion! be thou my Legacy, and Will;
To thee I give my life, Crown, reputation;
My pomps to clouds; and (as forlorn with men)
My strength to women; hoping this alone,
Though feared, sought, and a King, to live unknown.
Celica! all these to thee: doe thou bestow
This living darkness, wherein I doe go.
My soul now joys. Doing breathes horror out.
Absence must be our first sleppe: Let vs fly:
A pause in rage makes Alaham to doubt;
Which doubt may stir in people hope, and fear,
With love, or hate, to seek you every where.
For Princes lives are fortunes misery;
" As dainty sparks, which till men dead doe know,
" To kindle for himself each man doth blow.
But hark! What's this? Malice doth never sleep:
I hear the Spies of power drawing near.
Sir! follow me: Misfortunes worst is come;
Her strength is change; and change yields better doom.
Choice now is past. Hard by there is a pile
Built, under colour of a sacrifice;
If God doe grant, it is a place to save;
If God denies, it is a ready grave.
Zophi. Celica.
Where am I now? All things are silent here.
What shall I doe? Go on from place, to place,
Not knowing what to trust, or whom to fear?
Yet what should I not fear, that live to know
Rights, Kingdoms, parents, all, my overthrow?
Are these the specious hopes of Princes heirs;
Is Right still subject to aspiring wit?
Have they that stand by Princes, more despairs,
Than they that doe supplant anointed heirs!
Is expectation nothing else in me,
But woes fore-runner, to make deep impression,
By these surprises, of adversity?
Are these the glorious triumphs of this day?
Absent, in presence; banished, in recalling;
A Throne, a tomb; a Prince become a prey.
Ah cruel, false, ambitious thirst of State!
Bloody-like rage! but more revengeful still,
Because their ends doe more inflame their will.
My rights, and hopes I give, and doe forgive:
Wrong! take the world, let me enjoy my self.
Scorned, blind, I cannot harm. Ah! let me live.
Let power despise
My needless, guiltless blood. The strength of fear
The loss of all things, but of life, can bear.
What see I here! More spectacles of woe?
And are my kindred only made to be
Agents, and Patients in iniquity?
Ah forlorn wretch! ruins example right!
Lost to thy self, not to thy enemy,
Whose hand, even while thou fliest, thou fal'st into;
And with thy fall, thy father dost undo.
Save one I may: Nature would save them both;
But Chance hath many wheels, Rage many eyes.
What shall I then abandon innocents?
Not help a helpless brother thrown on me?
Is nature narrow to adversity?
No, No. Our God left duty for a law;
Pity, at large; Love, in authority;
Despair, in bonds; fear, of it self in awe:
That rage of time, and powers strange liberty,
Oppressing good men might resistance find:
Nor can I to a brother be less kind.
Dost thou, that can not see, hope to escape?
Disgrace, can have no friend; contempt, no guide;
Right, is thy guilt; thy Judge, iniquity;
Which desolation casts on them that see.
Make calm thy rage: pity a ghost distressed:
My right, my liberty, I freely give:
Give him, that never harmed thee, leave to live.
Nay; God, the World, thy Parents it deny;
A brothers jealous heart, usurped might
Grows friends with all the world, except thy right.
Secure thy self. Exile me from this coast:
My fault, suspicion is; my Judge, is fear;
Occasion, with my self, away I bear.
Fly unto God: For in humanity
Hope there is none. Reach me thy fearful hand:
I am thy sister; neither fiend, nor spy
Of Tyrants rage; but one that feels despair
Of thy Estate, which thou dost only fear.
Kneel down; embrace this holy mystery,
A refuge to the worst for rape, and blood;
And yet, I fear, not hallowed for the good,
Help God! defend thine Altar! since thy might,
In earth, leaves Innocence no other right.
Eternal God! that see thy self in vs!
If vows be more than sacrifice of lust,
Raised from the smokes of hope, and fear in vs;
Protect this innocent; calm Alahams rage;
By miracles faith goes from age, to age.
Affection trembles; reason is oppressed;
Nature, methinkes, doth her own entrails tear:
In resolution ominous is fear.
Alaham. Celica.
Sirs! seek the City, examine, torture, rack:
Sanctuaries none let there be: make darkness known:
Pull down the roofs, dig, burn, put all to wrack:
And let the guiltless for the guilty groan.
Change, shame, misfortune in their scoping, lie;
And in their finding our prosperity.
Good fortune Welcome! we have lost our care,
And found our loss: Celica distract I see;
The King is near: She is her fathers eyes.
Behold! the forlorn wretch, half of my fear,
Takes Sanctuary at holy Altars feet:
Lead him apart, examine, force, and try;
These bind the subject, not the Monarchy.
Celica! awake: that God of whom you crave
Is deaf, and only gives men what they have.
Ah cruel wretch! guilty of parents blood!
Might I, poor innocent, my father free,
My murder yet were less impiety.
But on; devour: fear only to be good:
Let vs not scope: thy glory then doth rise,
When thou at once thy house dost sacrifice.
Tell me where thy Father is.
O bloody scorn?
Must he be killed again that gave thee breath?
Is duty nothing else in thee but death?
Leave off this mask; deceit is never wise;
Though he be blind, a King hath many eyes
O twofold scorn. God be revenged for me.
Yet since my Father is destroyed by thee,
Add still more scorn, it sorrow multiplies.
Passions are learned, not borne within the heart;
That method keep: Order is quiets art.
Tell where he is: For look what love conceals,
Pain out of Natures Labyrinths reveals.
This is reward which thou dost threaten me:
If terror thou wilt threaten, promise joys.
Smart cools these boiling stiles of vanity.
And if my Father I no more shall see,
Help me unto the place where he remains;
To hell below, or to the sky aboue:
The way is easy, where the guide is love.
Confess: where is he hid?
Rack not my woe.
Thy glorious pride of this vnglorious deed
Doth mischief, ripe; and therefore falling, show.
Bodies have place, and blindness must be led:
Graves be the Thrones of Kings, when they be dead.
He was (Unhappy) cause that thou art now;
Thou art, ah wicked! cause that he is not;
And fear thou Parricide can be forgot?
Bear witness, Thou Almighty God on high!
And you black Powers inhabiting below!
That for his life my self would yield to die.
Well Sirs! Go seek the dark, and secret caves,
The holy Temples, sanctified Cells,
All parts wherein a living corps may dwell.
Seek him amongst the dead, you placed him there:
Yet lose no pains, good Souls! go not to hell;
And, but to heaven, you may go every where.
Guilty, with you, of his blood let me be,
If any more I of my Father know,
Than that he is where you would have him go.
Tear up the vaults: behold her agonies!
" Sorrow substracts, and multiplies the spirits;
" Care, and desire doe under anguish cease!
" Doubt curious is, affecting piety;
" Woe, loves it self; fear from it self would fly.
Doe not these trembling motions witness bear,
That all these protestations be of fear?
If ought be quick in me, move it with scorn:
Nothing can come amiss to thoughts forlorn.
Confess in time. Revenge is merciless.
Reward, and pain; fear, and desire too,
Are vain, in things impossible to doe.
Tell yet where thou thy Father last did see.
Even where he by his loss of eyes hath won,
That he no more shall see his monstrous Son.
First, in perpetual night thou made him go;
His flesh the grave, his life the stage, where sense
Plays all the Tragedies of pain, and woe.
And would thou trayterosly thy self exceed,
By seeking thus to make his Ghost to bleed?
Bear her away: devise; add to the rack
Torments, that both call death, and turn it back.
The flattering glass of Power is others pain.
Perfect thy work; that heaven, and hell may know,
To worse I cannot, going from thee, go.
" Eternal life, that ever liu'st aboue!
" If sense there be with thee of hate, or love;
" Revenge my King, and Fathers overthrow.
"O Father! if that name reach up so high,
" And be more than a proper word of Art,
" To teach respects in our humanity;
" Accept these pains, whereof you feel no smart.
King. Alaham.
What sound is this of Celica's distress?
Alaham! wrong not a silly sisters faith.
It is plague enough that she is innocent;
My child, thy sister; borne (by thee, and me)
With shame, and sin to have affinity.
Break me; I am the prison of thy thought:
Crowns dear enough, with fathers blood, are bought.
Now feel thou shalt, thou ghost unnatural!
Those wounds which thou to my heart then did give,
When, in despite of God, this State, and me,
Thou did from death mine elder brother free.
The smart of Kings oppression doth not die:
Time, rusted malice; rust, wounds cruelly.
Flatter thy wickedness; adorn thy rage;
To wear a Crown tear up thy Fathers age.
Kill not thy sister: It is lack of wit,
To doe an ill that brings no good with it.
Go, lead them hence. Prepare the funeral;
Hasten the sacrifice, and pomp of woe.
Where she did hide him, thither let them go.
" O God! who made those laws which this " Wretch breaks,
" Let parents blood this curse upon him bring;
" That he, who of a child breaks all respect,
" May, in his children, find the same neglect.
LIke as strong winds doe work upon the Sea,
Stirring, and tossing waives to war each other:
So Princes doe with Peoples humours play,
As if Confusion were the Scepters mother.
But Crowns! take heed: when humble things mount high,
The winds oft calm before those billows lie.
When we are all wronged, had we all one mind,
Whom could you punish? what could you reserve?
Again, as hope, and fear distract mankind;
Knew Kings their strength, our freedom were to serve.
But Fate doth to her self reserve both these,
With each to punish other, when it please.
Grant that we be the stuff for Princes art,
By, and on it, to build their Thrones aboue vs:
Yet if Kings be the head, we be the heart;
And know we love no soul, that doth not love vs.
Men's many passions judge the worst at length,
And they that doe so, easily know their strength:
With bruit, and rumour, as with hope, and fear,
You lay vs low, or lift vs from our earth;
You try what nature, what our States can bear;
By law you bind the liberties of birth;
Making the People bellows unto Fame,
Which ushers heavy dooms with evil name.
Kings govern People, ouer-racke them not:
Fleece vs; but doe not clip vs to the quick.
Think not with good, and ill, to write, and blot:
The good doth vanish, where the ill doth stick.
Hope not with trifles to grow popular;
Wounds that are healed for ever leave a scarre.
To offer People shows makes vs too great:
Princes descend not, keep your selves aboue.
The Sun draws not our brows up, but our swear:
Your safest rack to wind vs up is Love.
To mask your vice in pomps is vainly done:
Motes lie not hidden in beams of a Sun.
The stamp of Sovereignty makes currant
Home brass to buy, or sell, as well as gold:
Yet mark! the Peoples standard is the warrant
What man ought not to doe, and what he should.
Of words we are the Grammar, and of deeds
The harvest both is ours, and eke the seeds.
We are the glass of Power, and doe reflect
That Image back, which it to vs presents:
If Princes flatter, straight we doe neglect;
If they be fine, we see, yet seem content.
Nor can the Throne, which Monarchs doe live in,
Shadow Kings faults, or sanctify their sin.
Make not the Church to vs an instrument
Of bondage, to your selves of liberty:
Obedience there confirms your Government;
Our Sovereigns, Gods Subalternes you be:
Else while Kings fashion God in humane light,
Men see, and scorn what is not Infinite.
Make not the end of Justice, Checquer-gaine,
It is the Liberality of Kings:
Oppression, and Extortion ever reign,
When Laws look more on Scepters, than on things.
Make crooked that line which you measure by;
And mar the fashion straight of Monarchy.
Why doe you then profane your Royal line,
Which we hold sacred, and dare not approach?
Their wounds, and wrongs prove you are not divine,
And we learn, by example, to encroch.
Your Fathers loss of eyes foretells his end:
By craft, which lets down Princes, we ascend.
How shall the People hope? how stay their fear,
When old foundations daily are made new?
Uncertain is a heavy load to bear;
What is not constant sure was never true.
Excess in one makes all indefinite:
Where nothing is our own, there what delight?
Kings then take heed! Men are the books of fate,
Wherein your vices deep engraven lye,
To show our God the grief of every State.
And though great bodies do not straightwaies die;
Yet know, Your errors have this proper doom,
Even in our ruin to prepare your tomb.
Alaham alone.
Chance now congratulates. This is indeed
A Princely work, and fashions nature new,
To sacrifice the living to the dead;
And with revenge be to a Kingdom led.
My father, brother, sister, and my King;
All slain for me? Obedience! Duty! Love!
Your followers to such height when do you bring.
Now Halo's Present, this Triumphant Robe
Shows all Estates, things real, humours, laws,
Yea Wives themselves owe homage unto might.
Justice in Kings cannot be definite.
Hala, who strove, by strength of wit, and passion,
To change, enforce, deceive, or undermine
Me, as a Man; yet to a Princes place
Humbles her pride, and strives to purchase grace.
When I ordained this mask, and first decreed
A specious death for Prince, and Parent too;
I felt once tenderness, that evil weed,
Which some call Duty; others, Natures Laws.
Should I have lost a Crown for such applause?
No, No: Each State peculiar wisdoms hath,
The way of Princes is to hide their minds:
For else each slave will suddenly descry
Our inward passions, which they traffic by.
Remissness did in me no sooner move,
And only by a pause it self express;
But straightway they divined remorse, or love;
And instantly drew arguments from both,
As if distraction to resolve were loath.
But, like a Sultan, mixing power with art;
When I made good my will, and only said;
Sirs, doe your charge. This intermittent passion
Is but the print of natural affection;
The seat of Justice is aboue compassion:
Straight, as if Furies breath had filled these bladders,
With cruel hearts their charge they undertook;
And ever after made my will their book.
Who govern men, if they will stay aboue,
Must see, and scorn the downfalls of selfe-loue.
Nay, mark again what glory Order yields,
Where every spirit is fitted to his room.
Did not distress these weak Ghosts well become?
At which fine plays of Chance, and intercession,
Did I relent? Or had I any sense,
But in the glories of Omnipotence?
These Scepter-mysteries Kings must observe,
Or not be Kings. Are private virtues such?
" Want great Estates no other strengths but those,
" Which make them, for good words, good fortune lose?
As Dogs their kennels, these their graves did frame:
It was crafty power that gave such laws to fame.
Away they went, rich in selfe-pitties smoke,
No hope of praise, but by their form of death;
Nor of revenge, but in the Peoples breath.
While I ascending roam to look about,
And in the strength of confidence, and power,
Behold the vnprosperities of doubt.
But hark! What mournful harmony is this?
In dole my Triumphs are. What sounds are these;
Change! is thy nature both to grieve, and please?
Confused Echo's! whither doe you fly?
Or whence proceed? From grudge? or from applause?
Except my will, craves Mankind any laws?
Solemnity infers the work is ended:
Yet hear I noise that shows unquiet motion;
As from their ashes some new work intended.
Now shall we know: Behold! I see one come,
Whose looks bring woe, and horror from that Tomb.
Nuntius. Alaham.
Distract, confused, are all my inward spy∣ritz:
Grief would complain, yet dares not speak for fear.
Horror the place of wonder disinherits.
Coins next of kin so willingly to die,
For pomp, and honour to his funeral;
The flesh to covet that which flesh doth fly;
This wonder went I to the Pile to see:
As costly glories of the vanity.
In stead of these; I saw the veils of Power,
Practise, and pomp, specious hypocrisy,
Rent from her face, even while she did devour.
I saw those glorious stiles of Government,
God, Laws, Religion (wherein Tyrants hide
The wrongs they doe, and all the woes we bide)
Wounded, profaned, destroyed. Power is unwise,
That thinks in pomp to mask her Tyrannies.
Look where he stands! a Monster grown within,
Still thirsty, and yet full with Parents blood:
Both man, and Tyrant dearly understood.
Hath meek devotion finished her work?
Tell what their manner was; and how they died;
That to the dead would thus be crucified.
The fire, though merciless, yet sometimes just,
Hath done his part; devoured, but refined;
Performed thy will, and yet deceived thy trust.
Speak plain: What threatening mysteries be these?
Echos they be of murmurs, which possess
The hearts of men against Powers wickedness.
The first which burnt, as Caine his next of kin,
In blood your Brother, and your Prince in State,
Drew wonder from men's hearts brought horror in.
This innocent, this soul too-meeke for sin,
Yet made for others to doe harm withal,
With his selfe-pitty tears, drew tears from vs;
His blood, compassion had; his wrong, stirred hate:
Deceit is odious in a Kings Estate.
Repiningly he goes unto his end:
Strange Visions rise; strange Furies haunt the flame;
People cry out; Echo repeats his name.
These words he spake, even breathing out his breath:
" Unhappy weakness! never innocent!
" If in a Crown, yet but an instrument.
" People! observe; this fact may make you see:
" Excess hath ruined what it self did build:
" But ah! the more oppressed, the more you yield.
The next was he, whose age had reverence;
His gesture something more than priuatenesse;
Guided by one, whose stately grace did move
Compassion, even in hearts that could not love.
As soon as these approached near the flame,
The wind, the steam, or furies, raised their veils;
And in their looks this image did appear:
Each, unto other; life, to neither dear.
These words he spake: " Behold one that hath lost
" Himself within; and so the world without;
" A King that brings authority in doubt:
" This is the fruit of Powers misgovernment.
" People! my fall is just; yet strange your fate,
" That, under worst, will hope for better State.
Grief roars aloud. Your Sister yet remained,
Helping in death to him in whom she died,
Then going to her own, as if she gained,
These mild words spake with looks to heaven bent:
" O God! It is thou that suffrest here, not we:
" Wrong doth but like it self in working thus:
" At thy will, Lord! Revenge thy self, not vs.
The fire straight upward bears the souls in breath:
Visions of horror circle in the flame,
With shapes, and figures like to that of death;
But lighter-tongu'd, and nimbler-wing'd than fame:
Some to the Church; some to the People fly:
A voice cries out; Revenge, and Liberty.
Princes! Take heed; Your glory is your care;
And Powers foundations, Strengths, not Vices, are.
What change is this, that now I feel within?
Is it disease that works this fall of spirits?
Or works this fall of spirits my disease?
Things seem not as they did; horror appears.
What sin embodied, what strange sight is this?
Doth sense bring back but what within me is?
Or doe I see those shapes which haunt the flame?
What summons up remorse? Shall Conscience rate
Kings deeds, to make them less than their Estate?
Ah silly ghost! is it you that swarm about?
Would thou, that art not now, a father be?
These body laws doe with the life go out.
What thoughts be these that doe my entrails tear?
You wandering spirits frame in me your hell;
I feel my brother, and my sister there.
Where is my wife? There lacks no more but she:
Let all my own together dwell with me.
Hala. Alaham.
Wife! Is that name but stile of thy remorse?
Must I go where thy silly parents be?
Thou yet but feel thy self: thou shalt feel me.
A King? And in a Throne built out of blood:
The ashes of your own must give you power.
Glutton Ambition! now thy self devour.
Look in thy Conscience, that vnflattering glass;
See there the wounds of Caine, thy wrongs to me:
Death triumphs now; And I doe give it thee.
Caine here begins to live, whilst thou dost feed
Upon the poison, that thy wife deuis'd:
Thy debtor yet; but stay I will exceed.
Now war thy self: a King, with Kings must war:
We are too base for friends, or enemies:
For lusts use, not for love, we women are.
All pains of death my self in Caine did feel;
And shall my rage aspire but to be just?
What is but once; be long in doing must.
Infernal womb! receive thy right. Of old
This body was thine own, before I was.
Obey my father, brother, sister, me:
I gave their ghosts; they must give mine to thee.
They call, I come. It was my sin alone,
That gloried many ways to tyrannise:
For all the dooms of ill let me suffice.
My Grief doth yet but roam it self in sense:
Hala is more: Rage multiplies with use:
These doe but morn; I must revenge abuse.
Even through thy sense will I send in thine own:
This child, that by thee lived shall in thee die;
In this will Caine, and I possess thy Throne.
Ah powerful God! why dost thou Thunders spend
(By chance, or without vengeance) on the plants;
Since it is Man, not Trees, that doth offend?
Sirs! tear the roof; perfect the work of Power:
I have no being, while she there doth sit,
Subject in sex, but King, in rage of wit.
Women! Behold, our sex I now improve:
Malice were vain, if Kings could it subdue:
This rage revives the dead; restores my love.
Is this Ormus? Or is Ormus my hell,
Where only Furies, and not Men, doe dwell?
The poison works; I feel my spirits faint;
I must beseech; my Power is but complaint.
Yet Wit! thou know what every Power can doe;
Be Strength to me. Can Mothers kill their own?
Selfe-loue will spare them. Why should I request?
Words doe inflame. But ah! it Hala is:
I must entreat. Her malice keeps no fashion:
Though she have all, that all is but one Passion.
If I entreat; doth sense show where to wound?
I owe it mine; doth that give malice Power?
Ah God!
What shall I doe, that both within, and out,
Authority have lost? Unused to request,
Yet must, and will: Yet, even in doing, know;
Impossible, adds but more scorn to woe.
Hala! I doe, with Nature, beg for thine.
Harm me alone thy Husband, and thy King.
Horror hath her degrees: there is excess
In all Revenge, that may be done with less.
Beyond the rule of Law, but not of Lou•,
This child was borne; this not in Love, but Law.
Before thy wrongs I had my passions free:
And in revenge shall ought else limit me?
Innocent, thine own, too young for hate, or fear:
His death doth only execration bear.
In him thou art: in him I plague my lust,
Where Sense, and Law, were traitors to affection.
Bear children only but to Caine I must.
Disease, or Grief (I know not which) or both:
Languish my powers: Hala! some respite give;
Spare him a while: I have not long to live.
Hala! make haste to multiply this wretch;
I must have both his sense, and judgment free:
It is horror, not disease, that honours me.
" All you superior Powers, which from aboue
" Behold this earth; and earthly mischiefs rod!
" Cast hence your eyes. These works are but for two:
" For him, that suffers; and for me, that doe.
Hala! then on: that Alaham may enrage,
Enrage thou first. New married now am I:
Remorse doth but for men in ambush lie.
Earth! Stand thou fast under this ugliness?
And fal'st not down to that infernal deep,
Which fears (perchance) worse than it self to keep?
Eyes! close your lids: There is no more to doe:
Yet know, you have seen that before you die,
Which no Age will believe; One worse than I.
Ah cursed Mortality! So soon put out?
And have I lost the glory of Revenge,
If Fame find greater, as she goes about?
This blood, that bloody throat should have devoured:
Rage lacked in this. Where is the place for scorn;
Since woes be dead in him, as soon as borne?
Flesh is too brittle mould for brave excess.
Yetlet these scraps give nourishment to Fame;
Since Love, and Rage this model may express.
But what is this? Wake I, or doe I dream?
If changed; with whom, or into whom am I?
Doth Horror dazzle sense, or multiply?
What world is this? Whore's Alaham? where my Son?
Caine! rise, and tell what Furies raised be.
Dost Thou remain alive? And art Thou dead?
Who did this deed? None answers. It was I.
And am I thus misted to lose Child, Husband, Fame,
Honour, Revenge, my Caine, my Harms, and Fury too?
And cannot harm my self, that those harms to me doe.
Must I forgive thee, Hala! that none else forgive?
Scarce trembling doth my heart conceive this hateful deed?
Doe eyes behold this work, and neither weep, nor bleed?
Shall I complain of Heaven, where fools lay selfe-de∣spear?
Or Hell shall I invoke, which ill hath every where?
Shall I remain alive, and turn my rage to woe?
Shall I distinguish Guilt, where Chance doth over∣throw?
Is Caine no more? Is it no more to love?
Hath Halo's hate made many hearts to bleed,
Upon the ruins of her love to feed?
Fury! art thou so long in getting up
Aboue the mists of poor selfe-pittie Tears?
Shall Rage be still a prisoner under fears?
Look! here is death: Return thou me remorse?
Here my beloved: Can sighs recall him back?
Here him I loath: Can scorn become his wrack?
My self yet live: Must Fury burn without?
These were in me: May Nature live in one?
What's due to death? Even Rage that grows to doubt.
Come Infant! Here is Empire. Let vs live.
This work is mine: Hell thanks, and envies me;
And lo! her Spirits, before I come, I see.
Discord, Sedition, Rage, you Furies all!
Possess again the State, where you began:
The Woman you; It is we deceive the Man.
Enter upon this large infernal womb;
Repay your selves; this mould did make you all.
Why doe you stay? Lead me the way: I come.
Flesh is too weak, it hath satiety;
Lust, intermittent here; and Fury, poor;
Rage, hath respects; Desires, here weary be.
Leave Man this mean: Let vs live in excess;
Where power is more, although the joys be less.
This Child is none of mine: I had no part:
Bear him I did with loathing, not desire:
My womb perchance did yield, but not my heart.
With Alaham his father he must dwell:
I will go down, and change this Ghost with hell.
This Tragedy, called Alaham, may bee printed, this 23. of June, 1632.

IF gracious silence, sweet Attention,
Quick sight, and quicker apprehension,
(The lights of iudgmēts throne) shine any where;
Our doubtful author hopes, this is their Sphere
And therefore opens he himself to those,
To other weaker Beams, his labours close;
As loathe to prostitute their virgin strain,
To every vulgar, and adulterate brain.
In this alone, his Muse her sweetness hath,
She shuns the print of any beaten path;
And proves new ways to come to learned ears:
Pied ignorance she neither loves. nor fears.
Nor hunts she after popular applause,
Or fomy praise, that drops from common Jaws;
The garland that she wears, their hands must twine,
Who can both censure, understand, define
What Merit is: Then cast those piercing rays,
Round as a crown, instead of honoured Baize,
About his Poesy; which (he knows) affords,
Words aboue Action: matter, aboue words.
WHo goes there?
Tic I, blind Archer.
Who? Mercury?
I.
Farewell.
Stay Cupped.
Not in your company Harms, ex∣cept
your hands were riveted at your back.
Why so my little Rover?
Because I know, you have not a finger, but is as long as
my quiver, (cousin Mercury,) when you please to extend it.
Whence derive you this speech Boy?
O! tic your best policy to be Ignorant: you did never
steal Mars his sword out of the sheath; you? nor Neptunes
Trident; nor Apolloes Bow; no, not you? Alas your palms
(Iupiter knows) they are as tender as the foot of a foundered
Nag, or a Ladies face new Mercuried; theyle touch nothing.
Go to (Infant) you'll be daring still.
Daring? O Ianus, what a word is there? why my light
fether-heeld Cousse, what are you, any more then my uncle
Ioues Pander, a Lackey that runs on errands for him, and can
whisper a light message to a loose wench with some round
volubility, waite at a table with a Trencher, and warble upon a
Crowd a little; One that sweeps the Gods drinking room
every morning, and sets the Cushions in order again which
they threw one at another head overnight? Heere's the Cata∣logue
of all your Imploiments now. O no, I err: you have the
Marshaling of all the Ghosts too, that pass the Stigian ferry;
and I suspect you for a share with the old Sculler there, if the
truth were known; but let that scope: one other peculiar ver∣tu
you possess▪ in lifting or Lieger-du-maine (which few of the
house of Heaven have else besides) I must confess; But (me
thinks) that should not make you set such an extreme distance
twixt your self and others, that we should be said too over∣dare
in speaking to your nimble Deity: So Hercules might
challenge a priority of vs both, because he can throw the Bar
farther▪ or lift more Ioyndstooles at the arms end then we. If
this might carry it; then we (who have made the whole body
of Divinity tremble at the twang of our Bow, and enforced
Saturnius himself to lay• by his curled front, Thunder, and three
forkd-fiers, and put on a Masking suit, too light for a reveller
of eighteen to be seen in—
How now my dancing Braggart in Decimo sexto?
charm your skipping tongue, or Isle—
What? use the virtue of your Snaky Tipstaffe there
upon vs?
No Boy, but the stretched vigour of mine arm about
your ears; you have forgot since I took your heals up into
ayre, (on the very hour I was borne) in sight of all the
bench of Deities, when the silver roof of the Olympian
Palace rung again with the applause of the fact.
O no, I remember it freshly, and by a particular in∣stance;
for my mother Venus (at the same time) but stopped to
embrace you, and (to speak by Metaphor) you borrowed a
Girdle of hers, as you did Ioues Sceptre (while he was laugh∣ing)
and would have done his thunder too, but that, it was too
hot for your itching fingers.
Tic well sir.
I heard you but looked in at Vulcans Forge the other
day, and entreated a pair of his new Tongs along with you
for company: Tic joy on you (I faith) that you will keep
your hooked talons in practise with any thing. Slight, now
you are on earth, we shall have you filch Spoons and Candle∣sticks
rather then fail: pray Jove the perfumed Courtiers keep
their Casting-bottles, Pick-toothes, and Shittle-cockes from you,
or our more ordinary Gallants their Tabaco-boxes, for I am
strangely jealous of your nails.
Ne'er trust me Cupped, but you are turned a most acute•
gallant of late, the edge of my wit is clear taken off with the
fine and subtle stroke of your thin-ground tongue, you fight
with too poignant a phrase, for me to deal with.
O Harms, your craft cannot make me confident, I know
my own steel to be almost spent, and therefore entreat my
peace with you in time: you are too cunning for me to in∣counter
at length, and I think it my safest ward to close.
Well for once, Isle suffer you to come within me wag,
but use not these strains too often, they•e stretch my patience.
Whether might you marche now?
Faith (to recover thy good thoughts) Isle discover my
whole project. The Huntress and queen of these groves,
Diana (in regard of some black and •nuious slanders hourly
breathed against her for her divine justice on Action as she
pretēds) hath here in the vale of Gargaphy proclaimed a solemn
revels, which she will grace with the full and royal expense
of one of her clearest moons: In which time it shall be lawful
for all sorts of ingenuous persons, to visit• her palace, to court
her Nymphs, to exerci•e all variety of generous and noble pa∣stems,
as well to intimate how far she treads such malicious
imputations beneath her, as also to show how clear her beau∣ties
are from the least wrinkle of Austerity, they may be
chardgd with.
But what is all this to Cupped?
Here do I mean to put off the title of a God, and take
the habit of a Page, in which disguise (during the Interim of
these revels) I will get to follow some one of Dianas maids,
where (if my bow hold, and my shafts fly but with half
the willingness and aim they are directed) I doubt not but
I shall really redeem the minutes I have lost by their so long
and ouer-nice proscription of my Deity, from their court.
Pursue it (druine Cupped) it will be rare.
But will Harms second me.
I am now to put in act an especial designement from
•y father Jove, but that performed, I am for any fresh action
that offers it self.
Well then we part.
Farewell good wag,
Now to my charge, Echo, fair Echo speak,
Tic Mercury that calls thee; •orrowfull Nymph:
Salute me with thy repercussi•e voice,
That I may know what cavern of the earth,
Contains thy aerie spirit: how, or where,
I may direct my speech, that thou moist hear,
Here.
So nigh.
I.
Know (gentle soul) then, I am sent from Jove•,
Who (pitying the sad burden of thy woes,
Still growing on thee, in thy want of words▪
To vent thy passion for Narcissus death)
Commands that now (after three thousand years,
Which have bin excercisde in Iunoes spite,)
Thou take a corporal figure and ascend,
Enriched with vocal, and articulate power,
Make haste sad Nymph: thrice doth my winged rod,
Strike th obsequious earth to give thee way,
Arise, and speak thy sorrows, Echo rise,
Here, by this Fountain where thy love did pine,
Whose memory lives fresh to vulgar fame,
Sh•in'd in this yellow flower, that bears his name
His name revives and lifts me up from earth.
O which way shall I first convert my self?
Or in what mood shall I assay to speak,
That (in a moment) I may be delivered,
Of the prodigions grief I go with all?
Se•, see, the morning fount whose spring weeps yet,
Th'vntimely fate of that too-beauteous boy,
That Trophy of self love, and spoil of nature,
Who (now transformed into this drooping flower)
Hangs the repentant head, back, from the stream;
As if it wished: Would I had never looked,
In such a flattering mirror. O Narcissus,
Thou that wast once (and yet art) my Narcissus,
Had Echo but been private with thy thoughts,
She would have dropped away her self in tears,
Till she had all turned water; that in her,
(As in a truer glass) thou mighst have gazed,
And seen thy beauties by more kind reflection:
But Self love never yet could look on truth,
but with bleared beams; Sleek flattery and she:
Are twin-borne sisters, and so mix their eyes,
As if you sever one, the other dies.
Why did the Gods give thee a heavenly form,
And earthy thoughts to make thee proud of it?
Why do I ask? tic now the known disease
That beauty hath, to bear to deep a sense,
Of her own selfe-conceiued excellence.
O had thou known the worth of heavens rich gift,
Thou would have turned it to a truer use,
And not (with lean and covetous ignorance)
Pined in continual eyeing that bright Gem,
The glance whereof to others had bine more,
Then to thy famished mind the wide worlds store;
" So wretched is it to be merely rich:
Witness thy youths dear sweets, here spent untasted;
Like a fair Taper, with his own flame wasted.
Echo be brief, Saturnia is abroad;
And if she hear, sheele storm at Ioues high will:
I will (kind Mercury) be brief as time,
Vouchsafe me I may do him these last Rites,
But kiss•e his flower, and sing some mourning strain:
Over his watery hearse.
Thou dost obtain,
I were no son to love should I deny thee;
Begin, and (more to grace thy cunning voice)
The humorous ayre shall mix her solemn tunes,
With thy sad words: strike Musique from the spheres,
And with your golden raptures swell our ears.
SLow, Slow Fresh fount, keep time with my salt tears;
yet flower, yet, o faintly gentle springs;
List to the heavy part the Musique bears,
" Woe weeps out her division when she sings▪
Droop herbs, and flowers,
fall grief in showers;
" Our beauties are not ours:
O I could still
(Like melting snow upon some craggy hill,)
drop, drop, drop, drop,
Since Natures pride, is now awither'd Daffodil.
Now have you done?
Done presently (good Harms) bide a little;
Suffer my thirsty eye to gaze a while,
But even to taste the place, and I am vanished:
Forgo thy use and liberty of tongue,
And thou moist dwell on earth, and sport thee there;
Here young Action •ell, pursued, and torn
By Cynthi•s wrath (more egar then his hounds;)
And here, (ay me the place is fatal) see,
The weeping Niobe, translated hither
From P•rygian mountains: and by Phoebe reared
As the proud Trophy of her sharpe revenge.
Nay but here▪
But here, oh here, the Fountain of self love:
In which Latona, and her careless Nymphs,
(Regardless of my sorrows) bath themselves,
In hourly pleasures.
Stint thy babbling tongue;
Fond Echo, thou prophanst the grace is done thee:
So idle worldlings (merely made of voice:)
Censure the powers aboue them. Come away,
Jove calls thee hence, and his will brookes no stay.
O stay: I have but one poor thought to clothe,
In aerie garments and then (faith) I go:
Henceforth, thou treacherous, and murdering spring,
Be ever called the Fountain of self love:
And with thy water let this curse remain,
(As an inseperate plague) that who but tastes,
A drop thereof, may (with the instant touch)
Grow dotingly enamoured on themselves.
Now Harms I have finished.
Then thy speech,
Must here forsake thee Echo, and thy voice:
(As it was wont) rebound but the last words, Fare well.
Well.
Now Cupped I am for you, and your mirth,
To make me light before I leave the earth.
Dear spark of beauty make not so fast away:
Away.
Stay let me observe this portent yet.
I am neither your Minotaure, nor your Centaur, nor
your Satire, nor your Hyena, nor your Babion, but your mere
trailer, believe me:
Leave me.
I gest it should be some travelling Motion pursued
Echo so.
Know you from whom you fly? or whence?
Hence.
This is somewhat aboue strange: a Nymph of her
feature and •ineament to be so preposterously rude; well; I
will but cool my self at yon' Spring and follow her.
Nay then I am familiar with the issue; Isle leave you
too.
I am a Rhinoceros, if I had thought a creature of her
Symmetry would have dard so improportionable and abrupt
a digression. Liberal and divine Founte, suffer my profane•
hand to take of thy bounties. By the purity of my taste, here
is most Ambrosiack water; I will sup of it again. By thy favour
sweet Founte. See, the water (a more running, subtle, and hue∣morose
Nymph then she) permits me to touche, and handle
her: what should I infer? If my behaviours had been of a
cheap, or customary garb; my Accent, or phrase, vulgar; my
Garmēts trite; my Countenance illiterate; or vnpractizd in the
encounter of a beautiful and braue-attirde Peace, then I might
(with some change of coullor) have suspected my faculties: but
(knowing my self an Essence so sublimated, and refined by
Travail; of so studied, and well exercised a gesture; so alone
in fashion, able to make the face of any States-man living, and
to speak the mere extraction of language; One that hath
now made the sixth return upon venture; and was your first
that ever enriched his country with the true laws of the Duello;
whose Optiques have drunk the spirit of beauty, in some eight
score and eighteen Princes Courts, where I have resi∣ded,
and bin there fortunate in the Amours of three hundred,
forty, and five Ladies (all nobly descend) whose names I have
in Catalogue: to conclude; in all so happy, as even Admiration
her self doth seem to fasten her kisses upon me: Certes I do
neither see, nor feel, nor taste, nor favour, the least steam, or
fume of a reason, that should inuit this foolish fastidious
Nymph so peevishly to abandon me: well let the memory of
her fleet into Ayre; my thoughts and I am for this other Eel∣meant,
water.
What? the well-dieted Amorphus become a Water-drinker?
I see he means not to write verses then.
No Criticus? why?
Queen nulla placer dive▪ nec viuere carmine possunt, quae scri∣buntur
aqua po•oribus.
What say you to your Helicon?
O, the Muses, well! that's ever excepted.
Sir, your Muses have no such water I assure you;
your Nectar, or the Juice of your Nepenthe is nothing to it; tic
aboue your Metheglin, believe it.
Metheglin! what's that Sir? may I be so Audacious
to demand?
A kind of Greek Wine I have met with Sir in my
Travails: it is the same that Demosthenes usually drunk, in the
composure of all his exquisite and Mellifluous Orations.
That's to be argued, (Amorphus) if wee may credit
Lucian, who in his (Enicomium Demosthenis) affirms, he never
drunk but water in any of his Compositions.
Lucian is absurd, he knew nothing: I will believe
my own Travels, before all the Lucians of Europe; he doth feed
you with fictions, and losings.
Indeed (I think) next a Traveller he do's prettily
well.
I assure you it was Wine, I have tasted it, and from
the hand of an Italian Antiquary, who derives it authentical∣lie
from the Duke of Ferrara's Bottles. How name you the
Gentleman you are in rank with there, Sir?
Tic Asotus, son to the late deceased Philargyrus
the Citizen.
Was his Father of any eminent place, or
means?
He was to have bin Praetor next year.
Ha! A pretty formal young Gallant (in good
soothe) pity, hee is not more gently propagated. Hark•
you Criticus: you may say to him what I am, if you please;
though I affect not popularity, yet I would be loathe to stand
out to any, whom you shall voutchsafe to call friend.
Sir, I fear I may doe wrong to your sufficiencies in
the reporting them, by forgetting or misplacing some one;
your self can best inform him of your self Sir, except you
had some Catalogue or Inuentory of your faculties ready
drawn, which you would request me to show him for you,
and him to take notice of.
This Crete•us is sower: I will think Sir.
Doe so Sir. O heaven, that any thing (in the likeness
of man) should suffer these racked extremities, for the uttering of
his Sophisticate good parts.
Criticus, I have a suit to you; but you must not de∣no
me: pray you make this Gentleman and I friends.
Friends! Why? is there any difference between you?
No: I mean acquaintance, to know one ano∣there.
O now I apprehend you; your phrase was without
me before.
In good faith hoe's a most excellent rare man I
warrant him.
Slight, they are mutually enamoured by this time.
Will you sweet Criticus?
Yes, yes.
Nay, but when? you'll defer it now, and forget
it?
Why, first a thing of such present necessity, that it re∣quires
so violent a dispatch?
No, but (would I might never stir) hoe's a most ravish∣ing
man; good Criticus you shall endear me to you, in good
faith law.
Well your longing shall be satisfied Sir.
And withal, you may tell him what my father was, and
how well he left me, and that I am his heir.
Leave it to me, Isle forget none of your dear graces I
warrant you.
Nay I know you can better marshall these affairs then
I can.—O Gods il'e give all the world (if I had it) for aboun∣dance
of such acquaintance.
What ridiculous circumstance might I devise now, to
bestow this reciprocal brace of Cockscombs, one upon ano∣there?
Since I trod on this side the Alps, I was not so fro∣zen
in my invention; let me see: to accost him with some choice
remnant of Spanish, or Italian? that would indifferently ex∣press
my languages now, mary then, if he should fall out to be
Ignorant, it were both hard, and harsh. How else? step into
some discourse of S•ate, and so make my induction? that were
aboue him too; and out of his element I fear Fine to have seen
him in Venice? or Padua? or some face near his in simillitude?
tic too pointed, and open▪ No; it must be a more quaint, &amp; col∣laterall
devise: As—stay; to frame some encomiastique speech
upon this our Metropolis, or the wise Magistrates thereof, in
which politic number, tic odds but his father filled up a rome?
descend into a particular admiration of their Justice; for the due
measuring of Coals, burning of Cans, and such like? As also
their religion, in pulling down a superstitious Cross, and ad∣uancing
a Venus; or Priapus, in place of it? ha? twill do well. Or
to talk of some Hospital, whose walls record his father a BE∣NEFACTOR?
or of so many Buckets bestowed on his parish
church in his life time, with his name at length (for want of
arms) tricked upon them; Any of these? or to praise the cleanesse
of the street wherein he dwelt, or the provident painting of
his posts against he should have been Praetor, or (leaving his
parent) come to some special ornament about him self, as his
Rapier, or some other of his accoutrements? I have it: Thanks
gre•ious Minerua.
Would I had but once spoke to him, and then—
Tic a most curious and neatly-wrought band this
same, as I have seen Sir.
O God Sir.
You forgive the humour of mine eye in observing it?
O Lord Sir, there needs no such Apology I assure you.
I am anticipated: theyle make a solemn deed of gift
of themselves you shall see.
Your Rose too do's most grace-fully in troth.
Tic the most gentile and received Wear now Sir.
Believe me Sir (I speak it not to humour you) I have
not seen a young gentleman (generally) put on his clothes
with more judgment.
O, tic your pleasure to say so, Sir.
No, as I am virtuous (being altogether vntrauel'd) it
strikes me into wonder.
I do purpose to travel (Sir) at Spring:
I think I shall affect you sir, this last speech of yours
hath begun to make you dear to me.
O God Sir, I would there were anything in me Sir, that
might appear worthy the least worthiness of your worth Sir,
I protest Sir, I should endeavour to show it Sir, with more then
common regard Sir.
O here is rare Motley, Sir.
Both your desert, and your endeavours are plentiful,
suspect them not: but your sweet disposition to travail (I
assure you) hath made you another Myself in mine eye, and
struck me enamoured on your beauties.
I would I were the fairest Lady of France for your
sake Sir, and yet I would travail too.
O you should digress from your self else: for (believe
it) your Travail is your only thing that rectifies, or (as the Ita∣lian
says) virendi pronto all' Attioni, makes you fit for Action.
I think it be great charge though Sir.
Charge? why tic nothing for a gentleman that goes
private, as your self, or so; my Intelligence shall quit my
charge at all times: Good faith this Hat hath possessed mine eye
exceedingly; tic so pretty, and fantastic; what? first a Beaver.
I Sir. Isle assure you tic a Beaver, it cost me six crowns
but this morning.
A very pretty fashion (believe me) and a most novel
kind of trim: your Button is conceited too.
Sir, it is all at your service.
O pardon me.
I beseech you Sir, if you please to wear it you shall
do me a most infinite grace.
Slight, will he be praised out of his clothes?
By heaven Sir, I do not offer it you after the Italian
manner; I would you should conceive so of me.
Sir, I shall fear to appear rude in denying your cur∣te•ies,
especially being invited by so proper a distinction; may
I pray your name Sir.
My name is Asotus Sir.
I take your love (gentle Asotus) but let me win
you to receive this in exchange.—
'Hart, theile change dublets anon.
And (from this time) esteem your self in the first
rank of those few whom I profess to love; what make you in
company of this school• here? I will bring you known to
gallants as Anaides, Hedon the courtier, and others, whose so∣cietie
shall render you graced, and respected; this is atriuiall
fellow, too mean, too coarse for you to converse with.
Slid, this is not worth a crown, and minecost me six
but this morning.
I looked when he would repent him, he he's beg•nne to
be sad a good while.
Sir, shall I say to you for that Hat? be not so sad,
be not so sad; tic a Relic I could not so easily have departed
with, but as the Hierogliphick of my affection; you shall alter it
to what form you please, it will take any block; I have varied
it my self to the three thousandth time, and not so few: It
hath these virtues beside; your head shall not ak• under it; nor
your brain leave you, without licence; It will preserve your
comple•ion to eternity; for no beam of the Sun (should
you wear it under Zona Torrid) hath force to approach it by
two ells. Tic proof against thunder, and enchantment: and
was given me by a great man (in Russia) as an especially-priz'd
present; and constantly affirmed to be the hat that acompanied
the politic Vlisses, in his tedious, and ten years Travails.
By Jove I will not depart withal, whosoever would
give me a Million.
Save you sweet bloods: do's any of you want a creature,
or a dependant?
Be-shrow me a fine blunt slave.
A page of good timber; it will now be my grace to
entertain him first, though I cashier him again in private:
how art thou called?
Cos Sir, Cos.
Cos? How happily hath Fortune furnished him with a
Whetstone?
I do entertain you Cos: conceal your quality till
we be private; if your parts be worthy of me, I will countenance
you; if not, catechise you; Gentles shall we go?
Stay Sir; isle but entertain this other fellow, and then—
I have a great humour to taste of this water too, but isle come a∣gain
alone for that mark the place; whats your name, youth?
Prosaites? Sir.
Prosaites? A very fine name Criticus? first not?
Yes, and a very ancient Sir, the Beggar;
Follow me good Prosaites: Lets talk.
He will rank even with you (ere't be long)
If you hold on your course: O vanity,
How are thy painted beauties doted on,
By light, and empty Idiots? how pursued
With open, and extended appetite?
How they do sweat, and run themselves from breath,
Raised on their toes, to catch thy aerie forms,
Still turning giddy, till they reel like drunkards,
That buy the merry madness of one hour,
With the long irksomeness of following time?
O how despised, and base a thing is Man,
If he not strive t'erect his grovelling thoughts
Aboue the strain of flesh. 'But how more cheap•
When, even his best and understanding part,
(The crown, and strength of all his faculties)
Floats like a dead drowned body, on the stream
Of vulgar humour, mixed with commonst dregs?
I suffer for their guilt now, and my Soul
(Like one that looks on ill affected eyes)
Is hurt with mere Intention on their follies:
Why will I view them then? my Sense might ask me:
Or first a Rarity, or some new Object,
That strains my strict observance to this point?
O would it were, therein I could afford
My Spirit should draw a little near to theirs,
To gaze on novelties: so Vice were one.
Tut, she is stale, rank, foul, and were it not
That those (that woo her) greet her with locked eyes
(In spite of all the Impostures, paintings, drugs,
Which her bawd Custom daubes her cheeks withal)
She would betray her loathed and leprous face,
And fright th'enamor'd dotards from themselves:
But such is the perverseness of our nature,
That if we once but fancy levity,
(How antique and ridiculous so ere
It suit with vs) yet will our muffled thought
Choose rather not to see it, then avoid it:
And if we can but banish our own sense,
We ac•e ou• Mimic tricks with that free licence,
That lust, that pleasure, that security,
As if we practised in a Past-boord case,
And no one saw the Motion, but the Motion.
Well, check thy passion, least it grow too load:
•While fools are pitied, they wax fat, and proud.
Why this was most unexpectedly followed (my divine
delicate Mercury) by the Beard of Jove, thou art a precious
Deity.
Nay Cupped leave to speak improperly; since we are
turned cracks, lets study to be like cracks: practise their lan∣gauge,
and behaviours, and not with a dead Imitation. Act
freely, carelessly, and capricciously, as if our veins ran with
Quick-siluer, and not utter a phrase, but what shall come forth
steeped in the very brine of conceit, and sparkle like salt in fire.
That's not every ones happiness (Harms) though you
can presume upon the •asinesse and dexterity of your wit, you
shall give me leave to be a little Jealous of mine; and not des∣perately
to hazard it after your capering humour.
Nay then Cupped, I think we must have you hood∣winckt
again, for you are grown too provident, since your
eyes were at liberty.
Not so (Mercury) I am still blind Cupped to thee:
And what to the Lady Nymph you serve?
Troth Page, Boy, and Sirha: these are all my titles.
Then thou hast not altered thy name with thy disguise.'
O No, that had bin Supererogation, you shall never hear
your Courtier call but by one of these three.
Faith then both our Fortunes are the same.
Why? what parcel of man hast thou lighted on for
a Moister?
Such a one (as before I begin to decipher him) I dare
not affirm him to be any thing else then a Courtier. So much
he is, during this open time of Revels, &amp; would be longer, but
that his means are to leave him shortly after: his name is He∣don,
a gallant wholly consecrated to his pleasures.—
Hedon? he uses much to my Ladies chamber, I think.
How is she called, and then I can show thee?
Madame Philautia.
O I, he affects her very particularly indeed. These are
his graces. he doth (besides me) keep a Barber, and a Monkey:
He has a ri•ch wrought Waste-coate to entertain his vis•tants
in, with a Cap almost suitable: His Curtains and Bedding are
thought to be his own; his bathing Tub is not suspected. He
loves to have a F•ncer, a Pedant, and a Musician seen in his
lodging a mornings.
And not a Poet?
Fie no: himself is a Rimer, and that's a thought bet∣la
than a Po•t: he is not lightly within to his Mercer, no,
though he come when he takes Phisique, which is commonly
after his play. He beats a Tailor very well, but a Stocking-seller
admirably; and so consequently any one he owes money
too, that dares not resist him. He never makes general inuit∣meant,
but against the publishing of a new Suit, mary then, you
shall have more drawn to his lodging, then come to the lane∣ching
of some three ships; especially if he be fur•ishd with
supplies for the retiring of his old Ward-robe from pawn;
if not, he do's hire a stock of Apparel, and some forty or fifty
pound in Gould for that forenoon to show: Hoe's thought
a very necessary Perfume for the Presence, and for that only
cause welcome thither: six Milliners shops afford you not
the like sent. He courts Ladies with how many great Horse he
hath rid that morning, or how o•t he has done the whole, or
the half Pommado in a seven-night before; and sometime
ve•ters so far upon the virtue of his Pomander, that he dares
tell'hem, how many shirts he has sweat at Tennis that week▪
but wisely conceals so many dozen of Balls he is on the
score. Here he comes that is all this.
Boy.
Sir.
Are any of the Ladies in the Presence?
None yet Sir.
Give me some Gold, More.
Is that thy Boy Hedon?
I, what think thou of him?
Shart, Il'd geld him; I warrant he has the Philoso∣phers stone.
Well said my good Melancholy devil: Sirah, I have
devised one or two of the pretiest Oaths (this morning in my
bed) as ever thou heard, to protest withal in the Presence.
Pray thee lets heere'hem.
Soft thoult vse'hem before me.
No (damn me then) I have more oaths then I know
how to utter, by this ayre.
Faith'one is; By the tip of your •are, Sweet Lady, Is it
not pretty, and Gentile?
Yes for the person it is applied to, a Lady. It should
be light, and—
Nay the other is better, exceeds it much: The Inuen∣tion
is farther fet too; By the while valley that lies between the
Alpine hills of your bosom, I protest—&amp;c.
Well, you travelled for that Hedon.
I, in a Map, where his eyes were but blind guides to
his understanding it seems.
And then I have a Salutatiō will nick all; by this Caper: ho•
How is that?
You know I cal Madā Philautia, my Honour, &amp; she calls me
her Ambitiō. Now (when I meet her in the Presence anon) I will
come to her, and say, Sweet Honour, I have hitherto con•ented my
Sense with the Lilies of your hand; but now I will taste the Roses of
your lip; and (withal) kiss her: to which she cannot but blue∣shingly
answer: Nay now you are too Ambitious, And then
do I reply; I cannot be too Ambitious of Honour, sweet Lady.
Wilt not be good? ha? ha?
O Assure your •whole.
By heaven I think twill be excellent, and a very poli∣tique
atchiuement of a kiss.
I have thought upon one for Mori of a sudden too
if it take.
What first, my dear mischief?
Mary, I will come to her, (and she always wears a
Muff if you be remembered) and I will tell her: Madame your
whole self cannot but be perfectly wise: for your hands have wit
enough to keep themselves warm.
Now (before Jove) admirable: look, thy Page takes it
too, by Phoebus, my sweet facetious Rascal, I could eat Wa∣ter-gruell
with thee a month, for this Jest, O my dear Rogue.
O (by Hercules) it is your only dish, aboue all your
Potatos, or Oyster-pyes in the world.
I have ruminated upon a most rare Wish too, and the
Prophecy to it, but Isle have some friend to be the Prophet; As
thus: I do wish my self one of my Mistress Ciopino's. Another
demands: Why would he be one of his Mistress Ciopinos? A third
answers, Because he would make her higher. A fourth shall say,
That will make her proud. And a fifth shall conclude: Then do I
prophecy, Pride will have a fall: and he shall give it her.
Isle be your Prophet▪ By gods so, it will be most exqui∣site,
th•• art a fine Inuentious Rogue, Sirah.
Nay and I have Posies for Rings too, and Riddles, that
they dream not of.
Tut theile do that, when they come to sleep on thē time
enough; but were thy devises never in the Presence yet Hedon?
O no, I disdain that.
It were good we went before then, &amp; brought th• acquain∣ted
with the room where they shall act, least the strangeness of
it put them out of countenance, when they should come forth.
Is that a Courtier too.
Troth no; he has two essential parts of the Courtier,
Pride and Ignorance (I mean of such a Courtier, who is (indeed)
but the Za•i to an exact Courtier) mary, the rest come somewhat
after the Ordinary Gallant. Tic Impudence it self Anaides; one,
that speaks all that comes in his cheeks, &amp; will blush no more
then a Sackbut. He lightly occupies the Easters room at the
table, &amp; keeps laughter, Gelai• (a wench in pages attire) follow∣ing
him in place of a Squire, whom he (now &amp; thē) tickles with
some strange ridiculous stuff, uttered (as his land came to him)
by chance: He will censure or discourse of any thing, but as ab∣surdly
as you would wish: His fashion is not to take know∣ledge
of him that is beneath him in clothes; He never drinks
below the Salt: He do's naturally admire his wit, that wears
Gold-lace, or Tissue; Stabs any man that speaks more con∣temptibly
of the Scholar then he. He is a great proficient in all
the illiberal Sciences, as Cheating, Drinking, Swaggering,
Whoring, and such like; never kneels, but to pledge Health's
nor prays, but for a Pipe of pudding Tobacco. He will blas∣pheame
in his shirt; The oaths which he vomits at one supper,
would maintain a Town of garrison in good swearing a twelvemonth:
One other genuine quality he has, which crowns
all these; and that is this; to a Friend in want, he will not de∣part
with the weight of a soldard Great, least the world might
censure him prodigal, or report him a Gull: Mary, to his Cos∣trice
or Punquetto; half a dozen Taffeta gowns or Satin Kerr∣tles,
in a pair or two of moneth's, why they are nothing.
I commend him he is one of my clients.
Come Sir. You are now within reguarde of the Pre∣sense,
And see, the privacy of this room, how sweetly it offers
it offers it self to our retired intendments, Page, cast a vigilant,
and enquiring eye about, that we be not rudely surprised, by
the approach of some ruder-stranger.
I warrant you Sir. Isle tell you when the Woolfe enters fear nothing.
O what a mass of benefit shall we possess, in being
the invisible Spectators of this strange show now to be acted?
Plant your self there Sir: And observe me. You shall
now, as well be the Ocular as the Eare-witnesse, how clearly
I can refill that Paradox, or rather Pseudodoxe of those, which
hold the face to be the Index of the mind, which (I assure
you) is not so, in any Politic creature; for Instance, I will now
give you the particular, and distinct face of every your most
noted Species of persons; As your Merchant, your School•er, your
Soldier, your Lawyer, Courtier, &amp;c. And each of these so truly, as
you would swear (but that your eye sees the variation of the
lineament) it were my most proper, and Genuine aspect: 〈…〉
for your Merchants, or City face; Tic thus: a dull 〈…〉
face; still looking in a direct line, forward: There is no 〈…〉
matter in this face. Then have you your Students, or Ac•de∣mique
face, which is here, an honest, simple, and Methodical
face; But somewhat more spread then the former. The third
is your Soldiers face: A menacing, and astounding face, that
looks broad, and big: the grace of this face consists much
in a Beard. The Anti face to this, is your Lawyers face; a contrac∣ted,
subtle, and Intricate face: full of quirks, and turnings;
A Labyrinthaean face, now angularly, now circularly, every way
aspected. Next is your Statists face, a serious, solemn, and
supercilious face, full of formal, and square gravity▪ the eye (for
the most part) artificially and deeply shadowed, there is great
judgment required in the making of this face. But now to come
to your face of faces; or Courtiers face: tic of three sorts: (accor∣ding
to our subdiuision of a Courtier; Elementary, Practique,
and Theoric: your Courtier Theoric, is he that hath arrived
to his fardest, and doth now know the Court rather by specu∣lotion,
then practise; &amp; this is his face: A fastidious, and oblique
face; that looks, as it went with a Vice, and were screwed thus.
Your Courtier Practique is he that is yet in his Path, his Course,
his Way, &amp; hath not touched the Puntillio or point of hopes; this
face is here: A most promising, open, smooth, and overflowing
face, that seems as it would run, and power it self into you;
your Courtier Elementary is one but newly entered, or as it were
in the Alphabet Vt-re-mi-fa-sol-la, of Courtship: Note well this
face, for it is this you must practise.
Isle practise 'hem all, if you please Sir.
I; here after you may: and it will not be altogether an
ungrateful study. For let your soul be assured of this (in any
Rank or profession whatsoever) the most general, or Mayor
part of Opiniō, goes with the face, &amp; (simply) respects nothing
else. Therefore: if that can be made, exactly, curiously, exqui∣sitely,
thoroughly, It is enough: But (for the present) you shall
only apply your self to this face of the Elementary Courtier, A
light, revelling, &amp; protesting face, now blushing, now smiling
which you may help much with a wanton wagging of your
head, thus; (a feather will teach you) or with kissing your finger
that hath the Ruby, or playing with some string of your band▪
which is a most quaint kind of Melancholy besides. Where is
your Page? call for your Casting Bottle, and place your Mirror
in your Hat, as I told you; so. Come, look not pale, observe
me: set your face, and enter,
O for some excellent Painter, to have to•e the copy
of all these faces.
Prosaites.
Fie, I premonisht you of that; In the Court, Boy, or Sirha.
Moister Lupus in— O it is Prosaites.
Sirha, prepare me my Casting-bottle, I think I must
be enforced to purchase me another Page, you see how at hand
Cos waits here.
So will he too in time.
What's he Mercury?
A notable Finch. One that hath newly entertained the
Beggar to follow him, but cannot get him to wait near enough.
Tic Asotus the heir of Philargirus: but first Isle give you the
others Character, which may make his the clearer? He that is
with him is Amorphus, A Traveller, One so made out of the
mixture and shreds of forms, that himself is truly defor∣med:
Hee walks most commonly with a Clove or Pick∣tooth
in his mouth, Hoe's the very Mint of Compl•meant;
All his behaviours are printed, his face is another volume of
Essays; and his beard an Aristarchus. He speaks all cream,
skimd, &amp; more affected then a dozen of waiting women; Hoe's
his own promooter in every place: The wife of the Ordinary
gives him his diet to maintain her table in discourse, which
(indeed) is a mere Tyranny over her other guests: for he will
usurp all the talk: Ten Cunstables are not so tedious. He is no
great shifter; once a year his Apparel is ready to revolt; He
doth use much to arbitrate quarrels, and fights himself ex∣ceeding
well (out at a window.) He will lie cheaper then any
Beggar, and louder then most Clocks; for which he is right
properly accommodated to the W•etstone his page. The other
gallant is his Zani, &amp; doth most of these tricks after him; sweats
to imitate him in every thing (to a hair) except a Beard, which
is not yet extant: he doth learn to eat Anchoues, &amp; Caueare be∣cause
he loves 'hem, speaks as he speaks; looks, walks, goes
so in Clothes and fashion, is in al, as he were moulded of him.
Marry (before they met) he had other very pretty sufficiencies,
which yet he retains some light Impression of: As frequen∣ting
a dancing school, and grievously torturing strangers,
with inquisitiō after his grace in his Galliard; He buys a fresh
acquaintance at any rate; his Eye, and his Raiment confer much
together as he goes in the street; He treads nicely, like a fellow
that walks upon ropes, especially the first Sunday of his Silk∣stockings,
and when he is most neat and new, you shall strip
him with commendations.
Here comes another.
I, but one of another strain Cupped: This fellow
weighs somewhat.
His name Harms?
Criticus. A creature of a most perfect and divine tem∣per;
One, in whom the Humours &amp; Elements are peaceably met,
without aemulation of Precedence: he is neither too fantas∣tickly
Melancholy; too slowly Plegmatick, too lightly Sanguine,
or too rashly Choleric, but m al, so composed and ordered; as it is
clear, Nature was about some full work, she did more then
make a man when she made him; His discourse is like his beha∣uiour,
vncommon, but not unpleasing; he is prodigal of nei∣there:
He strives rather to be (that which men call) Judicious,
then to be thought so; and is so truly learned that he affects
not to show it: He will think, &amp; speak his thought, both freely;
but as distant frō deprauing any other mans Merit, as procla∣ming
his own: For his valour, tic such, that he dares as little to
offer an Injury, as receive one. In sum, he hath a most Engine∣os
and sweet spirit, a sharp and seasoned wit, a straight judge∣meant.
and a strong mind; constant and unshaken: Fortune
could never break him, or make him less, he counts it his
pleasure to despise pleasures, and is more delighted with good
deeds then Goods, It is a competencie to him that he can be
virtuous. He doth neither covet, nor fear; he hath too much
reason to do either: and that commends all things to him.
Not better then Mercury commends him.
O Cupped, it is beyond my deity to give him his due
praises; I could leave my Place in heaven, to live among Mortals,
so I were sure to bee no other then he.
Slight, I believe he is your Minion; you seem to be so
ravished with him.
Hoe's one, I would not have awry thought darted a∣against
willingly.
No, but a straight shaft in his bosom, Isle promise him,
if I am Cithereas son.
Shall we go Cupped?
Stay and see the Ladies now; theile come presently. Isle
help to paint them.
What lay Couller upon Colour▪ that affords but
an ill blazon.
Here comes Mettle to help it, the Lady Erg•rion.
Money, money.
The same: A Nymph of a most wandering and giddy
disposition, humorous as the Ayre, she'll run from Gallant to
Gallant (as they sit at Primero in the Presence) most strangely,
and seldom stays with any; She spreads as she goes: To day
you shall have her look as clear and fresh as the morning
and to morrow as Melancholy as midnight. She takes special
pleasure in a close, obscure lodging, and for that cause visits
the City so often, where she has many secret and true-con∣cealing
favourites. When she comes abroad shoe's more loose
and scattering then dust, and will fly from place to place, as she
were rapt with a whirlwind. Your young Student (for the
most part) she affects not, only salutes him▪ and away: A Poet
or a Philosopher she is hardly brought to take any notice of, no,
though he be some part of an Alchemist. She loves a Player,
well; and a Lawyer infinitely: but your Fool aboue all. She can
do much in the Court for the obtaining of any suit whatsoe∣for,
no door but flies open to her; her presence is aboue a
Charm: The worst in her is want of keeping s•ate, and to
much descending into inferior and base offices, Shoe's for any
course Employment you will put upon her, as to be your
Procurer or Pander.
Peace Cupped; here comes more work for you,
another Character or two.
Stay sweet Philautia; Isle but change my fann, and go
presently.
Now (in very good serious) Ladies, I will have this or∣der
reversed, the Presence must be better maintained from you;
A quarter past eleven, &amp; ne'er a Nymph in Prospective; beshrew
my hand, there must be a reformed Discipline. Is that your new
Ruff sweet Lady Bird? by my truth it is most Intricately
rare.
Good Jove, what reverend gentlewoman in years
might this be?
This Madam Mori, Guardian of the Nymphs: One that
is not now to be persuaded of her Wit, she will think herself
wise against all the Judgements that come. A Lady made all
of voice, &amp; Ayre, talks any thing of any thing: She is like one
of your Ignorant Po•tasters of the time; who when• the have
got acquainted with a strange word, never rest t•ll they have
wrong it in, though it loosen the who•e fabric of their
Sense.
That was pretty and sharply noted Cupped.
She will tell you Philosophy was a fine Reveller, when she
was young and a Gallant, and that then (though she say it) she was
thought to be the Dame-Dido, and Hallen of the Court; As also,
what a sweet Dog she had this time four year, and how it was
called Fortune, and that (if the fates had not cut his thread) he had
been a Dog to have given entertainment to any Gallant in this
kingdom.
O I pray thee no more, I am full of her.
Yes (I must needs tell you) She composes a Sack∣pos•et
well; and would court a young Page sweetly, but that
her breath is against it.
Now her breath (or some thing more strong) protect
me from her; the other, the other, Cupped.
O, that's my Lady and Mistress Madam Philautia: She
admires not herself for any one particularity, but for all; She
is fair, and she knows it; She has a pretty light wit too, and she
knows it; She can dance, and she knows that too; play at
Shuttlecock, and that too: No quality she has, but she shall
take a very particular knowledge of, and most Lady-like
commend it to you; you shall have her at any time read you
the History of her self, and very subtly run over ano∣there
Ladies sufficiences to come to her own.
She has a good superficial judgment in Painting; and would
seem to have so in Poetry. A most complete Lady in the open∣neon
of some three beside herself.
Faith, how liked you my quip to Hedon, about the gar∣la?
wast not witty?
Exceeding witty and Integrate: you did so Aggravate
the Jest withal.
And did I not dance moouingly last night?
Moouingly; out of measure (in troth) Sweet Lady.
A happy commendation, to dance, out of measure.
Save only you wanted the swimi the turn; O! when
I was atfourteene—
Nay thats mine own from any Nymph in the Court) I
am sure on it) therefore you mistake me in that Guardian; both
the swim, and the trip, are properly mine; every body will
affirm it, that has any judgment in dancing: I assure you.
Come now Philautia I am for you, shall we go?
I good Phantaste; What? have you changed your headtire?
Yes faith; the other was so near the common, it had
no extraordinary grace; besides, I had worn it almost a• day
in good troth.
Isle be sworn, this is most excellent for the devise,
and rare. Tic after the Italian print we looked on tother night.
Tic so: by this fan, I cannot abide any thing that
savours the poor overworn cut, that has any kindred with it;
I must have variety, •▪ this mixing in fashion I hate it worse,
then to burn Juniper in my Chamber I protest.
And yet we cannot have a new peculiar Court-tyre, but
these Retainers will have it; these Suburb sunday-waiters, these
Courtiers for High days, I know not what I should call 'hem.—
O I, they doo most pitifully Imitate; but I have a tire a
coming (I faith) shall—
In good certain, Madame, it makes you look most
heavenly; but (lay your hand on your hart) you never skinned a
new beauty more prosperously in your life, nor more super∣naturally;
look good Lady, sweet Lady look.
Tic very clear, and well believe me. But if you had
seen mine yesterday when it was young, you would have—
who's your Doctor Phantaste?
Nay thats counsel Philautia, you shall pardon me: yet
(Isle assure you) hoe's the most dainty, sweet, absolute rare man,
of the whole College. O! his very looks, his discourse, his
behaviour, all he doo's is Physic I protest.
For heavens sake his name; good, dear, Phantaste—
No, no, no, no, no, no, (believe me) not for a Million of
heavens: I will not make him cheap. Fie—
There is a Nymph too of a most curious and elabo∣rate
strain, light, all motion, an Ubiquitary, she is every where,
Phantaste—
Her very name speaks her; let her pass. But are these
(Cupped) the stars of Cynthias Court? doe these Nymphs at∣tend
upon Di•na?
They are in her Court (Mercury) but not as Stars;
these never come in the presence of Cynthia: the Nymphs
that make her train, are the divine Arete, Time, Phronesis,
Thauma, and others of that high sort. These are privately
brought in by Mori in this licentious time, against her know∣ledge;
and (like so many Meteors) will vanish when she
appears.
COme follow me my Wags, and say as I say.
There's no retches but in Rags; hey day, hey day;
You that profess this art. Come away; come away:
And help to bear a part. Hey day; hey day.
Beare-wards, &amp; Blackingmē.
Corne-cutters, and Carmen.
Sellers of mar-king stones.
Gatherer's up o• Marow-bones
Peddlers, and Puppit-players.
Sow-gelders, and Sooth-saiers.
Gipsies and •aylers,
Rat-catchers▪ and Raylers,
Beadles, and Ballad-singers.
Fiddlers, and Fadingers.
Thomalins, and Tinkers.
Scauengers, and Skinkers.
There goes the Hare away.
Hey day, Hey day.
Bawds and blind Doctors.
Paritors, and spittle Proctors.
Chemists, and Cuttlebungs.
Hookers, and Horne-thums.
With all cast commanders.
turned Post-knights, or Pādars.
Jugglers, and Easters. 
Borrowers of Testers.
And all the troop of trash
That're allied to the lash,
Come, and Join with your •eggs
Shake up your muscle-bags.
For Beggary bears the sway,
Then singe cast care away,
Hey day, hey day.
What? those that were our fellow Pages but now, so
soon preferred to be Yeomen of the Bottles? the mystery, the
mystery, good wags?
Some diet drink, they have the guard of.
No Sir, we are going in quest of a strange Fountain,
lately found out.
By whom?
My Moister o• the great discoverer, Amorphus.
Thou ha•• well entitled him Cos, for he will discover
all he knows.
I and a little more too, when the spirit is upon him.
O the good travelling Gentleman yonder, he's caused
such a drought 〈◊〉 the Presence, wi•h reporting the wonders of
this new water; that all the Ladies, and Gallants ••e languishing
upon the Rushes, like so many pounded Ca•tle 〈◊〉 the midst of
〈◊〉, sighing one to another, and gasping, as if each of them
expected a Cock from the Fountain, to be brought into his
mouth• and (without we return quickly) they are all (as a youth
would say) no better then a few Trouts cast a shore, or a dish
of Eels in a Sand-bag.
Well then, you were best dispatch &amp; have a care of them,
Come Cupped, thou and Isle go peruse this dry wonder.
Sir, let not this discountenance, or dis-gallant you a
whit, you must not sink under the first disaster; It is with your
young Grammatical Courtier, as with your Neophyte-Player,
a thing usual to be daunted at the first presence, or enter-view:
you saw, there was Hedon &amp; Anaides, (far more practiced gallants
then your self) who were both out, to comfort you: It is no
disgrace, no more, then for your adventurous Reveller to fall
by some in-auspicious chance in his Galliard, or •or some sub∣till
Politician to undertake the Bastinado, that the State might
think worthily of him, and respect him as a man well beaten
to the world. What? hath your Tailor provided the property
(we spake of) at your Chamber, or no?
I think he has.
Nay▪ (I entreat you) be not so flat, and melancholic,
erect your mind: you shall redeem this with the Courtship
I will teach you against afternoon: Where eat you to day?
Where you please Sir, any where I.
Come let vs go and taste some light dinner, A dish
of she'd Caueare, or so, and after you shall practise an hour
at your lodging, some few forms that I have remembered; If
you had but (so f•rre) gathered your spirits to you, as to have
taken up a Rush (when you were out) and wagd it, thus; or
clensde your tee•h with it, or but turned aside, and fa••de
some business to whisper with your Page, till you had
recovered your self, or but found some slight stain in your
stocking, or any other pretty Invention (so it had been sud∣deign,)
you might have come off with a most clear and
Courtly grace.
A poison of all, I think I was forespoake, I.
No, I do partly aim at the cause (which was ome∣nous
indeed) for as you enter at the door, there is opposed to
you the frame of a Wolf in the Hangings, which (your eye
taking suddenly) gave a false Alarm to the heart; and that
was it called your blood out of your face, and so disordered the
whole rank of your spirits: I beseech you labour to forget it.
Heart, was there ever so prosperous an Invention thus
unluckily perverted, and spoiled, by a whoore-sonne Book∣worm,
a Candle-waster?
Nay, be not impatient, Hedon.
Slight, I would fine know his name.
Hang him poor Grogran Rascal, pray thee think not
of him: Isle send for him to my lodging, and have him blanketed
when thou wilt, man.
By gods so; I would thou could. Look, here he coms.
Laugh at him, laugh at him. Ha, ha, ha.
Faugh, he smells all Lamp-oyle, with studying by
Candle-light.
How confidently hee went by vs; and carelessly!
never moved! nor stirred at any thing! Did you observe him?
I a pox on him, let him go, D•rmouse: hee is in a
dream now; He has no other time, to sleep but thus when he
walks abroad, to take the ayre.
Gods precious, this afflicts me more then all the rest,
that we should so particularly direct our Hate, and Contempt
against him; and he to carry it thus without wound or passion!
tic insufferable.
'Slid, (my dear Envy) if, thou but say the word now,
Isle undo him eternally for thee.
How sweet Anaides?
Marry half a score of vs get him in (one night) and
make him pawn his wit for a supper.
Away, thou hast such unseasonable Jests. By this hey∣uen
I wonder at nothing more then our Gentlemen Ushers;
that will suffer a piece of Serge, or Perpetuana, to come into
the Presence: me thinks, they, should (out of their Expo•i∣ence)
better distinguish the silken disposition of a Courtier,
then to let such terrible course Rags mix with 'hem, able to
fret any smooth or gentile Society to the threads, with their
rubbing Devises.
Damn me, if I should adventure on his company
once more, without a suit of Buff, to defend my wit: he do's
nothing but stab the slave: how mischievously he crossed thy
devise of the Prophecy there? And Mori she comes without
her Muff too; and there my invention was lost.
Well, I am resolved, what Isle do.
What, my good spirituous Spark?
Marry, speak all the venom I can of him; and poi∣son
his reputation in every place where I come.
Before god most Courtly.
And if I chance to be present where any question is
made of his sufficiencies, or of any thing he hath done private
or public; Isle censure it slightly, and ridiculously—
At any hand beware of that, so you may draw your
own judgment, insuspect; No, Isle instruct thee what thou
shalt doe, and by a safer means: approve any thing thou hey∣r•st
of his, to the received opinion of it; but if it be extraordina∣rye,
give it from him to some other, whom thou more parti∣culerly
affectst, that's the way to plague him, and hee shall
never come to defend himself: Sblood, Isle give out all he do•
is dictated from other men: and swear it too (if thou'lt have me)
and that I know the time, and place, where he stole it: though
my soul be guilty of no such thing; and that I think out of
my hart, he hates such barren shi•ts; yet to doe thee a pleasure
and him a disgrace, Isle damn my self, or do any thing.
Gramercies my dear Devil: weal put it seriously in
practise, I faith.
Do good Detraction, do: and I the while
Shall shake thy spite off with a careless smile.
Poor piteous Gallants, what lean idle sleights
Their thoughts suggest to flatter their starved Hopes!
As if I knew not how to entertain
These Straw-deuises; but of foe•ce must yield
To the weak stroke of their calumnious tongues.
Why should I care what every Dor doth buzz▪
In credulous ears? it is a Crown to me,
That the best judgements can report me wronged;
Them Liars; and their slanders impudent.
Perhaps (upon the rumour of their speeches)
Some grieved friend will whisper, Criticus,
Men speak ill of thee: So they be ill men,
If they spake worse, it were better: For of such
To be dispraised, is the most perfect praise.
What can his Censure hurt me, whom the world
Hath censured vile before me? If good Chre•tus,
Euthus, or Phronimus, had spoke the words,
They would have moved me; &amp; I should have called
My thoughts and Actions to a strict account
Upon the hearing: But when I remember
Tic Hedon and Anaides: Alas, then,
I think but what they are, and am not stirred:
The one, a light voluptuous Reveller,
The other a strange arrogating Puff,
Both impudent, and ignorant enough;
That talk (as they are wont) not as I merit;
Traduce by Custom, as most Dogs do bark,
Do nothing out of judgment, but disease;
Speak ill, because they never could speak well:
And who'ld be angry with this race of Creatures?
What wise Physician have we ever seen
Moved with a frantic man? the same affects
That he doth bear to his sick Patient,
Should a right mind carry to such as these:
And I do count it a most rare Revenge,
That I can thus (with such a sweet neglect)
Pluck from them all the pleasure of their Malice.
For that's the mark of all their ingenuous drifts,
To wound my Patience (how so ever they seem
To aim at other objects) which if mist,
Their Enuy's like an Arrow shot upright,
That in the fall endangers their own heads.
What Criticus? where have you spent the day▪
You have not visited your jealous friends?
Where I have seen (most honoured Arete,)
The strangest Pageant, fashioned like a Court,
(At least I dreamt I saw it) so di••used,
So painted, pied, and full of Rainbow strains;
As never yet (either by Time, or Place)
Was made the food to my distasted Sense:
Nor can my weak imperfect Memory
Now render half the forms unto my tongue,
That were conuolu'd within this thrifty Room.
Here, stalks me by, a proud, and spangled Sir,
That looks three handfuls higher then his fore-top;
Savours himself alone, is only kind
And loving to himself: One that will speak
More dark and doubtful then six oracles;
Salutes a friend, as if he had a stitch,
Is his own Chronicle, and scarce can eat
For registering himself; is waited on,
By Mimiques, Easters, Panders, Parasites,
And other such like Prodigies of men.
He past; there comes some subtle Proteus: One
Can •hang, and vary with all forms he sees;
Be any thing but honest; serves the time;
Hovers betwixt two factions, and explores
The drifts of both; which (with cross face) he bears
To the divided heads, and is received
With mutual grace of either: One that dares
Do deeds worthy the Hurdle, or the Wheel,
To be thought some body; and is (in sooth)
Such as the Satyrist points truly forth,
Criminibus debent hortos, praetoria, mensas:
You tell vs wonders Criticus.
Tut, this is nothing.
There stands a Neophyte, glazing of his face,
Against his Idol enters; and repeats,
(Like an imperfect Prologue, at third Musique)
His part of speeches, and confederate Jests
In passion to himself; Another swears
His Scene of Courtship over, and then seems
As he would kiss away his hand in kindness;
A third, is most in Action; swims, and frisks,
Plays with his mistress paps, salutes her pomps;
Will spend his Patrimony for a Garter,
Or the least feather in he• bounteous Fan:
A fourth, he only comes in for a Mute,
Divides the Act with a dumb show, and Exit,
Then must the Ladies laugh: straight comes their Scene;
A sixth times worse Confusion then the Rest.
Where you shall hear one talk of this mans Eye;
Another of his Lip, a third, his Nose;
A fourth commend his Leg, a •ifth his Foot,
A sixth his Hand, and every one a limb;
That you would think the poor distorted Gallant
Must there expire: Then fall they in discourse
Of Tires, and Fashions; how they must take place:
Where they may kiss; and whom: when to sit down;
And with what grace to rise: if they salute,
What courtesy they must use; such Cob-web stuff,
As would enforce the commonst sense abhor
The Arachnean workers.
Patience Criticus.
This knot of Spiders will be soon dissolved,
And all their webs swept out of Cynthias Court,
When once her glorious Deity appears,
And but presents it self in her full light:
Till when, go in: and spend your hours with vs
Your honoured friends Time, and Phronesis,
In contemplation of our Goddess name:
Think on some sweet, and choice Invention now,
(Worthy her serious, and illustrous Eyes)
That from the merit of it we may take
Desired occasion to prefer your worth,
And make your service known to Cynthia:
It is the pride of Arete to grace
Her studious lovers; and (in scorn of Time,
Envy, and Ignorance) to lift their state
Aboue a vulgar height. True Happiness
Consists not in the multitude of friends,
But in the worth, and choice; Nor would I have
Virtue, a popular Reguard pursew;
Let them be good that love me, though but few.
I kiss thy hands, divinest Arete,
And vow my self to thee, and Cynthia.
A little more forward; So Sir. Now go in, dis-cloake
your self, and come forth. Taylor; bestow thy absence upon
vs; and be not prodigal of this secret, but to a dear Customer.
Tic well entered Sir. Stay you come on too fast; your Pace is too
impetuous. Imagine this to be the Palace of your Pleasure, or
Place where your Lady is pleased to be seen: First you present
your self thus; and spying her you fall off, and walk some
two turns; in which time it is to be supposed your Passion
hath sufficiently whited your Face? then (stifling a sigh or two,
and closing your lips) with a trembling boldness, and bold
terror; you advance your self forward. Try thus much I pray
you.
Yes Sir, (pray god I can light on it) Here I come in you
say: and present my self?
Good.
And then I spy her, and walk off?
Very good.
Now sir I stiff•le, and advance forward?
Trembling.
Yes Sir, trembling. I shall do it better when I come to it.
And what must I speak now?
Mary you shall say; Dear Beauty, or sweet Honour, or
by what other title you please to remember her) me thinks you
are Melancholy. This is if she be alone now and discompanied.
Well Sir, Isle enter again; her title shall be My dear
Lindabrides.
Lindabrides?
I Sir, the Emperor Alicandro's Daughter, and the
Prince M•ridians sister (in the Knight of the Sun) she should
have been married to him, but that the Princess Clari•iana—
O you betray your reading.
Nay sir, I have read History: I am a little Humanitian.
Interrupt me no•, good Sir. My dear Lindabrides, My
dear Lindabrides, My dear Lindabrides, me thinks you are
Melancholy.
I, and take her by the Rosie-fingerd hand.
Must I so? O: My dear Lindabrides, me thinks you are
Melancholy.
Or thus Sir. All variety of divine pleasures, choice sports,
sweet Musique, rich Fare, brave Attires, soft Beds, &amp; silken thoughts,
attend this dear Beauty.
Believe me that's prerty: All variety of diuino pleasures,
choice sports, sweet Musique, rich Fare, brave Attires, soft Beds, and
silken thoughts, attend this dear Beauty.
And then, offering to kiss her hand, if she shall coyly
recoil, and signify your repulse; you are to re-enforce your
self with, More then most fair Lady; let not the Rigour of your just
disdain thus coursly censure of your servants zeal: and (with-all)
protest her, To be the only, and absolute vn-paraeleld Creature, you
do adore, and admire, and respect, and reverence, in this Court, Corner
of the world, or Kingdom.
This is hard by my faith: Isle begin it all again.
Do so, and I will Act it for your Lady.
Will you vouchsafe sir? All variety of divine pleasures,
choice Sports, sweet Musique, rich Fare, brave• Attire, soft Beds, and
silken thoughts, attend this dear Beauty.
So Sir, pray you a way.
More then most fair Lady, let not the Rigour of your just
disdain, thus coursly censure of your s•ruants zeal. I protest you are
the only and absolute vn-aparailed—
Unparalleled.
Unparalleled Creature, I do adore, and admire, and respect,
and reverence, in this Court, Corner of the world, or kingdom.
This is if she abide you: But now; put case she
should be Peasant when you enter, as thus: you are to
frame your Gate ther'after, and call upon her: Lady, Nymph,
Sweet Refuge, Star of our Court: Then if she be Guardant,
here: you are to come on, and (•aterally disposing your self,)
swear by her blushing and well coloured cheek: the bright dye of
her hair, her Ivory teeth, or some such white and Innocent
oath, to induce you. If Reguardant; then, maintain your station,
Brisk, and Irpe, show the supple motion of your pliant body:
but (in chief) of your knee, and hand, which cannot but arid
her proud Humour exceedingly.
I conceive you sir, I shall perform all these things
in good time, I doubt not, they do so hit me.
Well Sir, I am your Lady; make use of any of these
beginnings, or some other out of your own invention: and
prove how you can hold up, and follow it. Say, Say.
Yes Sir: my dear Lindabrides.
No, you affect that Lindabrides too much: And (let me
tell you) it is not so Courtly. Your Pedant should provide you
some parcels of French, or some pretty Commodity of Ita∣lian
to commence with, if you would be exotic, and exqui∣site.
Yes Sir, he was at my lodging t'other morning, I gau•
him a Doublet.
Double your benevolence, and give him the Hose
too; clothe you his body, hee will help to apparaile your
mind. But now, see what your proper Genius can perform
alone, without adiection of any other Minerua.
I comprehend you sir.
I do stand you Sir: fall back to your first place.
Good; passing well: Very properly pursewd.
Beautiful, ambiguous, and sufficient Lady. What are
you all alone.
We would be Sir, if you would leave vs.
I am at your beauties appointment: bright Angel;
but—
What but?
No harm, more then most fair feature.
Th•t touch relished well.
But I protest.
And why should you protest?
For good will (dear esteemed Madam) and I hope your
Ladyship will so conceive of it: If ever you have seen great
TAMBERLAINE.
O that Blank was excellent: if you could pick out
more of these Play-particles, and (as occasion shall salute you)
embroider or damask your discourse with them (persuade
your soul) it would judiciously commend you: Come, this
was a well-dischar'gd and auspicious Bout: prove the se∣cond.
Lady, I cannot swagger it in Black and Yellow.
Why if you can Revel it in White Sir, it is suffice∣ent.
Say you so Sweet Lady? Lan, tede de, de, dant, dant, dant,
dante, &amp;c. No (in good faith) Madame, whoseuer told your
Ladyship so, abused you; but I would be glad to meet your
Ladyship in a measure.
Me Sir? beelike you measure me by your self
then?
Would I might Fair Feature.
And what were you the better, if you might?
The better it please you to ask, Fair Lady.
Why this was ravishing, and most acutely conti∣newed;
Well, spend not your humour too much, you have now
competently exercised your Conceit: This (once or twice a
day (will render you an accomplished, elaborate, and well leveled
Gentleman; convey in your Courting-stock, wee will (in the
heate of this) go visit the Nymphs Chamber.
I would this water would arrive once our travailing
friend so commended to vs.
So would I, for he has left all vs in travail, with ex∣pectation
of it.
Pray Jove, I never rise from this Couch, if ever I their∣sted
more for a thing, in my whole time of being a Courtier.
Nor I, Isle be sworn; the very mention of it sets my
lips in a worse heate, then if he had sprinkled them with
Mercury. Reach me the glass Sirah.
Here Lady.
They do not peel sweet charge? do they?
Yes a little Guardian.
O it is a imminent good sign. Ever when my lips
do so, I am sure to have some delicious good drink or other
approaching.
Mary &amp; this may be good for vs Ladies: for (it seems)
tic far-fet by their stay.
My palate for yours (dear Honour) it shall prove
most elegant I warrant you: O, I do fancy this gear thats
long a coming, with an unmeasurable strain.
Pray thee sit down Philautia, that Rebatu beecoms
thee singularly.
First not quaint?
Yes faith: me thinks thy serve•ned Hedon is nothing so
obsequious to thee, as he was wont to be; I know not how,
Hoe's grown out of his Garb elate, hoe's warp't▪
In trueness, and so me thinks too, he's much con∣uerted.
Tut; let him bee what he will, it is an Animal• I
dream not of. This tire (me thinks) makes me look very In∣genuously,
quick, and spirited: I should be some Laura, or some
Delia me thinks.
As I am wise (fair honours) that title she gave him, to
be her Ambition, spoiled him: Before, he was the most propi∣tious,
and observant young Novice.—
No, no; you are the whole heaven awry Guardian, tic
the swaggering tilt-horse Anaides draws with him there, has
been the diuerter of him.
For Cupids sake speak no more of him; would I might
never dare to look in a Mirror again, if I respect ere a Mar∣maset
of them all, otherwise, then I would a Feather, or my Shit∣tle-cock,
to make sport with, now and then.
Come sit down; troth (and you be good Beauties) lets
run over 'hem all now: Which is the properst man amongst
them? I say the Travailer, Amorphus.
O fie on him: he looks like a Dutch Trumpeter in the
battle of Lepanto, in the gallery yonder; and speaks to the tune
of a country Lady, that comes ever in the rear ward, or train of
a Fashion.
I should have judgment, in a feature sweet Beauties.
A body would think so, at these years.
And I prefer another now, far before him, A million
at least.
Who might that be Guardian?
Mary (fair Charge) Anaides.
Anaides? you talked of a tune Philautia, theres one
speaks in a Key: like the opening of some Justices gate, or a
Post-Boyes horn, as if his voice feared an Arrest for some ill
words it should give, and were loath to come forth.
I, and he has a very imperfect face.
Like a squeezed Orange, sower, sower.
His Hand's too great to; by at least a straws breadth.
Nay he has a worse fault then that too.
A long heel?
That were a fault in a Lady rather then him: No, they
say he puts of the Calves of his legs with his Stockings eve∣rye
night.
Out upon him: turn to another of the Pictures for
Gods sake. What says Argurion? whom do's she commend a∣fore
the rest?
I hope I have instructed her sufficiently for an an∣swear.
Troth I made the motion to her Lady-ship for one to
day in the Presence, but it appeared she was other ways fur∣nisht
before; She would none.
Who was that Argurion?
Mary the little, poor, plain Gentlemā in the black there.
Who? Criticus?
I, I, he; A fellow that no body so much as looked upon,
or regarded, and she would have had me done him particular
grace.
That was a true trick of your self Mori, to persuade
Argurion affect the scholar.
Tut; but she shall be no chooser for me. In good faith I
like the Citizens son there Asotus, me thinks, none of
them all come near him.
Not Hedon?
Hedon, in troth no. Hedon's a pretty slight Courtier▪
and he wears his clothes well, and sometimes in fashion; mar∣rye
his face is but indifferent, and he has no such excellent by∣die.
No; the other is a most delicate youth, a sweet face, a straight
body, a well proportioned leg, and foot, a white hand, a ten∣der
voice.
How now Argurion?
O you should have let her alone, she was bestowing a
Copy of him upon vs.
Why she dotes more palpably upon him, then ere his
Father did upon her.
Believe me, the young gentleman deserves it; if she
could dote more it were not amiss: He is an exceeding pro∣per
youth, and would have made a most neat Barber-surge∣on,
if he had been put to it in time.
Say you so? me thinks▪ he looks like a Taylor already.
I, that had said on one of his Customers suites.
Well Ladies, Jest on: the best of you both would be glad
of such a servant.
I, Isle be sworn would they: Go to Beauties, make much
of Time, and Place, and Occasion, and Opportunity, and Favourites,
and things that belong to them; for Isle ensure you, they will all
relinquish; they cannot endure aboue another year; I know it
out of future experience, and therefore take exhibition, and
warning: I was once a Reveller my self, and though I speak
it (as mine own Trumpet) I was then esteemed—
The very Marchpane of the Court I warrant?
And all the Gallants came about you like flies, did they
not?
Go to; they did somewhat, that's no matter now. Here
comes Hedon.
Save you sweet and clear beauties: By the spirit that
moos in me, you are almost pleasingly bestowed Ladies.
Only, I can take it for no good Omen, to find mine Honour so
dejected.
You need not fear Sir, I did of purpose humble my
self against your coming, to decline the pride of my Ambi∣tion.
Fair Honour, Ambition dares not stoop; but if it be
your sweet pleasure, I shall loose that Title; I will (as I am
Hedon) apply my self to your bounties.
That were the next way to distitle my self of Honour:
O no, rather be still Ambitious I pray you.
I will be any thing that you please, whilst it pleases
you to be your self Lady. Sweet Phantaste, Dear Mori,
most beautiful Argurion.—
Farewell Hedon.
Anaides, Stay: whether go you?
Slight, what should I do here? and you engross •hem
all for your own use, it is time for me to seek out.
I engross 'hem? Away mischief, this is one of your
extravagant Jests now, because I began to salute 'hem by their
names—
Faith you might have spared vs Madame Prudence
the Guardian there, though you had more covetously aymde
at the rest.
'Shart, take 'hem all man; what speak you to me of
aiming or Covetous?
I, say you so? nay then, have at 'hem: Ladies, heir's
one hath distinguished you by your names already; It shall
only become me, to ask; How you doe?
Gods so, was this the disseigne you travelled with?
Who answers the Brazen head? it spoke to some body?
Lady Wisdom, do you Interpret for these puppets?
In truth, and sadness (Honours) you are in great offence
for this; go too, the Gentleman (Isle undertake with him) is a
man of fair living, and able to maintain a Lady in her two
Coaches a day, besides Pages, Munkeys, and Parachitos, with
s•tch attendants as she shall think meet for her turn; and
therefore there is more respect requirable, how soever you
seem to connive: Hark you Sir, let me discourse a syllable
with you. I am to say to you, these Ladies are not of that close,
and open behaviour, as happily you may suspend; their Cari∣edge
is well known to be such as it should be, both gentle and
extraordinary.
O here comes the other Pair.
That was your Fathers Love, the Nymph Argurion.
I would have you direct all your Courtship thither, if you
could but endear your self to her affection, you were eternal∣lie
engallanted.
In truth Sir? pray Phoebus I prove fauorsome in her
fair eyes.
All divine mixture, and increase of beauty, to this
bright B•uy of Ladies; and to the male-Courtiers Complement,
and Curtsy.
In the behalf of the Males, I gratify you Amorphus.
And I of the Females.
Succinctly spoken: I doe vale to both your thanks,
and kiss them; but primarily to yours, Most ingenious, acute,
and polite Lady.
Gods my life, how he do's all to be qualify her! Inge∣nious,
Acute, and Polite? as if there were not others in place, as
Ingenious, Acute, and Polite, as she.
Yes, but you must know Lady, he cannot speak out
of a Dictionary method.
Sit down sweet Amorphus. When will this water
come think you?
It cannot now be long fair Lady.
Now observe Mercury.
How most Ambiguous beauty? Love you? that I will
by this Hand-kercher.
'Slid he draws his oaths out of his pocket.
But will you be constant?
Constant Madame? I will not say for Constant∣ness,
but by this Purse (which I would bee loath to
swear by, unless it were embroidered)
I protest (more then most fair Lady) you are the only, absolute
and unparalleled Creature, I do adore, and admire, and respect, and
reverence in this Court, Corner of the world, or Kingdom, Me thinks
you are Melancholy.
Do's your heart speak all this?
Say you?
O he is groping for another oath.
Now by this Watch (I marle how forward the day
is) I do unfeignedly vow my self (Slight it is deeper then I
took it, past five) yours entirely addicted, Madame.
I require no more dearest Asotus, hence-forth let me
call you mine; and in remembrance of me, voutchsafe to wear
this Chain, and this Diamond.
O god sweet Lady.
There are new oaths for him: what? doth Harms
taste no Alteration in all this?
Yes, thou hast struck Argurion enamoured on Aso∣tus
methinkes?
Alas no; I am no body, I: I can do nothing in this
disguise.
But thou hast not wounded any of the rest, Cu∣bid?
Not yet: it is enough that I have begun so prospe∣rously.
Tut, these are nothing to the Gems I will hourly
bestow upon• thee: be but faithful and kind to me, and I will
lade thee with my richest bounties: behold here my Brace∣lets
from mine Arms.
Not so good Lady, By this Diamond.
Take 'hem; wear 'hem: my Jewels, Chain of Pearl,
Pendants, all I have.
Nay then, by this Pearl You make me a Wanton.
Shall not she answer for this, to maintain him thus
in swearing?
O, no, there is away to wean him from this: the
Gentleman may be reclaimed.
I, if you had the airing of his apparel Cosse, I think.
Loving? it were pity I should be living else, believe
me. Save you Sir. Save you sweet Lady, Save you Monsieur
Anaides; Save you dear Madame.
Dost thou know him that saluted thee, He∣don?
No, some idle Fungoso I warrant you.
'Sbloud, I never saw him till this morning, and he sa∣lutes
me as familiarly, as if we had known together, since the
first year of the siege of Troy.
A most right-handed, and auspicious encounter.
Confine your self to your fortunes.
For gods sake lets have some Ri•dles or Purposes;
hough.
No faith, your Prophecies are best, the tother are
stale.
Prophecies? wee cannot all •it in at them; we shall
make a confusion: no; what called you that we had in the fore∣noon?
Substantives, and Adiectiues. First not Hedon?
I that, who begins?
I have thought; speak your Adiectiues Sirs?
But doe not you change then.
Not I, Who says?
Odoriferous.
Popular.
Humble.
White-liuer'd.
Barbarous.
Pythagoricall.
Yours Signior.
What must I doe Sir?
Give forth your Adiectiue with the rest; as Pro∣sperous,
Good, Fair, Sweet, Well.
Any thing that hath not bin spoken.
Yes Sir: Well-spoken shall be mine.
What? ha you all done.
I.
Then the Substantive is Breeches. Why Odoriferous
Breeches Guardian?
Odoriferous, because Odoriferous: that which con∣taines
most variety of savor, and smell, we say is most Odorife∣rous:
now Breeches I presume are incident to that variety, and
therefore, Odoriferous Breeches.
Well, we must take it howsoever, who's next. Phi∣lautia.
Popular.
Why Popular Breeches?
Mary that is, when they are not content to be gene∣rally
noted in Court; but will press footth on common Sty∣ges,
and Brokers stalls, to the public view of the world.
Good: why Humble Breeches? Argurien.
Humble, because they use to be sat upon; besides
if you tie 'hem not up, their property is to fall down about
your heals.
She has worn the Breeches it seems which have
done so.
But why White-liuerd?
Why? 'Sharte are not their linings white? besides,
when they come in swaggering company, and will pocket up
any thing; may they not properly bee said to bee White-liuerd?
O yes, wee cannot deny it. And why Barbarous,
Hedon?
Barbarous, because commonly when you have worn•
your Breeches sufficiently, you give them to your Barber.
That's good: but now Pythagoricall?
I, Amorphus. Why Pythagoricall Breeches?
O most kindly of all, it is a conceit of that Fortune;
I am bold to hug my brain for.
How first, E•quisite Amorphus?
O I am rapt with it, it is so fit, so proper, so happy.
Nay doe not rack vs thus?
I never truly relished my self before. Give me your
ears. Breeches Pythagoricall, by reason of their transmigration
into several shapes.
Most rare in sweet troth. Mary this young Gen∣tleman,
for his Well-spoken—
I, why Well-spoken Breeches?
Well-spoken: mary well-spoken, because whatso∣ever
they speak is well taken, and whatsoever is well taken, is
well-spoken.
Excellent: believe me.
Not so Ladies neither.
But why Breeches now?
Breeches quasi Beare-riches; when a gallant bears all
his Retches in his Breeches.
In good faith these unhappy Pages, would be whipped
for staying thus.
Beshrew my hand, and my hart else.
I do wonder at their protraction.
Pray God my whore have not discovered her self to
the raskally Boys, and that be the cause of their stay.
I must suit my self with another Page; this idle Pro∣saites
will never be brought to waite well▪
Sir I have a kinseman I could willingly wish to your
service, if you would deign to accept of him.
And I shall be glad (most sweet Lady) to embrace him;
where is he?
I can fetch him Sir, but I would be loath to make you
turn away your other Page.
You shall not most sufficient Lady, I will keep both:
pray you lets go see him.
Whether goes my Love?
Isle return presently; I go but to see a Page with this Lady.
As sure as Fate it is so; she he's opened all:
A pox of all Cocatrices. Damn me if she have played
loose with me, Isle cut her throat within a hairs breadth, so it
may be heald again.
What is he Jealous of his Hermaphrodite?
O I, this will be excellent sport.
Phantaste, Argurion, what? you are suddenly stroke
me thinks; for Gods will lets have some Musique till they
come. Ambition reach the Lyra I pray you.
Any thing to which my Honour shall direct me.
Come Amorphus; cheer up Phantaste.
It shall be my pride fair Lady to attempt all that is
in my power. But here is an Instrument that (alone) is able to
infuse soul in the most melancholic, and dull disposed
Creature upon earth; O! let me kiss thy fair knees: Beauteous
•ares attend it.
Will you have the Kiss Honour.
I good Ambition.
O That Joy so soon should wast!
or so sweet a bliss
as a Kiss,
Might not for ever last!
So sugared, so melting, so soft, so delicious,
The dew that lies on Roses,
When the Morn her self discloses,
is not so precious:
O, rather then I would it smother,
Were I to taste such another;
It should be my wishing
That I might dye kissing.
I made this Ditty and the Note to it upon a kiss that
my Honour gave me; how like you it Sir.
A pretty Ayre; in general I like it well. But in par∣ticuler,
your long die-Note did arid me most, but it was some∣what
too long: I can show one, almost of the same nature, but
much before it, and not so long; in a Composition of mine
own: I think I have both the Note, and Ditty about me.
Pray you Sir see.
Yes there is the Note; and all the parts if I mis-thinke
not. I will read the Ditty to your Beauties here, but first I am
to make you familiar with the occasion, which presents it
self thus. Upon a time, going to take my leave of the Empe∣roar,
and kiss his great hands; there being then present, the
Kings of France, and Arragon, the Dukes of Sauoy, Florence,
Orleans, Bourbon, Brunswick, the Lantgrau•, Count Palatine, all
which had severally feasted me; besides infinite more of info∣riour
persons, as Earls, and others: it was my chance (the Em∣perour
detained by some other affair) to waite him the fifth
part of an hour, or much ne'er it▪ In which time (retiring my
self into a Bay-window) I encountered the Lady Annabel niece
to the Empress, and •ester to the king of Arragon; who (having
never before ey de me, but only heard the common report of
my Virtue, Learning, and Travail) fell into that extremity of
passion, for my love, that she there immediately sounded: Phisi∣teens
were sent for; she had to her chamber; so to her bed; where
(languishing some few days) after many times calling upon
me, with my name in her mouth, she expired. As that (I must
needs say) is the only fault of my Fortune, that as it hath ever
bin my hap to be sewed to by all Ladies, and Beauties where
I have come; so, I never yet sojourned, or rested in that place,
or part of the world, where some great and admirable fair
Creature died not for my love.
O the sweet power of travail, are you guilty of this
Cupped?
No Mercury; and that his page (Cos) knows, and he were
here present to be sworn.
But how doth this draw on the Ditty Sir.
O she is to quick with him; he hath not deuis'd that
yet.
Marry some hour before she departed, she be∣queath'd
to me this Glove•; which the Emperor himself took
care to send after me, in six Coaches, covered all with black-veluet,
attended by the state of his Empire; all which he freely
gave me, and I reciprocally (out of the same bounty) gave it to
the Lords that brought it: only reserving, and respecting, the
gift of the deceased Lady, upon which I composed this Ode,
and set it to my most affected Instrument the Lyra.
THou more then most sweet Glove,
Unto my more sweet Love;
Suffer me to store, with kisses
This empty lodging, th•t now misses
The pure Rosie hand that ware thee,
Whiter then the Kid that bare thee:
Thou art soft, but that was softer;
Cupids self hath kissed it ofter,
Then ere he did his mothers Doves,
Supposing her the Queen of Loves
That was thy Mistress
Best of Gloves.
Blasphemy, Blasphemy Cupped.
I, Isle revenge it time enough; Harms.
Good Amorphus, let's here it sung.
I care not to do that, since it pleases Philautia to re∣quest
it.
Here Sir.
Nay play it I pray you, you do well, you do well: how
like you it Sir?
Very well in troth.
But very well? O you are a mere Mammo•hrept in
judgment then: why do you not observe how excellently
the Ditty is affected in every place? that I do not marry a word
of short quantity, to a long Note▪ nor an ascending Syllable
to a descending Tone. Besides upon the word Best there,
you see how I do enter with an odd Minnum, and drive it
thorough the Brief, which no intelligent Musician (I know)
but will affirm to bee very rare, extraordinary, and plea∣sing.
And yet not fit to lament the death of a Lady for all
this.
Tut here be they will swallow any thing.
Pray you let me have a copy of it Amor∣phus.
And me too, in troth I like it exceedingly.
I have denied it to Princes, nevertheless to
you (the true Female Twins of Perfection) I am won
to depart withal.
I hope I shall have my Honours copy.
You are Ambitious in that Hedon. Enter Anaides.
How now Anaides? what is it hath conjured up this
distemperature in the circle of your face?
'Sblod what have you to do? A pox of God o'your
filthy travailing Beard; hold your tongue.
Nay, dost hear mischief?
Away Musk-cat.
I say to thee: Thou art rude, impudent, course, im∣polished;
a Frapler, and base.
Heart of my father, what a strange alteration has half
a years haunting of Ordinaries wrought in this fellow? that
came with a Tuff-taffata Jerkin to Town but the other
day, and now hee is turned Hercules, hee wants but a
Club.
Sir, I will garter my hose with your guts; and that
shall be all.
'Slid what rare fire works bee here? flash,
flash.
What's the matter Hedon? can you tell?
Nothing but that he lacks money, &amp; thinks weel• lend
him some to be friends.
Come sweet Lady▪ in good truth isle have it, you shall
not deny me; Morus persuade your Aunt I may have her pic∣ture,
by any means.
Yes Sir: good Aunt now, let him have it; he will use
me the better, if you love me, do good Aunt.
Well, tell him he shall have it.
Moister, you shall have it, she says;
Shall I? thank her good Page.
What has he entertained the Fool?
I, heel waite close you shall see, though the Beg•r
hang off.
Aunt my moister thanks you.
Call him hither.
Yes: moister.
Yes in very truth, and gave me this Purse, and he
he's promised me a most fine Dog; which he will have drawn
with my Picture, and desires most vehemently to be known
to your Ladyshipps.
Call him hither, it is good groping such a Gull.
Moister Asotus. Moister Asotus.
For Gods sake, let me go: you see, I am called to the
Ladies.
Wilt thou forsake me then?
Gods so, what would you have me doe?
Come hither moister Asotus; I do ensure your La∣dyships,
he is a Gentleman of a very worthy desert; and of a
most •ounti•ull nature. You must show and insinuate your
self responsible, and equivalent now to my commandment.
Good Honours grace him.
I protest (more then most fair Ladies) I doe wish all
variety of divine ple•sure, choice sport, sweet Musique, rich Fare,
brave A••yres, soft Beds, and silken Thoughts, attend these fair
Beauties. Will it please your Ladyship to wear this Chain of
Pearl, and this Diamond for my sake.
O.
And you Madam this Jewel, and Pendants.
O.
We know not how to deserve these bounties out of
so slight merit, Asotus.
No in faith, but the'rs my Glove for a favour.
And soon after the Revels I will bestow a Garter
on you.
O Lord Ladies, it is more grace then ever I could have
hoped, but that it pleases your Ladyships to extend; I protest
it is enough that you but take knowledge of my—if your
Ladyships want embroidered Gowns, Tyres of any Fashion,
Rebatus, Jewels, or Carkanets, any thing what soever; if you
vouchsafe to accept.
And for it they will help you to Shoo-tyes, and de∣uises.
I cannot utter my self (Dear Beauties) but; you can
conceive—
O.
Sir we will acknowledge your service doubt not;
henceforth you shall be no more Asotus to vs, but our Golde-Finch,
and we your Cages.
O God Madams, how shall I deserve this? if I were
but made acquainted with Hedon now; Isle try: pray you a∣way.
How he prays Money to go away from him.
Amorphus, a word with you: hears a Watch I would
bestow upon you, pray you make me known to that Gal∣lant.
That I will Sir. Monsieur Hedon I must entreat
you to exchange knowledge with this Gentleman.
It is a thing (next to the water we expect) I thirst
after Sir. Good Monsieur Asotus.
Good Monsieur Hedon, I would be glad to bee
loved of men of your Rank, and spirit, I protest. Please you
to accept this pair of Bracelets Sir, they are not worth the
bestowing.
O Hercules; how the Gentleman purchases? this must
needs bring Argurion to a consumption.
Sir, I shall never stand in the merit of such Bounty.
I fear.
O Lord Sir; your acquaintance shall be sufficient.
And if at any time you need my Bill or my Bond.
O, O.
Help the Lady there.
Gods dear, Argurion. Madam, how do you?
Sick.
Have her forth and give her ayre.
I come again straight Ladies.
Well, I doubt all the Phisique he he's, will scarce re∣cover
her; shoe's too far spent.
O heir's the Water come: fetch Glasses Page.
Heart of my body hears a coil indeed with your
•jealous humours. Nothing but Whore, and Bitch, and all the
villainous swaggering names you can think on? 'Slid take
your Bottle, and put it in your guts •or me, Isle see you poxed
ere I follow you any longer?
Nay good Punk, sweet Rascal; damn me if I am
Jealous now.
That's true indeed, pray lets go.
What's the matter there?
Slight he has me upon Intergatories, (nay my Mo∣there
shall know how you use me) where I have been? and why
I should stay so long? and how first possible? and with-all calls
me at his pleasure; I know not how many Cocatrices, and
things.
In truth and sadness, these are no good Epithets
to bestow upon any Gentlewoman; and (Isle ensure
you) if I had known you would have dealt thus with my
Daughter, she should never have fancied you so deeply, as she
has done. Go too.
Why doe you he•re Mother Mori. Heart.
Nay I pray you Sir doe not swear.
Swear? why? Sblood I have sworn before now I
hope. Both you and your daughter mistake me; I have not
honoured Arete that is held the worthiest Lady in the Court
(next to Cynthia) with half that observance and respect, as
I have done her in private, howsoever outwardly I have ca∣ried
my self careless and negligent. Come you are a foolish
Punk, and know not when you are well employed. Kiss me.
Come on. Do it I say.
Nay, indeed I must confess she is apt too mispri∣zion.
But I must have you leave it Minion.
How now Asotus? how do's the Lady?
Faith ill. I have left my Page with her at her
lodging.
O heir's the rarest Water that ever was tasted; fill
him some.
What? has my Moister a new Page?
Yes a kinsman of the Lady Morias: you must waite
better now, or you are cashiered Prosaites.
Come Gallants; you must pardon my foolish humour,
when I am angry, that any thing crosses me, I grow impatient
straight. Here I drink to you.
O that we had five or six Bottles more of this liquor.
Now I commend your judgment Amorphus: who's
that knocks? look Page.
O most delicious, a little of this would make Arguri∣on
well.
O no give her no cold drink by any means.
Sblood, this water is the spirit of Wine, Isle be hanged
•ls.
Hears the Lady Arete Madam.
What at your Beaver Gallants?
Wilt please your Ladyship drink, tic of the new
fountain water.
Not I, Mori; I thank you: Gallants you must pro∣uide
for some solemn Revels to night, Cynthia is minded to
come forth, and grace your sports with her presence; therefore
I could wish there were some thing extraordinary to enter∣taine
her.
What say you to a Masque?
Nothing better, if the Invention or Project were new
and rare.
Why, Isle send for Criticus, and have his advise; you
will be ready in your endeavours;
Yes▪ but will not your Lady-ship stay?
Not now Phantaste.
Let her go, I pray you; good Lady Sobriety, I am glad
we are rid of her.
What a set Face the gentlewoman has, as she were still
going to a Sacrifice?
O she is the extraction of a dozen of Puritans, for a
look.
Of all Nymphs 'i•he Court I cannot away with her:
it is the coursest thing—
I wounder how Cynthia can affect her so aboue the
rest! Here be they are every way as fair as she, and a thought,
fairer, I trow.
I, and as ingenious, and conceited as she.
I and as politic as she, for all she sets such a Fore∣head
on it.
Would I were dead if I would change to bee Cyn∣thia.
Or I.
Or I.
And there's her Minion Criticus; why his advise
more then Amorphus? have I not Invention, before him?
Learning, to better that Invention, aboue him? and Tra∣uaile.—
Death, what talk you of his Learning? he under∣stands
no more then a schoole-Boy; I have put him down my
self a thousand times (by this Ayre) and yet I never talked with
him but twice in my life; you never saw his like: I could never
get him to argue with me, but once, and then because I could
not construe a piece of Horace at first sight, he went away
and laughed at me. By Gods will, I scorn him, as I do the
sodden Nymph that was here even now; his mistress Arete:
And I love my self for nothing else.
I wonder the Fellow d•e's not hang himself, being
thus scorned, and contemned of vs that are held the most ac∣complisht
Society of Gallants!
By your selves none else.
I protest, if I had no Musique in me, no Courtship;
that I were not a Reveller and could dance, or had not those
excellent qualities that give a man Life, and Perfection,
but a mere poor Scholar as he is, I think I should make
some desperate way with my self; whereas now (would I
might never breath more) if I do know that Creature in this
kingdom, with whom I would change.
This is excellent: well I must alter this soon.
Look you do Cupped.
O I shall tickle it soon; I did never appear till then.
Slid I am the no•tliest-made Gallant in the company, &amp; have the
best presence; and my dancing—I know what the Usher
said to me the last time I was at the school; would I might
lead Philautia in the measure, and 'tweere gods will. I am most
worthy, I am sure.
Moister I can tell you news, the Lady kissed me yon∣der,
and plaid with me; and says she loved you once, as well as
she do's me, but that you cast her of.
Peace my most esteemed Page.
Yes.
Gallants, think upon your Time, and take it by the
forehead; Anaides, we must mix this gentleman with you in
acquaintance. Monsieur Asotus.
I am easily entreated to grace any of your friends, A∣morphus.
Sir, and his friends shall likewise grace you Sir. Nay I
begin to know my self now.
O, you must continue your Bounties.
Must I? why isle give him this Ruby on my fin∣ger.
Come Ladies; but stay we shall want one to Lady it in
our Masque in place of Argurion.
Why my page shall do it, Gelaia.
Troth and have•e do it well, it shall be so.
Do you here Sir, I do heartily wish your acquain∣tance,
and I partly know my self worthy of it; please you Sir,
to accept this poor Ruby in a Ring Sir. The Poe•ie is of my
own devise▪ Let this blush for me Sir.
So it must for me, too. For I am not ashamed to
take it.
Sweet man, by my troth moister I love you;
will you love me to? for my Aunts sake? Isle waite well you
shall see, Isle still be here. Would I might never stir, but you
are in gay clothes.
As for that Morus, thou shalt see more here after, in
the mean time, by this Ay•e, or by this Feather, isle do as much
for thee as any Ga•lant shall do for his Page whatsoever, in this
Court, corner of the world, or Kingdom.
I wounder this gentleman should affect to
keep a •oole, me thinks he makes sport enough with him
self.
Well Prosaites tweere good you did waite closer.
I, Isle look to it; it is time.
Wee are like to have sumptuous Revels to night
Sirs.
We must needs when all the choicest Singularities
of the Court are up in Pantofles, ne'er a one of them, but is able
to make a whole show of it sell•e.
Sirah a Torch, a torch.
O what a call is there? I will have a Canz•net
made with nothing in it but 〈◊〉; and the Burden shall be. I
come.
—.A masque, bright Aret••
Why tweere a labour more for Hercules.
Better, and sooner durst I undertake:
To make the different seasons of the Year,
The Winds, or Elements to sympathize;
Then their unmeasurable vanity
Dance truly in a measure: They agree?
What though all Concord's borne of Contraries?
So many Follies will confusion prove▪
And like a sort of earring Instruments,
All out of tune; because (indeed) we see
There is not that Analogy twixt Discords,
As between things but merely opposite.
There is your error; for as H••mes wand
Charms the disorders, of tumultuous Ghosts,
And as the strife of Chaos then did cease,
When better light then Natures did arrive;
So, what could never in it self agree,
Forgets the eccentric property,
And at her sight turns forthwith regular,
Whose sceptre guides the flowing Ocean:
And though it did not, yet the most of them
(Being either Courtiers, or not wholly rude)
Respect of Majesty, the Place, and Pres•nce,
Will ke•pe them within Ring; especially
When they are not presented as themselves,
But masked like others: for (in troth) not so
T'incorporate them, could be nothing else
Then like a State ungoverned, without laws; or
A body made of nothing but diseases;
The one, through impotence poor, and wretched;
The other for the Anarchy absurd.
But Lady, for the Revellers themselves;
It would be better (in my poor conceit,)
That others were employed; for such as are
Unfit to be in Cynthias Court, can seem
No les•e unfit to be in Cynthias sports.
That is not done (my Criticus) without
Particular knowledge of the Goddess mind;
Who (holding true intelligence, what Follies
Had crept into her Palace) she resolved,
Of sports, and Triumphs; under that pretext,
To have them muster in their Pomp and Fullness:
That so she might more strictly, and to root,
Effect the Reformation she intends.
I now conceive her heavenly drift in all;
And will apply my spirits to serve thy will:
O thou, the very power by which I am;
And but for which, it were in vain to be;
Chief next Diana, Virgin, heavenly fair▪
Admired Arete, (of them admired
Whose souls are not kindled by the sense)
Disdeigne not my chaste fire, but feed the flame
Devoted truly to thy gracious name.
Leave to suspect vs: Criticus shall find
As we are now most dear, weal prove most kind.
Hark, I am called.
I follow instantly,
Phoebus Apollo: if with ancient Rites,
And due Devotions, I have ever hung
Elaborate Paeans on thy golden Shrine,
Or sung thy Triumphs in a lofty strain;
Fit for a Theater of Gods to hear:)
And thou the other son of mighty Io••
Cyllenian Mercury (sweet Maias joy)
If in the busy tumults of the mind,
My path thou ever hast illumined:
For which, thine Altars I have oft per•um'de,
And decked thy Statue with discoulored flowers:
Now thrive Invention in this glorious Court,
That not of bounty only, but of right,
Cynthia may grace, and give it life by sight.
QVeene and Huntress,
chaste, and fair,
Now the Sun is laid to sleep,
Seated, in thy silver Chair,
State in wonted manner keep:
Hesperus entreats thy light,
Goddess excellently bright.
Earth, let not thy envious shade
Dare it self to interpose;
Cynthias shining Or be was made
Heaven to clear, when day did close:
Bless vs then with wished sight,
Goddess excellently bright.
Lay thy Bow of Pearl apart.
And thy Christ all-shining Quiver;
Give unto the flying Hart,
Space to breath, how short soever.
Thou, that makst a day of night,
Goddess excellently Bright.
When hath Diana, like an envious wretch▪
That glitters only to his soothed self,
Denying to the world the precious v•e
Of hoarded wealth, with-held her friendly aid?
Mon'thly we spend our still-repaired shine,
And not forbid our Virgin-waxen torch,
To burn, and blaze while nutriment doth last:
That once consumed, out of Ioues treasury
Anew we take, and stick it in our Sphere
To give the mutinous kind of wanting men,
Their looked for light. Yet what is their desert?
" Bounty is wronged, interpreted as due;
" Mortals can challenge not a Ray but right,
" Yet do expect the whole of Cynthias light:
But if that Deities with-drew their gifts,
For humane Follies, what should men deserve
But Death and Darkness? It behoo•es the high,
For their own sakes to do things worthily.
Most true, most sacred goddess; for the Heavens
Receive no good of all the good they do:
Nor Jove, nor you, nor other heavenly Power,
Are fed with Fumes, which do from Incense rise,
Or Sacrifices reeking in their gore:
Yet for the care which you of mortals have,
(Whose proper Good it is, that they be so;)
You well are pleased with Odours redolent:
But ignorant is all the Race of men,
Which still complains, not knowing why, or when,
Else noble Arete, they would notblame,
And tax for or unjust, or for as proud
Thy Cynthia, in the things which are indeed
The greatest glories in our starry crown:
Such is our Chastity, which safely scorns,
Not Love (for who more fervently doth love
Immortal Honour, and divine Renown?)
But giddy Cupped, Venus frantic son.
Yet Arete, if by this veiled light
We but discovered (what we not discern)
Any the least of imputations, stand
Ready to sprinkle our unspotted fame,
With note of lightness, from these Revels near:
Not, for the Empire of the Vniuerse
Should Night or Court, this whatsoever shine
Or grace of ours, unhappily enjoy.
" Place, and Occ•zion are two privy Thieves;
" And from poor innocent Ladies, often steal
" (The best of things) an honourable Name:
" To stay with Follies, or where Faults may be,
" Infers a Crime, although the party free.
How Cynthianly (that is how worthily
And like her self) the matchless Cynthia speaks!
Infinite Jealousies, infinite Reguards,
Do watch about the true virginity:
But Phoebe lives from all not only fault,
But as from thought, so from suspicion free,
" Thy Presence broad-seales our delights for pure,
" What's done in Cynthias sight, is done secure.
That then so answered (Dearest Arete)
What the Argument, or of what sort, our Sports
Are like to be this night; I not demand.
Nothing which Duty, and desire to please
Bears written in the for•head, comes amiss•;
But unto whose Invention, must we owe,
The complement of this nights furniture?
Excellent Goddess, to mans, whose worth,
(Without Hyperbole,) I thus may praise;
One (at least) studious, of deserving well:
And (to speak truth) indeed deserving well,
" Potential merit stands for actual,
" Where only Opportunity doth want,
" Not Will, nor Power: both which in him abound.
One whom the Muses, and Minerua love;
For whom should they more love then Criticus,
Whom Phoebus (though not Fortune) holds dear?
And (which conuinceth excellence in him▪)
A principal admirer of your self:
Even▪ through th'vngentle injuries of Fate,
And difficulties, which do virtue choke,
Thus much of him appears. What other things
Of farther note, do lye unborn in him,
Them I do leave for cherishment to show.
And for a Goddess graciously to judge.
We have already judged him Arete:
Nor are we ignorant, how noble minds
Suffer too much through those indignities,
Which Times, and vicious Persons cast on them:
Our self have ever vowed to esteem
(As Virtue, for it self) so Fortune, base;
Who first in Worth, the same be first in Place.
Nor farther notice (Arete) we crave
Then thine approualls sovereign warranty:
Let, be thy care, to make vs known to him;
" Cynthia shall brighten what the World made dim▪
Clear Pearl of Heaven, and not to be farther ambitious in
titles) Cynthia. The fame of this illustrious night, among others
hath also drawn these four fair Virgins from the Palace of their
Queen Perfection (a word, which makes no sufficient difference,
twixt hers, and thine) to visit thy Imperial Court: for she their Some∣reign
Lady, not finding where to dwell among men, before her teturne
to heaven: advised them wholly to consecrate themselves to thy Coele∣stiall
service, as in whose clear Spirit (the proper Element, and Sphere
of virtues) they should behold not her alone, (their ever honoured
Mistress) but themselves) more truly themselves) to live en∣thronised.
Her self would have commended them vnt• thy favour
more particularly, but that she knows no commendation is more avail∣able
with thee then that of proper virtue: Nevertheless, she wilde
them to present this Crystal Mound, a note of Monarchy, and
Symbol of Perfection, to thy more worthy Deity; which as here by
me they most humbly do, so amongst the Rarities thereof, that is the
chief, to show whatsoever the world hath excellent, howsoever re∣mote
and various. But your irradiate judgment will soon disco∣for
the secrets of this little Crystal world. Themselves (to appear
the more plainly) because they know nothing more odious then false
pretexts: have chosen to express their several qualities thus in seue∣rall
colours.
1 The first in Citron colour is natural Affection, which given
vs to procure our good, is sometime called Storge, and as every one is
nearest to himself, so this Hand-maid of Reason, allowable Selfe-loue,
as it is without harm, so are none without it: Her place in the Court
of Perfection was to quicken minds in the pursuit of Honour. Her
device is a Perpendicular Level upon a▪ Cube or Square. The
word, SE SVO MODVLO: alluding to that true measure
of ones self, which as every one ought to make, so is it most conspicuous
in thy divine example.
2 The second in Greene is Aglaia, delectable and pleasant Con∣uersation,
whose property it is to move a kindly delight, and sometime
not without laughter: Her office to entertain assemblies, and keep
societies together with fair familliarity. Her device within a Ring
of clouds, a Heart with shine about it, the word, CVRARVM
NUBILE POLO. An Allegory of Cynthias light,
which no less clears the Sky, then her •ayre M•rd the heart.
3 The third, in discoul•ur'd Mantle spangled all over, is Eu∣phantaste,
a well conceited Wittiness, and employed in honouring
the Court with the retches of her pure Invention. Her device upon
a Petasus, or Mer•nriall Hat, a Crescent. The word; SIC
LIVES INGENII: Inferring that the praise and glory of
wit, doth ever increase, as doth thy growing Moon.
4 The fourth in White is Apheleia, a Nymph as pure and s••∣ple
as the Soul, or as an abrase Table, and is therefore called Sympli∣city;
without folds, without pleights, without colour, without coun∣terfeit:
and (to speak plainly) Plainness it self. Her device is no De∣vice.
The word under her silver Shield: OMNIS ABASED
FVCVS, alluding to thy spotless self, who art as far from Impu∣rity,
as from Mortality.
My self (Celestial Goddess) more fit for the Court of Cyn∣thia,
then the Arbors of Cider, am called Anteros, or Loves en∣my;
the more welcome therefore to thy Court, and the fitter to conduct
this Quaternio, who as they are thy professed Votaries, and for that
cause adversaries to Love, yet thee (Perpetual Virgin) they both
love, and vow to love eternally.
Not without wounder, nor with out delight,
Mine eyes have viewed in Contemplations depth,
This work of wit, divine, and excellent:
What Shape? what Substance? or what unknown Power
In virgins habit crowned with Laurel leaves
And Olive branches woven in between,
On Sea-girt Rock like to a Goddess shin•s?
O front! O face! O all celestial sure
And more then mortal! Arete, behold
Another Cynthia, and another Queen,
Whose glory (like a lasting Plenilun•)
Seems ignorant of what it is to wane.
Not under heaven an Object could be found
More fit to please; let Criticus approach,
Bounty forbids to paull our thanks with stay,
Or to defer our favour after view:
" The time of Grace is, when the Cause is new.
Lo here the man (celestial Delia)
Who (like a Circle bounded in it self,)
Contains as much, as Man in fullness may.
Lo here the man; who, not of usual earth,
But of that nobler, and more precious mould
Which Phoebus self doth temper, is composed;
And, who (though all were wanting to reward,
Yet, to himself he would not wanting be:
Thy Favours gain is his Ambitions most,
And labours best; who (humble in his height)
Stands fixed silent in thy glorious sight.
With no less pleasure, then we have beheld,
This precious Crystal, work of rarest wit,
Our eye doth read thee, now, our Criticus;
Whom Learning, Virtue, and our Favour last,
Exempted from the gloomy Multitude.
" With common eye the Supreme should not see.
Hence forth be ours, the more thy self to be.
Heavens purest light, whose Orb may be eclipsed,
But not thy Praise; (divinest Cynthia)
How much too narrow for so high a grace,
Thy (save therein) unworthy Criticus:
Doth find himself? for ever shine thy Fame;
Thine Honours ever, as thy Beauties do;
In me they must, my dark worlds chiefest Lights;
By whose propitious beams my powers are raised
To hope some part of those most lofty points,
Which blessed Arete hath pleased to name
As marks, which my'ndeuors steps should bend:
Mine, as begun at thee, in thee must end.
Sister of Phoebus to whose bright Orb we owe, that we not
complain of his Absence; These four Brethren (for they are Brethrē
and sons of Eutaxia, a Lady known, and highly beloved of your
resplendent Deity) not able to be absent, when Cynthia held a solemp∣nity,
officiously insinuate themselves into thy presence: For as there are
four Cardinal virtues, upon which the whole Frame of the Cour•
doth move, so are these the four Cardinal properties without which
the Body of Complement moves not. With those four silver Javelins
(which they bear in their hands) they support in Princes Courts the
state of the Presence, as by office they are obliged; which though here
they may seem superfluous, yet for Honours sake they thus presume to
visit thee, having also bin employed in the Palace of Queen Per∣fection.
And though to them, that would make themselves gracious
to a Goddess, Sacrifices were fitter then Presents or Impresses, yet
they both hope thy favour, and (in place of either) use several Simon∣boles
containing the titles of thy imperial Dignity.
1 The hit hermost in the changeable blew, and greene Robe, is
the commendably-fashionate Gallant Eucosmos; whose Courtly Ha∣•it
is the grace of the Presence, and delight of the surveying eye: whom
Ladies understand by the names of Neat, &amp; Elegant. His Symbol
is DIVAE VIRGIN, in which he would express thy Dei∣ties
principal glory, which hath ever bin Virginity.
2 The second in the rich Acoutrement, and Robe of Purple
impaled with Gold, is Eupathes; who entertains his mind with an
harmless, but not incurious variety: All the Objects of his senses are
Sumptuous, himself a Gallant, that without excess can make use of
superfluities: go ritchly in Embroiders, Jewels, (and what not?) with∣out
Vanity; and fare delicately without Gluttony: and therefore (not
without cause) is universally thought to be of fine humour. His Simon∣bole
is DIVAE OPTIMA. An attribute to express thy
Goodness in which thou so resembles love thy father.
3. The third in the blush-collourd Suit is Eutolmos, as duly
respecting others, as never neglecting himself; commonly known by
the title of Good Audacity, to Courts and courtly assemblies, a guest
most acceptable. His Symbol is DIVAE VIRAGINI, To
express thy hardy Courage, in chase of Savage beasts which har∣bore
in Woods, and Wilderness.
4. The fourth in Watchet-Tinsell, is the kind, and truly Be∣nefique
Eucolos. Who imparts not without respect, but yet without
difficulty: and hath the happiness to make every kindness seem dou∣ble,
by the timely, and freely bestowing thereof, he is the chief of them
who (by the vulgar) are said to be of Good Nature. His Symbol is
DIVAE MAXIMAE. An Adjunct to signify thy great∣ness,
which in heaven, earth, and hell is formidable.
Is not that Amorphus the Traveller?
As though it were not? do you not see how his legs
are in travail with a Measure?
Hedon, thy moister is next.
What will Cupped turn Nomenclator, and cry them?
No faith, but I have a Comedy toward, that would not
be lost for a kingdom.
In good time, for Cupped will prove the Comedy.
Mercury, I am studying how to match them.
How too mismatch them, were harder.
It is the Nymphs must do it, I shall sport my self with
their passions aboue measure.
Those Nymphs would be tamed a little indeed, but I
fear thou hast not Arrows for the purpose.
O yes, here be of all sorts, Flights, Rovers, and But∣shafts.
But I can wound with a Brandish, and never draw Bow
for the matter.
I cannot but believe it my invisible Archer, and yet
me thinks you are tedious.
It behooves me to be somewhat circumspect Mercury,
for if Cynthia here the twang of my Bow, sneele go near to
whip me with the string; therefore to prevent that, I thus dis∣charge
a Brandish upon—it makes no matter which of the
couples: Phantaste, and Amorphus at you.
Will the shaking of a shaft, strike'hem into such a Fe∣for
of Affection?
As well as the wink of an Eye: but I pray thee hinder
me not with thy prattle.
Jove forbid I hinder thee. Marry all that I fear is Cyn∣thias
presence, which with the could of her Chaste•y, casts
such an Antiperistasis about the place, that no heate of thine
will tarry with the Patient.
It wiltarry the rather, for the Antiperistasis will keep it in.
I long to see the experiment.
Why their marrow boils already, or they are all turned
Eunuchs.
Nay and't be so, Isle give ouerspeaking, &amp; be a Specta∣tor
only.
Cynthia (by my bright soul) is a right exquisite, and
spendidious Lady; yet Amorphus I think hath seen more fa∣shions,
I am sure more Countries; but whether I have or no:
what need we gaze on Cynthia, that have our self to admire?
O excellent Cynthia; yet if Phantaste sat where she
do's, and had such a tyre on her head (for attire can do much) I
say no more; but Goddesses are Goddesses, and Phantaste is as she
is. I would the R•u•ls were done once, I might go to my
School of Glass again, and learn to do my self right after
all this Ruffling.
How now Cupped? heir's a wonderful change with
your Brandish? do you not hear, how they dote?
What Prodigy is this? no Word of Love? no Mention?
no Motion?
Not a word my little H•ll-fire, not a word.
Are my Darts enchanted? is their vigour gone? is their
virtue—
What? Cupped turned jealous of himself? ha, ha, ha.
Laughs Mercury?
Is Cupped angry?
Hath he not cause, when his purpose is so deluded?
A rare Comedy, it shall be entitled; Cupids.
Doe not scorn vs Harms.
Choler and Cupped are two fiery things; I scorn 'hem
not. But I see that come to pass which I presaged in the be∣ginning.
You cannot tell: perhaps the Physic will not work
so soon upon some, as upon others. It may be the Rest are not
so resty.
Ex vngue, you know the old Adage; as these, so are the
remainder.
Isle try: this is the same Shaft with which I won∣ded
Argurion.
I, but let me save you a labour Cupped: there were cer∣taine
Bottles of Water fetched, and drunk off, (since that time,)
by these Gallants.
Jove strike me into earth: The Fountain of Selfe-loue?
Nay faint not Cupped.
I remembered it not.
Faith it was ominous to take the name of Anteros
vpō you, you know not what Charm or Enchantment lies in
the word: you saw I durst not venture upon any Devise in our
presentment: but was content to be no other then a simple
Page. Your Arrows properties (to keep deco•um) Cupped, are
suited (it should seem) to the nature of him you personate.
Indignity not to be borne.
Nay rather an attempt to have bin forborne.
How might I revenge my self on this insulting Mer∣cury?
ther's Criticus his Minion: he has not tasted of this wa∣la?
it shall be so.
Is Criticus turned Dotard on himself too?
That follows not, because the venom of your sha•ts
cannot pierce him.
As though there were one Antidote for these, &amp; another
for him?
As though there were not? or as if one Effect might
not arise of diverse causes? what say you to Cynthia, Arete,
Phronesis Tim E, and others there?
They are divine.
And Criticus aspires to be so.
But that shall not serve him.
Tic like to do prettily well at this time. But Cupped is
grown too covetous, that will not spare one of a Multitude.
One is more then a Multitude.
Orates favour makes any one shot proof against
thee Cupped.
I pray thee light Hony-Bee, remember thou art not now in
Atones garden, but in Cynthias presence, where thorns 〈◊〉
garrison about the Roses. Soft Cynthia speaks.
Ladies and gallants,
To give a timely period to our sports,
Let vs conclude them, with declining night;
Our Empire is but of the darker half:
And if you judge it any recompense▪
For your fair pains, t'haue earnd Di••as thanks;
Diana grants them: and bestows their crown
To gratify your acceptable Zeal.
For you are they, that not (as some have done)
Do censure vs, as too severe, and sower,
But as (more rightly) Gracious to the Good;
Although we not deny, unto the Proud,
Or the Profane, perhaps indeed austere:
For so Actaeon by presuming far,
Did (to our grief) incur a fatal doom;
And so, swollen Niob• (comparing more
Then he presumed) was trophaeed into stone.
But are we therefore judged too extreme?
Seems it no Crime to •••er sacred Bowers,
And hallowed Places with impure aspect
Most lewdly to pollute? Seems it no crime,
To brave a Deity? let Mortals learn
To make Religion of offending Heaven;
And not at all to censure powers divine:
To Men, this Argument should stand for firm,
" A Goddess did it; therefore it was good:
" We are not cruel, nor delight in blood.
But what have serious Repetitions
To do with Revels, and the sports of Court?
We not intend to sour your late delights
With harsh expostulation; Let suffice
That we take notice, and can take revenge
Of these calumnious, and lewd Blasphemies;
For we are no less Cynthia, then we were,
Nor is our Power (but as our Self) the same:
Though we have now put on no tyre of shine
But mortal eyes vndazled may endure.
" Years, are beneath the Spears; and Time makes weak,
" Things under Heaven; not Powers which govern Heaven:
And though our Self be in our self, secure,
Yet let not mortals challenge to themselves
Immunity from thence; Lo this is all:
" Honour hath store of spleen, but wants Gall.
Once more, we cast the slumber of our thanks
On your tan toil, which here let take an end:
And that we not mistake your several words▪
Nor you our Favour; from your selves remove,
What makes you not your selves; those clouds of Masque:
" Particular pains, particular thanks do ask.
—Are we contemned?
Is there so little awe of our Disdeigne,
That any (under trust of their disguise)
Should mix themselves with others of the Court?
And (without forehead) boldly press so far▪
As farther none? 〈◊〉 apt is Lenity
To be abused? Seu•rity to be loathed?
And yet, how much more doth the s•eming Face
Of neighbor Virtues, and their borrowed Names,
Add of lewd Boldness to loose Vanities?
Who would ha•n• thought that Philautia durst,
Or have usurped noble Storge's name?
Or with that theft have ventured on our eyes?
Who would have thought that all of them should hope,
So much of our conniuence, as to come
To grace themselves, with Titles not their own?
Instead of Medicines have we Maladies?
And such Impostumes, as Phantaste is,
Grow in our Palace? we must lance these sores,
Or all will putrefy: Nor are these all,
For we suspect a farther fraud then this;
Take off our veil, that shadows may depart,
And shapes appear, beloved Arete. So.
Another Face of things presents it self
Then did of late: what? Featherd Cupped masked?
And masked like to Anteros? but, more strange!
Dear Mercury our Brother, like a Page,
To countenance the ambush of the Boy?
Nor ends our discovery as yet;
Gelaia like a Nymph, that but ere while
(In male attire,) did serve Anaides?
Cupped came hither to find sport and Game,
Who, heretofore hath been too conversant
Among our train; but never felt Revenge:
And Mercury bare Cupped company:
Cupped, we must confess this Time of mirth
(Proclaimed by vs) gave Opportunity,
To thy attempts, although no Privilege;
Tempt vs no farther, we cannot endure
Thy presence longer: Vanish, Hence, Away.
You Mercury, we must entreat to stay,
And hear what we determine of the rest;
For in this Plot, you have the deepest hand:
But (for we mean not a Censorian tasque
And yet to lance these ulcers grown so ripe)
Dear Arete, and Criticus, to you
Wee give the charge; Impose what pains you please:
Th'incurable cut of, the rest reform;
Remembering ever what we first decreed,
Since Revels were proclaimed, Let now none bleed.
How well Diana can distinguish Times?
And sort her Censures? keeping to her self
The doom of Gods, leaving the rest to vs?
Come, cite them Criticus and then proceed.
First Philautia (for she was the first)
Then light Gelaia, in Aglaias name,
Thirdly Phantaste, and Mori next,
Mayne follies all, and of the Female crew;
Amorphus, or Eucosmos counterfeit,
Voluptuous Hedon taken for Eupathes,
Brazen Anaides, and Asotus last,
With his too Pages Morus, and Prosaites;
And thou the Travellers Evil, Cos, approach,
Impostors all, and male Deformities.
Nay forward, for I delegate my power,
And will, that at thy mercy they do stand
Whom they so oft, so plainly scorned before:
" Tic virtue which they want, and wanting it,
" Honour no garment to their backs can fit.
Now Criticus, use your Discretion.
Adored Cynthia, and bright Arete;
Another might seem fitter for this tasque
Then Criticus, but that you judge not so:
For I (not to appear vindictive,
Or mindful of Contempts, which I contemned
As done of Impotence) must be remiss;
Who as I was the Author in some sort,
To work their knowledge into Cynthias sight,
So should be much severer to revenge
The indignity, hence issuing to her Name:
But ther's not one of these, who are vnpaind,
Or by themselves unpunished; for Vice
Is like a fury to the vicious mind,
And turns Delight it self to Punishment.
But we must forward to define their Doom;
You are Offenders, that must be confessed.
Do you confess it?
We doe.
And that you merit sharpe Correction?
We doe.
Then we (reserving unto Delias grace,
Her farther pleasure, and to Arete
What Delia grants) thus do sentence you.
That from this place (for Penance known of all,
Since you have drunk so deeply of Selfe-loue)
You (two and two) singing a Palinode,
March to your several homes by Nio•es stone,
And offer up two tears a piece thereon;
That it may change the name, as you must change,
And of a stone be called Weeping Cross:
Because it stands cross of Cynthias way,
One of whose names is sacred TRIVIA.
And after penance thus performed, you pass
In like set order; not as Midas did
To wash his Gold off into Tagus stream;
But to the Well of Knowledge, Helicon,
Where, purged of your present Maladies,
(Which are nor few, nor s•ender) you become
Such as you fine would seem; and then return
Offering your service to great Cynthia.
This is your Sentence, if the Goddess please
To ratify it with her high Consent:
" The scope of wise Mirth unto fruit is bent.
We do approve thy Censure Criticu•▪
Which Mercury, thy true propitious friend,
(A D•ity, next Jove, beloved of vs,)
Will undertake to see exactly done.
And for this service of Discovery
Performed by thee, in honour of our name,
We vow to guerdon it with such due grace,
As shall become our Bounty, and thy Place.
" Princes that would their People should do well,
" Must at themselves begin, as at the heads;
" For men by their example pattern out
" Their Imitations, and reguard of Laws:
" A virtuous Court, a world to virtue draws.
From Spanish shrugs, French faces, Smirks, Irps,
and all affected Humours.
Good Mercury defend vs.
From secret friends, sweet Servants, Loves, Doves,
and such Phantastique Humours.
•ood Mercury defend vs.
From stabbing of Arms, Flap-dragons, Healths,
Whiffs, and all such swaggering Humours.
Good Mercury defend vs.
From waving of Fans, coy Glances, Glicks,
Cringes, and all such simpering Humours.
Good Mercury defend vs.
From making love by Attorney, courting of Pup∣p•ts,
and paying for new acquaintance.
Good Mercury defend vs.
From perfumed Dogs, Monkeys, Sparrows, Dildos,
and Parachitos.
Good Mercury defend vs.
From wearing Bracelets of Hair, Shoo-tyes, Gloves,
Garters, and Rings with Poesies.
Good Mercury defend vs.
From Pargetting, Painting, Sleeking, Glazing,
and Renewing old rivaled Faces.
Good Mercury defend vs.
From Squiring to Tilt-yards, Play-Houses, Page∣ants,
and all such Public places.
Good Mercury defend vs.
From entertaining one Gallant to gull another,
and making Fools of either.
Good Mercury defend vs.
From Belying Ladies favours, Noble-mens count∣nonce,
coining counterfeit Employments, vain-glorious taking
to them other men's Services, and all selfe-louing Humours.
Good Mercury defend vs.
NOw each one dry his weeping Eyes,
and to the Well of Knowledge hast;
Where purged of your Maladies,
we may of sweeter waters taste:
And with refined voice report,
The Grace of Cynthia, and her Court.
GEntles, be it known to you, since I went in
I am turned Rimer; and do thus begin:
The Author (jealous, how your sense doth take
His travails) hath enjoined me to make
Some short, and Ceremonious Epilogue;
But if I yet know what, I am a Rogue:
He ties me to such Laws, as quite distract
My thoughts; and would a Year of time exact.
I neither must be Faint, Remiss, nor Sorry,
Sower, Serious, Confident, nor Peremptory:
But betwixt these. Lets see? to lay the blame
Upon the Childrens Action, that were lame.
To crave your Favours with a begging knee,
Were to distrust the Writers faculty;
To promise better at the next we bring,
Prorogues disgrace, commends not any thing.
Stiffly to stand on this, and proudly approve
The Play, might tax the Maker of Selfe-loue.
Isle only speak, what I have heard him say;
By God it is good, and if you liked, you may,
Ass rubied quidam, pallet, stupet, oscitat, odit.
Hoc volo: nuns nobis carmine nostra placent.

THe manifold great favours we have found,
By you, to vs poor weaklings still extended:
Whereof your virtues have been only ground,
And no desert in vs to be so friended:
Binds vs some way or other to express,
(Though all our all be else defeated quite
Of any means) save duteous thankfulness,
Which is the utmost measure of our might:
Then to the boundless Ocean of your worth,
This little drop of water we present:
Where though it never can be singled forth,
Let zeal be pleader for our good intent.
Drops not diminish, but increase great floods:
And mites impair not, but augment our goods.
Philander, and Orestes, what conceit
Troubles your silent minds? Let me entreat
Since we are come thus far, as we do walk
You would devise some pretty pleasant talk:
The air is cool, the evening high and fair,
Why should your cloudy looks, then show despair?
Believe me fair Eurimine, my skill
Is simple in discourse, and utterance ill:
Orestes if he were disposed to try,
Can better manage such affairs than I.
Why then Orestes let me crave of you
Some old, or late done story to renew:
Another time you shall request of me
As good, if not, a greater courtesy.
Trust me as now (nor can I show a reason)
All mirth unto my mind comes out of season:
For inward I am troubled in such sort,
As all unfit I am to make report
Of any thing may breed the least delight,
Rather in tears, I wish the day were night:
For neither can my self be merry now,
Nor treat of ought that may be likte of you.
Thats but your melancholic old disease,
That never are disposed but when ye please.
Nay mistress, then since he denies the task
My self will strait complish what ye ask:
And though the pleasure in my tale be small,
Yet may it serve to pass the time withal.
Thanks good Philander, when you please say on,
Better I deem a bad discourse, then none.
Sometime there lived a Duke not far from hence,
Mighty in fame, and virtues excellence,
Subjects he had, as ready to obey
As he to rule: beloved every way,
But that which most of all he gloried in,
(Hope of his age, and comfort of his kin,)
Was the fruition of one only son,
A gallant youth, inferior unto none
For virtue, shape, or excellence of wit,
That after him upon his throne might sit.
This youth when once he came to perfect age,
The Duke would fine have linked in marriage
With divers dames of honourable blood,
But still his fathers purpose he withstood.
How, was he not of metal apt to love?
Yes apt enough, as will the sequel prove.
But so the stream of his affection lay,
As he did lean a quite contrary way,
Disprouing still the choice his father made,
And oftentimes the matter had delayed:
Now giving hope he would at length consent,
And then again, excusing his intent.
What made him so repugnant in his deeds?
Another love, which this disorder breeds:
For even at home within his fathers Court
The Saint was shrinde, whom he did honour most:
A lovely dame, a virgin pure and chaste,
And worthy of a Prince to be embraced.
Had but her birth (which was obscure they said)
Answered her beauty, this their opinion staid.
Yet did this wilful youth affect her still,
And none but she was mistress of his will.
Full often did his father him dissuade,
From liking such a mean and low borne maid.
The more his father strove to change his mind,
The more the son became with fancy blind.
Alas, how sped the silly Lovers then?
As might even grieve the rude vnciuel'st men.
When hereupon to wean his fixed heart
From such dishonour, to his high desert,
The Duke had labourd, but in vain did strive,
Thus he began his purpose to contrive:
Two of his servants of undoubted troth,
He bound by virtue of a solemn oath,
To train the silly damsel out of sight,
And there in secret to bereave her quite
Of what, her life?
Yes Madame of her life,
Which was the cause of all the former strife.
And did they kill her?
You shall hear anon:
The question first must be descended on
In your opinion, whats your judgment? say,
Who were most cruel: those that did obey,
Or he that gave commandment for the fact?
In each of them it was a bloody act:
Yet they deserve (to speak my mind of both)
Most pardon, that were bound thereto by oath.
It is enough, we do accept your doom,
To pass vnblam'd, what ere of you become.
To pass vnblamde, what ere become of me?
What may the meaning of these speeches be?
Eurymine, my trembling tongue doth sail,
My conscience yrkes, my fainting senses quail:
My faltering speech bewrays my guilty thought,
And stammers at the message we have brought.
Ay me, what horror doth invade my breast?
Nay then Philander I will tell the rest.
Damsel thus fares thy case, demand not why,
You must forth with prepare your self to dye.
Therefore dispatch, and set your mind at rest.
Philander is it true? or doth he jest?
There is no remedy but you must dye:
By you I framed my tragic history.
The Duke my moister, is the man I meant,
His son, the Prince, the maid of mean descent
Your self, on whom Ascanio so doth dote,
As for no reason may remove his thought:
Your death the Duke determines by vs two,
To end the love betwixt his son and you:
And for that cause we trained you to this wood,
Where you must sacrifice your dearest blood.
Respect my tears.
We must regard our oath.
My tender years.
They are but trifles both.
Mine innocence.
That would our promise break,
Dispatch forthwith, we may not hear you speak.
If neither tears nor innocence move,
Yet think there is a heavenly power aboue.
A done, and stand not preaching here all day.
Then since there is no remedy, I pray
Yet good my masters, do but stay so long
Till I have tan my farewell with a song,
Of him whom I shall never see again.
We will afford that respit to your pain.
But least the fear of death appal my mind,
Sweet gentlemen let me this favour find.
That you will vale mine eye-sight with this scarf:
That when the fatal stroke is aymde at me,
I may not start, but suffer patiently.
Agreed, give me, Isle shadow ye from fear,
If this may do it.
Oh I would it might,
But shadows want the power to do that right.
Ye sacred Fires, and powers aboue,
Forge of desires working love,
Cast down your eye, cast down your eye
Upon a Maid in misery.
My sacrifice is lovers blood:
And from eyes salt tears a flood:
All which I spend, all which I spend
For thee Ascanio, my dear friend:
And though this hour I must feel
The bitter sower of pricking steel,
Yet ill or well, yet ill or well
To thee Ascanio still farewell.
What means Philander?
Oh forbear thy stroke,
Her piteous moan and gesture might provoke
Hard flints to ruth.
Hast thou forgot thy oath?
Forgot it? no.
Then wherefore doest thou interrupt me so?
A sudden terror ouercomes my thought.
The?? suffer me, that stands in fear of nought.
Oh hold Orestes, hear my reason first.
Is all religion of thy vow forgot?
Do as thou wilt, but I forget it not.
Orestes, if thou standst upon thine oath,
Let me alone, to answer for vs both.
What answer can thou give? I will not stay.
Nay villain, then my sword shall make me way.
Wilt thou in this, against thy conscience strive?
I will defend a woman while I live.
A virgin, and an innocent beside,
Therefore put up, or else thy chance abide.
Isle never sheath my sword, unless thou show,
Our oath reserved, we may let her go.
That will I do, if truth may be of force.
And then will I be pleased to grant remorse.
Little thought &amp; when out of door I went,
That thus my life should stand on argument.
A lawful oath in an unlawful cause,
Is first dispensed withal, by reasons laws:
Then next, respect must to the end be had,
Because th'intent, doth make it good or bad.
Now here th'intent is murder as thou see,
Which to perform, thou on thy oath rely:
But since the cause is wicked and unjust,
Th'effect must likewise be held odious.
We swore to kill, and God forbids to kill:
Shall we be ruled by him, or by mans will?
Beside it is a woman is condemned:
And what is he that is a man indeed,
That can endure to see a woman bleed?
Thou hast prevailed, Eurymine stand up,
I will not touch thee for a world of gold.
Why now thou seem to be of humane mould.
But on our grant fair maid that you shall live,
Will you to vs your faithful promise give,
Henceforth t'abandon this your Country quite,
And never more return into the sight
Of fierce Telemachus, the angry Duke,
Whereby we may be void of all rebuke?
Here do I plight my chaste unspotted hand,
I will abjure this most accursed land:
And vow henceforth what fortune ere betide,
Within these woods and deserts to abide.
Now wants there nothing, but a fit excuse,
To sooth the Duke, in his conceived abuse:
That he may be persuaded she is slain,
And we our wonted favour still maintain.
It shall be thus, within a Lawn hard by,
Obscure with bushes, where no humane eye,
Can any way discover our deceit:
There feeds a heard of Goats, and country neat.
Some Kid, or other young ling, will we take,
And with our swords dispatch it for her sake.
And having slain it, rip his panting breast,
And take the heart of the unguilty beast:
Which to th'intent, our counterfeit report
May seem more likely, we will bear to court:
And there protest with bloody weapons drawn,
It was her heart.
Then likewise take this Lawn,
Which well Telemachus did know she wore:
And let it be all spotted too with gore.
How say you mistress, will you spare that vale?
That or what else, to verify your tale:
And thanks Philander, and Orestes both,
That you preserve me from a Tyrants wroth.
I would it were within my power, I wis,
To do you greater courtesy then this:
But what we cannot by our deeds express
In heart we wish to ease your heaviness.
A double debt, yet one word ere ye go,
Commmend me to my dear Ascanio:
Whose loyal love, and presence to forgo,
Doth gall me more then all my other woe.
Our lives shall never want to do him good.
Nor yet our death, if he in danger stood:
And mistress, so good fortune be your guide.
And ought that may be fortunate beside.
The like I wish unto your selves again:
And many happy days devoid of pain.
And now Eurymine record thy state,
So much dejected, and oppressed by fate:
What hope remains? wherein hast thou to joy?
Wherein to triumph, but thine own annoy?
If ever wretch might tell of misery,
Then I alas, poor I, am only she:
Unknown of parents, destitute of friends,
Hopeful of nought, but what misfortune sends.
Banished, to live a fugitive alone,
In uncouth paths, and regions never known.
Behold Ascanio, for thy only sake,
These tedious travels I must undertake:
Nor do I grudge, the pain seems less to me,
In that I suffer this distress for thee.
Well met fair Nymph, or Goddess if ye bee:
Tic strange me thinks, that one of your degree
Should walk these solitary groves alone.
It were no marvel if you knew my moan.
But what are you that question me so far?
My habit tells you that, a Forester:
That having lost a heard of skittish Dear,
Was of good hope, I should a found them here.
Trust me, I saw not any, so farewell.
Nay stay: and further of your fortunes tell:
I am not one that means you any harm.
I think my Boy be fled away by charm.
Ranger well met: within thy walk I pray,
Saw thou not Moyso, my unhappy Boy?
Shepherd not I, what meanst to seek him here?
Because the wag, possessed with doubtful fear,
Least I would beat him for a fault he did:
Amongst those Trees, I do suspect hes hid.
But how now Ranger? you mistake I trow,
This is a Lady, and no barren Dow.
It is indeed, and as it seems, distressed,
Whose grief to know, I humbly made request:
But she as yet will not reveal the same.
Perhaps to me she will: speak gentle dame?
What danger great hath driven ye to this place?
Make known your state, and look what slender grace,
A Shepherds poor ability may yield,
You shall be sure of, ere I leave the field.
Alas good Sir, the cause may not be known,
That hath enforced me to be here alone.
Nay fear not to discover what you are:
It may be we may remedy your care.
Since needs you will, that I renew my grief,
Whether it be my chance to find relief
Or not, I wreak not: such my crosses are,
As sooner I expect to meet despair.
Then thus it is: not far from hence do dwell
My parents, of the world esteemed well:
Who with their bitter threats, my grau??t had won,
This day to marry with a neighbours son.
And such a one, to whom I should be wife,
As I could never fancy in my life.
And therefore to avoid that endless thrall,
This morn I came away and left them all.
Now trust me virgin, they were much unkind,
To seek to match you so against your mind.
It was beside, unnatural constraint:
But by the tenure of your just complaint,
It seems you are not minded to return,
Nor any more to dwell where you were borne.
It is my purpose, if I might obtain
A place of refuge where I might remain.
Why go with me, my Lodge is not far off,
Where you shall have such hospitality
As shall be for your health and safety.
Soft Ranger, you do range beyond your skill,
My house is nearer: and for my good will,
It shall exceed a woodmans wooden stuff:
Then go with me, Isle keep you safe enough.
Isle bring her to a bower beset with greene.
And I an arbour, may delight a Queen.
Her diet shall be Venson at my board.
Young Kid and Lamb, we shepherds can afford.
And nothing else?
Yes, ranging now and then,
A Hog, a Goose, a Capon, or a Hen.
These walks are mine, amongst the shady trees.
For that I have, a garden full of Bees,
Whose buzzing music with the flowers sweet,
Each even and morning, shall her senses greet.
The Nightingale is my continual clock.
And mine the watchful, sin-remembring cock.
A hunts up, I can tune her with my hounds.
And I can show her meads, and fruitful grounds.
Within these woods are many pleasant springs.
Betwixt yond dales, the Echo daily sings.
I marvel that a rustic shepherd dare
With woodmen then audaciously compare?
Why, hunting is a pleasure for a King,
And Gods themselves sometime frequent the thing.
Diana with her bow and arrows keen,
Did often use the Chase, in Forests greene.
And so alas, the good Athenian knight,
And swift Action herein took delight:
And Atalanta the Arcadian dame,
Conceived such wondrous pleasure in the game:
That with her train of Nymphs attending on,
She came to hunt the Bore of Calydon.
So did Apollo walk with shepherds crook,
And many Kings their scepters have forsook:
To lead the quiet life we shepherds took.
Accounting it a refuge for their woe.
But we take choice of many a pleasant walk
And mark the Dear how they begin to stalk.
When each according to his age and time,
Pricks up his head, and bears a Princely mind:
The lusty Stag conductor of the train,
Leads all the heard in order down the plain:
The baser rascals scatter here and there,
As not presuming to approach so near.
So shepherds sometime sit upon a hill,
Or in the cooling shadow of a mill:
And as we sit, unto our pipes we sing,
And therewith make the neighboring groves to ring.
And when the sun steals downward to the west,
We leave our chat, and whistle in the fist:
Which is a signal to our straggling flock,
As Trumpets sound to men in martial shock.
Shall I be thus out-faced by a swain?
Isle have a guard to wait upon her train,
Of gallant woodmen, clad in comely greene:
The like whereof, hath seldom yet been seen.
And I of shepherds such a lusty crew,
As never Forester the like yet knew:
Who for their persons and their neat array,
Shall be as fresh, as is the month of May.
Where are ye there, ye merry noted swains?
Draw near a while, and whilst upon the plains
Your flocks do gently feed, lets see your skill,
How you with chanting, can sad sorrow kill.
Thinks Gemulo to bear the bell away?
By singing of a simple Rundelay?
No, I have fellows, whose melodious throats
Shall even as far exceed those homely notes
As doth the Nightingale in music pass,
The most melodious bird that ever was.
And for an instance, here they are at hand,
When they have done, let our deserts be scand.
Thanks to you both, you both deserve so well,
As I want skill your worthiness to tell:
And both I do commend for your good will,
And both Isle honour, love and reverence still:
For never virgin had such kindness shown,
Of strangers, yea, and men to her unknown.
But more, to end this sudden controversy,
Since I am made an vmpier in the plea,
This is my verdict: Isle entreat of you
A Cottage for my dwelling: and of you,
A flock to tend: and so indifferent
My grateful pains on either shall be spent.
I am agreed, and for the love I bear
Isle boast, I have a Tenant is so fair.
And I will hold it as a rich possession,
That she vouchsafes to be of my profession.
The?? for a sign that no man here hath wrong
From hence lets all conduct her with a song.
Away Ioculo.
Here sir, at hand.
Ioculo, where is she?
I know not.
When went she?
I know not.
Which way went she?
I know not.
Where should I seek her?
I know not.
When shall I find her?
I know not.
A vengeance take thee slave, what dost thou know?
Marry sir, that I doo know.
What villain?
And you be so testy, go look:
What a coils here with you?
If we knew where she were, what need we seek her?
I think you are lunatic: where were you
When you should have looked after her? now you
Go crying up and down after your wench, like
A Boy had lost his horn book.
Ah my sweet Boy.
Ah my sweet Moister: nay I can give you as good
Words as you can give me: alls one for that.
What can thou give me no relief?
Faith sir, there comes not one morsel of comfort
From my lips, to sustain that hungry maw
Of your misery, there is such a dearth at this time,
God amend it.
A Ioculo, my breast is full of grief,
And yet my hope, that only wants relief.
Your breast and my belly, are in two contrary kaies,
You walk to get stomach to your meat,
And I walk to get meat to my stomach:
Your breast's full, and my belle's empty.
If they chance to part in this case, God send them
Merry meeting: that my belly be full, and your breast empty.
Boy, for the love that ever thou did owe,
To thy dear master, poor Ascanio,
Rack thy proved wits, unto the highest strain,
To bring me back Eurymine again.
Nay master, if wit could do it, I could tell you
More: but if it ever be done, the very legerity
Of the feet must do it: these ten nimble bones
Must do the deed: Isle trot like a little dog:
Theres not a bush so big as my beard,
But Isle be peeping in it: theres not a Coat but
Isle search every corner: if she be aboue, or
Beneath, over the ground, or under, Isle find her out.
Stay Ioculo: alas it cannot be:
If we should part, I loose both her and thee:
The woods are wide: and wandering thus about,
Thou moist be lost: and not my Love found out.
I pray you let me go.
I pray thee stay.
I faith isle run.
And doest not know which way.
Any way: alls one, isle draw dry foot:
If you send not to seek her, you may lye
Here long enough, before she come to seek you:
She little thinks that you are hunting for her
In these quarters.
Ah Ioculo, before I leave my Boy,
Of this worlds comfort, now my only joy:
See thou this place? upon this grassy bed,
With summers gaudy diaper bespred.
Under these shadows shall my dwelling be:
Till thou return, sweet Ioculo to me.
And if my Convoy be not cut off by the way,
It shall not be long before I be with you.
Well, I pray you look to my moister: for
Here I leave him amongst you: and if I
Chance to light on the wench, you shall hear
Of me by the next wind.
In vain I fear, I beat my brains about,
Proving by search, to find my mistress out:
Eurymine, Eurymine, return:
And with thy presence guild the beauteous morn:
And yet I fear to call upon thy name,
The prattling Echo, should she learn the same,
The last words accent sheele no more prolong,
But bear that sound upon her airy tong.
Adorned with the presence of my Love,
The woods I fear, such secret power shall prove
As they'll shut up each path: hide every way,
Because they still would have her go astray:
And in that place would always have her scene,
Only because they would be ever greene:
And keep the wingged Choristers still there,
To banish winter clean out of the year.
But why persist I to bemoan my state,
When she is gone, and my complaint too late?
A drowsy dullness closes up my sight,
O powerful sleep, I yield unto thy might.
Come hither Iris.
Iris is at hand,
To attend Ioues wife: great Iunos hie command.
Iris I know I do thy service prove,
And ever since I was the wife of Jove
Thou hast been ready when I called still,
And always most obedient to my will:
Thou see how that imperial Queen of love,
With all the Gods, how she prevails aboue,
And still against great Iunos hests doth stand,
To have all stoup and bow, at her command:
Her Doves and Swans, and Sparrows, must be graced.
And on Loves Aultars, must be highly placed.
My starry Peacocks, which doth bear my state:
Scar???sly allowed within his palace gate:
And since her self, she thus preferred doth see,
Now the proud huswife will contend with me:
And practises her wanton pranks to play
With this Ascanio, and Eurymine.
But Love shall know, in spite of all his skill,
Iuno's a woman, and will have her will.
What is my Goddess will? may Iris ask?
Iris, on thee I do impose this task,
To cross proud Venus, and her purblind Lad,
Until the mother, and her brat be mad,
And with each other, set them so at odds,
Till to their teeth they curse, and ban the Gods.
Gods, the grant consists alone in you,
Then mark the course which now you must pursue.
Within this ore-growne Forest, there is found
A dusky Cave, thrust lowe into the ground:
So ugly dark, so damp and steep,
As for his life the sun durst never peep
Into the entrance: which doth so affright
The very day, that half the world is night.
Where fennish fogs, and vapours do abound:
There Morpheus doth dwell within the ground,
No crowing Cock, nor waking bell doth call,
Nor watchful dog disturbs sleep at all.
No sound is heard in compass of the hill,
But every thing is quiet, wished, and still.
Amid this Cave, upon the ground doth lie,
A hollow plancher, all of Ebony
Covered with black, whereon the drowsy God,
Drowned in sleep, continually doth nod:
Go Iris go, and my commandment take,
And beat against the doors till sleep awake,
Bid him from me, in vision to appear,
Unto Ascanio that lies slumbering hear.
And in that vision, to reveal the way,
How he may find the fair Eurymine.
Madam, my service is at your command,
Dispatch it then, good Iris out of hand.
My Peacocks and my Chariot shall remain,
About the shore, till thou return again.
About the business now that I am sent,
To sleeps black Cave, I will incontinent:
And his dark cabin, boldly will I shake,
Until the drowsy lumpish God awake:
And such a bouncing at his Cave Isle keep,
That if pale death, seized on the eyes of sleep,
Isle rouse him up, that when he shall me hear,
Isle make his locks stand up on end with fear.
Be silent air, whilst Iris in her pride
Swifter then thought, upon the winds doth ride.
What Somnus, what Somnus, Somnus.
What wilt thou not awake? are thou still so fast?
Nay then in faith, Isle have an other cast.
What Somnus Somnus I say?
Who calls at this time of the day?
What a balling dost thou keep?
A vengeance take thee, let me sleep,
Up thou drowsy God, I say,
And come presently away,
Or I will beat upon this door,
That after this, thou sleep no more.
Isle take a nap, and come anon.
Out you beast, you block, you stone:
Come, or at thy door Isle thunder,
Till both heaven and hell do wonder, Somnus I say.
A vengeance split thy chaps asunder.
What Somnus?
Iris I thought it should be thee.
How now mad wench, what would with me?
From mighty Iuno, Ioues immortal wife,
Somnus I come: to charge thee on thy life,
That thou unto this Gentleman appear,
And in this place, thus as he lies here,
Present his mistress to his inward eyes,
In as true manner, as thou can devise.
I would thou were hanged for waking me.
Three sons I have, the eldest Morpheus hight:
He shows of man, the shape or sight.
The second Icelor, whose behests
Doth show the forms of birds and beasts.
Phantasor for the third, things lifeless hee:
Choose which like thee of these three.
Morpheus: if he in humane shape appear.
Morpheus come forth in perfect likeness here,
Of, how call ye the Gentlewoman?
Eurymine.
Of Eurymine: and show this Gentleman,
What of his mistress is become.
My dear Ascanio, in this vision see,
Eurymine doth thus appear to thee:
As soon as sleep hath left thy drowsy eyes,
Follow the path that on thy right hand lies,
An aged Hermit thou by chance shalt find,
That there hath been, time almost out of mind:
This holy man, this aged reverent Father,
There in the woods, doth roots and simples gather:
His wrinkled brow, tells strengths past long ago:
His beard as white, as winters driven snow.
He shall discourse the troubles I have past,
And bring vs both together at the last.
Thus she presents her shadow to thy sight,
That would her person gladly if she might.
See how he catches to embrace the shade.
This vision fully doth his powers invade.
And when the heate shall but a little slake:
Thou then shalt see him presently awake.
Hast thou ought else, that I may stand in sted?
No Somnus, no: go back unto thy bed:
Iuno she shall reward thee for thy pain.
Then good night Iris, Isle to rest again.
Morpheus farewell: to Iuno I will fly.
And I to sleep, as fast as I can hie.
Eurymine: Ah my good Angel stay:
O vanish not so suddenly away.
O stay my Gods, whither doest thou fly?
Return my sweet Eurymine, tic I.
Where art thou speak? Let me behold thy face:
Did I not see thee in this very place
Even now? Here did I not see thee stand?
And here thy feet did bless the happy land?
Eurymine: Oh wilt thou not attend?
Fly from thy foe: Ascanio is thy friend.
The fearful Hare, so shuns the labouring hound,
And so the Dear eschues the Hunts man wound.
The trembling Foul, so flies the Falcons gripe:
The Bond-man, so, his angry masters stripe.
I follow not, as Phoebus Daphne did:
Nor as the Dog pursues the trembling Kid.
Thy shape it was: alas I saw not thee:
That sight were fitter for the Gods then me.
But if in dreams, there any truth be found,
Thou art within the compass of this ground.
Isle range the woods, and all the groves about,
And never rest, until I find thee out.
Terlitelo, Terlitelo, terlitelee, terlo,
So merrily this shepherds Boy
His horn that he can blow,
Early in a morning, late, late, in an evening,
And ever sat this little Boy,
So merrily piping.
Can you blow the little horn?
Weell, weell, and very weell.
And can you blow the little horn,
Amongst the leaves greene?
Fortune my foe, why doest thou frown on me?
And will my fortune never better bee:
Wilt thou I say, for ever breed my pain?
And wilt thou not restore my Joys again?
Cannot a man be merry in his own walk,
But a must be thus encombred?
I am disposed to be melancholy,
And I cannot be private, for one villain or other.
How the devil stumbled this case of rope-ripes in???to
my way?
Sirrha, what art thou? and thou?
I am Page to a Courtier.
And I a Boy to a Shepherd.
Thou art the Apple-squier to an Eawe,
And thou sworn brother to a bale of false dice.
What art thou?
I am a Boy to a Ranger.
An Out-lawe by authority: one that never sets mark
of his own goods, nor never knows how he comes by other
men's.
That never knows his cattle, but by their horns.
Sirrha, so you might have said of your masters sheep.
I marry: this takes fire like touch powder,
And goes off with a huff.
They come of crick-cracks, and shake their tails
like a squib.
Ha you Rogues, the very steel of my wit, shall strike
fire from the flint of your understandings: have you not
heard of me?
Yes, if you be that Ioculo that I take you for, we
have heard of your exploits, for cosoning of some seven,
and thirty Alewiues, in the Villages here about.
A wit, as nimble as a Sempsters needle, or a girls fin???ger
at her Buck point.
Your jest goes too low sir.
O but tic a tickling jest.
Who wold have thought to have found this in a plain
villain, that never wore better garment, then a green Ier???kin?
O Sir, though you Courtiers have all the honour,
You have not all the wit.
Soft sir, tic not your wit can carry it away in this
company.
Sweet Rogues, your company to me, is like music to
a wench at midnight: when she lies alone, and could wish,
yea marry could she.
And thou art as welcome to me, as a new poking stick
to a Chamber maid.
But soft, who comes here?
By the Moon we sport and play,
With the night begins our day:
As we dance the dew doth fall,
Trip it little urchins all:
Lightly as the little Bee,
Two by two, and three by three:
And about go we, and about go wee.
What Mawmets are these?
O they be the Fairies that haunt these woods.
O we shall be pinched most cruelly.
Will you have any music Sir?
Will you have any fine music?
Most dainty music?
We must set a face on it now, theres no flying???
No Sir: we are very merry I thank you.
O but you shall Sir.
No, I pray you save your labour.
O Sir, it shall not cost you a penny.
Where be your Fiddles?
You shall have most dainty Instruments Sir.
I pray you, what might I call you?
My name is Penny.
I am sorry I cannot purse you.
I pray you sir, what might I call you?
My name is Cricket.
I would I were a Chimney for your sake.
I pray you, you pretty little fellow, whats your name?
My name is little, little Prick.
Little, little Prick? ?? you are a dangerous Fayrie,
And fright all the little wenches in the Country,
Out of their beds.
I care not whose hand I were in, so I were out of yours.
I do come about the coppes,
Leaping upon flowers tops:
Then I get upon a fly,
She carries me aboue the sky:
And trip and go.
When a dew drop falls down,
And doth light upon my crown,
Then I shake my head and skip:
And about I trip.
When I feel a girl a sleep,
Underneath her frock I peep,
There to sport, and there I play,
Then I byte her like a flea:
And about I skip.
I, I thought where I should have you.
Wilt please you dance fir?
Indeed sir, I cannot handle my legs.
O you must needs dance and sing:
Which if you refuse to doo,
We will pinch you black and blew.
And about we go.
Round about, round about, in a fine Ring a:
Thus we dance, thus we dance, and thus we sing a.
Trip and go, too and fro, over this Greene a:
All about, in and out, for our brave Queen a.
Round about, round about, in a fine Ring a:
Thus we dance, thus we dance, and thus we sing a.
Trip and go, too and fro, over this Greene a:
All about, in and out, for our brave Queen a.
We have danced round about, in a fine Ring a:
We have danced lustily, and thus we sing a.
All about, in and out, over this Greene a:
Too and fro, trip and go, to our brave Queen a.
No no great Phoebus, this your silence tends.
To hide your grief from knowledge of your friends,
Who if they knew the cause in each respect,
Would show their utmost skill to cure th'effect.
Good Ladies, your conceits in judgment err,
Because you see me dumpish, you refer
The reason to some secret grief of mine:
But you have seen me melancholy many a time,
Perhaps it is the glowing weather now,
That makes me seem so ill at ease to you.
Fine shifts to colour that you cannot hide,
No Phoebus, by your looks may be discride
Some hid conceit that harbors in your thought,
Which hath therein, some strange impression wrought:
That by the course thereof, you seem to me,
An other man then you were wont to bee.
No Ladies, you deceive your selves in me:
What likelihood or token do ye see,
That may persuade it true that you suppose?
Appollo, hence a great suspicion grows,
Year not so pleasant now, as erst in company,
Ye walk alone, and wander solitary.
The pleasant toys we did frequent sometime,
Are worn away, and grown out of prime.
Your Instrument hath lost his silver sound,
That rang of late, through all this grove ground.
Your bow wherewith the chase you did frequent,
Is closed in case, and long hath been unbent.
How differ you from that Appollo now,
That meanwhile sat in shade of Laurel bow,
And with the warbling of your Ivory Lute,
T'alure the Fairies for to dance about.
Or from Th'appollo that with bended bow,
Did many a sharp and wounding shaft bestow.
A midst the Dragon Pithons scaly wings,
And forced his dying blood to spout in springs.
Believe me Phebus, who saw you then and now,
Would think there were a wondrous change in you.
Alas fair dames, to make my sorrows plain,
Would but revive an ancient wound again.
Which grating presently upon my mind,
Doth leave a scar of former woes behind.
Phoebus, if you account vs for the same,
That tender thee, and love Appollos name,
Power forth to vs the fountain of your woe,
Fro?? whence the spring of these your sorrows slow?
If we may any way redress your moan,
Command our best, harm will we do you none.
Good Ladies, though I hope for no relief,
Isle show the ground of this my present grief.
This time of year, or there about it was,
Accursed be the time, ten times alas:
When I from Delphos took my journey down,
To see the games in noble Sparta Town,
There saw I that, wherein I began to joy,
Amilchars son a gallant comely boy,
Hight (Hiacinth) full fifteen years of age,
Whom I intended to have made my Page,
And bare as great affection to the boy,
As ever Jove, in Ganimede did joy.
Among the games, my self put in a pledge,
To try my strength in throwing of the sledge,
Which poising with my strained arm I threw
So far, that it beyond the other slew.
My Hiacinth, delighting in the game,
Desierd to prove his manhood in the same:
And catching ere the sledge lay still on ground,
With violent force, aloft it did rebound
Against his head, and battered out his brain:
And so alas, my lovely boy was slain.
Hard hap O Phoebus, but sis it's past &amp; gone,
We wish ye to forbear this frustrate moan.
Ladies, I know my sorrows are in vain,
And yet from mourning can I not refrain.
Eurania some pleasant Song shall sing.
To put ye from your dumps.
Alas, no Song will bring
The least relief to my perplexed mind.
No Phoebus? what other pastime shall we find,
To make ye merry with?
Fair dames I thank you all,
No sport nor pastime can release my thrall:
My grief's of course, when it the course hath had,
I shall be merry, and no longer sad.
What will ye then we doo?
And please ye, you may go,
And leave me here to seed upon my woe.
Then Phebus, we can but wish ye well again.
I thank ye gentle Ladies for your pain.
O Phoebus wretched thou thus art thou fine
With forged excuses, to conceal thy pain.
O Hyacinth, I suffer not these fits
For thee my Boy, no, no, another sits
Deeper then thou, in closet of my breast:
Whose sight so late, hath wrought me this unrest.
And yet no Goddess, nor of heavenly kind
She is, whose beauty thus torments my mind.
No Fayrie Nymph, that haunts these pleasant woods,
No Goddess of the flowers, the fields, nor floods:
Yet such an one, whom justly I may call
A Nymph, as well as any of them all.
Eurymine, what heaven affords thee here?
So may I say, because thou come so near?
And nearer far unto a heavenly shape,
Then she of whom Jove triumphed in the Rape.
Isle sit me down, and wake my grief again,
To sing a while, in honour of thy name.
A midst the mountain Ida groves,
Where Paris kept his Heard:
Before the other Ladies all,
He would have thee preferred.
Pallas for all her painting than,
Her face would seem but pale:
Then Iuno would have blushed for shame,
And ??enus looked stale.
Eurymine thy self alone,
Should bear the golden ball:
So far would thy most heavenly form,
Excel the other all.
O happy Phoebus, happy then,
Most happy should I bee:
If fair Eurymine would please,
To join in love with me.
Although there be such difference in the change,
To live in Court, and desert woods to range,
Yet in extremes, wherein we cannot choose,
An extreme refuge is not to refuse.
Good gentlemen, did any see my heard?
I shall not find them out, I am afraid:
And yet my moister wayteth with his bow,
Within a standing, for to strike a Doe.
You saw them not? your silence makes me doubt:
I must go further, till I ???inde them out.
What seek you pretty Maid?
Forsooth my heard of Dear.
I saw them lately, but they are not here.
I pray Sir, where?
An hour ago or twain,
I saw them feeding all aboue the plain.
So much the more my toil to fetch them in.
I thank ye Sir.
Nay stay sweet Nymph with me.
My business, cannot so dispatched bee.
But pray ye Maid, it will be very good,
To take the shade, in this unhaunted wood:
This flowering bay with branches large and great,
Will shroud ye safely, from the parching heat.
Good sir, my business calls me hence in hast.
O stay with him, who?? conquered thou hast.
With him, whose restless thoughts do beat on thee:
With him that joys, thy wished face to see.
With him whose joys surmount all joys aboue:
If thou would think him worthy of thy love.
Why Sir, would you desire another make?
And wear that garland for your Mistress sake?
No Nymph, although I love this laurel tree,
My fancy ten times more affects thee:
And as the bay is always fresh and greene,
So shall my love as fresh to thee be seen.
Now truly Sir, you offer me great wrong,
To hold me from my business here so long.
O stay sweet Nymph, with more advisement view,
What one he is, that for thy grace doth sue:
I am not one that haunts on hills or Rocks,
I am no shepherd waiting on my flocks.
I am no boisterous Satire, no nor Fane,
That am with pleasure of thy beauty drawn.
Thou dost not know God wot, thou dost not know,
The wight, whose presence thou disdain so.
But I may know, if you wold please to tell.
My father in the highest heavens doth dwell:
And I am known the son of Jove to bee,
Whereon the folk of Delphos honour me.
By me is known what is, what was, and what shall bee,
By me are learned the Rules of harmony.
By me the depth of Phisicks lore is found:
And power of herbs that grow upon the ground.
And thus by circumstances moist thou see,
That I am Phoebus, who doth fancy thee.
No sir, by these discourses may I see,
You mock me with a forged pedigree.
If son you be to Jove, as erst ye said,
In making love unto a mortal maid,
You work dishonour to your deity:
I must be gone: I thank ye for your courtesy.
Alas, abandon not thy Lover so.
I pray sir heartily, give me leave to go.
The way ore-growne, with shrubs and bushes thick,
The sharpened thorns, your tender feet will prick.
The brambles round about, your train will lap,
The burs and briers, about your skirts will wrap.
If Phoebus, thou of Jove the offspring be,
Dishonour not thy deity so much,
With proffered force, a silly maid to touch:
For doing so, although a god thou bee,
The earth, and men on earth, shall ring thy infamy.
Hard speech to him that loves thee so well.
What know I that?
I know it, and can tell: and feel it too.
If that your love be such,
As you pretend, so fervent and so much,
For proof thereof, grant me but one request.
I will, by Jove my father, I protest:
Provided first, that thy petition bee,
Not hurtful to thy self, nor harm to me.
For so sometimes did Phaeton my son,
Request a thing, whereby he was undone.
He lost his life through craving it, and I
Through granting it, lost him my son thereby.
Then Phoebus thus it is, if thou be hee,
That art pretended in thy pedigree,
If son thou be to Jove as thou doest fine,
And chalengest that title not in vain:
Now heer bewray some sign of godhood than?
And change me straight, from shape of maid to man?
Alas, what fond desire doth move thy mind
To wish thee altered from thy native kind?
If thou in this thy women's form can move,
Not men but gods, to sue and seek thy love:
Content thy self with natures bounty than,
And covet not to bear the shape of man.
And this moreover will I say to thee,
Fairer man then may de, thou shalt never bee.
These vain excuses, manifestly show,
Whether you usurp Appollos name or no.
Sith my demand so far surmounts your Art,
Ye join exceptions, on the other part.
Nay then my doubtless Deity to prove,
Although thereby for ever I loose my Love,
I grant thy wish, thou art become a man:
I speak no more, then well perform I can.
And though thou walk in changed body now,
This penance shall be added to thy vow:
Thy self a man, shalt love a man, in vain:
And loving, wish to be a maid again.
Appollo, whether I love a man or not,
I thank ye, now I will accept my lot:
And sith my change hath disappointed you,
Ye are at liberty to love anew.
If ever I love, sith now I am forsaken,
Where next I love, it shall be better taken:
But what so ere my fate in loving bee,
Yet thou moist vaunt, that Phoebus loved thee.
Ioculo, whither iettest thou?
Hast thou found thy Moister?
Mopso well met, hast thou found thy mistress?
Not I by Pan.
Nor I by Pot.
Pot? what god's that?
The next god to a Pan, and such a pot it may be,
As he shall have more servants then all the Pannes in a Tin???cares
shop.
Fresco, where hast thou been frisking? hast thou
found?
I have found.
What hast thou found Fresco?
A couple of crack-roapes.
And I.
And I.
I mean you two.
I you two.
And I you two.
Come, a treble conjunction: all three, all three.
But Fresco, hast not found the fair shepherdess,
thy Masters Mistress?
Not I by God, Priapus I mean.
Priapus quoth a? Whattin a God might that bee?
A plain God, with a good peg to hang a shephear???dress
bottle upon.
Thou being a Foresters Boy, should swear by the
God of the woods.
My Moister swears by Siluanus, I must swear by
his poor neighbour.
And heer???s a shepherds swain, swears by a Kitchen
God, Pan.
Pan's the shepherds God, but thou swearest by
Pot, what God's that?
The God of good-fellowship: well, you have wicked
Masters, that teach such little Boys as you are to swear so
young.
Alas good old great man, will nor your master swear?
I never heard him swear six sound oaths in all my life.
May hap he cannot, because hes diseasd.
Peace Mopso, I will stand toot, hoe's neither brave
Courtier, bouncing Cavalier, nor boon Companion, if he
swear not sometime: for they will swear, forswear, and
swear.
How? swear, forswear, and swear? how is that?
They'll swear at dice, forswear their debts:
And swear when they loose their labour in love.
Well, your masters have much to answer for, that
bring ye up so wickedly.
Nay my moister is damned Isle be sworn, for his ve???rye
soul burns in the fiery eye of his fair mistress.
My moister is not damned, but he is dead, for he hath
buried his joys in the bosom of his fair mistress.
My moister is neither damned nor dead, and yet is in
the case of both your masters: like a wooden shepherd,
and a sheepish wood-man, for he is lost in seeking of a lost
sheep, and spent in hunting a Doe that hee would fine
strike.
Faith and I am founderd with flinging too and fro,
with Ches-nuts, Hazel-nuts, Bullaze, and wildings, for pre???scents
from my moister to the fair shepherdess.
And I am tierd like a Calfe, with carrying a Kid
every week to the Cottage of my masters sweet Lamb???kin.
I am not tierd, but so weary I cannot go, with follow???ing
a moister, that follows his mistress, that follows her
shadow, that follows the sun, that follows his course.
That follows the colt, that followed the mare, the
man rode on to Middleton: shall I speak a wise word?
Do and wee will burn our caps.
Are not we fools?
Is that a wise word?
Give me leave: are not we fools to wear our young
feet to old stumps, when there dwells a cunning man in a
Cave hereby, who for a bunch of roots, a bag of nuts, or
a bushel of crabs, will tell vs, where thou shalt find thy my???ster,
and which of our masters shall win the wenches favour?
Bring me to him Fresco, Isle give him all the points at
my hose, to point me right to my moister.
A bottle of whey shall be his meed, if he save me la???bore
for posting with presents.
Here he comes, offend him not Ioculo,
For fear he turn thee to a Jack an Apes.
And thee to an Owl.
And thee to a Wood-cocke.
A Wood-cocke, an Owl, and an Ape?
A long bill, a broad face, and no tail?
Kiss it Mopso, and be quiet, Isle salute him civilly.
Good speed good man.
Welcome bad boy.
He speaks to thee Ioculo.
Meaning thee Fresco.
I speak, and mean not him, nor him, nor thee,
But speaking so, I speak and mean, all three.
If ye be good at Rimes and Riddles old man, expound
me this.
These two serve two, those two serve one,
Assoyle me this, and I am gone.
You three serve three, those three do seek to one,
One shall her find, he comes, and she is gone.
This is a wise answer: her going caused his coming,
For if she had ne'er gone he had ne'er come.
Good moister wizard, leave these murlemewes, and
tel Mopso plainly, whether Gemulo my moister, that gentle
shepherd, shall win the love of the fair shepherdess his
flock keeper or not, and Isle give ye a bottle of as good
whey, as ere ye laid lips too.
And good father Fortune teller, let Fresco know,
whither Silu???o my moister that lusty Forester, shall gain that
same gay shepherdess or no? Isle promise ye nothing for your
pains, but a bag full of nuts: if I bring a crab or two in my
pocket, take them for advantage.
And gentle moister wise-man, tell Ioculo, if his noble
Moister Ascanio, that gallant Courtier, shall be found by me,
and she found by him, for whom, he hath lost his fathers fa???uour,
and his own liberty, and I my labour, and Isle give ye
thanks: for we Courtiers, neither give nor take bribes.
I take your meaning better then your speech,
And I will grant the thing you doo beseech:
But for the tears of Lovers be no toys,
Isle tell their chance in parables to Boys.
In what ye will, lets hear our masters luck.
Thy masters Doe, shall turn unto a Buck.
Thy masters Eawe, be changed to a Ram,
Thy moister seeks a maid, and finds a man.
Yet for his labour shall he gain his mead,
The other two shall sigh, to see him speed.
Then my moister shall not win the shepherdess?
No: hast thee home, and bid him right his wrong,
The shepherdess will leave his flock ere long.
Isle run to warn my master of that.
My moister wood-man, takes but wooden pains
to no purpose I think, what say ye, shall he speed?
No: tell him so, and bid him tend his Dear:
And cease to woe, he shall not wed this year.
I am not sorry for it, farewell Ioculo.
I may go with thee, for I shall speed even so too, by
staying behind.
Better my Boy, thou shalt thy moister find,
And he shall find the party he requires:
And yet not find the sum of his desires.
Keep on that way, thy moister walks before,
Whom when thou find, loose him good Boy no more.
Shall then my travel ever endless prove?
That I can hear no tidings of my Love?
In neither desert, grove, nor shady wood,
Nor obscure thicket, where my foot hath trod?
But every plough-man, and rude shepherd swain,
Doth still reply unto my greater pain?
Some Satire then, or Goddess of this place,
Some water Nymph, vouchsafe me so much grace
As by some view, some sign, or other shoe,
I may have knowledge if she live or no.
No.
Then my poor hart is buried too in wo:
Record it once more, if the truth be so?
So.
How, that Eurymine is dead, or lives?
Lives.
Now gentle Goddess thou redeem my soul
From death to life: Oh tell me quickly where?
Where?
In some remote far region, or else near?
Near.
Oh what conceals her from my thirsty eyes?
Is it restraint? or some unknown disguise?
Disguise.
Let me be hanged my Lord, but all is lies.
Lies.
True, we are both persuaded thou doest lye.
Thou doest lye.
Who I?
Who I?
I thou.
I thou.
Thou dare not come and say so to my face.
Thy face.
Isle make you then for ever prating more.
More.
Will ye prate more? Isle see that presently.
Stay Ioculo, it is the Echo Boy,
That mocks our grief, and laughs at our annoy.
Hard by this grove there is a goodly plain
Betwixt two hills, still fresh with drops of rain:
Where never spreading Oak nor Poplar grew,
Might hinder the prospect or other view,
But all the country that about it lies,
Presents it self unto our mortal eyes:
Save that upon each hill, by levy trees,
The Sun at highest, his scorching heat may leese.
There languishing my self I will betake,
As heaven shall please, and only for her sake.
Stay moister, I have spied the fellow now, that mocked
vs all this while: see where he sits.
The very shape my Vision told me off,
That I should meet with as I strayd this way.
What lines he draws? best go not over far.
Let me alone, thou doest but trouble me.
You'll trouble vs all anon, ye shall see.
God speed fair Sir.
My Lord doo ye not mark?
How the sky thickens, and begins to dark?
Health to ye Sir.
Nay then God be our speed.
Forgive me Sir, I saw ye not indeed.
Pardon me rather, for molesting you.
Such another face I never knew.
Thus studious I am wont to pass the time,
By true proportion, of each line from line.
Oh now I see he was learning to spell,
Theres A. B. C. in midst of his table.
Tel me I pray ye sir, may I be bold to crave
The cause of your abode within this Cave?
To tell you that in this extreme distress,
Were but a tale of Fortunes fickleness.
Sometime I was a Prince of Lesbos Isle,
And lived beloved, whilst my good stars did smile:
But clouded once with this worlds bitter cross,
My joy to grife, my gain converts to loss.
Forward I pray ye, faint not in your tale.
It will not all be worth a cup of Ale.
A short discourse of that which is too long
How ever pleasing, can never seem but wrong:
Yet would my tragic story fit the stage,
Pleasant in youth, but wretched in mine age.
Blind Fortune setting up and pulling down,
A bust by those my self raised to renown:
But yt which wrings me near, and wounds my hart,
Is a false brothers base unthankful part.
A small offence compared with my disease,
No doubt ingratitude in time may cease
And be forgot: my grief out-liues all hours:
Raining on my head, continual haplesse showers.
You sing of yours, and I of mine relate:
To every one, seems worst his own estate.
But to proceed, exiled thus by spite,
Both country I forgo, and brothers sight:
And coming hither where I thought to live,
Yet here I cannot but lament and grieve.
Some comfort yet in this there doth remain:
That you have found a partner in your pain.
How are your sorrows subject, let me hear?
More overthrown, and deeper in despair
Than is the manner of your heavy smart,
My cureless grief, doth ranckle at my hart.
And in a word, to hear the sum of all,
I love, and am beloved: but there-withall
The sweetness of that banquet must forgo,
Whose pleasant taste is changed with bitter wo.
A conflict, but to try your noble mind,
As common unto youth, as rain to wind.
But hence it it that doth me treble wrong,
Expected good, that is forborne so long:
Doth loose the virtue which the use would prove.
Are you then sir, despised of your Love?
No, but deprived of her company.
And for my careless negligence therein:
Am bound to doo this penance for my sin.
That if I never find where she remains,
I vow a year shall be my end of pains.
Was she then lost within this Forest here?
Lost or forlorn, to me she was right dear.
And this is certain, unto him that could
The place where she abides to me unfold:
For ever I would vow my self his friend,
Never revolting till my life did end.
And therefore sir, (as well I know your skill)
If you will give me physic for this ill,
And show me if Eurymine do live,
It were a recompense for all my pain,
And I should think my joys were full again.
They know the want of health that have been sick,
My self sometime acquainted with the like,
Do learn in duty of a kind regard,
To pity him whose hap hath been so hard.
How long I pray ye hath she absent been?
Three days it is since that my Love was seen.
Heir's learning for the nonce, that stands on joints:
For all his cunning, isle scarce give two points.
Mercurio regnante virum, subsequent Luna,
Faeminum designate.
Nay and you go to latin, then tic sure, my moister shall
find her, if he could tell when.
I cannot tell what reason it should bee,
But love and reason here doo disagree.
By proof of learned principles I find,
The manner of your loue's against all kind.
And not to feed ye with uncertain joy,
Whom you affect so much, is but a Boy.
A Riddle for my life, some Antic Jest???
Did I not tell ye what his cunning was?
I love a Boy?
Mine Art doth tell me so.
Add not a fresh increase unto my woe.
I dare avouch what lately I have said,
The love that troubles you, is for no maid.
As well I might be said to touch the sky,
Or dark the horizon with tapestry:
Or walk upon the waters of the sea,
As to be haunted with such lunacy.
If it be false, mine Art I will defy.
Amazed with grief, my love is then transformed.
Moister be contented, this is leap year.
Women wear breeches, petticoats are dear.
And thats his meaning, on my life it is.
Oh God, and shall my torments never cease?
Repress the fury of your troubled mind:
Walk here a while, your Lady you may find.
A Lady and a Boy, this hangs well together:
Like snow in harvest, sun-shine and foul weather.
Since hope of help my froward stars deny,
Come sweetest death, and end my misery.
He left his country, I my shape have lost,
Dear is the love, that hath so dearly cost.
Yet can I boast, though Phoebus were unjust
This shift did serve, to bar him from his lust.
But who are these alone? I cannot choose
But blush for shame, that any one should see,
Eurymine in this disguise to bee.
It is, it is not my love, Eurymine.
Hark some one hallows: gentlemen adieu,
In this at???re I dare not stay their view.
My love, my joy, my life,
By eye, by face, by tongue, it should be she.
Oh I, it was my love, Isle after her,
And though she pass the Eagle in her flight,
Isle never rest, till I have gained her sight.
Love carries him, and so retains his mind,
That he forgets how I am left behind:
Yet will I follow softly, as I can.
In hope to see the fortune of the man.
Nay let them go a Gods name, one by one,
With my heart I am glad to be alone.
Here is old transforming, would with all his Art,
He could transform this tree into a tart.
See then if I would flinch from hence or no:
But for it is not so, I needs must go.
Is it a bargain Gemulo, or not?
Thou never knew me break my word I wot,
Nor will I now, betide me bale or blis.
Nor I break mine, and here her cottage is:
Isle call her forth.
Will Siluio be so rude?
Never shall we betwixt our selves conclude
Our controversy, for we over wean.
Not I, but thou, for though thou iet'st in greene,
As fresh as Meadow in a morn of May,
And scorn the shepherd, for he goes in gray.
But Forester, believe it as thy Creed,
My mistress minds my person, not my weed.
So it was I thought, because she tends thy sheep
Thou think in love of thee she takes keep:
That is as townish damsels send the hand,
But send the heart to him a loose doth stand.
So deals Eurymine with Siluto.
Alb she look more blithe on Gemulo,
Her heart is in the dial of her eye,
That points me her???.
That shall we quickly try.
Eurymine.
Erynnis stop thy throat,
Unto thy hound thou hallowst such a note:
I thought that shepherds had been mannerlesse,
But Wood-men are the ruder grooms I guess.
How should I cal her Swain, but by her name?
So Hobinoll the ploughmen, calls his dame.
Call her in Carroll from her quiet coat.
Agreed: but whether shall begin his note.
Draw cuts.
Content, the longest shall begin.
Tic mine.
Sing loud, for she is far within.
Instruct thy singing in thy Forest ways.
Shepherds know how to chant their roundelays.
Repeat our bargain, ere we sing our Song,
Least after wrangling, should our mistress wrong.
If me she choose, thou must be well content:
If thee she choose, I give the like consent.
Tic done: now Pan pipe on thy sweetest Reed,
And as I love, so let thy servant speed.
As little Lambs lift up their snowy sides,
When mounting Lark salutes the gray-eyed morn:
As from the Oaken leaves the honey glides,
Where Nightingales record upon the thorne.
So rise my thoughts.
So all my senses cheer.
When she surveys my flocks.
And she my Dear.
Eurymine.
Eurymine.
Come forth.
Come forth.
Come forth and cheer these plains.
The Wood-mans Love.
And Lady of the Swains.
Fair Forester and lovely shepherd Swain,
Your Carols call Eurymine in vain:
For she is gone, her Cottage and her sheep,
With me her brother, hath she left to keep:
And made me swear by Pan??? ere she did go,
To see them safely kept, for Gemulo.
What? hath my Love a new come Lover than???
What? hath my Mistress got another man?
This Swain will rob me of Eurymine.
This youth hath power to win Eurymine.
This strangers beauty bears away my prize.
This stranger will bewitch her with his eyes.
It is Atones.
It is Ganymede.
My blood is chill.
My heart is cold as Lead.
Fair youths, you have forgot for what ye came,
You seek your Love, shoe's gone.
The more too blame.
Not so, my sister had no will to go:
But that our parents dread command was so.
It is thy scuse, thou art not of her kin,
But as my Rival, com'??????e my Love to win.
By great Apollos sacred Deity,
That shepherdess so near is Sib to me,
As I no may (for all this world) her wed:
For she and I in one self womb were bred.
But she is gone, her flock is left to me.
The shepcoat's mine, and I will in and see???
And I.
Go both, cold comfort shall you find,
My manly shape, hath yet a women's mind:
Prone to reveal what secret she doth know,
God pardon me, I was about to show
My transformation: peace they come again.
Have ye found her?
No, we look in vain.
I told ye so.
Yet hear me, new-come Swain.
Alb thy seemly feature set no sale???
But honest truth upon thy novel tale,
Yet (for this world is full of subtlety)
We wish thee go with vs for company
Unto a Wise-man wonning in this wood,
Hight Aramanth, whose wit and skill is good:
That he may certify our mazing doubt,
How this strange chance and change hath fallen out.
I am content: have with ye, when ye will.
Even now.
He will make ye muse, if he have any skill.
Eurymine, I pray if thou be she,
Refrain thy haste, and doo not fly from me.
The time hath been my words thou would allow,
And am I grown so loathsome to thee now?
Ascanio, time hath been I must confess,
When in thy presence was my happiness:
But now the manner of my misery,
Hath changed that course, that so it cannot be.
What wrong have I contrived? what injury
To alienate thy liking so from me?
If thou be she whom sometime thou did fine,
And bear not the name of friend in vain,
Let not thy borrowed guise of altered kind,
Alter the wonted liking of thy mind:
But though in habit of a man thou goosed,
Yet be the same Eurymine thou wast.
How gladly would I be thy Lady still,
If earnest vows might answer to my will?
And is thy fancy altered with thy guise?
My kind, but not my mind in any wise.
What though thy habit differ from thy kind:
Thou majesty retain thy wonted loving mind.
And so I doo.
Then why art thou so strange?
Or wherefore doth thy plighted fancy change?
Ascanio, my heart doth honour thee.
And yet continue still so strange to me?
Not strange, so far as kind will give me leave.
Unkind that kind, that kindness doth bereave:
Thou say thou love me.
As a friend his friend:
And so I vow to love thee to the end.
I wreak not of such love, love me but so
As fair Eurymine loved Ascanio.
That loue's denied unto my present kind.
In kindly shows, unkind I doo thee find:
I see thou art as constant as the wind.
Doth kind allow a man to love a man?
Why art not thou Eurymine?
I am.
Eurymine my Love?
The very same.
And wast not thou a woman then?
Most true.
And art thou changed from a woman now?
Too true.
These tales my mind perplex: thou art Eurymine.
In name, but not in sex.
What then?
A man.
In guise thou art I see.
The guise thou see, doth with my kind agree.
Before thy flight thou wast a woman tho.
True Ascanio.
And since art thou a man?
Too true dear friend.
Then have I lost a wife.
But found a friend, whose dearest blood and life,
Shall be as ready as thine own for thee:
In place of wife, such friend thou hast of me.
I here they are: moister well ouertane.
I thought we two should never meet again:
You went so fast, that I to follow ye,
Slipped over hedge and ditch, and many a tall tree.
Well said my Boy, thou know not how to lie.
To lye Sir? how say you was it not so?
You were at my heals, though far off, ye know:
For moister, not to counterfeit with ye now,
Hoe's as good a footman as a shackeld sow.
Good Sir you're welcome, sirrha hold your prate.
What speed in that I told to you of late?
Both good and bad, as doth the sequel prove,
For (wretched) I have found, and lost my Love.
If that be lost which I can ne'er enjoy.
Faith Mistress you're too blame to be so coy.
The day hath been, but what is that to me:
When more familiar with a man you'd bee.
I told ye you should find a man of her:
Or else my rule did very strangely err.
Father, the trial of your skill I find,
My Loue's transformed into another kind:
And so I find, and yet have lost my Love.
Ye cannot tell, take her aside and prove.
But sweet Eurymine make some report
Why thou departed from my fathers Court?
And how this strange mishap to thee befell,
Let me entreat thou would the process tell.
To show how I arrived in this ground,
Were but renewing of an ancient wound:
Another time that office isle fulfil,
Let it suffice, I came against my will.
And wandering here about this Forest side,
It was my chance of Phoebus to be spied.
Whose love because I chastely did withstand,
He thought to offer me a violent hand.
But for a present shift to shun his rape,
I wished my self transformed into this shape:
Which he performed (God knows) against his will:
And I since then, have wayld my fortune still.
Not for misliking ought I find in me,
But for thy sake, whose wife I meant to bee.
Thus have you heard our woeful destiny,
Which I in heart lament, and so doth she.
The fittest remedy that I can find,
Is this, to ease the torment of your mind.
Persuade your selves that great Apollo can,
As easily make a woman of a man,
As contrariwise he made a man of her.
I think no less.
Then humble suite prefer
To him: perhaps your prayers may attain,
To have her turned into her form again.
But Phoebus such disdain to me doth bear,
As hardly we shall win his grant I fear.
Then in these verdant fields al richly did,
With natures gifts, and Floras painted pride:
There is a goodly spring whose crystal streams
Beset with myrtles, keep back Phoebus beams:
There in rich seats all wrought of Ivory,
The Graces sit, listening the melody:
The warbling Birds doo from their pretty bills
Unite in concord, as the brooke distills.
Whose gentle murmur with his buzzing notes,
Is as a base unto their hollow throats.
Garlands beside they wear upon their brows,
Made of all sorts of flowers earth allows:
From whence such fragrant sweet perfumes arise,
As you would swear that place is Paradise.
To them let vs repair with humble hart,
And meekly show the manner of your smart:
So gracious are they in Apollos eyes,
As their entreaty quickly may suffice.
In your behalf, Isle tell them of your states,
And crave their aides, to stand your advocates.
For ever you shall bind vs to you than.
Come go with me: Isle doo the best I can.
Is not this hard luck to wander so long,
And in the end to find his wife marked wrong.
A proper jest as ever I heard tell,
In sooth, me thinks the breech becomes her well:
And might it not make their husbands fear then,
Wold all the wives in our town might wear them.
Tell me youth, art a stranger here or no?
Is your commission sir, to examine me so?
What is it thou? now by my troth well met.
By your leave, it's well overtaken yet.
I little thought I should a found thee here.
Perhaps so sir.
I prithee speak, what cheer?
What cheer can here be hopte for in these woods?
Except trees, stones, briars, bushes, or buds?
My meaning is, I fine would hear thee say,
How thou doest man, why thou take this another way.
Why then sir, I doo as well as I may.
And to persuade ye, that welcome ye bee,
Wilt please ye sir, to eat a crab with me?
Believe me Ioculo, reasonable hard cheer.
Philander, tic the best we can get here.
But when return ye to the Court again?
Shortly, now I have found thee.
To requite your pain,
Shall I entreat you bear a present from me?
To whom?
To the Duke.
What shall it be?
Because Venson so convenient doth not fall,
A peck of Acorns to make merry withal.
What meanest thou by that?
By my troth sir as ye see,
Acorns are good enough for such as hee.
I wish his honour well, and to doo him good:
Would he had eaten all the Acorns in th'wood.
Good words Ioculo, of your Lord &amp; mine.
As may agree with such a churlish swine.
How dooes his honour?
Indifferently well.
I wish him better.
How?
Vice-gerent in hell.
Doest thou wish so, for ought that he hath done?
I for the love he bears unto his son.
Hes grown of late, as fatherly and mild,
As ever father was unto his child:
And sent me forth to search the coast about,
If so my hap might be to find him out.
And if Eurymine alive remain,
To bring them both unto the Court again.
Where is thy moister?
Walking about the ground.
Oh that his Love Eurymine were found.
Why so she is, come follow me and see.
Isle bring ye strait where they remaining bee.
Cease your contention for Eurymine.
Nor words, nor vows, can help her misery:
But he it is that did her first transform,
Must calm the gloomy rigour of this storm:
Great Phoebus, whose Palace we are near,
Salute him then in his celestial sphere:
That with the notes of cheerful harmony,
He may be moved to show his Deity.
But wheres Eurymine, have we lost her sight?
Poor soul, within a cave, with fear affright
She sits??? to shun Apollos angry view,
Until she see what of our prayers ensue:
If we can reconcile his love or no,
Or that she must continue in her woe.
Once have we tried Ascanio, for thy sake
And once again we will his power awake:
Not doubting but as he is of heavenly race,
At length he will take pity on her case.
Sing therefore, and each party from his heart,
In this our music, bear a cheerful part.
All hail fair Phoebus, in thy purple throne,
Vouchsafe the regarding of our deep moan.
Hide not, oh hide not, thy comfortable face,
But pity, but pity, a virgins poor case.
Illustrate beauty, Crystal heavens eye,
Once more we do entreat thy clemency:
That as thou art the power of vs all,
Thou would redeem Eurymine from thrall.
Grant gentle God, grant this our small request,
And if ability in vs do rest:
Whereby we ever may deserve the same,
It shall be seen, we reverence Phoebus name.
You sacred sisters of fair Hellion,
On whom my favours evermore have shone,
In this you must have patience with my vow,
I cannot grant what you aspire unto.
Nor was it my fault, she was transformed so,
But her own fond desire, as ye well know.
We told her too, before her vow was past,
That cold repentance would ensue at last.
And sith her self did wish the shape of man,
She caused the abuse, digest it how she can.
Alas, if unto her you be so hard,
Yet of Ascanio have some more regard,
And let him not endure such endless wrong,
That hath pursued her constant love so long.
Great God, the grievous travels I have past,
In restless search, to find her out at last:
My plaints my toils, in lieu of my annoy,
Have well deserved my Lady to enjoy.
Penance too much I have sustained before:
Oh Phoebus, plague me not with any more.
Nor be thou so extreme, now at the worst
To make my torments greater than at the first???
My Fathers late displeasure is forgot,
And theres no let, nor any churlish blot
To interrupt our joys from being complete,
But only thy good favour to entreat:
In thy great grace it lies to make my state
Most happy now, or most unfortunate.
Heavenly Apollo, on our knees I pray,
Vouchsafe thy great displeasure to allay.
What honour to thy Godhood will arise,
To plague a silly Lady in this wise?
Beside, it is a stain unto thy Deity,
To yield thine own desires the sovereignty:
Then show some grace unto a woeful Dame,
And in these groves, our tongues shall sound thy fame.
Arise dear Nourses of divinest skill,
You sacred Muses of Pernassus hill:
Phoebus is conquered by your dear respect,
And will no longer clemency neglect.
You have not sud nor praide to me in vain:
I grant your wills, she is a maid again.
Thy praise shall never die whilst I do live.
Nor will we slack perpetual thanks to give.
Thalia, near the Cave where she remains
The Fairies keep, request them of their pains,
And in my name, bid them forthwith provide,
From that dark place, to be the Ladies guide.
And in the bounty of their liberal mind,
To give her clothes according to her kind.
I go divine Apollo.
Haste again.
No time too swift, to ease a Lovers pain.
Most sacred Phoebus, endless thanks to thee,
That doest vouchsafe so much to pity me.
And aged father, for your kindness shown,
Imagine not your friendship ill bestowne.
The earth shall sooner vanish and decay,
Than I will prove unthankful any way.
It is sufficient recompense to me,
If that my silly help have pleasured ye.
If you enjoy your Love and hearts desire,
It is enough: nor doo I more require.
Grave Aramanthus, now I see thy face
I call to mind, how tedious a long space
Thou hast frequented these sad deserts here,
Thy time employed, in heedful mind I bear:
The patient sufferance of thy former wrong,
Thy poor estate, and sharpe exile so long,
The honourable port thou bor'st sometime,
Till wronged thou wast, with undeserved crime
By them whom thou to honour did advance,
The memory of which thy heavy chance,
Provokes my mind to take remorse on thee,
Father henceforth, my client shalt thou bee:
And pass the remnant of thy fleeting time,
With Laurel wreath, amongst the Muses nine.
And when thy age hath given place to fate,
Thou shalt exchange thy former mortal state:
And after death, a palm of fame shalt wear,
Amongst the rest that live in honour here.
And lastly know, that fair Eurymine
Redeemed now from former misery
Thy daughter is, whom I for that intent
Did hide from thee, in this thy banishment:
That so she might the greater scourge sustain,
In putting Phoebus to so great a pain.
But freely now, enjoy each others sight:
No more Eurymine: abandon quite
That borrowed name, as Atlanta, she is called,
And here she woman, in her right shape instalde.
Is then my Love derived of noble race?
No more of that, but mutually embrace.
Lives my Atlanta, whom the rough seas wave
I thought had brought unto a timeless grave?
Look not so strange, it is thy fathers voice.
And this thy Love: Atlanta now rejoice.
As in another world of greater blis
My daunted spirits doo stand amazed at this.
So great a tide of comfort overflows,
As what to say, my faltering tongue scarce knows:
But only this, imperfect though it bee,
Immortal thanks great Phoebus unto thee.
Well lady, you are retransformed now,
But I am sure you did repent your vow.
Bright Lamp of glory, pardon my rashness past???
The penance was your own, though I did fast???
Behold dear Love, to make your joys abound,
Yonder Philander comes.
Oh sir, well found.
But most especially it glads my mind,
To see my mistress restored to kind.
My Lord &amp; Madam, to requite your pain,
Telemachus hath sent for you again.
All former quarrels now are trodden down,
And he doth smile, that heretofore did frown.
Thanks kind Philander, for thy friendly news
Like Iunos balm, that our lifes blood renews.
But Lady, first ere you your journey take,
Vouchsafe at my request, one grant to make.
Most willingly.
The matter is but small.
To wear a branch of Laurel in your Caull
For Phoebus sake, least else I be forgot,
And think upon me, when you see me not.
Here while I live a solemn oath I make,
To love the Laurel for Apollos sake.
Our suite is dashed, we may depart I see.
Nay Gemulo and Siluio, contented bee:
This night let me entreat ye you will take,
Such cheer as I and these poor Dames can make.
To morrow morn weal bring you on your way.
Your Godhood shall command vs all to stay.
Then Ladies gratulate this happy chance,
With some delightful tune and pleasant dance.
Mean space, upon his Harp will Phoebus play,
So both of them may boast another day
And make report, that when their wedding chance it,
Phoebus gave music, and the Muses danced.
Since painful sorrows date hath end,
And time hath coupled friend with friend:
Rejoice we all, rejoice and sing,
Let all these groaues of Phoebus ring.
Hope having won, despair is vanished:
Pleasure revives, and care is banished.
Then trip we all this Roundelay,
And still be mindful of the Bay.

THE ravish dank of clumsy winter ramps
The fluent summers vain: and drizzling sleet
Chilleth the wan bleak cheek of the numd earth,
Whilst snarling gusts nibble the iuyceles leaves,
From the nak't shuddering branch; and pills the skin
From off the soft and delicate aspects.
O, now, me thinks, a sullen tragic Scene
Would suite the time, with pleasing congruence.
May we be happy in our weak deuoyer,
And all part pleased in most wished content:
But swear of Hercules can ne'er beget
So blessed an issue. Therefore we proclaim,
If any spirit breathes within this round,
Incapable of weighty passion
(As from his birth, being hugged in the arms,
And nuzzled twixt the breasts of happiness)
Who winks, and shuts his apprehension up
From common sense of what men were, and are,
Who would not know what men must be; let such
Hurry amain from our black visaged shows:
We shall affright their eyes. But if a breast,
Nailed to the earth with grief: if any heart
Pierced through with anguish, pant within this ring:
If there be any blood, whose heate is choked
And stifled with true sense of misery:
If ought of these strains fill this consort up,
Th'arriue most welcome. O that our power
Could lackey, or keep wing with our desires;
That with unused poise of stile and sense,
We might weigh massy in judicious scale.
Yet heere's the prop that doth support our hopes;
When our Scenes falter, or invention halts▪
Your favour will give crutches to our faults. 
HO, Gasper Strotzo, bind Feliches trunk
Unto the panting side of Mellida. 
Tic yet dead night, yet al the earth is cloucht
In the dull leaden hand of snoring sleep:
No breath disturbs the quiet of the ayre.
No spirit moves upon the breast of earth,
Save howling dogs, nightcrowes, &amp; screeching owls,
Save meager ghosts, Piero, and black thoughts.
One, two▪ Lord, in two hours what a topless mount
Of vnpeer'd mischief, have these hands cast up!
I can scarce coop triumphing vengeance up,
From bursting forth in braggart passion.
My Lord, tic firmly said that
Andrugio sleeps in peace: this brain hath choked
The organ of his breast. Foolish hangs,
But as a bait upon the line of death,
To tice on mischief. I am great in blood,
Vnequald in revenge. You horrid scouts,
That sentinel answered night, give load applause
From your large palms. First know, my hart was raised
Unto Andrugios life, upon this ground:
Duke, tic reported
We both were rivals in our May of blood,
Unto Maria, 〈◊〉 Ferraras heir.
He wan the Lady, to my honours death:
And from her sweets, cropped this Antonio:
For which, I burnt in inward sweltring hate,
And festered rankling malice in my breast,
Till I might belke revenge upon his eyes:
And now (ô blessed now) tic done. Hell, night,
Give load applause to my hypocrisy.
When his bright valour even dazzled sense,
In offering his own head, public reproach
Had blurt my name. Speak Strotzo, had it not?
If then I had
It had, so please
What had so please? Unseasoned Sycophant,
Piero Sforza is no numbed Lord,
Senseless of all true touch; stroke not the head
Of infant speech, till it be fully borne▪
Go to.
How now? Foot, Isle not smother your speech.
Nay, right thine eyes: it was but a little spline:
(Huge plunge!
Sin's grown a slave, and must observe slight evils.
Huge villains are enforced to claw all devils.)
Pish, sweet thy thoughts, and give me
Stroke not the head of infant speech? Go to?
Nay, calm this storm. I ever held thy breast
More secret, and more firm in league of blood,
Then to be struck in heate with each-slight puff.
Give me thy ears; Huge infamy
Press down my honour; if even then, when
His fresh act of prowess bloomed out full,
I had tan vengeance on his hated head
Why it had
Could I avoid to give a seeming grant
Unto fruition of Antonios love?
No.
And did thou ever see, a Iudas kiss,
With a more covert touch of flooring hate?
No.
And having clipped them with pretence of love,
Have I not crushed them with a cruel wring?
Yes.
Say, faith, did thou ere hear, or read, or see
Such happy vengeance, unsuspected death?
That I should drop strong poison in the boawle,
Which I my self caroused unto his health,
And future fortune of our unity,
That it should work even in the hushed of night,
And strangle him on sudden; that fair show
Of death, for the excessive joy of his fate,
Might choke the murder? Ha Strotzo, is it not rare?
Nay, but weigh it. Then Foolish stabbed
(Whose sinking thought frighted my conscious hart)
And laid by Mellida, to stop the match,
And hale on mischief. This all in one night?
Is it to be equalled think thou? O, I could eat
Thy fumbling throat, for thy legedd censure. Foot,
Is it not rare?
Yes.
No? yes? nothing but no, and yes, dull lump?
Can thou not honey me with fluent speech,
And even adore my topless villainy?
Will I not blast my own blood for revenge?
Must not thou straight be perjured for revenge▪
And yet no creature dream tic my revenge.
Will I not turn a glorious bridal morn
Unto a Stygian night? Yet nought but no, and yes?
I would have told you, if the incubus,
That rides your bosom, would have patience:
It is reported, that in private state,
Maria, Genous Duchess, makes to Court,
Longing to see him, whom she ne'er shall see,
Her Lord Andrugio. Belike she hath received
The news of reconciliation:
Reconciliation with a death?
Poor Lady shall but find poor comfort in it.
O, let me swoon for joy. By heaven, I think
I ha said my prayers, within this month at least;
I am so boundless happy. Doth she come?
By this warm reeking gore, Isle marry her.
Look I not now like an inamorata?
Poison the father, butcher the son, &amp; marry the mo∣there; ha!
Strotzo, to bed: snort in securest sleep:
For see, the dapple gray coursers of the morn
Beat up the light with their bright silver hooves,
And chase it through the sky. To bed, to bed.
This morn my vengeance shall be amply fed. 
STAY gentle Luceo, and vouchsafe thy hand.
O, Madam
Nay, pree thee give me leave to say, vouchsafe,
Submiss entreats beseem my humble fate.
Here let vs sit. O Luceo, fortunes gilt
Is rubbed quite off from my slight tin-foild state,
And poor Maria must appear vngrac't
Of the bright fulgor of glossed majesty.
Cheer up your spirits Madam; fairer chance
Then that which courts your presence instantly,
Can not be formed by the quick mould of thought.
Art thou assured the dukes are reconciled▪
Shall my wombs honour wed fair Mellida?
Will heaven at length grant harbour to my head?
Shall I once more clip my Andrugio?
And wreath my arms about Antonio's neck?
Or is glib rumour grown a parasite,
Holding a false glass to my sorrows eyes,
Making the wrinkled front of grief seem fair,
Though tic much rivaled with abortive care.
Most virtuous Princess, banish straggling fear;
Keep league with comfort. For these eyes beheld
The Dukes united; you faint glimmering light
Ne'er peeped through the crannies of the east,
Since I beheld them drink a sound carouse,
In sparkling Bacchus,
Unto each others health;
Your son assured to beauteous Mellida:
And all clouds cleared of threatening discontent.
What age is morning of?
I think about five.
Nutriche, Nutriche.
Beshrow your fingers marry, you have disturbed the pleasure of the finest dream. O God, I was even coming to it law▪ O Iesu, it was coming of the swe∣test. Isle tell you now, me thought I was married, and me thought I spent (O Lord why did you wake me) and me thought I spent three spur Roials on the Fid∣lers for striking up a fresh hornepipe. Saint Vrsula, I was even going to bed, &amp; you, me thought, my hus∣band was even putting out the tapers, when you, Lord
I shall never have such a dream come upon me, as long as
Peace idle creature, peace.
When will the Court rise?
Madam, it were best you took some lodging up,
And lay in private till the soil of grief
Were cleared your cheek, and new burnished lustre
Clothed your presence, before you saw the Dukes,
And entered, among the proud Venetian States.
No Lucio, my dear Lord's wise, and knows
That tinsel glitter, or rich purfled robes,
Curled hairs, hung full of sparkling Carcanets,
Are not the true adornements of a wife.
So long as wives are faithful, modest, chaste,
Wise Lords affect them. Virtue doth not waste,
With each slight flame of crackling vanity.
A modest eye forces affection,
Whilst outward gains light looks but entice.
Fairer then Natures fair is foulest vice.
She that loves Art, to get her cheek more lovers,
Much outward gauds slight inward grace discovers.
I care not to seem fair, but to my Lord.
Those that strive most to please most strangers sight,
Folly may judge most fair, wisdom most light.
But hark, soft musique gently moos the ayre:
I think the bridegroom's up. Lucio, stand close.
O, now Marya, challenge grief to stay
Thy joys encounter. Look Lucio, tic clear day.
DARKNESS is fled: look, infant morn hath drawn
Bright silver curtains, about the couch of night:
And now Auroras horse trots azure rings,
Breathing fair light about the firmament,
Stand, what's that?
And if a horned devil should burst forth,
I would pass on him with a mortal stock.
Oh, a horned devil would prove ominous,
Unto a bridegrooms eyes,
A horned devil? good, good: ha ha ha, very good.
Good tand prince laugh not. By the joys of love,
When thou dost girne, thy rusty face doth look
Like the head of a roasted rabbit: fie vpont.
By my troth, me thinks his nose is just colour de Roy
I tel thee fool, my nose will abide no jest.
No in truth, I doe not jest, I speak truth. Truth is the touchstone of all things: and if your nose will not abide the truth, your nose will not abide the touch: and if your nose will not abide the touch, your nose is a copper nose, and must be nailed up for a slip.
I scorn to retort the obtuse jest of a fool.
Retort and obtuse, good words, very good words.
Young Prince, look sprightly; fie, a bridegroom sad!
In truth, if he were retort, and obtuse, no quest∣on, hee would bee merry: but and please my Genius, I will be most retort and obtuse ere night. Isle tell you, what Isle bear soon at night in my shield, for my device.
What, good Balurdo?
O, doe me right: sir Gefferey Balurdo: sir, sir, as long as ye live, sir.
What, good sir Gefferey Balurdo?
Marry forsooth, Isle carry for my device, my grand fathers great stone-hors, flinging up his head, &amp; ierking out his left leg. The word; Wighy Purt. As I am a true knight, will it not bee most retort and obtuse, ha?
Blow hence these faplesse jests. I tell you bloods
My spirit's heavy, and the juice of life
Creeps slowly through my stifned arteries.
Last sleep, my sense was stooped in horrid dreams:
Three parrs of night were swallowed in the gulf
Of ravenous time, when to my slumbering powers,
Two meager ghosts made apparition.
The on's breast seemed fresh paunched with bleeding wounds:
Whose bubbling gore sprang in frighted eyes.
The other ghost assumed my fathers shape:
Both cried Revenge. At which my trembling joints
(Iced quite over with a froz'd cold sweat)
Leaped forth the sheets. Three times I gasp't at shades:
And thrice, deluded by erroneous sense,
I forced my thoughts make stand; when lo, I op't
A large bay window, through which the night
Struck terror to my soul. The verge of heaven
Was ringd with flames, and all the upper vault
Thick laced with flakes of fire; in midst whereof
A blazing Comet shot his threatening train
Just on my face. Viewing these prodigies,
I bowed my naked knee, and pierced the star,
With an outfacing eye; pronouncing thus;
Deus imperat astris. At which, my nose straight bled:
Then doubled I my word, so slunk to bed.
Verily, sir Gefferey had a monstrous strange dream the last night. For me thought I dreamt I was asleep, and me thought the ground yaun'd and belkt up the abominable ghost of a misshapen Simile, with two ugly Pages; the one called master, even as going be∣fore; and the other Mounser, even so following after; whilst Signior Simile stalked most prodigiously in the midst. At which I betrayed the fearfulness of my nature: and being ready to forsake the fortress of my wit, start up, called for a clean shirt, eat a mess of broth, and with that I awaked.
I pree thee peace. I tell you gentlemen,
The frightful shades of night yet shake my brain:
My gellied blood's not thawed: the sulphur damps,
That flow in winged lightning about my couch,
Yet stick within my sense, my soul is great,
In expectation of dire prodigies.
Tut, my young Prince, let not thy fortunes see
Their Lord a coward. He, thats nobly borne,
Abhors to fear. Base feare's the brand of slaves.
Hee that observes, pursues, slinks back for fright,
Was never cast in mould of noble spright.
Tush, there's a fun will straight exhale these damps
Of chilling fear. Come, shal's salute the bride?
I pree the mix thy breath with his:
Sing one of Signior Renaldo's airs,
To rouse the slumbering bride from gluttoning,
In surfeit of superfluous sleep. Good Signior, sing.
What means this silence and vnmooued calm!
Boy, wind thy Cornet: force the leaden gates
Of lasy sleep fly open, with thy breath,
My Mellida not up? not stirring yet? vmh.
That voice, should be my sons Antonio's. Antonio?
Here, who calls? here stands Antonio.
Sweet son.
Dear mother.
Fair honour of a chaste and loyal bed,
Thy fathers beauty, thy sad mothers love,
Were I as powerful as the voice of fate,
Felicity complete should sweet thy state:
But all the blessings, that a poor banished wretch,
Can power upon thy head, take gentle son:
Live, gracious youth, to close thy mothers eyes,
Loved of thy parents, till their latest hour:
How cheers my Lord, thy father? O sweet boy,
Part of him thus I clip, my dear, dear joy.
Madam, last night I kissed his princely hand,
And took a treasured blessing from his lips:
O mother, you arrive in Jubilee,
And firm atonement of all boisterous rage:
Pleasure, united love, protested faith,
Guard my loved father, as sworn Pensioners:
The Dukes are leagued in firmest bond of love,
And you arrive even in the Solstice,
And highest point of sun-shine happiness.
Hark Madam, how you Cornet ierketh up
His strained shrill accents, in the capering ayre;
As proud to summon up my bright cheeked love.
Now, mother, op wide expectation:
Let loose your amplest sense, to entertain
Th'impression of an object of such worth,
That life's too poor to▪
Nay leave Hyperboles.
I tel thee prince, that presence straight appears,
Of which thou can not form Hyperboles,
The trophy of triumphing excellence:
The heart of beauty, Mellida appears.
See, look, the curtain stirs, shine natures pride,
Loves vital spirit, dear Antonio's bride.
What villain bloods the window of my love?
What slave hath hung you gorie ensign up,
In flat defiance of humanity?
Awake thou fair unspotted purity.
Death's at thy window, awake bright Mellida:
Antonio calls.
WHO gives these il-befitting attributes
Of chaste, unspotted, bright, to Mellida,
He lies as load as thunder, shoe's unchaste,
Tainted, impure, black as the soul of hell.
Dog, I will make the eat thy vomit up,
Which thou hast belk't against taintlesse Mellida.
Ramm't quickly down, that it may not rise up
To imbraid my thoughts. Behold my stomack's:
Strike me quite through with the relentless edge
Of raging fury. Boy, Isle kill thy love
Pandulfe Foolish, I have stabbed thy son:
Look, yet his lifeblood reekes upon this steel.
Albert, you hangs thy friend▪ Have none of you
Courage of vengeance? Forget I am your Duke.
Think Mellida is not Pieros blood.
Imagine on slight ground, Isle blast his honour.
Suppose I saw not that incestuous slave,
Clipping the strumpet, with luxurious twines:
O, numme my sense of anguish, cast my life
In a dead sleep, whilst law cuts off yon maine,
Yon putrid ulcer of my royal blood.
Keep league with reason, gracious Sovereign.
There glow no sparks of reason in the world;
All are raked up in ashy beastliness.
The bulk of man's as dark as Erebus,
No branch of Reasons light hangs in his trunk:
There lives no reason to keep league withal.
I ha no reason to be reasonable.
Her wedding eve, linked to the noble blood
Of my most firmly reconciled friend,
And found even clingd in sensuality!
O heaven! O heaven! Were she as near my heart
As is my liver, I would rend her off.
WHITHER, O whither shall I hurl vast grief?
Here, into my breast: tic a place built wide
By fate, to give receipt to boundless woes.
O no; here throb those hearts, which I must cleave
With my keen piercing news. Andrugio's dead.
Dead?
O me most miserable.
Dead, alas, how dead? 
Foot weep, act, fine. Dead, alas, how dead?
The vast delights of his large sudden joys
Opned his powers so wide, that's native heate
So prodigally flowed, t'exterior parts,
That thinner Citadel was left vnmand,
And so surprised onsodaine by cold death.
O fatal, disastrous, cursed, dismal!
Choke breath and life▪ I breath, I live too long.
Andrugio my Lord, I come, I come.
Be cheerful Princess, help Castilio,
The Laddie's swouned, help to bear her in.
Slow comfort to huge cares, is swiftest sin.
Courage, courage sweet Lady, tic sir Gefferey Ba∣lurdo
bids you courage. Truly I am as nimble as an E∣lephant about a Lady.
Dead?
Dead.
Dead?
Why now the womb of mischief is delivered,
Of the prodigious issue of the night.
Ha, ha, ha.
My father dead, my love attained of lust:
Thats a large lye, as vast as spacious hell:
Poor guiltless Lady. O accursed lye.
What, whom, whether, which shall I first lament?
A dead father, a dishonoured wife. Stand.
Me thinks I feel the frame of nature shake.
Cracks not the joints of earth to bear my woes?
Sweet Prince, be patient.
S'lid sir, I will not in despite of thee.
Patience is slave to fools: a chain that's fixed
Only to posts, and senseless log-like dolts.
Tic reasons glory to command affects.
Lies thy cold father dead, his glossed eyes
New closed up by thy sad mothers hands?
Hast thou a love as spotless as the brow
Of clearest heaven, blurt with false defames?
Are thy moist entrails crumpled up with grief
Of parching mischiefs? Tel me, does thy hart
With punching anguish spur thy galled ribs?
Then come and let's sit and weep &amp; wreath our arms:
Isle hear thy counsel.
Take comfort
Confusion to all comfort: I defy it.
Comfort's a Parasite, a flattering Jack:
And melts resolved despair. O boundless woe,
If there be any black yet unknown grief:
If there be any horror yet unfelt,
Unthought of mischief in thy fiendlike power,
Dash it upon my miserable head.
Make me more wretch, more cursed if thou can.
O, now my fate is more than I could fear:
My woes more weighty than my soul can bear. 
Ha, ha, ha,
Why laugh you uncle? Thats my cousin, your son,
Whose breast hangs cased in his cluttered gore.
True man, true: why, wherefore should I weep?
Come sit, kind Nephew: come on: thou and I
Will talk as Chorus to this tragedy▪
Entreat the music strain their instruments,
With a slight touch whilst we. Say on fair cousin.
He was the very hope of Italy, 
The blooming honour of your drooping age.
True cousin, true. They say that men of hope are crushed:
Good are suppressed by base desertlesse clods,
That stifle gasping virtue. Look sweet youth,
How provident our quick Venetians are,
Least houes of jade should trample on my boy:
Look how they lift him up to eminence,
Heave him, above reach of flesh. Ha, ha, ha.
Uncle, this laughter ill becomes your grief.
Would have me cry, run raving up &amp; down,
For my sons loss? would have me turn rank mad,
Or wring my face with mimic action;
Stamp, curse, weep, rage, &amp; then my bosom strike?
Away tic apish action, player-like.
If hee is guiltless, why should tears be spent?
Thrice blessed soul that dies innocent.
If he is leapred with so foul a guilt,
Why should a sigh be lent, a tear be spilt?
The gripe of chance is weak, to wring a tear,
From him that knows what fortitude should bear.
Listen young blood. Tic not true valors pride,
To swagger, quarrel, swear, stamp, rave, and chide,
To stab in fume of blood, to keep load coil,
To bandy factions in domestic broils,
To dare the act of Sins, whose filth excels.
The blackest customs of blind Infidels.
No, my loved youth: he may of valour vaunt;
Whom fortunes loudest thunder can not daunt,
Whom fretful gaules of chance, sterne fortunes siege;
Makes not his reason slink, the souls fair liege,
Whose well poised action ever rests upon
Not giddy humours, but discretion.
This heart in valour even Jove out-goes:
Jove is without, but this above sense of woes:
And such a one eternity: Behold,
Good morrow son: thou bid a fig for cold.
Sound louder music: let my breath exact,
You strike sad Tones unto this dismal act.
ROT there thou cearcloth that enfolds the flesh
Of my loathed foe; molder to crūbling dust:
Oblivion choke the passage of thy fame.
Trophies of honoured birth drop quickly down:
Let nought of him, but what was vicious, live.
Though thou art dead, think not my hate is dead:
I have but newly twone my arm in the curled locks
Of snaky vengeance. Pale beetle-brow'd hate
But newly bustles up. Sweet wrong, I clap thy thoughts.
O let me hug my bosom, rub my breast,
In hope of what may hap. Andrugio rots:
Antonio lives: vmh: how long? ha, ha; how long?
Antonio packed hence, Isle his mother wed,
Then clear my daughter of supposed lust,
Wed her to Florence heir. O excellent.
Venice, Genoa, Florence, at my beck,
At Piero's nod, Balurdo, ô ho.
O, twill be rare, all unsuspected donne.
I have bin nursed in blood, and still have sucked
The steam of reeking gore. Balurdo, ho?
When my beard is on, most noble prince, when my beard is on.
Why, what dost thou with a beard?
In truth, one told me that my wit was bald, &amp; that a Meremaide was half fish, and half fish: and therefore to speak wisely, like one of your counsel, as indeed it hath pleased you to make me, not only being a fool, of your counsel, but also to make me of your counsel, being a fool; If my wit be bald, and a Mermaid be half fish and half cunger, then I must be forced to conclude the tyring man hath not glewd on my beard half fast, enough. Gods bores, it will not stick to fall off.
Dost thou know what thou hast spoken all this while?
O Lord Duke, I would be sorry of that. Many men can utter that which, no man, but themselves can conceive: but I thank a good wit, I have the gift to speak that which neither any man else, nor my self understands.
Thou art wise. He that speaks he knows not what, shall never sin against his own conscience: go to, thou
art wise.
Wise? O no. I have a little natural discretion, or so: but for wise, I am somewhat prudent: but for wise, ô Lord▪
Hold, take those keys, open the Castle vault, &amp; put in Mellida.
And put in Mellida? well, let me alone,
Bid Forobosco, and Castilio guard,
Indeere thy self Piero's intimate.
Indeere, and intimate: good, I assure you. I will indeere and intimate Mellida into the dūgeon presētly.
Will Pandulfo Foolish waite on me?
I will make him come, most retort and obtuse, to you presently. I think, sir Ieffrey talks like a counsellor. Go to, gods nooks, I think I tickle it.
Isle seem to wind you fool with kindest arm.
He that's ambitious minded, and but man,
Must have his followers beasts, dubbed slavish sots:
Whose service is obedience, and whose wit
Reaches no further then to admire their Lord,
And stare in adoration of his worth.
I love, a slave raked out of common mud
Should seem to sit in counsel with my heart.
High honoured blood's too squeamish to assent,
And lend a hand to an ignoble act▪
Poison from roses who could ere abstract?
How now Pandulfo, weeping for thy son?
NO no, Piero, weeping for my sins:
Had I bin a good father, he had bin a gracious son.
Pollution must be purged.
Why taintst thou then the ayre with stench of flesh,
And humane putrifactions noisome sent?
I pray his body. Who less boon can crave,
Than to bestow upon the dead, his grave?
Grave? why? think thou he deserves a grave,
That hath defiled the temple of
Peace, peace:
Me thinks I hear a humming murmur creep
From out his gelli'd wounds. Look on those lips,
Those now lawn pillows, on whose tender softness,
Chaste modest speech, stealing from out his breast,
Had wont to rest it self, as loath to post
From out so fair an Inn: look, look, they seem to stir,
And breath defiance to black obloquy.
Think thou thy son could suffer wrongfully?
A wise man wrongfully, but never wrong
Can take: his breast's of such well tempered proof,
It may be raced, not pierced by savage tooth
Of foaming malice: showers of darts may dark
Heavens ample brow: but not strike out a spark;
Much less pearce the Suns cheek. Such songs as these,
I often dittied till my boy did sleep:
But now I turn plain fool (alas) I weep.
Fore heaven he makes me shrug: wold a were dead:
He is a virtuous man. What has our court to doe
With virtue, in the devils name! Pandulpho, hark.
My lustful daughter dies: start not, she dies.
I pursue justice, I love sanctity,
And an undefiled temple of pure thoughts.
Shall I speak freely? Good Andrugio's dead:
And I doe fear a fetch; but (vmh) would I durst speak.
I doe mistrust; but (vmh) death: is he all, all man:
Hath he no part of mother in him, ha?
No licorish womanish inquisitiveness?
Andrugio's dead!
I, and I fear, his own unnatural blood,
To whom he gave life, hath given death for life.
How could he come on, I see false suspect
Is vicde; wrung hardly in a virtuous heart.
Well, I could give you reason for my doubts.
You are of honoured birth, my very friend.
You know how god-like tic to root out sin.
Antonio is a villain. Will you join
In oath with me, against the traitors life,
And swear, you knew, he sought his fathers death?
I loved him well, yet I love justice more:
Our friends we should affect, justice adore.
My Lord, the clapper of my mouth's not glibd
With court oil, twill not strike on both sides yet.
Tic just that subjects act commands of kings.
Command then just and honourable things.
Even so my self then will traduce his guilt.
Beware, take heed least guiltless blood be spilt.
Where only honest deeds to kings are free,
It is no empire, but a beggary.
Where more than noble deeds to kings are free,
It is no empire, but a tyranny.
Tush iuicelesse graybeard, tic immunity,
Proper to princes, that our state exacts,
Our subjects not alone to bear, but praise our acts.
O, but that prince that worthfull praise aspires,
From hearts, and not from lips, applause desires.
Pish, true praise, the brow of common men doth ring,
False, only girts the temple of a king,
He that hath strength, and's ignorant of power,
He was not made to rule, but to be ruled.
Tic praise to doe, not what we can, but should.
Hence doting Stoic: by my hope of bliss,
Isle make thee wretched.
Defiance to thy power, thou rifted Iawne.
Now, by the loved heaven, sooner thou shalt
Rince thy soul ribs from the black filth of sin,
That soots thy heart, then make me wretched. Pish,
Thou can not coupe me up. Had thou a Jail
With treble walls, like antic Babilon,
Pandulpho can get out. I tell thee Duke,
I have old Fortunatus wishing cap:
And can be where I list, even in a trice.
Isle skip from earth into the arms of heaven:
And from triumphal arch of blessedness,
Spit on thy froathy breast. Thou can not slave
Or banish me; I will be free at home,
Maugre the beard of greatness. The port holes
Of sheathed spirit are ne'er corb'd up:
But still stand open ready to discharge
Their precious shot into the shrouds of heaven▪
O torture! slave, I banish thee the town,
Thy native seat of birth.
How proud thou speak! I tell thee Duke, the blasts
Of the swollen cheeked winds, nor all the breath of kings
Can puff me out my native seat of birth.
The earth's my bodies, and the heauen's my souls
Most native place of birth, which they will keep:
Despite the menace of mortality.
Why Duke:
That's not my native place, where I was rocked.
A wise mans home is wheresoever he is wise.
Now that, from man, not from the place doth rise.
Wold I were deaf (ô plague) hence dotard wretch:
Tread not in court. All that thou hast, I seize.
His quiet's firmer then I can disease.
Go, boast unto thy flattering Sycophants;
Pandulpho's slave, Piero hath orethrowne.
Loose Fortunes rags are lost; my owne's my own.
Tic true Piero, thy vexed heart shall see,
Thou hast but tripped my slave, not conquered me.
NAY sweet be comforted, take counsel and
Alberto, peace: that grief is wanton sick,
Whose stomach can digest and brooke the diet
Of stale ill relished counsel. Pygmy cares
Can shelter under patience shield: but giant griefs
Will burst all covert.
My Lord, tic supper time.
Drink deep Alberto: eat, good Lucio:
But my pined heart shall eat on nought but woe.
My Lord, we dare not leave you thus alone.
You cannot leave Antonio alone.
The chamber of my breast is even thronged,
With firm attendance, that forswears to flinch.
I have a thing sits here; it is not grief,
Tic not despair, nor the most plague
That the most wretched are infected with:
But the most greefull, despairing, wretched,
Accursed, miserable. O, for heavens sake
Forsake me now; you see how light I am,
And yet you force me to defame my patience.
Fair gentle prince
Away, thy voice is hateful: thou dost buzz,
And beat my ears with intimations
That Mellida, that Mellida is light,
And stained with adulterous luxury:
I cannot brook't. I tell the Lucio,
Sooner will I give faith, that virtue's scant
In princes courts, will be adorned with wreath
Of choice respect, and indeerd intimate.
Sooner will I believe that friendships rain.
Will curb ambition from utility,
Then Mellida is light. Alas poor soul,
Did ere see her (good heart) hast heard her speak?
Kind, kind soul▪ Incredulity it self
Would not be so brass hearted, as suspect so modest cheeks
My Lord
Away, a selfe-one guilt doth only hatch distrust:
But a chaste thought's as far from doubt, as lust.
I entreat you leave me,
Will you endeavour to forget your grief?
I faith I will, good friend, I faith I will.
Isle come and eat with you. Alberto, see,
I am taking Physic, heir's Philosophy.
Good honest leave me, Isle drink wine anon.
Since you enforce vs, fair prince, we are gone.
Ferte fortiter: hoc est quo deum antecedatis. Ille enim ex∣tra patientiam malorum; vos supra. Contemnite dolorem: aut soluetur, aut soluet. Contemnite fortunā: nullū telū, quo feriret animum habit.
Pish, thy mother was not lately widowed,
Thy dear affied love, lately defamed,
With blemish of foul lust, when thou wrot'st thus.
Thou wrapped in furs, booking thy limbs before fierce,
Forbidst the frozē Zone to shudder. Ha, ha: tic nought,
But some bubbling of a fleam brain,
Nought else but smoke. O what dank marrish spirit,
But would be fired with impatience,
At my No more, no more: he that was never blessed,
With height of birth, fair expectation
Of mounted fortunes, knows not what it is
To be the pitied object of the world.
O, poor Antonio, thou moist sigh.
Aye me.
And curse.
Black powers.
And cry.
O heaven.
And close laments with
O me most miserable.
Woe for my dear dear son.
Woe for my dear, dear husband.
Woe for my dear dear love.
Woe for me all, close all your woes in me:
In me Antonio, ha? Where live these sounds?
I can see nothing; griefe's invisible,
And lurks in secret angles of the heart▪
Come sigh again, Antonio bears his part.
O here, here is a vent to pass my sighs.
I have surcharged the dungeon with my plaints.
Prison, and heart will burst, if void of vent▪
I, that is Phoebe, empress of the night,
That gins to mount; ô chastest deity:
If I be false to my Antonio,
If the least soil of lust smears my pure love,
Make me more wretched, make me more accursed
Then infamy, torture, death, hell and heaven
Can bound with amplest power of thought: if not,
Purge my poor heart, with defamations blot.
Purge my poor heart from defamations blot!
Poor heart, how like her virtuous self▪ she speaks.
Mellida, dear Mellida, it is Antonio:
Slink not away, tic thy Antonio.
How found you out, my Lord (alas) I know
Tic easy in this age, to find out woe.
I have a suit to you.
What is it, dear soul?
Kill me, I faith Isle wink, not stir a jot.
For God sake kill me: insooth, loved youth,
I am much injured; look, see how I creep.
I cannot wreak my wrong, but sigh and weep.
May I be cursed, but I credit thee.
To morrow I must die▪
Alas, for what?
For loving thee; tic true my sweetest breast▪
I must die falsely: so must thou, dear heart.
Nets are a knitting to entrap thy life.
Thy fathers death must make a Paradise
To my (I shame to call him) father. Tell me sweet,
Shall I die thine? dost love me still, and still?
I doe.
Then welcome heavens will.
Madam, I will not swell like a Tragedian, in for∣ced passion of affected strains.
If I had present power of ought but pitying you, I would be as ready to redress your wrongs, as to pur∣sue your love. Throngs of thoughts crowd for their passage, somewhat I will doe.
Reach me thy hand: think this is honours bent,
To live vnslau'd, to die innocent.
Let me entreat a favour, gracious love.
Be patient, see me die, good doe not weep:
Go sup, sweet chuck, drink, and securely sleep.
I faith I cannot, but Isle force my face
To palliate my sickness.
Give me thy hand. Peace on thy bosom dwell:
Thats all my woe can breath: kiss. Thus farewell.
Farewell: my heart is great of thoughts,
Stay dove:
And therefore I must speak: but what? ô Love!
By this white hand: eno more: read in these tears,
What crushing anguish thy Antonio bears.
God night good heart,
Thus heate from blood, thus souls from bodies part.
He grieves, laugh Strozzo: laugh, he weeps.
Hath he tears? ô pleasure! hath he tears?
Now doe I scourge Andrugio with steel whips
Of knotty vengeance. Strozzo, cause me straight
Some plaining ditty to augment despair.
Triumph Piero: hark, he groans, ô rare!
Behold a prostrate wretch laid on his tomb.
His Epitaph, thus; No plus ultra. Ho.
Let none out▪ woe me: mine's Herculean woe.
MAY I be more cursed then heaven can make me;
If I am not more wretched
Then man can conceive me. Sore forlorn
Orphaned, what omnipotence can make thee happy?
How now sweet son? good youth, what dost thou?
Weep, weep.
Dost nought but weep, weep?
Yes mother, I do sigh, and wring my hands,
Beat my poor breast, and wreath my tender arms.
Hark ye; Isle tel you wondrous strange, strāge news.
What my good boy, stark mad?
I am not.
Alas, is that strange news?
Strange news? why mother, is it not wondrous strange
I am not mad? I run not frantic, ha?
Knowing my fathers trunk scarce cold, your love
Is sought by him that doth pursue my life?
Seeing the beauty of creation,
Antonio's bride, pure heart, defamed, and stoad
Under the hatches of obscuring earth.
Heu quo labour, quo vote ceciderunt mea!
Good evening to the fair Antonio,
Most happy fortune, sweet succeeding time,
Rich hope: think not thy fate a bankrupt though
Vmh, the devil in his good time and tide for∣sake thee.
How now? hark ye Prince.
God be with you.
Nay, noble blood, I hope ye not suspect
Suspect, I scorn't. Here's cap &amp; leg; good night:
Thou that wants power, with dissemblance fight.
Madam, O that you could remēber to forget
I had a husband and a happy son.
Most powreful beauty, that enchanting grace
Talk not of beauty, nor enchanting grace.
My husband's dead, my son's distraught, accursed.
Come, I must vent my griefs, or heart will burst.
Shoe's gone (&amp; yet she's here) she hath left a print
Of her sweet graces fixed within my heart,
As fresh as is her face. Isle marry her.
Shoe's most fair, true, most chaste, most false: because
Most fair, tic firm Isle marry her.
MY Lord,
Ha, Strotzo, my other soul; my life,
Dear, hast thou steeled the point of thy resolve?
Wilt not turn edge in execution?
No.
Doe it with rare passion, and present thy guilt,
As if it were wrung out with thy conscience gripe.
Swear that my daughter's innocent of lust,
And that Antonio bribed thee to defame
Her maiden honour, on inveterate hate
Unto my blood; and that thy hand was feed
By his large bounty, for his fathers death.
Swear plainly that thou chok'tst Andrugio,
By his sons only egging. Rush me in
Whilst Mellida prepares her self to die:
Halter about thy neck, and with such sighs,
Laments and acclamations lyfen it,
As if impulsiue power of remorse
Isle weep.
I, I, fall on thy face and cry; why suffer you
So lewd a slave as Strotzo is to breath?
Isle beg a strangling, grow importunate
As if thy life were loathsome to thee: then I
Catch straight the cords end; and, as much incensed
With thy damned mischiefs, offer a rude hand,
As ready to gird in thy pipe of breath:
But on the sudden straight Isle stand amazed,
And fall in exclamations of thy virtues.
Applaud my agonies, and penitence.
Thy honest stomach, that could not digest
The crudities of murder: but surcharged,
Vomited'st them up in Christian piety.
Then clip me in your arms.
And call thee brother, mount thee straight to state,
Make thee of counsel; tut, tut, what not, what not?
Think ont, be confident, pursue the plot.
Look here's a troop, a true rogues lips are mute▪
I doe not use to speak, but execute.
So, so; run headlong to confusion:
Thou slight brained mischief, thou art made as dirt,
To plaster up the bracks of my defects.
Isle wring what may be squeezed from out his use:
And good night Strozzo. Swell plump bold heart.
For now thy tide of vengeance rolled in:
O now Tragoedia Cothurnata mounts▪
Piero's thoughts are fixed on dire exploits.
Pell mell: confusion, and black murder guides
The organs of my spirit: shrink not heart.
Capienda rebus in malis praeceps via est.
THE black jade of answered night trot foggy rings Bout heavens brow. (12) Tic now stark dead night.
Is this Saint Marks Church?
It is, my Lord.
Where stands my fathers hearse?
Those streamers bear his arms. I, that is it.
Set tapers to the tomb, &amp; lamp the Church.
Give me the fire, Now depart and sleep. 
I purify the ayre with odorous fume.
Graves, volts, and toumbes, groan not to bear my weight,
Cold flesh, bleak trunks, wrapped in your half-rot shrouds,
I press you softly, with a tender foot.
Most honoured sepulchre, vouchsafe a wretch,
Leave to weep ore thee, Toumb, Isle not be long
Ere I creep in thee, and with bloodless lips
Kiss my cold fathers cheek. I pree thee, grave,
Provide soft mould to wrap my carcass in.
Thou royal spirit of Andrugio, where ere thou houerst
(Airy intellect) I heave up tapers to thee (view thy son)
In celebration of dew obsequies.
Once every night, Isle dew thy funeral hearse
With my religious tears,
O blessed father of a cursed son,
Thou died most happy, since thou lived not
To see thy son most wretched, and thy wife
Pursued by him that seeks my guiltless blood.
O, in what orb thy mighty spirit soars,
Stoop and beat down this rising fog of shame,
That strives to blur thy blood, and girt defame
About my innocent and spotless brows.
Non est more miserum, sed miserè more.
Thy pangs of anguish rip my cerecloth up:
And lo the ghost of old Andrugio
Forsakes his coffin. Antonio, revenge.
I was empoisoned by Piero's hand:
Revenge my blood; take spirit gentle boy:
Revenge my blood. Thy Mellida, is chaste:
Only to frustrate thy pursuit in love,
Is blazed unchaste. Thy mother yields consent
To be his wife, &amp; give his blood a son,
That made her husbandless, and doth complot
To make her sonlesse: but before I touch
The banks of rest, my ghost shall visit her.
Thou vigour of my youth, juice of my love,
Seize on revenge, grasp the sterne bended front
Of frowning vengeance, with vnpaized clutch.
Alarm Nemesis, rouse up thy blood,
Invent some stratagem of vengeance:
Which but to think on, may like lightning glide,
With horror through thy breast; remember this.
Scelera non vlcisceris, nisi vincis. 
WHERE left you him? show me good boys, away.
Gods me, your hair.
Nurse, tic not yet proud day:
The neat gay mists of the light's not up,
Her cheeks not yet flourish over with the paint
Of borrowed crimson; the vnpranked world
Wears yet the nightclothes: let flare my loosed hair.
I scorn the presence of the night.
Whore's my boy? Run: Isle range about the Church,
Like frantic Bachanell, or Iasons wife,
Invoking all the spirits of the graves,
To tell me where. Ho? O my poor wretched blood,
What dost thou up at midnight, my kind boy?
Dear soul, to bed: ô thou hast struck a fright
Unto thy mothers panting
O quisquis nova
Supplicia functis dirus vmbrarum arbiter
Disponis, quisquis exeso eases
Pauidus sub entry, quisquis venture times
Montis ruinam, quisquis auidorum feres,
Rictus leonum, &amp; dira furiarum agmina
Implicitus horse, Antonii vocem excipe
Properantis ad vos Vlciscar.
Alas my son's distraught. Sweet boy appease▪
Thy mutining affections.
By the astonning terror of answered night,
By the infectious damps of clammy graves,
And by the mould that presses down
My dead fathers sculle: Isle be revenged.
Wherefore? on whom? for what? go, go to bed
Good duteous son. Ho, but thy idle
So I may sleep toumb'd in an honoured hearse,
So may my bones rest in that Sepulchre,
Forget not duty son: to bed, to bed.
May I be cursed by my fathers ghost,
And blasted with incensed breath of heaven,
If my heart beat on ought but vengeance,
May I be numd with horror, and my veins
Pucker with sing'ing torture, if my brain
Digest a thought, but of dire vengeance:
May I be fettered slave to coward Chance,
If blood, heart, brain, plot ought save vengeance.
Wilt thou to bed▪ I wonder when thou sleepst▪
In faith thou look sunk-ey'd▪ go couch thy head:
Now faith tic idle: sweet, sweet son to bed.
I have a prayer or two, to offer up,
For the good, good Prince, my most dear, dear Lord,
The Duke Piero, and your virtuous self:
And then when those prayers have obtained success,
In sooth Isle come (believe it now) and couch
My head in downy mold: but first Isle see
You safely laid. Isle bring ye all to bed.
Piero, Maria, Strotzo, Lucio,
Isle see you all laid: Isle bring you all to bed,
And then, in faith, Isle come and couch my head,
And sleep in peace.
Look then, wee go before.
I, so you must, before we touch the shore
Of wished revenge. O you departed souls,
That lodge in coffined 〈◊〉, which my feet press
(If Pythagorian Axioms be true,
Of spirits transmigration) floote no more
To humane bodies, rather live in swine,
Inhabit wolves flesh, scorpions, dogs, and toads,
Rather then man, The curse of heaven rains
In plagues unlimited through all his days,
His mature age grows only mature vice,
And ripens only to corrupt and rot
The budding hopes of infant modesty.
Still striving to be more then man, he proves
More then a devil, devilish suspect, devilish cruelty:
All hell-straid juice is powered to his veins,
Making him drunk with fuming surquedries,
Contempt of heaven, untamed arrogance,
Lust, state, pride, murder.
Murder.
Murder.
Murder.
I, I will murder: graves and ghosts
Fright me no more, Isle suck red vengeance
Out of Pieros wounds Piero's wounds.
Maria, love Maria: she took this Isle.
Left you her here? On lights away:
I think we shall not warm our beds to day.
Ho, father? father?
How now Iulio, my little pretty son?
Why suffer you the child to walk so late.
He will not sleep, but calls to follow you,
Crying that bug-beares &amp; spirits haunted him.
No, not so.
This shall be sought for; Isle force him feed on life
Till he shall loath it. This shall be the close.
Of vengeance strain.
Away there: Pages, lead on fast with light.
The Church is full of damps: tic yet dead night.
BROTHER Antonio, are you here in faith?
Why doe you frown? Indeed my sister said,
That I should call you brother, that she did,
When you were married to her. Bus me; good
Truth, I love you better then my father, deed.
Thy father? Gracious, ô bounteous heaven!
I doe adore thy Justice; Venit in nostras manus
Tandem vindicta, venit &amp; tota quidem.
Truth, since my mother dyed, I loved you best.
Something hath angered you; pray you look merrily.
I will laugh, and dimple my thin cheek,
With capering joy; chuck, my heart doth leap
To grasp thy bosom. Time, place, and blood,
How fit you close together! Heavens tones
Strike not such music to immortal souls,
As your accordance sweets my breast withal.
Me thinks I pace upon the front of Jove,
And kick corruption with a scornful heel,
Griping this flesh, disdain mortality.
O that I knew which joint, which side, which limb
Were father all, and had no mother in it:
That I might rip it vain by vain; and carve revenge
In bleeding races: but since it is mixed together,
Have at adventure, pel mell, no reverse.
Come hither boy. This is Andrugio's hearse.
O God, you'll hurt me. For my sisters sake,
Pray you doe not hurt me. And you kill me, deed,
Isle tell my father
O, for thy sisters sake, I flag revenge.
Revenge.
Stay, stay, dear father, fright mine eyes no more.
Revenge as swift as lightning bursts forth,
And clears his heart. Come, pretty tender child,
It is not thee I hate, not thee I kill.
Thy fathers blood that flows within thy veins,
Is it I loath; is that, Revenge must suck.
I love thy soul: and were thy heart lapped up
In any flesh, but in Piero's blood,
I would thus kiss it: but being his: thus, thus,
And thus Isle punch it. Abandon fears.
Whilst thy wounds bleed, my brows shall gush out tears.
So you will love me, doe even what you will.
Now barks the Wolf against the full cheeked Moon.
Now Lyons halfe-clamd entrails roar for food.
Now croaks the toad, &amp; night-crowes screech aloud,
Fluttering about casements of departing souls.
Now gapes the graves, and through their yawns let loose
Imprisoned spirits to revisit earth:
And now swarthy night, to swell thy hour out,
Behold I spurt warm blood in thy black eyes.
Howl not thou pury mould, groan not ye graves.
Be dumb all breath. Here stands Andrugio's son,
Worthy his father. So: I feel no breath.
His jaws are fallen, his dislodged soul is fled:
And now there's nothing, but Piero, left.
He is all Piero, father all. This blood,
This breast, this heart, Piero all:
Whom thus I mangle. Spright of Iulyo,
Forget this was thy trunk. I live thy friend.
Moist thou be twined with the sofest embrace
Of clear eternity: but thy fathers blood,
I thus make incense of, to vengeance.
Ghost of my poisoned Sire, suck this fume:
To sweet revenge perfume thy circling ayre,
With smoke of blood. I sprinkle round his gore,
And dew thy hearse, with these fresh reeking drops.
Lo thus I heave my blood-died hands to heaven:
Even like insatiate hell, still crying; More.
My heart hath thirsting Dropsies after gore.
Sound peace, and rest, to Church, night ghosts, and graves.
Blood cries for blood; and murder murder craves.
FIE, fie; to morrow your wedding day, and weep! Gods my comfort. Andrugio could do well: Piero may doe better. I have had four husbands
my self. The first I called, Sweet Duck; the second, Dear Heart; the third, Pretty Pugge: But the fourth most sweet, dear, pretty, all in all: he was the very cockeall of a husband. What, Lady? your skin is smooth, your blood warm, your cheek fresh, your eye quick: change of pasture makes fat calves: choice of linen, clean bodies; and (no question) variety of husbands perfect wives▪ I would you should know it, as few teeth as I have in my head, I have red A∣ristotles Problems, which saith; that woman receives perfection by the man. What then be the men? Go to, to bed, lye on your back, dream not on Piero. I say no more: to morrow is your wedding: doe, dream not of Piero.
What an idle prate thou keep? good nurse go sleep.
I have a mighty task of tears to weep.
Lady, with a most retort and obtuse leg I kiss the curled locks of your loose hair. The Duke hath sent you the most musical sir Gefferey, with his not base, but most ennobled Viol, to rock your baby thoughts in the Cradle of sleep.
I give the noble Duke respective thanks.
Respective; truly a very pretty word. Indeed Madam, I have the most respective fiddle▪ Did you e∣for smell a more sweet sound. My ditty must go thus; very witty, I assure you: I my self in an humo∣rous passion made it, to the tune of my mistress Nu∣triches beauty. Indeed, very pretty, very retort, and
obtuse; Isle assure you tic thus.
My mistress eye doth oil my joints,
And makes my fingers nimble:
O love, come on, untruss your points,
My fiddlestick wants Rosin.
My Ladies dugs are all so smooth,
That no flesh must them handle▪
Her eyes doe shine, for to say sooth,
Like a new snuffed candle.
Truly, very pathetic, and vnuulgar.
Pathetic, and vnuulgar; words of worth, ex∣cellent words. In sooth, Madam, I have taken a murre, which makes my nose run most pathetically, and un∣vulgarly. Have you any Tobacco?
Good Signior, your song.
Instantly, most vnvulgarlie, at your service.
Truly, here's the most pathetic rosin. Vmh.
In sooth, most knightly sung, &amp; like sir Gefferey.
Why, look you Lady, I was wade a knight on∣lie for my voice; &amp; a counsellor, only for my wit.
I believe it. God night, gentle sir, god night.
You will give me leave to take my leave of my mistress, and I will do it most famously in rime.
Farewell, adieu: Saith thy love true,
As to part loath.
Time bids vs part, Mine own sweet heart,
God bless vs both. 
God night Nutriche. Pages, leave the room.
The life of night grows short, tic almost dead.
O thou cold widow bed, sometime thrice blessed,
By the warm pressure of my sleeping Lord:
Open thy leaves, and whilst on thee I tread,
Groan out. Alas, my dear Andrugio's dead.
Amazing terror, what portent is this?
DISLOYAL to our Hymniall rites,
What raging heat rains in thy strūpet blood?
Hast thou so soon forgot Andrugio?
Are our loue-bands so quickly cancelled?
Where lives thy plighted faith unto this breast?
O weak Marya! Go to, calm thy fears.
I pardon thee, poor soul. O shed no tears.
Thy sex is weak. That black incarnate fiend
May trip thy faith, that hath orethrowne my life:
I was empoisoned by Piero's hand.
Join with my son, to bend up strained revenge.
Maintain a seeming favour to his suite,
Till time may form our vengeance absolute.
See, vnamaz'd, I will behold thy face,
Outstare the terror of thy grimm aspect,
Daring the horridest object of the night.
Look how I smoke in blood, reeking the steam▪
Of foaming vengeance. O my solo's inthroan'd
In the triumphant chariot of revenge.
Me thinks I am all ayre, and feel no weight
Of humane dirt clog. This is Iulios blood.
Rich musique, father; this is Iulio's blood.
Why lives that mother?
Pardon ignorance. Fly dear Antonio:
Once more assume disguise, and dog the Court
In fained habit, till Piero's blood
May even ore-flowe the brim of full revenge.
Peace, and all blessed fortunes to you both.
Fly thou from Court, be peerless in revenge:
Sleep thou in rest, lo here I close thy couch.
And now ye sooty coursers of the night,
Hurry your chariot into hells black womb.
Darkness, make flight; Graves, eat your dead again:
Let's repossess our shrouds. Why lags delay?
Mount sparkling brightness, give the world his day.
AWAY with this disguise in any hand.
Fie, tic vnsuting to your elate spirit:
Rather put on some transshap't cavalier,
Some habit of a spitting Critic, whose mouth
Voids nothing but gentile and vnuulgar
Rheum of censure: rather assume▪
Why then should I put on the very flesh
Of solid folly. No, this cockscomb is a crown
Which I affect, even with unbounded zeal.
Twil twhart your plot, disgrace your high resolve.
By wisdoms heart there is no essence mortal,
That I can envy, but a plump cheeked fool:
O, he hath a patent of immunities
Confirmed by custom, sealed by policy,
As large as spacious thought.
You can not press among the courtiers,
And have access to
What? not a fool? Why friend, a golden ass,
A babbled fool are sole canonical,
Whilst pale cheeked wisdom, and lean ribbed art
Are kept in distance at the halberds point:
All held Apocrypha, not worth survey.
Why, by the Genius of that Florentine,
Deep, deep observing, sound brained Macheueil,
He is is not wise that strives not to seem fool.
When will the Duke hold feed Intelligence,
Keep wary observation in large pay,
To dog a fools act?
I, but such faining, known, disgraces much.
Pish, most things that morally adhere to souls,
VVholly exist in drunk opinion:
Whose reeling censure, if I value not,
It valewes nought.
You are transported with too slight a thought,
If you but meditate of what is past,
And what you plot to pass.
Even in that, note a fools beatitude:
He is not capable of passion,
Wanting the power of distinction,
He bears an vnturnd sail with every wind:
Blow East, blow West, he stirs his course alike.
I never saw a fool lean: the chub-fac'tfop
Shines sleek with full crammed fat of happiness,
Whilst studious contemplation sucks the juice
From wizards cheeks: who making curious search
For Natures secrets, the first innating cause
Laughs them to scorn, as man doth busy Apes
When they will zany men. Had heaven bin kind,
Creating me an honest senseless dolt,
A good poor fool, I should want sense to feel
The stings of anguish shoot through every vain,
I should not know what it were to loose a father:
I should be dead of sense, to view defame
Blur my bright love; I could not thus run mad,
As one confounded in a maze of mischief,
Staggerd, stark field with bruising stroke of chance.
I should not shoot mine eyes into the earth,
Poring for mischief, that might counterpoise 
mischief, murder and How now Lucio?
My Lord, the Duke, with the Venetian States,
Approach the great hall to judge Mellida.
Asked he for Iulio yet?
No motion of him: dare you trust this habit?
Alberto, see you straight rumour me dead:
Leave me, good mother, leave me Luceo,
Forsake me all. Now patience hoop my sides,
With steeled ribs, least I doe burst my breast
With struggling passions. Now disguise stand bold.
Poor scorned habits, oft choice souls enfold.
ENTREAT me not: ther's not a beauty lives,
Hath that imperial predominance
Ore my affects, as your enchanting graces:
Yet give me leave to be my self.
A villain.
Just.
Most just.
Most just and upright in our judgment seat.
Were Mellida mine eye, with such a blemish
Of most loathed looseness, I would scratch it out.
Produce the strumpet in her bridal robes,
That she may blush t'appeare so white in show,
And black in inward substance. Bring her in.
I hold Antonio, for his fathers sake,
So very dearly, so entirely choice,
That knew I but a thought of prejudice,
Imaigin'd against his high ennobled blood,
I would maintain a mortal feude, vndying hate
Against the conceiuers life. And shall Justice sleep
In fleshly Lethargy, for mine own bloods favour,
When the sweet prince hath so apparent scorn
By my (I will not call her) daughter. Go,
Conduct in the loved youth Antonio:
He shall behold me spurn my private good.
Piero loves his honour more then's blood.
The devil he does more then both.
Stand back there, fool; I do hate a fool most most pathetically. O these that have no sap of of re∣tort
and obtuse wit in them: faugh.
Puff; hold world: puff, hold bubble; Puff, hold world: puff, break not behind: puff, thou art full of wind; puff, keep up by wind: puff, it is broke: &amp; now I laugh like a good fool at the breath of mine own lips, he, he, he, he, he.
You fool.
You fool, puff.
I cannot digest thee, the vnuulgar fool. Go fool.
Forbear, Balurdo, let the fool alone,
Come hither (ficto) Is he your fool?
Yes, my loved Lord.
Would all the States in Venice were like thee.
O then I were secured.
He that's a villain, or but meanly sowl'd,
Must still converse, and cling to routes of fools,
That can not search the leaks of his defects.
O, your vnsalted fresh fool is your only man:
These vinegar tart spirits are too piercing,
Too searching in the vnglewd joints of shaken wits.
Find they a chink, they'll wriggle in and in,
And eat like salt sea in his siddowe ribs,
Till they have opened all his rotten parts,
Unto the vaunting surge of base contempt,
And sunk the tossed galleasse in depth
Of whirlepoole Scorn. Give me an honest fop:
Dud a dud a? why lo sir, this takes he
As grateful now, as a Monopoly.
ALL honour to this royal confluence.
Forbear (impure) to blot bright honours name,
With thy defiled lips. The flux of sin
Flows from thy tainted body: thou so foul,
So all dishonoured, can no honour give,
No wish of good, that can have good effect
To this grave senate, and illustrate bloods.
Why stays the doom of death?
Who rises up to manifest her guilt?
You must produce apparent proof, my Lord.
Why, where is Strotzo? he that swore he saw
The very act: and vowed that Foolish fled
Upon his sight: on which, I brake the breast
Of the adulterous lecher, with five stabs.
Go fetch in Strotzo. Now thou impudent,
If thou hast any drop of modest blood
Shrouded within thy cheeks; blush, blush for shame,
That rumour yet may say, thou felt defame.
Produce the devil,; let your Strotzo come:
I can defeat his strongest argument,
Which
With what?
With tears, with blushes, sighs, &amp; clasped hands,
With innocent vpreared arms to heaven:
With my vnnookt simplicity. These, these
Must, will, can only quit my heart of guilt.
Heaven permits not taintlesse blood be spilt.
If no remorse live in your savage breast
Then thou must die
Yet dying, Isle be blessed.
Accursed by me.
Yet blessed, in that I strove
To live, and die
My hate.
Antonyo's love.
Antonio's love!
O what vast ocean of repentant tears
Can cleanse my breast from the polluting filth
Of ulcerous sin! Supreme Efficient,
Why cleau'st thou not my breast with thunderbolts
Of winged revenge?
What means this passion?
What villainy are they decocting now? Vmh.
In me convertite forum, O proceres.
Nihil iste, nec ista.
Lay hold on him. What strange portent is this?
I will not flinch. Death, hell more grimly stare
Within my heart, then in your threatening brows.
Record, thou threefold guard of dreadest power,
What I here speak, is forced from my lips,
By the pulsiue strain of conscience,
I have a mount of mischief clogs my soul,
As weighty as the high-nol'd Appenine:
Which I must straight disgorge, or breast will burst.
I have defamed this Lady wrongfully,
By instigation of Antonio:
Whose reeling love, tossed on each fancies surge,
Began to loath before it fully joyed.
Go, seize Antonio, guard him strongly in.
By his ambition, being only bribed,
Feed by his impious hand, I poisoned
His aged father: that his thirsty hope
Might quench their dropsy of aspiring drought,
With full unbounded quaff.
Seize me Antonio.
O why permit you now such scum of filth
As Strotzo is, to live, and taint the ayre,
With his infectious breath!
My self will be thy strangler, unmatched slave.
Now change your
I, pluck Castilio: I change my humour? pluck Castilio.
Dye, with thy deaths entreats even in thy jaws.
Now, now, now, now, now, my plot begins to work.
Why, thus should States-men doe,
That cleave through knots of craggy policies,
Use men like wedges, one strike out another;
Till by degrees the tough and knurly trunk
Be riu'd in sunder. Whore's Antonio?
O black accursed fate. Antonyo's drowned.
Speak, on thy faith, on thy allegiance, speak.
As I doe love Piero, he is drowned.
In an inundation of amazement.
I, is this the clofe of all my strains in love?
O me most wretched maid.
Antonio drowned? how? how? Antonio drowned?
Distraught and raving, from a turrets top
He threw his body in the high swollen sea,
And as he headlong topsy turuie dingd down,
He still cried Mellida.
My loves bright crown.
He still cried Mellida?
Daughter, me thinks your eyes should sparkle joy,
Your bosom rise on tiptoe at this news.
Aye me.
How now? Ay me? why, art not great of thanks
To gracious heaven, for the just revenge
Upon the author of thy obloquies!
Sweet beauty, I could sigh as fast as you,
But that I know that, which I weep to know,
His fortunes should be such he dare not show
His open presence.
I know he loved me dearly, dearly, I:
And since I cannot live with him, I dye.
Fore heaven, her speech falters, look she swouns.
Convey her up into her private bed.
I hope sheele live. If not
Antonio's dead, the fool will follow too, he, he, he,
Now works the scene; quick observation scud
To coat the plot, or else the path is lost:
My very self am gone, my way is fled:
I, all is lost, if Mellida is dead. 
Alberto, I am kind, Alberto, kind.
I am sorry for thy cos, in faith I am.
Go, take him down, and bear him to his father:
Let him be buried, look ye, Isle pay the priest.
Please you to admit his father to the Court?
No.
Please you to restore his lands &amp; goods again?
No.
Please you vouchsafe him lodging in the city?
Gods foot, no, thou odd uncivil fellow:
I think you doe forget sir, where you are.
I know you doe forget sir, where you must be.
You are too malapert, in faith you are.
Your honour might doe well to
Peace Parasite, thou bur, that only sticks
Unto the nap of greatness.
Away with that same yelping cur, away.
I, I am gone: but mark, Piero, this.
There is a thing called scourging Nemesis. 
Gods neakes he has wrong, that he has: and
S'fut, and I were as he, I would bear no coals, law I,
I begin to swell, puff.
How now fool, fop, fool?
Fool, fop, fool? Marry muff. I pray you, how ma∣no fools have you seen go in a suite of Satin? I hope yet, I doe not look a fool in faith: a fool? Gods bores, I scorn't with my heel. S'neaks, and I were worth but three hundred pound a year more, I could swear richly: nay, but as poor as I am, I will swear the fellow hath wrong.
Young Galeatzo? I, a proper man.
Florence, a goodly city: it shall be so.
Isle marry her to him instantly.
Then Genoa mine, by my Mariaes match,
Which Isle solemnise ere next setting Sun.
Thus Venice, Florence, Genoa, strongly leagued.
Excellent, excellent. Isle conquer Rome,
Pop out the light of bright religion:
And then, halter skelter, all cock sure.
Go to, tic just, the man hath wrong: go to.
Go to, thou shalt have right. Go to Castilio,
Clap him into the Palace dungeon:
Lap him in rags, and let him feed on slime
That smears the dungeon cheek. Away with him.
In very good truth now, Isle ne'er do so more; this one time and
Away with him, observe it strictly, go.
Why then, ô wight, alas poor knight.
O, welladay, sir Gefferey. Let Poets roar,
And all deplore: for now I bid you god night.
O piteous end of love: ô too too rude hand
Of vnrespectiue death! Alas, sweet maid.
Forbear me heaven. What intend these plaints?
The beauty of admired creation,
The life of modest vnmixt purity,
Our sexes glory, Mellida is
What? ô heaven, what?
Dead.
May it not sad your thoughts, how?
Being laid upon her bed, she grasped my hād,
And kissing it, spake thus; Thou very pore,
Why dost not weep? The Jewel of thy brow,
The rich adornment, that inchac't thy breast,
Is lost: thy son, my love is lost, is dead.
And doe I live to say Antonio's dead?
And have I lived to see his virtues blurt,
With guiltless blots! O world thou art too subtle,
For honest natures to converse withal.
Therefore Isle leave thee; farewell mart of woe,
I fly to clip my love, Antonio.
With that her head sunk down upon her breast:
Her cheek changed earth, her senses slept in rest:
Until my fool, that pressed unto the bed,
Screch't out so loud, that he brought back her soul,
Called her again, that her bright eyes began op,
And stared upon him: he audatious fool,
Dared kiss her hand, wished her soft rest, loved bride;
She fumbled out, thanks good, and so she did.
And so she did: I doe not use to weep:
But by thy love (out of whose fertile sweet,
I hope for as fair fruit) I am deep sad:
I will not stay my marriage for all this.
Castilio Forobosco, all
Strain all your wits, wind up invention
Unto his highest bent: to sweet this night,
Make vs drink Lethe by your quaint conceits;
That for two days, oblivion smother grief:
But when my daughters exequies approach,
Let's all turn sighers. Come, despite of fate,
Sound loudest music, lets pace out in state.
I Heaven, thou moist, thou moist omnipotence.
What vermin bred of putrifacted slime,
Shall dare to expostulate with thy decrees!
O heaven, thou moist indeed: she was all thine,
All heavenly, I did but humbly beg
To borrow her of thee a little time.
Thou gau'st her me, as some weak breasted dame
Gives her infant, puts it out to nurse;
And when it once goes high-lone, takes it back.
She was my vital blood, and yet, and yet,
Isle not blaspheme. Look here, behold,
I turn my prostrate breast upon thy face,
And vent a heaving sigh. O hear but this;
I am a poor poor Orphaned; a weak, weak child,
The wrack of splitted fortune, the very Oz,
The quick sand that devours all misery.
Behold the valiant'st creature that doth breath.
For all this, I dare live, and I will live,
Only to numme some others cursed blood,
With the dead palsy of like misery.
Then death, like to a stifling Incubus,
Lie on my bosom. Lo sir, I am sped.
My breast is Golgotha, grave for the dead.
ANTONIO, kiss my foot: I honour thee,
In laying thwart my blood upon thy breast.
I tell thee boy, he was Pandulphos son:
And I doe grace thee with supporting him,
Young man.
The dominering Monarch of the earth,
He who hath nought that fortunes gripe can seize,
He who is all impregnably his own,
Hee whose great heart heaven can not force with force,
Vouchsafes his love. Non seruio Deo, sed assentio.
I ha lost a good wife.
Did find her good, or did thou make her good?
If found, thou moist refined, because thou had her.
If made, the work is lost: but thou that made her
Liu'st yet as cunning. Hast lost a good wife?
Thrice blessed man that lost her whilst she was good,
Fair, young, unblemished, constant, loving, chaste.
I tell thee youth, age knows, young loves seem graced,
Which with gray cares, rude jars, are oft defaced.
But she was full of hope.
May be, may be: but that, which may be, stood,
Stands now without all may; she died good,
And dost thou grieve?
I ha lost a true friend.
I live encompassed with two blessed souls.
Thou lost a good wife, thou lost a true friend, ha?
Two of the rarest landings of the heavens:
But landings: which at the fixed day of pay
Set down by fate, thou must restore again.
O what unconscionable souls are here?
Are you all like the spoke-shaues of the Church?
Have you no maw to restitution?
Hast lost a true friend, cousin? then thou had one.
I tell thee youth, tic all as difficult
To find true friend in this apostate age
(That balkes all right affiance twixt two hearts)
As tic to find a fixed modest heart,
Under a painted breast. Lost a true friend?
O happy soul that lost him whilst he was true.
Believe it cousin, I to my tears have found,
Oft durts respect makes firmer friends unsound.
You have lost a good son.
Why there's the cōfort ont, that he was good:
Alas, poor innocent.
Why weeps mine uncle?
Ha, dost ask me why? ha? ha?
Good cousin, look here.
Man will break out, despite Philosophy.
Why, all this while I ha but plaid a part,
Like to some boy, that acts a Tragedy,
Speaks burly words, and raves out passion:
But, when he thinks upon his infant weakness,
He droopes his eye. I spake more then a god;
Yet am less then a man.
I am the miserablest soul that breathes.
S'lid, sir ye lye: by th'heart of grief, thou lie.
I scorn't that any wretched should survive,
Outmounting me in that Superlative,
Most miserable, most unmatched in woe:
Who dare assume that, but Antonio?
Wilt still be so? and shall you blood-hound live?
Have I an arm, a heart, a sword, a soul?
Were you but private unto what we know
Isle know it all; first let's inter the dead:
Let's dig his grave, with that shall dig the heart,
Liver, and entrails of the murderer.
Wilt sing a Dirge boy?
No, no song: twill be vile out of tune.
Indeed he's hoarse: the poor boys voice is cracked.
Why cousin? why should it not be hoarse &amp; cracked,
When all the strings of natures symphony
Are cracked, &amp; jar? why should his voice keep tune,
When ther's no music in the breast of man?
Isle say an honest antic rime I have;
(Help me good sorrow-mates to give him grave.)
Death, exile, plaints, and woe,
Are but mans lackeys, not his foe.
No mortal scopes from fortunes war,
Without a wound, at least a scarre.
Many have led these to the grave:
But all shall follow, none shall save.
Blood of my youth, rot and consume,
Virtue, in dirt, doth life assume:
With this old saw, close up this dust;
Thrice blessed man that dies just.
The gloomy wing of night begins to stretch
His lasy pinion over all the ayre:
We must be stiff and steady in resolve.
Let's thus our hands, our hearts, our arms involve.
Now swear we by this Gordian knot of love,
By the fresh turned up mould that wraps my son;
By the dead brow of triple Hecate:
Ere night shall close the lids of you bright stars,
Weal sit as heavy on Pieros heart,
As Aetna doth on groaning Pelorus.
Thanks good old man.
Weal cast at royal chance.
Let's think a plot; then pell mell vengeance.
Venit dies, tempúsque, quo reddat suis
Animam squallentem sceleribus.
The fist of strenuous vengeance is clutched,
And sterne Vindicta towreth up aloft,
That she may fall with a more weighty paise,
And crush lives sap from out Pieros veins.
Now gins the leprous cores of vlcered sins
Wheal to a head: now is his fate grown mellow,
Instant to fall into the rotten jaws
Of chap-falne death. Now down looks prouidēce,
T'attend the last act of my sons revenge.
Be gracious, Observation, to our scene:
For now the plot vnites his scattred limbs
Close in contracted bands. The Florence Prince
(Drawn by firm notice of the Dukes black deeds)
Is made a partner in conspiracy.
The States of Venice are so swollen in hate
Against the Duke, for his accursed deeds
(Of which they are confirmed by some odd letters
Found in dead Strotzos study, which had past
Betwixt Piero and the murdering slave)
That they can scarce retain from bursting forth
In plain revolt. O, now triumphs my ghost;
Exclaiming, heauen's just; for I shall see,
The scourge of murder and impiety.
HOE, who's aboue there, hoe? A murren on all Proverbs. They say, hunger breaks tho∣rough stone walls; but I am as gent, as lean ribbed fa∣mine: yet I can burst through no stone walls. O, now sir Gefferey, show thy valour, break prison, and be
hanged. Nor shall the darkest nook of hell contain the discontented sir Balurdos ghost. Well, I am out well, I have put off the prison to put on the rope. O poor shotten herring, what a pickle art thou in! O hunger, how thou dominer'st in my guts! O, for a fat leg of Ewe mutton in stewed broth; or drunken song to feed on. I could belch rarely, for I am all wind. O cold, cold, cold, cold, cold. O poor knight, ô poor sir Gefferey; sing like an Unicorn, before thou dost dip thy horn in the water of death; ô cold, ô sing, ô cold, ô poor sir Geffrey, sing, sing.
VINDICTA.
Mellida.
Alberto.
Antonio.
Hath the Duke supped?
Yes, and triumphant revels mount aloft.
The Duke drinks deep to ouerdowe his grief.
The court is racked to pleasure, each man strains
To fine a jocund eye. The Florentine
Young Galeatzo?
Even he is mighty on our part. The States of Venice
Like high-swoln floods, drive down the mud∣die dams
Of pent allegiance. O, my lusty bloods,
Heaven sits clapping of our enterprise.
I have been labouring general favour firm,
And I doe find the citizens grown sick
With swallowing the bloody crudities
Of black Pieros acts; they fine would cast
And vomit him from off their government.
Now is the plot of mischief ripped wide op:
Letters are found twixt Strotzo and the Duke,
So clear apparent: yet more firmly strong
By suiting circumstance; that as I walked
Muffled, to eues-drop speech, I might observe
The graver States-men whispering fearfully.
Here one gives nods &amp; hums, what he would speak:
The rumour's got among troop of citizens,
Making load murmur, with confused din:
One shakes his head, and sighs; O ill used power:
Another frets, and sets his grinding teeth,
Foaming with rage; and swears this must not be.
Here one complots, and on a sudden starts,
And cries; ô monstrous, ô deep villainy!
All knit there nerues, and from beneath swollen brows
Appears a gloting eye of much mislike:
Whilst answered Pieros lips reek steam of wine,
Swallows lust-thoughts, devours all pleasing hopes,
With strong imagination of, what not?
O, now Vindicta; that's the word we have:
A royal vengeance, or a royal grave.
Vindicta.
I am acolde.
Who's there? sir Geffrey?
A poor knight, god wot: the nose of thy knight∣hood is bitten off with cold. O poor sir Geffrey, cold, cold.
What chance of fortune hath tripped up his heels,
And laid him in the kennel? ha?
I will discourse it all. Poor honest soul,
Had thou a beaver to clasp up thy face,
Thou should associate vs in masquery,
And see revenge.
Nay, and you talk of revenge, my stomack's up,
For I am most tyrannically hungry. A beaver? I have a headpeece, a skull, a brain of proof, I warrant ye.
Slink to my chamber then, and tyre thee.
Is there a fire?
Yes.
Is there a fat leg of Ewe mutton?
Yes.
And a clean shirt?
Yes.
Then am I for you, most pathetically, &amp; vnvul∣garly, law.
Resolved hearts, time curtals night, opportunity shakes vs his foretop. Steel your thoughts, sharp your resolve, imboldē your spirit, grasp your swords; alarm mischief, &amp; with an vndāted brow, out scout the grim opposition
Of most menacing peril.
Hark here, proud pomp shoots mounting triumph up,
Borne in load accents to the front of Jove.
O now, he that wants soul to kill a slave,
Let him die slave, and rot in peasants grave.
Give me thy hand, and thine, most noble heart,
Thus will wee live, and, but thus, never part.
SIt close unto my breast, heart of my love,
Advance thy drooping eyes,
Thy son is drowned,
Rich happiness that such a son is drowned.
Thy husband's dead, life of my joys most blessed,
In that the sapless log, that pressed thy bed
With an unpleasing weight, being lifted hence,
Even I Piero, live to warm his place.
I tell you, Lady, had you viewed vs both,
With an vnprtiall eye, when first we wooed
Your maiden beauties, I had borne the prize,
Tic firm I had: for, fair, I ha done that
Murder.
Which he would quake to have adventured;
Thou know I have.
Murdered my husband.
Borne out the shock of war, &amp; done, what not,
That valour durst. Dost love me fairest? say.
As I doe hate my son, I love thy soul.
Why then Io to Hymen, mount a lofty note:
Fill red cheeked Bacchus, let Lyeus flote
In burnished goblets. Force the plump leapt god,
Skip light lauoltaes in your full sapt veins.
Tic well brim full. Even I have glut of blood:
Let quaff carouse; I drink this Bordeaux wine
Unto the health of dead Andrugio,
Foolish, Strotzo▪ and Antonios ghosts.
Would I had some poison to infuse it with;
That having done this honour to the dead,
I might send one to give them notice ont.
I would indeere my favour to the full.
Boy, sing aloud, make heavens vault to ring
With thy breaths strength. I drink. Now loudly sing.
CALL Iulio hither; whore's the little foul?
I saw him not to day. Here's sport alone
For him, in faith; for babes and fools, I know,
Relish not substance, but applaud the show.
All blessed fortune crown your brave attempt.
I have a troop to second your attempt.
The Venice States join hearts unto your hands.
By the delights in contemplation
Of coming joys, it is magnificent.
You grace my marriage eve with sumptuous pomp.
Sound still, load music. O, your breath gives grace
To curious feet, that in proud measure pace.
Mother, is Iulios body
Speak not, doubt not; all is aboue all hope.
Then will I dance and whirl about the ayre.
Me thinks I am all soul, all heart, all spirit.
Now murder shall receive his ample merit.
Bring hither suckets, canded delicates.
Weal taste some sweet meats, gallants, ere we sleep.
Weal cooke your sweet meats, gallants, with tart sower sauce.
Here will I sit, spectator of revenge,
And glad my ghost in anguish of my foe.
Marry and shall; in faith I were too rude,
If I gainesaide so civil fashion.
The mockers pray you to forbear the room,
Till they have banqueted. Let it be so:
No man presume to visit them, on death.
Only my self? O, why with all my heart▪
Isle fill your consort; here Piero sits:
Come on, unmask, lets fall to
Murder and torture: no prayers, no entreats.
Weal spoil your oratory. Out with his tong.
I have it Pandulpho: the veins panting bleed,
Trickling fresh gore about my fist. Bind fast; so, so.
Blessed be thy hand. I taste the joys of heaven,
Viewing my son triumph in his black blood.
Down to the dungeon with him, Isle dungeon with him; Isle fool you: sir Gefferey will be sir Geffrey. Isle tickle you.
Behold, black dog.
Grinst thou, thou snurling cur?
Eat thy black liver.
To thine anguish see
A fool triumphant in thy misery.
Vex him Balurdo.
He weeps: now doe I glorify my hands,
I had no vengeance, if I had no tears.
Fall to, good Duke. ô these are worthless cares,
You have no stomach to them; look, look here:
Here lies a dish to feast thy fathers gorge.
Here's flesh and blood, which I am sure thou love.
Was he thy flesh, thy son, thy dearest son?
So was Andrugio my dearest father.
So was Foolish my dearest son.
So was Andrugio my dearest husband.
My father found no pity in thy blood.
Remorse was banished, when thou slew my son.
When thou impoysoned'st my loving Lord,
Exiled was piety.
Now, therefore, pity, piety, remorse,
Be aliens to our thoughts: grim fier-ey'd rage
Possess vs wholly.
Thy son? true: and which is my most joy,
I hope no bastard, but thy very blood
Thy true begotten, most legitimate
And loved issue: there's the comfort ont.
Scum of the mud of hell.
Slime of all filth.
Thou most detested road.
Thou most retort and obtuse rascal.
Thus charge we death at thee: remember hell,
And let the howling murmurs of black spirits,
The horrid torments of the damned Ghosts
Affright thy soul, as it descends down
Into the entrails of the ugly deep.
Sa, sa; no, let him die, and die, and still be dying,
And yet not die, till he hath died and died
Ten thousand deaths in agony of heart.
Now pel mell; thus the hand of heaven chokes
The throat of murder. This for my fathers blood.
This for my son.
This for them all.
And this, and this; sink to the heart of hell.
Murder for murder, blood for blood doth yell.
Tic done, and now my soul shall sleep in rest.
Sons that revenge their fathers blood, are blessed.
WHOSE hand presents this gory spe∣ctacle?
Mine.
No: mine.
No: mine.
I will not loose the glory of the deed,
Were all the tortures of the deepest hell
Fixed to my limbs. I pierced the monsters heart,
With an undaunted hand.
By yon bright spangled front of heaven it was I:
It was I sluc't out his life blood.
Tush, to say truth, it was all.
Blessed be you all, and may your honours live
Religiously held sacred, even for ever and ever.
To Antonio. Thou art another Hercules to vs,
In ridding huge pollution from our State.
Antonio, belief is fortified,
With most invincible approuemēts of much wrong,
By this Piero to thee. We have found
Beadroles of mischief, plots of villainy,
Laid twixt the Duke and Strotzo: which we found
Too firmly acted.
Alas poor Orphaned.
Poor? standing triumphant over Beelzebub?
Having large interest for blood; &amp; yet deemed poor?
What satisfaction outward pomp can yield,
Or chiefest fortunes of the Venice state,
Claim freely. You are well second props,
And will not warp, or lean to either part▪
Calamity gives man a steady heart.
We are amazed at your benignity:
But other vows constrain another course.
We know the world, and did we know no more,
Wee would not live to know: but since constraint
Of holy bands forces vs keep this lodge
Of durts corruption, till dread power calls
Our souls appearance, we will live enclosed
In holy verge of some religious order,
Most constant votaries.
First let's cleanse our hands,
Purge hearts of hatred, and entomb my love:
Over whose hearse, Isle weep away my brain
In true affections tears,
For her sake, here I vow a virgin bed.
She lives in me, with her my love is dead.
We will attend her mournful exequies,
Conduct you to your calm sequestered life,
And then
Leave vs, to meditate on misery;
To sad our thought with contemplation
Of past calamities. If any ask
Where lives the widow of the poisoned Lord?
Where lies the Orphaned of a murdered father?
Where lies the father of a butchered son?
Where lives all woe? conduct him to vs three;
The downe-cast ruins of calamity.
Sound doleful tunes, a solemn hymn advance,
To close the last act of my vengeance:
And when the subject of your passion's spent,
Sing Mellida is dead, all hearts will relent,
In sad condolement, at that heavy sound,
Never more woe in lesser plot was found.
And, ô, if ever time create a Muse,
That to th'immortall fame of virgin faith,
Dares once engage his pen to write her death,
Presenting it in some black Tragedy.
May it prove gracious, may his stile be decked
With freshest blooms of purest elegance;
May it have gentle presence, and the Scions sucked up
By calm attention of choice audience:
And when the closing Epilogue appears,
In stead of claps, may it obtain but tears.

BEfore we proceed any further, hear me speak.
Speak, speak.
You are all resolved rather to die then to famish?
Resolved, resolved.
First you know, Caius Martius is chief enemy to the people.
We know it, we know it.
Let vs kill him, and we'll have Corn at our own price. Is it a Verdict?
No more talking on it; Let it be done, away, away
One word, good Citizens.
We are accounted poor Citizens, the Patri∣cians good: what Authority surfeits one, would relieve vs. If they would yield vs but the superfluity while it were wholesome, wee might guess they relieved vs hue∣manely: But they think we are too dear, the leanness that afflicts vs, the object of our misery, is as an inuento∣rye to particularise their abundance, our sufferance is a gain to them. Let vs revenge this with our Pikes, ere we become Rakes. For the Gods know, I speak this in hunger for Bread, not in thirst for Revenge.
Would you proceed especially against Caius Martius.
Against him first: He's a very dog to the Com∣monalty.
Consider you what Services he he's done for his Country?
Very well, and could bee content to give him good report for it, but that hee pays himself with bee∣ing proud.
Nay, but speak not maliciously.
I say unto you, what he hath done Famously, he did it to that end: though soft conscienc'd men can be content to say it was for his Country, he did it to please his Mother and to be partly proud, which he is, even to the altitude of his virtue.
What he cannot help in his Nature, you ac∣count a Vice in him: You must in no way say he is co∣uetous.
If I must not, I need not be barren of Accuse∣tions he hath faults (with surplus) to tyre in repetition.
What shouts are these? The other side a' th City is risen: why stay we prating here? To the Capitol.
Come, come.
Soft, who comes here?
Worthy Menenius Agrippa, one that hath al∣ways loved the people.
He's one honest enough, wold al the rest were so.
What work's my Countrymen in hand?
Where go you with Bats and Clubs? The matter
Speak I pray you.
Our business is not unknown to the Senate, they have had inkling this fortnight what we intend to do, with now we'll show em in deeds: they say poor Suitors have strong breaths, they shall know we have strong arms too.
Why Masters, my good Friends, mine honest Neighbours, will you undo your selves?
We cannot Sir, we are undone already.
I tell you Friends, most charitable care
Have the Patricians of you for your wants.
Your suffering in this dearth, you may as well
Strike at the Heaven with your staves, as lift them
Against the Roman State, whose course will on
The way it takes: cracking ten thousand Curbs
Of more strong link asunder, then can ever
Appear in your impediment. For the Dearth,
The Gods, not the Patricians make it, and
Your knees to them (not arms) must help. Alack,
You are transported by Calamity
Thither, where more attends you, and you slander
The Helmes of th State; who care for you like Fathers,
When you curse them, as Enemies.
Care for vs? True indeed, they ne'er cared for vs yet. Suffer vs to famish, and their Store-houses crammed with Grain: Make Edicts for Usury, to support Vsu∣rears; repeal daily any wholesome Act established against the rich, and provide more piercing Statutes daily, to chain up and restrain the poor. If the Wars eat vs not up, they will; and there's all the love they bear vs.
Either you must
Confess your selves wondrous Malicious,
Or be accused of Folly. I shall tell you
A pretty Tale, it may be you have heard it,
But since it serves my purpose, I will venture
To scale't a little more.
Well,
Isle hear it Sir: yet you must not think
To fob off our disgrace with a tale:
But and't please you deliver.
There was a time, when all the bodies members
Rebelled against the Belly; thus accused it:
That only like a Gulf it did remain
In th midst a the body, idle and vnactiue,
Still cupboarding the Viand, never bearing
Like labour with the rest, where the other Instruments
Did see, and hear, devise, instruct, walk, feel,
And mutually participate, did minister
Unto the appetite; and affection common
Of the whole body, the Belly answered.
Well sir, what answer made the Belly.
Sir, I shall tell you with a kind of Smile,
Which ne'er came from the Lungs, but even thus:
For look you I may make the belly Smile,
As well as speak, it taintingly replied
To the discontented Members, the mutinous parts
That envied his receipt: even so most fitly,
As you malign our Senators, for that
They are not such as you.
Your Bellies answer: What
The Kingly crowned head, the vigilant eye,
The Counsailor Heart, the Arm our Soldier,
Our Steed the Leg, the Tongue our Trumpeter,
With other Muniments and petty helps
In this our Fabric, if that they—
What then? Foreme, this Fellow speaks.
What then? What then?
Should by the Cormorant belly be restrained,
Who is the sink a the body.
Well, what then?
The former Agents, if they did complain,
What could the Belly answer?
I will tell you,
If you'll bestow a small (of what you have little)
Patience awhile; you'st hear the Bellies answer.
Y' are long about it.
Note me this good Friend;
Your most grave Belly was deliberate,
Not rash like his Accusers, and thus answered.
True is it my Incorporate Friends (quoth he)
That I receive the general Food at first
Which you do live upon: and fit it is,
Because I am the Store-house, and the Shop
Of the whole Body. But, if you do remember,
I send it through the Rivers of your blood
Even to the Court, the Heart, to the seat of the Brain,
And through the Cranks and Offices of man,
The strongest Nerues, and small inferior Veins
From me receive that natural competencie
Whereby they live. And though that all at once
(You my good Friends, this says the Belly) mark me.
I sir, well, well.
Though all at once, cannot
See what I do deliver out to each,
Yet I can make my Audit up, that all
From me do back receive the Flower of all,
And leave me but the Bran. What say you too't?
It was an answer, how apply you this?
The Senators of Rome, are this good Belly,
And you the mutinous Members: For examine
Their Counsels, and their Cares; digest things rightly,
Touching the Weal a' th Common, you shall find
No public benefit which you receive
But it proceeds, or comes from them to you,
And no way from your selves. What do you think?
You, the great Toe of this Assembly?
I the great Toe? Why the great Toe?
For that being one of th lowest, basest, poorest
Of this most wise Rebellion, thou goosed foremost:
Thou Rascal, that art worst in blood to run,
Lead first to win some vantage.
But make you ready your stiff bats and clubs,
Rome, and her Rats, are at the point of battle,
The one side must have bail.
Hail, Noble Martius.
Thanks. What's the matter you dissentious rogues
That rubbing the poor Itch of your Opinion,
Make your selves Scabs.
We have ever your good word.
He that will give good words to thee, will flatter
Beneath abhorring. What would you have, you Cures,
That like nor Peace, nor War? The one affrights you,
The other makes you proud. He that trusts to you,
Where he should find you Lyons, finds you Hares:
Where Foxes, Geese you are: No surer, no,
Then is the coal of fire upon the Ice,
Or Hailstone in the Sun. Your Virtue is,
To make him worthy, whose offence subdues him,
And curse that Justice did it. Who deserves Greatness,
Deserves your Hate: and your Affections are
A sickmans Appetite; who desires most that
Which would increase his evil. He that depends
Upon your favours, swims with finns of Lead,
And hues down Oaks, with rushes. Hang ye: trust ye?
With every Minute you do change a Mind,
And call him Noble, that was now your Hate:
Him wild, that was your Garland. What's the matter,
That in these several places of the City,
You cry against the Noble Senate, who
(Under the Gods) keep you in awe, which else
Would feed on one another? What's their seeking?
For Corn at their own rates, whereof they say
The City is well stored.
Hang 'em: They say?
They'll sit by the fire, and presume to know
What's done in th Capitol: Who's like to rise,
Who thrives, &amp; who declines: Side factions, &amp; give out
Conjectural Marriages, making parties strong▪
And feebling such as stand not in their liking,
Below their cobbled Shoes. They say ther's grain enough?
Would the Nobility lay aside their ruth,
And let me use my Sword, I'd make a Quarry
With thousands of these quartered slaves, as high
As I could pick my Lance.
Nay these are almost thoroughly persuaded:
For though abundantly they lack discretion
Yet are they passing Cowardly. But I beseech you,
What says the other Troop?
They are dissolved: Hang em;
They said they were an hungry, sighed forth Proverbs
That Hunger-broke stone walls: that dogs must eat
That meat was made for mouths. That the gods sent not
Corn for the Richmen only: With these shreds
They vented their Complainings, which being answered
And a petition granted them, a strange one,
To break the heart of generosity,
And make bold power look pale, they threw their caps
As they would hang them on the horns a' th Moon,
Shooting their Emulation.
What is granted them?
Five Tribunes to defend their vulgar wisdom•
Of their own choice. One's Iunius Brutus,
Sicinius Velutus, and I know not. Stead,
The rabble should have first vnroo'ft the City
Ere so prevailed with me; it will in time
Win upon power, and throw forth greater Theames
For Insurrections arguing.
This is strange.
Go get you home you Fragments.
Whore's Caius Martius?
Here: what's the matter?
The news is sir, the Volcies are in Arms.
I am glad on it, then we shall ha means to vent
Our musty superfluity. See our best Elders.
Martius it is true, that you have lately told vs,
The Volces are in Arms.
They have a Leader,
Tullus Auffidius that will put you too't:
I sin in envying his Nobility:
And were I any thing but what I am,
I would wish me only he.
You have fought together?
Were half to half the world by the ears, &amp; he upon my party, I'd revolt to make
Only my wars with him. He is a Lion
That I am proud to hunt.
Then worthy Martius,
Attend upon Cominius to these Wars.
It is your former promise.
Sir it is,
And I am constant: Titus Lucius, thou
Shalt see me once more strike at Tullus face.
What art thou stiff? Stand out?
No Caius Martius,
Isle lean upon one Crutch, and fight with tother,
Ere stay behind this Business.
Oh true-bred.
Your Company to the Capitol, where I know
Our greatest Friends attend vs.
Lead you on: Follow Cominius, we must follow you, right worthy you Priority.
Noble Martius.
Hence to your homes, be gone.
Nay let them follow,
The Volces have much Corn: take these Rats thither,
To gnaw their Garners. Worshipful Mutiners,
Your valour puts well forth: Pray follow.
Was ever man so proud as is this Martius?
He has no equal.
When we were chosen Tribunes for the people.
Marked you his lip and eyes.
Nay, but his taunts.
Being moved, he will not spare to gird the Gods.
Bemock the modest Moon.
The present Wars devour him, he is grown
Too proud to be so valiant.
Such a Nature, tickled with good success, dis∣deigns the shadow which he treads on at noon, but I do wonder, his insolence can brooke to be commanded un∣der Cominius?
Fame, at the which he aims,
In whom already he's well graced, cannot
Better be held, nor more attained then by
A place below the first: for what miscarries
Shall be the Generals fault, though he perform
To the utmost of a man, and giddy censure
Will then cry out of Martius: Oh, if he
Had borne the business.
Besides, if things go well,
Opinion that so sticks on Martius, shall
Of his demerits rob Cominius.
Come: half all Cominius Honours are to Martius
Though Martius earned them not: and all his faults
To Martius shall be Honours, though indeed
In ought he merit not.
Let's hence, and hear
How the dispatch is made, and in what fashion
More then his singularity, he goes
Upon this present Action.
Let's along.
So, your opinion is Auffidius,
That they of Rome are entered in our Counsels,
And know how we proceed,
Is it not yours?
What ever have bin thought one in this State
That could be brought to bodily act, ere Rome
Had circumvention: it is not four days gone
Since I heard thence, these are the words, I think
I have the Letter here: yes, here it is;
They have pressed a Power, but it is not known
Whether for East or West: the Dearth is great,
The people Mutinous: And it is •umour'd,
Cominius, Martius your old Enemy
(Who is of Rome worse hated then of you)
And Titus Lartius, a most valiant Roman,
These three lead on this Preparation
Whether it is bent: most likely, it is for you:
Consider of it.
Our Armie's in the Field:
We never yet made doubt but Rome was ready
To answer vs.
Nor did you think it folly,
To keep your great pretences veiled, till when
They needs must show themselves, which in the hatching
It seemed appeared to Rome. By the discovery,
We shall be shortened in our aim, which was
To take in many Towns, ere (almost) Rome
Should know we were afoot.
Noble Auffidius,
Take your Commission, hye you to your Bands,
Let vs alone to guard Corioles
If they set down before's: for the remove
Bring up your Army: but (I think) you'll find
The have not prepared for vs.
O doubt not that,
I speak from Certainties. Nay more,
Some parcels of their Power are forth already,
And only hitherward. I leave your Honours.
If we, and Caius Martius chance to meet,
It is sworn between vs, we shall ever strike
Till one can do no more.
The Gods assist you.
And keep your Honours safe.
Farewell.
Farewell.
Farewell.
I pray you daughter sing, or express your self in a more comfortable sort: If my Son were my Hus∣band, I should freelier rejoice in that absence wherein he won Honour, then in the embraces of his Bed, where he would show most love. When yet hee was but tender-bodied, and the only Son of my womb; when youth with comeliness plucked all gaze his way; when for a day of Kings entreaties, a Mother should not sell him an hour from her beholding; I considering how Honour would become such a person, that it was no better then Picture-like to hang by the wall, if renown made it not stir, was pleased to let him seek danger, where he was like to find fame: To a cruel War I sent him, from whence he returned, his brows bound with Oak. I tell thee Daughter, I sprang not more in joy at first hearing he was a Man-child, then now in first seeing he had pro∣ued himself a man.
But had he died in the Business Madame, how then?
Then his good report should have been my Son, I therein would have found issue. Hear me pro∣fesse sincerely, had I a dozen sons each in my love alike, and none less dear then thine, and my good Martius, I had rather had eleven dye Nobly for their Country, then one voluptuously surfeit out of Action.
Madam, the Lady Valerie is come to visit you.
Beseech you give me leave to retire my self.
Indeed you shall not:
Me thinks, I hear hither your Husbands Drum:
See him pluck Auffidius down by the hair:
(As children from a Bear) the Volces shunning him:
Me thinks I see him stamp thus, and call thus,
Come on you Cowards, you were got in fear
Though you were borne in Rome; his bloody brow
With his mailed hand, then wiping, forth he goes
Like to a Harvest man, that tasked to mow
Or all, or loose his hire.
His bloody Brow? Oh Iupiter, no blood.
Away you Fool; it more becomes a man
Then gilt his Trophy. The breasts of Hecuba
When she did suckle Hector, looked not lovelier
Then Hectors forehead, when it spit forth blood
At Grecian sword. Contenning, tell Valerie
We are fit to bid her welcome.
Heavens bless my Lord from fell Auffidius.
He will beat Auffidius head below his knee,
And tread upon his neck.
My Ladies both good day to you.
Sweet Madam.
I am glad to see your Ladyship.
How do you both? You are manifest house-kee∣pers. What are you sowing here? A fine spot in good faith. How does your little Son?
I thank your Lady-ship: Well good Madam.
He had rather see the swords, and hear a Drum, then look upon his Schoolmaster.
A my word the Fathers Son: Isle swear it is a very pretty boy. A my troth, I looked upon him a Wens∣day half an hour together: he's such a confirmed coun∣tenance. I saw him run after a gilded Butterfly, &amp; when he caught it, he let it go again, and after it again, and o∣for and over he comes, and up again: caught it again: or whether his fall enraged him, or how it was, hee did so set his teeth, and tear it. Oh, I warrant how he mammockt it.
One on's Fathers moods.
Indeed la, tic a Noble child.
A Crack Madam.
Come, lay aside your stitchery, I must have you play the idle Huswife with me this afternoon.
No (good Madam)
I will not out of doors.
Not out of doors?
She shall, she shall.
Indeed no, by your patience; Isle not over the threshold, till my Lord return from the Wars.
Fie, you confine your self most unreasonably:
Come, you must go visit the good Lady that lies in.
I will wish her speedy strength, and visit her with my prayers: but I cannot go thither.
Why I pray you.
It is not to save labour, nor that I want love.
You would be another Penelope: yet they say, all the yearn she spun in Vlisses absence, did but fill Athica full of Moths. Come, I would your Cambric were sen∣sible as your finger, that you might leave pricking it for pity. Come you shall go with vs.
No good Madam, pardon me, indeed I will not forth.
In truth la go with me, and Isle tell you excellent news of your Husband.
Oh good Madam, there can be none yet.
Verily I do not jest with you: there came news from him last night.
Indeed Madam.
In earnest it's true; I heard a Senator speak it. Thus it is: the Volcies have an Army forth, against whō Cominius the General is gone, with one part of our To∣mane power. Your Lord, and Titus Lartius, are set down before their City Carrioles, they nothing doubt preuai∣ling, and to make it brief Wars. This is true on mine Honour, and so I pray go with vs.
Give me excuse good Madame, I will obey you in every thing hereafter.
Let her alone Lady, as she is now:
She will but disease our better mirth.
In troth I think she would:
Fare you well then. Come good sweet Lady.
Prithee Virgilia turn thy solemnise out a door,
And go along with vs.
No
At a word Madam; Indeed I must not,
I wish you much mirth.
Well, then farewell.
Yonder comes News:
A Wager they have met.
My horse to yours, no.
Tic done.
Agreed.
Say, he's our General met the Enemy?
They lye in view, but have not spoke as yet.
So, the good Horse is mine.
Isle buy him of you.
No, Isle nor sell, nor give him: Lend you him I will
For half a hundred years: Summon the Town.
How far off lie these Armies?
Within this mile and half.
Then shall we hear their Larum, &amp; they Ours.
Now Mars, I prithee make vs quick in work,
That we with smoking swords may march from hence
To help our fielded Friends. Come, blow thy blast.
Tullus Assiduous, is he within your Walls?
No, nor a man that fears you less then he,
That's lesser then a little:
Hark, our Drums
Are bringing forth our youth: We'll break our Walls
Rather then they shall pound vs up our Gates,
Which yet seem shut, we have but pined with Rushes,
They'll open of themselves. Hark you, far off
There is Assiduous. List what work he makes
Amongst your cloven Army.
Oh they are at it.
Their noise be our instruction. Ladders hoe.
They fear vs not, but issue forth their City.
Now put your Shields before your hearts, and fight
With hearts more proof then Shields.
Advance brave Titus,
They do disdain vs much beyond our Thoughts,
which makes me sweat with wrath. Come on my fellows
He that retires, Isle take him for a Volce,
And he shall feel mine edge.
All the contagion of the South, light on you,
You Shames of Rome: you Heard of Boils and Plagues
Plaster you o'er, that you may be abhorred
Farther then seen, and one infect another
Against the Wind a mile: you souls of Geese,
That bear the shapes of men, how have you run
From Slaves, that Apes would beat; Pluto and Hell,
All hurt behind, backs red, and faces pale
With flight and agued fear, mend and charge home,
Or by the fires of heaven, Isle leave the Foe,
And make my Wars on you: Look too't: Come on,
If you'll stand fast, we'll beat them to their Wives,
As they vs to our Trenches follows.
So, now the gates are op: now prove good Seconds,
It is for the followers Fortune, widens them,
Not for the flyers: Mark me, and do the like.
Foole-hardinesse, not I.
Nor I.
See they have shut him in.
To the pot I warrant him.
What is become of Martius?
Slain (Sir) doubtless.
Following the Flyers at the very heals,
With them he enters: who upon the sudden
Clapped to their Gates, he is himself alone,
To answer all the City.
Oh Noble Fellow!
Who sensibly out-dares his senseless Sword,
And when it bows, stand up: Thou art left Martius,
A Carbuncle entire: as big as thou art
Wear not so rich a Jewel. Thou was it a Soldier
Even to Calves wish, not fierce and terrible
Only in strokes, but with thy grim looks, and
The Thunder-like percussion of thy sounds
Thou made thine enemies shake, as if the World
Were Feauorous, and did tremble.
Look Sir.
O it is Martius.
Let's fetch him off, or make remain alike.
This will I carry to Rome.
And I this.
A Murrain on it, I took this for Silver.
See here these mouers, that do prize their hours
At a cracked Drachma: Cushions, Leaden Spoons,
Irons of a Do it, Dublets that Hangmen would
Bury with those that wore them. These base slaves,
Ere yet the fight be done, pack up, down with them.
And hark, what noise the General makes: To him
There is the man of my souls hate, Assiduous,
Piercing our Romans: Then Valiant Titus take
Convenient Numbers to make good the City,
Whilst I with those that have the spirit, will haste
To help Cominius.
Worthy Sir, thou bleed,
Thy exercise hath bin too violent,
For a second course of Fight.
Sir, praise me not:
My work hath yet not warmed me. Fare you well:
The blood I drop, is rather Physical
Then dangerous to me: To Assiduous thus, I will appear and fight.
Now the fair Goddess Fortune,
Fall deep in love with thee, and her great charms
Misguide thy Opposers swords, Bold Gentleman:
Prosperity be thy Page.
Thy Friend no less,
Then those she places highest: So farewell.
Thou worthiest Martius,
Go sound thy Trumpet in the Market place,
Call thither all the Officers a' the Town,
Where they shall know our mind. Away.
Breath you my friends, well fought, we are come off,
Like Romans, neither foolish in our stands,
Nor Cowardly in retire: Believe me Sirs,
We shall be charged again. Whiles we have struck
By Interims and conveying gusts, we have heard
The Charges of our Friends. The Roman Gods,
Lead their successes, as we wish our own,
That both our powers, with smiling Fronts encountering,
May give you thankful Sacrifice. Thy News?
The Citizens of Corioles have issued,
And given to Lartius and to Martius Battle:
I saw our party to their Trenches driven,
And then I came away.
Though thou speak truth,
Me thinks thou speak not well. How long is it since?
Aboue an hour, my Lord.
It is not a mile: briefly we heard their drums.
How coldest thou in a mile confound an hour,
And bring thy News so late?
Spies of the Ʋolces
Held me in chase, that I was forced to wheel
Three or four miles about, else had I sir
Half an hour since brought my report.
Whose yonder,
That doe's appear as he were Flayed? O Gods,
He has the stamp of Martius, and I have
Before time seen him thus.
Come I too late?
The Shepherd knows not Thunder frō a Taber,
More then I know the sound of Martius Tongue
From every meaner man.
Come I too late?
I, if you come not in the blood of others,
But mantled in your own.
Oh! let me clip ye
In Arms as sound, as when I wooed in heart;
As merry, as when our Nuptial day was done,
And Tapers burnt to Bedward.
Flower of Warriors, how is it with Titus Lartius?
As with a man busied about Decrees:
Condemning some to death, and some to exile,
Ransoming him, or pitying, threatening the other;
Holding Corioles in the name of Rome,
Even like a fawning Grey-hound in the Leash,
To let him slip at will.
Where is that Slave
Which told me they had beat you to your Trenches?
Where is he? Call him hither.
Let him alone,
He did inform the truth: but for our Gentlemen,
The common file, (a plague-Tribunes for them)
The Mouse ne'er shunned the Cat, as they did budge
From Rascals worse then they.
But how prevailed you?
Will the time serve to tell, I do not think:
Where is the enemy? Are you Lords a' th Field?
If not, why cease you till you are so?
Martius, we have at disadvantage fought,
And did retire to win our purpose.
How lies their Battle? Know you on wc side
They have placed their men of trust?
As I guess Martius,
Their Bands in th Vaward are the Ancients
Of their best trust: O'er them Assiduous,
Their very heart of Hope.
I do beseech you,
By all the Battles wherein we have fought,
By the Blood we have shed together,
By the Vows we have made
To endure Friends, that you directly set me
Against Assiduous, and his Antiats,
And that you not delay the present (but
Filling the air with Swords advanced) and Darts,
We prove this very hour.
Though I could wish,
You were conducted to a gentle Bath,
And Balms applied to you, yet dare I never
Deny your asking, take your choice of those
That best can aid your action.
Those are they
That most are willing; if any such be here,
(As it were sin to doubt) that love this painting
Wherein you see me smeared, if any fear
Lessen his person, then an ill report:
If any think, brave death out-weighes bad life,
And that his Countries dearer then himself,
Let him alone: Or so many so minded,
Wave thus to express his disposition,
And follow Martius.
Oh me alone, make you a sword of me:
If these shows be not outward, which of you
But is four Volces? None of you, but is
Able to bear against the great Assiduous
A Shield, as hard as his. A certain number
(Though thanks to all) must I select from all:
The rest shall bear the business in some other fight
(As cause will be obeyed:) please you to March,
And four shall quickly draw out my Command,
Which men are best inclined.
March on my Fellows:
Make good this ostentation, and you shall
Divide in all, with vs.
So, let the Ports be guarded; keep your Duties
As I have set them down. If I do send, dispatch
Those Centuries to our aid, the rest will serve
For a short holding, if we loose the Field,
We cannot keep the Town.
Fear not our care Sir.
Hence; and shut your gates vpon's:
Our Guitar come, to the Roman Gampe conduct vs.
Isle fight with none but thee, for I do hate thee
Worse then a Promise-breaker.
We hate alike:
Not Africa owns a Serpent I abhor
More then thy Fame and Envy: Fix thy foot.
Let the first Budger dye the others Slave,
And the Gods doom him after.
If I fly Martius, hollow me like a Hare.
Within these three hours Tullus
Alone I fought in your Corioles walls,
And made what work I pleased: It is not my blood,
Wherein thou see me maskt, for thy Revenge
Wrench up thy power to the highest.
Were it thou the Hector,
That was the whip of your bragged Progeny,
Thou should not scope me here.
Officious and not valiant, you have shamed me
In your condemned Seconds.
If I should tell thee o'er this thy days Work,
Thou't not believe thy deeds: but Isle report it,
Where Senators shall mingle tears with smiles,
Where great Patricians shall attend, and shrug,
In the end admire: where Ladies shall be frighted,
And gladly quaked, hear more: where the dull Tribunes,
That with the fusty Plebeans, hate thine Honours,
Shall say against their hearts, We thank the Gods
Our Rome hath such a Soldier.
Yet came thou to a Morsel of this Feast,
Having fully dined before.
Oh General:
Here is the Steed, wee the Caparison:
Had thou beheld—
Pray now, no more:
My Mother, who he's a Charter to extol her Blood,
When she do's praise me, grieves me:
I have done as you have done, that's what I can,
Induced as you have been, that's for my Country:
He that he's but effected his good will,
Hath ouerta'ne mine Act.
You shall not be the Grave of your deserving,
Rome must know the value of her own:
It were a Concealment worse then a Theft,
No less then a Traducement,
To hide your doings, and to silence that,
Which to the spire, and top of praises vouched,
Would seem but modest: therefore I beseech you,
In sign of what you are, not to reward
What you have done, before our Army hear me.
I have some Wounds upon me, and they smart
To hear themselves remembered.
Should they not:
Well might they fester against Ingratitude,
And tent themselves with death: of all the Horses,
Whereof we have taken good, and good store of all,
The Treasure in this field achieved, and City,
We render you the Tenth, to be taken forth,
Before the common distribution,
At your only choice.
I thank you General:
But cannot make my heart consent to take
A Bribe, to pay my Sword: I doe refuse it,
And stand upon my common part with those,
That have beheld the doing.
May these same Instruments, which you profane,
Never sound more: when Drums and Trumpets shall
In the field prove flatterers, let Courts and Cities be
Made all of false-fac'd soothing:
When Steel grows soft, as the Phrasites Silk,
Let him be made an Overture for the Wars:
No more I say, for that I have not washed
My Nose that bled, or foiled some debile Wretch,
Which without note, here's many else have done,
You shoot me forth in acclamations hyperbolical,
As if I loved my little should be dieted
In praises, sawc'st with Lies.
Too modest are you:
More cruel to your good report, then grateful
To vs, that give you truly: by your patience,
If against your self you be incensed, we'll put you
(Like one that means his proper harm) in Manacles,
Then reason safely with you: Therefore be it known,
As to vs, to all the World, That Caius Martius
Wears this Wars Garland: in token of the which,
My Noble Steed, known to the Camp, I give him,
With all his trim belonging; and from this time,
For what he did before Corioles, call him,
With all the applause and Clamour of the Host,
Bear the addition Nobly ever?
I will go wash:
And when my Face is fair, you shall perceive
Whether I blush, or no: howbeit, I thank you,
I mean to stride your Steed, and at all times
To vnder-crest your good Addition,
To the fairness of my power.
So, to our Tent:
Where ere we doe repose vs, we will write
To Rome of our success: you Titus Lartius
Must to Corioles back, send vs to Rome
The best, with whom we may articulate,
For their own good, and ours.
I shall, my Lord.
The Gods begin to mock me:
I that now refused most Princely gifts,
Am bound to beg of my Lord General.
Tak't, it is yours: what is it?
I sometime lay here in Corioles,
At a poor mans house: he used me kindly,
He cried to me: I saw him Prisoner:
But then Auffidius was within my view,
And Wrath o're-whelm'd my pity: I request you
To give my poor Host freedom.
Oh well begged:
Were he the Butcher of my Son, he should
Be free, as is the Wind: deliver him, Titus.
Martius, his Name.
By Iupiter forgot:
I am weary, yea my memory is tired:
Have we no Wine here?
Go we to our Tent:
The blood upon your Visage dries, it is time
It should be looked too: come.
The Town is taken.
Twill be delivered back on good Condition.
Condition?
I would I were a Roman, for I cannot.
Being a Ʋolce, be that I am. Condition?
What good Condition can a Treaty find
In the part that is at mercy? five times, Martius,
I have fought with thee; so often hast thou beat me:
And would doe so, I think, should we encounter
As often as we eat. By the Elements,
If ere again I meet him beard to beard,
He's mine, or I am his: Mine Emulation
Hath not that Honour in it it had: For where
I thought to crush him in an equal Force,
True Sword to Sword: Isle potche at him some way,
Or Wrath, or Craft may get him.
He's the devil.
Bolder, though not so subtle: my valors poisoned,
With only suffering stain by him: for him
Shall fly out of it self, nor sleep, nor sanctuary,
Being naked, sick; nor Phone, nor Capitol,
The Prayers of Priests, nor times of Sacrifice:
Embarquements all of Fury, shall lift up
Their rotten Privilege, and Custom against
My hate to Martius. Where I find him, were it
At home, upon my Brothers Guard, even there
Against the hospitable Canon, would I
Wash my fierce hand in's heart. Go you to the City,
Learn how it is held, and what they are that must
Be Hostages for Rome.
Will not you go?
I am attended at the Cyprus grove▪ I pray you
(It is South the City Mils) bring me word thither
How the world goes: that to the pace of it
I may spur on my journey.
I shall sir.
The Agurer tells me, wee shall have News to night.
Good or bad?
Not according to the prayer of the people, for they love not Martius.
Nature teaches Beasts to know their Friends.
Pray you, who does the Wolf love?
The Lamb.
I, to devour him, as the hungry Plebeians would the Noble Martius.
He's a Lamb indeed, that baes like a Bear.
Hoe's a Bear indeed, that lives like a Lamb.
You two are old men, tell me one thing that I shall ask you.
Well sir.
In what enormity is Martius poor in, that you two have not in abundance?
He's poor in no one fault, but stored withal.
Especially in Pride.
And topping all others in boasting.
This is strange now: Do you two know, how you are censured here in the City, I mean of vs a' the right hand File, do you?
Why? ho ware we censured?
Because you talk of Pride now, will you not be angry.
Well, well sir, well.
Why it is no great matter: for a very little thief of Occasion, will rob you of a great deal of Patience: Give your dispositions the reins, and bee angry at your pleasures (at the least) if you take it as a pleasure to you, in being so: you blame Martius for being proud.
We do it not alone, sir.
I know you can doe very little alone, for your helps are many, or else your actions would grow won∣dross single: your abilities are to Infant-like, for doing much alone. You talk of Pride: Oh, that you could turn your eyes toward the Napes of your necks, and make but an Interior survey of your good selves. Oh that you could.
What then sir?
Why then you should discover a brace of un∣meriting, proud, violent, testy Magistrates (alias Fools) as any in Rome.
Menenius, you are known well enough too.
I am known to be a humorous Patrician, and one that loves a cup of hot Wine, with not a drop of allay∣ing Tiber in it: Said, to be something imperfect in fauou∣ring the first complaint, hasty and Tinder-like upon, to trivial motion: One, that converses more with the But∣tocke of the night, then with the forehead of the morning. What I think, I utter, and spend my malice in my breath. Meeting two such Weals men as you are (I cannot call you Licurgusses,) if the drink you give me, touch my Pa∣lat adversely, I make a crooked face at it, I can say, your Worships have delivered the matter well, when I find the Ass in compound, with the Mayor part of your sylla∣bless. And though I must be content to bear with those, that say you are reverend grave men, yet they lye deadly, that tell you have good faces, if you see this in the Map of my Microcosm, follows it that I am known well e∣nough too? What harm can your beesome Conspectui∣ties glean out of this Character, if I be known well e∣nough too.
Come sir come, we know you well enough.
You know neither me, your selves, nor any thing: you are ambitious, for poor knaves caps and legs: you wear out a good wholesome Forenoon, in hearing a cause between an Orendge wife, and a Forced∣seller, and then reiourne the Controversy of three-pence to a second day of Audience. When you are hearing a matter between party and party, if you chance to bee pinched with the Colic, you make faces like Mum∣mers, set up the bloody Flag against all Patience, and in roaring for a Chamber-pot, dismiss the Controversy bleeding, the more entangled by your hearing: All the peace you make in their Cause, is calling both the parties Knaves. You are a pair of strange ones.
Come, come, you are well understood to bee a perfecter gyber for the Table, then a necessary Bencher in the Capitol.
Our very Priests must become Mockers, if they shall encounter such ridiculous Subjects as you are, when you speak best unto the purpose. It is not worth the wagging of your Beards, and your Beards deserve not so honourable a grave, as to stuff a Botchers Cushion, or to be entombed in an Asses Packe-saddle; yet you must bee saying, Martius is proud: who in a cheap estimation, is worth all your predecessors, since Deucalion, though per∣adventure some of the best of 'em were hereditary hang∣men. Gotten to your Worships, more of your conuer∣sation would infect my Brain, being the Heardsmen of the Beastly Plebeans. I will be bold to take my leave of you.
How now (my as fair as Noble) Ladies, and the Moon were she Earthly, no Nobler; whither doe you follow your Eyes so fast?
Honourable Menenius, my Boy Martius appro∣ches: for the love of Iuno let's go.
Ha? Martius coming home?
I, worthy Menenius▪ and with most prosperous approbation.
Take my Cap Iupiter, and I thank thee: hoo, Martius coming home?
Nay, it is true.
Look, here's a Letter from him, the State hath another, his Wife another, and (I think) there's one at home for you.
I will make my very house reel to night:
A Letter for me?
Yes certain, there's a Letter for you, I saw't.
A Letter for me? it gives me an Estate of se∣uen years health; in which time, I will make a Lip at the Physician: The most sovereign Prescription in Galen, is but Empiric qutique; and to this Preservative, of no better report then a Horse-drench. Is he not wounded? he was wont to come home wounded?
Oh no, no, no.
Oh, he is wounded, I thank the Gods for it.
So doe I too, if it be not too much: brings a Victory in his Pocket? the wounds become him.
On's Brows: Menenius, hee comes the third time home with the Oaken Garland.
He's he disciplined Auffidius soundly?
Titus Lartius writes, they fought together, but Auffidius got off.
And it was time for him too, Isle warrant him that: and he had stayed by him, I would not have been so fiddious'd, for all the Chests in Carrioles, and the Gold that's in them. Is the Senate possessed of this?
Good Ladies let's go. Yes, yes, yes: The Senate he's Letters from the General, wherein hee gives my Son the whole Name of the War: he hath in this action out-done his former deeds doubly.
In troth, there's wondrous things spoke of him.
Wondrous: I, I warrant you, and not with∣out his true purchasing.
The Gods grant them true.
True? pow waw.
True? Isle be sworn they are true: where is hee wounded, God save your good Worships? Martius is coming home: hee he's more cause to be proud: where is he wounded?
In the Shoulder, and in the left Arm: there will be large Cicatrices to show the People, when hee shall stand for his place: he received in the repulse of Tarquin seven hurts in the Body.
One in the Neck, and two in the Thigh, there's nine that I know.
Hee had, before this last Expedition, twenty five Wounds upon him.
Now it's twenty seven; every gash was an Enemies Grave. Hark, the Trumpets.
These are the Ushers of Martius:
Before him, hee carries Noise;
And behind him, hee leaves Tears:
Death, that dark Spirit, in's neruie Arm doth lye,
Which being advanced, declines, and then men dye.
Know Rome, that all alone Martius did fight
Within Corioles Gates: where he hath won,
With Fame, a Name to Martius Caius:
These in honour follows Martius Caius Coriolanus.
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus.
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus.
No more of this, it does offend my heart: pray now no more.
Look, Sir, your Mother.
Oh! you have, I know, petitioned all the Gods for my prosperity.
Nay, my good Soldier, up:
My gentle Martius, worthy Caius,
And by deed-atchieuing Honour newly named,
What is it (Coriolanus) must I call thee?
But oh, thy Wife.
My gracious silence, hail:
Would thou have laughed, had I come Coffined home,
That weep to see me triumph? Ah my dear,
Such eyes the Widows in Carrioles were,
And Mothers that lack Sons.
Now the Gods Crown thee.
And live you yet? Oh my sweet Lady, pardon.
I know not where to turn.
Oh welcome home: and welcome General,
And y' are welcome all.
A hundred thousand Welcomes:
I could weep, and I could laugh,
I am light, and heavy; welcome:
A Curse begin at very root on's heart,
That is not glad to see thee.
You are three, that Rome should dote on:
Yet by the faith of men, we have
Some old Crab-trees here at home,
That will not be grafted to your Relish.
Yet welcome Warriors:
Wee call a Nettle, but a Nettle;
And the faults of fools, but folly.
Ever right.
Menenius, ever, ever.
Give way there, and go on.
Your Hand, and yours?
Ere in our own house I doe shade my Head,
The good Patricians must be visited,
From whom I have received not only greetings,
But with them, change of Honours.
I have lived,
To see inherited my very Wishes,
And the Buildings of my Fancy:
Only there's one thing wanting,
Which (I doubt not) but our Rome
Will cast upon thee.
Know, good Mother,
I had rather be their servant in my way,
Then sway with them in theirs.
On, to the Capital.
All tongues speak of him, and the bleared sights
Are spectacled to see him. Your prattling Nurse
Into a rapture lets her Baby cry,
While she chats him: the Kitchen Malkin pins
Her richest Lockram about her reechie neck,
Clambering the Walls to eye him:
Stalls, Bulks, Windows, are smothered up,
Leads filled, and Ridges horsed
With variable Complexions; all agreeing
In earnestness to see him: seld-showne Flamins
Doe press among the popular Throngs, and puff
To win a vulgar station: our veiled Dames
Commit the War of White and Damask
In their nicely gawded Cheeks, to the wanton spoil
Of Phoebus burning Kisses: such a poother,
As if that whatsoever God, who leads him,
Were slyly crept into his humane powers,
And gave him graceful posture.
On the sudden, I warrant him Consul.
Then our Office may, during his power, go sleep.
He cannot temp'rately transport his Honours,
From where he should begin, and end, but will
Lose those he hath won.
In that there's comfort.
Doubt not,
The Commoners, for whom we stand, but they
Upon their ancient malice, will forget
With the least cause, these his new Honours,
Which that he will give them, make I as little question,
As he is proud to do it.
I heard him swear,
Were he to stand for Consul, never would he
Appear in the Market place, nor on him put
The Naples Vesture of Humility,
Nor showing (as the manner is) his Wounds
To the People, beg their stinking Breaths.
It is right.
It was his word:
Oh he would miss it, rather then carry it,
But by the suite of the Gentry to him,
And the desire of the Nobles.
I wish no better, then have him hold that pur∣pose, and to put it in execution.
It is most like he will.
It shall be to him then, as our good wills; a sure destruction.
So it must fall out
To him, or our Authorities, for an end.
We must suggest the People, in what hatred
He still hath held them: that to's power he would
Have made them Mules, silenced their Pleaders,
And dispropertied their Freedoms; holding them,
In humane Action, and Capacity,
Of no more Soul, nor fitness for the World,
Then Camels in their War, who have their Provant
Only for bearing Burdens, and sore blows
For sinking under them.
This (as you say) suggested,
At some time, when his soaring Insolence
Shall teach the People, which time shall not want,
If he be put upon it, and that's as easy,
As to set Dogs on Sheep, will be his fire
To kindle their dry Stubble: and their Blaze
Shall darken him for ever.
What's the matter?
You are sent for to the Capitol:
It is thought, that Martius shall be Consul:
I have seen the dumb men throng to see him,
And the blind to hear him speak: Matrons flong Gloves,
Ladies and Maids their Scarves, and Handkerchers,
Upon him as he passed: the Nobles bended
As to Ioues Statue, and the Commons made
A Shower, and Thunder, with their Caps, and Shouts:
I never saw the like.
Let's to the Capitol,
And carry with vs Ears and Eyes for the time,
But Hearts for the event.
Have with you.
Come, come, they are almost here: how many stand for Consulships?
Three, they say: but it is thought of every one, Coriolanus will carry it.
That's a brave fellow: but hoe's vengeance proud, and loves not the common people.
Faith, there hath been many great men that have flattered the people, who ne'er loved them; and there be many that they have loved, they know not wherefore: so that if they love they know not why, they hate upon no better a ground. Therefore, for Coriolanus neither to care whether they love, or hate him, manifests the true knowledge he he's in their disposition, and out of his No∣ble carelessness lets them plainly see it.
If he did not care whether he had their love, or no, hee waued indifferently, twixt doing them neither good, nor harm: but hee seeks their hate with greater devotion, then they can render it him; and leaves nothing undone, that may fully discover him their opposite. Now to seem to affect the malice and displeasure of the Peo∣ple, is as bad, as that which he dislikes, to flatter them for their love.
Hee hath deserved worthily of his Country, and his assent is not by such easy degrees as those, who having been supple and courteous to the People, Bon∣netted, without any further deed, to have them at all into their estimation, and report: but hee hath so planted his Honours in their Eyes, and his actions in their Hearts, that for their Tongues to be silent, and not confess so much, were a kind of ungrateful Injury: to report otherwise, were a Malice, that giving it self the Lye, would pluck reproof and rebuke from every Ear that heard it.
No more of him, hoe's a worthy man: make way, they are coming.
Having determined of the Volces,
And to send for Titus Lartius: it remains,
As the maine Point of this our after-meeting,
To gratify his Noble service, that hath
Thus stood for his Country. Therefore please you,
Most reverend and grave Elders, to desire
The present Consul, and last General,
In our well-found Successes, to report
A little of that worthy Work, performed
By Martius Caius Coriolanus: whom
We met here, both to thank, and to remember,
With Honours like himself.
Speak, good Cominius:
Leave nothing out for length, and make vs think
Rather our states defective for requital,
Then we to stretch it out. Masters a' the People,
We doe request your kindest ears: and after
Your loving motion toward the common Body,
To yield what passes here.
We are convented upon a pleasing Treaty, and have hearts inclinable to honour and advance the Theme of our Assembly.
Which the rather wee shall be blessed to doe, if he remember a kinder value of the People, then he hath hereto prized them at.
That's off, that's off: I would you rather had been silent: Please you to hear Cominius speak?
Most willingly: but yet my Caution was more pertinent then the rebuke you give it.
He loves your People, but tie him not to be their Bed-fellow: Worthy Cominius speak.
Nay, keep your place.
Sit Coriolanus: never shame to hear
What you have Nobly done.
Your Honours pardon:
I had rather have my Wounds to heal again,
Then hear say how I got them.
Sir, I hope my words dis-bench'd you not?
No Sir: yet oft,
When blows have made me stay, I fled from words.
You soothed not, therefore hurt not: but your People,
I love them as they weigh—
Pray now sit down.
I had rather have one scratch my Head in the Sun,
When the Alarm were struck, then idly sit
To hear my Nothings monster'd.
Masters of the People,
Your multiplying Spawn, how can he flatter?
That's thousand to one good one, when you now see
He had rather venture all his Limbs for Honour,
Then on ones Ears to hear it. Proceed Cominius.
I shall lack voice: the deeds of Coriolanus
Should not be uttered feebly: it is held,
That Valour is the chiefest Virtue,
And most dignifies the hauer: if it be,
The man I speak of, cannot in the World
Be singly counter-poys'd. At sixteen years,
When Tarquin made a Head for Rome, he fought
Beyond the mark of others: our then Dictator,
Whom with all praise I point at, saw him fight,
When with his Amazonian Shin he drove
The bristled Lips before him: he bestride
An o're-prest Roman, and in the Consuls view
Slew three Opposers: Tarquins self he met,
And struck him on his Knee: in that days feats,
When he might act the Woman in the Scene,
He proved best man in the field, and for his meed
Was Brow-bound with the Oak. His Pupil age
Man-entred thus, he waxed like a Sea,
And in the brunt of seventeen Battles since,
He lurched all Swords of the Garland: for this last,
Before, and in Corioles, let me say
I cannot speak him home: he stopped the flyers,
And by his rare example made the Coward
Turn terror into sport: as Weeds before
A Vessel under sail, so men obeyed,
And fell below his Stem: his Sword, Deaths stamp,
Where it did mark, it took from face to foot:
He was a thing of Blood, whose every motion
Was timed with dying Cries: alone he entered
The mortal Gate of the City, which he painted
With shunlesse destiny: aidless came off,
And with a sudden re-inforcement struck
Carrioles like a Planet: now ell's his,
When by and by the din of War began pierce
His ready sense: then straight his doubled spirit
Requickned what in flesh was fatigate,
And to the Battle came he, where he did
Run reeking o'er the lives of men, as if it were
A perpetual spoil: and till we called
Both Field and City ours, he never stood
To ease his Breast with panting.
Worthy man.
He cannot but with measure fit the Honours which we devise him.
Our spoils he kicked at,
And looked upon things precious, as they were
The common Muck of the World: he covets less
Then Misery it self would give, rewards his deeds
With doing them, and is content
To spend the time▪ to end it.
Hoe's right Noble, let him be called for.
Call Coriolanus.
He doth appear.
The Senate, Coriolanus, are well pleased to make thee Consul.
I doe owe them still my Life, and Services.
It then remains, that you doe speak to the People.
I doe beseech you,
Let me o're-leape that custom: for I cannot
Put on the Gown, stand naked, and entreat them
For my Wounds sake, to give their sufferage:
Please you that I may pass this doing.
Sir, the People must have their Voices,
Neither will they bate one jot of Ceremony.
Put them not too't:
Pray you go fit you to the Custom,
And take to you, as your Predecessors have,
Your Honour with your form.
It is a part that I shall blush in acting,
And might well be taken from the People.
Mark you that.
To brag unto them, thus I did, and thus
Show them the vnaking Skarres, which I should hide,
As if I had received them for the hire
Of their breath only.
Doe not stand upon it:
We recommend to you Tribunes of the People
Our purpose to them, and to our Noble Consul
Wish we all Joy, and Honour.
To Coriolanus come all joy and Honour.
You see how he intends to use the people.
May they perceiue's intent: he will require them
As if he did contemn what he requested,
Should be in them to give.
Come, we'll inform them
Of our proceedings here on the Market place,
I know they do attend vs.
Once if he do require our voices, wee ought not to deny him.
We may Sir if we will.
We have power in our selves to do it, but it is a power that we have no power to do: For, if hee show vs his wounds, and tell vs his deeds, we are to put our ton∣gues into those wounds, and speak for them: So if he tel vs his Noble deeds, we must also tell him our Noble ac∣ceptance of them. Ingratitude is monstrous, and for the multitude to be ungrateful, were to make a Monster of the multitude; of the which, we being members, should bring our selves to be monstrous members.
And to make vs no better thought of a little help will serve: for once we stood up about the Corn, he himself stuck not to call vs the many-headed Multi∣tude.
We have been called so of many, not that our heads are some browne, some black, some Abram, some bald; but that our wits are so diversely Coulord; and true∣lie I think, if all our wits were to issue out of one Scull, they would fly East, West, North, South, and their con∣sent of one direct way, should be at once to all the points a' th Compass.
Think you so? Which way do you judge my wit would fly.
Nay your wit will not so soon out as another mans will, it is strongly wedged up in a blockhead: but if it were at liberty, it would sure Southward.
Why that way?
To loose it self in a Fog, where being three parts melted away with rotten Dews, the fourth would return for Conscience sake, to help to get thee a Wife.
You are never without your tricks, you may, you may.
Are you all resolved to give your voices? But that's no matter, the greater part carries it, I say. If hee would incline to the people, there was never a worthier man.
Here he comes, and in the Gown of humility, mark his behaviour: we are not to stay altogether, but to come by him where he stands, by ones, by twos, &amp; by threes. He's to make his requests by particulars, wherein every one of vs he's a single Honour, in giving him our own voi∣ces with our own tongues, therefore follow me, and Isle direct you how you shall go by him.
Content, content.
Oh Sir, you are not right: have you not known
The worthiest men have done it?
What must I say, I pray Sir?
Plague upon it, I cannot bring
My tongue to such a pace. Look Sir, my wounds,
I got them in my Countries Service, when
Some certain of your Brethren roared, and ran
From the noise of our own Drums.
Oh me the Gods, you must not speak of that,
You must desire them to think upon you.
Think upon me? Hang 'em,
I would they would forget me, like the Virtues
Which our Divines lose by em.
You'll mar all.
Isle leave you: Pray you speak to em, I pray you
In wholesome manner.
Bid them wash their Faces,
And keep their teeth clean: So, here comes a brace,
You know the cause (Sir) of my standing here.
We do Sir, tell vs what hath brought you too't.
Mine own desert.
Your own desert.
I, but mine own desire.
How not your own desire?
No Sir, it was never my desire yet to trouble the poor with begging.
You must think if we give you any thing, we hope to gain by you.
Well then I pray, your price a' the Consulship.
The price is, to ask it kindly.
Kindly sir, I pray let me have it: I have wounds to show you, which shall bee yours in private: your good voice Sir, what say you?
You shall have it worthy Sir.
A match Sir, there's in all two worthy voices begged: I have your Alms, Adieu.
But this is something odd.
And it were to give again: but it is no matter.
Pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of your voices, that I may bee Consul, I have here the Customary Gown.
You have deserved Nobly of your Country, and you have not deserved Nobly.
Your Enigma.
You have bin a scourge to her enemies, you have bin a Rod to her Friends, you have not indeed loved the Common people.
You should account me the more Virtuous, that I have not bin common in my Love, I will sir flatter my sworn Brother the people to earn a dearer esteem∣tion of them, it is a condition they account gentle▪ &amp; since the wisdom of their choice, is rather to have my Hat, then my Heart, I will practice the insinuating nod, and be off to them most counterfeitly, that is sir, I will counter∣fet the bewitchment of some popular man, and give it bountiful to the desire•s: Therefore beseech you, I may be Consul.
Wee hope to find you our friend: and therefore give you our voices heartily.
You have received many wounds for your Coun∣trey.
I will not Seal your knowledge with showing them. I will make much of your voices, and so trouble you no farther.
The Gods give you joy Sir heartily.
Most sweet Voices:
Better it is to dye, better to starve,
Then crave the higher, which first we do deserve.
Why in this Wooluish tongue should I stand here,
To beg of Hob and Dicke, that does appear
Their needless Vouches: Custom calls me too't.
What Custom wills in all things, should we do it?
The Dust on antique Time would lye vnswept,
And mountainous Error be too highly heaped,
For Truth to o're-peere. Rather then fool it so,
Let the high Office and the Honour go
To one that would doe thus. I am half through,
The one part suffered, the other will I doe.
Here come more Voices.
Your Voices? for your Voices I have fought,
Watched for your Voices: for your Voices, bear
Of Wounds, two dozen odd: Battles thrice six
I have seen, and heard of: for your Voices,
Have done many things, some less, some more:
Your Voices? Indeed I would be Consul.
Hee he's done Nobly, and cannot go without any honest mans Voice.
Therefore let him be Consul: the Gods give him joy, and make him good friend to the People.
Amen, Amen. God save thee, Noble Consul.
Worthy Voices.
You have stood your Limitation:
And the Tribunes endue you with the Peoples Voice,
Remains, that in the Official Marks invested,
You anon doe meet the Senate.
Is this done?
The Custom of Request you have discharged:
The People doe admit you and are summoned
To meet anon, upon your approbation.
Where? at the Senate-house?
There, Coriolanus.
May I change these Garments?
You may, Sir.
That Isle straight do: and knowing my self again,
Repair to the Senate-house.
Isle keep you company. Will you along?
We stay here for the People.
Fare you well.
He he's it now: and by his Looks, me thinks,
It is warm it's heart.
With a proud heart he wore his humble Weeds:
Will you dismiss the People?
How now, my Masters, have you chose this man?
He he's our Voices, Sir.
We pray the Gods, he may deserve your loves.
Amen, Sir: to my poor unworthy notice,
He mocked vs, when he begged our Voices.
Certainly, he flouted vs downright.
No, it is his kind of speech, he did not mock vs.
Not one amongst vs, save your self, but says
He used vs scornfully: he should have showed vs
His Marks of Merit, Wounds received for's Country.
Why so he did I am sure.
No, no: no man saw 'em.
Hee said hee had Wounds,
Which he could show in private:
And with his Hat, thus waving it in scorn,
I would be Consul, says he: aged Custom,
But by your Voices, will not so permit me.
Your Voices therefore: when we granted that,
Here was, I thank you for your Voices, thank you
Your most sweet Voices: now you have left your Voices
I have no further with you. Was not this mockery?
Why either were you ignorant to see it?
Or seeing it, of such Childish friendliness,
To yield your Voices?
Could you not have told him,
As you were lesson'd: When he had no Power,
But was a petty servant to the State,
He was your Enemy, ever sp•ke against
Your Liberties, and the Charters that you bear
In the Body of the Weal: and now arriving
A place of Potency, and sway of the State,
If he should still malignantly remain
Fast Foe to the Plebeij, your Voices might
Be Curses to your selves. You should have said,
That as his worthy deeds did claim no less
Then what he stood for: so his gracious nature
Would think upon you, for your Voices,
And translate his Malice towards you, into Love,
Standing your friendly Lord.
Thus to have said,
As you were fore-aduis'd, had touched his Spirit,
And tried his Inclinations from him plucked
Either his gracious Promise, which you might
As cause had called you up, have held him to;
Or else it would have galled his surly nature,
Which easily endures not Article,
Tying him to ought, so putting him to Rage,
You should have taken the advantage of his Choler,
And passed him vnelected.
Did you perceive,
He did solicit you in free Contempt,
When he did need your Loves▪ and doe you think,
That his Contempt shall not be bruising to you,
When he hath power to crush? Why, had your Bodies
No Heart among you? Or had you Tongues, to cry
Against the Rectorship of Judgment?
Have you, ere now denied the as•er:
And now again, of him that did not ask, but mock,
Bestow your sued for Tongues?
Hoe's not confirmed, we may deny him yet.
And will deny him:
Isle have five hundred Voices of that sound.
I twice five hundred &amp; their friends, to piece 'em.
Get you hence instantly, and tell those friends,
They have chose a Consul, that will from them take
Their Liberties, make them of no more Voice
Then Dogs, that are as often beat for barking,
As therefore kept to doe so.
Let them assemble: and on a safer Judgment,
All revoke your ignorant election: Enforce his Pride,
And his old Hate unto you: besides, forget not
With what Contempt he wore the humble Weed,
How in his Suit he scorned you: but your Loves,
Thinking upon his Services, took from you
The apprehension of his present portance,
Which most gibingly, vngrauely, he did fashion
After the inveterate Hate he bears you.
Lay a fault on vs, your Tribunes,
That we laboured (no impediment between)
But that you must cast your Election on him.
Say you chose him, more after our commandment,
Then as guided by your own true affections, and that
Your Minds pre-occupy'd with what you rather must do,
Then what you should, made you against the grain
To Voice him Consul. Lay the fault on vs.
I, spare vs not: Say, we read Lectures to you,
How youngly he began to serve his Country,
How long continued, and what stock he springs of,
The Noble House▪ of the Martians: from whence came
That Ancus Martius, Numaes Daughters Son:
Who after great Hostilius here was King,
Of the same House Publius and Quintus were,
That our best Water, brought by Conduits hither,
And Nobly named, so twice being Censor,
Was his great Ancestor.
One thus descended,
That hath beside well in his person wrought,
To be set high in place, we did commend
To your remembrances: but you have found,
Scaling his present bearing with his past,
That hoe's your fixed enemy; and revoke
Your sudden approbation.
Say you ne'er had don't,
(Harp on that still) but by our putting on:
And presently, when you have drawn your number,
Repair to the Capitol.
We will so: almost all repent in their election.
Let them go on:
This Mutiny were better put in hazard,
Then stay past doubt, for greater:
If, as his nature is, he fall in rage
With their refusal, both observe and answer
The vantage of his anger.
To the Capitol, come:
We will be there before the stream of the People:
And this shall seem, as partly it is, their own,
Which we have goaded on-ward.
Tullus Auffidius then had made new head.
He had, my Lord, and that it was which cause
Our swifter Composition.
So then the Volces stand but as at first,
Ready when time shall prompt them, to make road
Vpon's again.
They are worn (Lord Consul) so,
That we shall hardly in our ages see
Their Banners wave again.
Saw you Auffidius?
On safeguard he came to me, and did curse
Against the Volces, for they had so wildly
Yielded the Town: he is retired to Antium.
Spoke he of me?
He did, my Lord.
How? what?
How often he had met you Sword to Sword:
That of all things upon the Earth, he hated
Your person most: That he would pawn his fortunes
To hopeless restitution, so he might
Be called your Vanquisher.
At Antium lives he?
At Antium.
I wish I had a cause to seek him there,
To oppose his hatred fully. Welcome home.
Behold, these are the Tribunes of the People,
The Tongues of the Common Mouth. I do despise them:
For they doe prank them in Authority,
Against all Noble sufferance.
Pass no further.
Ho? what is that?
It will be dangerous to go on— No further.
What makes this change?
The matter?
Hath he not passed the Noble, and the Common?
Cominius, no.
Have I had Childrens Voices?
Tribunes give way, he shall to the Market place.
The People are incensed against him.
Stop, or all will fall in broil.
Are these your Heard?
Must these have Voices, that can yield them now,
And straight disclaim their tongs? what are your Offices?
You being their Mouths, why rule you not their Teeth?
Have you not set them on?
Be calm, be calm.
It is a purposed thing, and grows by Plot,
To curb the will of the Nobility:
Suffer't, and live with such as cannot rule,
Nor ever will be ruled.
Call it not a Plot:
The People cry you mocked them: and of late,
When Corn was given them gratis, you repined,
Scandal'd the Suppliants: for the People, called them
Time-pleasers, flatterers, foes to Nobleness.
Why this was known before.
Not to them all.
Have you informed them since?
How? I inform them?
You are like to doe such business.
Not unlike each way to better yours.
Why then should I be Consul? by yond Clouds
Let me deserve so ill as you, and make me
Your fellow Tribune.
You show too much of that,
For which the People stir: if you will pass
To where you are bound, you must enquire your way,
Which you are out of, with a gentler spirit,
Or never be so Noble as a Consul,
Nor yoke with him for Tribune.
Let's be calm.
The People are abused: set on, this paltring
Becomes not Rome: nor he's Coriolanus
Deserved this so dishonoured Rub, laid falsely
In the plain Way of his Merit.
Tell me of Corn: this was my speech,
And I will speak't again.
Not now, not now.
Not in this heat, Sir, now.
Now as I live, I will.
My Nobler friends, I crave their pardons:
For the mutable ranke-sented Meynie,
Let them regard me, as I doe not flatter,
And therein behold themselves: I say again,
In soothing them, we nourish against our Senate
The Cockle of Rebellion, Insolence, Sedition,
Which we our selves have ploughed for, sowed, &amp; scattered,
By mingling them with vs, the honoured Number,
Who lack not Virtue, no, nor Power, but that
Which they have given to Beggars.
Well, no more.
No more words, we beseech you.
How? no more?
As for my Country, I have shed my blood,
Not fearing outward force: So shall my Lungs
Coin words till their decay, against those Meazels
Which we disdain should Tetter vs, yet sought
The very way to catch them.
You speak a' the people, as if you were a God,
To punish; Not a man, of their Infirmity.
It were well we let the people know it.
What, what? His Choler?
Choler? Were I as patient as the midnight sleep,
By Jove, it would be my mind.
It is a mind that shall remain a poison
Where it is: not poison any further.
Shall remain?
Hear you this Triton of the Minnoues? Mark you
His absolute Shall?
It was from the Cannon.
Shall? O God! but most unwise Patricians: why
You grave, but wreaklesse Senators, have you thus
Given Hidra here to choose an Officer,
That with his peremptory Shall, being but
The horn, and noise of the Monsters, wants not spirit
To say, he will turn your Current in a ditch,
And make your Channel his? If he have power,
Then vale your Ignorance: If none, awake
Your dangerous Lenity: If you are Learned,
Be not as common Fools; if you are not,
Let them have Cushions by you. You are Plebeians,
If they be Senators: and they are no less,
When both your voices blended, the greatest taste
Most pallates theirs. They choose their Magistrate,
And such a one as he, who puts his Shall,
His popular Shall, against a graver Bench
Then ever frowned in Greece. By Jove himself,
It makes the Consuls base; and my Soul aches
To know, when two Authorities are up,
Neither Supreme; How soon Confusion
May enter twixt the gap of Both, and take
The one by the other.
Well, on to the Market place.
Who ever gave that Counsel, to give forth
The Corn a' the Store-house gratis, as it was used
Sometime in Greece.
Well, well, no more of that.
Though there the people had more absolute power I say they nourished disobedience: fed, the ruin of the State.
Why shall the people give
One that speaks thus, their voice?
Isle give my Reasons,
More worthier then their Voices. They know the Corn
Was not our recompense, resting well assured
They ne'er did service for it; being pressed to the War,
Even when the Navel of the State was touched,
They would not thread the Gates: This kind of Service
Did not deserve Corn gratis. Being in the War,
There Mutinies and Revolts, wherein they showed
Most Valour spoke not for them. The Accusation
Which they have often made against the Senate,
All cause unborn, could never be the Native
Of our so frank Donation. Well, what then?
How shall this Bosome-multiplied, digest
The Senates Curtsy? Let deeds express
What's like to be their words, We did request it,
We are the greater pole, and in true fear
They gave vs our demands. Thus we debase
The Nature of our Seats, and make the Rabble
Call our Cares, Fears; which will in time
Break op the Lockes a' the Senate, and bring in
The Crows to peck the Eagles.
Come enough.
Enough, with over measure.
No, take more.
What may be sworn by, both Divine and Humane,
Seal what I end withal. This double worship,
Whereon part do's disdain with cause, the other
Insult without all reason: where Gentry, Title, wisdom
Cannot conclude, but by the yea and no
Of general Ignorance, it must omit
Real Necessities, and give way the while
To unstable Slightness. Purpose so barred, it follows,
Nothing is done to purpose. Therefore beseech you,
You that will be less fearful, then discreet,
That love the Fundamental part of State
More then you doubt the change on it: That prefer
A Noble life, before a Long, and Wish,
To jump a Body with a dangerous Physic,
That's sure of death without it: at once pluck out
The Multitudinous Tongue, let them not •icke
The sweet which is their poison. Your dishonour
Mangles true judgment, and bereaves the State
Of that Integrity which should becomed:
Not having the power to do the good it would
For the ill which doth control it.
Has said enough.
He's spoken like a Traitor, and shall answer
As Traitors do.
Thou wretch, despite ore-whelme thee:
What should the people do with these bald Tribunes?
On whom depending, their obedience fails
To the greater Bench, in a Rebellion:
When what's not me•, but what must be, was Law,
Then were they chosen: in a better hour,
Let what is meet, be said it must be meet,
And throw their power in the dust.
Manifest Treason.
This a Consul? No.
The Ediles hoe: Let him be apprehended:
Go call the people, in whose name my Self
Attach thee as a Traitorous Innouator:
A Foe to the public Weal. Obey I charge thee,
And follow to thine answer.
Hence old Goat.
We'll Surety him.
Aged sir, hands-off.
Hence rotten thing, or I shall shake thy bones
Out of thy Garments.
Help ye Citizens.
On both sides more respect.
Heere's hee, that would take from you all your power.
Seize him Aediles.
Down with him, down with him.
Weapons, weapons, weapons:
Tribunes, Patricians, Citizens: what ho:
Sicinius, Brutus, Coriolanus, Citizens.
Peace, peace, peace, stay, hold, peace.
What is about to be? I am out of Breath,
Confusions near, I cannot speak. You, Tribunes
To the people: Coriolanus, patience: Speak good Sicinius.
Hear me, People peace.
Let's here our Tribune: peace, speak, speak, speak.
You are at point to lose your Liberties:
Martius would have all from you; Martius,
Whom late you have named for Consul.
Fie, fie, fie, this is the way to kindle, not to quench.
To vnbuild the City, and to lay all flat.
What is the City, but the People?
True, the People are the City.
By the consent of all, we were established the Peoples Magistrates.
You so remain.
And so are like to doe.
That is the way to lay the City flat,
To bring the Roof to the Foundation,
And bury all, which yet distinctly ranges
In heaps, and piles of Ruin.
This deserves Death.
Or let vs stand to our Authority,
Or let vs lose it: we doe here pronounce,
Upon the part of the People, in whose power
We were elected theirs, Martius is worthy
Of present Death.
Therefore lay hold of him:
Bear him to the Rock Tarpeian, and from thence
Into destruction cast him.
Aediles seize him.
Yield Martius, yield.
Hear me one word, beseech you Tribunes, hear me but a word.
Peace, peace.
Be that you seem, truly your Countries friend,
And temp•rately proceed to what you would
Thus violently redress.
Sir, those cold ways,
That seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous,
Where the Disease is violent. Lay hands upon him,
And bear him to the Rock.
No, Isle die here:
There's some among you have beheld me fighting,
Come try upon your selves, what you have seen me.
Down with that Sword, Tribunes withdraw a while.
Lay hands upon him.
Help Martius, help: you that be noble, help him young and old.
Down with him, down with him.
Go, get you to our House: be gone, away.
All will be nought else.
Get you gone.
Stand fast, we have as many friends as enemies.
Shall it be put to that?
The Gods forbid:
I prithee noble friend, home to thy House,
Leave vs to cure this Cause.
For it is a Sore upon vs,
You cannot Tent your self: be gone, beseech you.
Come Sir, along with vs.
I would they were Barbarians, as they are,
Though in Rome littered not Romans, as they are not,
Though calved in the Porch of the Capitol:
Be gone, put not your worthy Rage into your Tongue,
One time will owe another.
On fair ground, I could beat forty of them.
I could my self take up a Brace of the best of them, yea, the two Tribunes.
But now it is odds beyond Arithmetic,
And Manhood is called Foolery, when it stands
Against a falling Fabric. Will you hence,
Before the Tag return? whose Rage doth rend
Like interrupted Waters, and o're-beare
What they are used to bear.
Pray you be gone:
Isle try whether my old Wit be in request
With those that have but little: this must be patched
With Cloth of any Colour.
Nay, come away.
This man he's marred his fortune.
His nature is too noble for the World:
He would not flatter Neptune for his Trident,
Or Jove, for's power to Thunder: his Heart's his Mouth:
What his Breast forges, that his Tongue must vent,
And being angry, does forget that ever
He heard the Name of Death.
Here's goodly work.
I would they were a bed.
I would they were in Tyber.
What the vengeance, could he not speak 'em fair?
Where is this Viper,
That would depopulate the city, &amp; be every man himself
You worthy Tribunes.
He shall be thrown down the Tarpeian rock
With rigorous hands: he hath resisted Law,
And therefore Law shall scorn him further Trial
Then the severity of the public Power,
Which he so sets at nought.
He shall well know the Noble Tribunes are
The peoples mouths, and we their hands.
He shall sure out.
Sir, sir.
Peace.
Do not cry havoc, where you should but hunt
With modest warrant.
Sir, how come that you have help
To make this rescue?
Here me speak? As I do know
The Consuls worthiness, so can I name his Faults.
Consul? what Consul?
The Consul Coriolanus.
He Consul.
No, no, no, no, no.
If by the Tribunes leave,
And yours good people,
I may be heard, I would crave a word or two,
The which shall turn you to no further harm,
Then so much loss of time.
Speak briefly then,
For we are peremptory to dispatch
This Viporous Traitor: to eiect him hence
Were but one danger, and to keep him here
Our certain death: therefore it is decreed,
He dyes to night.
Now the good Gods forbid,
That our renowned Rome▪ whose gratitude
Towards her deserved Children, is enrolled
In Ioues own Book, like an unnatural Dam
Should now eat up her own.
He's a Disease that must be cut away.
Oh he's a Limb, that he's but a Disease
Mortal, to cut it off: to cure it, easy.
What he's he done to Rome, that's worthy death?
Killing our Enemies, the blood he hath lost
(Which I dare vouch, is more then that he hath
By many an Ounce) he dropped it for his Country:
And what is left, to loose it by his Country,
Were to vs all that do it, and suffer it
A brand to the end a 'th World.
This is clean kamme.
Merely awry:
When he did love his Country, it honoured him.
The service of the foot
Being once gangrened, is not then respected
For what before it was.
We'll hear no more:
Pursue him to his house, and pluck him thence,
Least his infection being of catching nature,
Spread further.
One word more, one word:
This Tiger-footed-rage, when it shall find
The harm of vnskan'd swiftness, will (too late)
Tie Leaden pounds too's heals. Proceed by Process,
Least parties (as he is beloved) break out,
And sack great Rome with Romans.
If it were so?
What do ye talk?
Have we not had a taste of his Obedience?
Our Ediles smote: our selves resisted: come.
Consider this: He he's bin bred in the Wars
Since a could draw a Sword, and is ill schooled
In bolted Language: Meal and Bran together
He throws without distinction. Give me leave,
Isle go to him, and undertake to bring him in peace,
Where he shall answer by a lawful Form
(In peace) to his utmost peril.
Noble Tribunes,
It is the humane way: the other course
Will prove to bloody: and the end of it,
Unknown to the Beginning.
Noble Menenius, be you then as the peoples officer:
Masters, lay down your Weapons.
Go not home.
Meet on the Market place: we'll attend you there:
Where if you bring not Martius, we'll proceed
In our first way.
Isle bring him to you.
Let me desire your company: he must come,
Or what is worst will follow.
Pray you let's to him.
Let them pull all about mine ears, present me
Death on the Wheel, or at wilde Horses heals,
Or pile ten hills on the Tarpeian Rock,
That the precipitation might down stretch
Below the beam of sight; yet will I still
Be thus to them.
You do the Nobler.
I muse my Mother
Do's not approve me further, who was wont
To call them Woollen Vassailes, things created
To buy and sell with Groats, to show bare heads
In Congregations, to yawn, be still, and wonder,
When one but of my ordinance stood up
To speak of Peace, or War. I talk of you,
Why did you wish me milder? Would you have me
False to my Nature? Rather say, I play
The man I am.
Oh sir, sir, sir,
I would have had you put your power well on
Before you had worn it out.
Let go.
You might have been enough the man you are,
With striving less to be so: Lesser had bin
The things of your dispositions, if
You had not showed them how ye were disposed
Ere they lacked power to cross you.
Let them hang.
I, and burn too.
Come, come, you have bin too rough, something too rough: you must return, and mend it.
There's no remedy,
Unless by not so doing, our good City
Cleave in the midst, and perish.
Pray be counselled;
I have a heart as little apt as yours,
But yet a brain, that leads my use of Anger
To better vantage.
Well said, Noble woman:
Before he should thus stoop to the heart, but that
The violent fit a' the time craves it as Physic
For the whole State; I would put mine Armour on,
Which I can scarcely bear.
What must I do?
Return to the Tribunes.
Well, what then? what then?
Repent, what you have spoke.
For them, I cannot do it to the Gods,
Must I then do it to them?
You are too absolute,
Though therein you can never be too Noble,
But when extremities speak. I have heard you say,
Honour and Policy, like vnseuer'd Friends,
In the War do grow together: Grant that, and tell me
In Peace, what each of them by the other loose,
That they combine not there?
Tush, tush.
A good demand.
If it be Honour in your Wars, to seem
The same you are not, which for your best ends
You adopt your policy: How is it less or worse
That it shall hold Companionship in Peace
With Honour, as in War; since that to both
It stands in like request.
Why force you this?
Because, that
Now it lies you on to speak to the people:
Not by your own instruction, nor by' the matter
Which your heart prompts you, but with such words
That are but rooted in your Tongue;
Though but Bastards, and Syllables
Of no allowance, to your bosoms truth.
Now, this no more dishonours you at all,
Then to take in a Town with gentle words,
Which else would put you to your fortune, and
The hazard of much blood.
I would dissemble with my Nature, where
My Fortunes and my Friends at stake, required
I should do so in Honour. I am in this
Your Wife, your Son: These Senators, the Nobles,
And you, will rather show our general Louts,
How you can frown, then spend a fawn upon 'em,
For the inheritance of their loves, and safeguard
Of what that want might ruin.
Noble Lady,
Come go with vs, speak fair: you may salve so,
Not what is dangerous present, but the loss
Of what is past.
I pry thee now, my Son,
Go to them, with this Bonnet in thy hand,
And thus far having stretched it (here be with them)
Thy Knee bussing the stones: for in such business
Action is eloquence, and the eyes of the ignorant
More learned then the ears, waving thy head,
Which often thus correcting thy stout heart,
Now humble as the ripest Mulberry,
That will not hold the handling: or say to them,
Thou art their Soldier, and being bred in broils,
Hast not the soft way, which thou dost confess
Were fit for thee to use, as they to claim,
In asking their good loves, but thou wilt frame
Thy self (forsooth) hereafter theirs so far,
As thou hast power and person.
This but done,
Even as she speaks, why their hearts were yours:
For they have Pardons, being asked, as free,
As words to little purpose.
Prithee now,
Go, and be ruled: although I know thou had rather
Follow thine Enemy in a fiery Gulf,
Then flatter him in a Bower.
Here is Cominius.
I have been in the Market place: and Sir it is fit
You make strong party, or defend your self
By calmness, or by absence: ell's in anger.
Only fair speech.
I think twill serve, if he can thereto frame his spirit.
He must, and will:
Prithee now say you will, and go about it.
Must I go show them my vnbarb'd Sconce?
Must I with my base Tongue give to my Noble Heart
A Lye, that it must bear well? I will do it:
Yet were there but this single Plot, to loose
This Mould of Martius, they to dust should grind it,
And throw't against the Wind. To the Market place:
You have put me now to such a part, which never
I shall discharge to the Life.
Come, come, we'll prompt you.
I prithee now sweet Son, as thou hast said
My praises made thee first a Soldier; so
To have my praise for this, perform a part
Thou hast not done before.
Well, I must do it:
Away my disposition, and possess me
Some Harlots spirit: My throat of War be turned,
Which queered with my Drum into a Pipe,
Small as an Eunuch, or the Virgin voice
That Babies lull asleep: The smiles of Knaves
Tent in my cheeks, and Schoole-boyes Tears take up
The Glasses of my sight: A Beggars Tongue
Make motion through my Lips, and my Armed knees
Who bowed but in my Stirrup, bend like his
That hath received an Alms. I will not do it,
Least I surcease to honour mine own truth,
And by my Bodies action, teach my Mind
A most inherent Baseness.
At thy choice then:
To beg of thee, it is my more dishonour,
Then thou of them. Come all to ruin, let
Thy Mother rather feel thy Pride, then fear
Thy dangerous Stoutness: for I mock at death
With as big heart as thou. Do as thou list,
Thy Valiantness was mine, thou suck it from me:
But owe thy Pride thy self.
Pray be content:
Mother, I am going to the Market place:
Chide me no more. Isle Mountebank their Loves,
Cog their Hearts from them, and come home beloved
Of all the Trades in Rome. Look, I am going:
Commend me to my Wife, Isle return Consul,
Or never trust to what my Tongue can do
In th way of Flattery further.
Do your will.
Away, the Tribunes do attend you: arm your self
To answer mildly: for they are prepared
With Accusations, as I hear more strong
Then are upon you yet.
The word is, Mildly. Pray you let vs go,
Let them accuse me by invention: I
Will answer in mine Honour.
I, but mildly.
Well mildly be it then, Mildly.
In this point charge him home, that he affects
Tyrannical power: If he euade vs there,
Enforce him with his envy to the people,
And that the Spoil got on the A•teats
Was ne'er distributed. What, will he come?
Hoe's coming.
How accompanied?
With old Menenius, and those Senators
That always favoured him.
Have you a Catalogue
Of all the Voices that we have procured, set down by 'th Pole?
I have: it is ready.
Have you collected them by Tribes?
I have.
Assemble presently the people hither:
And when they hear me say, it shall be so,
In the right and strength a' the Commons: be it either
For death, for fine, or Banishment, then let them
If I say Fine, cry Fine; if Death, cry Death,
Insisting on the old prerogative
And power in th Truth a' th Cause.
I shall inform them.
And when such time they have begun to cry,
Let them not cease, but with a din confused
Enforce the present Execution
Of what we chance to Sentence.
Very well.
Make them be strong, and ready for this hint
When we shall hap to gived them.
Go about it,
Put him to Choler strait, he hath been used
Ever to conquer, and to have his worth
Of contradiction. Being once chaft, he cannot
Be reined again to Temperance, then he speaks
What's in his heart, and that is there which looks
With vs to break his neck.
Well, here he comes.
Calmly, I do beseech you.
I, as an Hostler, that fourth poorest piece
Will bear the Knave by 'th Volume:
The honoured Gods
Keep Rome in safety, and the Chairs of Justice
Supplied with worthy men, plant love among
Through our large Temples with ye shows of peace
And not our streets with War.
Amen, Amen.
A Noble wish.
Draw near ye people.
List to your Tribunes. Audience:
Peace I say.
First hear me speak.
Well, say: Peace hoe.
Shall I be charged no further then this present?
Must all determine here?
I do demand,
If you submit you to the peoples voices,
Allow their Officers, and are content
To suffer lawful Censure for such faults
As shall be proved upon you.
I am Content.
Lo Citizens, he says he is Content.
The warlike Service he he's done, consider: Think
Upon the wounds his body bears, which show
Like Graves in th holy Church-yard.
Scratches with Briers, scars to move
Laughter only.
Consider further:
That when he speaks not like a Citizen,
You find him like a Soldier: do not take
His rougher Actions for malicious sounds:
But as I say, such as become a Soldier,
Rather then envy you.
Well, well, no more.
What is the matter,
That being past for Consul with full voice:
I am so dishonoured, that the very hour
You take it off again.
Answer to vs.
Say then: it is true, I ought so
We charge you, that you have contrived to take
From Rome all seasoned Office, and to wind
Your self into a power tyrannical,
For which you are a Traitor to the people.
How? Traitor?
Nay temperately: your promise.
The fires in the lowest hell. Fouled in the people:
Call me their Traitor, thou injurious Tribune.
Within thine eyes sate twenty thousand deaths
In thy hands clutched: as many Millions in
Thy lying tongue, both numbers. I would say
Thou lie unto thee, with a voice as free,
As I do pray the Gods.
Mark you this people?
To the Rock, to the Rock with him.
Peace:
We need not put new matter to his charge:
What you have seen him do, and heard him speak:
Beating your Officers, cursing your selves,
Opposing Laws with strokes, and here defying
Those whose great power must try him.
Even this so criminal, and in such capital kind
Deserves the extremest death.
But since he hath served well for Rome.
What do you prate of Service.
I talk of that, that know it.
You?
Is this the promise that you made your mother.
Know, I pray you.
Isle know no further:
Let them pronounce the steep Tarpeian death,
Vagabond exile, Fleeing, pent to linger
But with a grain a day, I would not buy
Their mercy, at the price of one fair word,
Nor check my Courage for what they can give,
To have it with saying, Good morrow.
For that he he's
(As much as in him lies) from time to time
Envied against the people; seeking means
To pluck away their power: as now at last,
Given Hostile strokes, and that not in the presence
Of dreaded Justice, but on the Ministers
That doth distribute it. In the name a' the people,
And in the power of vs the Tribunes, wee
(Even from this instant) banish him our City
In peril of precipitation
From off the Rock Tarpeian, never more
To enter our Rome gates. In the Peoples name,
I say it shall bee so.
It shall be so, it shall be so: let him away:
Hoe's banished, and it shall be so.
Hear me my Masters, and my common friends.
He's sentenced: No more hearing.
Let me speak:
I have been Consul, and can show from Rome
Her Enemies marks upon me. I do love
My Countries good, with a respect more tender,
More holy, and profound, then mine own life,
My dear Wives estimate, her wombs increase,
And treasure of my Loins: then if I would
Speak that.
We know your drift. Speak what?
There's no more to be said, but he is banished
As Enemy to the people, and his Country.
It shall bee so.
It shall be so, it shall be so.
You common cry of Curs, whose breath I hate,
As reeke a' the rotten Fens: whose Loves I prize,
As the dead Carcasses of unburied men,
That do corrupt my Ayre: I banish you,
And here remain with your uncertainty.
Let every feeble Rumour shake your hearts:
Your Enemies, with nodding of their Plumes
Fan you into despair: Have the power still
To banish your Defenders, till at length
Your ignorance (which finds not till it feels,
Making but reservation of your selves,
Still your own Foes) deliver you
As most abated Captives, to some Nation
That won you without blows, despising
For you the City. Thus I turn my back;
There is a world elsewhere.
The peoples Enemy is gone, is gone.
Our enemy is banished, he is gone: Hoo, oo.
Go see him out at Gates, and follow him
As he hath followed you, with all despite
Give him deserved vexation. Let a guard
Attend vs through the City.
Come, come, lets see him out at gates, come:
The Gods preserve our Noble Tribunes, come.
Come leave your tears: a brief farewell: the beast
With many heads butts me away. Nay Mother,
Where is your ancient Courage? You were used
To say, Extremities was the trier of spirits,
That common chances. Common men could bear,
That when the Sea was calm, all Boats alike
Showed Mastership in floating. Fortunes blows,
When most struck home, being gentle wounded, craves
A Noble cunning. You were used to load me
With Precepts that would make invincible
The heart that conned them.
Oh heavens! O heavens!
Nay, I prithee woman.
Now the Red Pestilence strike al Trades in Rome,
And Occupations perish.
What, what, what:
I shall be loved when I am lacked. Nay Mother,
Resume that Spirit, when you were wont to say,
If you had been the Wife of Hercules.
Six of his Labours youl'd have done, and saved
Your Husband so much sweat. Cominius,
Droop not, Adieu: Farewell my Wife, my Mother,
Isle do well yet. Thou old and true Menenius,
Thy tears are salter then a younger mans,
And venomous to thine eyes. My (sometime) General,
I have seen the Sterne, and thou hast oft beheld
Heart-hardning spectacles. Tell these sad women,
It is fond to wail inevitable strokes,
As it is to laugh at 'em My Mother, you wot well
My hazards still have been your solace, and
Believe not lightly, though I go alone
Like to a lonely Dragon, that his Fen
Makes feared, and talked of more then seen: your Son
Will or exceed the Common, or be caught
With cautelous baits and practice.
My first son,
Whether will thou go? Take good Cominius
With thee a while: Determine on some course
More then a wilde exposture, to each chance
That start's in the way before thee.
O the Gods!
Isle follow thee a Month, devise with thee
Where thou shalt rest, that thou may hear of vs,
And we of thee. So if the time thrust forth
A cause for thy Repeal, we shall not send
O'er the vast world, to seek a single man,
And loose advantage, which doth ever cool
I the absence of the needer.
Fare ye well:
Thou hast years upon thee, and thou art too full
Of the wars surfeits, to go rove with one
That's yet unbruised: bring me but out at gate.
Come my sweet wife, my dearest Mother, and
My Friends of Noble touch: when I am forth,
Bid me farewell, and smile. I pray you come:
While I remain aboue the ground, you shall
Hear from me still, and never of me ought
But what is like me formerly.
That's worthily
As any ear can hear. Come, let's not weep,
If I could shake off but one seven years
From these old arms and legs, by the good Gods
I'd with thee, every foot.
Give me thy hand, come.
Bid them all home, he's gone: &amp; we'll no further,
The Nobility are vexed, whom we see have sided
In his behalf.
Now we have shown our power,
Let vs seem humbler after it is done,
Then when it was a doing.
Bid them home: say their great enemy is gone,
And they, stand in their ancient strength.
Dismiss them home. Here comes his Mother.
Let's not meet her.
Why?
They say she's mad.
They have tan note of vs: keep on your way.
Oh y' are well met:
The hoarded plague a' the Gods requite your love.
Peace, peace, be not so loud.
If that I could for weeping, you should hear,
Nay, and you shall hear some. Will you be gone?
You shall stay too: I would I had the power
To say so to my Husband.
Are you mankind?
I fool, is that a shame. Note but this Fool,
Was not a man my Father? Had thou Foxship
To banish him that struck more blows for Rome
Then thou hast spoken words.
Oh blessed Heavens!
More Noble blows, then ever you wise words.
And for Romes good, Isle tell thee what: yet go:
Nay but thou shalt stay too: I would my Son
Were in Arabia, and thy Tribe before him,
His good Sword in his hand.
What then?
What then? Hee'ld make an end of thy posterity
Bastards, and all.
Good man, the Wounds that he does bear for Rome!
Come, come, peace.
I would he had continued to his Country
As he began, and not vnknit himself
The Noble knot he made.
I would he had.
I would he had? It was you incensed the rabble.
Cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth,
As I can of those Mysteries which heaven
Will not have earth to know.
Pray let's go.
Now pray sir get you gone.
You have done a brave deed: Ere you go, hear this:
As far as doth the Capitol exceed
The meanest house in Rome; so far my Son
This Ladies Husband here; this (do you see)
Whom you have banished, does exceed you all.
Well, well, we'll leave you.
Why stay we to be baited
With one that wants her Wits.
Take my Prayers with you.
I would the Gods had nothing else to do,
But to confirm my Curses. Could I meet 'em
But once a day, it would vnclogge my heart
Of what lies heavy too't.
You have told them home,
And by my troth you have cause: you'll Sup with me.
Angers my Meat: I sup upon my self,
And so shall starve with Feeding: Come, let's go,
Leave this faint-puling, and lament as I do,
In Anger, Iuno-like: Come, come, come.
Fie, fie, fie.
I know you well sir, and you know me: your name I think is Adrian.
It is so sir, truly I have forgot you.
I am a Roman, and my Services are as you are, against 'em. Know you me yet.
Nicanor: no.
The same sir.
You had more Beard when I last saw you, but your Favour is well appeared by your Tongue. What's the News in Rome: I have a Note from the Volcean state to find you out there. You have well saved me a days journey.
There hath been in Rome strange Insurrecti∣once: The people, against the Senators, Patricians, and Nobles.
Hath bin; is it ended then? Our State thinks not so, they are in a most warlike preparation, &amp; hope to com upon them, in the heate of their division
The maine blaze of it is past, but a small thing would make it flame again. For the Nobles receive so to heart, the Banishment of that worthy Coriolanus, that they are in a ripe aptness, to take al power from the peo∣ple, and to pluck from them their Tribunes for ever. This lies glowing I can tell you, and is almost mature for the violent breaking out.
Coriolanus Banished?
Banished sir.
You will be welcome with this intelligence No∣canor.
The day serves well for them now. I have heard it said, the fittest time to corrupt a mans Wife, is when shoe's fallen out with her Husband. Your Noble Tullus Auffidius well appear well in these Wars, his great Opposer Coriolanus being now in no request of his coun∣trey.
He cannot choose: I am most fortunate, thus accidentally to encounter you. You have ended my Bu∣sinesse, and I will merrily accompany you home.
I shall between this and Supper, tell you most strange things from Rome: all tending to the good of their Adversaries. Have you an Army ready say you?
A most Royal one: The Centurions, and their charges distinctly billeted already in the entertainment, and to be on foot at an hours warning.
I am joyful to hear of their readiness, and am the man I think, that shall set them in present Action. So sir, heartily well met, and most glad of your Company.
You take my part from me sir, I have the most cause to be glad of yours.
Well, let vs go together.
A goodly City is this Antium▪ City,
It is I that made thy Widows: Many an heir
Of these fair Edifices fore my Wars
Have I heard groan, and drop: Then know me not,
Least that thy Wives with Spits, and Boys with stones
In puny Battle slay me. Save you sir.
And you.
Direct me, if it be your will, where great Auf∣fidius lies: Is he in Antium?
He is, and Feasts the Nobles of the State, at his house this night.
Which is his house, beseech you?
This here before you.
Thank you sir, farewell.
Oh World, thy slippery turns! Friends now fast sworn,
Whose double bosoms seems to wear one heart,
Whose Hours, whose Bed, whose Meal and Exercise
Are still together: who Twin (as it were) in Love,
Unseparable, shall within this hour,
On a dissention of a Do it, break out
To bitterest Enmity: So fellest Foes,
Whose Passions, and whose Plots have broke their sleep
To take the one the other, by some chance,
Some trick not worth an Egg, shall grow dear friends
And inter-ioyne their issues. So with me,
My Birth-place have I, and my loves upon
This Enemy Town: Isle enter, if he slay me
He does fair Justice: if he give me way,
Isle do his Country Service.
Wine, Wine, Wine: What service is here? I think our Fellows are asleep.
Whore's Cotus: my M. calls for him: Cotus.
A goodly House:
The Feast smells well: but I appear not like a Guest.
What would you have Friend? whence are you?
Here's no place for you: Pray go to the door?
I have deserved no better entertainment, in be∣ing Coriolanus.
Whence are you sir? He's the Porter his eyes in his head, that he gives entrance to such Companions? Pray get you out.
Away.
Away? Get you away.
Now the art troublesome.
Are you so brave: Isle have you talked with anon
What Fellows this?
A strange one as ever I looked on: I cannot get him out of the house: Prithee call my Master to him.
What have you to do here fellow? Pray you avoid the house.
Let me but stand, I will not hurt your Harth.
What are you?
A Gentleman.
A maru'llous poor one.
True, so I am.
Pray you poor Gentleman, take up some other sty∣tion:
Heere's no place for you, pray you avoid: Come.
Follow your Function, go, and batten on cold bits.
What you will not? Prithee tell my Moister what a strange Guest he he's here.
And I shall.
Where dwel'st thou?
Under the Canopy.
Under the Canopy?
I.
Whore's that?
In th City of Kites and Crows.
In th City of Kites and Crows? What an Ass it is, then thou dwel'st with Daws too?
No, I serve not thy Master.
How sir? Do you meddle with my Master?
I, tic an honester service, then to meddle with thy Mistress: Thou prat'st, and prat'st, serve with thy tren∣cher: Hence.
Where is this Fellow?
Here sir, I'd have beaten him like a dog, but for disturbing the Lords within.
Whence come thou? What would you? Thy name?
Why speak not? Speak man: What's thy name?
If Tullus not yet thou know me, and seeing me, dost not think me for the man I am, necessity com∣mands me name my self.
What is thy name?
A name vnmusicall to the Volcians cares,
And harsh in sound to thine.
Say, what's thy name?
Thou hast a Grim appearance, and thy Face
Bears a Command in it: Though thy Tackles torn,
Thou show a Noble Vessel: What's thy name?
Prepare thy brow to frown: know you me yet?
I know thee not? Thy Name?
My name is Caius Martius, who hath done
To thee particularly, and to all the Volces
Great hurt and Mischief: thereto witness may
My Surname Coriolanus. The painful Service,
The extreme Dangers, and the drops of Blood
Shed for my thankless Country, are requited:
But with that Surname, a good memory
And witness of the Malice and Displeasure
Which thou should bear me, only that name remains.
The Cruelty and Envy of the people,
Permitted by our dastard Nobles, who
Have all forsook me, hath devoured the rest:
And suffered me by the voice of Slaves to be
Hooped out of Rome. Now this extremity,
Hath brought me to thy Harth, not out of Hope
(Mistake me not) to save my life: for if
I had feared death, of all the Men in the World
I would have voided thee. But in mere spite
To be full quit of those my Banishers,
Stand I before thee here: Then if thou hast
A heart of wreak in thee, that wilt revenge
Thine own particular wrongs, and stop those maims
Of shame seen through thy Country, speed thee straight
And make my misery serve thy turn: So use it,
That my revengeful Services may prove
As Benefits to thee. For I will fight
Against my Cankered Country, with the Spleen
Of all the under Fiends. But if so be,
Thou dare not this, and that to prove more Fortunes
The art tired, then in a word, I also am
Longer to live most weary: and present
My throat to thee, and to thy Ancient Malice:
Which not to cut, would show thee but a Fool,
Since I have ever followed thee with hate,
Drawn Tons of Blood out of thy Countries breast,
And cannot live but to thy shame, unless
It be to do thee service.
Oh Martius, Martius;
Each word thou hast spoke, hath weeded from my heart
A root of Ancient Envy. If Iupiter
Should from yond cloud speak divine things,
And say it is true; I'd not believe them more
Then thee all-Noble Martius. Let me twine
Mine arms about that body, where against
My greened Ash an hundred times hath broke,
And scarred the Moon with splinters: here I cleep
The Anvil of my Sword, and do contest
As hotly, and as Nobly with thy Love,
As ever in Ambitious strength, I did
Contend against thy Valour. Know thou first,
I loved the Maid I married: never man
Sighed truer breath. But that I see thee here
Thou Noble thing, more dances my rapt heart,
Then when I first my wedded Mistress saw
Bestride my Threshold. Why, thou Mars I tell thee,
We have a Power on foot: and I had purpose
Once more to hew thy Target from thy Brawn,
Or loose mine Arm for it: Thou hast beat me out
Twelve several times, and I have nightly since
Dreamt of encounters twixt thy self and me:
We have been down together in my sleep,
Unbuckling Helmes, fisting each others Throat,
And waked half dead with nothing. Worthy Martius,
Had we no other quarrel else to Rome, but that
Thou art thence Banished, we would muster all
From twelve, to seventy: and pouring War
Into the bowels of ungrateful Rome,
Like a bold Flood o're-beate. Oh come, go in,
And take our Friendly Senators by' the hands
Who now are here, taking their leaves of me,
Who am prepared against your Territories,
Though not for Rome it self.
You bless me Gods.
Therefore most absolute Sir, if thou wilt have
The leading of thine own Revenges, take
The one half of my Commission, and set down
As best thou art experienced, since thou know
Thy Countries strength and weakness, thine own ways
Whether to knock against the Gates of Rome,
Or rudely visit them in parts remote,
To fright them, ere destroy. But come in,
Let me commend thee first, to those that shall
Say yea to thy desires. A thousand welcomes,
And more a Friend, then ere an Enemy,
Yet Martius that was much. Your hand: most welcome.
Heere's a strange alteration?
By my hand, I had thought to have stricken him with a Cudgel, and yet my mind gave me, his clothes made a false report of him.
What an Arm he has, he turned me about with his finger and his thumb, as one would set up a Top.
Nay, I knew by his face that there was some-thing in him. He had fir, a kind of face me thought, I cannot
tell how to term it.
He had so, looking as it were, would I were hanged but I thought there was more in him, then I could think.
So did I, Isle be sworn: He is simply the rarest man in the world.
I think he is: but a greater soldier then he,
You wot one.
Who my Master?
Nay, it's no matter for that.
Worth six on him.
Nay not so neither: but I take him to be the greater Soldier.
Faith look you, one cannot tell how to say that: for the Defence of a Town, our General is excellent.
I, and for an assault too.
Oh Slaves, I can tell you News, News you Rascals
What, what, what? Let's partake.
I would not be a Roman of all Nations; I had as live be a condemned man.
Wherefore? Wherefore?
Why here's he that was wont to thwack our Ge∣nerall, Caius Martius.
Why do you say, thwack our General?
I do not say thwack our General, but he was al∣ways good enough for him▪
Come we are fellows and friends: he was ever too hard for him, I have heard him say so himself.
He was too hard for him directly, to say the Troth on it before Corioles, he scotched him, and notched him like a Carbonado.
And hee had bin Cannibally given, hee might have boiled and eaten him too.
But more of thy News.
Why he is so made on here within, as if hee were Son and Heir to Mars, set at upper end of the Table: No question asked him by any of the Senators, but they stand bald before him. Our General himself makes a Mistress of him, Sanctifies himself wed's hand, and turns up the white of the eye to his Discourse. But the bottom of the News is, our General is cut in the middle, &amp; but one half of what he was yesterday. For the other he's half, by the entreaty and grant of the whole Table. He will go he says, and sole the Porter of Rome Gates by the ears. He will mow all down before him, and leave his passage poled.
And he's as like to do it, as any man I can imagine.
Do it? he will do it: for look you sir, he has as ma∣ny Friends as Enemies: which Friends sir as it were, durst not (look you sir) show themselves (as we term it) his Friends, whilst he's in Directitude.
Directitude? What's that?
But when they shall see sir, his Crest up again, and the man in blood, they will out of their Burroughes (like Cones after Rain) and revel all with him.
But when goes this forward:
To morrow, to day, presently, you shall have the Drum struck up this afternoon: It is as it were a parcel of their Feast, and to be executed ere they wipe their lips.
Why then wee shall have a stirring World again: This peace is nothing, but to rust Iron, increase Taylors, and breed Ballad-makers.
Let me have War say I, it exceeds peace as far as day do's night: It's sprightly walking, audible, and full of Vent. Peace, is a very Apoplexy, Lethargy, mulled, deaf, sleep, insensible, a getter of more bastard. I will∣drone, then wars a destroyer of men.
It is so, and as wars in some sort may be said to be a Rauishen, so it cannot be denied, but peace is a great maker of Cuckolds.
I, and it makes men hate one another.
Reason, because they then less need one another: The Wars for my money. I hope to see Romans as cheap as Volcians. They are rising, they are rising.
In, in, in, in.
We hear not of him, neither need we fear him,
His remedies are tame, the present peace,
And quietness of the people, which before
Were in wilde hurry. Here do we make his Friend•
Blush, that the world goes well: who rather had,
Though they themselves did suffer by it, behold
Dissentious numbers pestring streets, then see
Our Tradesmen singing in their shops, and going
About their Functions friendly.
We stood too't in good time. Is this Menenius?
It is he, it is he: O he is grown most kind of late: Hail Sir.
Hail to you both.
Your Coriolanus is not much mist, but with his Friends: the Commonwealth doth stand, and so would do, were he more angry at it.
Ell's well, and might have been much better, if he could have temporised.
Where is he, hear you?
Nay I hear nothing:
His Mother and his wife, hear nothing from him.
The Gods preserve you both.
Gooden our Neighbours.
Gooden to you all, gooden to you all.
Our selves, our wives, and children, on our knees,
Are bound to pray for you both.
Live, and thrive.
Farewell kind Neighhours:
We wished Coriolanus had loved you as we did.
Now the Gods keep you.
Farewell, farewell.
This is a happier and more comely time,
Then when these Fellows ran about the streets,
Crying Confusion.
Caius Martius was
A worthy Officer in the War, but Insolent,
Overcome with Pride, Ambitious, past all thinking
Selfe-louing.
And affecting one sole Throne, without assistāce
I think not so.
We should by this, to all our Lamention,
If he had gone forth Consul, found it so.
The Gods have well prevented it, and Rome
Sits safe and still, without him.
Worthy Tribunes,
There is a Slave whom we have put in prison,
Reports the Volces with two several Powers
Are entered in the Roman Territories,
And with the deepest malice of the War,
Destroy, what lies before 'em.
It is Auffidius,
Who hearing of our Martius Banishment,
Thrusts forth his horns again into the world
Which were In-shell'd, when Martius stood for Rome,
And durst not once peep out.
Come, what talk you of Martius.
Go see this Rumorer whipped, it cannot be,
The Volces dare break with vs.
Cannot be?
We have Record, that very well it can,
And three examples of the like, hath been
Within my Age. But reason with the fellow
Before you punish him, where he heard this,
Least you shall chance to whip your Information,
And beat the Messenger, who bids beware
Of what is to be dreaded.
Tell not me: I know this cannot be.
Not possible.
The Nobles in great earnestness are going
All to the Senate-house: some news is coming
That turns their Countenances.
It is this Slave:
Go whip him fore the peoples eyes: His raising,
Nothing but his report.
Yes worthy Sir,
The Slaves report is seconded, and more
More fearful is delivered.
What more fearful?
It is spoke freely out of many mouths,
How probable I do not know, that Martius
Joined with Auffidius, leads a power against Rome,
And vows Revenge as spacious, as between
The youngest and oldest thing.
This is most likely.
Raised only, that the weaker sort may wish
Good Martius home again.
The very trick on it.
This is unlikely,
He, and Auffidius can no more atone
Then violent'st Contrariety.
You are sent for to the Senate:
A fearful Army, led by Caius Martius,
Associated with Auffidius, Rages
Upon our Territories, and have already
O're-borne their way, consumed with fire, and took
What lay before them.
Oh you have made good work.
What news? What news?
You have help to ravish your own daughters, &amp;
To melt the City Leads upon your pates,
To see your Wives dishonoured to your Noses.
What's the news? What's the news?
Your Temples burned in their Cement, and
Your Franchises, whereon you stood, confined
Into an Augors boar.
Pray now, your News:
You have made fair work I fear me: pray your news,
If Martius should be joined with Volceans.
If? He is their God, he leads them like a thing
Made by some other Deity then Nature,
That shapes man Better: and they follow him
Against vs Brats, with no less Confidence,
Then Boys pursuing Summer Butter-flies,
Or Butchers killing Flies.
You have made good work,
You and your Apron men: you, that stood so much
Upon the voice of occupation, and
The breath of Garlicke-eaters.
Hee I shake your Rome about your ears.
As Hercules did shake down Mellow Fruit▪
You have made fair work.
But is this true sir?
I, and you'll look pale
Before you find it other. All the Regions
Do smilingly Revolt, and who resists
Are mocked for valiant Ignorance,
And perish constant Fools: who is it can blame him?
Your Enemies and his, find something in him.
We are all undone, unless
The Noble man have mercy.
Who shall ask it?
The Tribunes cannot do it for shame; the people
Deserve such pity of him, as the Wolf
Doe's of the Shepherds: For his best Friends, if they
Should say be good to Rome, they charged him, even
As those should do that had deserved his hate,
And therein showed like Enemies.
It is true, if he were putting to my house, the brand
That should consume it, I have not the face
To say, beseech you cease. You have made fair hands,
You and your Crafts, you have crafted fair.
You have brought
A Trembling upon Rome, such as was never
S'incapeable of help.
Say not, we brought it.
How? Was it we? We loved him,
But like Beasts, and Cowardly Nobles,
Gave way unto your Clusters, who did hoot
Him out of the City.
But I fear
They'll roar him in again. Tullus Auffidius,
The second name of men, obeys his points
As if he were his Officer: Desperation,
Is all the Policy, Strength, and Defence
That Rome can make against them.
Here come the Clusters.
And is Auffidius with him? You are they
That made the Ayre unwholesome, when you cast
Your stinking, greasy Caps, in hooting
At Coriolanus Exile. Now he's coming,
And not a hair upon a Soldiers head
Which will not prove a whip: As many Coxcombs
As you threw Caps up, will he tumble down,
And pay you for your voices. It is no matter,
If he could burn vs all into one coal,
We have deserved it.
Faith, we hear fearful News.
For mine own part.
When I said banish him, I said it was pity.
And so did I.
And so did I: and to say the truth, so did very ma∣ny of vs, that we did we did for the best, and though wee willingly consented to his Banishment, yet it was against our will.
Y' are goodly things, you Voices.
You have made good work
You and your cry. Shal's to the Capitol?
Oh I, what else?
Go Masters get you home, be not dismayed,
These are a Side, that would be glad to have
This true, which they so seem to fear. Go home,
And show no sign of Fear.
The Gods bee good to vs: Come Masters let's home, I ever said we were in th wrong, when we banished him.
So did we all. But come, let's home.
I do not like this News.
Nor I.
Let's to the Capitol: would half my wealth
Would buy this for a lye.
Pray let's go.
Do they still fly to the Roman?
I do not know what Witchcraft's in him: but
Your Soldiers use him as the Grace before meat,
Their talk at Table, and their Thanks at end,
And you are darkened in this action Sir,
Even by your own.
I cannot help it now,
Unless by using means I lame the foot
Of our design. He bears himself more proudlier,
Even to my person, then I thought he would
When first I did embrace him. Yet his Nature
In that's no Changeling, and I must excuse
What cannot be amended.
Yet I wish Sir,
(I mean for your particular) you had not
Joined in Commission with him: but either have borne
The action of your self, or else to him, had left it soly.
I understand thee well, and be thou sure
When he shall come to his account, he knows not
What I can urge against him, although it seems
And so he thinks, and is no less apparent
To the vulgar eye, that he bears all things fairly:
And show• good Husbandry for the Volcian State,
Fights Dragon-like, and does achieve as soon
As draw his Sword: yet he hath left undone
That which shall break his neck, or hazard mine,
When ere we come to our account.
Sir, I beseech you, think you he'll carry Rome?
All places yields to him ere he sits down,
And the Nobility of Rome are his:
The Senators and Patricians love him too:
The Tribunes are no Soldiers: and their people
Will be as rash in the repeal, as hasty
To expel him thence. I think he will be to Rome
As is the Aspray to the Fish, who takes it
By Sovereignty of Nature. First, he was
A Noble servant to them, but he could not
Carry his Honours even: whether 'was Pride
Which out of daily Fortune ever taints
The happy man; whether detect of judgment,
To fail in the disposing of those chances
Which he was Lord of: or whether Nature,
Not to be other then one thing, not mooing
From the Cask to the Cushion: but commanding peace
Even with the same austerity and garb,
As he controlled the war. But one of these
(As he hath spices of them all) not all,
For I dare so far free him, made him feared,
So hated, and so banished: but he he's a Merit
To choke it in the vtt'rance: So our Virtue,
Lie in the interpretation of the time,
And power unto it self most commendable,
Hath not a Tomb so evident as a Chair
To extol what it hath done.
One fire drives out one fire; one Nail, one Nail;
Rights by rights fouler, strengths by strengths do fail.
Come let's away: when Caius Rome is thine,
Thou art poor'st of all; then shortly art thou mine.
No, Isle not go: you hear what he hath said
Which was sometime his General: who loved him
In a most dear particular. He called me Father:
But what o'that? Go you that banished him
A Mile before his Tent, fall down, and knee
The way into his mercy: Nay, if he coyed
To hear Cominius speak, Isle keep at home.
He would not seem to know me.
Do you hear?
Yet one time he did call me by my name:
I urged our old acquaintance, and the drops
That we have bled together. Coriolanus
He would not answer too: Forbad all Names,
He was a kind of Nothing, Titlelesse,
Till he had forged himself a name a' the fire
Of burning Rome.
Why so: you have made good work:
A pair of Tribunes, that have wracked for Rome,
To make Coals cheap: A Noble memory.
I minded him, how Royal it was to pardon
When it was less expected. He replied
It was a bare petition of a State
To one whom they had punished.
Very well, could he say less.
I offered to awaken his regard
For's private Friends. His answer to me was
He could not stay to pick them, in a pile
Of noisome musty Chafe. He said, it was folly
For one poor grain or two, to leave vnburnt
And still to nose the offence.
For one poor grain or two?
I am one of those: his Mother, Wife, his Child,
And this brave Fellow too: we are the Grains,
You are the musty Chafe, and you are smelt
Aboue the Moon. We must be burnt for you.
Nay, pray be patient: If you refuse your aid
In this so neuer-needed help, yet do not
Vpbraid's with our distress. But sure if you
Would be your Countries Pleader, your good tongue
More then the instant Army we can make
Might stop our Countryman.
No: Isle not meddle.
Pray you go to him.
What should I do?
Only make trial what your Love can do,
For Rome, towards Martius.
Well, and say that Martius return me,
As Cominius is returned, unheard: what then?
But as a discontented Friend, greefe-shot
With his unkindness. Say it be so?
Yet your good will
Must have that thanks from Rome, after the measure
As you intended well.
Isle vndertak't:
I think he will hear me. Yet to bite his lip,
And humm at good Cominius, much vnhearts me.
He was not taken well, he had not dined,
The Veins vnfill'd, our blood is cold, and then
We pout upon the Morning, are unapt
To give or to forgive; but when we have stuffed
These Pipes, and these Conveyances of our blood
With Wine and Feeding, we have suppler Souls
Then in our Priest-like Fasts: therefore Isle watch him
Till he be dieted to my request,
And then Isle set upon him.
You know the very rode into his kindness,
And cannot lose your way.
Good faith Isle prove him,
Speed how it will. I shall ere long, have knowledge
Of my success.
He will never hear him.
Not.
I tell you, he doe's sit in Gold, his eye
Red as it would burn Rome: and his Injury
The Jailer to his pity. I kneeled before him,
It was very faintly he said Rise: dismissed me
Thus with his speechless hand. What he would do
He sent in writing after me: what he would not,
Bound with an Oath to yield to his conditions:
So that all hope is vain, unless his Noble Mother,
And his Wife, who (as I hear) mean to solicit him
For mercy to his Country: therefore let's hence,
And with our fair entreaties hast them on.
Stay: whence are you.
Stand, and go back.
You guard like men, it is well. But by your leave,
I am an Officer of State, &amp; come to speak with Coriolanus
From whence?
From Rome.
You may not pass, you must return: our General will no more hear from thence.
You'll see your Rome embraced with fire, before
You'll speak with Coriolanus.
Good my Friends,
If you have heard your General talk of Rome,
And of his Friends there, it is Lots to Blanks,
My name hath touched your ears: it is Menenius.
Be it so, go back: the virtue of your name,
Is not here passable.
I tell thee Fellow,
Thy General is my Lover: I have been
The book of his good Acts, whence men have read
His Fame vnparolell'd, happily amplified:
For I have ever verified my Friends▪
(Of whom hoe's chief) with all the size that verity
Would without lapsing suffer▪ Nay, sometimes,
Like to a Bowl upon a subtle ground
I have tumbled past the throw: and in his praise
Have (almost) stamped the Leasing. Therefore Fellow,
I must have leave to pass.
Faith Sir, if you had told as many lies in his behalf, as you have uttered words in your own, you should not pass here: no, though it were as virtuous to lye, as to live chastely. Therefore go back.
Prithee fellow, remember my name is Menenius, always factionary on the party of your General.
Howsoever you have bin his Lier, as you say you have, I am one that telling true under him, must say you cannot pass. Therefore go back.
He's he dined can thou tell? For I would not speak with him, till after dinner.
You are a Roman, are you?
I am as thy General is.
Then you should hate Rome, as he do's. Can you, when you have pushed out your gates, the very Defender of them, and in a violent popular ignorance, given your enemy your shield, think to front his revenges with the easy groans of old women, the Virginal Palms of your daughters, or with the palsied intercession of such a de∣cay'd Dotant as you seem to be? Can you think to blow out the intended fire, your City is ready to flame in, with such weak breath as this? No, you are deceived, therefore back to Rome, and prepare for your execution: you are condemned, our General has sworn you out of repreeue and pardon.
Sir, if thy Captain knew I were here,
He would use me with estimation.
Come, my Captain knows you not.
I mean thy General.
My General cares not for you. Back I say, go: least I let forth your half pint of blood. Back, that's the vt∣most of your having, back.
Nay but Fellow, Fellow.
What's the matter?
Now you Companion: Isle say an arrant for you: you shall know now that I am in estimation: you shall perceive, that a Jack gardened cannot office me from my Son Coriolanus, guess but my entertainment with him: if thou stand not in th state of hanging, or of some death more long in Spectatorship, and crueler in suffering, be∣hold now presently, and swooned for what's to come upon thee. The glorious Gods sit in hourly Synod about thy particular prosperity, and love thee no worse then thy old Father Menenius do's. O my Son, my Soul thou art pre∣paring fire for vs: look thee, heere's water to quench it. I was hardly moved to come to thee: but being assured none but my self could move thee, I have been blown out of your Gates with sighs: and conjure thee to par∣don Rome, and thy petitionary Countrymen. The good Gods assuage thy wrath, and turn the dregs of it, upon this Varlet here: This, who like a block hath denied my access to thee.
Away.
How? Away?
Wife, Mother, Child, I know not. My affairs
Are Seruanted to others: Though I owe
My Revenge properly, my remission lies
In Volcean breasts. That we have been familiar,
Ingrate forgetfulness shall poison rather
Then pity: Note how much, therefore be gone.
Mine ears against your suites, are stronger then
Your gates against my force. Yet for I loved thee,
Take this along, I writ it for thy sake,
And would have sent it. Another word Menenius,
I will not hear thee speak. This man Auffidius
Was my beloved in Rome: yet thou behold.
You keep a constant temper.
Now sir, is your name Menenius?
It is a spell you see of much power:
You know the way home again.
Do you hear how wee are shent for keeping your greatness back?
What cause do you think I have to swooned?
I neither care for the world, nor your General: for such things as you. I can scarce think ther's any, y' are so slight. He that hath a will to die by himself, fears it
not from another: Let your General do his worst. For you, bee that you are, long; and your misery increase with your age. I say to you, as I was said to, Away.
A Noble Fellow I warrant him.
The worthy Fellow is our General. He's the Rock,
The Oak not to be winde-shaken.
We will before the walls of Rome to morrow
Set down our Host. My partner in this Action,
You must report to the Volcian Lords, how plainly
I have borne this Business.
Only their ends you have respected,
Stopped your ears against the general suite of Rome:
Never admitted a private whisper, no not with such friends
That thought them sure of you.
This last old man,
Whom with a cracked heart I have sent to Rome,
Loved me, aboue the measure of a Father,
Nay godded me indeed. Their latest refuge
Was to send him: for whose old Love I have
(Though I showed sourly to him) once more offered
The first Conditions which they did refuse,
And cannot now accept, to grace him only,
That thought he could do more: A very little
I have yielded too. Fresh Embosses, and Suites,
Nor from the State, nor private friends hereafter
Will I lend ear to. Ha? what shout is this? Shout within
Shall I be tempted to infringe my vow
In the same time it is made? I will not.
My wife comes foremost, then the honoured mould
Wherein this Trunk was framed, and in her hand
The Grandchild to her blood. But out affection,
All bond and privilege of Nature break;
Let it be Virtuous to be Obstinate.
What is that Curtsy worth? Or those Doves eyes,
Which can make Gods forsworn? I melt, and am not
Of stronger earth then others: my Mother bows,
As if Olympus to a Mole-hill should
In supplication Nod: and my young Boy
Hath an Aspect of intercession, which
Great Nature cries, Deny not. Let the Volces
Plough Rome, and harrow Italy, Isle never
Be such a Gosling to obey instinct: but stand
As if a man were Author of himself, &amp; knew no other kin
My Lord and Husband.
These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome.
The sorrow that delivers vs thus changed,
Makes you think so.
Like a dull Actor now, I have forgot my part,
And I am out, even to a full Disgrace. Best of my Flesh,
Forgive my Tyranny: but do not say,
For that forgive our Romans. O a kiss
Long as my Exile, sweet as my Revenge!
Now by the jealous Queen of Heaven, that kiss
I carried from thee dear; and my true Lip
Hath Virgin'd it ere since. You Gods, I pray,
And the most noble Mother of the world
Leave unsaluted: Sink my knee in the earth,
Of thy deep duty, more impression show
Then that of common Sons.
Oh stand up blessed!
Whilst with no softer Cushion then the Flint
I kneel before thee, and unproperly
Show duty as mistaken, all this while,
Between the Child, and Parent.
What's this? your knees to me?
To your Corrected Son?
Then let the Pebbles on the hungry beach
Fillop the Stars: Then, let the mutinous winds
Strike the proud Cedars against the fiery Sun:
Murd'ring Impossibility, to make
What cannot be, slight work.
Thou art my Warrior, I hope to frame thee
Do you know this Lady?
The Noble Sister of Publicola;
The Moon of Rome: Chaste as the Icicle
That's curdied by the Frost, from purest Snow,
And hangs on Deans Temple: Dear Ʋaleria.
This is a poor Epitome of yours,
Which by the interpretation of full time,
May show like all your self.
The God of Soldiers:
With the consent of supreme Jove, inform
Thy thoughts with Nobleness, that thou may prove
To shame vnvulnerable, and stick in th Wars
Like a great Sea-marke standing every flaw,
And saving those that eye thee.
Your knee, Sirrah.
That's my brave Boy.
Even he, your wife, this Lady, and my self,
Are Suitors to you.
I beseech you peace:
Or if you'd ask, remember this before;
The thing I have forsworn to grant, may never
Be held by you denials. Do not bid me
Dismiss my Soldiers, or capitulate
Again, with Romes Mechanickes. Tell me not
Wherein I seem unnatural: Desire not to allay
My Rages and Revenges, with your colder reasons.
Oh no more, no more:
You have said you will not grant vs any thing:
For we have nothing else to ask, but that
Which you deny already: yet we will ask,
That if you fail in our request, the blame
May hang upon your hardness, therefore hear vs.
Auffidius, and you Volces mark, for we'll
Hear nought from Rome in private. Your request?
Should we be silent &amp; not speak, our Raiment
And state of Bodies would bewray what life
We have led since thy Exile. Think with thy self,
How more unfortunate then all living women
Are we come hither; since that thy sight, which should
Make our eyes flow with joy, harts dance with comforts,
Constrains them weep, and shake with fear &amp; sorrow,
Making the Mother, wife, and Child to see,
The Son, the Husband, and the Father tearing
His Countries Bowels out; and to poor we
Thine enmities most capital: Thou bar vs
Our prayers to the Gods, which is a comfort
That all but we enjoy. For how can we?
Alas! how can we, for our Country pray?
Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory:
Whereto we are bound: Alack, or we must loose
The Country our dear Nurse, or else thy person
Our comfort in the Country. We must find
An evident Calamity, though we had
Our wish, which side should win. For either thou
Must as a Foreign Recreant be led
With Manacles through our streets, or else
Triumphantly tread on thy Countries ruin,
And bear the Palm, for having bravely shed
Thy Wife and Childrens blood: For my self, Son,
I purpose not to waite on Fortune, till
These wars determine: If I cannot persuade thee,
Rather to show a Noble grace to both parts,
Then seek the end of one; thou shalt no sooner
March to assault thy Country, then to tread
(Trust too't, thou shalt not) on thy Mothers womb
That brought thee to this world.
I, and mine, that brought you forth this boy,
To keep your name living to time.
A shall not tread on me: Isle run away
Till I am bigger, but then Isle sight.
Not of a women's tenderness to be,
Requires nor Child, nor women's face to see:
I have sate too long.
Nay, go not from vs thus:
If it were so, that our request did tend
To save the Romans, thereby to destroy
The Volces whom you serve, you might condemn vs
As poisonous of your Honour. No, our suite
Is that you reconcile them: While the Volces
May say, this mercy we have showed: the Romans,
This we received, and each in either side
Give the All-hail to thee, and cry be Blessed
For making up this peace. Thou know (great Son)
The end of Wars uncertain: but this certain,
That if thou conquer Rome, the benefit
Which thou shalt thereby reap, is such a name
Whose repetition will be dogged with Curses:
Whose Chronicle thus writ, The man was Noble,
But with his last Attempt, he wiped it out.
Destroyed his Country, and his name remains
To the ensuing Age, abhorred. Speak to me Son:
Thou hast affected the five strains of Honour,
To imitate the graces of the Gods.
To tear with Thunder the wide Cheeks a' the Ayre,
And yet to change thy Sulphur with a Bolt
That should but rive an Oak. Why dost not speak?
Think thou it Honourable for a Nobleman
Still to remember wrongs? Daughter, speak you:
He cares not for your weeping. Speak thou Boy,
Perhaps thy childishness will move him more
Then can our Reasons. There's no man in the world
More bound to's Mother, yet here he let's me prate
Like one in the Stocks. Thou hast never in thy life,
Showed thy dear Mother any courtesy,
When she (poor Hen) fond of no second brood,
He's clocked thee to the Wars: and safely home
Laden with Honour. Say my Request's unjust,
And spurn me back: But, if it be not so
Thou art not honest, and the Gods will plague thee
That thou restrain from me the Duty, which
To a Mothers part belongs. He turns away:
Down Ladies: let vs shame him with him with our knees
To his sur-name Coriolanus longs more pride
Then pity to our Prayers. Down: an end,
This is the last. So, we will home to Rome,
And dye among our Neighbours: Nay, behold's,
This Boy that cannot tell what he would have,
But kneels, and holds up hands for fellowship,
Doe's reason our Petition with more strength
Then thou hast to deny it. Come, let vs go:
This Fellow had a Volcean to his Mother:
His Wife is in Corioles, and his Child
Like him by chance: yet give vs our dispatch:
I am hushed until our City be afire, &amp; then Isle speak a little
O Mother, Mother!
What have you done? Behold, the Heavens do op,
The Gods look down, and this unnatural Scene
They laugh at. Oh my Mother, Mother: Oh!
You have won a happy Victory to Rome.
But for your Son, believe it: Oh believe it,
Most dangerously you have with him prevailed,
If not most mortal to him. But let it come:
Auffidius, though I cannot make true Wars,
Isle frame convenient peace. Now good Auffidius,
Were you in my steed, would you have heard
A Mother less? or granted less Auffidius?
I was moved withal.
I dare be sworn you were:
And sir, it is no little thing to make
Mine eyes to sweat compassion. But (good sir)
What peace you'll make, advise me: For my part,
Isle not to Rome, Isle back with you, and pray you
Stand to me in this cause. Oh Mother! Wife!
I am glad thou hast set thy mercy, &amp; thy Honour
At difference in thee: Out of that Isle work
My self a former Fortune.
I by and by; But we will drink together:
And you shall bear
A better witness back then words, which we
On like conditions, will have Counter-seal'd.
Come enter with vs: Ladies you deserve
To have a Temple built you: All the Swords
In Italy, and her Confederate Arms
Could not have made this peace.
See you yon'd Coin a' th Capitol, you • corner stone?
Why what of that?
If it be possible for you to displace it with your little finger, there is some hope the Ladies of Rome, espe∣cially his Mother, may prevail with him. But I say, there is no hope in it, our throats are sentenced, and stay upon execution.
Is it possible, that so short a time can alter the condition of a man.
There is difference between a Grub &amp; a But∣terfly, yet your Butterfly was a Grub: this Martius, is grown from Man to Dragon: He has wings, hoe's more then a creeping thing.
He loved his Mother dearly.
So did he me: and he no more remembers his Mother now, then an eight year old horse. The rareness of his face, sours ripe Grapes. When he walks, he moves like an Engine, and the ground shrinks before his Trea∣ding. He is able to pierce a Corflet with his eye: Talks like a knell, and his hum is a Battery. He sits in his State, as a thing made for Alexander. What he bids bee done, is finished with his bidding. He wants nothing of a God but Eternity, and a Heaven to Throne in.
Yes, mercy, if you report him truly.
I paint him in the Character. Mark what mer∣cy his Mother shall bring from him: There is no more mercy in him, then there is milk in a male-Tyger, that shall our poor City find: and all this is long of you.
The Gods be good unto vs.
No, in such a case the Gods will not bee good unto vs. When we banished him, we respected not them: and he returning to break our necks, they respect not vs.
Sir, if you'd save your life, fly to your House,
The Plebeians have got your Fellow Tribune,
And hale him up and down; all swearing, if
The Roman Ladies bring not comfort home,
They'll give him death by Inches.
What's the News?
Good News, good news, the Ladies have prevailed,
The Volcians are dislodged, and Martius gone:
A merrier day did never yet greet Rome,
No, not the expulsion of the Tarquins.
Friend, art thou certain this is true?
Is it most certain.
As certain as I know the Sun is fire:
Where have you lurked that you make doubt of it:
Ne'er through an Arch so hurried the blown Tide,
As the recomforted through the gates. Why hark you:
The Trumpets, Sack-buts, Psalteries, and Fifes,
Tabors, and Symboles, and the shouting Romans▪
Make the Sun dance. Hark you.
This is good News:
I will go meet the Ladies. This Volumnia,
Is worth of Consuls, Senators, Patricians,
A City full: Of Tribunes such as you,
A Sea and Land full: you have prayed well to day:
This Morning, for ten thousand of your throats,
I'd not have given a do it. Hark, how they joy.
First, the Gods bless you for your tidings:
Next, accept my thankfulness.
Sir, we have all great cause to give great thanks.
They are near the City.
Almost at point to enter.
We'll meet them, and help the joy.
Behold our Patroness, the life of Rome:
Call all your Tribes together, praise the Gods,
And make triumphant fires, strew Flowers before them:
Vnshoot the noise that Banished Martius;
Repeal him, with the welcome of his Mother:
Cry welcome Ladies, welcome.
Welcome Ladies, welcome.
Go tell the Lords a' the City, I am here:
Deliver them this Paper: having read it,
Bid them repair to the Market place, where I
Even in theirs, and in the Commons ears
Will vouch the truth of it. Him I accuse:
The City Ports by this hath entered, and
Intends to appear before the People, hoping
To purge himself with words. Dispatch.
Most Welcome.
How is it with our General?
Even so, as with a man by his own Alms im∣poisoned, and with his Charity slain.
Most Noble Sir, If you do hold the same intent
Wherein you wished vs parties: We'll deliver you
Of your great danger.
Sir, I cannot tell,
We must proceed as we do find the People.
The People will remain uncertain, whilst
Twixt you there's difference: but the fall of either
Makes the Survivor heir of all.
I know it:
And my pretext to strike at him, admits
A good construction. I raised him, and I pawned
Mine Honour for his truth: who being so heightened,
He watered his new Plants with dews of Flattery,
Seducing so my Friends: and to this end,
He bowed his Nature, never known before,
But to be rough, vnswayable, and free.
Sir, his stoutness
When he did stand for Consul, which he lost
By lack of stooping.
That I would have spoke of:
Being banished for it, he came unto my Harth,
Presented to my knife his Throat: I took him,
Made him ioynt-seruant with me: Gave him way
In all his own desires: Nay, let him choose
Out of my Files, his proiects, to accomplish
My best and freshest men, served his designments
In mine own person: help to reap the Fame
Which he did end all his; and took some pride
To do my self this wrong: Till at the last
I seemed his Follower, not Partner; and
He wedged me with his Countenance, as if
I had bin Mercenary.
So he did my Lord:
The Army marveled at it, and in the last,
When he had carried Rome, and that we looked
For no less Spoil, then Glory.
There was it:
For which my sinews shall be stretched upon him,
At a few drops of Women's rheum, which are
As cheap as Lies; he sold the Blood and Labour
Of our great Action; therefore shall he dye,
And Isle renew me in his fall. But hark.
Your Native Town you entered like a Post,
And had no welcomes home, but he returns
Splitting the Ayre with noise.
And patient Fools,
Whose children he hath slain, their base throats tear
With giving him glory.
Therefore at your vantage,
Ere he express himself, or move the people
With what he would say, let him feel your Sword:
Which we will second, when he lies along
After your way. His Tale pronounced, shall bury
His Reasons, with his Body.
Say no more. Here come the Lords▪
You are most welcome home.
I have not deserved it.
But worthy Lords, have you with heed perused
What I have written to you?
We have.
And grieve to heare't:
What faults he made before the last, I think
Might have sound easy Fines: But there to end
Where he was to begin, and give away
The benefit of our Leuies, answering vs
With our own charge: making a Treaty, where
There was a yielding; this admits no excuse.
He approaches, you shall hear him.
Hail Lords, I am returned your Soldier:
No more infected with my Countries love
Then when I parted hence: but still subsisting
Under your great Command. You are to know,
That prosperously I have attempted, and
With bloody passage led your Wars, even to
The gates of Rome: Our spoils we have brought home
Doth more then counterpoise a full third part
The charges of the Action. We have made peace
With no less Honour to the Antiates
Then shame to the Romaines. And we here deliver
Subscribed by' the Consuls, and Patricians,
Together with the Seal a' th Senate, what
We have compounded on.
Read it not Noble Lords,
But tell the Traitor in the highest degree
He hath abused your Powers.
Traitor? How now?
I Traitor, Martius.
Martius?
I Martius, Caius Martius: Dost thou think
Isle grace thee with that Robbery, thy stolen name Coriolanus in Corioles?
You Lords and Heads a' the State, perfidiously
He he's betrayed your business, and given up
For certain drops of Salt, your City Rome:
I say your City to his Wife and Mother,
Breaking his Oath and Resolution, like
A twist of rotten Silk, never admitting
Counsel a' the war: But at his Nurses tears
He whined and roared away your Victory,
That Pages blushed at him, and men of heart
Looked wondering each at others.
Hear thou Mars?
Name not the God, thou boy of Tears.
Ha?
No more.
Measureless Liar, thou hast made my heart
Too great for what contains it. Boy? Oh Slave,
Pardon me Lords, it is the first time that ever
I was forced to scoul'd. Your judgments my grave Lords
Must give this Cur the Lye: and his own Notion,
Who wears my stripes impressed upon him, that
Must bear my beating to his Grave, shall join
To thrust the Lye unto him.
Peace •oath, and hear me speak.
Cut me to pieces Volces men and Lads,
Stain all your edges on me. Boy, false Hound:
If you have writ your Annals true, it is there,
That like an Eagle in a Doue-coat, I
Flattered your Volcians in Corioles.
Alone I did it, Boy.
Why Noble Lords,
Will you be put in mind of his blind Fortune,
Which was your shame, by this unholy Braggart?
Before your own eyes, and ears?
Let him dye for it.
Tear him to pieces, do it presently:
He killed my Son, my daughter, he killed my Cosine
Marcus, he killed my Father.
Peace hoe: no outrage, peace:
The man is Noble, and his Fame folds in
This Orb of the earth: His last offences to vs
Shall have Judicious hearing. Stand Auffidius,
And trouble not the peace.
O that I had him, with six Auffidiusses, or more:
His Tribe, to use my lawful Sword.
Insolent Villain.
Kill, kill, kill, kill, kill him.
Hold, hold, hold, hold.
My Noble Masters, hear me speak.
O Tullus.
Thou hast done a deed, whereat Valour will weep.
Tread not upon him Masters, all be quiet,
Put up your Swords.
My Lords,
When you shall know (as in this Rage
Provoked by him, you cannot) the great danger
Which this mans life did owe you, you'll rejoice
That he is thus cut off. Please it your Honours
To call me to your Senate, Isle deliver
My self your loyal Servant, or endure
Your heaviest Censure.
Bear from hence his body,
And morn you for him. Let him be regarded
As the most Noble Coarse, that ever Herald
Did follow to his Urn.
His own impatience,
Takes from Auffidius a great part of blame:
Let's make the Best of it.
My Rage is gone,
And I am struck with sorrow. Take him up:
Help three a' the chiefest Soldiers, Isle be one.
Beat thou the Drum that it speak mournfully:
Trail your steel Pikes. Though in this City hee
Hath widowed and vnchilded many a one,
Which to this hour bewail the Injury,
Yet he shall have a Noble Memory. Assist.

Look you so strange my hearts, to sée our limbs
Thus suited in a Hunters livery?
Oh tic a lovely habit, when gréene youth
Like to the flowery blossom of the spring,
Conforms his outward habit to his mind,
Look how yon one-eyed wagoner of heaven,
Hath by his horses fiery winged hooves,
Burst op the melancholy Jail of Night,
And with his gilt beams cunning Alchemy,
Turned al these clouds to gold, who (with the winds)
Upon their misty shoulders bring in day:
Then sally not this morning with foul looks,
But teach your Iocond spirits to ply the Chase,
For hunting is a sport for Emperors.
We know it is, and therefore doe not throw
On these your pastimes, a contracted brow,
How swift youths Bias runs to catch dēlights,
To me is not unknown: no brother Guilder,
When you were wooed by vs to choose a wife,
This day you vowed to wed: but now I see,
Your promises turn all to mockery.
This day your self appointed to give answer
To all those neighbour-Princes, who in love
Offer their Daughters, Sisters and Allies,
In marriage to your hand: yet for all this
The hour being come that calls you to your choice
You stand prepared for sport and start aside:
To hunt poor déere when you should séeke a Bride.
Nay come Mario your opinion too,
H'ad néede of ten men's wit that goes to woe.
First satisfy these Princes, who expect
Your gracious answer to their embassies,
Then may you freely revel: now you fly
Both from your own vows, &amp; their amity.
How much your iudgmens err: who gets a wife
Must like a huntsman beat untrodden paths,
To gain the flying presence of his love.
Look how the yelping beagles spend their mouths
So Lovers doe their sighs: and as the dear,
Out-strips the active hound, &amp; oft turns back
To note the angry visage of her foe,
Who greedy to possess so sweet a pray,
Never gives over till he cease on her,
So fares it with coy dames, who great with scorn
Show the care-pined hearts, that sue to them
Yet on that feigned slight, (Love conquering them)
They cast an eye of longing back again,
As who would say, be not dismayed with frowns,
For though our tongues speak no: our hearts sound
Or if not so, before theile miss their lovers,
Their swéet breathes shall perfume the Amorous ayre yea,
And brave them still to run in beauties Chase:
Then can you blame me to be hunter like,
When I must get a wife: but be content,
So yo'ule engage your faith by other to vs,
Your wills shall answer mine, my liking yours,
And that no wrinkle on your cheeks shall ride.
This day the Marquess vows to choose a bride.
Even by my honour,
Brother be advised,
The importunity of you and these,
Thrusts my free thoughts into the yoke of love,
To groan under the load of marriage,
Since then you throw this burden on my youth
Swear to me whom soever my fancy choose,
Of what descent, beauty or birth she be,
Her you shall like and love as you love me.
Now by my birth I swear, wed whom you please,
And Isle embrace her with a brothers arm.
Mario and my self to your fair choice,
Shall yield all duties and true reverence.
Your protestations please me Iollilie,
Lets ring a hunters peal, and in the ears
Of our swift forest, Citizens proclaim,
Defiance to their lightness: our sports done,
The Uenson that we kill shall feast our bride,
If she prove bad, isle cast all blame on you,
But if sweet peace succeed this amorous strife,
Isle say my wit was best to choose a wife.
Old Master hears a morning able to make vs work tooth and nail (marry then we must have victuals) the Sun hath plaid bow péep in the element any time these two hours, as I doe some mornings whē you cal: what Babulo say you: héere Master say I and then this eye opens, yet don is the mouse, lis still:
what Babulo says Grissil, anon say I, and then this eye looks up, yet down I snug again: what Babu∣lo say you again, and then I start up, and sée the Sun, and then snéeze, and then shake mine ears, and then rise, and then get my breakfast, and then fall to work, and then wash my hands, and by this time I am ready: héer's your basket, and Grissil I heir's yours.
Fetch thine own Babulo lets ply our business.
God send me good luck Master.
Why Babulo, what's the matter?
God forgive me, I think I shall not eat a peck of salt: I shall not live long sure, I should be a rich man by right, for they never doe good déedes, but when they sée they must dye, and I have now a mon∣strous stomach to work, because I think I shall not live long.
Go fool, cease this vain talk and fall to work.
Isle hamper some body if I dye, because I am a basket maker.
Come Grissill, work swéet girl, héere the warm Sun will shine on vs,
And when his fires begin,
Wée'll cool our sweating brows in yonder shade.
Father, me thinks it doth not fit a maid,
By sitting thus in view, to draw men's eyes
To stare upon her: might it please your age,
I could be more content to work within.
Indéed my child, men's eyes do now adays,
Quickly take fire at the least spark of beauty,
And if those flames be quenched by chaste disdain,
Then their inuenom'd tongues (alack) doe strike,
To wound her fame whose beauty they did like.
I will avoid their darts and work within.
Thou need not, in a painted coat goes sin,
And loves those that love pride; none looks on thee,
Then keep me company: how much unlike
Are thy desires to many of thy sex?
How many wantons in Saliuia,
Frown like the sullen night, when their fair faces
Are hid within doors: but got once abroad,
Like the proud Sun they spread their staring beams,
They shine out to be seen, their loose eyes tell,
That in their bosoms wantonness doe dwell:
Thou can not doe so Grissill, for thy Sun,
Is but a Star, thy Star, a spark of fire,
Which hath no power t'inflame doting desire:
Thy silks are threadbare russets: all thy portion
Is but an honest name: that gon thou art dead,
Though dead thou liu'st, that being unblemished.
If to die free from shame be ne'er to die,
Then Isle be crowned with immortality.
Pray God thou moist: yet child my jealous soul
Trembles through fears, so often as mine eyes
Sees our Duke court thée: and when to thine ears
He tunes sweet loue-songs: oh beware my Grissill
He can prepare his way with gifts of gold,
Upon his breath, winged Promotion flies
Oh my dear Girl trust not his sorceries,
Did he not séeke the shipwreck of thy fame?
Why should he send his tailors to take measure
Of Grissils body: but as one should say,
If thou wilt be the Marquess concubine,
Thou shalt wear rich attires: but they that think,
With costly garments, sins black face to hide,
Wear naked bravery and ragged pride.
Good father doe not shake your age with fears
Although the Marquess sometimes visit vs,
Yet all his words and deeds are like his birth,
Steeped in true honour: but admit they were not,
Before my soul look black with speckled sin,
My hands shall make me pale deaths underling,
The music of those words sweetē mine ears
Come girl lets faster work: time apace wears.
Come Babulo why hast thou staid so long?
Nay why are you so short, Masters hears mo∣no I took (since I went) for a cradle: this year I think be leap year, for woniē doe nothing but buy cradles, by my troth I think the world is at an end, for as soon as we be borne we marry: as soon as we marry we get children, (by hook or by crook gotten they are) children must have cradles, and as soon as they are in them, they hop out of thē, for I have séene little girls that yesterday had scarce a hand to make them ready, the next day had worn wedding rings on their fingers, so that if the world doe not end, we shall not live one by another: basket making as all o∣there trades runs to decay, and shortly we shall not be worth a button, for non in this cutting age sow true stitches, but tailors and shoemakers, &amp; yet now and then they tread their shoes a wry too.
Let not thy tongue go so: sit down to work
And that our labour may not seem to long,
Weal cunningly beguile it with a song.
Doe master for thats honest cousinage.
Song Art thou poor yet hast thou golden Slumbers:
Oh sweet content!
Art thou rich yet is thy mind perplexed?
Oh punishment.
Dost thou laugh to see how fools are vexed?
To ad to golden numbers, golden numbers.
O sweet content, of sweet &amp;c.
Foot Work apace, apace, apace, apace▪
Honest labour bears a lovely face,
Then hey noney, noney: hey noney, noney.
Can drink the waters of the Crisped spring,
O sweet content!
Swim'st thou in wealth, yet sinck'st in thine own tears,
O punishment.
Then hee that patiently wants, burden bears,
No burden bears, but is a King, a King,
O sweet content, &amp;c.
Foot. Work apace, apace, &amp;c.
Weep master, yonder comes your Son
Laureo my Son? oh heaven let thy rich hand
Pour plenteous showers of blessing on his head.
Treble the number fall upon your age,
Sister?
Dear brother Laureo welcome home.
Master Laureo) (aniculaes son) welcome home, how doe the nine muses, Pride, covetousness, envy, sloth, wrath, gluttony and lechery? you that are Scholars read how they doe.
Muses: these (fool) are the seven deadly sins.
Are they: Mas me thinks its better serving thē, then your nine muses, for they are stark beggars.
Often I have wished to sée you here,
It grieves me that you see me here so soon.
Why Laureo dost thou grieve to see thy father,
Or dost thou scorn me for my poverty.
He needs not, for he looks like poor Iohn him∣self, eight to a neck of Mutton, is not that your com∣mons, &amp; a Cue of bread?
Father I grieve my young years to your age,
Should add more sorrow.
Why son whats the matter?
That which to think on makes me desperate.
I that have charged my friends, and from my father
Pulled more then he could spare, I that have liud,
These nine years at the University,
Must now for this worlds devil: this angel of gold,
Have all those days and nights to beggary sold,
Through want of money, what I want I miss,
Who is more scorned then a poor: scholar is?
Yes three things: Age, wisdom, &amp; basket ma∣cares
Brothers whatmeanes these words?
Oh, I am mad.
To think how much a Scholar undergoes,
And in th'ende reapes nought but penury.
Father I am enforced to leave my book,
Because the study of my book doth leave me,
In the lean arms of lancke necessity.
Having no shelter (ah me) but to fly
Into the sanctuary of your aged arms.
A trade, a trade, follow basket-makeing, leave books and turn block head.
Peace fool, welcome my son, though I am poor
My love shall not be so: go daughter Grissill,
Fetch water from the spring to séeth our fish,
Which yesterday I caught: the cheer is mean,
But be content, when I have sold these Baskets,
The money shall be spent to bid thee welcome:
Grissill make hast, run and kindle fire.
Go Grissill Isle make fire, and scour the kettle, its a hard world when scholars ease fish upon flesh days
First not a shame for me that am a man,
Nay more, a scholar to endure such need,
That I must pray on him, whom I should feed?
Nay grieve not Son, better have felt worse woe
Come sit by me while I work to get bread,
And Grissill spin vs yearn to cloth our backs.
Thou shalt read doctrine to vs for the soul,
Then what shall we there want, nothing my son
For when we cease from work even in that while,
My song shall charm griefs ears and care beguile.
Father as I was runaing to fetch water,
I saw the Marquess with a gallant train
Come riding towards vs, O see where they come.
See where my Grissill, and her father is,
Me thinks for beauty shining through those weeds,
Seems like a bright star in the sullen night.
How lovely poverty dwells on her back,
Did but the proud world note her as I doe,
She would cast off rich robes, forswear rich state,
To cloth them in such poor habiliments,
Father good fortune ever bless thine age.
All happiness attend my gracious Lord.
And what wish you fair Maid?
That your high thoughts.
To your contentment may be satisfied.
Thou would wish so, knew thou for what I come
Brother of Pay behold this virgin,
Mario Lepido is she not fair?
Brother I have not seen so mean a creature,
So full of beauty.
Were but Grissils birth,
As worthy as her form, she might be held
A fit companion for the greatest state.
Oh blindness, so that men may beauty find,
They ne'er respect the beauties of the mind,
Father any•whole whats hee that speaks
A poor despised scholar and my Son.
This is no time to hold dispute with scholars
Tell me in faith old man what dost thou think,
Because the Marquess visits thee so oft?
The will of Princes subjects must not search,
Let it suffice, your grace is welcome hither.
And isle requite that welcome if I live,
Grissill suppose a man should love you dearly,
As I know some that doe, would you agree
To quittance true affection with the like.
None is so fond to fancy poverty.
I say there is: come Lords stand by my side,
Nay brother you are sped and have a wife,
Then give vs leave that are all Bachelors,
Now Grissil, eye vs well and give your verdict,
Which of vs three you hold the proprest man,
I have no skill to judge proportions.
Nay then you jest, women have eagles eyes,
To pry even to the heart, and why not you?
Come, we stand fairly, freely speak your mind,
For by my birth, he whom thy choice shall bless,
Shall be thy husband.
What intends your graft?
My Lord I have vowed to lead a single life,
A single life? this cunning cannot serve,
Doe not I know you love her I have heard?
Your passions spent for her your sighs for her,
Mario to the wonder of her beauty,
Compiled a Sonnet.
I my Lord write sonnets?
You did entreat me to entreat her father,
That you might have his daughter to his wife.
To any one I willingly resign,
All interest in her, which doth look like mine,
My Lord I swear she ne'er shall be my bride,
I hope sheele swear so too being thus denied,
Both of you turned Apostates in love,
Nay then Isle play the crier: once, twice, thrice,
Speak or shoe's gone else: no since twill not be,
Since you are not for her, yet shoe's for me.
What mean you Brother?
Faith no more but this:
By loves most wondrous Metamorphosis,
To turn this Maid into your Brothers wife,
Nay sweet heart look not strange I doe not jest,
But to thine ears mine Amorous thoughts impart,
Gualter protests he loves thée with his heart,
The admiration of such happiness,
Makes me astonished.
Oh my gracious Lord,
Humble not your high state to my lowe birth,
Whom not worthy to be held your slave,
Much less your wife.
Grissill that shall suffice,
I count thee worthy: old Ianicola,
Art thou content that I shall be thy Son?
I am unworthy of so great a good.
Tush tush talk not of worth, in honest terms
Tell me if I shall have her? for by heaven
Unless your free consent allow my choice,
To win ten kingdoms Isle not call her mine.
Whats thy Sons name?
Laureo My gracious Lord.
Isle have both your consents: I tell ye Lords,
I have wooed the virgin long, oh many an hour,
Have I bin glad to steal from all your eyes,
To come disguised to her: I swear to you,
Beauty first made me love, and virtue woe,
I loved her lowliness, but when I tried
What virtues were intempled in her breast,
My chaste hart swore that she should be my bride
Say Father, must I be forsworn or no?
What to my Lord séemes best to me séemes so
Laureo whats your opinion?
Thus my Lord.
If equal thoughts durst both your states confer,
Her's is to lowe, and you to high for her,
What says fair Grissill now?
This doth she say,
As her old Father yields to your dread will,
So she her fathers pleasure must fulfil.
If old Ianicola make Grissill yours,
Grissill must not deny, yet had she rather,
Be the poor Daughter still of her poor Father.
Isle gild that poverty and make it shine,
With beams of dignity: this base attire,
These Ladies shall tear of, and deck thy beauty
In robes of honour, that the world may say,
Virtue and beauty was my bride to day.
This mean choice, will distain your nobleness
No more Mario then it doth disgrace
The Sun to shine on me.
Shoe's poor and base.
Shoe's rich: for virtue beautifies her face.
What will ye world say when the trump of fame
Shall sound your high birth with a beggars name?
The world still looks a squint, &amp; I deride
His purblind judgment; Grissill is my Bride,
Ianicola, and Laureo: father, brother,
You and your Son graced with our royal favour,
Shall live to outwear time in happiness.
Master I have made a good fire: sirha Grissill, the fish
Fall on thy knees thou fool: sée hears our duke
I have not offended him, therefore Isle not duck
and he were ten Dukes.
Isle kneel to none but God and my Prince.
This is thy Prince, be silent Babulo,
Silence is a virtue, marie tic a dumb virtue: I love virtue that speaks, and has a long tongue like a belweather, to lead other virtues after: if he be a Prince, I hope hee is not Prince over my tongue, snails, where∣fore come all these: Master hears not fish enough for vs, Sirha Grissill the fire burns out.
Tell me my love what pleasant fellow is this?
My aged Fathers servant my gracious Lord.
How, my love: master a word to ye wise, scillicet me my love.
Whats his name,
Babulo Sir is my name▪
Why dost thou tremble so? we are al thy friends
Its hard sir for this motley Jerkin, to find friend∣ship with this fine doublet.
Ianicola bring him to Court with thee.
You may be ashamed to lay such knavish burden upon old ages shoulders: but I see they are stooping a little, all cry down with him: He shall not bring me sir, isle carry my self.
I pray thee doe, Isle have thee live at court,
I have a better trade sir, basketmaking,
Grissill I like thy mans simplicity,
Still shall he be thy servant Babulo,
Grissill thy mistress, now shall be my wife
I think sir I am a fitter husband for her.
Why should thou think, I will make her rich
Thats al one sir, beggars are fit for beggars, gētle∣folks for gētlefolkes: I am afraid yt this wōder of ye rich leaving ye poor, will last but mine days: old M bid this mer∣rye gentlemā home to dinner, you shall have a good dish of fish sir: &amp; thank him for his good will to your daughter Gris. for isle be hāgd if he do not (as many rich cogging marchāts) now adays doe when they have got what they would,
give her the belles, let her fly.
Oh bear my Lord with his intemperate tongue
Grissill I take delight to bear him talk.
I, I, y'eare best take me up for your foul: are not you he, that came speaking so? to Grissill héere, doe you remember how I knocked you once for offering to have a like at her lips.
I doe remember it and for thy pains,
A golden recompense isle give to thée.
Why doe, and isle knock you as often as you list.
Grissill this merry fellow shall be mine,
But we forget our selves, the day grows old.
Come Lords cheer up your looks &amp; with fair smiles,
Grace our intended nuptials: time may come,
When all commanding love your hearts subdue,
The Marquess may perform as much for you.
Rice how now man? whether art you galloping?
Faith even to find a full manger: my téeth wa∣la till I be mounching, I have bin at the Cutlers, to bid him bring away Sir Owens rapier, and I am ambling home thus fast, for fear I am driven to fast.
But Sirha Rice, when's the day? will not thy master Sir Owen and Signior Emulo fight?
No, for Signior Emulo has warned my Master to the court of Conscience, and theres an order set down, that the coward shall pay my Master good words week∣lie, till the debt of his choler be run out.
Excellent, but did not Emulo write a challenge to Sir Owen.
No he sent a terrible one, but hee gave a sexton of a Chuch a groat to write it, and hee set his mark to
it, for the gull can neither write nor read.
Ha ha, not write and read? why I have séene him pull out a bundle of sonnets written, &amp; read them to Ladies.
He got thē by heart Vrcenze, &amp; so deceived the poor souls: as a gallant whom I know, cozens others: for my brisk spāgled baby will come into a Stationers shop, call for a stool and a cushion, and then asking for some greek Poet, to him he falls, and there he grumbles God knows what, but Isle be sworn he knows not so much as one Character of the tongue.
Why then its greek to him.
Ha, ha, Emulo not write and read?
Not a letter and you would hang him.
Then heel never be saved by his book.
No nor by his good works, for heel doe none. Signiors both, I commend you to the skies, I commit you to God, adieu.
Nay sweet Rice a little more,
A little more will make me a great deal less, house keeping you know is out of fashion: unless I ride post, I kiss the post: in a word isle tell you all, challenge was sent, answered no fight, no kill, all friends, all fools,Emulo coward, Sir Owen brave man, farewell, dinner, hungry: little cheer, great great stomach, meat meat, meat, mouth, mouth, mouth, adieu, adieu, adieu.
Ha, ha, adieu Rice, Sir Owen belike kéepes a lean Kitchen.
What else man, thats one of the miserable vows he makes when hoe's dubbed: yet he doth but as many of his brother knights doe, keep an ordinary table for him and his long coat follower.
That long coat makes the master a little king, for wheresoever his piece of a follower comes hopping after him, hes sure of a double guard.
Isle set some of the Pages upon thy skirts for this
I shall feel them no more then so many fleas,
therefore I care not: but Farneze you'll prove a most ac∣complisht coxcomb.
Oh old touch lad, this yonker is right Trinidado pure leaf Tobacco, for indeed hoe's nothing purffe, réeke, and would be tried (not by God and his country) but by fire, the very soul of his substance and needs would convert into smoke.
Hoe's Steel to the back you see, for he writes Challenges.
True, and Iron to the head, oh theres a rich lea∣den mineral amongst his brains, if his skull were well digd, Sirha Vrcence, this is one of those changeable Silk gallants, who in a very scurvy pride, scorn alschol∣lers, and read no books but a looking glass, and speak no language but sweet Lady, and sweet Signior and chew between their téeth terrible words, as though they would conjure, as complement and Proiects, and Fastidious, &amp; Caprichious, and Misprizian, and the Sintheresis, of the soul, and such like raise velvet terms.
What be the accontremēts now of these gallāts?
Indeed thats one of their fustiā outlādish phrases to, marry sir their accontremēts, are al ye fātasticke fashi∣once, yt can be taken up, either vpō trust or at second hand.
Whats their qualities?
None good, these are the best: to make good fa∣ces: to take Tobacco well, to spit well, to laugh like a waiting Genllewoman, to lie well, to blush for nothing, to look big upon little fellows, to scoff with a grace, though they hane a very filthy grace in scoffing, and for a need to ride pretty and well.
They cannot choose but ride well, because every good wit rides them.
Héere's the difference, that they ride upon horses, and when they are ridden they are spurred for asses, so they can cry wighee and hollow kicking jade, they care not if they have no more learning then a Jade.
No more of these Iadith tricks: here comes the hobby horse.
Oh he would dance a morris rarely if hee were hung with belles.
He would jangle villainously.
Peace lets encounter them.
By Cod Sir Emuloes, sir Owen is clad out a cry because is friends with her, for Sir Owen swear, did her not swear Rice?
Yes forsooth. Spit out his meat.
By Cod is swear terrible to knog her pade, and fling her spingle legs at plum trees, when her come to fall to her tagger and fencing trigs, yes faith and to breag her shins did her not Rice?
Yes by my troth Sir.
By Cods vdge me is all true, and to give her a great teale of blouddie nose, because Sir Emuloes you challenge the prittish Knight, Rice you know Sir Owen gentleman first, and secondly knight, what apoxale you Rice, is shoke now?
No sir I have my five senses and am as well as any man.
Well here is hand, now is mighty friends.
Sir Owen
Now the gallimaufrie of language comes in.
I protest to you, the magnitude of my condole∣meant, hath bin elevated the higher to sée you and my self, two gentlemen.
Nay tic well known Sir Owen is good shen∣tleman, is not Rice?
He that shall deny it Sir isle make him eat his words.
Good friend I am not in the Negative, bee not so Caprichious, you misprize me, my collocution tēdeth to S. Owens dignifiing.
Lets step in, God save you Singnior Emulo.
Well encountered S. Owen.
Owe, how do you S. Em. is friends out a cry now
but Emuloes take heed, you match no more love trigs to widow Gwenthyans, by Cod vrdge me, that doe so must knoge her, see you now?
Not so tempestuous sweet knight: though to my disconsolation, I will obliuionize my love to the welch widow, and doe here proclaim my delinquishment, but sweet Signior be not to Diogenicall to me,
Ha ha is know not what genicalls mean, but Sir Owen will genicall her, and her fag her genicalling Gwenthyan.
Nay faith weal have you sound friends indeed, otherwise you know, Signior Emulo, if you should bear all the wrongs, you would be our Athlassed.
Most true.
By god is out a cry friends, but harg Farneze, Vrcenze twig a great teale to Emuloes: Ow. is great teale of friends: ha ha is tell sine admirable shest, by Cod Emu∣loes, for fear S. Owen, knog her shines, is tell, Sir Owen by tozen gentlemen her pooets is put about with lathes, ha, ha, serge her serge her.
No more tell Vrcenze of it: why should you two fall out for the love of a woman, considering what store we have of them? Sir Emulo I gratulate your peace, your company you know is precious to vs, and weal bee merry, and ride abroad: before god now I talk of riding, Sir Owen me thinks has an excellent boot.
His leg graces the boot.
By God is fine leg and fine poote to: but Emu∣las leg is petter, and finer, and shenglier skin to wear.
I bought them of a penurious Cordwainer, &amp; they are the most incongruent that ere I ware.
Congruent? sploud what leather is congru∣ent, spanish leather?
Ha ha, well Gentlemen I have other proiects beckon for me, I must disgrace from this bias, and leave you: accept I beseeeh you of this vulgar and domestic
complement.
Pray Emuloes let her see her congruenee leather ha ha, owe what a pox is here: ha, ha, is mag a wall to her shins, for keeb her warm?
Whats heer lathes? whore's the lime &amp; hair Emulo,
Oh rare, is this to save his shins?
Ha, ha, Rice go call Gwenthyan,
I will master dahoma, Gewnthyan dahoma?
A pogs on her go sedge her and call her within
I am gone sir.
Nay sir Owen what mean you?
By Cod is mean ta let Gwenthyan see what bob fool love her, apogs on you.
Sir Owen and Signiors both, doe not expatiate my obloquy, my love shall bee so fast conglutinated to you.
Cods plud, you call her gluttons, Gwenthyan, so ho Gwenthyan?
Isle not digest this pill, Signiors adieu.
You are Fastidious and I banish you.
Gods so, here comes the widow, but in faith Sir Owen say nothing of this.
No go to thē, by Cod Sir Owen bear as prove mind as Emperor.
Who calls Gwenthyan so great teale of time?
Sweet widow even your countrymen here.
Belly the ruddo whee: wrong witho, Mandag¦any Mou du ac whellock en wea awh.
Sir Owen gramarrye whee: Gwenthyan Montage
any, ac wellock en Thawen en ryn mogh.
Mundage Thlawen, oh my good widow gabble that we may understand you, and have at you.
Have at her: nay by Cod is no have at her to, Is tawge an her prittish tongue, for tic fine delicates tongue, I can tell her. welshe tongue is finer as greek tongue.
A baked Neates tongue is finer then both.
But what says Gwenthyans now? will have Sir Owen, Sir Owen is known for a wisely man, as any since Adam and Eves time, and that is by Gods vdge me a great teale ago.
I think Solomon was wiser then Sir Owen.
Salomons had pretty wit: but what say you to King Tauie: King Tauie is well known was as good musicians, as the pest fiddler in aul Italy, and King Tauie was Sir Owens countrymen, yes truly a prettish shen∣tlemen porne, and did twinckle, twinckle, twinckle, out a cry upon welsh-harpe, and tic known Tauie love Mis∣tris Persabe, as Sir Owen loves Gwenthyan: will her have Sir Owen now?
Faith widow take him, Sir owen is a tall man I can tell you.
Tall man, as God vnde me, her think the prittish shentelman, is valiant as Mars that is the fine knaves, the poets say the God of pribles &amp; prables, I hope widow you see little more in Sir owen then in Sir Emuloes, say shall her? have her now, tic valiant, as can desire, I warrant her.
Sir owen, Sir owen, tic not for valiant, Gwen∣thyan care so much, but for honest and fertuous, and lo∣uing and pundall to lead her have her will.
God vdge me, tage her away▪ to her hus∣band, and is led her have her will out a cry, yet by God is pridle her well enough.
Well S. owen, Gwenthyan is going to her cozen
Guilder the Duke, for you know is her near cozen by marriage, by tother husband that pring her from Wales.
By Cod Wales is better country then Italies, a great teale so better.
Now if her cozen Gwalther say Gwenthyan tage ths pritish knight, shall love her diggon: but must have her good will: merge your thad Sir owen.
Owe whats else: Sir owen merge yt farewell, yet shall tage her down quiglie enough, come widow will wag to the coward, now to her cozen, and bid her co∣zen tell her mind of Str owen.
You'll man Gwenthyan Sir owen?
Yes by Cod and privily to, come Gentlemen you'll tag pains to go with her?
Weal follow you presently Sir owen.
Come widow: Un lod dis Glen Gwēthyā mondu
Gramercy wheeh, Am a Mock honnoh.
So this will be rare: Sirrah Vrcenze, at the mar∣riage night of these two, instead of Io Hymen, we shall here hey ho Hiemen, their love will bee like a great fire made of bay leaves, that yields nothing but cracking noise, noise.
If she miss his crown tic no matter for crack∣king,
So she soader it again, it will pass currant.
Peace here comes our fair mistress.
Lets have a fling at her.
So you may, but the hardness is to hit her.
Farewell Farneze you attēd well vpō your mistress,
Nay, nay, their wages shall be of the same colour that their service is of.
Faith mistress would you had travelled a little so∣ner this way, you should have seen a rare comedy ac∣ted by Emulo.
Every courteous mouth will be a stage for that, rather tell her of the welch tragedy that's towards.
What Tragedy?
Sir Owen shall marry your cousin Gwenthyan,
First possible: oh they two will beget brave warri∣ours: for if she scold heel fight, and if he quarrel sheele take up the bucklers: shoe's fire and hoe's brimstone, must not there be hot doings then think you?
Theyle prove Turtles, for their hearts being so like, they cannot choose but bee loving.
Turtles: Turkie-cocks, for Gods louelets entreat the Duke my brother, tomake a law, that wheresoe∣for Sir Owen and his Lady dwell, the next neighbour may always be Constable, least the peace bee broken, for theyl'e doe nothing but cryearme, arm, arm.
I think sir Owen would die rather then loose her love
So think not I.
I should for Iulia, if I were Iulies husband.
Therefore Iulia shall not be Onophries wife, for Isle have none die for me.
I like not that colour.
Yes for your love you would Iulia.
No nor yet for my hate Farneze.
Would you not have men love you swéet mistress?
No not I, fie upon it sweet servant.
Would you wish men to hate you?
Yes rather then love me, of al saints I love not to serve mistress Venus.
Then I prceiue you mean to lead apes in hell.
That spiteful proverb was proclaimed against them that are married upon earth, for to be married is to live in a kind of hell.
I as they doe at barlibreake.
Your wife is your ape, and that heavy burden wedlock, your Jack an Apes clog, therefore isle not be tied too't: Master Farneze, sweet virginity is that
invisible God-head that turns into Angels, that makes vs saints on earth and stars in heaven: here Virgins seem goodly, but there glorious: In heaven is no wooing yet all there are lovely: in heaven are no weddings yet al there are lovers.
Let vs sweet Madame turn earth into heaven, by being all lovers here to.
So we doe to an earthly heaven we turn it.
Nay but dear Iulia, tel vs why so much you hate, to enter into the lists of this same combat Martimonie?
You may well call that a combat, for indéede mar∣riage is nothing else, but a battle of love, a friendly figh∣ting, a kind of favourable terrible war: but you err Onophrio in thinking I hate it I deal by marriage as some Indians doe the Sun, adore it, and reverence it, but dare not stare on it, for fear I be stark blind: you three are bachelors, and being sick of this maiden∣head, count al things bitter, which the physic of a sing∣le life ministers unto you: you imagine if you could make the arms of fair Ladies the spheres of your hearts, good hearts, then you were in heaven: oh but Bachelors take heed, you are no sooner in that heaven, but you strait slip into hell.
As long as I have a beautiful Lady to torment me, I care not.
Nor I the sweetness of her looks shall make me relish any punishment.
Except the punishment of the horn Vrcenze, put that in.
Nay hee were best put that by: Lord, Lord, see what unthrifts this love makes vs? if he once but get into ourmouthes, hee labours to turn our tongues to clap∣pers, and to ring all in, at Cupids Church when we were better to bite off our tōgues, so we may thrust him out, Cupped is sworn enemy to time, &amp; he that loses time I can tell you loses afriend.
I a bald friend.
Therefore my good servants if, you wear my li∣very, cast of this loose upper coat of love: bee ashamed to waite upon a boy, a wag, a blind boy, a wanton: My brother the Duke wants our companies, tic Idle∣nes and love, makes you captains to this solitariness, foal∣lowe me &amp; love not, &amp; isle teach you how to find liberty.
We obey to follow you, but not to love you, no re∣nounce that obedience.
Furio.
My Lord.
Thy faith I oft have tried, thy faith I credits
For I have found it solid as the rock:
No babbling echo sits upon thy lips,
For silence even in speech, doth seal them up,
Wilt thou be trusty Furio to thy Lord?
I will.
It is enough, those words I will,
Yields sweeter music then the gilded sounds,
Which chatting parrots long toung'd sycophants,
Send from the organs of their siren voice,
Grissill my wife thou see bear in her womb,
The joy of marriage: Furio I protest,
My love to her is as the heate to fire,
Her love to mée as beauty to the Sun,
(Inseparable adiuncts) in one word,
So dearly love I Grissill, that my life
Shall end, when she doth end to be my wife.
Tic well done.
Yet is my bosom burnt up with desires,
To try my Grissils patience, Isle put on
A wrinkled forehead, and turn both mine eyes,
Into two balls of fire, and clasp my hand
Like to a mace of Iron, to threaten death.
But Furio when that hand lifts up to strike,
It shall fly open to embrace my love,
Yet Grissill must not know this: all my words,
Shall smack of wormwood, all my deeds of gall,
My tongue shall jar, my hart be musical,
Yet Grissill must not know this?
Not for me,
Furio My trial is thy secrecy,
Yonder she comes: on goes this mask of frowns,
Tell her I am angry: men men try your wives,
Love that abides sharpe tempests, sweetly thrives.
My Lord is angry.
Angry? the heauēs foresēd: with whō? for what?
Is it with me?
Not me.
May I presume,
To touch the vain of that sad discontent,
Which swells upon my dear Lords angry brow?
Away away,
Oh chide me not away,
Your handmaid Grissill with vnuexed thoughts,
And with an vnrepining soul, will bear
The burden of all sorrows, of all woe,
Before the smallest grief should wound you so.
I am not beholding to your love for this,
Woman I love thee not, thine eyes to mine
Are eyes of Basilisks, they murder me.
Suffer me to part hence, Isle tear them out,
Because they work such treason to my love.
Talk not of love I hate thee more thē poison
That sticks upon the aires infected wings,
Exhald up by the hot breath of the Sun,
Tic for thy sake that speckled infamy,
Sits like a screech-owle on my honoured breast,
To make my subjects stare and mock at me,
They swear theyle never bend their awful knees,
To the base issue of the beggar womb,
Tic for thy sake they curse me, rail at me,
Think thou then I can love thee (oh my soul)
Why did thou build this mountain of my shame,
Why lye my joys buried in Grissills name?
My gracious Lord.
Call not me gracious Lord,
See woman here hangs up thine ancestry,
The monuments of thy nobility,
This is thy russet gentry, coat, and crest
Thy earthen honours I will never hide,
Because this bridle shall pull in thy pride.
Poor Grissill is not proud of these attires,
They are to me but as you livery,
And from your humble servant when you please,
You may take all this outside, which indéede
Is none of Grissills, her best wealth is need,
Isle cast this gayness of, and be content
To wear this russet bravery of my own,
For thats more warm then this, I shall look old,
No sooner in course freeze then cloth of gold.
Spite of my soul sheele triumph over me.
Your glove my Lord,
Cast down my glove again,
Stoop you for it, for I will have you stoop,
And kneel even to the meanest groom I keep.
Tic but my duty if you'll have me stoop,
Even to your meanest groom my Lord isle stoop.
Furio how slovenly thou goosed attired?
Why so my lord?
Look here thy shoes are both untied,
Grissill kneel you and tie them.
Pardon me.
Quickly I charge you,
Friend you doe me wrong,
To let me hold my Lord in wrath so long,
Stand still Isle kneel and tie them: what I doe
Furio tic done to him and not to you.
Tic so.
Oh strange oh admiral patience,
I fear when Grissills bones sleep in her grave,
The world a second Grissill ne'er will have,
Now get you in.
I go my gracious Lord.
Did thou not here her sigh, did not one frown
Contract her beauteous forehead.
I saw none
Did not one drop fall down frō sorrows eyes,
To blame my heart for these her injuries?
Faith not a drop, I fear sheele frown on me,
For doing me service?
Furio that isle try,
My voice may yet ore-take her: Grissill, Grissill?
She comes at first call.
Did my Lord call?
Woman I called thee not,
I said this slave was like to Grissill, Grissill,
And must you therefore come to torture me?
Nay stay here's a companion fit for you,
Thou vex me, so doth this villain to,
But ere the Sun to his highest throne ascend,
My indignation in his death shall end.
Oh pardon him my Lord, for mercies wings
Bears round about the world the fame of Kings,
Temper your wrath I beg it on my knee,
Forgive his fault though you'll not pardon mée,
Thank her.
Thanks Madame.
I have not true power,
To wound thée with denial, oh my Grissill,
How dearly should I love thee,
Yea die to doe thee good, but that my subjects
Upbraid me with thy birth, and call it base.
And grieve to sée thy Father and thy Brother
Heaved up to dignities.
Oh cast them down,
And send poor Grissill poorly home again,
High Cedars fall, when lowe shrubs safe remain.
Fetch me a cup of wine.
Shees a saint sure.
Oh Furio now isle boast that I have found,
An Angel upon earth: she shall be cround
The empress of all women. Lepido?
Mario? what was she that passed by you?
Your virtuous wife.
Call her not virtuous,
For I abhor her, did not her swollen eyes
Look red with hate or scorn? did she not curse
My name or Furioes name?
No my dear Lord.
For he and I raild at her, spit at her,
Isle burst her heart with sorrow, for I grieve
To see you grieve that I have wronged my state,
By loving one whose baseness now I hate.
Come faster if you can forbear Mario,
Tic but her office: what she does to mée,
She Shall perform to any of you three,
I am glad to see her pride thus trampeled down
Now serve Mario, then serve Lepido:
And as you bow to me, so bend to them.
Isle not done it to win a diadem.
Your wisdom I commend that have ye power
To raise or throw down as you smile or lower.
Your patience I commend that can abide,
To hear a flatterer speak yet never chide.
Hence, hence dare you control thē whom I grace
Come not within my sight.
I will obey,
And if you please, ne'er more behold the day.
Furio?
My Lord,
Watch her where she goes,
And mark how in her looks this tryeall shows.
I will.
Mario, Lepido, I loath this Grissill,
As sick men loath the bitterest potion
Which the Physicians hand holds out to them,
For Gods sake frown upon her when she smiles,
For Gods sake smile for joy to see her frown,
For Gods sake scorn her, call her beggars brat,
Torment her with your looks, your words your déedes,
My heart she'll leap for joy, that her heart bleeds,
Wilt thou doe this Mario?
If you say.
Mario, doe this I must in it obey.
I know you must, so Lepido must you
Tic well; but counsel me whats best to doe,
How shall I please my subjects? doe but speak,
Isle doe it though Grissills heart in sunder break.
Your subjects doe rapine at nothing more,
Then to behold Ianicola her Father,
And her base brother lifted up so high.
To banish them from Court were policy.
Oh rare, oh profound wisdom, dear Marie,
It forthwith shall be done, they shall not stay,
Though I may win by them a Kingdoms sway,
Mario laugh at this.
Why so I doe.
Headlong I had rather fall to misery.
Then see a beggar raised to dignity.
Boy how sits my rapier: la sol la sol. &amp;c.
It hangs as even as a chandlers beam.
Some of them deserve to hang upon a beam for that euennes, boy learn to give every man his due, give the hangman his due, for hoe's a necessary member.
Thats true, for he cuts of many wicked mēbers.
Hes an excellent barber, he shaves most cleanly But page how dost thou like the Court?
Prettily and so,
Faith so doe I pretlie and so: I am weary of being a Courtier Boy.
That you cannot bee Master, for you are but a Courtiers man.
Thou say true &amp; thou art the Courtiers mans boy, so thou art a courtier in decimo sexro in the least volume, or a courtier at the third hand, or a courtier by re∣uersion, or a courtier three descents removed, or a court∣er in minority or an under Courtier or a courtier in posse, and I thie Master in esse:
A posse an esse non este argumentum Master,
Thou hast to much wit to be so little, but imita∣tion, imitation, is his good Lord and Master.
Banished from Count, oh what have wee mis∣done?
What have wee done, wee must bee thus dis∣graced?
I know not, but you are best pack, tic my Lords will, and thats law, I must uncase you: your best course is to fall to your own trades.
Sir, what art thou a Broker?
No, how then, I am a Gentleman.
You are a Iewe, you are a Pagan: howe dare thou leave them without a cloak for the rain, whē his daugh∣la, and his sister, and my Mistress is the Kings wife?
Go look, sir soole, my condition is to ship you too.
There's a ship of fools ready to hoist sail, they stay but for a good wind and your company: ha ha ha, I wonder (if all fools were banished) where thou would take shipping.
Peace Babulo, we are banished from the Court.
I am glad, it shall case me of a charge héere, as long as we have good clothes on one backs, tic no mat∣la for our honesty, wée'll live any where, and kéep Court in any corner.
Oh my déere Grissill.
You from me are banished,
But ere you leave the Court, oh leave I pray
Your grief in Grissils bosom, let my chéekes
Be watered with woes tears, for héere and héere,
And in the error of these wandering eyes,
Began your discontent: had not I been,
By nature painted thus: this had not been,
To leave the Court and care be patient,
In your old cottage you shall find content.
Morn not because these silks are tan away,
You'll seem more rich in a course gown of gray,
Will you be parking? when?
Friend whats thy name?
Furio my name is, what of that?
Is thy name Fury? thou art half hanged, for thou hast an ill name.
Thy looks are like thy name, thy name &amp; looks Approve thy nature to be violent.
Brother forbear, hoe's servant to my Lord.
To him, M. spare him not an inch.
Princes are never pleased with subjects sins,
But pity those whom they are sworn to smite,
And grieve as tender mothers when they beat,
With kind correction their unquiet babes
So should their Officers compassionate,
The misery of any wretches state.
I must obey my Master, though indéed My heart (that seems hard) at their wrongs doth bleed. Pray get you gone, I say little, but you know my mind.
Little said is soon amended, thou say but lit∣tle, and that little will be mended soon indeed, thats no∣for, and so the Proverb stands in his full strength, pow∣er and virtue.
They will not go my Lord.
Will they not go?
Away with them, expel them from our Court,
Base wretches, is it wrong to ask mine own?
Think you that my affection to my wife,
Is greater then my love to public weal?
Doe not my people murmur every hour,
That I have raised you up to dignities?
Doe not lewd Minstrels in their ribald runes,
Scofe at her birth, and descant on her dower?
Alas my Lord, you knew her state before.
I did, and from the bounty of my heart,
I robed my wardrobe of all precious robes,
That she might shine in beauty like the Sun,
And in exchange, I hung this russet gown,
And this poor pitcher for a monument,
Amongst my costliest Iemmes: sée here they hang,
Grissill look héere, this gown is unlike to this?
My gracious Lord, I know full well it is.
Grissill was as pretty a Grissill in the one as in the other.
you have forgot these rags, this water pot.
With reuerenre of your Highness I have not.
Nor I, many a good mess of water grewell has that yielded vs.
Yes, you are proud of these your rich attires.
Never did pride keep pace with my desires.
Well, get you on, part briefly with your father.
Our parting shall be short, daughter farewell.
Our parting shall be short, sister farewell.
Our parting shall be short, Grissill farewell.
Remember thou did live when thou were poor,
And now thou dost but live, come son no more.
See them without the Palace Furio.
Good, yet tic bad.
Shall Furio see them out of the Palace? doe you turn vs out of doors? you turn vs out of doors then?
Hence with that fool, Mario drive him hence,
He shall not need, I am no Ox nor Ass, I can go without driving, for al his turning, I am glad of one thing.
Whats that Babulo?
Mary that hee shall never hit vs ith téeth with turning vs, for tic not a good turn, follower I must ca∣shere you: I must give over houskeeping, tic the fashion, farewell boy.
Marie farewell and be hanged.
I am glad thou take thy death so patiently, fare∣well my Lord, adieu my Lady, great was the wisdom of that Taylor, that stitched me in Motley, for hée's a fool that leaves basket making to turn Courtier: I sée my destiny dogs me: at first I was a fool (for I was borne an Innocent) then I was a traveller, and then a Basket-maker, and then a Courtier, and now I most turn bas∣ket-maker and fool again, the one I am sworn to, but the fool I bestow upon the world, for Stultorum plane sunt ominia adieu, adieu.
Farewell simplicity, part of my shame farewell, Now Lady what say you of their exile?
What ever you think good, Isle not term vile,
By this rich burden in my worthless womb,
Your hand-maide is so subject to your will,
That nothing which you doe, to her seems ill.
I am glad you are so patient, get you in,
Thy like will never be, never hath bin.
Mario, Lepido?
My gracious Lord.
The hand of poverty held down your states,
As it did Grissils, and as her I raised,
To shine in greatness sphere, so did mine eye,
Through gilt beams of your births, therefore me thinks
Your soul should sympathise, and you should know,
Wht passions in my Grissils bosom flow,
Faith tell me your opinions of my wife?
She is as virtuous and as patient,
As innocent, as patience it self.
She merits much of love, little of hate,
Only in birth she is vnfortuuate.
I, I, the memory of that mirth doth kill me,
She is with child you see, her travail past,
I am determined she shall leave the Court,
And live again with old Ianicola.
Therein you show true wisdom.
Doe I indeed?
Dear friends it shall be done, Isle have you two
Rumour that presently, to the wide ears
Of that newes-louing-beast the multitude,
Go tell them for their sakes this shall be done.
With wings we fly.
Swifter then time we run.
Begone then: oh these times, these impious times,
How swift is mischief? with what nimble feet
Doth envy gallop to doe injury?
They both confess my Grissils innocence,
They both admire her wondrous patience,
Yet in their malice and to flatter me,
Head-long they run to this impiety.
Oh whats this world, but a confused throng
Of fools and mad men, crowding in a thrust
To shoulder out the wise, trip down the just.
But I will try by self experience,
And shun the vulgar sentence of the base,
If I find Grissill strong in patience,
These flatterers shall be wounded with disgrace,
And whilst verse lives, the fame shall never dye,
Of Grissils patience, and her constancy.
Onophrio and Vrcenze early met, every man take his stand, for there comes a most rich purchase of mirth: Emulo with his hand in a fair scarf, and Iulia
He will strip himself out of his shirt anon, for Gods sake step in.
My opinion is I shall never recuperate the le∣gittimate office of this member my arm.
Signior Emulo.
Sweet and accomplished Signiors.
Ha ha, Madame you had a pitiful hand with this fool, but see he is recovered.
But servant where is your other hand?
See sweet mistress one is my prisoner.
The other I have tan up with the fine finger.
Look in his scarf Farneze for an other, hee has a third hand, and tic pitifully wounded hee tells me, pitiful∣lie, pitifully.
Wounded, oh palpable, come a demonstration of it.
Give him your larded cloak Signior to stop his mouth, for he will undo you with lies.
Come Signior, one fine lye now to apparel all these former, in some light sarcenet robe of truth: none, none, in this mint?
Fie servant, is your accomplished Courtship no∣thing but lies:
Fie Signior, no music in your mouth, but bat∣tles, yet a mere milke-sop.
Fie Emulo, nothing but wardrobe, yet hear all your trunks of suites?
Fie Signior, a scarce about your neck, yet will not hang your self to hear all this?
Servant I discharge you my service, Isle enter∣taine no braggarts.
Signior, we discharge yoy the Court, we'll have no gulles in our company.
Abram we cashier you our company, wee must have no minions at Court.
Oh patience bee thou my fortification: Italy
thou spurnest me for uttering that nutriment, which I sucked from thée.
How Italy? away you idiot: Italy infects you not, but your own diseased spirits: Italy? out you froth, you scum, because your soul is mud, and that you have breathed in Italy, you'll say Italy have defiled you: away you bore, thou wilt wallow in mire in the sweetest coun∣try in the world.
I cannot conceit this rawness: Italy farewell, Italians adieu.
A virtuous soul abhors to dwell with you.
Ha ha ha:
Peace servants, here comes the Duke my brother.
Lo cousin here they be: are ye here Gen∣tlemen?
And Iulia you too? then Isle call your eyes,
To testify, that to Sir Meredith,
I doe deliver here four sealed bonds:
Cos have a care to them, it much behooves you,
For Gentlemen, within this parchment lies,
Five thousand Ducats payable to him,
Just fourteen days before next Penticoast,
Cos it concerns you, therefore keep them safe.
Fugh, her warrant her shall log them vb from Sun and Moon, and seven stars too I hobe, but harg you cozen Marquess.
Now, whats the matter?
A pore on it tic scald matter, well, well pray cozen Marquess, use her Latie Grissill a good teale better, for as God vdge me, you hurd Sir Owen out a cry by maging her sad and pout so, see you?
Hurt you? what harm or good reap you thereby?
Harm, yes by Gods lid, a poggie teale of harm, for loog you cozen, and cozen Iulia, &amp; Gentlemen awl, (for awl is to know her wives case) you know her tag to wife the widow Gwenthyan.
True cozen &amp; shée's a virtuous gentlewoman.
One of the patientest Ladies in the world.
Shée's wondrous beautiful &amp; wondrous kind.
Shée's the quietest woman that ere I knew, for good heart, shée'll put up any thing.
Cozen I am proud that you are sped so well.
Are you? by God so are not I, isle tel you what co∣zen Marquess, you awl know her well, you know her face is little fair &amp; smug, but her has a tongue goes Jingle ian∣glee, Jingle jangle, petter and worse then pelles when her house is a fire: patient? ha ha sir Owen shall tag her héeles and run to Wales, and her play the tiuell so out a cry la∣rible a pogs on her la.
Why cozen what are her qualities that you so commend her?
Commend her? no by God not I, ha ha: is know her qualities petter &amp; petter, fore I commend her: but Gwenthian is worse and worse out a cry, owe out a cry worse, out of awl cry, shée's feared to be made fool as Gris∣sill is, &amp; as God vdge me, her mag fine pobbie fool of Sir Owen, her shide &amp; shide, &amp; prowl &amp; scold, by God and scradge terrible sometime, owe &amp; haid her will doe what her can, ha ha ha, and sir Owen were handsome pachcler again, pray cozen Marquess tag some order in Grissill, or fedge sir Owen to mag Gwenthians quiet and tame her.
To tame her? that Isle teach you presently,
You had no sooner spake the word of Taming,
But mine eye met a speedy remedy,
Sée cozen heere's a plot where Osiers grow,
The ground belongs to old Ianicula
(My Grissils father) come Sir Meredith,
Take out your knife cut three and so will I,
So, keep yours cozen let them be safe laid up,
These thrée (thus wound together) Isle preserve.
What shall her doe now with these? peat and knog her Gwenthian.
You shall not take such counsel from my lips,
How now Mario? what news brings thee hither in such quick haste?
Your wife (my gracious Lord)
Is now delivered of two beauteous twins,
A son and daughter.
Take that for thy pains,
Not for the joy that I conceive thereby,
For Grissill is not gracious in the eye
Of those that love me, therefore I must hate
Those that doe make my life unfortunate.
And thats my children: must I not Mario?
Thou bowest thy knee, well, well I know thy mind,
Virtue in villains can no succour find,
A son and daughter? I by them will prove,
My Grissils patience better, and her love:
Come Iulia, come Onophrio, cos farewell,
Reserve those wands, these three Isle bear away,
When I require them back, then will I show
How easily a man may tame a shrew.
Ha ha ha, tame a shrew, owe tic out a cry terri∣ble hard, and more worse then tame a mad pull, but whad mean her cozen to mag her cut her wands? ha ha, God vdge me tic fine knag, I sée her knavery now, tic to pang Gwenthyans podie and she mag a noise &amp; prabble: Is not so? by Gods lid so, &amp; Gwenthian, sir Owen will knog you before her abide such horrible doe.
Gods lid here her comes. Terdawgh Gwenthian Terdawgh.
Terdawgh whee, Sir Owen Terdawgh whee.
Owe, looge here, fine wands Gwenthyan, is not?
Rees tag them and preag them in pieces.
What say you forsooth?
What say you forsooth? you saucy knave, must her tell her once, and twice, and thrice, and four times, what to doe? preag these wands.
Rees is petter preake Rees his pate: here Rees carry her home.
Would I were at gallows, so I were not here:
Doe and her tare, doe and her tare, see you now, what shall her doe with wands? peat Gwenthyan? podie and mag Gwenthyan put her finger in me hole: ha, by God by God, is scradge her eyes out that judge her, that tawg to her, that loog on her, merge you that Sir Owen?
Yes, her merge her, Rees pray merge her Lady?
Not I sir she'll set her marks on me then.
Is prade? is prade? go too Rees, Isle Rees her, you tawg you.
Pray Gwenthien bee patient, as her cozen Grissill is.
Grissill owe? owe? Grissill? no, no, no, no. her shall not mag Gwenthian such ninny pobbie fool as Grissill, I say preage her wands.
Cods pluto is pought her to peat dust out of her cloag and perils.
Peat her cloag and perils? fie, fie, fie, tic lye Sir Owen tic lye.
Your worship may stab her, she gives you the lye.
Peace Rees, go to, I pought them indeed to mag her horse run and go a mighty teale of pace, pray let Rees tag her in good Gwenthian?
Rees bear in her wands because Sir Owen beg so gently.
Go Rees, go locke them up in a pox or shest, go.
You shall not need to bid me go, for Isle run.
I pought them for her horse indeed, for here was her cozen Marquess and brought her ponds and scriblings here for her money: Gwenthyan pray keep her ponds and keep her wisely: Sir Gwenthyan is tell her prove news, Grissill is brought to bed of little gentleman and shentlewoman: (is glad out a cry speag her fair) yes truly Grissill is brought a bed.
Grissils no podie but Grissils? what care I for Grissill: I say if Sir Owen love Gwenthyan, shall not love Grissill nor Marquess so, see you now?
God vdge me, not love her cozen? is shealous? owe is fine trig, not love her cozen? God vdge me her will, and hang her self, see you now?
Hang her self, owe, owe, owe, Gwenthyans to∣there husband is scawrne to say hang her self: hang her self? owe owe, owe owe.
Gods pluto, what cannot get by prowls, is get by owe, owe owe, is terrible Lady, pray be peace, and cry no more owe, owe, owe, Tawsone Gwenthyans, God vdge me is very fury.
O mon logo, mon due, hang Gwenthyans?
Adologo whee Gwenthyan bethogh, en Tho∣nigh, en moyen due.
No vetho en Thonigh, cna wathe gethla Tee, hang Gwenthyans?
Sir Owen shall say no more hang her self, be out a cry still and her shall pie her new card to ride in, &amp; two new fine horses, and more plow coats and padges ta follow her heals, see you now?
But will her say no more hang her self?
Oh no more, as God vdge me no more, pray leave, owe, owe, owe.
Tannekin the Fide hath brought your Rebato, it comes to three pound.
What a pestilence is this for Gwenthyan?
For her nag, is called repatoes, Gwenthian wear it here, first not prove?
Prove? yes is prove, tic repatoes I warrant her: I patois money out a cry, yes tic prove, Rees the press? Rees the press?
The Fro sir says five pound.
Ha ha ha, pound, Gwenthyan pray doe not pie it.
By God vdge me her shall pie it.
God vdge me her shall not.
Shall not? Rees tag her away, I say her shall and wear it pie and pie.
Then mag a pobbie fool of Sir Owen indeed: Gods pluto shall? I say shall not: five pound for puble, for patois: here there, so tag it now, wear it now pout her nag, shall pridle sir Owen ha?
Oh rare sir Owen, ah precious Kninght, oh rare Sir Owen.
Out you raskals, you prade and prade, isle prade your nieces.
Oh rare Madame, oh precious Madame, O God, O God, O God, O.
Is domineer now, you tear her ruffs and re∣patois, you preake her ponds? Isle tear as good ponds, and petter too, and petter too.
Owe Gwenthyan, Cods pluto is five thousand ducats, hold hold hold, a pogs on her pride, what has her done?
Go loog, is now paid for her repatoes, isle have her wills &amp; desires, isle teadge her pridle her Lady: Catho crogge, No vetho, en Thlonigh gna wathee Gnathlatee.
A breath vawer or no Tee: pridle her, sir owen is pridled I warrant: widows (were petter Gods pluto marry whore) were petter be hanged and quarter, then marry widows as God vdge me: Sir owen fall on her knees, &amp; pray God to tag her to her mercy, or else put pet∣la mind in her Lady: awl prittish Gentlemen tag
heed how her marry fixen widow.
Sir owen ap Meredith can rightly tell,
A shrews sharpe tongue is terrible as hell.
Did she not see thee when thou took it up?
No, she was fast a sleep.
Give me this blessed burden, pretty fool
With what an amiable look it sleeps,
And in that slumber how it sweetly smiles,
And in that smile how my heart leaps for joy:
Furio Isle turn this circle to a cradle,
To rock my dear babe: A great Romaine Lord,
Taught his young Son to ride a Hodby-horse.
Then why should I think scorn to dandle mine:
Furio behold it well, to whom first like?
You, there's your nose and black eye-browes.
Thou dost but flatter me, here comes Mario,
I know Mario will not flatter me,
Mario, thy opinion, view this child,
Doth not his lips, his nose, his fore-head,
And every other part resemble mine?
So like my Lord, that the nice difference,
Would stay the judgment of the curioust eye.
And yet me thinks I am not half so browne.
Indeed your cheeks bear a more lively colour
Furio, play thou the nurse, handle it softly.
One were better get a dozen then nurse one.
Mario step to Grissill shoe's a sleep,
Her white hand is the pillar to those cares,
Which I ungently lodg'e within her head,
Steal thou the other child and bring it hither,
If Grissill be awake and strive with thee,
Bring it perforce, nor let her know what hand,
Hath robed her of this other, haste Mario.
I fly my gracious Lord.
Run flattery, because I did blaspheme and cal it browne,
This Parasite cried (like an Echo) browne.
The child is fair my Lord, you were ne'er so fair.
I know tic fair, I know tic wondrous fair,
Dear pretty infant let me with a kiss,
Take that dishonour off, which the foul breath
Of a profane slave, laid upon thy cheeks;
Had but I said my boy's a Blackamoore,
He would have damned himself and so have swore.
Give me mine infant, whore's my other babe?
You cannot play the nurse, your horrid eyes
Will fright my little ones and make them cry,
Your tongue's too ruff to chime a lullaby:
Tic not the pleasure of my Lord I know,
To load me with such wrong.
No, I unload you.
Give her her child Mario and yet stay,
Furio hold thou them both, Grissill forbear,
You are but nurse to them they are not thine.
I know my gracious Lord they are not mine,
I am but their poor nurse I must confess,
Alas let not a nurse be pitiless.
To see the cold ayre make them look thus bleak,
Makes me shed tears because they cannot speak.
If they could speak, what think you they would say?
That I in all things will your will obey.
Obey it then in silence: shall not I
Bestow what is mine own, as likes me best?
Deliver me these brats: come press me down,
With weighty infamy: here is aloade
Of shame, of speckled shame: O God how heavy
An armefull of dishonour is? hears two,
Grissill for this isle thank none else but you,
Which way so ere I turn I meet a face,
That makes my cheeks blush at mine own disgrace.
This way or this way, never shall mine eye
Look thus, or thus: but (oh me) presently,
(Take them for Gods sake Furio) presently
I shall spend childish tears: true tears indéed,
That thus I wrong my babes and make her bleed,
Go Grissill get you in.
I go my Lord.
Farewell sweet sweet dear babes, so you were free,
Would all the worlds cares might be thrown on me.
Ha, ha, why this is pleasing harmony.
My Lord they'll wrawle, what shall I doe with them?
Tell her thou must provide a nurse for them
Comes she not back Mario?
No my Lord.
Tush, tush, it cannot be but sheele return,
I know her bosom bears no marble heart,
I know, a tender Mother cannot part,
With such a patient soul, from such sweet souls,
She stands and watches sure, and sure the weeps,
To see my seeming flinty breast, Mario
Withdraw with me: Furio stay thou here still,
If she return, seem childish, and deny
To let her kiss or touch them.
Faith not I: I have not such a heart, and she ask to touch them. Isle deny it because isle obey my Lord, yet she shall kiss and touch them to, because Isle please my Lady: alas, alas, pretty fools I love you well but I would you had a better Nurse.
A better Nurse: seek thou a better Nurse?
A better Nurse then whom?
Then you, away.
I am their Mother I must not away,
Look, look, good Furio look they smile on mée,
I know poor hearts they fear to smile on thee,
I prithée let me have them.
Touch them not.
I pry thee let me touch them.
No: Hands off.
I pry thee gentle Furio let me kiss them.
Not one kiss for a Kings crown:
Must I not kiss my babes: must I not touch them?
Alas what sin so vile hath Grissil done
That thus she should be vexed? not kiss my infants?
Who taught thee to be cruel gentle churl,
What must thou doe with them?
Get them a nurse.
A Nurse alack, what Nurse? where must she dwell
I must not tell you: till I know my self,
For Gods sake who must Nurse them doe but name her,
And I will swear those fiery eyes doe smile,
And I will swear that which none else will swear,
That thy grim brows, doe mercies livery wear,
Choose you.
Oh God, oh God, might Grissill have her choice
My babes should not be scard with thy devils voice.
Thou get a Nurse for them? they can abide,
To taste no milk but mine, come, come Isle chide,
In faith you cruel man, Isle chide indéede,
If I grow angry.
Do do I care not.
To chide &amp; curse thy Lord thou hast more néed
Wilt thou not tell me who shall be their Nurse?
No.
Wilt thou not let me kiss them?
No I say.
I prithee let my tears, let my bowed knees,
Bend thy obdurate hart, see héer's a fountain,
Which heaven into this Alabaster bowels,
Instilled to nourish them: man theyle cry,
And blame thee that this ronnes so lavishly,
Here is milk for both my babes two breasts for two.
Poor babes I wéep to sée what wrong I doe.
I pray thee let them suck I am most méete,
To play their Nurse: theyle smile and say tic swéet,
Which streams frō hence, if thou dost bear them hēce,
My angry breasts will swell, and as mine eyes
Lets fall salt drops, with these white Nectar tears,
They will be mixed: this sweet will then be brine,
Theyle cry Isle chide and say the sin is thine.
Mine arms ache mightily.
And my heart aches.
And so doth mine: sweet sounds this discord makes.
Here Madame take one, I am weary of both, touch it and kiss it to, its a sweet child, I would I were rid of my misery, for I shall drown my heart, with my tears that fall inward.
Oh this is gently done this is my boy.
My first borne care: thy feet that never felt ground,
Have travelled longest in this land of woe,
This worlds wilderness, and hast most need,
Of my most comfort: oh I thank thee Furio,
I know I should transform thee with my tears,
And melt thy adamantiue heart like wax,
What wrong shall these have to be tan from mée,
Mildly entreat their Nurse to touch them mildly,
For my soul tells me, that my honoured Lord,
Does but to try poor Grissils constancy,
Hes full of mercy justice, full of love.
My cheeks doe glow with shame to here her speak,
Should I not weep for joy my heart would break,
And yet a little more Isle stretch my trial.
Mario, Lepido?
My gracious Lord?
You shall be witness of this open wrong,
I gave strait charge, she should not touch these brats,
Yet has she tempted with lascivious tears,
The heart of Furio, see she dandles them,
Take that child from her: stay, stay, isle commend,
That pity in thee which Isle reprepend.
Doe.
Dare you thus contradict our strait command
But hears a trusty groom, out hipocrite,
I shall doe Justice wrong to let thée breath,
For disobeying me.
My gracious Lord,
Tempt me not Siren, since you are so loving,
Hold you take both your children, get you gon,
Derobe her of these rich habiliments,
Take down her hat, her pitcher and her gown,
And as she came to me in beggary,
So drive her to her fathers.
My dear Lord.
Uex me not good Mario if you woe me,
(Or if you shed one tear) to pity her,
Or if by any drift you succour her,
You loose my favour everlastingly,
We must obey since there's no remedy,
You must be villains theres no remedy,
Mario, Lepido, you two shall help,
To bear her children home.
It shall not néede I can bear more.
Thou bear too much indeed.
Come, come sweet lambs we'll laugh and live content
Though from the Court we live in banishment,
These rich attires are for your mother fit,
But not your nurse, therefore Isle off with it.
Away with her I say.
Away, away?
Nothing but that cold comfort we'll obey,
Heaven smile upon my Lord with gracious eye,
Drive her hence Lepido.
Good Madame hence.
Thus tyranny oppresses innocence,
Thy looks seem heavy, but thy heart is light,
For villains laugh when wrong oppresses right.
Must we then be driven hence: Oh see my Lord,
Sweet pretty fools they both smiled at that word.
They smile as who should say indeed indeed,
Your tongue cries hence, but your heart's not agreed,
Can you thus part from them? in truth I know,
Your true love cannot let these infants go.
She'll triumph over me doe what I can.
Good Madame hence.
Oh send one gracious smile
Before we leave this place: turn not away,
Doe but look back, let vs but once more see
Those eyes, whose beams shall breath new souls in three,
It is enough now weal depart in joy,
Nay be not you so cruel, should you two
Be thus driven hence, trust me Id pity you.
Disrobe her presently.
It shall be done.
To work some good deed thus you would not run.
Oh Grissill in large Characters of gold,
Thy virtuous sacred fame shall be enroled,
Tell me thy judgment Furio of my wife?
I think my Lord shoe's a true woman, for she loves her children, a rare wife, for she loves you, (I be∣leeue you'll hardly find her match) and I think shoe's more then a woman, because she conquers all wrongs by patience.
Yet once more will I try her, presently
Isle have thée go to old Ianicolaes,
And take her children from her, breed some doubt,
(By speeches) in her, that her eyes shall never
Behold them more: bear them to Pay,
Commend vs to our brother, say from vs,
That we desire him with all kind respect,
To nurse the infants, and withal conceal,
Their parentage from any mortal ear,
I charge thee on thy life reveal not this,
I charge thee on thy life, be like thy name,
(When thou come to her) rough and furious.
Well, I will: It's far from Saluce to Pay, the children will cry, I have no teates you know, it were good you thought upon it.
There's gold.
That's good.
Provide them nurses.
That's better, I will and I can.
Away, though I dare trust thy secrecy,
Yet will I follow thee in some disguise,
And try thy faith, and Grissils constancy:
If thou abide unblemished, then I swear,
A have found two wonders that are seldom rise,
A trusty servant, and a patient wife.
Father how fare you?
Very well my son,
This labour is a comfort to my age,
The Marquess hath to me been merciful,
In sending me from Courtly delicates,
To taste the quiet of this country life.
Call him not merciful, his tyranny
Exceeds the most inhumaine.
Peace my son,
I thought by learning thou had been made wise,
But I perceive it puffs up thy soul,
Thou takst a pleasure to be counted just,
And kick against the faults of mighty men:
Oh tic in vain, the earth may even as well
Challenge the potter to be partial,
For forming it to sundry offices:
Alas the error of ambitious fools,
How frail are all their thoughts, how faint, how weak?
Those that doe strive to jostle with the great,
Are certain to be bruised, or soon to break.
Come, come mell with our Osiers, here let's rest,
This is old homely home, &amp; that's still best.
Hush, hush, hush, hush, and I dance mine own child and I dance mine own child, &amp;c: ha ha, whoop old Master, so ho ho, look here, and I dance mine own child, &amp;c: heere's sixteen pence a week, and sixteen pence a week, eight groats, soap and candle, I met her in Osier grove, crying hush, hush, hush, hush: I thought it had been some beggar woman, because of her pitcher, for you know they bear such household stuff, to put drink and porrage together, and I dance mine, &amp;c.
Oh father now forswear all patience,
Grissill comes home to you in poor array,
Grissill is made a drudge, a cast-away.
Grissill is welcome home to poverty,
GOlden slumbers kiss your eyes,
Smiles awake you when you rise:
Sleep pretty wantons doe not cry,
And I will sing a lullaby,
Rock them rock them lullaby.
Care is heavy therefore sleep you,
You are care and care must keep you:
Sleep pretty wantons doe not cry,
And I will sing a lullaby,
Rock them rock them lullaby.
Leave singing.
We may choose, Grandsire sol fa once more, we'll alla mire him, and he we wail in woe, and who can hen∣der vs?
Sir Scholar read there, it's a commission for me to take away these children.
Nay then you're welcome, there's four groats, and heere's four more.
To take away my children gentle Furio,
Why must my babes bear this ungentle doom?
Go look.
O misery, O most accursed time,
When to be foes to guilt is held a crime,
Sister this fiend must bear your infants hence.
Good Grissil bear al wrongs with patience.
Good father let true patience cure all woe,
You bid me be content, oh be you so.
Father why doe you weep?
What can I doe,
Though her he punish, he might pity you.
Let's fret and curse the Marquess cruelly.
I by my troth that's a good way, we may well do it, now we are out of his hearing.
Must I then be divorced? and loose this treasure,
I must and am content, since tic his pleasure,
I pry thee tell we whither they must go?
No.
Art thou commanded to conceal the place?
I.
Then will not I inquire, thou dost but jest
I know thou must not rob me, tic to try
If I love them: no, no, here I read,
That which strikes blind mine eyes, makes my heart bleed,
Farewell, farewell, dear souls, adieu adieu,
Your father sends and I must part from you,
I must oh God I must, must is for Kings,
And lo obedience for lo underlings.
He shall not hale them thus, keep them perforce,
This slave looks on them with a murdering eye.
No, he shall not have them, knock out his brains, and save the little hop a my thumbs.
Doe if you dare.
How now my hearts, what's the matter?
What care thou.
This is poor Grissil, wife unto our Duke,
And these her children, thus he sends her home,
And thus he sends a serpent to devour,
Their precious lives he brings commission,
To hale them hence, but whither none can tell.
Forbear, forbear.
Take them from him perforce,
Are these his children?
So she says.
Two sweet Ducks, and is this his wife?
Yes, he has lyne with her.
A pretty soul, sir thou wilt be hanged for this.
Hang thy self.
Beat him, but first take these two from his arms,
I am a basket maker, and I swear
Isle dye before he bear away the babes.
Oh rare, cry prentices and clubs, the corporation cannot be ( ) sir set down thy baskets and to it pell mell.
Would I were rid of my office?
What will you doe, drive this rash fellow hence?
The Marquess is a tyrant and does worng.
I would not for the world that hee should hear thee.
I would not for ten worlds but hear my Grissil.
A tyrant, no he's mercy even her self,
Justice in triumph rides in his two eyes,
Take héede how thou prophanest high deities:
Go Furio, get thee gone: good father help me
To guard my dear Lords servant from this place,
I know hée'll doe my pretty babes no harm,
For see Furio looks gently: oh get thee gone,
Pity sits on thy cheeks, but God can tell,
My heart says my tongue lies, farewell farewell.
Stay sir take thy purse.
I let none fall.
Half part.
A purse of gold Furio is fallen from thee.
Its none of mine, sir basket-maker, if my arms were not full, thou should have thy hands full: farewell Grissill, if thou never see thy children more, curse me, if thou dost see them again, thank God, adieu.
Farewell and be hanged.
I will thank God for all, why should I grieve,
To loose my children? no no, I ought rather
Rejoice, because they are borne to their Father.
Daughter, heere's nothing in this purse but gold.
So much the better, Master we'll quickly turn
it into silver.
This purse that fellow did let fall, run run,
Carry it him again, run Babulo,
Away with it, tic laid to doe vs wrong.
Try all their golden baits, stay never run,
They can doe no more wrong then they have done.
What ails my Grissill? comfort my child.
Isle fetch Rosa solis.
Poor soul her grief burns inward, yet her tongue
Is loath to give it freedom: I doe wrong,
Oh Grissill I doe wrong thee and, lament,
That for my sake thou feel this languishment.
I came to try a servant and a wife,
Both have I proved true, that purse of gold I brought,
And let if fall of purpose to relieve her,
Well may I give her gold that so much grieve her,
As I came in by stealth, so Isle away,
Joy has a tongue, but knows not what to say.
So father I am well, I am well indeed,
I should doe wondrous ill, should I rapine,
At my babes loss for they are none of mine.
I am glad thou take this wound so patiently.
Whoop whether is my brother basket-maker gone: ha let me see, I smell a rat, sneaked hence and never take leave, either hoe's a crafty knave, or else hee dogs Furio to byte him, for when a quarrel enters into a trade it serves seven years before it be free.
Let him be whom he will, he seemed our friend,
Grissill lay up this gold tic Furioes sure,
Or it may be thy Lord did give it him,
To let it fall for thee, but keep it safe,
If he disdain to love thee as a wife,
His gold shall not buy food to nourish thee,
Grissill come in, time swiftly runs away,
The greatest sorrow hath an ending day.
Rees, lay her table, and set out her fittailes, and preades, and wines, and ale, and pear, and salt for her guess.
Yes forsooth my Lady but what shall I do with all yonder beggars?
Send out the peggers into her Lady, go.
How? the beggars in, wee shall have a lousy feast Madame.
You rascals prate no more, but fetch them in: shall pridle Sir Owen a good teale well enough, is war∣rant her. Sir Owen is gone to bid her cozen Marquess and a meiny to dine at her house, but Gwenthyan shall kiue her dinner I warrant her, for peggers shall have all her meat.
Come my hearts, troop, troop, every man follow his leader, heere's my Lady.
God bless your Ladyship, God bless your Lady∣ship.
I thang you my good peggers, Rees pring stools, sid awl down, Rees pring more meat.
Here Madame, Isle set it on, tak't off who will.
Let vs alone for that, my Lady shall we scram∣ble or eat mannerly?
Peggers I hobe have no manners, but first hear me pray you now, and then fall to out a cry.
Peace hear my Lady, Iacke-mumble-crust steal no penny loaves.
Peggers, awl you know Sir Owen?
Passing well, passing well, God bless his worcester∣ship.
Madame, we know him as well as a beggar knows his dish.
Awl these fittels is made for Cozen Marquess: Sir Owen is gone to fedge him, but Sir owen has anger her Lady.
More shame for him, hoe's not a Knight, but a knitter of caps for it.
Sir Owen has anger her Lady, and therefore her Lady is anger Sir Owen
Make him a cuckold Madame, and upon that I drink to you: halter skelter here rogues, top and top gallant, pell mell, huftie tuft, hem, God save the Duke, and a fig for the hangman.
Rees fedge wine and pears enough, and fall to pegger, and eat awl her shéere, and tomineere, see you now, pray doe.
Nay I pray peggers be quiet, tag your meates, you have trinkes enough I see, and get you home now good peggers.
Come your rogues, lets go tag and rag, cut and long tail, I am victualed for a month, God bo'y Madame, pray God Sir owen and you may fall out eve∣rye day: Is there any harm in this now? hey tri-lill, give the dog a loaf, fill the tother pot you whore &amp; God save the Duke.
I thang you good peggers, ha ha, this is fine sport, by God is have peggers eat her fittales all day long.
Where is the sheer Rees? Cods pluto where?
I beseech you sir be patient, I tell you the beggars have it.
Wad a pogs is doe with peggers? wad is peg∣gers
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
••
How my Lady Gwenthian? ha ha ha.
You see Sir Owen we are soon invited,
Where is your wife the Lady Gwenthian?
Is come pie and pie, Cod vdge me Gwenthian pray put on your prairie and fine knags, and shame not Sir Owen, yes truly Gwenthian is come out pie and pie, Man gras worth whee cozen Marguesse, Man gras worth whee cozen Iolia is welcome awl.
Ha ha welcome, come come Madame appear in your likeness, or rather in the likeness of another, my Lord you're best send back to your own Cooks, if you mean to set your teeth a work to day.
Why Farneze what's the matter?
Nay there's no matter in it, the fire's quenched, the victuals given to beggars, Sir Owens kitchen looks like the first Chaos, or like a Brokers stall, full of odd ends: or like the end of some terrible battle, for upon every dres∣ser lies legs and feathers, and heads of poor Capons and wilde foul that have bin drawn and quartred, and now morn that their carcasses are carried away: his are not rewmaticke, for there's no spitting here lye fish in a pitiful pickle, there stands the coffins of pies, wherein the dead bodies of birds should have been buri∣ed, but their ghosts have forsaken their graves &amp; walked abroad: the best sport is to see the scullions, some laugh∣ing, some crying, &amp; whilst they wipe their eyes they black their faces, the Cooks curse her Lady, and some pray for our Lord.
Sir Owen Meredith is all this true?
True, et is true I warrant her pogs on her too true.
You told his Grace you had tamed your wife.
By Cod is tell her a lye then, her wise has pri∣dled
&amp; tamed her indeed: cozen Marquess because Grissill is made fool and turn away, Gwenthian mag fool of sir owen: is good? ha, is good?
Tic lye cozen Marguesse, is terrible lye: raw∣soon en Ennoh Twewle, tic lye, tic lye, sit Owen tear her repatoes and ruffs, and pridle her Latie, &amp; bid her hang her self, but is pridled I warrant her, is not Sir Owen?
Adologg whee bethogh en Thlonigh, en Moyen due, Gwenthian.
No vetho en Thlonigh, Gna watha gethla Tee.
What says she sir Owen?
I pray &amp; pray her for Cods love be quiet, splude her say her will not be quiet, do what Sir owen can: mon due Gwenthian, Me knock the pen, en vmbleth, pobe des, and pobe nose.
Gwenogh olcha vessagh whee, en herawgh, ee.
Stand between them Farneze.
You shall bob no nose here.
En herawgh Ee? Me grauat the Legatee, athlan ith pendee▪ adroh ornymee on dictar, en hecar Ee.
Doth she threaten you Sir Owen? bind her to the peace.
By Cod is threaten her indeed, her says she'll scradge out Sir owens eyes, and her frown upon her, a pogs on her nails.
Oh my dear Grissill, how much different
Art thou to this cursed spirit here, I say
My Grissils virtues shine Sir Meredith.
And Cozen Gwenthian come Isle have you friends,
This dinner shall be saved, and all shall say,
Tic done, because tic Gwenthians fasting day.
Gwenthian scawrnes to be fciendes, her Lady will be Master Sir owen.
By Cod isle see her Latie hanged first: cozen Mar∣guess &amp; cozens awl, pray tag time &amp; stay here, Rees shall
dress more fittels, and shall dine her in spite of her La∣die: Cod splude Rees Rees.
Will you? Is try that pie and pie: Stethe whee lawer, Cozen Marguesse Stethe whee lawer Gentlemen, Gwenthian is not pridled so soon.
Isle see the peace kept sure, doe what he can, I doubt his wife will prove the better man.
Signior Mario you say nothing, how like you this interlude?
So well Madame, that I rather with to play the beggar, then a Kings part in it in Sir Owens ap∣parrell.
Why this it is to be married, thus you see those that go to woo, go to woe, oh for a Drum to summon all my lovers, my suitors, my servants together.
I appear sweet mistress without summons.
So does Onophrio.
So does Vrcenze.
Signior Emulo I see will not bee seen without calling.
No faith Madame, he's blown up, no calling can serve him, hee has tan another manner of calling upon him, and I hope repents the folly of his youth.
If he follow that vocation well, he'll prove weal∣thy in wit.
He had need for his head is very poor.
Well mistress wee appear without drumming, what's your parley (and yet not so) your eyes are the drums that summons vs.
And your beauty the colours we fight under.
And the touch of your soft hand, arms vs at al points with devotion to serve you, desire to obey you, and vows to love you.
Nay then in faith make me all soldier, mine eyes a drum, my beauty your colours, and my hand your are∣more: what becomes of the rest?
It becomes vs to rest, before we come to the rest, yet for a need we could turn you into an armourie: as for example, your lips (let me see) no point of war for your lips? can I put them to no use but kissing? oh yes, if you change them to shoot out unkind language to vs that stand at your mercy, they are two culuerins to de∣stroy vs.
That isle try: my tongue shall give fire to my words presently.
Oh be more merciful fair Iulia.
Not I, would you have me pity you and pun∣nish my self? would you wish me to love? when love is so full of hate? how unlovely is love? how bitter? how full of blemishes, my Lord and brother insults our Grissill, that makes me glad, Gwenthyan curbs Sir Owen, that makes you glad, Sir Owen is maistred by his Mistress that makes you mad, poor Grissil is martred by her Lord that makes you merry, for I always wish that a womā may never meet better bargains, when sheele thrust her sweet liberty into the hands of a man: fie upon you, you're nothing but woormewood, and oak, and glass: you have bitter tongues, hard hearts, and brittle faith.
Condemn vs not till you try our loves.
Sweet servant speak not in this language of love, Gwenthyans peevishness and Grissils patience, make me here to defy that Ape Cupped, if you love stand upon his laws, I charge you leave it, I charge you neither to sigh for love nor speak of love, nor frown for hate: if you sigh isle mock you, if you speak isle stop mine ears, if you frown isle bend my fist.
Then you'll turn warrior in deed.
Had I not need encountering with such en∣mies? but say will you obey and follow me or disobey, and Isle fly you.
I obey since it is your pleasure.
I obey though I taste no pleasure in it.
I obey to, but so God help me mistress I shall show you a fair pair of heals and cry a new Mistress a new, if any pitiful creature will have me.
Better lost then found if you be so wavering.
Furio hie thee to old Ianicolaes,
Charge him, his daughter Grissil, and his Son
To come to Court, to doe such office,
Of duty to our marriage, as shall like
Our state to lay upon them.
Oh my Lord,
Uex not poor Grissill more, alas her heart,
Tut tut, isle have my will and tame her pride,
Isle make her be a servant to my bride,
Iulia Isle bridle her.
You doe her wrong.
Sister correct that error, come Sir owen,
Is not this better music then your brawls?
Yes as Cod vdg me is: how cozen Iulia, is out a cry friends now, Gwenthyan is laugh &amp; be ferie patience now Sir Owen kiss her Lady, a great teale now: see else?
I but Sir owen, the kissing her Lady is no mirth to vs, if wee kiss the post.
Owe her cozen Marquess has terrible mighty news for tell her, or else is made ready a great banquet at home for awl, pray come home, is awll ready for her, her Lady say not boepeepe now: but first hear her cozen Marquess news.
Iulia and Gentlemen these are the news,
Brought on the wings of hast and happiness,
By trusty Lepido our endeared brother,
Is hard at hand who in his company,
Brings my fair second choice a worthy bride,
Attended by the States of Pay,
Shees daughter to the Duke of Brandenburgh,
Now shall no subjects envious soul rapine,
And call her base whom now I will make mine,
None shall upbraid me now, (as they have done)
That I will slay a daughter and a Son,
Grissils▪ two babes are dead, and kilt by scorn,
But that fair issue that shall now be borne
Shall make a satisfaction of all wrongs.
Come gentlemen we will go meet this train,
Let every one put on a smiling brow,
Sir Owen I will have your company,
And yours fair cozen: well remembered to,
Bring your three wands Sir Owen to the Court,
Though Gwenthyan look with a smoother eye,
Isle teach you how to win the sovereignty.
Is glad of that, ha, ha, ha, tag heed of wands
Lady,
Tag heed of nails knight,
We play the unthrifts in consuming time,
Though your cursed wife make some afraid to woe
Yet Isle woe once more and be married to.
Cod vdge me Sir Owen would hang before her marry once more, if I were another Patcheler: marie owe.
Come I have left my work to see what mattēs you mumble to your self, faith Laureo I would you could leave this latin, and fall to make baskets, you think tic enough if at dinner you tell vs a tale of Pigmes, and then mounch up our virtuals, but that fits not vs: or the history of the well Helicon, &amp; then drink up our bear we cannot live upon it.
A Scholar doth disdain to spend his spirits, Upon such base imploiments as hand labours.
Good Furio vanish, we have no appetite, tell your Master, Clowns are not for the Court, we'll keep Court our selves, for what doe Courtiers but wee doe the like: you eat good cheer, and wee eat good bread and cheese: you drink wine, and we strong bear: at night you are as hungry slaves as you were at noon, why so are wee: you go to bed, you can but sleep, why and so doe wee: in the morning you rise about eleven of the clock, why there we are your betters, for wee are going before you: you wear silks, and wee sheep∣skins, innocence caries it away in the world to come, and therefore vanish good Furio, torment vs not good my sweet Furio.
Ass Isle have you snaffled,
It may be so, but then Furio Isle kick.
Will you go, or shall I force you?
You need not, for Isle run to serve my Lord,
Or if I wanted legs, upon my knees
Isle creep to Court so I may see him pleased,
Then courage Father.
Well said patience,
Thy virtues arm mine age with confidence,
Come son, bond-men must serve, shall we away?
I, I, but this shall prove a fatal day.
Brother, for my sake doe not wrong your self.
Shall I in silence bury all our wrongs?
Yes when your words cannot get remedy,
Learn of me Laureo I that share most woe,
Am the least moved, father lean on mine arm,
Brother lead you the way, whilst wretched I
Uphold old age, and cast down misery.
Away.
Old M. you have fished fair &amp; caught a frog.
Lords as you love our State, affect our loves,
Like of your own content, respect your lives,
Urge vs no further, Gwalter is resolved,
To marry the half heir of Brandenburgh,
My brother Pau•• with no small expense,
Hath brought the Princess out of Germany.
Together with Prince Gwalter her young brother,
Now they are come, learn of the rising Sun,
Scatter the cloudy mists of discontent,
As he disperceth vapours with his beams.
Brother, there is no eye but brightly shines,
Gladness voth lodge in your Nobles looks,
Nor have they any cause to cloud their brows.
Oh here comes Sir Owen, and my Lady pati∣ence, coome there.
Tardaugh Cozen Marquess &amp; Lawrdes awl.
Welcome good cozen Gwenthian, will you please Go in, and lend your presence to my bride?
Cozen, tic her intentions so to do, but I swear and I were Grissill▪ I would pull her eyes out, &amp; she were as many Sharmaines daughter is there becowes in Cam∣bria and that is aboue twenty score and a little more, you know Sir Owen?
Yes truly aboue a dozen more is warrant her.
Grissill is patient Madame, be you pleased.
Well, and she bee so baselies minded tic well, but I know whad I know Sir Owen here thinks to make Gwenthians so patience, sir owen tic awl in veins, well I go to her Brides.
You prade and you tag Gwenthians, but I made you put on perils for awl your tag and prade: Rees, whore's Rees spring the wands here Rees.
They are héere sir, in the twinkling of an eye.
Cozen, when her weddings are done and at lea∣sures, I will learn your medicines to tame shrews.
You shall anon good Cozen Meredith.
Stand by Rees, walk in the halles among the Seruingmans, kéepe her wands till I call, hear you now?
Yes Sir.
Furio are Grissill and the other come?
Yes, they are come.
Are they employed according to our charge?
They are.
How does her brother take it?
Ill.
How her Father?
Well.
How her self?
Better.
Furio, go call out Grissill from the Bride.
I will.
It's pity that fellow was not made a Soldier, hee should have but a word and a blow at his hands.
Master go you but under the Cole-staffe, Babu∣lo can bear all, staff basket and all.
It is the Marquess pleasure I must drudge,
Load me I pray thee, I am borne to bear.
But Isle no longer bear a logger head,
Thus Isle cast down his fuel in despite,
So, though my heart be sad, my shoulder's light.
Alas what doe you brother, see you not
Our dread Lord yonder▪ come perform his will,
Oh in a subject this is too too ill.
What mean thou fellow to cast down thy load?
I have cast down my burden not my load,
The load of your gross wrongs lies héere like lead.
What fellow is this?
Your handmaid Grissils brother,
Take him away into the Posters lodge,
Lodge me in dungeons, I will still exclaim,
On Gwalters cursed acts and hated name.
Grissill Take you his load and bear it in.
Oh tiger minded monstrous Marquess, make thy Lady a collier?
Whats that that villain prates so?
God bless the noble Marquess,
Sirha take you his coals, Grissill depart,
Return but bear that first,
With all my heart.
Stay you Ianicola, I have heard you sing,
I could have sung when I was free from care.
What grief can in your aged bosom lie?
Grief that I am ungracious in your eye,
Then would he not desire your company▪
Ianicola here is a bridal song,
Play you the Lark to greet my blessed sun,
Grissill are you returned? play you the morning,
To lead forth Gratiana my bright bride
Go in and waite on her Ianicola.
Sing Hymeneus himmes, Music I say.
Tawsone Tawsone Cozens aul, and here harmonies and sol faes.
Song. Beauty arise, show forth thy glorious shining,
Thine eyes feed Love, for them he stands pining,
Honour and youth attend to doe their duty,
To thee (their only sovereign) Beauty.
Beauty arise, whilst we thy servants sing,
Jove to Hymen wedlock jocund King.
Ioto Hymen lo lo sing.
of wedlock, love, and youth is Hymen King.
Beauty arise, beauty arise, thy glorious lights display▪
Whilst we sing so, glad to see this day,
Io Io Io Hymen Io Io sing,
Of wedlock, love, and youth is Hymen King.
Art thou as glad in soul as in thy song?
Who can be glad when he endures wrong?
As Cod vdge me Ian Niclas is honest man, hee does not flatter and sembles, but tell his intentions: owe more melodies, owe here come her new pride.
Salute my beauteous love.
All joy betide to Gratiana our dear Marquess Bride.
Bring me a crown of gold to crown my love,
A wreath of willow for despised Grissill.
Grissill is not despised in your eye,
Since you name her name so gently.
Gwenthians there's wives, there's patient wives
Fuh fuh is fools, Tawsone is arrant pobie fools.
Grissill place you this crown upon her head,
Put these embroidered slippers on her feet.
Tic well, deliver me your wedding ring,
Circle-her finger with it, now stand by,
Art thou content with all?
Content with all.
My Bride is Crowned, now tell me all of you,
Which of you ever saw my love before?
What is her name, her birth, place, or estate,
Till now I never beheld her beauty.
Nor I.
Trust me nor I.
By my troth nor I.
We hear that she was borne in Germany,
And half heir to the Duke of Brandenburgh.
You all hear this, and all think this?
We doe.
Then Few. stand thou forth, Lords in his breast
A loyal servants true soul doth rest,
Furio shall be apparelled in a robe.
I shall not become it.
Some that are great put robes on Parasites,
Mario, Lepido come you two hither,
Are not you richly clad? have I done so?
What means your grace by this?
Graceless, have done,
Truth, seldom dwells in a still talking tongue,
Furio bring Laureo from the Porters lodge,
Take in Ianicola, and cloth them both
In rich habiliments, they shall awhile
Be flattered with false fortunes wanton smiles.
Fortune can do no more then she hath done,
They that are marked to woe, to woe must run.
How doe you like my Bride?
I think her blessed.
To have the love of such a noble Lord.
You flatter me.
Indeed I speak the truth,
Only I prostrately beseech your grace,
That you consider of her tender years,
Which as a flower in spring may soon be nipped,
With the least frost of cold adversity.
Why are not you then nipped? you still seem fresh
As if adversities cold Easy hand,
Had never laid his fingers on your heart.
It never touched my heart, adversity
Dwells still with them that dwells with misery,
But mild content hath eased me of that yoke,
Patience hath borne the bruise and I the stroke.
Give him his silks they shall not touch my back
What strife is there, what ails Laureo?
I will not wear proud trappings like a beast,
Yet hourly feel the scornful riders spur,
Cloth old Ianicola in rich attire,
Doe, load me, for to bear is my desire.
Doe ye rapine, nay then isle vex you more,
Grissill I will receive this second wife
From none but from thy hands: come give her mée,
I here present you with an endless bliss,
Rich honour, beauteous virtue, virtuous youth,
Long live my Lord with her contentedly.
Merge patience there Gwenthyan see you thade▪
Grissill dost thou deliver me this maid,
As an untainted flower which I shall keep,
Despite of envies canker, till the rust,
Of all consuming death finish her lilfe?
I doe my dear Lord, and as willingly
As I delivered up my maiden youth.
What says Ianicola?
I say but thus,
Great men are Gods, and they have power ore vs,
Grissill hold fast the right hand of my bride,
Thou worst a willow wreath and she a crown,
True bride take thou the crown and she the wreath,
My gracious Lord you doe mistake your self.
Peace peace, thou Siccophant Grissil receive
Large interests for thy love and sufferance.
Thou gau'st me this fair maid, I in exchange,
Return thee her: and this young Gentleman
Thy Son and daughter kiss with patience,
And breath thy virtuous spirit into their souls.
Owe Sir Owen merge you now, the man is yéel∣ded to her Latie, learn now Sir owen learn, learn Knight your duty, see you thade?
Why stands my wronged Grissil thus amazed?
Joy fear, love hate, hope doubts encompass me.
Are these my children I supposed slain?
Are these my nephews that were murdered?
Blessing distill on you like morning dew,
My soul knit to your souls, knows you are mine.
They are, &amp; I am thine: Lords look not strange,
These two are they, at whose births envies tongue,
Darted enuenom'd stings, these are the fruit
Of this most virtuous tree, that multitude,
That many headed beasts, nipped their sweet hearts,
With wrongs, with bitter wrongs, al you hane wronged her,
My self have done most wrong, for I did try
To break the temper of true constancy:
But these whom all thought murdered are alive,
My Grissill lives, and in the book of Fame,
All worlds in gold shall register her name.
Most dreaded Lord.
Arise flatterers get you gone,
Your souls are made of black confusion.
Father Ianicola.
Oh pardon me,
Though dumb betwixt my grief and joy I be.
Who stands thus sad, what brother Laureo?
Pardon me my gracious Lord, for now I see,
That Scholars with weak eyes, pore on their books,
But want true souls to judge on Majesty:
None else but Kings can know the hearts of Kings,
Hence forth my pride shall fly with humbler wings.
Our pardon and our love circle thee round,
Lets all to banquet, mirth our cares confound.
Hold, hold, hold, banquet? if you banquet so, Sir Owen is like to have sheer, her Latie here is cog a hoop now at this, pray Cozen keep your promise, Rees the wands Rees, your medicines and fine trigs to tame shrews.
Furio where be the wands that I bound up?
Here my Lord.
I wreathed them then sir Owen, and you see
They still continue so, wreath you these three.
Owe wind them, yes is wind them and mag good mighty cudgel, to tame and knog her Latie, and she prowl, or cry, or give bred and meat to peggers, or tear ponds, by God is well remembered too, Cozen you promised to help her to her Duckegs, for all her pa∣per and ponds is torn?
And I will kéep my promise, wreath your wands
Owe Gods lid mine is stubborn like Gwen∣thians, Gods pluto see it preakes in snip snap péeces, what now Cozen?
But cozen these you see did gently bow,
I tried my Grissils patience when it was greene,
Like a young Over, and I moulded it
Like wax to all impressions: married men
That long to tame their wives must curb them in,
Before they néed a bridle, then they'll prove
All Grissils full of patience, full of love,
Yet that old trial must be tempered so,
Least seeking to tame them they master you.
By God is true as Pestle and Gospel, oh true out a cry.
But you Sir Owen giving her the head,
As you gave liberty to those three wands,
She'll break as those doe if you bend her now,
And then you're past all help, for if you strive,
You'll gain as gamesters doe that seldom thrive.
What shall doe to her Latie then? is pest run a∣way cozen, or knog her brains out? for is as valiant as Mars if I be anger.
That were a shame either to run away from a woman or to strike her, your best Physic Sir Owen, is to wear a velvet hand, leaden ears, and no tongue, you must not fight howsoever she quarrels, you must be deaf
whenever she brawls, and dumb when your self should brabble: take this caudle next your heart every morning, and if your wife be not patient, the next reme∣die that I know is, to buy your winding sheet.
Cozen Marquess, cozen Iulia, and Lawrds and Laties all, it shall not need as her cozen has tried Grissill, so Gwenthian has Sir Owen,
Owe, by Cod is thought should pull her down, ah ha.
Is not pulled down neither, but sir Owen shall be her head, and is sorry has anger her head and mag it ache, but pray good Knight be not proud &amp; triumph too much &amp; freade her Latie down, God vdge me will tag her will again doe what her can.
By Cod is love her out a cry now, sir owen could tame her before, but Prittish plod scawrnes to fide with Laties, yes faith scorns out a cry, a pogs ont tic nought: Gwenthian shall no more be called Gwenthian but patient Grissill, ah ha is.
Our joys are complete, forward to our feast, Patience hath won the prize and now is blessed.
Nay brother your pardon awhile: besides our selves there are a number héere, that have beheld Grissils patience, you own trials, and Sir Owens sufferance, Gwenthians frowardness, these Gentlemen louertine and my self a hater of love: amongst this company I trust there are some maiden bachelors, and virgin maidens, those that live in that freedom &amp; love it, those that know the war of marriage and hate it, set their hands to my bill, which is rather to dye a maid and lead Apes in hell, then to live a wife and be continually in hell.
Iulia by your leaves a little while, you tag and you prable about shidings in marriages, and you abuse young men's and damsels, &amp; afraid them from good sports and honourable states: but hear you now, awl that bee sembled here, know you that discord's mag good mu∣sick,
and when loners fall out is soon fall in, and tic good you know: pray you al be married, for wedlock increases peoples and cities, awl you then that have husbands that you would pridle, set your hands to Gwenthians pill, for tic not fid that poor women's should be kept always under.
Since Iulia of the maids, and Gwenthian
Of froward wives, entreat a kind applaud,
See Grissill among all this multitude,
Who will be friend to gentle patience?
Ha ha ha, Grissil is weary, pray let sir owen speag Grissill is patient, and her cozen is patient, therefore is speage for two, Gods pluto you see her Latie is spride of buttrie, yet sir owen tame her and tear her ruffs, &amp; mag her cry and put ou her perils, and say is sorry Sir owen, merge that well: if sir owen was not patient, her Latie had not been pridled, if Grissill had not been patient her cozen Marquess had not been pridled: well now if you love sir owens Latie, I hope you love sir owen too, or is grow mighty angry, sir owen love you as God vdge me out a cry, a terrible feale, doe you hear now, then pray awl that have crabbed husbands and cannot mend them, as Grissils had, and awl that have fixen wives, and yet is tame her well enough as sir owen does, &amp; awl that have scolds as sir owen does, and awl that love fair Laties as sir owen does, to sed her two hands to his pill, and by God shall have sir owens heard and soul in his pellie: and so God save you all. Man gras wortha whee, Man gras worcester∣tha whee. God night Cozens awl.

Come Timothy Twedle, tickle thy Pipe on the greene, as I have tippled the Pot in the Seller, and the hoy for the honour of High-gate, you old Trojan.
And a heigh for the honour of Hygate, Hem, by my holydam, tho I say it, that should not say it, I think I am as perfect in my Pipe, as Officers in poling, Courtiers in flattery, or wenches in falling: Why look you Jack Drum, tic even as natural to me, as brawdry to a Somner, knavery to a Promoter, or damnation to an Usurer. But is Holloway Morris prancing up the hill?
I, I; and Sir Edward, and the yellow toothed, sunck-eyde, gouty shankt Usurer Maman, my young
Mistresses and all are coming to the greene, lay Cu∣shions, lay the Cushions, ha the wenches!
The wenches, ha, when I was a young man and could tickle the Minikin, and made them cry thanks sweet Timothy, I had the best stroke, the sweetest touch, but now (I may sigh to say it) I am fallen from the Fiddle and betook me to thee.
Sit M. Mamon, ha hears a goodly day nigh.
I thank you Sir, and faith what news at court?
What news at court? ha, ha, now Iesu God,
Fetch me some Bordeaux wine, what news at court?
Reprobate fashion, when each ragged clout,
Each Cobblers spawn, and yeasty bowzing bench,
Reekes in the face of sacred majesty
His stinking breath of censure, Out-vpont,
Why by this Bordeaux juice, tic now become
The shewing-horne of Bezelers discourse,
The common food of prate: what news at court?
But in these stiff naked times when every Jade
Huffs his vpreared crest, the zealous bent
Of Councellors solide cares is trampled on
By every hacknies heals: Oh I could burst
At the conjectures fears, preventions
And restless tumbling of our tossed brains:
Ye shall have me an empty cask thats furd
With nought but barmy froth, that ne'er travelled
Beyond the confines of his Mistress lips,
Discourse as confident of peace with Spain▪
As if the Genius of quick Machiauel
Ushered his speech.
Oh forbear, you are too sharpe with me.
Nay M▪ Mamon, misinterpret not,
I only burn the bavin heath of youth,
That cannot court the presence of fair time
With ought but with, what news at Court sweet sir?
I had rather that Kemps Morris were their chat,
For of foolish actions, may be theyle talk wisely, but of
Wise intendments, most part talk like fools.
The sum is this, bear only this good thought,
The Counsell-chamber is the Phoenix nest,
Who wastes it self, to give vs peace and rest.
Oh a Morris is come, observe our country sport,
Tic Whitson-tyde, and we must frolic it.
Skip it, &amp; trip it, nimbly, nimbly, tickle it, tickle it, lustily,
Strike up the Taber, for the wenches favour, tickle it, tickle it, lustily:
Let vs be seen, on Hygate Greene, to dance for the ho∣nor of Holloway.
Since we are come hither, lets spare for no leather,
To dance for the honour of Holloway.
Well said my boys, I must have my Lords liuory, what first, a May-pole? troth it were a good body for a courtiers impress, if it had but this life, Frustra florescit. Hold Cousin hold.
Thanks Cousin, when the Lord my Fathers Audit comes, weel repay you again. Your benevolence too sir.
What a Lords son become a beggar?
Why not, when beggars are become Lords sons, come tic but a small trifle.
Oh sir, many a small make a great.
No sir, a few great make a many small, come my Lords, poor and need hath no law.
Nor necessity no right, Drum down with them into the Cellar, rest content, rest cōtent, one bout more and then away.
Speak like a true heart, I kiss thy foot sweet knight.
Sir Edward Fortune you keep too great a house,
I am your friend, in hope your son in law,
And from my love I speak, you keep too great a house,
Go too you do, yon same dry throated husks
Will suck you up, and you are ignorant
What frosty fortunes may benumme your age,
Poverty, the Princes frown, a civil war, or.
Or what? tush, tush, your life hath lost his taste,
Oh madness still to sweat in hot pursuit
Of cold abhorred sluttish nigardise,
To exile ones fortunes from their native use,
To entertain a present poverty,
A willing want, for Infidel mistrust
Of gracious providence: Oh Lunacy,
I have two thousand pound a year, and but two Girls,
I owe nothing, live in all men's love,
Why should I now go make my self a slave
Unto the god of fools; put worst: then heir's my rest.
I had rather live rich to die poor, then live poor to die rich.
Oh but so great a mass of coin might mount from wholesome thrift, that after your decease your issue might swell out your name with pomp.
Ha, I was not borne to be my Cradles drudge,
To choke and stifle up my pleasures breath,
To poison with the venomed cares of thrift
My private sweet of life: only to scrape
A heap of muck, to fatten and manure
The barren virtues of my progeny,
And make them sprout, spite of their want of worth:
No, I do love my Girls should wish me live,
Which few do wish that have a greedy Sire:
But still expect and gape with hungry lip,
When heel give up his gouty stewardship.
You touch the quick of sense, but thē I wonder
You not aspire unto the eminence
And height of pleasing life: to Court, to Court,
There burnish, there spread, there stick in pomp
Like a bright Diamond in a Ladies brow,
There plant your fortunes in the flowering spring,
And get the sun before you of respect:
There trench your self within the peoples love,
And glitter in the eye of glorious grace,
What's wealth without respect and mounted place?
Worse and worse, I am not yet distraught,
I long not to be squeasd with mine own weight:
Nor hoise up all my sails to catch the wind
Of the drunk reeling Commons: I labour not
To have an awful presence, nor be feared
(Since who is feared, still fears to be so feared)
I care not to be like the Horeb Calfe,
One day adored, and next poshed all in pieces:
Nor do I envy Poliphemiā puffs,
Swizars slopt greatness: I adore the Sun,
Yet love to live within a temperate zone,
Let who will climb ambitious glibbery rounds,
And lean upon the vulgars rotten love,
I'll not coriuall him: The Sun will give
As great a shadow to my trunk as his:
And after death like Chesmen having stood
In play for Bishops, some for Knights, and Pawns,
We all together shall be tumbled up, into one bag,
Let hushed calm quiet, rock my life a sleep:
And being dead, my own ground press my bones,
Whilst some old Beldam hobbling ore my grave,
May mumble thus: Here lies a knight whose money 
Was his slave. Now Jack what news?
And please your Worcester. the Morris have tan their liquor.
Hath not the liquor tan them?
Tripped up their heals or so? one of them hath undertaken to dance the Morris from Hygate to Hello∣way on his heals, with his hands upwards.
Thats nothing hard.
Yes sir, tic easier for him to dance on his head than his heals, for indeed his heals are turned rank rebels, they will not obey, but they are tumbling down the hill a pace.
And I must after then, farewell my souls delight,
Sweet Katherine adieu. Camelia goodnight.
Nay not to London Sir to night, In faith at least stay supper.
Hark you sir, theres but two Lambs, a dozen Capons, half a score couple of Robots, three Tartes, and four Tansies, for supper, and therefore I beseech you
give him Jack Drums entertainment: Let the Iebusite de∣part in peace.
Why Jack, is not that sufficient?
I for any Christian, but for a yawning usurer tic but a bit, a morsel, if you table him, heel devour your whole Lordship, hee is a quicksand, a Goodwin, a Gulf, as hungry as the Jaws of a Jail, hee will waste more substance then Ireland soldiers: A Die, a Drab, and a paunch-swolne Usurer, devour whole Monar∣chies: Let him pass sweet knight, let him pass.
Peace knave peace.
Daughter, lay your express commandment upon the stay of moister Mamon, what tic women's year,
Dian doth rule, and you must domineer.
No sheele not wish my stay, oh I am cursed
With her inexorable swiftness, by her love
Which dotes me more then new kind glowing gold,
The utmost bent of my affection
Shoots all my fortunes to obtain her love,
And yet I cannot praise, but still am loathde.
My presence hated, therefore Mamon down,
Farewell sir Edward, farewell beauties Crown.
Faith as it please you for going, and her for wooing,
I will enforce neither.
With your pardon sir, I shall sooner hate my self,
Then love him.
Nay be free my daughters in election,
Oh, how my soul abhors enforced yokes,
Chiefly in love, where the affections bent:
Should wholly sway the Fathers kind consent.
Foregod when I was bachelor, had a friend,
Nay had my Father wished me to a wife,
That might have liked me, yet their very wish
Made me mistrust my Love had not true course,
But had some sway from duty which might hold
For some slight space: but ô when time shall search
The strength of love, then virtue, and your eye,
Must knit his sinews: I chusde my self a wife
Poor, but of good dissent, and we did live
Till death divorced vs, as a man would wish:
I made a woman, now wenches make a man:
Choose one either of valour, wit, honesty, or wealth,
So he begentle, and you have my heart,
I faith you have: What, I have land for you both,
You have love for your selves. Hears M. Mamon now.
A club-fisted Usurer.
A wealthy, careful, thriving Citizen.
Careful, I, I, let nothing without good black and white, I warrant you.
Yes sir.
No sir.
A little back wind, saving your worcester. sir.
I am scoft at, wheres my man there ho?
Sir you need not take the pepper in the nose,
Your nose is fiery enough.
What Flown, what Christopher, Hart whore's the knave become? Hold sirrah carry my cloak.
It seems he can scarce carry himself.
Hoe's over the shoes, yet heel hold out wa∣la, for I have liquored him soundly.
Why cannot you come where heady liquor is, but you must needs bozo?
What a man may lead a horse to the water, but heel choose to drink.
True, but I am no horse, for I cannot choose but drink.
A pale weak stripling, yet contend with Ale.
Why the weakest go to the Pot still.
That Jest shall save him. Sir Edward now good day.
Nay sir, weal bring you a little of the way.
Rely on me Christopher, I will be thy staff,
And thy Masters nose shall be thy lantern &amp; candlelight
Mistress Camelia, me thinks your eye
Sparkles not spirit as it was wont to doo.
My mind is dull, and yet my thoughts are fixed
Upon a pleasing object, Brabants love.
Indeed young Brabant is a proper man,
And yet his legs are somewhat of the least:
And faith a chitty well complexioned face,
And yet it wants a beard: A good sweet youth,
And yet some say he hath a valiant breath,
Of a good hair, but oh, his eyes, his eyes.
Last day thy praise extolled him to the skies.
Indeed he wares good clothes, &amp; throws his cloak
With good discretion under his left arm,
He curls his boot with judgment, and takes a whiff
With graceful fashion, swears a valorous oath,
But ô the devil, hath a hateful fault, he is a younger bro∣there.
A younger brother? ô intolerable.
No Mistress, no: but theres M. Iohn,
M. Iohn Ellis, theres a Lad In faith,
Ha for a virtuous honest good youth!
Tut he is good, because he knows not how to be bad,
Nor wherefore he is good.
I know not, me thinks not to be bad, is good enough in these days.
Nay he is a fool, a perfect Idiot.
Why all the better. And I'll tell you this,
The greatest Lady in the Land affects him,
Nay dotes upon him, I, and lies with him.
What Lady, good sweet Winifride, what Lady say▪ Faith there be some good parts about the fool, which I perceive not, yet an other may: what Lady, good sweet Winifride? say quick good wench.
The Lady Fortune.
Why my name's Fortune too.
Then you must needs favour him▪
For Fortune favours fools.
Oh but to hug a fool is odious.
Foul water quenches fire well enough,
And with more lively pallar, you shall taste
The Juice of pleasures fount at private times:
Pish, by my maiden-head, were I to match,
I would elect a wealthy fool foreall,
Then may one hurry in her Chariot,
Shine in rich purpled Tissue, have hundred loves,
Rule all, pay all, take all, without check or snib.
When being married to a wise man (O the Lord)
You are made a fool, a Ward, curbed and controlled, and (O) out upon it.
Believe me wench, thy words have fired me,
I'll lay me down upon a bank of Pinks,
And dream vppont; Sweet fool, I tic most clear,
A foolish bed-mate, why he hath no peer.
Ha, ha, her love is as uncertain as an Alma∣nacke, as inconstant as the fashion, Just like a whiff of Tobacco, no sooner in at the mouth, but out at the nose: I think in my heart I could make her enamoured on Timothy Twedle: well he that fees me best, speeds best. For as it pleased my bribed lips to blow,
So turns her feathry fancy too and fro.
Good speed thee my good sweet Planet,
How doest thou Chuck?
How now Brabant, where have you lived these three or four days?
Ho at the glittering Court my Pytheas.
Plague on ye Pytheas, what have you done there?
Why lane in my Ladies lap, eat, drink, &amp; sleep.
So hath thy Ladies Dog done, what art in love
With you Hygate Mammer still?
Still, I still, and still, I in eternity.
It shall bee Cronicled next after the death of Banks his Horse, I wonder why thou love her?
Love hath no reason.
Then is love a beast.
O my Camelia is love it self.
The devil she is: Harder lips look like a dried Neats-tongue: her face as richly yellow, as the skin of a cold Custard, and her mind as settled as the feet of bald pated time.
Plague on your hateful humour, out vppont,
Why should your stomach be so queasy now,
As to bespawle the pleasures of the world?
Why should you run an Idle counter-course
Thwart to the path of fashion? Come your reason?
O you are buried in Philosophy,
And there entombed in supernaturals,
You are dead to native pleasures life.
Let me bus thy cheek sweet Pugge,
Now I am perfect hate, I loved but three things in the world, Philosophy, Thrift, and my self. Thou hast made me hate Philosophy. A Usurers greasy Codpeece made me loath Thrift: but if all the Brewers Jade in the town can drug me from love of my self, they shall doo more then ever the seven wise men of Greece could: Come, come, now I'll be as sociable as Timon of Athens.
Along with me then, you droming Sagbut,
I'll bring thee to a Crewe.
Of Fools wilt not?
Faith if you have any weight of judgment, you may easily sound what depth of wits they draw, theres first my elder brother.
Oh the Prince of Fools, vnequald Idiot,
He that makes costly suppers to try wits:
And will not stick to spend some 20. pound
To grope a gull: that same perpetual grin
That leads his Cork Jests to make them sink
Into the ears of his Deryders with his own applause.
Indeed his Jests are like Indian beef, they will not last, and yet he powders them soundly with his own laughter.
Then theres the Gotish French-man, Monsieur Iohn foe de King, know thou him?
Oh, I to a hair, for I knew him when he had no∣for a hair on his head.
He is a faithful pure Rogue.
I, I, as pure as the gold that hath been seven times tried in the fire.
Then theres Iohn Ellis, and profound toungd Moister Puff, he that hath a perpetuity of complement, he whose phrases are as neatly decked as my Lord Majors
Hensmen, he whose throat squeakes like a treble Organ, and speaks as small and shrill, as the Irish-men cry Pip, fine Pip.
And when his period comes not roundly off, takes told of the tenth hair of his Bourbon locke: as thus. Sweet Sir, repute me as a (Puff) selected spirit borne to be the admirer, of your never enough admired (Puff).
Oh we shall be ouerwhelmd with an invndati∣on of laughter. Come, where are they?
Here at this Tavern.
In, in, in, in, I long to burst my sides and tier my spleen with laughter.
Why dost thou cry?
Why dost thou laugh?
I laugh to see thee cry.
And I cry to see thee laugh.
Peace be to vs. Here is our Masters.
You shall see his humour, I pray you bee fa∣miliar with this Gentleman moister Puff, he is a man of a well grown spirit, richly worth your. I assure you, ha, ha, ha.
Sir I enrowle you in the Legend of my (Puff) intimates, I shall be infinitely proud if you will deign to value me worthy the embrace of your (Puff) better affection.
Speak you from your thought sir?
I, or would my silk stock should loose his gloss else, I shall triumph as much in the purchase of your (Puff) love, as if I had obtained the great Elixir: Let vs incorporate our affections I pray you: let me be forward in your favour.
Sir, I pray you let me beg you for a Fool.
I affect no rudeness gentlemē, the heavens stand
Propitious to your fair designs:
As soon as next the sun shall gin to shine,
I will salute the eyes of Katherine.
Of Katherine, M. Planet observe the next,
M. Iohn, what makes you so melancholy?
I do not use to answer questions.
What are you thinking on now?
I do not use to think.
He looks as demurely as if he were asking his Father blessing.
I do not use to ask my Father blessing.
Hart, how chance he is out of his similes?
I have followed Ordinaries this twelve month, only to find a Fool that had lands, or a fellow that would talk treason, that I might beg him. Iohn, be my Ward Iohn, faith Isle give thee two coats a year and be my Fool.
He shall be your Fool, and you shall be his
Coxe-come. Ha, ha, I have a simple wit, ha, ha.
I shall crow o'er him then.
Is there not one M. Iohn Ellis here?
There sits the thing so called.
Now to the last course: Monsieur Iohn foe de King,
I will help you to a wench Monsieur.
No point, a burn child fear de fire.
As a hungry dog waits for a mutton bone, or as a tattered foote-boy for a cast suit, even so will I at∣tend on my Mistress.
O my Vinifride, piee you awe, by gore, me ang de for her.
Nay stay, stay, I will help you to a delicate plump-lipt wench.
Toh, phi, phi, your proffer ware stink: stay Vini∣fride; or by gore die, me die, me die by gore, me ang so de∣serous adieu goot Sir.
Oh stay Monsieur, how do you pronounce Demurra? Ha, ha, Isle plague him.
Grand Sot, my vench is gone, &amp; me broil, and me broil, like one mad bull, me go into de vaterto cool my reine, ang my back made de vater his again, dus so broil, me burst for a vench, and yet grand pose on you all, pree you adieu.
As the Jig is called for when the Play is done, even so let Monsieur go.
Hee, me teach you much French for dis, I go to Hygate, adieu grand Sors.
As sore eyes cannot endure the Sun, nor scabbed hands abide salt water, so must I leave all, and see my mi∣stress, and as fair Ladies do use soul foils, even so do I bid you farewell.
Why this is sport imperial, by my Gentry, I would spend forty Crowns, for such an other feast of fools. Ha, ha.
I wonder who would be the fool then?
Why tic the recreation of my Intellect, I think I speak as significant, ha, ha, these are my zanies, I fill their paunches, they seed my pleasures, I use them as my fools faith, ha, ha.
Tic a generous honour.
Troth I think you have a good wit, ha? pray you sup with me, I love good wits, because mine own is not unfortunate: pray you sup with me.
Isle give God thanks sir, that hath sent a fool to feed me.
Come along then, ye shall have a Capon, a Tansey, and some kick-showes of my wits, ha, ha, some toys of my spirit.
I will eat his meat, and spend's money, thats all the spite I can do him: but if I can get a Patent for concealed Sots, that Dawe shall troupe among my Id∣ots.
Boy whats a Clock?
Past three, and a fair morning.
Burns not that light within the sacred shrine?
I mean the chamber of bright Katherine.
I, should appear by these presence, that it doth.
I wonder that the light is up so soon.
O Mistress Snuff was weary with sleeping in the Socket, and therefore hath newly put on her stamell petticoat, &amp; takē her pewter state to give light to things are in darkness.
And I know that women of gravity and sweet∣nes are soon up.
I see that women of levity and lightness, are soon down.
Boy clear thy throat, and mount thy sweetest notes
Upon the bosom of this sleek cheeked air:
That it may gently breathe them in the ear
Of my adored Mistress: Come begin.
Delicious beauty that doth lie
Wrapped in a skin of Ivory,
Lie still, lie still upon thy back,
And Fancy let no sweet dreams lack
To tickle her, to tickle her with pleasing thoughts.
But if thy eyes are open full,
Then deign to view an honest gull,
That stands, that stands, expecting still
When that thy Casement open will
And bless his eyes, &amp; bless his eyes, with one kind glance.
All happiness and vnconceiu'd delight,
Waite on the love of sweet faced Katherine.
Good youth Amen: I do return your wish
With ample interest of beatitude.
I do protest, with ceremonious (puff) lips
The purest blood of my affection,
Is even fatally predestinate
To consecrate it self unto your (puff) love.
Unto my love? Oh sir you bind me to you:
Fair Gentleman I have a thankful heart,
Tho not a glorious speech to sweet my thanks.
Reward my love then with your kinder love.
With my love sir, I relish not your speech.
I with your love, in pleasing marriage.
Alas sir, cannot be my Loves a man,
Who hardly can requite the dear protests
Of kind affection, which you seem to vow
Unto his fortunes: kind youth, you did wish
All happiness to wait upon my love:
Well he shall know it when we next do meet,
And thank you kindly: now good morrow sweet.
You take my, my, my meaning (puff.)
Nay if he be puffing once, the fire of his wit is out.
Why she is gone. Hart did I rise for this?
She cannot endure puffing. O you puffed her away
Lets slink along unseen, tic yet scarce day.
Now me thinks I hold the candle to the devil.
Put out the light, the day begins to break.
Would the day and thy neck were broke to∣gender.
Oh how the gout and love do tyre me.
Why sir, love is nothing but the very gout.
As how Flown? as how?
Thus sir: Gout and love, both come with Idleness, both incurable, both humorous, only this difference: the Gout causes a great tumor in a mans legs, and love a great swelling in a women's belly.
Why then ô Love, ô Gout, ô gouty Love, how thou torments old Mamon: good morrow to the
sweet leapt Katherine, eternal spring unto thy beauties love.
Alas good aged Sir, what make you up?
In faith I pity you, good soul to bed,
Troth soon you'll cry, Oh God my head, my head.
No Katherine, the wrinckling print of time
Erred, when it sealed my forehead up with age:
I have as warm an arm to entertain
And hug thy presence in a nuptial bed▪
As those that have a cheek more lively red:
And tho my voice be rude, yet Flown can sing
Peans of beauty, and of Katherine.
List to the Music that corrupts the Gods,
Subverts even Destiny, and thus it shogges.
Chunk, chunk, chunk, chunk, his bags do ring
A merry note with chuncks to sing▪
Those that are far more young and witty,
Are wide from singing such a Ditty
As Chunk, chunk, chunk,
Theres Chunk that makes the Lawyer prate,
Theres Chunk that make a fool of Fate:
Theres Chunk, that if you will be his,
Shall make you live in all hearts blis▪
With Chunk, chunk, chunk.
Tic well sung good old man, hence with your gold,
Leave the green fields tic dewy; you'll take cold.
The Casements shut, well here Isle lu•ke &amp; stay,
To see who bears the glory of the day.
Hence, hence, to London, Flown let me alone.
I can hardly leave him alone, for the Devil and double Ducats, still associate him, but I am gone.
The glooming morn with shining Arms hath chaste
The silver Ensign of the grim cheeked night,
And forced the sacred troupes of sparkling stars
Into their private Tents, yet calm hushed sleep
Strikes dumb the snoring world: yet frolic youth
Thats lately matched unto a well shaped Lass,
Clippes his sweet Mistress, with a pleasing arm,
Whilst the great power of Imperious Love
Sommons my duty to salute the shine
Of my Loves beauties. Vnequald Katherine
I bring no Music to prepare thy thoughts
To entertain an amorous discourse:
More Musick's in thy name, and sweet dispose,
Then in Apollos Lyre, or Orpheus close.
I'll chant thy name, and so enchant each ear,
That Katherinas happy name shall hear.
My Katherine, my life, my Katherine.
My Ned, my Pasquil, sweet I come, I come,
Even with like swiftness, tho not with like heart:
As the fierce Falcon stoups to rising foul
I hurry to thee: do not go away,
The place is private, and tic yet scarce day.
Oh these kind words imparadize my thoughts.
Ha, ha, young Pasquil have I found you out▪
First you must bore my nose, Isle bore your heart:
Why this same boy's as bare as naked Truth.
A lowe ebd gallant, yet sheele match with him:
Isle match him, if his skin be poniard proof▪
He may scope the force of gold and murder, if not▪
As you return sir, I will pepper you.
And art thou come dear hart, first fee be this,
This kind embrace, and next this modest kiss.
This is no kiss, but an Ambrosian bowl,
The Nectar dew of thy delicious soul:
Let me suck one kiss more, and with a nimble lip,
Nibble upon those Rosie banks, more soft and clear
Then is the Ieweld tip of Venus ear.
Oh how a kiss inflames a Lovers thought,
With such a fuel let me burn and die,
And like to Hercules so mount the sky.
Come you grow wanton. Oh you bite my lip.
In faith you Jest, I did but softly sip
The Roseall Juice of your reviving breath:
Let clumsy judgements, chilblaind gouty wits
Bung up their chief content within the whoops
Of a stuffed dry Fat: and repose their hopes
Of happiness, and hearts tranquillity,
Upon increase of dirt: but let me live
Clipped in the cincture of a faithful arm,
Luld in contented joy, being made divine,
With the most precious love of Katherine.
Let the vnsanctified spirit of ambition
Entice the choice of muddy minded Dames
To yoke themselves to swine, and for vain hope
Of gay rich trappings, be still spurt and pricked
With pining discontent for nuptial sweets.
But let me live loved in my husbands eyes,
Whose thoughts with mine, may sweetly sympathise.
The heavens shall melt, the sun shall cease to shine,
Before I leave the love of Katherine.
Nay when heavens melted, &amp; the sun struck dead,
Even then my love shall not be vanquished.
When I turn fickle, virtue shall be vice.
When I prove false, Hell shall be Paradise.
My life shall be maintained by thy kind breath.
Thy love shall be my life, thy hate my death.
Oh when I die let me embrace thy waste.
In death let me be counted thine and chaste.
Heavens grant, being dead my soul may live no thee
One kiss shall give thee mine eternally.
In fair exchange vouchsafe my hart to take.
With all my mind, wear this Ned for my sake,
But now no more, bright day malings our love,
Farewell, yet stay, but tic no matter too,
My Father knows I think, what must ensue.
Adieu, yet hark, nay faith, adieu, adieu.
Peace to thy passions, till next interview.
Now Monsieur be but confident, and hold
There is the price of blood, this way he comes,
Strike home bold arm, and thou shalt want no crowns.
Fear you noting, when he is die, me bring you word. 
Hee, by gore brave crown, brave money,
Me have here a patent to take up, one, two, treescore
Vench: fine Crown, fine vench, unreasonably fine,
Dis money is my bawd. Me send a French crown
To fetch a fine vench, de French crown fetch de
Fine vench, de fine vench take de French crown,
And give me de French pose. Hee excellent, you see
Me kill a man, you see me hang like de Burgullian,
Hee no poine: Hee by Gore, me have much vitt,
Ang me much bald, and me ang much bald wit.
Here come de Gentleman metre Pasquill.
First possible that sisters should so thwart
In native humours? one's as kind and fair,
As constant, virtuous, and as debonair,
As is the heart of goodness: the other, proud,
Inconstant, fantastic, and as vain in loves,
As travellers in lies: blessed Katherine,
Camelia's not thy sister, if she bee,
Shees bastard to the sweets that shine in thee.
Boniour Metre Pasquill, sance Jest, me am hired to kill you, Monsieur Mamon, Messier: Iounck, Iounck, give me money to stab you, but me know there is a God that hate blood, derfore, me no kill, me know dere is a vench, that love Crown, therefore me keep de money.
Unhallowed villain, that with gold and blood, Thinks that almighty love can be withstood.
Hold Monsieur, there are more Crowns, only do this, return to Mamon, tell him the deed is done, and bring him hither, that he may vainly triumph in my blood, I have some painting which I found by chance in loose Camelias chamber, with that Isle stain my breast, go and return with speed.
Hee, by gore I smell a rat, me fly, me fly, by gore.
Leaud miscreant, that through the throat of hell,
Would mount to heaven, and enjoy love,
Invaluably precious: no rank churl,
Thou wast not made to slaver her fair lips
With thy dead rewmy chops, nor clip her waste,
With thy shrunk bloodless arm, I hear him come.
Now Pasquill feign, ô thou eternal light,
Morn that thy creatures should in blood delight.
Now smug faced boy, now nibble on her lips,
Now sip the dew of her delicious breath.
Stink, rot, damn, bake in thy cluttered blood,
Snakes, Toads, and Earwigs, make thy skull their nest,
Engendering deaw-wormes, cling orethwart thy breast.
Hush, hush, leave praying for dead, tic no good
Caluianisme, puritanism. Dissemble, here are company.
Good morrow Sir, who lies there murdered?
Oh Gentlemen, the kindest virtuous youth
That ever adorned London. Damned thieves
To spoil such hopes: the last words that he spake,
Sticks still within the hollow of mine ear.
Katherine quoth he, hold M. Mamon dear,
I know not what he meant, but so he said.
If that you pass to Hygate, tell the Knight,
P•squill is sunk into eternal night.
Faith it was a good youth, come Brabant, come a∣away.
Dead Kate, dead Kate, dead is the boy,
That kept rich Mamon from his joy.
Oh the devil, the ghost of Pasquill, I am dead, if you have any courtesy in you, believe it. I believed you when you feigned, believe me now, for I am almost dead, numbed up with fear, give faith sweet gentle youth.
Old wretch, amend thy thoughts, purge, purge, repent,
Isle hide thy ulcer, be but penitent.
Ha, I think it was but his ghost that swept along.
Grand sot Mamō, Pho, phy, phy, phy, a foutra pour vos chūck, chunk. Iohn foe de King, teach you a ding, Iohn foe de King grand Sot, Sot, Sot.
Death, plague, and hell, how is cursed Mamō vexed?
Scourged with the whip of sharpe derision:
Isle home, and starve, this cross, this peevish hap,
Strikes dead my spirits like a thunderclap.
Gods precious, I forgot to bring my Page,
To breathe some Ditty in my Mistress ear.
Would have a Ballet to salute her with?
No, but a Song. How would thou court thy Mistress?
Why with the world, the flesh &amp; the devil.
Right dog, well thoult swear, that I am blessed
Beyond infinity of happiness,
When thou behold admired Camelia.
And God wold bless me with 3. such mistresses,
I would give two of them to the devil, that hee would take the third.
Oh when she clips, and clings about my neck,
And sucks my soul forth with a melting kiss.
Doth she use thee so kindly then, ha?
O I, and calls me dear, dear Brabant, and (ô Ie∣su God)
I cannot express her sweets of entertain,
Sheele so insinuate with chaste amorous speech,
And play the wanton with such pretty grace,
And vows love to me: Oh I'll make thee mad
To see how gracious Brabant's in her eye.
Here is her window, mark but when I call,
How swift she comes, and with what kind salutes
She welcomes me. What ho Camelia?
Faith you'll be tan up, what in bed so late?
And you take her up Brabant, sheele take you down.
Hart they hear not: My Camelia wake?
What harsh uncivil tongue keeps such a coil?
Winifride tic I. Tell my sweet Duck I am here,
Now mark Ned Planet, now observe her well.
She wonders at your rudeness that intrudes
Upon the quiet of her mornings rest,
And shoe's amazed, that with such impudence
You dare presume to intimate some love to her,
As if she knew you more then for a youth,
A younger brother, and a stipendary.
Now mark Ned Planet, now observe her kindness.
Good morrow M. Iohn.
As the Country maid cries to her Cow to milk her, or as the Travailer knocks with his Hostess for a reckoning, even so do I call to thee ô Mistress.
Sweet Iohn my Love, heir's thy Camelia:
Hold wear this favour, with this kiss vppont.
Flesh and blood cannot bear such disgrace.
Help, help, help, help, he boxes me that hee doth. Help, help.
What outrage have we here so early up?
Sir you do wrong the quiet of my house. 
I faith you do, and tic but rudely done,
Go too tic not. Is this a place to brawl?
And please thee knight, I'll tell thee faith &amp; troth.
What did he strike thee sweet?
I in good deed law, and a my conscience, I think he hath made my nose bleed.
And would not you draw your weapon out, and to it lustily, as long as you could stand?
I do not use to draw.
Did he give thee a box on the ear, and would thou take it?
And he be such a fool to give it me, why should not I be so wise as to take it.
Pure honesty, kind Duck, kiss me sweet Iohn.
Hart Sir Edward, will you suffer this?
Now on my life she is enamord on the fools babble.
Go too sir boy forbear, you wrong my Love,
And you forget your self to use such Jests,
Such nasty ribaldry upon my daughter:
I tell you M. Brabant, doth she love
Any that merits the name of man?
Why hoe's no man, but a very—
Well, well, no more; my house, my self, my love,
Opens their hearts with liberal embrace
To entertain your presence: I or any mans
So they'll be civil, modest, not profane,
Not like to those that make it their chief grace,
To be quite graceless.
Well said honest knight,
We have had blood enough to day already:
Ned Pasquil's slain by bloody murdering Rogues.
Speak softly, God forbid, my daughter hears,
Tell me the circumstance, I pray you Sir.
Eternal death unto my happiness,
My Pasquil slain? Oh God, oh God, oh God.
I, and I think the Usurer made a Tent
Even of his nose it was so red and near:
God for his mercy, what mischance is here?
A good youth, a virtuous modest youth,
I faith he was. And I can tell your sir,
My daughter Katherine, where is she now?
Whithers she gone? Drum call her hither strait.
Your Drum will sound a call sir presently.
And as I told you sir, my daughter Katherine
Affected him right dearly: by my peace of soul,
If he had lived, I could have heartily wished
He had been my son in law, I faith I could:
But see the will of God. How now Drum,
Whore's my daughter?
Sir, she is either invisible, or deaf, for I can neither see her, nor she hear me.
Body of me, my heart misgives me now,
Look, call, search, run all about.
My daughter gone? Go all and search her out.
Heir's Pasquil ha? Is this the man thats dead?
Let me entreat this favour, do not search
Or be inquisitive why I feigned:
Repute me worthy your better censure: and thus think
My cause was urgent, the rest lie buried.
Well, I would you had not fainde.
Why would you have had me dead indeed?
Oh no, but I have lost my child I fear,
By your strange faining, she no sooner heard
The tidings of your death, but gone she was,
And God knows whither. Ha what news now?
Tic easier to find wit in balloting, honesty in Brokers, Virginity in Shortish, then to hear of my Mistress.
Broach me a fresh Butt of Canary Sack,
Lets sing, drink, sleep, for thats the best relief:
To drown all care, and overwhelm all grief.
Power Wine, sound Music, let our bloods not freeze,
Drink Duch like gallants, lets drink vpsey freeze.
Servant you'll go in too, and stay dinner?
I in truth, for as the Itch is augmented
By scratching, so is my love by seeing my mistress.
How's this, how's this, My Katherine gone hence?
Senses awake, and thou amazed soul
Unwind thy self from out the Labyrinth
Of gaping wonder, and astonishment.
My Katherine departed? how? which way?
Fool, fool, stand not debating, but pursue
Haste to her comfort, for from thee doth spring
(Wretch that thou art) her cause of sorrowing.
Ha, ha, ha, tipsy, tipsy, tipsy, all turned whirl∣gig, Iohn foe de king, Drum, and Timothy Twedle, are rare fine, ha for the heavens, In faith: Drums Lyon drunk, and he dings the pots about, cracks the glasses, swaggers with his own shadow. Honest Timothy is Mawdelin drunk, and he weeps for kindness, and kisses the hilts of Jack Drums Dagger. Mounsieurs Goat drunk, and he
shrugges, and skrubbes, and hes it for a wench. Here they come reeling, I must pack, or we shall swagger, for they having a crack in their heads, and I afault in my hands, we shall ne'er agree.
A Serving-man quoth you? Hart, and if I serve any thats flesh and blood, would I might ne'er taste my liquor more: stand bare whilst hee makes water, out vppont, Isle to Ireland, and there Isle Tan, ran, tie, rye, dan, Sa, sa, sa, sa: Nay tic the only life.
Nay good Thought hart, good kind Jack, stay, if you would love me, as I love you, we would live &amp; die together: and please God, would I were dead, and you are gone. And hears M. Iohn so de king, a very honest man too.
I, I, hoe's a very good honest man: for theres not a hair betwixt him and heaven.
Heel live with vs now &amp; teach vs French.
I by my trot, ang you help me to a Vench now, me teach you French. 5. thousand, thousand year, ô your Secke is hot, and make me broil, and broil, and burn, for a (hee) by gore your Seck is hot.
Welcome Basilisco, thou wilt carry level, and knock ones brains out with thy pricking wit. Kiss me sweet wench, kiss me.
Hee my Vinifride, by gore you are come, in te very nick to pleasure me, pree you kiss me, clip me, love me, or by gore me ang die certain.
Out you French Dog, touch my Love, and Isle—
Touch her, by gore me touch her, and touch her, and touch her.
Isle touch you, Isle slash you, Isle vench ye.
Put up, put up, for the passion of God put up, or if you'll needs too it, sheath both your weapons in me first.
Hart touch my love, touch my Winifride?
Hark you Jack, come to my chamber an hour hence, and you shall have what you will ask, and I can grant.
Why then my chollers down. Iohn foe de King. Fontra for you.
Fontra for me, futtra, futtra, futtra, five tow∣sand futtra's for you.
Stay friend Jack, Isle reel along with you, if you'll not swagger.
Sweet, sweet Monsieur, hang you slaves, I love you infinitely.
By gore me teach you French four thousand year dan.
Well Monsieur, I'll give you pleasure.
But will you presently? quickly, for by gore me am a hot shot.
I so they say, I heard you were under the Tor∣red zone last day.
Pish tic no matter, me am like a Tobacco Pipe, de more me am burn, de cleaner me am.
Well then, two hours hence come to my chamber, and Timothy Twedle shall give you me in a sack.
In a sack? Ha very well.
And you shall carry me to my Masters house at Holloway, for in the house we cannot be private with∣out suspect. Till then, farewell.
By my trot vnreasonablie good, I carry de vench on my back, and devench carry me on her (hee) fine back, fine vench, fine Monsieur, fine, fine, fine Knight, all fine, vnreasonablie fine, me sing for joy; by gore me sing la, liro, liro la, lilo.
Gentlemen, as ever you loved wench, observe M. Puff and me.
What shall we observe you for?
Oh for our complement.
Complement, whats that?
Complement, is as much as (what call you it) tic derived of the Greek word, a pox ont.
Complement, is as much as what call you it, tic derived of the Greek word, a pox ont.
You shall see M. Puff and me toss it, In faith mark with what grace I encounter him.
Hart thy brother's like the Instrument the Mer∣chants sent over to the great Turk: you need not play upon him, heel make music of himself, and hee bee once set going.
M. Puff, I long to do fair service to your love.
Most accomplished wit, exquisitely accoutred, (Puff) Judgment, I could wish my ability worthy your service, and my service worthy your ability.
By the Lord fustian, now I understand it: com∣plement is as much as fustian.
I protest your abilities are infinite, your per∣fections matchless, your matchless perfection infinite in ability, and your infinite ability, matchless in per∣fection.
Good again, rejoice Brabant, thy brother will not live long, he talks Idly already.
Delicious spirit, disparage not your curtsy, stand not bare to him that was borne to honour you.
Let vs press our hairs then, with an uni∣form consent.
The pressure of my hairs, or the puncture of my heart, stands at the service of your •ollide perfections: my life is bound to your love, your love being my life, tho my life bee not worthy your love, your perfection is the center to which all the paralels of my affection are drawn: your love my life, your perfection, my af∣fection, being—
Your Ass, my Fool.
Being chainde by the mighty coplet of ineui∣table destiny, who sees the sun, but hee must adore it: who sees beauty, but he must honour it: who view∣eth gold, but he must covet it: then, (ô then) who can behold your sun-like beauteous golden beauties, but he must more then adore, much more then honour, and most infinitely love to be out, out, out.
Out he is indeed.
Hoe's at a stand, like a resty Jade, or a Fiddler, whē he hath cracked his Minikin.
Outrageously addicted to the worthy pursuit of such matchless worth.
Sir, I can rest but truly thankful, for your more then good conceit of my no less then little worth. And now fir for the consequent hours of the day; how stands your intention for employment?
I ha tan my leave of Sir Edward, bid adieu to love, my Mistress is gone, my humour is spent, my joys are at an end, and therefore Gentlemen, I leave
love, and fall to the (puff) Law, I will inter my self in Ploydens Coffin, and take an eternal Conge of the world. And so sweet gallants farewell.
Nay Isle follow you to your grave. Gentle∣men you'll not accompany the coarse?
No, no, look Ned Brabant, yons a pleasing obe∣jest for thy eyes.
My Mistress is turned Bucephalus, no body must ride her but Alexander: no body kiss her but Iohn Ellis. Now stand and list good Planet.
Come sweetest Love, lets give time pleasing wing,
What shall we make some purposes or sing?
I will sing, so you will bear my burden.
Come lay thy head then in my virgin lap,
And with a soft sleek hand Il'e clap thy cheek,
And wring thy fingers with an ardent gripe:
Isle breathe amours, and even entrance thy spirit,
And sweetly in the shade lie dallying.
Now dally sport and play, This merry month of May,
This is the merry, merry month, Sweet time for dallying:
The Birds sit chirping, chirping, The Doves sit billing, billing,
Phillip is treading, is treading, is treading, is treading, is trea∣ding,
All are to pleasures willing.
You that are fair and witty, Observe this easy Ditty,
And leave not Natures Natures bliss; Do not refuse to kiss.
The Birds sit chirping, chirping, The Doves sit billing, billing,
Phillip is treading, is treading, &amp;c.
Death I can holder: Life of love
Amazing beauty, let not me seem rude,
Tho thus I seem to square with modesty.
Pray you let me go, for heel begin to square, And even as some doo wear Muffs for warmth, some for wantonness, some for pride, some for neither, but to hide gouty fingers, so will I get your Fathers consent, and marry you. Fare you well.
Sir it were good you got a benefice,
Some Evenuch'd Vicaridge, or some Fellowship,
To prop up your weak younger brothership.
Match with your equals, dare not to aspier
My seat of love, I wis Sir, I look higher.
Astonishment of Nature, be not proud
Of Forunes bounties: Brabant is a man,
Tho not so clogd with dirt as others are:
I do confess my younger brothership;
Yet therein lay no such disparagement
As your high scorn imputes unto my worth.
Coach Jade and Dogs, are coupled still together,
Only for outward likeness, growth and strength,
But the bright models of eternity,
Are joint together for affection,
Which in the soul is formed. Oh let this move,
Love should make marriage, and not marriage Love.
Woo her no more Brabant, thou'lt make her proud,
You Duch Ancient why should you look higher?
His births as good as yours, and so's his face:
Put off your Iengle, Iangles, and be not as fair,
He shall renounce it, fore this Audience,
Put off your clothes, and you are like a Banbery cheese,
Nothing but paring: why should you be proud,
And look on none but Weathercocks forsooth?
O you shall have a thousand pound a year!
Bar Lady thats a bumming sound. But hark,
Wilt therefore be a slave, unto a slave,
One thats a bound Rogue unto Ignorance?
Well thou'lt serve to make him gellide broaths,
And scratch his head, and may be now and then
Heel slaver thee a kiss. Plague on such marriages.
Rudevnciuile Clown.
Tut rail not at me, turn your eye vpō the leprosy of your own judgment, loath it, hate it, scorn it, and love this young Gentleman, who is a Fool in nothing but in loving thee: mad in nothing but affecting thee: and cursed in eternity if he marry thee.
Sir you ha spoke exceeding pleasingly,
For which I love you, as I love a dull dead eye.
Brabant I do conjure thee Court not me,
Do not presume to love or fancy me.
How not presume to love or fancy you?
Hart, I will love you, by this light I will
Whether you will or no, I'll love you still.
Spite of your teeth I will your love pursue,
I will by heaven, and so sweet soul adieu.
Farewell, and never view my face again.
Hark you fair Winifride, sweet gentle maid,
I have but fained with you all this while,
I dote upon the sweet Camelia,
And if your favour will but second me,
I vow when I shall wed Camelia,
To endow you with a hundred pound a year,
And what I have shall stand at your command.
Sir I will undertake to forward your fair love,
So you'll remember what you here do vow.
If I forget it, heaven forget me:
Do you but praise me, let not her once know
I love, or do affect her for the world.
Well fear no rubs, farewell fair bounteous Sir.
It works, it works, magnificent delight,
Laughter, triumph, for ere the Sum godowne,
Thy forehead shall be wreathed, with pleasures crown.
Now my kind Page, can thou nor hear, nor see,
Which way my Katherine hath bent her steppes?
Sir I can.
What can thou my sweet Page?
What can thou Boy?
Oh how my soul doth burn in longing hope,
And hangs upon thy lips for pleasing news.
Sir I can tell ye.
What▪ ô how my hart doth quake &amp; throb with fear.
Sir I can tell you nothing of her in good faith.
Oh thou hast tortured me with lingering hope,
Go haste away, fly from the pestilence
Of my contagious grief, it will infect thee boy,
Murder thy youth, and poison thy lifes joy.
Run search out Katherine, in her eyes dwell
Heavens of joy; but in Pasquil hell.
Oh thou omnipotent, infinity,
Crack not the sinews of my patience
With racking torment: Insist not thus to scourge
My tender youth with sharpe affliction,
If I do love that glory of thy hand,
That rich Idea of perfection,
With any lustful or profane intent,
Crossed be my love, murdered be all my hopes:
But if with chaste and virtuous arm I clip
The rarest model of thy workmanship,
Be then propitious: ô eternal light,
And bless my fortunes, maugre hellish spite.
Black sorrow, nurse of plaints, of tears, &amp; groans,
Evaporate my spirit with a sigh,
That it may hurry after his sweet breath,
Who made thee dote on life, now hunt for death.
What soul is that, that with her teare-full eyes
Seems to lament with me in miseries?
Here seems to be the pressure of his trunk,
Dear earth confirm my doubt, was this the place
Which the fair body of my Pasquil pressed,
When he lay murdered? See the drooping grass
Hangs down his mourning head, and seems to say
This was the fatal place, where Pasquil lay.
Oh thou sweet print, stamped by the fairest limbs,
The richest Coffin of the purest soul
That ever pressed the bosom of the earth,
First drink my tears, and next suck up my blood.
Now thou immortal spirit of my Love,
Thou precious soul of Pasquil view this knife
Which once thou gave me, and prepare thy arm
To clip the spirit of thy constant Love.
Dear Ned I come, by death I will be thine,
Since life denies it to poor Katherine.
Hold, hold, thou miracle of constancy,
First let heaven perish, and the crazde world run
Into first Chaos of confusion,
Before such cruel violence be done
To her fair breast, whose fame by virtue won,
Shall honour women whilst there shines a sun.
Thrice sacred spirit, why dost thou forsake
Elizeum pleasures, to withhold the arm
Of wretched Katherine? Oh let me die,
Retire sweet Ghost, do not pollute thy hand
With touch of mortals.
Amazement of thy Sex, Pasquill doth live,
And lives to love thee in eternity.
Be not aghast, recover spirit, (Sweet)
Tic Pasquill speaks, tic Pasquill clips thy waste,
Tic Pasquill prints a kiss on thy fair hand.
What do I dream? or have I drawn the sluice
Of life up? and through streams of blood
Unfelt, have set my prisoned soul at large?
Am I in heaven? or in Pasquills Arms?
I am in heaven, for my Neds embrace
Is Katherines long wished celestial place.
Divinity of sweetness, I protest,
If these inferior Orbs were rolled up,
And the imperial heaven bared to my view,
It were not so gracious, nor so much desired,
As my dear Katherine is to Pasquills sight.
Heaven of Content, Paphos of my delight.
Mirror of Constancy, life-bloud of love.
Center to whom all my affections move.
Renown of Virgins, whose fame shall ne'er fleet.
Oh I am mazed with joy, I pree thee sweet,
Unfold to me, what sad mischance it was,
Forced thy deaths rumour, and such woes dispersed?
Sad sorrow past, delights to be rehearsed.
It will be tedious, but in brief think thus,
Old Mamons malice was the venombd foam,
That poisoned all the sweets of our content.
Alas dear heart, that love should be so crossed.
Now good Ned fetch my gown, tic at yon house,
I would be loath to turn to Hygate thus.
I am obliged with infinite respect, to do you ser∣vice.
Oh power divine, was ever such a love as Katherine?
Look Mamon, search Mamon, this way she went,
Put on thy spectacles, this way she went:
Blessed, blessed, blessed, be thy nativity,
Yonder she sits, Isle either have her now,
Or none shall ever enjoy her with content.
How loves impatient, when will Ned return?
Tut, tic no matter when, look where thy Mamō is.
Good devil, for Gods sake do not vex my sight:
Did not thou plot the death of my dear Love?
Yes, yes, and wold complot ten thousand deaths,
Even damn my soul, for beauteous Katherine.
My ship shall kemb the Oceans curled back
To furnish thee with brave Abiliaments,
Rusks of rich Pearl, and sparkling Diamonds
Shall fringe thy garments with Imbroadry:
Thy head shall blaze as bright with Orient stone,
As did the world being burnt by Phaeton.
You make me death, for pities sake forbear:
Oh when will Pasquil come? Good Sir depart.
When wilt return? I pray you Sir go hence,
And troth, I will not hate you: nay I'll speak
Against my heart, and say I loath you not.
You vex my patience, gentle sir forbear,
I beg it on my knee, and with a tear.
Tut will you love me, and detest yon boy?
Heaven detest me first, and loathe my soul.
Is it your final resolution?
God knows it is. So good Sir rest content.
I, I will rest, and thou shalt rest thus blurred,
Thus poisoned; venomed with this oil of Toads:
If Mamon cannot get thee, none shall joy
Which he could not enjoy. I fear no law,
Gold in the firmest conscience makes a flaw.
Rot like to Helen: Spittle hence, adieu,
Let Pasquil boast in your next interview.
Be pitiful and kill me gentle Sir.
Heaven my heart is cracked with misery:
Where shall I hide me? which way shall I cleanse
The eating poison of this venomed oil?
Poor wretch (alas) see where thy Pasquil comes.
Here Love put on your gown. How now? good God,
Heauē give me patiēce: who hath used thee thus?
The devil in the shape of Mamon. Sweet
Touch me not. Pasquil I conjure thee now
By all the power of affection,
By that strict bond of love that lincks our hearts,
Leave and abandon me eternally.
I merit now no love, yet prithee sweet,
Vouchsafe to give me leave to love thee still.
But I do bind thee by thy sacred vow
Of our once happy, and thrice blessed love,
Follow not Katherine: good Ned, doo not grieve,
In time just heaven may our woes relieve.
O dira fata, saeua, miseranda, horrid
Quis hic Locus? quae Regio? quae Mundi plaga?
Vbi sum? Katherine, Katherine, Eheu Katherine.
My Spectacles will betray me, look
Mamon, search Mamon, here abouts they fell.
Welcome Erra Pater, you that make Prognosti∣cations for ever. Whore's you Almanac?
Lord bless my Obligations, Lord bless my bonds, Lord bless my Obligations. Alas, alas, alas.
Let me see sir now, when will true valour be at the full? Oh theres an opposition tic eclipsed, Venus, I Venus is mounted. Wheres the Goat now? Kembd, fine kemd. Oh here are Dog days, out vpont Dog days, Dog days, Dog days, out vpont.
Alas my Obligations, my Bonds, my Oblige∣tions, my Bonds. Alas, alas, alas.
Katherine, Katherine, Ehew Katherine.
Obligations, Obligations: Alas my Obligate∣once, I am undone, undone, undone.
Sir, Sir, Sir.
What sir you for, you Dog, you Hound, you
Crust, whats best news with you now? Out-alas my
Obligations, my Bonds, I am undone, undone.
Sir, the best news is, your ship (the Hope∣well) hath hoped ill, returning from Barberry. Tic but sunk, or so, not a scrap of goods sau'de.
Villains, Rogues, Jaws, Turks, Infidels, my nose will rot off with grief. O the Gout, the Gout, the Gout, I shall run mad, run mad, run mad.
Amen, amen, amen. But theres other news to comfort you withal sir.
Lets hear them good Flown. My ship, my bonds, my bonds, my ship, I shall run mad unless thy good news reclaim me. Lets hear thy news.
Your house with all the furniture is burnt, not a rag left, the people stand warming their hands at the fire, and laugh at your misery.
I defy heaven, earth and hell, renounce my nose, plague, pestilence, confusion, famine, sword and fire, devour all, devour me, devour Flown, devour all: bonds, house, and ship, ship, house, and bonds, Di∣spear, Damnation, Hell, I come, I come, so room for Mamon, room for Usury, room for thirty in the hun∣dred. I come, I come, I come.
Why me thinks this is right now, Isle even lay him up in Bedlam, commit him to the mercy of the whip, the entertainment of bread and water, and the the sting of a Usurers Conscience for ever.
Truly Mistress Winifride, as I would be will∣ling to be thankful, and thankful to find you willing to prostrate your fair parts to my pleasure, so I hope you will remember your promise, and promise what you now remember, if you have forgot, I would be glad to put you in mind of it.
Truly friend Iohn, as I would be loath to break my promise, so I would be unwilling to keep my word to the dishonesting of my virginity. Marry for a nights lodging or so, I will not be strait laced to my friend. There∣fore thus it must be. To night I must lie at the Farm at Holloway, thither shall you be conueyed in this Sack, &amp; laid in my chamber, from whence you shall have free access to the pleasures of my private bed.
Well then bee constant Winifride, and you shall find me faithful Jack Drum: and so taking leave of your lips, I betake me to the tuition of the Sack.
Winifride my Mistress Camelia stays for you to attend her to the Greene, I must go and clap my Tabers cheeks there, for the heavens In faith.
Stay a little here, and if Iohn foe de king come, give him that Sack. Oh I could crack my Whalebones, break my Buck, to think what laughter may arise from this.
By my trot, dis love is a most cleanly Gentle∣man, he is very full of shift, de fine Vench, can invent ten thousand, thousand trick to kiss a men (hee) see by gore she ha keep her word, she is in de seck already, hee, brave by gore, my blood das sparkle in my vein for joy. Metre Timotty you must give me dat seck dere.
Owy da Monsieur, that is well pronounced is it not?
Ritt, ritt, ritt, excellan: excellan: adieu Timo∣thy, me am almost burst for joy.
Well, I know what the Wenches on the green are saying now, as well as if I were in their bellies, when will Timothy come, when will honest Timothy approach, when will good Timothy draw near? Well Wenches now rejoice, for Timothy Twedle doth come.
Brother how like you of our modern wits?
How like you the new Poet Mellidus?
A slight bubbling spirit, a Cork, a Husk.
How like you Mucus fashion in his carriage?
O filthy, he is as blunt as Pawles.
What think you of the Lines of Decius?
Writes he not a good cordial sappy stile?
A surreinde Iaded wit, but a rubs on.
Brabant thou art like a pair of Balance,
Thou wayest all saving thy self.
Good faith, troth is, they are all Apes &amp; gulls,
Vile imitating spirits, dry heady Turfs.
Nay brother, now I think your judgment erres.
Err, he cannot err man, for children &amp; fools speak truth always.
See who comes yonder sweating with a pack.
Monsieur, what do you bear there ha?
Pree you away, you break my glasses der, Ie∣shu, now me know not what to doe, Zot dat I was to come dis way widd them.
Glasses you salt rheum, come what ha you there?
Trike no more for Ieshu sake, by gore me have brittle var, if you knock it, it will break presant, pre you adieu.
We must know whats in the bag In faith.
By my trot, me tell you true, will you no trike madden?
No faith, but see you tell vs true, or else.
Or else, or else by gore, do wat you please wid me: Sweet Vinifride, my very art dus first, he by gore, me did not dink to vrong you dus: come out sweet Vinifrid, me much discredit you.
He Jack Drum. Iesu vat made you dere?
Gentlemen my M. desires you to come supp with him, I was sent to inuit you, and this itching goat, would needs ease my legs &amp; carry me: I hope you'll
come, and so I take my leave. I, I am gulled, but if I quit her not, well.
Come, there's some knot of knavery in this trick.
His culler is not currant, well, let pass.
Come Monsieur, come, Isle help you to a
Go down the hill before, Isle follow you. Wench,
Me dank you: More deu, he mo• a me, me am trooke dead wit grief, de cock of my humour is down, and me may hang my self for a Vench.
Gentlemen will you laugh heartily now?
I, and if thou wilt play the fool kindly now.
I will strait frame the strongest eternal Jest
That ever was builded by Invention:
My wife lies very private in the Town,
I'll bring the French man to her presently,
As to a loose lascivious Courtesan:
Nor he, nor you, nor she, shall know the rest,
But it shall be immortal for a Jest.
Farewell brother, we shall meet at Hygate soon.
The wicked Jest be turned on his own head,
Pray God he may be kindly Cuckoled.
Carry this favour to my Ellis straight,
I long to see him, prithee bid him come.
I would be loath to nourish your defame,
And therefore Mistress pray you pardon me.
What is thy judgment of my Ellis chandge?
No that is firm: but your estate is changed.
You know your sister's strangely vanished,
And now the hope and revenue of all,
Calls you his sole, and fair apparent heir:
Now therefore would I have you change your love.
Indeed I yield tic modern policy,
To kiss even dirt that plasters up our wants.
I'll not deny, tic worthy wits applause,
For women on whom lowering Fortune squints,
And casts but half an eye of due respect,
To pin some amorous Idiot to their eyes,
And use him as they use their Looking-glasse,
See how to adorn their beauties by his wealth,
And then case up the fool and lay him by.
But for such Ladies as your self is now,
Whose fortunes are sustained by all the proppes
That gracious Fortune can advance you with,
For such a one to yoke her free sweet youth
Unto a Lowne, a Dane-like barbarous Sot,
A guilden Truncheon, fie, tic slavish vile.
Oh what is richer then content in love?
And will you now having so huge a Rusk
Of heaped up fortunes, go and chain your self
To a dull post, whose very eyes will blaze
His base bred spirit, where so ever he comes,
And shame you with the very name of wife.
No Mistress, no, I have found out a man
That merits you, if man can merit you.
Lord what a tide of hate comes creeping on
Upon my former judgment? Come, the man?
The man? (oh God) the man is such a man,
That he is matchless: oh, I shall profane
His name, with unrespected utterance.
Oh thou tormentst me, dear Winifride the man?
By the sweet pleasures of an amorous bed,
I think you will be deified by him.
O God the most accomplished man that breathes,
And Planet is the man.
Out on the devil, th•res a man indeed.
Nay look you now, you'll straight oreshoot yourself,
You'll say hoe's sour and unsociable:
Tush you know him not, that humor's forced:
But in his native spirit hoe's as kind
As is the life of love. And then the clearest skin,
The whitest hand, the cleanest well shaped leg:
The quickest eye: Fie, fie, I shall but blur
And sully his bright worth with my rude speech.
Well, if he court me, Isle not be much coy.
Court you? nay you must court him for ought I know:
You must not think forsooth, that I am feed
To urge you thus. I solemnly protest,
I motion this out of my pure vowed love,
Which wishes all advancement and content
To attend the glory of your beauteous youth.
O I am Planet stricken Winifride,
How shall I intimate my love to him?
I saw him coming up the hill even now,
Send him a favour, and Isle bear it to him,
And tell him you desire to speak with him.
Do, do, dear Winifride, sweet wench make haste.
Sir, I have her good will, and please you now to give me your consent, and look you Sir, here I have I∣tem'd forth what I am worth.
Tush show me no Items, and she love you, a God• name: Isle not bee cursed by my daughter for
forcing her to clip a loathed, abhorred match: and see how fortunate we are; Look where she stands.
Sweet Planet, thou only gouernst me.
Daughter give me your hand, with your consent, I give you to this Gentleman.
Marry phoh, will you match me to a fool?
God pardon me, not I: why M. Ellis ha?
Had you her consent, speak freely man?
Indeed law now; I thought so: by my troth
You sed you loved me, that you did indeed.
I as my fool, my I diot to make sport.
Fie daughter, you are too plain with him.
Alas my son Simile is out of countenance.
Truly as a Mill-horse, is not a horse Mill, and as a Cart Jade, is not a Jade Cart, even so will I go hang my self.
Mary godforbid, what frolic, frolic man, weal have a Cup of Sack and Sugar soon, shall quite expel these musty humours of stale melancholy.
Is this the Egg where Castor and Pollux bred?
Isle crack the Bastard in the very shell.
Alas my markets, my markets are clean spoiled.
Vbi Helena, vbi Troia, first not true my Ganimede,
When shall old Saturn mount his Throne again?
See, see, alas how bleak Religion stands.
Katherine, Katherine, you damned Titanoies,
Why prick you heavens ribs with blasphemy?
Python yet breathes, old gray haired piety.
Alas kind youth, how came he thus di•••aught?
I left him in pursuit of Katherine,
And found him in this strange distemperature.
O Sir, first you that stamp on litrature?
You are inspired you with Prophecy.
Not I, as I shall be saved, I am M. Iohn Ellis I.
Come, come, lets entice him by some good means,
Isle labour to reclaim him to his wits.
O now my daughter Katherine remembers me,
Where art thou girl? heaven give me patience.
Poor, poor Astrea, who blurs thy orient shine?
Come yons the Capitol of Iupiter,
Letts whip the Senate, else they will not leave
To have their Justice blasted with abuse
Of flattering Sycophants. Come lets mount the Stars,
Reverend antiquity go you in first—
Dotage will follow. Then comes pale faced Lust—
Next Sodomy, then Gomorha, next poor I,
By heaven my heart is burst with misery.
I ha tell you de very trot of the lagg Jest, by gore your England Damsels are so fear, so vittie, so kitt, by my trot she toss me wish vey she please der: but pre you were is de Vench? Is dis de house? Ha is dis de house, pre you tell me ha?
It is, it is, and she is in the Inner Chamber:
Boy call her forth.
By gore den me must needs now sing,
Ding, ding, a ding, Ding a, ding a, ding,
For me am now at pleasures spring.
Ding a, ding, ding, ding a, ding a, ding a, ding,
And a hee da vench, da vench, da vench,
Which must my br•ling humour quench. Coma, coma, com.
Now sweet, you kept your promise well last night.
By gorshe give him much kind word already.
Well to make thee amends, boy fetch vs a quart of Canary Sack. Pry thee Mall entertain this French Gentleman.
Sir you are very welcome to my Lodging.
Me danck you, and first me kiss your fingre, next me bus your lip, and last me clip your vast, and now foutra for de Vinifride.
Sir Edwards Caterer passed by sir, you wild me to remember Lemmons.
Gods precious tic true: Boy go with me to Billings-gate. Mall I'll return straight.
Will you no Vine sir, hee, he is gone purposely, by my trot most kind Gentleman. Fair Madame pree you pity me, by Gore me languish for your love, me am a pouera French Ientleman, pree you show me your bed-Chambre.
What mean you sir, by this strange passion?
Nay noting, by Gore damsel, you be so faer, so admirably feer, flesh and blood cannot endure your countenance, me broil, ang me broil, ang you ha no compassion, by gore me ang quite languish. Last night me go to bed, ang me put de candle behind me, and by my trot me see clean torough me. Me ang so dry, me put a cold plattre at my back, and my back melt de plattre quite, do so burn. Pree you show me your bed Chambre, me will be secrete constant: I love you un∣reasonably vell▪ unreasonably vell by gore.
In faith you make me blush, what should I say?
Say no, ang take it: Or arc you one ting, Say neder yea nor no, but take it, ang say noting.
You will be close and secret?
Secred, by gore as secred as your soul, me will tell noting, possible.
Well Sir, if it please you to see my Cham∣ber, tic at your service.
Hee now me ang brave Monsieur, by gore ang me had know dis, me wood have eat some Potatos, or Ringoe: but vell: hee. Me will tanck Metre Brabant for dis, by gore me am caught in heaven bliss.
Oh too unkind, why doest thou scorn my love?
She that with all the vehemence of speech
Hath been pursued, and kneeled too for love,
Prostrates her self, and all her choicest hopes,
As lowe as to thy feet, disdain me not,
To scorn a Virgin, is mans odious blot▪
To scorn a man, is Virgins odious blot.
Were thou as rich as is the Oceans womb,
As beauteous as the glorious frame of heaven,
Yet would I loath thee worse then varnished skulls,
Whose rivals are daubed up with plastering paint.
O Rocky spirit.
Breathe not in vain, I hate thy flatterings,
Detest thy purest elegance of speech,
Worse then I do the Croaking of a Toad.
Sweet Gentleman.
Peace you Rebato pinner, Poting-sticke,
Y•• bribed corrupters of affection:
I hate you both, by heaven I hate her more
Then I do love my self. Hence pack, away,
I'll sooner dote upon a bleare-eide Witch,
A sapless Beldam, then Isle flatter thee.
Be not too cruel sweet Planet, dear relent,
Compassionate my amorous languishment.
Ha, ha, I pree thee kneel, beg, blubber, Cry,
Whilst I behold thee with a loathing eye:
And laugh to see thee weep.
Look, on my knees I creep,
Be not impenetrable beauteous youth,
But smile upon me, and Isle make the air
Court thy choice ear with soft delicious sounds.
Bring forth the Viols, each one play his part,
Musick's the quiver of young Cupids dart.
Out Siren, peace scritch-owle, hence chattering Pie,
The blackt beaked night Crow, or the howling Dog,
Shall be more gracious then thy squeaking voice:
Go sing to M. Iohn. I shall be blunt
If thou depart not, hence, go morn and die,
I am the scourge of light inconstancy. 
Thus my dear Brabant, am I thy revenge,
And whip her for the peevish scorn she bare
To thy weak younger bi•th: ô that the souls of men
Were temperate like mine, then Natures paint
Should not triumph o'er our infirmities.
I do adore with infinite respect,
Women whose merit issues from their worth
Of inward graces, but these rotten posts
That are but guilt with outward garnishment,
O how my soul abhors them. Yons my friend, 
I will conceal what I for him have wrought,
Nice Jealousy mistakes a friendly part:
Now Brabant wheres thy elder brother ha?
What hath he built the Jest with Monsieur yet?
Faith I know not, but I heard he left the
French-man with his wife.
Knew she thy brothers meaning?
Not a whit, shoe's a mere stranger to this merriment.
Hit and be lucky, ô that it were lawful now
To pray to God that he were Cuckoled.
Dear Brabant I do hate these bombast wits,
That are puffed up with arrogant conceit
Of their own worth, as if Omnipotence
Had hoised them to such vnequald height,
That they surveyed our spirits with an eye
Only create to censure from aboue,
When good souls they do nothing but reprove.
See where a Shallop comes. How now, what news?
What might this mean, that Winifrid salutes
The blunt tongued Planet, with such private speech?
See with what vehemence she seems to urge
Some private matter. Planet is my friend,
And yet the strongest link of friendship's strained,
When female love puts to her mighty strength.
Mark, Mark, she offers him Camelias scarf:
Now on my life tic so: Planet supplants my Love.
Friend I must leave thee, prithee pardon me,
Weal meet at supper soon with the good knight.
I, I, content: ô hell to my delight,
My friend will murder me, thin Cobweb Lawn
Burst with each little breath of tempting sweets. 
She entreats you M. Planet, to meet
Her at the Cross stile.
Ha, at the cross stile, well I'll meet him there.
He thats persidious to me in my love,
Confusion take him, and his blood be spilt
Without confusion to the murderer.
So load it soundly, murders great with me,
Go Boy, discharge it, even in Planets breast,
Shoot him quite through, &amp; through, thou can not sin
To murder him, that murdered his dear friend
With damned breach of friendship, when he is slain
Bring me his Cloak and Hat, here I will stay
To be embraced in steed of Planet: go, away. 
I had rather die with blood upon my head,
Shame and reproach clogging my heavy hour,
Then t'haue my friend still wounding of my soul
With reprobate Apostacisme in love.
O this Sophisticate friendship, that dissolves
With every heate of Fancy, let it melt
Even in Hells Forge▪ Hark, the Pistol is discharged,
The Act of gory murder is performd'e.
Have mercy heaven: ô my soul is rent
 With Planets wound. Come Boy the Hat and Cloak,
Go post to Scotland, there are crowns for thee,
Leave Brabant unto death, and obloquy. 
Why now the ulcerous swelling of my hate
Is broken forth: Oh that these women's beauties,
This Natures witchcraft, should enchant our souls
So infinitely unrecoverable,
That Hell, death, shame, eternal infamy,
Cannot reclaim our desperate resolves,
But we will on spite of damnation. 
Come ye poor garments of my murdered friend,
Morn that you are compelled to hide his limbs
That slew you Moister. See Camelia comes,
I'll stand thus muffled and deceive her sight,
When love makes head, friendship is put to flight.
Persist not still, ô thou relentless youth
To scorn my love: what tho I scorned thy friend,
Do not upbraid me still with hating him,
Do not still view me with a loathing eye.
For Brabants sake, do you but love me sweet,
And Isle not scorn him. Why should be so nice
In keeping laws of friendship? did thou ever hear
Of any soul that held a friend more dear,
Then a fair woman?
O the sting of death, how hath Brabant erred?
Hence thou vile womb of my damnation,
Oh thou wronged spirit of my murdered friend,
Thou guiltless, spotless, pure Immaculate,
Behold this arm thrusting swift vengeance
Into the Trunk of a cursed damned wretch.
Heel spoil himself, lets run &amp; call for help.
Now have I room for murder, this vast place,
Hushed silence, and dumb solitude, are fit
To be observers of my Tragedy.
Planet accept the smoke of reeking blood
To expiate thy murder. Friend I come,
Weal troop together to Elizium.
Hold hairbrainde youth, what mischief maddes thy thoughts?
Forbear good knight, you never sinned so deep,
As in detaining this just vengeance
To light upon me, but know I will die,
I have infringed the laws of God and Man,
In shedding of my Planets guiltless blood,
Who I supposed corryuald me in love
Of that Camelia, but injuriously:
And therefore gentle knight, let mine own hand
Be mine own hangman.
Brother I'll get you pardon, fear it not.
You'll get my pardon, brother pardon me,
You shall not, for Isle die in spite of thee.
I am turned wilde in wonder of this act.
Come Brabant come, give me my Cloak &amp; Hat,
The evenings raw and dank, I shall take cold.
How now? turned mad, why stir thou on me thus?
Give me my Cloak. Hart is the youth distraught?
Ha, doest thou breathe, lets see where is thy wound?
Doest breathe, my wound, what doest thou mean by this?
Gentlemen I can direct you forth
This Labyrinth of intricate misdoubts,
My M. willed me kill that Gentleman,
Now I thought he was mad in putting me
To such an enterprise, and therefore soothed him up,
With I sir, yes sir, and so sir, at each word,
Whilst he would show me how to hold the Dagge,
To draw the Cock, to charge, and set the flint,
Mean time I had the wit to think him mad,
And therefore went, and as he willed me shot,
Which he God knows, thought pierced his deer friends hart,
Then went &amp; borrowed that same Hat &amp; cloak
Of M. Planet, brought them to my Moister,
And so.
No more, no more, knight I will make thee smile
When I discourse how much my friend hath erred.
I will dissolve and melt my soul to night,
In influent laughter. Come' my Jocund spirit
Presages some vnhopte for happiness:
We'll crown this evening with triumphant joy,
Isle sup upon this Greene, heir's room enough
To draw a liberal breath, and laugh aloud:
Drum fetch the Table: Twedle scour your Pipe,
For my old bones will have a Round to night.
Now by my troth and I had thought ont too,
I would have had a play: I faith I would.
I saw the Children of Powles last night,
And troth they pleased me pretty, pretty well,
The Apes in time will do it handsomely.
I faith I like the Audience that frequented there
With much applause: A man shall not be choked
With the stench of Garlic, nor be pasted
To the barmy Jacket of a Beer▪brewer.
Tic a good gentle Audience, and I hope the Boys
Will come one day into the Court of requests.
I and they had good Plays, but they pro∣duce
Such musty fopperies of antiquity,
And do not suit the humorous ages backs
With clothes in fashion.
Well Brabant well, you will be censuring still,
There lies a Jest in steep will whip you fort't.
Gallants I have no judgment in these things,
But will it please you sit? Camelia
Call these same Gentlemen unto thee wench:
O there with thee my Katherine was wont
To sit with graceful presence, well let it pass:
Fetch me a Cup of Sack. Come Gallants sit,
M. Brabant, M. Planet, I pray you sit.
Young M. Brabant, and Gods precious M. Iohn,
Sit all, and consecrate this night to mirth.
Here is old Neds place: Come, sound Music there,
What Gallants have you ne'er a Page can entertain
This pleasing time with some French brawl or Song?
What shall we have a Galliard? troth tic well.
 Good Boy I faith, I would thou had more room.
Once more the gracious heavens have renewd
My wasted hopes, once more a blessed chance
Hath fetched again my spirit from the sound
And languishing despair of happiness.
A skilful Beldam with the Juice of herbs
Hath curd my face, and kilt the venoms power,
And now if Pasquil live and love me still,
Heaven is bounteous to poor Katherine.
Yon suppes my Father, but my Ned's not there
I fear, and yet I know not what I fear.
Gallants I drink this to Ned Pasquils health.
I faith Isle pledge him, would he had his wits.
And I my daughter. Fill me one Cup more:
No grief so potent, but neat sparkling wine
Can conquer him: Oh this is Juice divine.
Would he had his wits. Oh what a numming fear
Strikes a cold palsy through my trembling blood.
Virtue shall burst op the Iron gates of Hell,
Isle not be cooped up, room for Phaeton▪
Lame policy how can thou go upright?
O Lust, stain not sweet Love. Fie be not lost
Upon the surge of vulgar humours. You Idiot
Riuet my Armour, and Caparison,
A mighty Centaur, for Isle run at Tilt,
And tumble down y on Giantin the dust.
Sit gentle Judges of great Radamant,
Let not Proserpine rule thee. Oh shoe's dead▪
Now thou art right Oecus, I appeal to thee,
Have pity on a wretches misery.
I am quite sunk with grief, what shall we do
To get recovery of his wits again?
Let Music sound, for I have often heard
It hath such sweet agreement with our souls,
That it corrects vain humours, and recalls
His straggling fancies to fair union.
Why the soul of man is nought but simphonies,
A sound of disagreeing parts, yet fair unite
By heavens hand, divine by reasons light.
Sound Music, then pray God it take effect.
Mark with what passion he sucks up the sweets
Of this fame delicate harmonious breath.
Observe him well, me thinks his eye is fixed
Upon some object that seems to attract
His very soul forth with astonishment
Mark with what vehemence his thoughts do speak
Even in his eyes, some creature stands far off,
That hath entranced him with a pleasing sight.
Amazement, wonder, stiff astonishment,
Stare and stand gazing on this miracle,
Perfection, of what ever a humane thought
Can reach with his discoursiue faculties,
Thou whose sweet presence purifies my sense,
And doest create a second soul in me,
Dear Katherine, the life of Pasquils hopes.
Dear Pasquil, the life of Katherines hopes.
Once more let me embrace the constant's one
That ever was termed her Sex perfection.
Once more let me be valued worth his love,
In decking of whose soul, the graces strove.
Spite hath outspent it self, and thus at last,
We clip with joyful arm each others wast.
O pardon me thou dread omnipotence,
I thought thou could not thus have blessed me.
O thou hast dewed my gray hairs with thy love,
And made my old heart sprout with fertile joy.
Forget dear father, that my act hath wronged
The quiet of your age.
No more, no more, I know what thou wold'st say
Daughter, there's nothing but salvation,
Could come unto my heart more gracious
Then is the sight of my dear Katherine.
Son Pasquill now, for thou shalt be my son,
What frolic gentle youth.
Is Mamon here?
Oh Sir, M. Mamon is in a City of Jury, called Bedlam, Alias plain Bedlam: the price of whips is migh∣tily risen since his brain was pitifully ouertumbled, they are so fast spent upon his shoulders.
Oh sacred heavens, howiust is thy revenge?
Why? did he cast you in the labyrinth
Of these strange crosses?
Yes honoured knight, which in more private place
And fitter time, I will disclose at large.
Faith Sister, as I am your elder borne,
So will I match before or with you sure,
Young M. Brabant?
By this light not I.
Honest M. Ellis?
No indeed law, not I, I do not use to marry▪
For even as black patches are worn,
Some for pride, some to stay the Rheum, and
Some to hide the scab, even so Iohn Ellis
Scorn her, that hath scorned him.
Virtuous Moister Planet.
Errant wandering star we shall ne'er agree.
M. Brabant, M. Planet, M. Ellis, faith Isle have any.
But no body will have thee, this is the plague of light inconstancy.
Go Twedle, bid the Butler broach fresh wine,
Set up wax lights, and furnish new the boards,
Knock down a score of Beefs,
Inuit my neighbours straight,
And make my Dressers groan with weight of meat.
M. Ellis, pray you let vs hear your high Dutch Song,
You are admired for it: Good lets hear it.
I do not use to sing, and yet even as when the sky falls we shall have Larks, even so when my voice rises, you shall have a Song.
Give vs once a drink, for an the black Bowl,
Sing gentle Butler balley moi,
For an the black bowl. Sing gentle Butler balley moi.
Give vs once some drink, for an the pint Pot,
Sing gentle Butler balley moi, the pint pot,
For an the black bowl. Sing gentle Butler balley moi.
Give vs once a drink, for an the quart Pot,
Sing gentle Butler bally moi, the quart, the pint Pot,
For an the black bowl. Sing gentle Butler bally moi.
Give vs once some drink, for an the pottle Pot,
Sing gentle Butler bally moi, the pottle, the quart, the pint pot,
For an the black bowl. Sing gentle Butler bally moi.
Give vs once a drink, for an the gallon Pot,
Sing gentle Butler bally moi, the gallon, the pottle, the quart, the pint pot, For an the black bowl.
Sing gentle Butler bally moi.
Give vs once a drink for an the Firkin,
Sing gentle Butler bally moi, the Firkin, the gallon, the pottle, the quart, the pint pot, For an the black bowl.
Sing gentle Butler bally moi.
Give vs once a drink for an the Kilderkin,
Sing gentle Butler bally moi, the Kilderkin, the Firkin, the gallon, the pottle, the quart, the pint pot,
For and the black bowl. Sing gentle Butler bally moi.
Give vs once some drink for an the Barrel,
Sing gentle Butler bally moi, the Barrel, the Kilderkin, the
Firkin, the gallon, the pottle, the quart, the pint pot,
For an the black bowl. Sing gentle Butler bally moi.
Give vs once some drink for an the Hoggeshead,
Sing gentle Butler bally moi, the Hoggeshead, the Barrel, the
Kilkerkin, the Firkin, the gallon, the pottle, the quart, the pint pot, For an the black bowl. Sing gentle Butler bally moi.
Give vs once a drink for an the But,
Sing gentle Butler bally moi, the But, the Hoggeshead, the Bar∣rel, the Kilderkin, the Firkin, the gallon, the pottle, the quart, the pint pot, For an the black bowl.
Sing gentle Butler bally moi.
Give vs once some drink for an the Pipe,
Sing gentle Butler bally moi, the Pipe, the But, the Hogeshead, the Barrel, the Kilderkin, the Firkin, the gallon, the pottle, the quart, the pint pot, For an the black bowl.
Sing gentle Butler bally moi.
Give vs once some drink for an the Tun,
Sing gentle Butler bally moi, the Tun, the Pipe, the But, the the Hoggeshead, the Barrel, the Kilderkin, the Firkin, the gal∣lan, the pottle, the quart, the pint pot, For an the black bowl.
Sing gentle Butler bally moi.
Well done, I faith it was chanted merrily:
What my Gallants, ne'er a tickeling Jest
To make vs sown with mirth ere we go in?
Faith Gent. I ha brewed such a strong headed Jest
Will make you drunk, and reel with laughter:
You know Monsieur Iohn foe de king?
Very well, he read French to my daughters.
I to gull the Fool, have brought him to my wife, as to a loose lascivious Courtesan, she being a mere stranger to the Jest, and there some three hours ago left him: but I am sure she hath so cudgeld him with quick sharpe Jests, and so bettered him with a volley of her wit, as indeed she is exceeding witty, and admirable chaste, that in my conscience heel never dare to court women more. Would to God he were returned.
See even on your wish hoe's come.
Iesu preserve you sweet Metre Brabant, by gore de most delicate plump vench dat ever me tuche: me am your slave, your peasant; by gore a votre service whilst I live for dis.
He would persuade you now that he touched her, with an immodest hand. Ha, ha, ha.
Tush her, by Gore me tush her, and tush her, and me tush her, me ne'er tush such a venche, de fine foot, de cleanest leg, de sleekest skin: and me tell e sure token, she hath de finest little varte you know veare: hee by Gore me ne'er tush such a vench.
Pray God hee have not brewed a heady Jest indeed.
Why faith Gentlemen I am Cuckold, by this light I am.
By gore me no know, you tell a me it was a Courtesan, prey you pardon me, by my trot, me tech you French to t'end of de world.
Come heir's thy Cap of Maintenance, the Co∣ronet
Of Cuckolds. Nay you shall wear it, or wear
My Rapier in your guts by heaven.
Why doest thou not well deserve to be thus used?
Why should thou take felicity to gull
Good honest souls, and in thy arrogance
And glorious ostentation of thy wit,
Think God infused all perfection
Into thy soul alone, and made the rest
For thee to laugh at? Now you Censurer
Be the ridiculous subject of our mirth.
Why Fool, the power of Creation
Is still Omnipotent, and there's no man that breathes
So valiant, learned, witty, or so wise,
But it can equal him out of the same mould.
Wherein the first was formed. Then leave proud scorn,
And honest self made Cuckold, wear the horn.
Wear the horn? I, spite of all your teethe
Isle wear this Crown, and triumph in this horn.
Why faith tic valorously spoke fair Sir,
Weel solemnise your Coronation
With royal pomp. Now Gentlemen prepare
A liberal spirit to entertain a Jest,
Where free light Jocund mirth shall be enthroand
With sumptuous state. Now Music beat the air,
Entrance our thoughts with your harmonious sounds,
Our Fortune laughs, and all content abounds.

ON me, do's music spend this sound on me
That hate all unity: ho: Zarack Baltazar?
My gracious Lord.
Are you there with your B•…ogles? hark you slaves,
Did not I bind you on your lives, to watch that none disturbed us.
Gentle Eleazar.
There, off: Is it you that deass me with this noise?
Why is my loves aspect so g•…im and horrid?
Look smoothly on me:
Chime out your softest strains of harmony,
And on delicious Musics silken wings
Send ravishing delight to my loves ears,
That he may be enamoured of your tunes.
Come let's kiss.
Away, away.
No, no, says I; and twice away says stay:
Come, come, I'll have a kiss, but if you •…rive
For one denial you shall forfeit five.
Nay prithee good Queen leave me,
I am now sick, heavy, and dull as lead.
I'll make thee lighter by taking something from thee.
Do: take from me this Ague and these fits that hanging on me
S•…ke me in pieces, and set all my blood
A boiling with the fire of rage: away, away
Thou believe I jest: and laugh, to see m•… wrath wear antic shapes:
Be gone, be gone.
What means my love, burst all those wires? burn all those Instruments?
For they displease my Moor. Art thou now pleased,
Or were thou now disturbed? I'll wage all Spain
To one sweet kiss, this is some new device
To make me fond and long. Oh! you men
Have tricks to make poor women die for you.
What die for me; away.
Away, what way? I prithee speak more kindly;
Why dost thou frown? at whom?
At thee.
At me? Oh why at me? for each contracted frown
A crooked wrinkle interlines my brow:
Spend but one hour in frowns, &amp; I shall look
Like to a Beldam of one hundred years:
I prithee speak to me and chide me not,
I prithee chide if I have done amiss,
But let my punishment be this, and this.
I prithee smile on me, if but a while,
Then frown on me, I'll die: I prithee smile:
Smile on me, and these two wanton boys,
these pretty lads that do attend on me,
Shall call thee Jove, shall wait upon thy cup
And fill thee Nectar: their enticing eyes
Shall serve as crystal, wherein thou moist see
To dress thy self, if thou wilt smile on me.
Smile on me, and with coroners of pearl,
And bells of gold, circling their pretty arms
In a round Ivory fount these two shall swim,
And dive to make thee sport:
Bestow one smile, one little little smile,
And in a net of twisted silk and gold
In my all-naked arms, thy self shalt lie.
Why, what to do? Lusts arms do stretch so wide.
That none can fill them? I'll lay there away.
Where hast thou learned this lan∣gauge? that can say
No more but two rude words; away, away:
Am I grown ugly now?
Ugly as hell.
Thou lovd'st me once.
That can thy bastards tell.
What is my sin? I will amend the same.
Hence strumpet, use of sin makes thee past shame.
Strumpet.
I Strumpet.
Too true it is, woe is me;
I am a Strumpet, but made so by thee.
By me; no, no; by these young bawds; fetch thee a glass
And thou shalt see the balls of both thine eyes
Burning in fire of lust; by me? there's here
Within this hollow ci•…earn of thy breast
A spring of hot blood: have not I to cool it
Made an x•…action to the quintessence
Even of my soul: melted all my spirits,
Ravished my youth, deflowered my lovely cheeks.
And dried this, this to anatomy
Only to feed your lust, (these boys have ears):
Yet would thou murder me.
I murder thee?
I cannot ride through the Castilian streets
But thousand eyes through windows, and through doors
Throw killing looks at me, and every flave
At Eleazar dar•…s a finger out,
And every hissing tongue cries, There's the Moor,
That's he that makes a Cuckold o•… our King,
there go's the Minion of the Spanish Queen;
That's the black Prince of Devils, there go's hee
That on smooth boys, on Masks and Re∣vellings
Spends the Revenues of the King of Spain.
Who arms this many headed beast but you,
Murder &amp; Lust are twins, and both are thine;
Being weary of me thou would worry me,
Because some new love makes thee loath thine old.
Eleazar!
Harlot! I'll not hear thee speak.
I'll kill my self unless thou hear me speak.
My husband King upon his death-bed lies,
Yet have I stolen from him to look on thee;
A Queen hath made her self thy Concubine:
Yet dost thou now abhor me, hear me speak!
Else shall my sons plague thy adult'rous wrongs,
And •…read upon thy heart for murd'ring me,
Thy tongue hath murd'red me (Cry mur∣der boys)
Murder! the Queen's murd'red!
Love? slaves peace?
Murder! the Queen's murd'red!
Stop your throats?
Hark Hush you Squales; Dear love look up:
Our Chamber window stares into the Court,
And every wide mouthed ear, hearing this news
Will give Alarm to the cuckold King.
I did dissemble when I chid my love,
And that dissembling was to try my love
Thou called me strumpe•….
I'll tear out my tongue
From this black temple for blaspheming
thee.
And when I wooed thee but to smile on me,
Thou cri'dst, away, away, and frown'dst up∣on me.
Come now I'll kiss thee, now I'll smile upon thee;
Call to thy ashy cheeks their wonted red:
Come frown not, pout not, smile, smile, but upon me
And with my poniard will I stab my flesh,
And q•…affe carouses to thee of my blood,
Whilst in moist Nectar kisses thou dost pledge me.
How now, why stir thou thus?
The King is dead.
Ha! dead! you hear this, is it true, is it true, the King dead!
Who dare knock thus?
It is the Cardinal, making in∣quiry if the Queen were here.
See? shoe's here, tell him? and yet Zarack stay.
Don Roderigo's come to seek the Queen.
Why should Roderigo seek her here?
The King hath sounded thrice, and being recovered,
Sends up and down the Court, to seek her grace.
The King was dead with you; Run? and with a voice.
Erected high as mine, say thus, thus threaten
To Roderigo and the Cardinal.
Seek no Queens here, I'll broach them if they do,
Upon my falchions point. Again more knocking!
Your father is at hand, my Gre∣cious Lord.
Lock all the chambers, bar him out you apes.
Hither, a vengeance; stir Eugenia,
You know your old walk under ground, away.
So down hye to the King, quick, quick, you Squalls
Crawl with your Dam, i'ch dark, dear love farewell,
One day I hope to shut you up in hell.
SOn Eleazar, saw you not the Queen?
Ho!
Was not the Queen here with you?
Queen with me; because my Lord I'm married to your daughter:
You (like your daughter) will grow Jealous,
The Queen with me, with me, a Moore, a Dev•…ll,
A slave of Barberry, a dog; for so
Your silken Courtiers christen me, but father
Although my flesh be tawny, in my veins,
Runs blood as red, and royal as the best
And proud'st in Spain, there does old man: my father,
Who with his Empire, lost his life,
And left me Captive to a Spanish Tyrant, Oh!
Go tell him! Spanish Tyrant? tell him, do?
He that can loose a kingdom and not rave,
He's a tame jade, I am not, tell old Philip
I call him Tyrant here's a sword &amp; arm•…,
A heart, a head, and so pish, it is but death:
Old fellow shoe's not here. But ere I dye,
Sword I'll bequeath thee a rich legacy.
Watch fitter hours to think on wrongs then now,
Deaths frozen hand hold's Royal Philip's heart,
Half of his body lies within a grave;
Then do not now by quarrels shake that state,
Which is already too much ruinate.
Come and take leave of him before he dye.
I'll follow you, now purple villainy;
Sit like a Robe imperial on my back,
That under thee I closelyer may contrive
My avenge•…nce; foul deeds hid do sweetly thrive:
Mischief erect thy throne and sit in state
Here, here upon this head; let fools fear fate.
Thus I defy my starr•…, I care not I
How low I tumble down, so I mount high.
Old time I'll wait ba•…e-headed at thy heel•…,
and be a foot-boy to thy winged hours;
They shall not tell one Minute out in sands,
But I'll set down the number, I•…e still wake,
And wast these balls of sight by tossing them;
In bu•…e observations upon thee.
Sweet opportunity I'll bind my self
to thee in base apprentice-hood so long,
Till on thy naked scalp grow hair as thick
As mine: &amp; all hands shall lay hold on thee,
If thou wilt lend me but thy rusty sith,
To cut down all that stand within my wrongs,
And my revenge. Love dance in twenty forms
Upon my beauty, that this Spanish dame
May be bewitched, and dote, her amorous flames
Shall blow up the old King. Consume his Sons,
And make all Spain a bonefire.
This Tragedy being acted hers does begin,
To shed a harlots blood can be no sin.
WHose was that Screech-Owls voice•…, that like the sound
Of a hell•… tortured soul rung through mine ears
Nothing but horrid shrieks, nothing but death?
Whilst I, veiling my knees to the cold earth,
D•…wning my withered cheeks in my warm tears,
And stretching out my arms to pull from heaven
Health for the Royal Majesty of Spain,
All cried, The Majesty of Spain is dead:
That last word [dead] struck through the echoing air,
Rebounded on my heart, and •…inote me down
•…reathlesse to the cold earth, and made me leave
My prayers for Philips life, but thanks to heaven
I see him live, and lives I hope to see
Unnumbred years to guide this Empery.
The number of my years ends in one day,
Ever this Sun's down all a King's glory sets,
For all our lives are but deaths counter•…jets.
Father Mendoza and you Peers of Spain,
Dry your wet eyes, •…r sorrow wants force
T'inspire a breathing soul in a dead coarse;
Such is your King: Whore's Isabel our Daughter?
At your beds-seet consounded in her tears.
She of your grief the heaviest bur∣then bears;
You can but lose a King, but she a Father.
She bear the heaviest bur•…hen; Oh say rather
I bear, and am born down, my sorrowing
Is for a husbands loss, loss of a King.
No more, Alvere call the Princess hi•…her.
Madam, his Majesty doth call for you.
Come hither Isabella, reach a hand;
Yet now it shall not need, in stead of thine
Death shoving •…hee back clasp his hands in mine,
And bids me come away, I must, I must;
Though Kings be gods on earth, they turn to dust.
Is not Prince Philip come from Portugal?
The Prince as yet is not returned, my Lord.
Commend me to him, if I ne'er be∣hold him:
This tells the order of my funeral,
Do it as it is set down? Embalm my body;
Though worms do make no difference of flesh;
Yet Kings are curious here to dig their graves,
Such is man's frailty; when I am embalmed,
Apparel me in a rich Royal Robe,
According to the custom of the Land;
Then place my bones within that brazen shrine
Which death hath builded for my ancestors:
I cannot name death, but he strait steps in,
And pulls me by the arm.
His Grace doth faint: help me my Lords softly to raise him up.
Lift me not up, I shortly must go down,
When a few dribbling minutes have run out;
Mine h•…ur is ended: King of Spain farewell:
You all acknowledge him your Sovereign.
When you are dead we will acknow∣ledg him.
Govern this kingdom well: to be a King
Is given to many: but to govern well
Granted to few: have care to Isabel,
Her virtue was King Philips looking-glasse.
Reverence the Queen your mother. Love your sister,
And the young Prince your brother; even that day
When Spain shall solemnise my Obsequies,
And lay me up in earth; let them crown you.
Whore's Eleazar, Don Alvero's son?
Yonder with crossed arms stands he malecontent.
I do commend him to thee for a man
Both wise and warlike, yet beware of him,
Ambition wings his spirit, keep him down;
What will not men attempt to win a crown.
Mendoza is Protector of thy Realm,
I did elect him for his gravity,
I trust he will be a father to thy youth:
Call help Fernando, now I saint indeed.
My Lords.
Let none with a distracted voice
Shriek out, and trouble me in my departure:
Heavens hands I see are beckoning for my soul;
I come, I come; thus do the proudest die,
Death hath no mercy, life no certainty.
As yet his soul's not from her temple gone.
Therefore forbear loud lamentation.
Oh he is dead, hoe's dead! la∣meant and die,
In her King's end begins Spains mis•…rye
He shall not end so soon; Father, dear Father!
Forbear sweet Isabella, shrieks are vain.
You cry forbear, you by his loss of breath
Have won a kingdom, you may cry forbear:
But I have lost a Father, and a King;
And no tongue shall control my sorrowing.
Whither, g•…d Isabella?
I will go,
Where I will languish in eternal wo.
Nay, gentle Love.
Talk not of love to me.
The world and the Wo•…lds pride henceforth I'll scorn.
My love shall follow thee, if thou deny
To live with poor Hortenzo as his wife;
I'll never change my love, but change my life.
I know he is not dead, I know proud Death
Durst not behold such sacred majesty.
Why stand you thus distracted? Mother, Brother,
My Lord Mendoza, whore's my Royal father?
Here lies the temple of his Royal soul.
Here's all that's left of Philips Majesty.
Wash you his tomb with tears; Fernandoes moan,
Hating a Partner, shall be spent alone.
Oh happy father, mise•…ble Son!
Philip is gone to Joy Philip's forlorn:
He dies to live; my life with woe is torn.
Sweet son.
Sweet mother: oh! how I now do shame
To lay on one so foul so fair a name:
Had you been a true mother, a true wife,
This King had not so soon been robbed of life.
What means this rage, my son?
Call not me your son:
My father while•… he lived tired his strong arms
In bearing christian armour, against the Turk's
And spent his brains in warlike stra•…agems
To bring Confusion on damned Infidels;
Whilst you that snorted here at home be∣traid
His name to everlasting Infamy;
Whilst you at home suffered his bed-cham∣ber
To be a Brothelry, whilst you at home
Suffered his Queen to be a Concubine;
And wanton red cheeked boy's to be her bawds
Whilst she reeking in that lechers arms.
Me!
Villain it is thee, thou hel-begotten fiend at thee I stare.
Philip thou art a villain to disho∣nor me.
Mother I am no villain; it is this villain
Dishonours you and me, dishonours Spain,
Dishonours all these Lords, this Devil is he, that—
What! Oh pardon me I must throw off
All chains of duty: were thou ten Kings sons,
Had I as many souls as I have sins:
As this from hence, so they from this should fly;
In just revenge of this Indignity.
Give way, or I'll make way upon your bosoms.
Did my dear Sovereign live, sirrha that tongue.
Did but King Philip live, traitor I'd tell,—
A tale, that should rid both your souls to hell.
Tell Philip's ghost, that Philip tells his Queen,
That Philip's Queen is a Moor'sConcubine:
Did the King live I'd tell him how you two,
Rip't up the entrails of his treasury:
With Masques and antic Revellings.
Words insupportable; dost hear me boy?
Stand you all still, and see me thus trod down.
Stand you all still, yet let this devil stand here.
Forbear sweet Prince; Eleazar, I am now
Protector to Fernando King of Spain:
•…y that authority and by consent
Of all these peers, I utterly deprive thee
Of all those Royalties thou hold in Spain,
Cardinal, who lends thee this Commission?
Cardinal, i'll shorten thee by th•… head for this.
Forward my Lord Mendoza, damn•… the fiend:
Princes of Spain, consent you to this pride?
wee doe.
For what cause? let his faith be tried
His treasons needs no trial, they're too plain;
Come not within the Court, for if you do,
To beg with Indian slaves I'll banish you.
WHy should my son be ba∣nished?
Of that dispute not now Alvero,
I'll to the King my son, it shall be tried•…
If Castles King can cool a Cardinal's pride.
If I digest this Gall; Oh! my Maria:
I am whipped, and racked, and torn upon the wheel
Of giddy fortune: She and her Minions
Have got me down; and treading on my by∣some.
They cr•…, lye still: the Cardinal
(Oh! rare) would bandy me away from Spain,
And banish me to beg; I, beg with slaves.
Conquer wi•…h patience these in∣dignities.
Patience; ha, ha: yes, yes: an honest Cardinal.
Yet smo•…her the grief &amp; seek revenge.
Ho! banish me, s'foot, why say hey do;
Ther's Portugal a good air, &amp; France a fine Country;
Or Barberry rich, and has Moors; the Turk
Pure Devil, and allows enough to fat
The sides of villainy; good living there:
I can live there, and there, and there,
Troth it is, a villain can live any where:
But say I go from hence, I leave behind me
A Cardinal, that will laugh, I leave behind me
A Philip, that will clap his hands for joy;
And dance levaltoes through the Castle Court.
But the deep'st wound of all is this, I leave
My wrongs, dishonours, and my discontents,
Oh! unrevenged; my bed-rid enemies
Shall never be raised up by the strong Physical,
Curing of my sword, therefore stay still;
Many have hearts to strike, that dare not kill•…
Leave me Maria: Cardinal, this disgrace,
Shall dye thy soul, as Inky as my face:
Pish, hence Maria.
To the King I'll fly.
He shall revenge my Lord's indignity.
Mendoza woo's the King to bani•… thee;
Startle thy wonted spirits, awake thy sou•…
And on thy resolution fasten wings,
Whose golden feathers may out-strip they•… hate,
I'll tie no golden feathers to my wings.
Shall they thus tread thee dow•… which once were glad,
To Lackey by thy conquering Chari•… wheels.
I care not, I can swallow mo•… sower wrongs:
If they triumph o'er thee; they spurn me down.
Look, spurn again.
what Ice hath cooled that fire,
Which sometimes made thy thoughts heaven aspire;
This patience had not wont to dwell wi•… thee:
It is right, but now the World's changed you see;
Though I seem dead to you, here lives a fire,
No more, here comes the King, &amp; my Maria;
The Spaniard loves my wife, she swears to me,
Shoe's chaste as the white Moon, well if she be.
Well too if she be not, I care not, I,
I'll climb up by that love to dignity.
Thou woo'st me to revenge thy husbands wrong,
I woo thy fair self not to wrong thy self;
Swear but to love me, and to thee I'll swear
To crown thy husband with a diadem.
Such love as I dare yield, I'll not deny.
When in the golden arms of Ma∣jesty.
I am broke off; yonder thy husband stands,
I'll set him free, if thou •…night my bands,
So much for that. Durst then the Cardinal,
Put on such insolence; tell me fair Madam,
Wher'es your most Valiant Husband?
He see's me, and yet inquires for me.
Yonder's my Lord.
Eleazar I have in my breast wri•… down
From her Report your late received disgrace:
My father loved you dearly, so will I.
True, for my wife's sake.
This Indignity will I have In∣terest in for being your King,
You shall perceive I'll curb my underling:
This morning is our Coronation
And father's funeral solemnised,
Be present, step into your wonted place;
•…ee'l guild your dim disgraces with our grace.
I thank my Sovereign that you love my wife;
I thank thee wife that thou wilt lock my head
In such strong armour, to bear off all blows;
Who dare say such wives are their husband foes:
Let's see now, by her falling I must rise.
Cardinal you die, if the King bid me live;
Philip you die for railing at me: proud Lord•… you die,
That with Mendoza cried, Banish the Moor•…
And you my loving Liege, you're best •…it sa•…
If all these live not, you must die at last.
WHy stares this Devil thus, as if pale death
Had made his eyes the dreadful messengers
To carry black destruction to the world.
Was hee not banished Spain?
Your sacred mouth, pronoune'd the sentence of his banishment:
Then spurn the villain forth.
Who spurns the Moor, were better set his foot upon the Devil,
Do; spurn me? and this confounding arm of wrath
Shall like a thunderbolt breaking the clouds
Divide his body from his soul. Stand back.
Spurn Eleazar?
Shall wee bear his pride.
Why not, he under went much Injury,
What injury have we performed proud Lord?
Proud Cardinal; my unjust ba∣nishment.
It was wee that did it; and our words are laws.
It was wee repealed him, and our words are laws.
If not these are.
How! threatened and out-dar'd?
Shall we give arm to hostile violence?
Sheath your sword•…, sheath them, it's wee command.
Grant Eels. justice my dread Liege
Eleazar hath had justice from our hands,
And he stands banished from the Court o•… Spain,
Have you done justice? why Lore•… Cardinal,
From whom do you derive authority,
To banish him the Court without our leav•…
From this, the Staff of our Pro•…;
From this, which the last will of your dea•… Father
Committed to our trust: from this hig•… place
Which lifts Mendoza's spirits beyond the pitch
Of ordinary honour, and from this.
Which too much over-weening Insolence Hath quite taken from you, Eleazar up,
And from us sway this Staff of Regency.
How's this?
Dare sons presume to break their fathers will?
Dare Subjects counter-check their Sovereigns will?
It is done, and who gainsays it is a Traitor.
I do Fernando, yet I am no Traitor.
Fernando I am wronged by Peters Chair,
Mendoza vows revenge. I'll lay afide
My Cardinals hat, and in a wall of steel
The glorious livery of a soldier; fight for my late lost honour
Cardinal.
King, thou shalt be no King for wronging me.
The Pope shall send his bulls through all thy Realm,
And pull obedience from thy Subjects hearts,
To put on armour of the Mother Church,
Curses shall fall like lightnings on your heads:
Bell, book and candle, holy water, prayers,
Shalallchim vengeance to the of Court Spain
Till they have power to conjure down that fiend;
That damned Moor, that Devil, that Lucifer,
That dares aspire the staff, the Cardinal swayed.
Ha ha ha, I laugh yet, that the Cardinal's v•…xt.
Laughts thou base slave, the wrin∣ckles of that scorn
Thine own heart blood shall fill; Brother farewell,
Since you disprove the will our father left,
For base lust of a loathed Concubine.
Ha, Concubine; who does Prince Philip mean?
Thy wife, thy daughter, base aspi∣ring Lords,
Who to buy honour, are content to sell,
Your names to infamy, your souls to hell:
And stamp you now? do, do, for you shall see,
I go for vengeance, and she'll com with me.
Stay, for she's here already, see proud boy.
Hold, stay this fury, if you long for blood,
Murder me first. Dear son you are a King:
Then stay the violent tempest of their wrath.
Shall Kings be overswaid in their desires?
Shall Subjects be oppressed by tyranny?
No State shall suffer wrong, then hear me speak,
Mendo, you have sworn you love the Queen,
Then by that love I charge you leave these arms:
Alias. for those favours I have given you,
Embrace the Cardinal, and be friends with him.
And have my wife called strumpet to my face.
It was rage made his tongue err, do you not know
The violent love Mendoza bears the Queen:
Then speak him fair, for inthathonied breath
I'll lay a bait shall train him to his death.
Come, come, I see your looks give way to peace;
Lord Cardinal begin, and for reward,
Ere this fair setting Sun behold his bride;
Be bold to challenge love, yet be denied
That promise makes me yield; my gracious Lord:
Although my disgrace hath graven its me∣mori
On every Spaniards eye, yet shall the d•…tie
I owe your sacred Highness; and the love
My Country challenges, make me lay by
Hostile intendments, and return again
To the fair circle of obedience.
Both pardon and our favour bids you welcome,
And for some satisfaction for your wrongs,
We here create you Salamanka's Duke,
But first as a true sign all grudges dye;
Shake hands with Eleazar and be friends;
This union pleases us, now brother Philip,
You are included in this league of love,
So is Roderigo to forget all wrongs:
Your Castle for a while shall bid us welcome,
Eleazar shall it not? It is enough,
Lords lead the way, that whilst you feast your selves,
Fernando may find time all means to prove,
To compass fair Maria for our love.
MAdam a word now, have you wit or spirit?
Both.
Set them both to a most gainful task,
Our enemies are in my Castle-work.
I; but the King's there too, it's dangerous pride,
To strike at those; that couch by a Lyons side.
Remove them:
How?
How? a thousand ways;
By poison, or by this, but every groom
Has skill in such base traffic; no our pol∣licies
Must look more strange, must fly with lof∣tier wings:
Avenge ance the higher it falls, more horror brings:
But you are cold, you dare not do.
I dare.
You have a women's heart, look you this hand,
Oh! it is too little to strike home.
At whom?
Your son.
Which son, the King?
Angels of heaven, stand like•… his guard about him, how? the King
Not for so many worlds as here be stars,
Sticking upon th'imbroidred firmament.
The King? he loves my wife and should he die;
I know none else would love her, let him live.
(in heaven) good Lord Philip.
He shall die.
How? good good.
By this hand.
When, good good; when?
This night if Eleazer give consent;
Why then this night Philip shall notlive,
To see you kill him. Is he not your son?
A mother be the murd'rer of a brat,
That lived within her; ho!
It is for thy sake.
Puh! What excuses cannot damned sin make
To save it self, I know you love him well,
But that he has an eye, an eye, an eye,
To others our two hearts seem to be locked
Up in a case of steel, upon our love others
Dare not look, or if they dare, they cast
Squint purblind glances; who care though all see all,
So long as none dare speak, but, Philip
Knows that the Iron ribs of our villains
Are thin: Hee laughs to see them like this hand,
With chinks, and crevices, how a villainous eye,
A stabbing desperate tongue, the boy dare speak,
A mouth, a villainous mouth, lets muzzle him.
How?
Thus.
Go you, and with a face well set do
In good sad colours; such as paint out
The cheek of that fool penitence, and with a tongue
Made clean and glib, Cull from their lazy swarm;
Some honest Friars, whom that damnation gold,
Can tempt to lay their souls to 'th stake;
Seek such, they are rank and thick.
What then, I know such, what's the use?
This is excellent.
Hire these to write books, preach and pro∣claim ab•…oat,
That your son Philip is a bastard.
How?
A bastard; do you; know a bastard? do it;
Say conscience spake with you, and cried out, do it
By this means shall you thrust him from all hopes
Of wearing Castles diadem, and that spur
Galling his sides, he will fly out, and fling,
And grind the Cardinals heart to a new edge
Of discontent, from discontent grows treason,
And on the stalk of treason death: he's dead
By this blow, and by you; yet no blood shed.
Do it then; by this trick, he gon!
We stand more sure in climbing high;
Care not who fall it is real policy:
Are you armed to do this? ho!
Sweet Moor it's done.
Away then, work with boldness, and with speed;
On greatest actions greatest dangers feed.
Ha, ha, I thank thee provident creation,
That seeing in moulding me thou did in∣tend,
I should prove villain, thanks to thee and nature
That skilful workman; thanks for my face,
Thanks that I have not wit to blush.
What Zarack? ho Baltazar.
my Lord.
Nearer, so silence;
Hang both your greedy ears upon my lips,
Let them devour my speech, suck in my breath;
And in who lets it break prison, here's his death,
This night the Cardinal shall be murd'red.
Where?
And to fill up a grave Philip dies:
Where?
Here.
By whom?
By thee; and slave by thee:
Have you hearts and hands to execute?
Here's both.
He dies were he my father.
Ho away?
Stay, go, go, stay, see me no more till night;
Your cheeks are black, let not your souls look white:
Till night.
Till night, a word, the Mo Qu.
Is trying if she can with fire of gold,
Warp the green consciences of two co∣vetous Friars,
To preach abroad Philip's bastardy.
His bastardy, who was his father?
Who?
Search for these friars, hire them to work with you;
Their holy callings will approve the fact.
Most good and meritorious; sin shines clear,
When her black face Religions masque doth wear.
YOur son a bastard; say we do,
But how then shall we deal with you?
I tell you as I said before;
His being a bastard, you are so poor
In honour and in name, that time
Can never take away the crime.
I grant that Friar, yet rather I'll endure
The wound of infamy, to kill my name,
Then to see Spain bleeding, with civil swords
The boy is proud, ambitious, he woo's great∣ness,
〈◊〉 takes up Spanish hearts on trust, to pay them
When he shall finger Castles Crown: Oh then
Were it not better my disgrace were known,
Then such a base aspirer fill the Throne.
Ha brother Crab, what think you?
As you dear brother Cole:
Then wee agree,
Coals Judgment is as Crabs you see.
Lady we swear to speak and write,
What you please so all go right.
Then as wee gave directions, spread abroad,
In Cales, Madrid, Granado, and Medyna;
And all the Royal Cities of the Realm:
The ambitious hopes of that proud bastard Philip,
And sometimes as you see occafion,
Tickle the ears of the Rude multitude,
With Eleazars praises; guild his virtues,
Naples recovery and his victories
Achieved against the Tutkish Ottoman:
Will you do this for us?
Say will you?
I.
Why start you back and stare? ha? are you afraid.
Oh? no Sir, no, but truth to tell;
Seeing your face, we thought of hell.
Hell is adream.
But none do dream in hell.
Friars stand to her; and me; and by your sin,
I'll shoulder out Mendoza from his seat;
And of two Friars create you Cardinals,
Oh! how would Cardinals hats on these heads sit.
This face would look most goodly under it:
Friar, Crab and Cole do swear,
In those circles still to appear:
In which she, or you, do charge us rise;
For you, our lives we'll sacrifice.
Valet, Gaudete;
Sipereamus flete;
Orate pro nobis,
Oramus pro vobis.
Cole will be burnt, and Crab be pressed;
Ere they prove knaves, thus areyoucrost and blessed.
Away; you know now Madam none shall throw
Their l•…aden envy in an opposite scale,
To weigh down our true golden happiness.
Yes, there is one.
One, who? give me his name and I will
Turn it to a magic spell,
To bind him here, here, who?
Your wife Maria.
Ho! my Maria.
She's the Hellespont divides my love and me,
She being cut off.
Stay, stay, cut off; let's think upon it, my wife?
Humh! Kill her too!
Do's her love make thee cold?
Had I a thousand wives, down go they all:
She dies, I'll cut her off: now Baltazar.
Madam, the King entreats your company.
His pleasure be obeyed, dear love farewell;
Remember your Maria.
Here a dieu;
With this I'll guard her, whilst it stabs at you.
My Lord! the Friars are won to join with us.
Be prosperous about it Baltazzar.
The watch word.
Oh! the word let it be treason;
When we cry treason, break op chamber doors:
Kill Phillip and the Cardinal; Hence
I fly.
Murder, now ride in triumph, darkness, horror;
Thus I invoke your aid, your Act begin;
Night is a glorious Robe, for th'ugliest fin.
PUt on my Lord, and fly or else you die.
I will not, I will die first; Cardinal,
Prithe good Cardinal pluck off, Eriers, slave,
Murder us two, he shall not by this sword.
My Lord, you will endanger both ou•… lives.
I care not; I'll kill some bfeore I die:
Away, s'heart take your rags; Moor, Devil, come.
My Lord put on, or else.
Gods foot come help:
Ambitious villain. Philip, let us fly
Into the chamber of the Mother Queen.
Thunder, beat down the lodgings.
Else let's break into the chamber of the King:
Agreed,
A pox upon those Iowzy gabardines,
Agreed, I am for you Moor; stand side by side,
Come, hands off, leave your ducking, hell cannot fright,
Their spirits that do desperately fight.
You are too rash, you are too hot,
Wild desperateness doth valour blot;
The lodging of the Kings beset,
With staring faces black as Jet,
And hearts of Iron, your deaths are vowed
If you fly that way, therefore shrow'd,
Your body in Friar Coals gray weed,
For is it not madness man to bleed:
When you may scope untouched away,
Here's hell, here's heaven, here if you stay
You're gon, you're gon, Friar Crab and I,
Will here dance friskin whilst you fly:
Gag us, bind u•…, come put on
The Gags too wide, so gon, gon, gon.
Oh! well, I'll come again, Lord Cardinal
Take you your Castle, I'll to Portugal:
I vow I'll come again, and if I do:
Nay good my Lord!
Black Devil I'll conjure you.
GUard all the pa•…ages, Zarack stand there,
There Baltazar, there you, the Friars,
Where have you placed the Friars?
My Lord a noise.
The Friars are gagged and bound.
It is Phil. and the Cardinal, shoot; ho stay!
Unbind them; whore's Mendoza, and the Prince.
Sancta Maria who can tell:
By Peters keys they bound us well,
And having cracked our shaven crowns,
They have escaped you in our gowns.
Escaped; escaped away? I am glad, it's good,
I would their arms may turn to Eagles wings,
To fly us swift, as time sweet air give way,
Winds leave your two and thirty palaces,
And meeting all in one, join all your might,
To give them speedy and a prosperousflight,
Escaped Friars, which way?
This way.
Good: Alas; what sin is it to shed innocent blood;
For look you holy men, it is the King;
The King, the King, see Friars sulphury wrath
Having once entered into Royal breasts:
Mark how it burns, the Qu. Philip's mother;
Oh! most unnatural, will have you two
Divulge abroad that hoe's a bastard. Oh!
Will you do it.
What says my brother F•…er?
A Princes love is balm, their wrath a fire:
It is true, but yer I'll publish no such thing;
What fool would lose his soul, to please a King?
Keep there, good there, yet for it wounds my soul,
To see the miserablest wretch to bleed.
I counsel you (in care unto your lives)
To obey the mother Queen, for by my life
I think she has been pricked, her consci∣ence
Oh! it has stung her, for some fact mis∣don,
She would not else disgrace her self and son
Do it therefore, hark, she'll work your deaths else, hate
Bred in a woman is insatiate.
Do it Friars.
Brother Cole? Zeal sets me in a flame,
I'll do it.
And I,
His baseness we'll proclaim
Do, and be damned; Zarack and Baltazar.
Dog them at the hee'ls, and when their poi∣sonous breath
Hath scattered this infection, on the hearts
Of credulous Spaniards, here reward them thus,
Slaves too much trusted do grow danger∣os;
Why this shall feed,
And fat suspicion, and my policy
I'll ring through all the Court, this loud alarm:
That they contrived the murder of the King,
The Qu. and me; and being undermined,
To scapethe blowing up, they fled. Oh good!
There, there, thou there, cry treason; each one take
A several door, your cries my music make.
Whore's the King? treason pursues him:
Whore's the sleepy Qu. Rise, rise, and arm, against the hand of treason.
Whence comes this sound of treason?
Who frights our quiet slumbers,
With this heavy noise:
Was it a dream? or did the sound
Of monster treason call me from my rest.
Who raised this rumour Eels. you?
I did my Liege, and still con∣tinue it,
Both for your safety, and mine own discharge.
Whence coms the ground then?
from the Cardinal,
And the young Prince, who bearing in his mind
The true Idea of his late disgrace,
In putting him from the Protectorship,
And envying the advancment of the Moor
Determined this night to murder you;
And for your Highness lodged within my Castle,
They would have laid the murder on my head.
The Cardinal, and my Brother bring them forth
Their lives shall answer this ambitious practice.
Alas my Lord it is impossible,
For when they saw I had discovered them
They trained two harmless Friars to their lodgings;
Disrobed them, gagged them, bound'em 〈◊〉 two posts,
And in their habits did escape the Castle.
That Cardinal, is all ambition,
And from him doth our Brother gather heart.
The ambition of the one in∣fects the other,
And in a word they both are dangerous;
But might your mothers counsel stand force,
I would advise you send the trusty M•…
To fetch them back, before they had seduce•…
The squint eyed mule•…tude from true alle∣giance,
And drawn them to their dangerous faction.
It shall be so, therefore my States best prop,
Within whose bosom I durst trust my life,
Both for my safety and thine own discharge.
Fetch back those traitors, and till your re∣turn
Our self will keep your Castle.
My Liege; the tongue of true obe∣audience
Most not gainsay his Sovereigns impose,
By heaven; I will not kiss the cheek of sleep,
Till I have fetched those traitors to the Court.
Why; this sorts right, he gon; his beauteous wife
Shall sail into the naked arms of love.
Why, this is as it should bee, he once gon,
His wife that keeps me from his marriage bed,
Shall by this hand of mine be muthered.
This storm is well nigh past the swelling clouds,
That hang so full of treason by the wind,
In awful Majesty are scatt'red.
Then each man to his rest; good night sweet friend,
Whilst thou persu'st the traitors that are fled,
Fernando means to warm thy marriage•… bed.
Many good nights, consume and dam your souls.
I know he means to Cuckold me thy•… night;
Yet do I know no means to hinder it.
Besides, who know, whether the lustful King
Having my wife and Castle at command,
Will ever make surrender back again:
But if he do not, with my falchions point
I'll lance those swelling veins in which ho•… lust
Does keep his Revels, and with that warm blood
Where Venus's bastard cooled his sweltrin•… spleen,
Wash the disgrace from Eleazars brows.
DEar Eleazar;
If they lock the gates
I'll toss a ball of wild-fire o'er the walls.
Husband, sweet husband:
Or else swim o'er the moat,
And make a breach through the •…inti sides
Of the rebellious walls:
Hear me, dear heart.
Or undermine the chamber where they lie,
And by the violent strength of gunpowder,
Blow up the Castle, and the ince•…tious couch,
In which lust wallows; but my labouring thoughts,
Wading too deep in bottomless extremes;
Do drown themselves in their own strata∣gems.
Sweet husband! dwell not upon circumstance,
When weeping sorrow like an Advocate
Importunes you for aid; look in mine eyes
There you shall see dim grief swimming in tears,
Invocating succour. Oh succour!
Succour. Zounds for what?
To shield me from Fernando's un∣chaste love,
Who with incessant prayers importuned me.
To lie with you I know it.
Then seek some means how to prevent it.
It is possible; for to the end that his unbridled lust
Might have more free access unto thy bed,
This night he hath enjoined me
To fetch back Philip and the Cardinal.
Then this ensuing night shall give an end
To all my sorrows, for before foul lust
Shall soil the fair complexion of mine ho∣nor,
This hand shall rob Maria of her life.
Not so dear soul, for in extra∣mities
Choose out the least, and ere the hand of death
Should suck this Ivory palace of thy life:
Embrace my counsel, and receive this poison
Which in the instant he attempts thy love,
Then give it him: do, do,
Do p•…on him, he gon, you're next;
Be sound in resolution; and farewell;
By one, and one, I'll ship you all to hell.
Spain I will drown thee with thine own proud blood,
Then make an ark of carcasses farewell.
Revenge and I will sail in blood to hell.
Poison the King, Alas my trem∣bling hand
Would let the poison fall, and through my cheeks
Fear suited in a bloodless livery,
Would make the world acquainted with my guilt,
But thanks prevention, I have found a means
Both to preserve my Royal Sovereigns life,
And keep my self a true and Loyal wife.
FAir eldest child of love, thou spotless night,
Empress of silence, and the Queen of •…leep;
Who with thy black cheeks pure comple∣xion,
Make lovers eyes enamoured of thy beau∣tie:
Thou art like my Moor, therefore will I a∣door thee,
For lending me this opportunity,
Oh with the soft skinned Negro! heavens keep back
The saucy staring day from the worlds eye,
Until my Eleazar make return;
Then in his Castle shall he find his wife,
Transformed into a strumpet by my son;
Then shall he hate her whom he would not kill?
Then shall I kill her whom I cannot love?
The King is sporting with his Concubine.
Blush not my boy, be bold like me thy mo∣there,
But their delights torture my soul like De∣vills,
Except her shame be seen: Wherefore awake
Christophero, Verdugo, raise the Court,
Arise you Peers of Spain, Alvaro rise,
Preserve your country from base infamies.
Who raised these exclamations through the Cour•…?
Sheath up your Swords, you need not swords, but eyes
To intercept this treason.
What's the treason?
Who are traitors? ring the larum bell;
Cry arm through all the City; once before
The horrid sound of treason did affright
Our sleeping spirits.
Stay, you need not cry arm
Arm, for this black deed
Works treason to your King, to me; to you,
To Spain, and all that shall in Spain ensue.
This night Maria (Eleazars wife)
Hath drawn the King by her Lascivious looks
Privately to a banquet, I unseen
Stood and beheld him in him in her lustful arms.
Oh God! shall bastards wear Spains Dia∣them?
If you can kneel to baseness, vex them not;
If you disdain to kneel, wash of this blot.
Lets break into the chamber and surprise her?
Oh miserable me! do, do, break in,
My Country shall not blush at my child's sin.
Delay is nurse to danger, follow me,
Come you and wi•…ness to her villainy.
Haplesse Alvero, how art thou undone,
In a light daughter, and a stubborn son.
OH! kill me ere you stain my chastity.
My hand holds death, but love sits in mine eye,
Exclaim not dear Maria, do but hear me;
Though thus in dead of night as I do now
The lustful Tarquin stole to the chaste bed
Of Collatines fair wife, yet shalt thou be
No Lucrece, nor thy King a Roman slave,
To make rude villainy thine honours grave.
Why from my bed have you thus frighted me?
To let the view a bloody horrid Tragedy.
Begin it then, I'll glaldly loose my life,
Rather then be an Emperors Concubine.
By my high birth I swear thou shalt be none,
The Tragedy I'll write with my own hand,
A King shall act it, and a King shall dye;
Except we•… mercies beam shine from thine eye.
If this a•…ight thee it shall sleep for ever,
If still thou hate me, thus this Noble blade,
This Royal purple temple shall invade.
My husband is from hence, for his sake spare me.
Thy husband is no Spaniard, thou art one,
So is Fernando, then for countries sake
Let me not spare thee, on thy husbands face
Eternal night in gloomy shades doth dwell;
But I'll look on thee like the gilded Sun,
When to the west his fiery horses run.
True, true, you look on me with Sun set eyes,
For by beholding you my glory dies.
Call me thy morning then, for like the morn,
In pride Mar•…a shall through Spain be born.
This 〈◊〉 I prepared thine ears,
Love me and thou shalt hear no other sounds,
Lo here's a banquet set with mine own hands;
Love me, and thou shalt feast thee like a Queen:
I might command thee being thy Sove∣reign;
But love me and I'll kneel and sue to thee,
And circle this white forehead with the Crown
Of Castle, Portugal, and Arragon,
And all those petty Kingdoms which do bow
Their tributary knees to Philip's heir.
I cannot love you whilst my hus∣band lives:
I'll send him to the wars, and in the front
Of some maine army shall he nobly dye.
I cannot love you if you murder him.
For thy sake then, I'll call a Par∣lament
And banish by a law all Moors from Spain.
I'll wander with him into ba∣nishment.
It shall be death for any Negroes hand,
To touch the beauty of a Spanish dame.
Come, come, what needs such cavils with a King?
Night blinds all Jealous eyes, and we may play,
Carouse that •…le to me, I'll pledge all this,
Being down, we will make it more sweet with a kiss.
Begin, I'll lock all doors, begin Spains Queen,
Loves banquet is most sweet, when it is least seen.
Oh thou conserver of my honours life!
Instead of poisoning him, drown him in sleep,
Because I'll quench the flames of wild de∣sire,
I'll drink this off, let fire conquer loves fire.
Were love himself in real sub∣stance here,
Thus would I drink him down, let your sweet strings,
Speak louder (pleasure is but a slave to Kings)
In which love swim. Maria kiss thy King,
Circle me in this ring of Ivory.
Oh! I grow dull, and the cold hand of sleep
Hath thrust his Icy fingers in my breast,
And made a frost within me; sweet, one kiss
To thaw this deadness that congeals my soul.
Your Majesty hath overwatched your self,
He sleeps already, not the sleep of death;
But a sweet slumber, which the powerful drug
Instilled through all his spirits. Oh! bright day
Bring home my dear Lord, ere his King awake,
Else of his unstained bed he'll shipwreck make.
Oh me! what shapes are these?
Stay, stay, Maria.
My Sovereign Lord awake, save poor Maria.
He cannot save thee, save that pain,
Before he wake thou shalt be slain;
His mothers hand shall stop thy breath,
Thinking her own son is done to death:
And she that takes away thy life,
Does it to be thy husbands wife.
Adieu Maria, we must hence,
Embrace thine end with patience;
Elves and Fairies make no stand,
Till you come in Fairy Land.
Fairies or Devils, whatsoever you be,
Thus will I hide me from your company.
LAy hold upon the strumpet, whore's the King?
Fernando, son; ah me your King is dead!
Lay hand upon the murdresse.
Imperious Queen, I am as free from murder as thy self,
Which I will prove, if you will here me speak:
The King is living.
If he lived his breath would beat within his breast.
The life he leads, Maria thou shalt soon participate.
Oh father save me!
thou•…rt no child of mine, had thou been owner of Alvero's spirit.
Thy heart would not have enterain'd a thought
That had conversed with murder: yet mine eyes
(However my tongue want words) brim full with tears,
Entreat her further trial•….
To what end: here lies her trial: from this royal breast
Hath she stolen all comfort, all the life
Of every bosom in the Realm of Spain.
She's both a traitor and murdrefs.
I'll have her forthwith strange∣led.
Hear her speak.
To heaven let her complain if she have wrong,
I murder but the murdresse of my son.
We murder the murdreffe of our King.
Ah me my child oh! Oh cease your torturing!
Heaven op the window•…, that my spotless soul,
Riding upon the wings of innocence,
May enter •…aradice, Fairies farewell;
Fernandoes death in mine you did •…retell.
Who calls Fernando? love, Maria, speak:
Oh! whither art thou fled? whence flow these waters
That fall like winter storms, from the drowned eyes.
From my Maria's death!
My Maria dead?
Damned be the soul to hell that stopped her breath;
Maria, Oh me who durst murder her?
I thought my dear Fernando had been dead,
And in my indignation murdered her.
I was not dead until you murdered me
By killing fair Maria.
Gentle son.
Ungentle mother, you a deed have done,
Of so much ruth that no succeeding age
Can ever clear you of; Oh my dear love,
Yet heavens can witness thou were never mine:
Spains wonder was Maria.
Sweet have done:
Have done! for what, for shedding zealous tears
Over the tomb of virtues chastity;
You cry have done, now I am doing good,
But cried do on, when you were shedding blood:
Have you done mother; yes, yes, you have done,
That which will undo your unhappy son.
These words become you not my gracious Lord.
These words become not me, no more it did
Become you Lords to be mute standers by,
When lustful fury ravished chastity.
It ill becomes me to lament her death,
But it became you well to stop her breath:
Had she been fair and not so virtuous,
This deed had not been half so impious.
But she was fair in virtue, virtuous fair, oh me!
Oh me! she was true honours heir.
Hence beldam from my presence, all fly hence,
You are all murderers, com poor innocence,
Clasp thy cold hand in mine, for here I'll lye,
And since I lived for her, for her I'll die.
BAr up my Castle Gates; fire and confusion
Shall girt these Spanish Currs; was I for this,
Sent to raise power against a fugitive:
To have my wife deflowered. Zounds whore's my wife,
My slaves cry out, she's dallying with the King?
Stand by, where is your King? Eleazars bed shall
Scorn to be an Emperors brothelrie.
Be patient Eleazar, here's the King,
Patience and I am foes, whore's my Maria?
Here is her haplesse coarse that was Maria.
Here lies Maria's body, here her grave,
Her dead heart in my breast a tomb shall have.
Now by the proud complexion of my cheeks,
Tan'e from the kisses of the amorous sun;
Were he ten thousand Kings that slew my love,
Thus should my hand (plumed with revenges wings)
Requite mine own dishonour, and her death.
Ah me! my son.
The King is murdered, lay hold on the damned traitor.
In his breast that dares but dart 〈◊〉 finger at the Moor,
I'll bury this Sharp steel yet reeking warm,
With the unchaste blood of that lecher King,
That threw my wife in an untimely grave.
She was my daughter and her time∣less grave
Did swallow down my joys as deep as yours:
But thus.
But what? bear injuries that can,
I'll wear no forked crest.
Damn this black fiend, cry trea∣son through the Court.
The King is murdered.
He that first ops his lips, I'll drive his words
Down his wide throat upon my rapiers point.
The King is murdered and I'll answer it;
I am dishonoured, and I will revenge it.
Bend not your dangerous weapons at my breast:
Think where you are, this Castle is the Moors,
You are environed with a wall of flint.
The Gates are locked, Purculle•…es let down
If Eels. spend one drop of blood,
On those high turret tops my slaves stand armed,
And shall con found your souls with mur∣dring shot.
Or if you murder me, yet under ground
A villain that for me will dig to hell,
Stands with a burning limstock in his fist,
Who firing gunpowder up in the air,
Shall fling your torn and mangled carcasses.
Oh! sheath your weapons, though my son be slain,
Yet save your selves, choose a new Sovereign.
Prince Philip is our Sovereign, choose him King.
Prince Philip shall not be my So∣veraign,
Philip's a bastard, and Fernando's dead;
Mendoza sweats to wear Spains Diadem,
Philip hath sworn confusion to this Realm,
They both are up in arms, wars flames do shine
Like lightningin their, wherefore my Lords
Look well on Eleazar; value me not by my sun-burnt
Cheek, but by my birth; nor by
My birth, but by my loss of blood,
Which I have sacrificed in Spains defence.
Then look on Philip, and the Cardinal:
Look on those gaping currs, whose wide throats
Stand stretched wide open like the gates of death,
To swallow you, your country, children, wives.
Philip cries fire and blood, the Cardinal
Cries likewise fire and blood, I'll quench those flames,
The Moor cries blood and fire, and that shall burn
Till Castle like proud Troy to Cinders turn.
Lay by these Ambages, what seeks the Moor?
A Kingdom, Castles crown.
Peace devil for shame.
Peace doting Lord for shame, Oh misery!
When Indian slaves thirst after Empery;
Princes and Peers of Spain wee are beset,
With horror on each side; you deny him,
Death stands at all our backs, we cannot fly him.
Crown Philip King, The Crown upon his head,
Will prove a fiery Meteor, War and ven∣geance
And desolation will invade our land,
Besides Prince Philip is a bastard born.
Oh! give me leave to blush at mine own shame;
But I for love to you, love to fair Spain,
Choose rather to rip up a Queens disgrace,
Then by concealing it to set the Crown
Upon a bastards head. Wherefore my Lords
By my consent crown that proud Black∣more,
Since Spains bright glory must so soon grow dim;
Since it must end, let it end all in him.
Eleazar shall be King.
Oh treachery! have you so soon ra•… out Fernando's love;
So soon forgot the duty of true Peers;
So soon, so soon buried a mothers name,
That you will crown him King that slew your King.
Will you hear him or me, who shall be King.
Eleazar shall be Castles Sovereign.
Do, do; make hast to crown him! Lords 〈◊〉.
Here hell must be when the Devil governs you.
By heavens great Star, which In∣deans do adore,
But that I hate to hear the giddy world;
Shame that I waded to a Crown through; blood,
I'd not digest his pills, but since my Lords
You have chosen Eleazar for your King?
Invest me with a general applause.
Live Eleazar, Castles Royal King.
A villain and a base born few∣gitive.
A bloody tyrant, an 〈◊〉 slave.
Thanks to you all, it is not the Spanish Crown
That Eleazar strives for, but Spains peace.
Amongst you I'll divide her Empery;
Christofero shall wear Granado's Crown;
To Roderigo I'll give Arragon:
Naples, Never and fair Jerusalem,
I'll give to other three, and then our vice Royce,
Shall Shine about our bright Castilian crown,
As stars about the Sun. Cry all, arm, arm;
Prince Philip and the Cardinal do ride
Like Jove in thunder, in a storm we will meet them;
Go levy powers, if any man must fall,
My death shall first begin the funeral.
IS thy cock ready, and thy pow∣der dry.
My cock stands perching, like a cock of the game;
With a red cole for his crest instead of a colme;
And for my powder, it is but touch &amp; take.
I have tickling gear too, anon I'll cry here I have it,
And yonder I see it; But Zarack is it poli∣cie for us
To kill these bald-pates.
Is it policy for us to save our selves,
If they live, we die. Is it not wisdom then
To send them to heaven, rather then be sent our selves;
Come you black slave, be resolute. This way they come,
Here they will stand, and yonder will I stand.
And in yonder hole I.
Our amiable faces cannot be seen, if we keep close:
Therefore hide your cocks head, left his burning cocks-comb betray us.
But soft, which of the two shall be thy white.
That black villain Friar Cole.
I shall have a sharp piece of service.
Friar Crab shall be my man.
Farewell and be resolut•….
Zounds Zarack I shall never have the heart to do it.
You rogue think who commands, Eleazar.
Who shall rise Baltazar?
Who shall die, a lousy Friar?
Who shall live our good Lord and Master?
The Negro King of Spain.
Cole, thou art but a dead man,
And shall turn to ashes.
Crab, here's that shall make vi∣negar of thy carcass.
I brother it is best, so now we have drawn them to a head,
We will begin here in the market place.
Tut so long as we be commanded by the Mother Queen.
We will say her son is a bastard, and he were ten Philips.
Take you one market form, I'll take another.
No, Gods so; we must both keep one form.
I in oration, but not in station mount, mount?
Well my masters, you know him not so well as I; on my word
Friar Crab is a sour fellow:
Yet he may utter sweet doctrine by your leave; but what
Think you of Friar Cole?
He all fire, and he be kindled once a hot Catholic.
And you mark him, he has a zealous nose,
And richly inflamed.
Peace you Rogues, now they begin.
Incipe Fritter?
Non ego 〈◊〉.
Nec ego.
Quare?
Queen?
Quaeso,
Here's a •…ueaxy beginning me thinks; silence, silence.
B•…throne, Citizens, and market∣folks of Sivell.
Well beloved and honoured Castili∣ans.
It is not unknown to you!
I am sure you are not ignorant.
How vi•…anous and strong?
How monstrous and huge?
The faction of Prince Philip is;
Philip that is a bastard:
Philip that is a d•…art.
Philip that ki•…'d your King.
Only to make himself King.
And by Gads ble•…ed Lady you are all damned, and you suffer it.
Friar Cole says true, he speaks out of the heat of his zeal;
Look how he glows.
Well Friar Crab for my money, he has set my teeth an edge
Against this bastard.
Oh! his words are like Verges, to when•… a mans stomach.
Silence, silence.
Now contrariwise.
Your Noble King the Moor.
Is a valiant Gentleman.
A Noble Gentleman.
An honourable Gentleman.
A fair black Gentleman.
A friend to Castilians.
A Champion for Castilians.
A man fit to be King.
If he were not born down by hi•… that would be King,
Who (as I said before) is a bastard, and n•… King.
What think you my masters? do you mark his words well.
Further compare them together.
S'blood, there's no comparison between them.
Nay, but hear us good Country men.
Hear Friar Cole, hear Friar Cole.
Set that bastard and Eleazar toge∣there:
How? mean you, by the ears.
No, but compare them.
Do but compare them.
Zounds, we say again comparisons are odious.
But say on, say on.
Treason, treason, every man shift for himself.
This is Philips treason. Arm, Arm, Arm.
ZArack and Baltazar, are they dispatched?
We saw'em sprawl, and turn up the white of the eye.
So shall they perish, that lay coun∣termines;
To arose our high designments: by their habi•…,
The Cardinal and Philip escaped our nets.
And by your hands they tasted our revenge.
Here come the Queen, away! under our wings,
You shall stand safe, and brave the proudest Kings.
Oh! fly my Eleazar, save thy lite.
Else point a guard about thee, the mad people
Tempestuous like the Sea run up and down
Some ca•…ing kill the bastard, some the M•…;
Some cry, God save King Philip; and some cry,
God save the Moor; some others, he shall die.
Are these your fears, thus blow them into air.
I rue•…he amongst the thickest of their crowds,
And with a countenance Majestic,
Like the Imperious Sun dispersed their clouds;
I have persum'd the rackness of their breath,
And by the magic of true eloquence,
Transformed this many headed Cerberus,
This pied Chameleon, this beast multitude,
Whose power consists in number, pride in threats;
Yet melt like•…now when Majesty shines forth
This heap of fools, who crowding in huge, swarms,
Stood at our Court gates like a heap ofdung,
Reeking and shouting out contagious breath
of power to poison all the elements;
This Wolf I held by 'th ear•…, and made him tame,
And made him tremble at the Moors great name.
No, we must combat with a grimmer foe,
That damned Mendoza over-turns our hopes.
He loves you dearly.
By his secret Letters he hath in∣treated
me in some disguise to leave the Court, and fly into his arms.
The world cannot devise a stra∣tagem
Sooner to throw confusion on his pride:
Subscribe to his desires, and in dead night
Steal to his Castle, swear to him his love
Hath drawn you thither; undermine his soul,
And learn what villainies are there laid up,
Then for your pleasure walk to take the air:
Near to the Castle I'll in ambush lie,
And seem by force to take you prisoner;
This done, I have a practice plotted here,
Shall rid him of his life, and us of fear:
About it madam, this is all in all;
We cannot stand unless Mendoza fall.
POor Spain, how is the body of thy peace
Mangled and torn by an ambitious Moor!
How is thy Prince and Counsellors abused,
And trodden under the base foot of scorn:
Wronged Lords, Emanuel of Portugal par∣takes
A falling share in all your miseries:
And though the tardy-hand of slow delay
With-held us from preventing your mishaps;
Yet shall revenge dart black confusion
Into the bosom of that damned fiend.
But is it possible our Mother Queen
Should countenance his ambition.
Her advice is as a Steers-man to di∣rect his course.
Besides, as we by circumstance have learnt,
She means to marry him.
Then here upon my knees
I pluck allegiance from her; all that love
Which by innative duty I did owe her,
Shall henceforth be converted into hate.
This will confirm the worlds opinion
That I am base born, and the damned Moor
Had interest in my birth, this wrong alone
Gives new fire to the cinders of my rage:
I may be well transformed from what I am,
When a black devil is husband to my dam.
Prince, let thy rage give way to patience,
And ••t a velvet brow upon the face
Of wrinkled anger, our keen swords,
Must right these wrongs, and not light airy words.
Yet words may make the edge of rage more sharp,
And whet a blunted courage with revenge.
Here's none wants whetting, for our keen resolves
Are steeled unto the back with double wrongs;
Wrongs that would make a handles man take arms;
Wrongs that would makea coward resolute.
Why then join all our several wrongs in one,
And from these wrongs assume a firm resolve,
To send this devil to damnation.
I hear the sound of his approaching march,
Stand fair; Saint Jaques for the right of Spain.
Bastard of Spain?
Thou true stamped son of hell,
Thy pedigree is written in thy face.
MOve forward, with your main battalion,
Or else all is lost.
I will not move a foot.
S'•…oared, will you lose the day.
You lose your wits,
You're mad, it is no policy.
You lye.
Lye?
Lye, a pox upon it Cardinal com on,
Second the desperate vanguard which is mine,
And where I'll dye or win, follow my sword
The bloody way I lead it, or by heaven
I'll play the Devil, and mar all, we will turn our backs
Upon thee Moors, and set on thee; I thee,
Thee Cardinal, s'heart thee.
Your desperate arm
H•…h almost thrust quite through the heart of hope;
Our fortunes lye a bleeding by your rash and violent
On set.
Oh! oh! s'life, s'foot, will you fight?
We will not hazard all upon one cast.
You will not?
No.
Coward.
By deeds I'll try,
Whether your venomous tongue says true, fare well.
Courage shines both in this, and policy.
To save thy skin whole, that's thy policy;
You whoreson fat-chopt guts. I'll melt away
That Iarded body by the heat of fight,
Which I'll compel thee to, or else by flying;
To work which I'll give way to the proud foe,
Whilst I stand laughing to behold thee run.
Cardinal I'll do it, I'll do it, a Moor, a Moor,
Philip cries a Moor, holla! ha! whoo!
Prince, Philip, Philip,
Here, plague whore's the Moor.
The Moor's a Devil, never did horrid fiend
Compelled by some Magicians mighty charm,
Break through the prisons of the solid earth,
With more strange horror, then this Prince of hell,
This damned Negro Lyon-like doth rush,
Through all, and •…pit of all knit oppose∣tion.
Puh! puh! where? Where? I'll meet him, where? you mad me.
It is not his arm,
That acts such wonders, but our cowardice,
This Cardinal, oh! this Cardinal is a slave.
Sound a retreat, or else the day is lost;
•…le b•…at that dog to death, that sounds; retr•…at.
Philip.
I'll tear his heart out, that dares name but Sound.
Sound a retreat.
Who's that? you tempt my sword Sir.
Continue this alarm, fight pell mell?
Fight, kill, be damned? this fat-back Cow∣art Cardinal,
Lies heavy on my shoulders; this, I this
Shall fling him off: Sound a retreat! Zounds, you mad me.
Ambition plumes the Moor, whilst black despair
Offering to tear from him the Diadem
Which he 〈◊〉, make, him to cry at all,
And to act deeds beyond •…stonishment;
But Philip is the night that darks his glories,
This swords yet reeking with his Negro's blood,
Being grasp't by equity, and this strong arm
Shall th•…ugh and through.
A•…ay then.
From before me;
Stay, st•…d, stand fast, 〈◊〉? A Moor, a M•…r.
OH for more work, more souls to post to hell;
That I might pile up Charons boat so full,
Until it topple o'er, Oh it would be sport
To see them sprawl through the black slimy lake.
Ha, ha; there's one going thither, sirrah, you,
You slave, who killed thee? how he grins! this breast,
Had it been tempered, and made proof like mine,
It never would have been a mark for fools
To hit afar off with their dastard bullets.
But thou did well, thou knew I was t•…y Lord;
And out of love and duty to me here,
Where I fell weary, thou laidst down thy self
To bear me up, thus: God a-mercy slave.
A King for this shall give thee a rich grave.
I'll wear thee to the pommel, but I'll find
The subject of mine honour and revenge.
Moor it is for thee I seek; Come now, now take me
At good advantage: speak, where art thou?
Here.
Fate and revenge I thank you rise.
Leave and live.
Villain, it is Philippe that bids rise.
It had been good for thee to have hid thy name.
Forth discovery, like to a dangerous charm,
Hurts him that finds it, wherefore do's those blood hounds
Thy rage and valour chase me?
Why to kill thee.
With that! what a blunt axe? think thou I'll let
Thy fur•… take a full blow at this head,
Having these arms, be wise; go change thy weapon.
Oh, Sir!
I'll stay thy coming.
Thou't be damned first.
By all our Indian gods.
Puh, never swear;
Thou know it is for a kingdom which we fight;
And for that who'l not venture to hell∣gates.
Come Moor, I am armed with more then complete steel,
The justice of my quarrel: when I look
Upon my Fathers wrongs, my brothers wounds,
My mothers infamy, Spains misery,
And lay my finger her, Oh! it is too dull,
To let out blood enough to quench them all.
But when I see your face, and know what fears.
Hang on thy troubled soul, like leaden weights,
To make it sink; I know this fingers touch
Has strenght to throw thee down, I know this iron
Is sharp and long enough to reach that head•
Fly not di••, if thou do?
How fly; Oh bast!
Come then
Stay Philip, whosoe're begat thee.
Why slave, a King begat me.
May be so.
But I'll be sworn thy mother was a Queen;
For her sake will I kill thee nobly:
Fling me thy •…word, there's mine, I scorn to strike
A man disarmed.
For this dishonoring me
•…e give thee one stab more.
I'll run away,
Unle•…e thou change that weapon, o•… take mine.
Neither.
Farewell.
•…'heart, stay, and if you dare,
Do as I do, oppose thy naked breast
Against this poniard; see, here's this for thine.
I am for thee Philip.
Come, nay take more ground,
That with a full career thou my•… strike•… home.
Thou't run away then.
Ho!
Thou't run away then.
Faith, I will, but first on this I'll bear
Thy panting heart, thy head upon thy spear.
Come.
Side upon the Moors.
Side upon the Cardinal.
Hold Cardinal, strike not any of our side,
Hold Moors, strike not any of our side,
wee two will close this battle•…
Come, agreed.
Stand armies and give aim, whilst wee two bleed.
With poniards; it is too desperate, dear Philip.
Away, have at the Moor, s'heart let me come?
Be armed with manly weapons, it is for slaves,
To dig their own and such unworthy graves.
I am for thee any way, thus, or see thus,
Here try the vigour of thy finewy arm,
The day is ours already, brainless heads
And bleeding bodies like a crown do stand,
About the temples of our victory.
Yet Spaniards if you dare we will fight it out,
Thus man to man alone, I'll first begin,
And conquer, or in blood wadeup to the chin.
Let not a weapon sty•…, but his and mine.
Nor on this side, conquest in blood shall shine.
Where is my Lord?
Where is our Sovereign?
What news brings Zarack and Christofero?
Oh fly my Lord! fly; for the day is lost.
There are three hundred and odd days in a year,
And cannot we lose one of them, com fight.
The Lords have left us, and the soldiers faint,
You are round beset with proud fierce en∣mies;
D•…h cannot be prevented but by flight?
He shall Christofer•… I have yet left,
〈◊〉, atagem that in de•…pit of fate,
Sh•… the wh•…el of warabout once more,
The Mother Queen ha•…h all this while 〈◊〉 sadly,
Within our tent, exp cting to whose bosom,
White winged peace and victory will fly,
Her have I used as a fit property,
To stop this dangerous current; her have I sent,
Armed with loves magic to enchant the Cardinal;
And bind revenge down with 〈◊〉 charms.
By this time does she hang about his neck,
And by the witchcraft of a cunning kiss;
Has she di•…armed him, hark, they sound
She has prevailed, a women's tongue and eye;
Are weapons stronger then Artillery.
BY all those sighs which thou (like passionate tunes)
Hast often to my dull ears offered,
By all thy hopes to enjoy my royal Bed;
By all those mourning lines which thou hast sent,
Weeping in black to tell thy languishment:
By loves best richest •rea•ur, which I swear,
I will bestow, and which none else shall wear,
As the most prised Jewel, but thy self,
By that bright fire which flaming through thine eyes;
From thy love scorched bosom does arise.
I do conjure thee, let no churlish sound,
With wars le•d horror mydesires confound;
Dear, dear Mendoza, thus I do entreat,
That still thou would con inue this retreat;
I'll hang upon thee till I hear thee say,
Woman prevail; or chiding, cri'st away.
Is there no trick in this, forged by the M•…r?
I would the Moors damnation were the ransom,
Of all that innocent blood, that has been shed
In this black day; I care not for the Moor,
Love to my kingdom•… peace makes me put on
This habit of a suppliant; shall I speed?
You shall, were i•… to have my by∣some bleed:
I have no power to spare the Negroes head,
When I behold the wounds which his black hand
Has given mine honour: but when I look on you,
I have no power to hate him, since your breath
Dissolves my frozen heart, being spent for him;
In you my life must drown it self or swim,
You have prevailed: Drum swiftly hence? cal•… back
Our fierce pursuing troops, that run to catch
The laurel wreath of conquest: Let it stand
A while untouched by any soldiers hand.
Away? stay you and guard us, whore's the Moor?
I'll Iose what I have got, a victors prize,
Yielding my self a prisoner to your eyes.
Mine eyes shall quickly grant you liberty,
The Moor stays my return, I'll put on wings,
And fetch him, to make peace belongs to Kings.
Soldiers call back the drum, wee are betrayed.
Moors stand upon your guard, a∣void, look back.
What means this jealousy? Men∣doza, Moor,
Lay by your weapons, and embrace the fight,
Of this, and this; begets suspicion,
Eleazar by my birth, he coms in peace,
Mendoza by mine honour so coms he.
Discharge these soldiers then.
And these.
Away.
Go.
Soul, rejoice to see this glorious day.
Your virtues work this wonder: I have met,
At her most dear command, whats your desires?
Peace and your honoured arms: how loathingly
I sounded the alarms, witness heaven
It was not to strike your breast, bu•… to let out,
The rank blood of ambition: That Philip
Kakes you his ladder, and being climbed so high
As he may reach a diadem, there you lie.
He's base begotten, that's his mothers sin.
God pardon it.
I, amen, but he's a bastard,
And rather then I'll kneel to him, I'll saw
My legs off by the thighs, because I'll stand
In spite of reverence: he's a bastard, he's,
And to beat down his usurpation,
I have th•…n about this thunder, but Men∣doza,
The people hate him for his birth,
He only leans on you, you are his pillar;
You 〈◊〉, he walks on crutches, or else falls;
Then shrink from under him, are not they
Fools, that bearing others up themselves seem low,
Because they above sit high, why you do so.
It is true.
Behold this error with fixed eyes.
It is true, well.
Oh! have you found it, have you smelt
The train of powder that must blow you up,
Up into air, what air? why this, a breath,
Look you, in this time may a King meet death;
An eye to it, check it, check it.
How?
How! thus:
Steal from the heat of that incestuousblood,
Where ravished honour, and Philippo lies;
Leave him, divide this huge and monstrous body
Of armed Spaniards into limbs thus big;
Part man from man, send every soldier home,
I'll do the like; Peace with an Olive branch
Shall fly with Dove-like wings about all Spain:
The crown which I as a good husband keep,
I will lay down upon the empty chair;
Marry you the Queen and fill it, for my part
These knees are yours, Sir.
Is this sound?
From my heart.
If you prove false.
If I do, let fire fall—
Amen.
Upon thy head, and so it shall.
All of my self is yours; soldiers be gone.
And that way you.
The rest I will divide:
The Lords shall be convented.
Good.
Let's meet.
Where.
Here anon, this is thy winding∣sheet.
What shape will this prodigy∣os womb bring forth,
Which groans with such strange labour.
Excellent.
Why, Eleazar, art thou wrapped with joys,
Or does thy sinking policy make to shore.
Ha!
Eleazar, mad man! hear thou Moor.
Well, so; you turn my brains, you mar the face
Of my attempts in•…h making: for this chaos,
This lump of projects, ere it be licked over,
It is like a Bears conception; stratagems
Being but begot, and not got out, are like
Charged Cannons not discharged, they do no •…arm,
Nor good, true policy breeding in the brain
Is like a bar of Iron, whose ribs being bro∣ken,
And softened in the fire, you then may forge∣it
Into a sword to kill, or to a helmet, to de∣fend life:
It is therefore wit to try
All fashions, ere you apparel villainy;
But, but I ha suited him, fit, fit, Oh fit!
How? prithee how?
Why thus; yet no, let's hence,
My heart is nearest of my counsel, yet,
I scarce dare trust my heart with it, what I do,
It shall look old, the hour wherein it is born,
Wonders twice seen are garments over∣worn.
SIrrah, you Cardinal, coward, run∣away:
So ho ho, what Cardinal.
I am not for your lure.
For that then, Oh! that it had nailed thy heart
Up to the pommel to the earth; come, arm me,
Ha! •…foot, when all our swords were roy∣ally guilt with blood,
When with red sweat that trickled from our wounds,
Wee had dearly earned a victory! when hell
Had from their hinges heaved off her iron gates
To bid the damned Moor and the devils en∣la;
Then •…o lose all, then to sound base retreat;
Why soldiers, ho?
I am glad of it my Lord.
Ho! glad; art glad I am dish ono∣red?
That thou and he dishonoured.
Why? my Lord;
I am glad, that you so cleanly did come off.
Thou hast a lean face, and a carrion heart:
A plague on him and thee too: then, s'heart then,
To crack the very hearts-strings of our Army,
To quarter itin pieces, I could tear my hair,
And in curfing spend my soul,
Cardinal; what Judas! come, we'll fight,
Till there be left but one, if I be hee,
I'll die a glorious death.
So will I, I hope in my bed.
Till there be but one left, my Lord, why that's now; for all our fellows are crawled home; some with one leg, some with ne'er an arm, some with their brains beaten out, and glad they escaped so.
But my dear Countrymen, you'll stick to me.
Stick! I my Lord, stick like Bandogs, till wee be pulled off.
That's nobly said, I'll lead you but to death,
Where I'll have greatest share, we shall win same,
For life and that doth crown a soldiers name.
How! to death my Lord? not I by ga•…led: I have a poor wife and i will∣drone at home, and if I die they beg; and do you think I'll see her go up and down the wide universal world.
For every drop of blood which thou shalt lose,
Coward I'll give thy wife a wedge of gold.
Hang him meacock, my Lord, arm your self, I'll fight for you, till I have not an eye to see the fire in my touch-hole.
Be thou a King's companion, thou and I
Will dare the Cardinal, and the Moor to fight,
In single combat, shall we? ho!
Agreed.
We'll beat 'em to hell gate, shall we? ho!
Hell gate's somewhat too hot, somewhat too hot; the Porter's a knave: I'd be loath to be damned for my consci∣ence; I'll knock any bodies costard, so I knock not there, my Lord; hell gates!
A pox upon such slaves.
Hang him, a peasant, my Lord, you see I am but a scrag, my Lord; my legs are not of the biggest, nor the least, nor the best that ever were stood upon, nor the worst, but they are of God's making; And for your sake, if ever we put our en∣mies to flight again, by God's lid if I run not after them like a Tiger, hoffe me.
But wilt thou stand to it ever they fly? ha! wilt thou?
Will I quoth a? by this hand, and the honour of a soldier.
And by a soldiers honour I will load thee
With Spanish pistolets: to have this head,
Thy face, and all thy body, stuck with scars,
Why it is a sight more glorious, then to see
A Lady hung with Diamonds: If thou lose
A hand, I'll send this after, if an arm,
I'll lend thee one of mine, com then lets fight.
A mangled Lame true soldier is a jem,
Worth Cesars Empire, though fools spurn at them.
Yet my Lord I ha seen lame soul∣diers, not worth the crutches they leant up∣on, hands and arms quoth? Zounds not I, I'll double my files, or stand sentry, or so; But I'll be hanged and quartred, before I'll
have my members cut off.
And I too, hold thee there.
Hold you both there, away you rogues, you dirt,
Thus do I tread upon you, out, begone?
One valiant is an host, fight then alone.
Prince Philip.
For the Crown of Spain, come all.
We come in love and peace.
But come in war:
Bring •…eked swords, not laurel boughs, in peace?
Plague on your rank peace, will you fight and cry
Down with the Moor, and then I'm yours: I'll dye,
I have a heart, two arms, a soul, a head,
I'll lay that down, I'll venture all; s'foot, all
Come tread upon me, so that Moor may fall.
By heaven that Moor shall fall.
Thy hand, and thine,
Give me but ha•…e your hearts, you have all mine,
By heaven, shall he fall?
Yes, upon thee
Like to the ruins of a tower, to grind
Thy body into du•…, traitor, and bastard,
I do arrest thee of High treason.
Ho!
Traitor? and bastard? and by thee? my weapons?
Lay hands upon him.
I, you're best do so.
Alvero there's the warrant to your hands,
The prisoner is committed, Lords lets part,
Look to him on your life
Hart, hart, hart, hart,
The Devil, and his dam, the Moor, and my Mother,
Their warrant? I will not obey, Old gray beard,
Thou shalt not bee my Jailer, there's no prison,
No dungeon deep enough, no grates so strong,
That can keep in a man so mad with wrong.
What dost thou weep?
I would fain shed a tear,
But from mine eyes so many •…hours are gon,
Grief drinks my tears so fast, that here's not one,
You must to prison.
Dost thou speak to me?
You must to prison.
And from thence to death;
I thought I should have had a tomb hung round,
With to•…red colours, broken spears, I thought
My body should have fallen down, full of wounds.
But one can kill an Emperor, fool then why
Would thou have many? curse, be mad, and dye,
A Lvero it is the pleasure of the King,
Of the Queen Mother, and these honoured States,
To ease you of Philip, there's a warrant
Sent to remove him to a stronger guard.
I thank you, you shall rid me of much care.
Sit down, and take your place!
If I might have the place I like best, it should be my grave.
Stand in voice, reach, away!
Wee are gon.
•…rinses of Spain if in this royal Court,
There sit a man, that having laid his hold,
So fast on such a jewel, and dare wear it,
In the contempt of envy as I dare,
Yet uncompeli'd (as freely as poor pilgrims,
Bestow their prayers) would give such wealth away;
Let such a man step forth; what do none rise?
No, no, for Kings indeed are deities.
And who'd not (as the sun) in brightness shine?
To be the greatest, is to be divine:
Who among millions would not be the might?
To sit in God-like state, to have all eyes,
D•…zled with admiration, and all tongues
Showing loud Prayers, to rob every heart
Of love, to have thest ength of every arm.
A Sovereigns name, why it is a Sovereign charm.
This glory round about me hath thrown beams,
I have stood upon the top of fortunes wheel,
And backward turned the Iron screw of fate,
The destinies have spun a silken thread
About my lef•, •et Noble Spaniards see?
Hoc tantum ta•ti, thus I cast aside
The shape of Majesty and on my knee,
To this Imperial State lowly resign,
This usurpation, wiping off your tears,
Which stuck so hard upon me, let a hand
A right, and royal hand take up this wreath,
And guard it, right is of it self most strong,
No kingdom got by cunning can stand long.
Proceed to new election of a King.
Agreed.
Stay Peers of Spain, if young Philippo,
Be Philips son, then is he Philips heir,
Then must his Royal name be set in gold,
Philip is then the Diamond to that ring;
But if he be a bastard, here's his seat,
For baseness has no gall, till it grow great.
First therefore let him blood, if he must bleed,
Yet in what vein you strike him, best take heed:
The Portugall's his friend, you saw he came
At holding up a finger, armed; this peace
Rid hence his dangerous friendship, he's at home,
But when he hears, that Philip is tied up,
Yet hears not why, he'll catch occasions lock,
And on that narrow bridge make shift to lead
A scrambling army through the heart of Spain,
Look to it being in, he'll hardly out again.
Therefore first prove, and then proclaim him bastard.
How shall we prove it?
He that put him out to making,
I am sure can tell, if not,
Then she that shaped him can, here's the Queen Mother
Being pricked in conscience, and preferring Spain,
Before her own respect, will name the man,
If he be noble &amp; a Spaniard born, he will hide,
The apparent scars of their infamies
With the white hand of marriage; that and time,
Will eat the blemish off, say? shall it?
No.
Spaniard or Moor, the saucy slave shall dye.
Death is too easy for such villainy.
Spaniard or Moor, the saucy slave shall dye.
I would he might, I know my self am clear
As is the new born Infant. Madam stand forth,
Behold to speak, shame in the grave wants sense:
Heaven with sins greatest 〈◊〉 can dispense.
Would I were covered with the vail of night,
You might not see red shame sit on my cheecke;
But being Spains common safety stands for truth,
Hiding my weeping eyes, I blush, and say;
Philippo's father sits here.
Here! name him?
The Lord Mendoza did beget that son,
Oh! let not this dishonour further run?
What Cardinal Mendoza?
Yes, yes, even h•…
Spaniard or Moor, the saucy slave shall die.
I Philips father?—
Nay! deny me not?
Now may a kingdom and my love be got.
Those eyes and tongue bewitch me, shame lie here;
That love has sweetest taste that is bought dear.
What answers Lord Mendoza to the Queen?
I confess guilty, Philip is my son,
Her Majesty hath named the time and place.
To you, but not to us, go forward Mad•…m.
Within the circle of twice ten years since,
Your 〈◊〉 King made war in Barbary,
W•…n Tunis, conquered Fesse, and hand to hand,
Slew great Abdela, King of Fesse, and father
To that Barbarian Prince.
I was but young, but now me∣thinks
I see m•… fathers won•…s, poor Barbary!
No m•…re.
In absence of my Lord mourning his want,
To me alone, being in my private walk,
I think at Salamanca; I, it was there;
Enters Mendoza under show of shrift,
Threatens my death if I denied his lust,
In fine by f•…rs he won me to his will,
I wept, and c•…d for help, but all in vain;
Mendoza there abused the bed of Spain.
Spaniard or Moor, that saucy slave 〈◊〉 die.
Why did not you complain of this vile act?
Alas! I was alone, young, full of fear;
Bashful, and doubtful of my own defame;
Knowing King Philip rash and jealous,
I hid his sins, thinking to hide my shame.
What says the Cardinal?
Such a time there was;
It is past, I'll make amends with marriage,
And satis•…e with Trentalls, dirges, prayers,
The offended spirit of the wronged King.
Spaniard or Moor, that saucy slave shall die;
Oh! it would seem best, it should be thus Mendoza:
She to accuse, I urge, and both conclude,
Your marriage like a comic interlude.
Lords will you hear this hateful sin confessed?
And not impose upon the ravisher death,
The due punishment, oh! it must be so.
What does the Queen desire?
Justice, revenge,
On vile Mendoza for my ravishment:
I kiss the cold earth with my humbled knees,
From whence I will not rise, till some just hand,
Cast to the ground the Traitor Cardinal.
Stand forth Mendoza.
Swells your heart so high?
Down Lecher; if you will not stand, then lie.
You have bret•…eyed me, by my too much trust,
I never did this deed of Rape and Lust.
Your tongue confessed it.
True, I was enticed.
Enticed? do you believe that?
Justice Lords! sentence the Cardinal for
His hateful sin.
We will assemble all the States of Spain,
And as they Judge, so Justice shall be done.
A guard! to prison with the Cardinal.
Damned slave my tongue shall go at liberty
To curse thee, ban that strumpet; Dogs keep off.
Hist, hist, on, on.
I cannot brook his sight.
You must to prison, and bee patient.
Weep thou Alvero? all struck dumb? my fears,
Are that those drops will change to bloody tears.
This woman, and this Serpent.
Drag him hence.
Who dares lay hands upon me, Lords of Spain
Let your swords bail me, this false Queen did lye.
Spaniard or Moor, the saucy slave shall die.
I'll fight with thee, damned hell∣hound for my life.
Spaniard or Moor, the saucy slave shall die.
I'll prove upon thy head.
The slave shall die.
Lords stop this villains throat.
Shall die, shall die.
Hear me but speak.
Away.
Words are ill spent,
Where wrong sits Judge, you're armed if in∣nocent.
Well, then I must to prison: Moor, no more:
Heavens thou art just, Prince Philip I betrayed,
And now my self fall: Guile with guile is paid.
Philip being proved a bastard; who shall sit
Upon this empty throne?
Strumpet, not you.
Strumpet! and I not sit there! who then?
Down;
Back, if she touch it she'll bewitch the chair;
This throne belongs to Isabel the fair,
Bring forth the Princes dressed in royal robes,
The true affecter of Alvero's son,
Virtuous Hortenzo. Lords, behold your Queen.
THou villain! what intendst thou, savage slave?
To advance virtue thus, and thus to tread
On lust, on murder, on adulteries head.
Look Lords upon your Sovereign Isabel,
Though all may doubt the fruits of such a Womb,
Is she not like King Philip? let her rule.
She rule?
She rule? I she.
A child to sway an empire? I am her Protectress;
I'll pour black curses on thy damned head,
If thou wrongst me. Lords, Lords!
Princes of Spain,
Be deaf, be blind, hear not, behold her not,
She killed my virtuous wife.
He killed your King.
It was in my just wrath.
It was to get his Crown.
His Crown! why here it is: thou slewst m• Maria,
To have access to my unstained bed.
Oh heaven!
It is true, how often have I stopped
Thy unchaste songs from passing through mine ears?
How oft, when thy luxurious arms have twined
About my jetty neck, have I cried out
Away, those scalding veins burn me it is true.
Devil, it is a lie.
Thou slewst my sweet Maria;
Alvero it was thy daughter, it was: Hortenzo,
She was thy sister; Justice Isabella!
This Serpent poisoned thy dear fathers bed,
Setting large horns on his Imperial head.
Hear me.
Ho! why?
Madam you shall be heard,
Before the Courts, before the Courts of Spain
A guard, a guard.
A guard; for what? for whom?
To wait on you,
So many great sins must not wait with few.
Keep me in prison! dare you Lords?
Oh no!
Were your cause strong, we would not arm you so;
But honour fainting needs many hands,
Kingdoms stand safe, when mischief lies in bands:
You must to prison.
Must I? must I, slave!
I'll dam thee, ere thou triumph'st o'er my grave.
DO, do! my jocund spleen;
It does, it will, it shall, I have at one throw,
Rifled away the Diadem of Spain;
It is gone, and there's no more to set but this
At all, then at this last cast I'll sweep up
My former petty losses, or lose all.
Like to a desperate Gamester; ho! how? fast?
Except their bodies turn to airy spirits,
And fly through windows, they are fast my Lord:
If they can eat through locks and bars of Iron,
They may escape, if not? then not.
Ho! Zarack!
Wit is a thief, there's pick-lock policy,
To whom all doors fly open: therefore go,
In our name charge the Keeper to resign
His office; and if he have tricks of cruelty,
Let him bequeath'em at his death, for kill him;
Turn all thy body into eyes,
And watch them, let those eyes like fiery comets
Sparkle ou•… nothing but the death of Kings.
And. ah! now thus thou know I did invent,
A tortu•…ing Iron chain.
Oh! for necks my Lord.
I that, that, that, away and yoke them, stay
Here's Balt. go both, teach them to preach,
Through an Iron P•…lorry: I'll spread a •…et,
To catch Alvero, oh! he's is old and wise,
They are onfit to live, that have sharp eyes, Hortenzo, Roderigo, to•…, to it all:
They have supple knees sleack'd brows, but hearts of gall:
The bitterness shall be washed off withblood,
Tyrants swim safest in a crimson flood.
I com to tel your grace that Isabella,
Is with Hortenzo arm in arm at hand,
Zarack and I may kill them, now with ease,
Is it done. and then it is done.
Murder thou the man,
And I'll stab her.
No, I'll speed her my self,
Arm in arm, so, so, look upon this Ring,
Who ever brings this token to your hands
Regard not for what purpose, seize on them,
And chain them to the rest, they com, away,
Murder be proud, and Tragedy laugh on,
I'll seek a stage for thee to jet upon.
My Lord! my Lord Hortenzo.
Ho! is it you,
Trust me I saw you not.
What makes your grace so sad?
She g•…ievs for the imprisoned Queen her Mother,
And for Philip, in the sandy heap,
That wait upon an hour, there are not found
 So many little bodies as those sighs
And tears, which she hathevery Minutespent,
Since her loved Brother felt Imprisonment.
Pity, great pity, would it lay in me,
To give him liberty.
It does.
In me?
Free him, your Mother Queen, and Card∣nil too.
In me? alas! not me, no, no, in you;
Yet for I'll have my conscience, white and pure,
Here Madam take this Ring, and if my name
Can break down Castle walls, and open Gates,
Take it, and do it, fetch them all forth: and yet,
It is unfit you should go.
That happy office I'll execute
My self.
Will you? would I,
Stood gracious in their sight: well, go,
Do what you will Hortenzo, if this charm
Unbinds them, here it is; Lady, you and I
Aloof will follow him, and when we meet,
Speak for me, for I'll kiss Philippo's feet.
I shall be proud to see all reconciled.
Alas! my Lord, why true, go, go.
Make hast dear love.
Hortenzo is a man
Composed of sweet proportion, he's a foot,
A leg, a hand, a face, an eye, a wit,
The best Hortenzo in the Spanish Court.
Oh! he's the Nonpareil.
Your tongue had wont,
To be more sparing in Hortenzo's praise.
I, I may cu•…e his praises, rather ban
Mine own nativity, why did this colour,
Dart in my flesh so far? oh! would my face
Were of Hortenzo's fashion, else would your
Were as black as mine is.
Mine like yours, why?
Hark!
I love you, yes faith, I said this, I love you
I do, leave him.
Damnation vanish from me.
Coy? were you as hard as flint Oh! you should yield
Like softened wax, were you as pure as fire,
I'll touch you, yes, I'll taint you, see yo•… this,
I'll bring you to this lure.
If I want hands
To kill my self, before thou dost it; do.
I'll cut away your hands: well my desire
Is raging as the Sea, and mad as fire,
Will you?
Torment me not good Devil.
Will you?
I'll tear mine eyes out if they temp•… thy lust;
Do.
Touch me not, these knives.
I, I, kill your self,
Because I jest with you: I wrong Hortenzo?
Settle your thoughts, it was but a trick to try,
That which few women have, true con∣stance.
If then my speeches taste of gall.
Nay faith,
You are not bitter, no, you should have railed,
Have spit upon me, spurned me, you are not bitter;
Why do you think that I'd nurse a though,
To hurt your honour? If that thought had brains,
I'd beat them out, but come, by this, H•…r∣tenzo
Is fast.
Ho! fast?
I fast in Philip's arms.
Wrestling together for the price of love;
By this, they're on the way, I'll be your guard,
Come follow me, I'll lead you in the van,
Where thou shalt see four chins upon one chain.
YOu d•…mned Ministers of villa∣ny,
Sworn to damnation by the book of hell;
You map•… of night, you element of Devils,
Why do you yoke my neck with Iron chains?
Many do borrow chains, but you have this
Gratis, for nothing.
Slaves unbind us.
No—
I am impatient, veins why crack you not?
And tilt your blood into the face of heaven
To make red clouds like Ensigns in the sky,
Displaying a damned tyrants cruelty;
Yet can I laugh in my extremest pangs,
Of blood, and spirit, to see the Cardinal,
Keep rank with me, and my vile Mother Queen,
To see her self, where she would have me seen.
Good fellowship I'faith.
And I can tell,
True misery, loves a companion well.
Thou left'st me to the mercy of a Moor,
That hath damnation died upon his flesh;
It was well, thou Mother did unmotherly
Betray thy true son to false bastardy:
Thou left'st me then, now thou art found; and staid,
And thou who did betray me, art betrayed.
A plague upon you all.
Thou cursest them,
Whom I may curse; first may I curse my self,
Too credulous of Loyalty and love;
Next may I curse the Moor, more then a Devil.
And last thy Mother, mother of all evil.
All curses, and all crosses light on thee,
What need I curse my self, when all curse me.
I have been deadly impious I confess,
Forgive me, and my sin will seem the less:
This heavy chain which now my neck a•…ault,
Weighs ten times lighter then my heavy faults.
Hortenzo, I commend my self to thee,
Thou that art nearest, stand furthest off from me.
That mold of Hell, that Moor has chained me here,
It is not my self, but Isabel I fear.
IT's strange! will not Prince Philip come with Hortenz•….
He swears he'll live and die there.
Marry, and shall;
I pray persuade him you, to leave the place,
A pri•…n? why its hell; Alas here they be,
Ho! they are they i'faith, see, see, see, see.
Moor, Devil, •…oat, serpent.
Oh sweet airs, sweet voices.
Oh my Hortenzo!
Do not these birds sing sweetly Isabella?
Oh! how their spirits would leap aloft and spring,
Had they their throats at liberty to sing.
Damnation dog thee.
Furies follow thee.
Come•…s confound thee.
And hell swallow thee.
Sweeter and sweeter still, Oh! harmony,
Why there's no music like to misery.
Hast thou betrayed me thus?
Not I, not I.
Sirrah, hedge-hog.
Ho! I'll hear thee presently.
Hear me then, Hell-hound; slaves, Unchain my love,
Or by—
By what? is it not rare walking here.
Me thinks this stage shows like a Tennis Court;
Do's it not Isabel? I'll show thee how:
Suppose that Iron chain to be the line,
The prison doors the hazard, and their heads
Scarce peeping ore the line suppose the balls;
Had I a racket now of burnished steel,
How smoothly could I bandy every ball,
Over this Globe of earth, win set and all.
How brisk the villain jetts in villa∣ny?
Prating? he's proud because he wears a chain:
Take it off Baltazar, and take him hence.
And whither then you dog?
Pity my brother.
Pity him, no; away I come, do, come.
I pray thee kill me: come.
I hope to see
Thy own hands do that office, down with him.
Is there another hell?
Try, try, he's gone.
So him next, he next, and next him; and then?
Worse then damnation, fiend, mon∣ster of men.
Why, when? down, down.
Slave, as thou thrusts me down,
Into this dungeon, so sink thou to hell.
Amen, Amen.
Together so, and you.
O pity my Hortenzo!
Farewell sweet Isabel, my life adieu.
Mischief and horror let the Moor pursue.
A consort, that amain, play that amain.
Amain, Amain. No; so soon fallen asleep,
Nay I'll not loose this music, sirrah! sirrah!
Take thou a drum, a Trumpet thou, and Hark;
Mad them with villainous sounds.
Rare sport, let's go.
About it. Music will doe well, in woe;
How like you this?
set my Hortenzo free,
And I'll like any thing.
A fool, a fool?
Hortenzo free; why look you, hee free? no;
Then must he marry you, you must be Queen,
Hee in a manner King, these dignities
Like poison make men swell, this Ratsbane honour
O it is so sweet, they'll lick it till all burst.
Hee will be proud, and pride you know must fall.
Come, come, he shall not; no, no; it is more meet,
To keep him down, safe standing on his feet.
Eleazar?
Mark: the imperial chair of Spain,
Is now as empty as a Misers Alms;
Be wise, I yet dare fit in it, it's for you,
If you will be for me, there's room for two.
Do meditate, muse on it: it's best for thee
To love me, live with me, and lye with me.
Thou know I'll first lye in the arms of death,
My meditations are how to revenge,
Thy bloody tyrannies; I fear thee not
Inhumane slave, but to thy face defy
Thy lust, thy love, thy barbarours villainy.
Zarack.
My Lord!
Whore's Baltazar?
A drumming.
I have made them rave, and curse, and
So; guard her:
Your Court shall be this prison, guard her slaves,
With open eyes; defy me? see my veins,
S•ruck'd out, being over heated with my blood,
Boiling in wrath: I'll tame you.
Do, do.
Ho!
I will, and once more fill a kingdoms Throne
Spain I'll new-mould thee, I will have a chair
Made all of dead men's bones, and the as∣cents
Shall be the heads of Spaniards set in ranks;
I will have Philip's head, Hortenzo's head,
Mendoza's head, thy Mothers head, and this,
This head that is so cross, I'll have it:
The Scene wants Actors, I'll fetch more, and cloth it
In rich Cothurnall pomp. A Tragedy
Ought to be grave, graves this shall beautify.
Moor execute to'th life my dread cōmands,
Vengeance awake, thou hast much work in hand.
I'm weary of this office, and this life,
It is too thirsty, and I would your blood,
Might scope the filling out: By heaven I swear,
I scorn these blows, and his rebukes to bear.
Oh! Zarack pity me, I Jove thee well,
Love deserves pity, pity Isabel.
What would you have me do?
To kill this Moor.
I'll cast an eye of death upon my, face.
I'll be no more his slave, swear to advance me;
And by yo'n setting sun, this hand, and this
Shall rid you of a tyrant.
By my birth;
No Spaniards honoured place shall equal thin•….
I'll kill him then.
And Baltazar.
And hee,
I pray thee first, setch Philippo &amp; Hortenzo
Out of that Hell; they two will be most glad
To aid thee; in this Execution;
My Lord Philippo; and Hortenzo; rise;
Your hands; so, talk to her; at my return
This sword shall reek with blood of Balta∣sir.
Three curses (like three comenda∣tions
To their three souls) I send; thy tortured brother
Does curse the Cardinal, the Moor, thy Mo∣there.
Curse not at all dear souls; re∣avenge is hot,
And boils in Zaracks brains; the plot is cast,
Into the mold of Hell: You freemen are;
Zarack will kill the Moor; and Baltazar.
How can that relish?
Why? I'll tell you how?
I did profess; I, and protested too:
I loved him well, what will not sorrow do?
Then he professed; I, and protested too
To kill them both, what will not devils do?
Then I profess; I, and protest it too,
That here's for him, what will not Philip do?
See where hee coms.
Zarack, what do I see?
Hortenzo and Philip, who did this?
I Baltazar.
Thou art half damned for it, I'll to my Lord.
I'll stop you on your way, lie there; thy tongue shall tel no tales to day Stabs him.
Nor thine to morrow, his revenge was well.
By this time both the slaves shake hands in hell.
Philippo and Hortenzo stand you still, what; dote you both? cannot you see your play? well •…are a woman then, to l•…ad the way. Once rob the dead, put the Moors bit•… on, and paint your faces with the •…l of hell, so waiting on the Tyrant.
Come no more, it is here, and here; room there below, stand wide, bury them well since they so godly died.
Away then, fate now let revenge be placed.
Here.
And here, a tyrants blood doth sweetly taste.
WHat, I imprison, who?
Philip •…nd Hortenzo.
Philip and Hortenzo, Ha, ha, ha.
Why laughs the Moor?
I laugh because you jest; laugh at a jest, who I imprison them? I prize their lives with weights, their necks with chains, their hands with Manacles? do I all this, because my face is in nights colour died.
Think you my conscience and my soul is so,
Black faces may have hearts as white as snow
And it is a general rule in moral rolls,
The whitest faces have the blackest souls.
But touching my Hortenzo.
Good old man, I never touched him, do not touch me then with thy Hortenzo.
Whore's Philip too?
And whore's Philippo too? I pray I pray, is Philip a tame Sp•…niard, what can I philip him hither, hither make him •…ve. First whore's Hortenzo, whore's Philippo too?
And where is Isabel, she was with you.
And where is Isabel, she was with me, and so are you, yet are you well you see but in good time, see where their keepers come. Come hither Zarack, Baltazar, come hither; Zarack, old Lord Al∣vero asks of thee, where young Hortenzo is.
My Lord! set free.
Oh is 〈◊〉; come hither Baltazar,
Lord Christofero here would ask of thee where Prince Philippo is.
My Lord set free.
Oh is he so! Roderigo asks me for Isabel,
I say my Lord shoe's free.
Oh! is she so.
Believe me Lords.
And me.
I set Philippo.
I Hortenzo free.
My Lords because you shall believe me too,
Go to the Castle, I will follow you.
Thanks to the mighty Moor, and for his fame,
Be more in honour, then thou art in name;
But let me wish the other prisoners well,
The Queen and Cardinal, let all have right,
Let law absolve them or dissolve them quite.
Grave man, thy gray hairs paint out gravity,
Thy counsels wisdom, thy wit policy.
There let us meet, and with a general brain,
Erect the peace of spirit and of Spain.
Then will Spain flourish.
I, when it is mine.
O heavenly meeting!
we must part in hell.
True peace of joy.
It is a dissembling kneel. Farewell my Lords, meet there so ha, ha, ha.
Now Tragedy thou Minion of the night, Rhamnusias pew-fellow; to thee I'll sing Upon an harp made of dead Spanish bones, The proudest instrument the world affords; When thou in Crimson jollity shalt Bath, Thy limbs as black as mine, in springs of blood; still gushing from the Conduit-head of Spain: To thee that never blush, though thy cheeks are full of blood. O! Saint re∣avenge to thee: I consecrate my Murders, all my stabs, my bloody labours, tortures, stra∣tagems: The volume of all wounds, that wound from me; mine is the stage, thine is the Tragedy. Where am I now? oh at the prison? true, Zarack and Baltazar come hither see, survey my Library. I study, I, whilst you two sleep, marry it is villainy. Here's a good book, Zarack behold it well, it's deeply written for it was made in hell. Now Baltazar, a better book for thee, but for my self, this, this, the best of all; and therefore do I chain it every day, for fear the Readers steal the art away. Where thou stand now, there must Hortenzo hang, Like Tantalus in a maw-eating pang: there
Baltaza•… must Pr•…nce Philip stand, like dam∣n'd Pr•…metheus, and to act his part; shall have a dagger sticking at his heart. But in my room I'll set the Cardinal, and he shalpreach Repentance to them all. Ha, ha, ha.
Damnation tickles him, he laughs a∣gain, Philip must stand there and bleed to death: Well villa•…n I only laugh to see, that we shall live to out-laugh him and thee.
Oh! fit, fit, fit, stay a rare jest, rare jest. Zarack, suppose thou art Hortenzo now? I pray thee stand in passion of a pang, to see by thee how quaintly he would hang.
I am Hortenzo, tut, tut, fear not man, thou look like Zarack.
I Hortenzo, here hee shall hang here, I'faith, come Zarack come, and Balta∣sir take thou 〈◊〉 room. First let me see you 〈◊〉
We're placed.
Slaves, ha, ha, ha, you are but players, they must end the play: how like Hortenzo and Philippo ha, stand my two slaves, were they as black as you. Well Za∣rack I'll unfix thee first of all, thou •…hale help me to play the Cardinal; This Iron engine on his head I'll clap, like a Pope•… Meter, or a Cardinals Cap. Then Manacle his hands as thou dost mine: so, so, I pray
thee Zarack set him free, that both of you may stand and laugh at me.
It is fine I'faith, cal in morecompany,
Alvero, Roderigo, and the rest,
Who will not laugh at Eleazars jest.
What? Zarack, Baltazar.
I, anon, anon, we have not laughed enough, it's but begun.
Unmanacle my hands I say.
Then shall we mar our mirth and spoil the play.
Alver•….
Let Alvero in.
And let me out.
I thank you for that flout,
To let Alver•… in, and let you out.
Villains, slaves, am I not your
Lord the Moor, and Eleazar.
And the Devi•… of hell,
And more then that, and Eleazar too.
And Devils dam, what do I here with you.
My tongue shall torture thee.
I know thee then, all women's tongues are tortures unto men.
Spaniards his w•…s the villain, this is he who through enticements of allu∣ring lust, and glory which makes silly wo∣men proud, and men malicious, did incense
my spirit beyond the limits of a women's mind, to wrong my self and that Lord Car∣dinall; And that which sticks more near unto my blood, he that was nearest to my blood; my son to dispossess him of his right by wrong. Oh! that I might embrace him on this breast, which did enclose him when he first was born. No greater happi∣ness can heaven shower upon me; then to circle in these arms of mine, that son whose Royal blood I did defame, to Crown with honour an ambitious Moor.
Thus then thy happiness is com∣pleat:
Behold thy Philip ransomed from that prison
In which the Moor had cloistered him.
And here's Hortenzo.
Then am I betrayed and cozened in my own designs: I did contrive their rue∣in, but their subtle policy hath blasted my ambitious thoughts: Villains! whore's Za∣rack? whore's Baltazar? what have you done with them.
They're gon to Pluto's kingdom to provide a place for thee, and to attend thee there; but least they should be tired with too long expecting hopes. Come brave spirits of Spain, this is the Moor the actor of these
evils: Thus thrust him down to act amongst the devils.
And am I thus dispatched; had I but breathed the space of one hour longer, I would have fully acted my revenge. But oh! now pallid death bids me prepare, and hast to Charon for to be his fare.
I com, I com, but ere my glass is run, I'll curse you all, and cursing end my life Moist thou Lascivious Queen whose d•…mned charms, bewitched me to the circle of thy arms, unpitied dye, consumed with loathed lust, which thy venereous mind hath basely nursed. And for you Philip, may your days be long, but clouded with perpetual misery. May thou Hortenzo, and thy Isabel, be fetched alive by Furies into hell, there to be damned for ever, oh! I faint; Devils com claim your right, and when I am, confined within your kingdom then shall I, out-act you all in perfect villa•…y.
Take down his body while his blood streams forth, his acts are past, and our last act is done. Now do I challenge my Here∣ditary right, to the Royal Spanish throne usurped by him. In which, in all your sights I thus do plant my self. Lord Cardinal, and you the Queen my mother, I pardon all those crimes you have committed.
I'll now repose my self in peaceful rest,
And fly unto some solitary residence;
Where I'll spin out the remnant of my life,
In true contrition for my past offences.
And now Hortenzo to close up your wound,
I here contract my sister unto thee,
With Comic joy to end a 〈◊〉.
And for this Barbarous Moor, and his black train,
Let all the Moors be banished from Spain.

