O Fie some lights, sirs fie, let there be no deeds of dark∣ness done among vs.—I so, so, pree thee Tyer-man set Senior Snuff a fire, he's a choleric Gentleman, he will take Pepper in the nose instantly, fear not, fore Heaven I wonder they tolerate him so ne'er the Stage.
Faith Doricus, thy brain boils, keel it, keel it, or all the fatt's in the fire: in the name of Phoebus, what merry Genius haunts thee to day, thy lips play with Feathers.
Troth they should pick straws before they should be idle,
But why, but why dost thou wonder they dare suffer Snuff so near the Stage?
O well resold, marry Sir senior Snuff, Monsieur Mew, and Cavalier Blirt, are three of the most to bee feared Auditors that ever—
Pish for shame, stint thy idle chat.
Nay dream what-so-ere your fantasy swims on Phylomuse, I protest in the love you have procured me to bear your friend the Author, I am vehemently fearful, this three∣fold halter of contempt that chokes the breath of wit, these aforesaid tria sunt omnia, Knights of the Meaw will sit heavy on the skirts of his Scenes, if—
If what? believe it Doricus his spirit,
Is higher blotted then to quake and pant
At the report of Skoffes Artillery;
Shall he be crestfallen, if some looser brain,
In flux of wit vnciuely befilth
His slight composures? shall his bosom faint
If drunken Censure belch out sower breath,
From Hatreds surfeit on his labours front?
Nay say some half a dozen rancorous breasts
Should plant them-selues on purpose to discharge
Impostum'd malice on his latest Scene
Shall his resolve be struck through with the blirt,
Of a goose breath? What imperfect borne?
What short lived Meteor? what cold hearted Snow
Would melt in dolor? cloud his mudded eyes
Sink down his jaws, if that some iuicles husk
Some boundless ignorance should on sudden shoot
His gross knob'd burbolt, with thats not so good,
Mew, blirt, ha, ha, light Chaffy stuff?
Why gentle spirits what loose waving fane?
What any thing would thus be skru'd about
With each slight touch of od Phantasmatas?
No let the feeble palsied lamer joints,
Lean on opinions crutches, let the—
Nay, nay, nay, Heavens my hope, I cannot smooth this strain,
Wits death I cannot, what a leprous humour
Breaks from rank swelling of these bubbling wits?
Now out vp-pont: I wonder what tight brain:
Wrung in this custom to maintain Contempt
Against common Censure: to give stiff counter buffs
To crack rude scorn even on the very face
Of better audience. Slight first not odious,
Why hark you honest, honest Phylomuse
(You that endeavour to indeere our thoughts,
To the composers spirit) hold this firm:
Music and Poetry were first approved
By common sconce; and that which pleased most,
Held most allowed pass: not rules of Art
Were shaped to pleasure, not pleasure to your rules,
Think you if that his scenes took stamp in mint
Of three or four deemed most iuditious,
It must enforce the world to currant them
That you must spit defiance on dislike?
Now as I love the light were I to pass
Through public verdict, I should fear my form
Least ought I offered were vnsquard or warped,
"The more we know, the more we know we want
"What Bayard boulder then the ignorant?
"Believe me Phylomuse: in faith thou must
"The best best seal of wit, is wits distrust.
Nay gentle Doricus.
Isle here no more of him, nay and your friend the Au∣thor, the composer: the What you will: seems so fair in his own glass, so straight in his own measure that hee talks once of squinting Critickes, drunken Censure, splay-footed Opinion, iui∣cles husks, I ha done with him, I ha done with him.
Pew nay then —
As if any such vnsanctified stuff could find a being monge these ingenuous breasts.
Come, let pass, let pass, lers see what stuff must cloth our ears: what's the plays name?
What you will.
1st Commedy, Tragedy, Pastoral, Moral, Nocturnal or History.
Faith perfectly neither, but even What you will, a slight toy, lightly composed, to swiftly finished, ill plotted, worse writ∣ten, I fear me worst acted, and indeed What you will.
Why I like this vain well now.
Come, wee strain the spectators patience in delaying their expected delights. Lets place our selves within the Cur∣taines, for good faith the Stage is so very little we shall wrong the general eye else very much.
If you'll stay but a little Isle accompany you, I have in∣gaged my self to the Author to give a kind of inductiue speech to his Commedy.
Away: you neglect your self, a gentleman —
Tut I have vowed it, I am double charged, go of is it twil, Isle set fire to it.
Isle not stand it, may chance recoil, and be not stuffed with salte-peeter, well mark the report, mark the report.
Nay pree thee stay, slid the female presence; the Gent∣letza; the women will put me out.
And they strive to put thee out, doe thou endeavour to put them.
In good faith if they put thee out of countenance; put thou them out of patience; &amp; hew their ears with hacking im∣perfect utterance.
Go stand to it, show thy self a tale man of thy tongue, make an honest leg, put off thy Cap with discreet carriage: and so we leave thee to the kind Gentlemen, and most respec∣ted Auditors.
NOR labours hee the favour of the rude,
Nor offers sops unto the Stigian Dog
To force a silence in his viperous tongs:
Nor cares he to insinuate the grace,
Of loathed detraction, nor pursues the love
Of the nice Critics of this squeamish age,
Nor strives he to bear up with every sail
Of floating Censure: nor once dreads or care's
What envious hand his guiltless Muse hath struck,
,,Sweet breath from tainted stomachs who can suck:
But to the fair proportioned loves of wit,
To the just scale of even poised thoughts:
To those that know the pangs of bringing forth
A perfect feature: to their gentle minds,
That can as soon slight of, as find a blemish,
To those as vmbly lowe as to their feet
I am obliged to bend: to those his Muse,
Makes solemn honour, for their wished delight:
He vows industrious sweat shall pale his cheek,
But heel gloss up sleek objects for their eyes:
For those he is ashamed, his best's too bad,
A silly subject too too simply clad
Is all his present, all his ready pay,
For many many debts. Give further day
Isle give a Proverb, Sufferance gives ease:
So you may once be paid, we once may please.
O O I beseech you Sir reclaim his wits,
My masters mad, stark mad, alas for love,
For love? nay and he be not mad for hate,
Tic amiable fortune; I tell thee youth
Right rare and geason: strange? mad for love,
O show me him Isle give him reasons straight.
So forcible so all invincible,
That it shall drag love out: run mad for love?
What mortally exsistes, on which our hearts
Should be enamoured with such passion?
For love? come Phylus; come Isle hang his fate,
In steed of love Isle make him mad for hate.
But troth say what strains his madness of?
Fantastical.
Immure him, skonce him, barricade him int,
Fantastical mad, thrice blessed heart;
Why hark good Phylus: (o that thy narrow sense,
Could but contain me now) all that exsists,
Takes valuation from opinion:
A giddy minion now: pish, thy taste is dull,
And can not relish me, come wher's Iacomo.
Look where he coms: O map of boundless wo!
You gleam is day, darkness, sleep and fear,
Dreams, and the ugly visions of the night
Are beat to hell by the bright palm of light,
Now romes the swain and whissells up the morn:
Deep Silence breaks: all things start up with light,
Only my hart, that endless night and day,
Lies bed-red, crippeld by coy Lucea,
There's a strain law.
Nay now I see hoe's mad most palpable,
He speaks like a player, ho! poetical.
The wanton spring lies dallying with the earth,
And powers fresh blood in her decayed veins,
Look how the new sapt branches are in child
With tender infants, how the Sun draws out,
And shapes their moisture into thousand forms
Of sprouting buds, all things that show or breath,
Are now instaur'd, saving my wretched breast,
That is eternally congeald with Ice
Of froz'd, despair. O Celia, coy, to nice.
Still sans question mad?
O where doth Piety and Pity rest?
Fetch cords he's irrecoverable, mad, rank mad,
He calls for strange Chimeras, fictions
That have no being since the curse of death
Was thrown on man: Pity and Piety,
Whole deign converse with them? alas vain head,
Pity and Piety are long since dead.
Ruin to Chance, and all that strive to stand,
Like swollen Colosses on her tottering Base.
Fortune is blind—
You lye, you lye,
None but a mad man would term Fortune blind,
How can she see to wound desert so right?
Just in the speeding place: to girt lewd brows
With honoured wreath; ha? Fortune blind? away,
How can she hud-winkt then so rightly see,
To starve rich worth and glut iniquity?
O Love!
Love? hang love,
It is the abject out-cast of the world,
Hate all things, hate the world, thy self, all men,
Hate knowledge, strive not to be ouer-wise,
,,It drew destruction into Paradise,
Hate Honour, Virtue, they are baits,
That tice men's hopes to sadder fates,
Hate beauty, every ballad-monger,
Can cry his idle soppish humour
Hate riches, wealths a flattering Jack,
A dors to face, mews hind thy back.
He that is poor is firmly sped,
He never shall be flattered▪
All things are error, dirt and nothing,
Or pant with want or gorged to loathing,
Love only hate, affect no higher
Then praise of heaven, wine, a fire.
Suck up thy days in silent breath,
When their snuffs out come Senior death.
Now Sir adieu run mad and twilt,
The worst is this my rimes but spilt.
Thy rimes are spilt who would not run rank mad,
To see a wandering French man rival, nay
Out-strip my suit. He kissed my Celias cheek,
Why man I saw my dog even kiss thy Celias lips,
To morrow morn they go to wed,
Well then I know.
Whether to morrow night they go.
Say quick.
To bed
I will invoke the triple Heccate,
Make charms as potent as the breath of Fate,
But Isle confound the match,
Nay then good day,
And you be conjuring once Isle slink away,
Boy could not Orpheus make the stones to dance?
Yes Sir.
Bear Lady a sweet touch: did he not bring Euridice out of hell with his lute.
So they say Sir,
And thou chanced bring Celias head out of the window with thy Lute, well hazard thy breath: look Sir hears a ditty.
Tic foully writ slight wit crossed here and there,
But where thou findst a blot, their fall a tear.
Fie peace, peace, peace, it hath no passion int.
O melt thy breath in fluent softer tunes
That every note may seem to tricle down
Like sad distilling tears and make: O God
That I were but a Poet now t'expresse my thoughts
Or a Musician but to sing my thoughts
Or any thing but what I am, sing't ore once more
My griefs a boundless sea that hath no shore.
Is this my favour? am I crowned with scorn?
Then thus I manumit my slau'd condition.
Celia but hear me execrate thy love.
By heaven that once was consious of my love
By all that is that knows my all was thine
I will perseu with detestation.
Thawart without stretched vehemence of hate
Thy wished Hymen: I will craze my brain
But all dissever all: thy hopes unite
What rage so violent as love turned spite?
Humbly complaining kissing the hands of your excelence your pore orators Randolfo and Andrea beseeches forbidding of the dis∣honoured match of their Niece Celia Widow to their Brother— O twill do, twill do, it can not choose but doe.
What should one say what should one do now; vmph
If she do match with you same wandering knight
Shoe's but undone, her estimation, wealth —
Nay sir her estimations mounted up
She shall be Ladi'd and sweet Madam'd now.
Be Ladi'd ha, ha, O could she but recaule
The honoured Port of her deceased love;
But think whose wife she was, God wot no knights
But one (that title of) was even a Prince
A Sultane Sollyman: thrice was he made
In dangerous arms Venice prouidetore.
He was a Merchant, but so bounteous
Valiant, wise, learned, all so absolute
That noughts, was valued praisfull excellent
But in it was he most praisfull excellent.
O I shall ne'er forget how he went clothed
He would maintaine't a base ill used fashion
To bind a Merchant to the sullen habit
Of precise black, chiefly in Venice state.
Where Merchants guilt the top
And therefore should you have him pass the bridge
Up the Rialto like a soldier
(As still hee stood a Potestate at sea)
In a black beaver felt, ash colour plain
A Florentine cloth of silver Jerkin, sleeves
White satin cut on tinsel, then long stock.
French pains embroidered, Gold-smithes work, O God!
Me thinks I see him now how he would walk:
With what a jolly presence he would pace
Round the Rialto. Well hoe's soon forgot
A straggling sir in his rich bed must sleep
Which if I can not cross▪ Isle curse and weep.
Shall I be plain as Truth, I love your Sister
My education birth and wealth deserves her
I have no cross, no rub to stop my suit
But Lauardur's a knight, that strikes all mute.
I ther's the devil, she must be Ladi'd now.
O ill nursed custom no sooner is the wealthy Merchant dead
His wife left great in fair possessions
But giddy rumour grasps it twixt his teeth
And shakes it bout our ears. Then thither flock
A rout of crazed fortunes whose cracked states
Gape to be sodderd up by the rich mass
Of the deceased labours, and now and then
The troupe of I beseech and I protest
And believe it sweet, is mixed with too or three
Hopeful, well stocked, neat clothed Citizens
But as we see the son of a Divine
Seldom proves Preacher, or a Lawyers son
Rarely a pleader, (for they strive to Run
A various fortune from their Ancestors)
So tic right geason for the Merchants widow,
To be the Citizens loved second spouse.
Variety of objects please vs still
One dish though ne'er so cooked doth quickly fill.
When diverse cates the palates sconce delight
And with fresh fast creates new appetite
Therefore my widow she cashiers the blacks
For swears turns of the furd-gownes, and surveys
The bedrowle of her suitors thinks and thinks,
And straight her questing thoughts springs up a knight,
Have after then a maine the gem's a foot
The match clapped up, tut tic the knight must do it.
Then must my pretty peat be Fan'd and Coached.
Muffd Masked and Ladied, with my more then most sweet Madam,
But how long doth this perfume of sweet Madam last?
Faith tic but a wash sent. My Riotous sir
Begins to crack Gestes on his Ladies front,
Touches her new stamped gentry, takes a glut
Keeps out, abandons home, and spends and spends
Till stock be melted, then sir takes up here
Takes up there, till no where ought is left.
Then for the Low-countries, hay for the French
And so (to make up rime) god night sweet wench.
By blessedness weal stop this fatal lot.
But how▪ but how?
Why stay lets think a plot.
Was not Albino Beletzo honourable rich?
Not peered in Venice, for birth, fortune love.
Tic scarce three months since fortune gave him dead.
In the black fight in the Venetian gulf.
You hold a truth.
Now what a giglet is this Celia?
To match so sudden so unworthily?
Why she might have —
Who might not Celia have?
The passionate mamord Iacomo.
The passionate mamord Iacomo.
Of honoured linage, and not meanly rich.
The sprightful Peso, the great Florentine,
Aurelius Tuber.
And to leave these all,
And wed a wandering Knight Sir Lauerdure,
A God knows what?
Brother she shall not, shall our blood be moungreld with the corruption of a straggling French?
Saint Mark she shall not,
She shall not fathers by; our brother souls.
Good day.
Wish me good day? it stands in idle stead,
My Celias lost, all my good days are dead.
Hark Lorenzo Celso the loose Venice Duke,
Is going to bed▪ tic now a forward morn
Fore he take rest. O strange transformed sight,
When Princes make night day the day there night.
Come weal petition him,
Away away,
He skornes all plaints makes jest of serious suit.
Fall out is it twill I am resolved to do it.
Saint Mark Saint Mark.
Did not I tell you, loose no more rich time,
What can one get but mere from a swine?
Lets work a cross, weal fame it all about
The French mans gelded.
O thats absolute.
Fie ont away, she knows to well tic false,
I fear it to well. No no I have it will strongly do it,
Who knows Francisco Soranza?
Pish, pish, why what of him?
Is he not wondrous like your decea'sd kinsman Albino.
Exceedingly the strangest nearly like
In voice, in gesture face in—
Nay he hath Albinos imperfection too,
And stuttes when he is vehemently moved.
Observe me then, him would I have disguised,
Most perfect like Albino: giving out,
Albino saved by swimming (as in faith
It is known he swam most strangely) rumour him,
This morn arrived in Venice, here to lurk
As having heard the for-ward Nuptials,
T'obserue his wives most infamous lewd hast
And to revenge—
I have it, I have it, I have it, twill be invincible.
By this means now some little time we catch,
For better hopes at least disturb the match.
Isle to Francisco.
Brother Adrian
You have our brothers picture, shape him to it.
Precise in each but Tassel, fear it not.
Saint Mark then prosper once, our hopeful plot.
Good souls, good day, I have not slept last night,
Isle take a nap, then pell mell broach all spite.
Ho Bidet Lackey.
Senior?
See who knocks, look you boy, peruse their habits, re∣turn perfect notice, la la lie to.
Quadratus.
Quadratus, more dieu, ma vie: I lay not at my lodging to night, Isle not see him now on my soul, hoe's in his old Perpetu∣ana suit, I am not within.
He is fair, gallant, rich, neat as a Bridegroom, fresh as a new-minted six-pence, with him Lampatho Doria, Symplici∣us Faber.
And in good clothes.
Accoutred worthy a presence.
Vdes so: my gold wrought Wast-coate and Night-cap open my Trunk, lay my richest suit on the top, my Velvet slip∣pers, cloth of gold gamashes, where are my cloth of silver hose, lay them. —
At pawn sir.
No sir, I do not bid you lay them at pawn Sir.
No sir, you need not for they are there already.
More du garzone: set my richest Gloves, Garters, Hats, just in the way of their eyes, so let them in, observe me withal duteous respect, let them in.
Phoebus, Phoebe, Sun, Moon, and seven Stars make thee the dilling of Fortune, my sweet Lauerdure, my rich French blood, ha ye dear rogue, hast any pudding Tobacco?
God morrow Senior.
Monsieur Lauerdure, do you see that Gentleman, hee goes but in black Satin as you see, but by Hellicon hee hath a cloth of Tissue wit, hee breaks a jest, ha, heel rail against the Courttil the gallants— O God he is very Nectar, if you but sip of his love, you were immortal, I must needs make you known to him: Isle induce your love with dear regard. Sini∣or Lampatho heers is a French Gentleman Monsieur Lauer∣dure a Traveller, a beloved of heaven, courts your acquaintance.
Sir I protest I not only take distinct notice of your dear rarities of exterior presence, but also I protest I am most vehe∣mently enamoured, and very passionately dote on your inward adornements and habilities of spirit, I protest I shall be proud to doe you most obsequious vassalage.
Is not this rare now: now by Gorgons head,
I gape and am struck stiff in wonderment,
At sight of these strange beasts. You Chamblet youth,
Symplicius Faber that Hermophrodite,
Party par pale, that bastard Moungerell soul,
Is nought but admiration and applause,
Of you Lampatho Doria, a fusty cask,
Devote to mouldy customs of hoard old,
Doth he but speak, O tones of heaven it self,
Doth he once write, O Iesu admirable
Cries out Symplicius: then Lampatho spittes,
And says faith it is good. But O to mark you thing
Sweat to unite acquaintance to his friend,
Labour his praises and indeere his worth
With titles all as formally tricked forth,
As the Cap of a Dedicatorie Epistle,
Then sir to view Lampatho, he protests,
Protests and vows, such sudden heate of love,
That O it were warmth enough of mirth to dry,
The stintlesse tears of old Heraclitus
Make Nyobe to laugh.
I protest I shall bee proud to give you proof, I hold a most religious affiance with your love.
Nay gentle Senior:
Let me not live else, I protest I will strain my utmost sineus, in strengthening your precious estimate, I protest, I will do all rights in all good offices that friendship can touch, or am∣plest virtue deserve.
I protest believe him not, Isle beg thee Lauerdure
For a concealed Idiot if thou credit him,
Hoe's a Hyena, and with Civet scent
Of perfumed words, draws to make a prey
For laughter of thy credit. O this hot crackling love
That blazes on an instant, flames me out
On the least puff of kindness, with protest, protest,
Catzo I dread these hot protests, that press
Come on so fast, no, no, away, away▪
You are a common friend or will betray.
Let me clip amity, that's got with suit,
I hate this whorish love that's prostitute.
Horn on my Tailor, could he not bring home,
My Satin Taffeta, or Tissue suit:
But I must needs bee clothed in Woollen thus.
Bidet, what says he for my Silver hose?
And Prim-rose Satin Doublet, Gods my life,
Gives he no more observance to my body.
O in that last suit gentle Lauerdure,
Visit my lodging: by Appollos front
Do but inquire my name; O straight theile say
Lampatho suits him-selfe in such a hose.
Mark that Quadratus.
Consorts him-selfe with such a doublet.
Good, good, good, O Iesu admirable.
La la lie to Sir.
O Pallas! Quadratus, hark, hark, a most complete phantasm, a most ridiculous humour, prithee shoot him through and through with a jest, make him lye by the lee, thou Basilisco of wit.
O Iesu, admirably well spoken, Angelical tongue.
Gnathonicall Coxcomb,
Nay pre-thee, foot fear not he's no edge tool, you may jest with him.
No edge-toole, oh!
Tones of heaven it self.
Tones of heaven it self.
By blessedness I thought so.
Nay when, when?
Why thou Pole-head, thou Ianus, thou poltroon, thou protest, thou Eare-wig that wrigglest into men's brains: thou dirty cur that be-mierst with thy fawning, thou—
Obscure me, or—
Synior Lauerdure, by the hart of an honest man, this Ie∣busite, this confusion to him, this worse then I dare to name, abu∣seth thee most incomprehensibly; is this your protest of most obsequious vassalage, protest to strain your utmost sum, your most —
So Phoebus warm my brain, Isle rime thee dead,
Look for the Satire, if all the sower juice
Of a tart brain, can sows thy estimate,
Isle pickle thee.
Ha he mount Chirall on the wings of fame.
A horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse,
Look the I speak play scraps. Bidet Isle down
Sing, sing, or stay weal quasse or any thing
Riuo, Saint Mark, lets talk as loss as ayre
Vn-wind youths colours, display our selves
So that you enuy-starued Cur may yelp
And spend his chappes at our Phantasticknesse.
O Lord Quadratus.
Away Idolater, why you Don Kynsayder
Thou Canker eaten rusty cur, thou snaffle
To freer spirits.
Think thou a libetine, am vngiu'd breast
Skornes not the shackles of thy envious clogs
You will traduce vs unto public scorn.
By this hand I will.
A fuotra for thy hand, thy heart, thy brain,
Thy hate, thy malice, Envy, grinning spite
Shall a free-borne that holds Autypathy.
Antipathy.
I Antipathy.
A native hate unto the curse of man, bare-pated servitude,
Quake at the frowns of a ragged Satyrist
A skrubbing railer whose course hardened fortune
Grating his hide, gauling his starved ribs
Sits howling at Deserts more battle fate
Who out of dungeon of his black Despairs
Skoules at the fortune of the fairer Merit.
Tut Via let all run glib and square.
Vds foot hee cogges and cheats your simpler thoughts,
My spleen's a fire in the heate of hate
I bear these gnats that humm about our ears,
And sting blister our credit's in obscured shades.
Pewte bougra la, la, la, titt shaugh
Shall I forbear to caper, sing, or vault
To wear fresh clothes or wear perfumed sweets
To trick my face, or glory in my fate,
To abandon natural propensitudes
My fancies humour, for a stiff jointed,
Tattr'd nasty taber faced, puh, la, la, lie to
Now by thy Ladies cheek I honour thee
My rich free-bloud, O my dear libertine
I could suck the juice, the syrup of thy lip,
For thy most generous thought. My Elysium.
O Sir you are so square you scorn repoofe.
No sir should discreet Mastigophoros
Or the dear spirit acute Canaidus
(That Aretine; that most of me beloved
Who in the rich esteem I prize his soul
I term my self) should these once menace me
Or curb, my humours with well governed check
I should with most industrious regard,
Observe abstain, and curb my skipping lightness
But when an arrogant od impudent,
A blushless fore-head only out of sconce.
Of his own wants, baules in malignant questing
At others means of waving gallantry
Pipht foutra.
I fail at none you well squared Syneor.
I can not tell, tic now grown fashion,
Whats out of railing's out of fashion:
A man can scarce put on a tuckt up cap
A buttoned frizado suit, scarce eat good meat,
Anchoues, cauiare, but hoe's Satyred
And termed Fantastical: by the muddy spawn
Of slimy Noughts, when troth, Phantasticknesse,
That which the natural Sophysters term
Phantusia incomplexa, is a function
Even of the bright immortal part of man.
It is the common pass, the sacred door,
Unto the privy chamber of the soul
That bared nought passes past the baser Court:
Of outward sconce by it th'inamorate,
Most lively thinks he sees the absent beauties
Of his loved mistress.
By it we shape a new creation,
Of things as yet unborn, by it wee feed:
Our ravenous memory, our intention feast
Slid he thats not Phantasticall's a beast.
Most Fantastical protection of Phantasticknesse.
Faith tic good.
So 't be fantastical tic wits life blood.
Come Senior my legs are girt.
Phantastically.
After a spetiall humour a new cut.
Why then tic, rare, tic excellent. vds foot
And I were to be hanged I would bee choked
Phantastically, he can scarce be saved
Thats not fantastical, I stand ferme to it.
Nay then sweet sir give reason, come on, when.
Tic hell to run in common base of men.
Hast not run thy self out of breath bully.
And I have not iaded thy ears more then I have tierd my tongue, I could run discourse, put him out of his full pace.
I could poor speech till thou crid'st ho, but troth,
I dread a glut, and I confess much love
To freer gentry whose pert agile spirits
Is t'o much frost-bit numbed with il strained snibbes
Hath tender-reach'd my speech. By Brutus blood
He is a turf that will be slave to man.
But he's a beast that dreads his mistress fan.
Come all merth and folace, capers, healths and whiffs
To morrow are my nuptials celebrate:
All friends all friends.
I protest —
Nay leave protestes, pluck out your snarling phanges. When thou hast means be Fantastical and sociable; go to, here is my hand and you want forty shillings I am your Maecenas though not Atauis Edit regibus.
Why content and I protest—
Isle no protest.
Well and I doe not leave these fopperies doe not lend me forty shillings, &amp; ther's my hand, I embrace you, love you, nay adore thee, for by the juice of worm-woode, thou hast a
bitter brain.
You Simplicius? woult leave that staring fellow Admiratiō, and Adoration of thy acquaintance wilt. A scorn out tic odi∣os, too eager a defence argues a strong opposition, &amp; to vehe∣meant a praise, draws a suspicion of others worthy disparige∣meant.
Set tapers to bright day, it ill befits
Good wines can vent themselves, and not good wits.
Good truth I love you, and with the grace of Heaven,
Isle be very civil and —
Fantastical.
Isle be some thing, I have a concealed humour in me and it were broached twold spurty faith.
Come then Saint Mark let's be as light as air
As fresh and iocond as the breast of May:
I pree thee good French knight good plump cheeked chub
Run some French passage, come lets see thy vain,
Dances, scenes, and songs, royal entertain.
Petite lacque▪ page, page, Bidet sing
Give it the French jerk, quick spart, lightly, ha,
Ha hers a turn unto my Lucea.
Stand stiff ho stand, take footing firm stand sure
For if thou fall before thy mistress
Thy man-hod's damned; stand firm—ho good, so, so.
Come now via alone to Celia.
Stay take an old rime first though dry and lean
Twill serve to close the stomach of the Scene.
This is thy humour to berime vs still,
Never so slightly pleased but out they fly.
They are mine own, no gleaned Poetry,
My fashions known, out rime takt as you list:
A fico, for the sower browd Zoilist.
Music, Tobacco, Sack and Sleep,
The tide of Sorrow backward keep.
If thou art sad at others fate,
Riuo drink deep give care the mate,
On vs the end of time is come,
Fond fear of that we cannot shun,
Whilst quickest sense doth freshly last,
Clip time about, hug pleasure fast.
The Sisters rauell out our twine,
He that knows littl's most divine.
Error deludes; whole beat this hence,
Noughts known but by exterior sense,
Let glory blazon others deed,
My blood then breath craves better mead,
Let twattling fame cheatd others rest,
I am no dish for Rumours feast.
Let honour others hope abuse,
Isle nothing have so nought will loose:
Isle strive to be nor great nor small,
To live nor die, fate helmeth all,
When I can breath no longer then,
Heaven take all, there put Amen.
How first, how first?
Faith so, so, telamant, quelamant, is it please Opinion
to currant it.
Why then via letts walk,
I must give notice to an od pedant as wee pass of my nuptials, I use him for he is obscure and shall marry vs in private, I have many enemies but secrecy is the best evasion from envy.
Holds it to morrow?
I firm absolute,
Isle say amen if the Priest be mute.
Epythalamiums will I singe my chuck,
Go on, spend freely, out on dross tic muck.
Salve Magister.
Saluete pueri estote salui, vos saluere exopto vobis salutem, Bat my fili, fili mi Bat.
Quid vis.
Stand forth repeat your lesson with out book.
A noun is the name of a thing that may be seen felt heard or understood.
Good boy, on on,
Of nouns some bee substantives and some bee sub∣stantiues.
Adiectiues.
Adiectiues, a noun substantive ether is proper to the thing that it betokneth.
Well to numbers.
In Nouns bee two numbers, the Singular and the Plural, the Singular number speaks of one as Lapis a Stone, the Plural speaks of more then one, as Lipids stones.
Good child, now thou art past Lipids Stones, pro∣ceed to the cases Nous, say you next Nous, wher's your lesson Nous.
I am in a verb forsooth.
Say on for sooth say say.
A verb is a part of speech declined with mood and tence and betokneth doing as Amo I love,
How many kind of verbes arthere?
2. Personal and impersonal,
Of verbs personals, how many kinds.
Five, Active Passive Neuter Deponent and Common. A Verb Active ends in O and beetokneth to doe as Amo I love and by putting to R it may bee a passive as Amor I am loved.
Very good child, now learn to know the Deponent and common: Say you slip.
Cedant arma togae, concedant laurie lingo.
What part of speech is lingo, inflecte, inflecte.
Singulariter, nominatiuo Hec lingo.
Why is lingo the Feminine gender?
Forsooth because it is the Feminine gender.
Ha thou Ass, thou Dolt, Item per item, mark it: lingo is declined with Hec the Feminine, because it is a household stuff particularly belonging, and most commonly resident un∣der the roof of Women's mouths. Come on you Nathaniell say you, say you next, not too fast, say tretably, say.
Mascula dicuntur Monosilaba nominee quedam.
Faster, faster.
Vt, sal, sol, ren &amp; splen: car, ser, fire, was, vadis, as, mas,
Bes, cries, pres &amp; pes, glis, glirens habens genetiuo,
Moss, floss, ros &amp; tros, muns, dens, mons, pons.
Rup, tup, snup, slup, bore, whore, cor, more: holla, holla, holla, you Holifernes Pippo, put him down, wipe your Nose: fie on your sleeve, whore's your Muckender your Grand-mother gave you? well say on▪ say on.
Pree Moister what words this?
Ass, Ass.
As in presenti perfectum format in, in, in.
In what Sir?
Perfectum format in what Sir?
In what Sir in avi?
In what Sir in avi.
Vt no, nas, naui, vocito, vocitas, voci, voci, voci—
What's next?
Voci, What's next?
Why thou ungracious child, thou simple animal, thou barnacle. Nous snare him, take him up, and you were my father you should up.
Indeed I am not your Father, O Lord now for God sake; let me go out, my mother told a thing, I shall bewray all else. Hark you Moister, my Grand-mother entreats you to come to dinner to morrow morning.
I say untruss take him up, Nous, dispatch what not per∣fact in an Ass in presenty?
In truth Isle bee as perfect an Ass in presenty as any of this Company, with the grace of god law, this once, this once, and I do so any more —
I say hold him up.
Ha let me say my prayers first. You know not what you ha done now, all the surrup of my brain is run into my but∣tockes &amp; ye spill the juice of my wit well, ha sweet, ha sweet, honey barberry sugar sweet Moister.
Sance tricks trifles, delays, demurrers procrastinations or retarations mount him, mount him.
Be merciful my gentle Senior.
Weal sue his pardon out.
He is reprieved: and now Appollo bless your brains Fa¦cundius and Elaborate elegance, make your presence gracious in the eyes of your Mistress.
You must along with vs, lend private ear.
What is your name.
Holifernes Pippo.
Who gave you that name. Nay let me alone for spo∣sing of a scholar.
My godfathers and god-mothers in my baptism.
Truly gallants I am inamord on thee boy wilt thou serve me.
Yes and please my grand-mother when I come to years of discretion.
And you have a propensitude to him, he shall be for you: I was solicited to grant him leave to play the Lady in com∣medies presented by Children, but I knew his voice was to small and his stature to lo, sing, sing a treble Holifernes; sing.
A very small sweet voice Isle assure you.
Tic smelly sweet indeed.
A very pretty Child, hold up thy head, there, buy thee some plummes.
Nay they must play, you go a long with vs.
Ludendi venue est petite &amp; concessa.
Gratias.
Pippo's my page, how like you him, ha has hee not a good face, ha.
Exceeding amiable; come away,
I long to see my love my Celia.
Carry my rapier hold up so, good child, stay gallants vmph a sweet face.
I relish not this mirth, my spirit is vntwist,
My heart is raueld out in discontents,
I am deep thoughtful, and I shoot my soul
Through all creation of omnipotence.
What art melancholy Lamp. Isle feed thy humour
Isle give thee reason straight to hang thy self
Marked marked: In heavens handiwork theirs nought
Believe it.
In heavens handiwork ther's nought
None more vile, accursed, reprobate to bliss
Then man, and mong men a scholar most.
Things only fleshly sensitive, an Ox or Horse,
They live and eat, and sleep, and drink, and die
And are not touched with recollections
Of things ore-past or staggerd infant doubts
Of things succeeding: but leave the manly beasts,
And give but pence a piece to have a sight:
Of beastly man now.
What so Lampatho, good truth I will not pay your Or∣denariate if you come not.
Dost thou hear that voice. Isle make a parrot now,
As good a man as hee in fourteen nights
I never heard him vent a syllable:
Of his own creating since I knew the use
Of eyes and ears? Well he's perfect blessed,
Because a perfect beast. Isle gage my heart
He knows no difference essential
Twixt my dog and him. The horizon sot is blessed
Is rich in ignorance, makes fair usance on it
And every day augments his barbarism
So love me Calmness I do envy him forts.
I was a scholar: seven vse-full springs
Did I deflower in quotations
Of crossed oppinions bout the soul of man
The more I learnt the more I learnt to doubt
Knowledge and wit faiths foes, turn faith about
Nay come good Senior, I stay all the gentlemen here, I wood fine give my pretty page a pudding pie.
Honest Epicure.
Nay mark list delight, delight my spaniel slept, whilst I bausd leaves.
Tossed ore the dunces pored on the old print
Of titled words, and still my spaniel slept.
Whilst I wasted lampoile, bated my flesh
Shrunk up my veins, and still my spaniel slept.
And still I held converse with Zabarell
Equines Scotus, and the musty saw
Of antic Donate, still my spaniel slept
Still on went I, first an sit enema
Then and it were mortal, O hold hold
At that they are at brain buffets fell by the ears,
A maine pell mell together, still my spaniel slept.
Then whether it were Corporeal, Local, fixed,
Extraduce, but whether't had free will
Or no, ho Philosophers
Stood banding factions all so strongly propped,
I staggerd, knew not which was firmer part.
But thought, quoted, read, observed and pried,
Stuffed noting books, and still my spaniel slept.
At length he waked and yawnd and by yon sky,
For aught I know he knew as much as I.
Delicate good Lampatho come away. I assure you isle give but two pence more.
How, it was created, how the soul exsistes
One talks of motes, the soul was made of motes,
An other fire, tother light, a third a spark of Star-like nature
Hippo water, Anaximenes ayre,
Aristoxenus Music; Critias I know not what,
A company of odd phrenetici
Did eat my youth, and when I crept abroad,
Finding my numnesse in this nimble age,
I fell a railing, but now soft and slow,
I know, I know nought, but I nought do know,
What shall I doe, what plot, what course persew?
Why turn a Temporised, row with the tide,
Pursew the cut, the fashion of the age,
Well heir's my Scholars course, first get a School,
And then a ten-pound Cure, keep both, then buy,
(Stay marry, I marry) then a farm or so,
Serve God and Mammon, to the Devil go,
Affect some sect, I it is the sect is it,
So thou can seem it is held the precious wit:
And O if thou can get some higher seat,
Where thou moist sell your holy portion,
(Which charitable providence ordained
In sacred bounty for a blessed use)
Alien the gleabe, entail it to thy loins,
Entomb it in thy grave
Past resurrection to his native use.
Now if there be a hell, and such swine saved,
Heaven take all, that's all my hopes have craved.
My Simplicias Moister.
Your Moister Simplicius.
Has come to you to sent.
Has sent to me to come.
Ha, ha, has bought me a fine dagger, and a Hat and a Feather, I can say As in presenti now.
Quadratus Quadratus, away, away.
We come sweet gallants; and grumbling hate lye still
And turn Phantastique: he that climbs a hill
Must wheel about, the ladder to account
Is sly dissemblance, he that means to mount,
Must lye all level in the prospective
Of eager sighted greatness, thou would thrive,
The Venice state is young, loose, and vnknit,
Can relish nought but lushious vanities
Go fit his tooth, O glauering flattery,
How potent art thou: front look brisk and sleek,
That such base dirt as you should dare to reeke,
In Princes nostrils. Well my scene is long.
I come hot bloods, those that their state would swell,
Must bear a counter-face: the devil and hell
Confound them all, that's all my prayers exact,
So ends our chat, sound Music for the Act.
For God-sake remember to take special marks of me, or you will ne'er be able to know me.
Why man?
Why good faith I scarce know my self already me thinks I should remember to forget my self, now I am so shining brave. Indeed Francisco was always a sweet youth, for I am a Persumer, but thus brave? I am an alien to it, would you make me like the drowned Albino, must I bear't mainly up, must I bee hee.
What else man? O what else?
I warrant you give him but fair rich clothes,
Hee can bee tan, reputed any thing,
Apparail's grown a God and goes more neat,
Makes men of rags, which straight he bears aloft,
Like patched up scar-Crowes to affright the rout
Of the Idolatrous vulgar, that worship Images,
Stand awed and bare-skalp't at the gloss of silks,
Which like the glorious Aiax of Lincolnes Inn,
(Surveyed with wonder by me when I lay,
Factor in London:) laps up nought but filth
And excrements, that bear the shape of men,
Whose in-side every day would peck and tear,
But that vain skar-crow clothes entreats forbear.
You would have me take upon me Albino,
A valiant gallant Venetian Burgomasco,
Well my beard, my feather, short sword and my oath
Shall do it fear not. What I know a number
By the sole warrant of a Lapy-beard,
A rain beat plume, and a good chop filling oath,
With an odd French shrug, and by the Lot or so,
Ha leapt into sweet Captain with such ease,
As you would-feart not, Isle gage my heart Isle do it,
How sits my Hat, ha, Jack doth my feather wag.
Me thinks now in the common sense of fashion,
Thou should grow proud, and like a fore-horse view,
None but before-hand gallants, as for sides▪
And those that rank in equal file with thee,
Study a faint salute, give a strange eye,
But as to those in rere-ward O be blind,
The world wants eyes, it cannot see behind.
Where is the strumpet, whore's the hot veined French,
Lives not Albino, hath Celia so forgot,
Albinos love, that she must forth-with wed,
A runne-about▪ a skipping French-man—
Now you must grow in heate and stut.
An odd phantasm, a beggar, a Sir, a who who who what you will, a straggling go go go gunds, f f f f foot—
Passing like him, passing like him, O twill strike all dead.
I am ravished twill be peerless exquisite,
Let him go out instantly.
O not till twilight, mean time Isle prop up
The tottering Rumour of Albinos skip.
And safe arrival, it begins to spread,
If this plot live Frenchman thy hopes are dead.
And if it live strike of this little head.
Can it be? first possible? first within the bounds of faith? O villainy.
The clapper of Rumour strikes on both sides ringing out the French knight is in firm possessiō of my Mistress your wife.
First possible I should be dead so soon?
In her affects, how long first since our shipprack?
Faith I have little arithmetic in me, yet I remember the storm made me cast up perfectly the whole sum of all I had received, three days before I was liquord soundly my guts were rinsed for the heavens: I look as pale ever since as if I had tan the diet this spring.
But how long first since our ship-wrack?
Mary since wee were hung by the heals on the batch of Cycily to make a jail delivery of the sea in our mawes tic just three months: shall I speak like a Poet?
Talk not of horns. O Celia how oft
(When thou hast laid thy cheek upon my breast
And with lascivious petulance sewed.
For Hymeneal dalliance marriage rights)
O then how oft with passionate protestes
And zealous vows hast thou obliged thy love,
In dateless bands unto Albinos breast?
Then did I but mention second Marriage
With what a bitter hate would she inveigh
Against retaild wedlockes. O would she lisp
If you should die, (then would she slide a tear,
And with a wanton languishment in-twist
Her hands) O God and you should die. Marry?
Could I love life; my dear Albino dead
Should any Prince possess his widows bed?
And now see, see, I am but rumord drowned.
Sheele make you Prince, your worship must be crowned
O master you know the woman is the weaker creature,
She must have a prop: the maid is the brittle mettell
Her head is quickly cracked: the wife is queasy stomached
She must be fed with novelties; but then whats your widow,
Custom is a second nature, I say no more but think you the rest.
If love be holy, if that mystery,
Of co-vnited hearts be sacrament?
If the unbounded goodness have infused.
A sacred ardor if a mutual love
Into our Speties, of those amorous joys,
Those sweets of life, those comforts even in death
Spring from a cause aboue our reasons reach?
If that clear flame deduce his heate from heaven?
Tic like his cause's eternal always one
As is the instiller of divinest love
Vnchangd by time immortal maugre death.
But O tic grown a figment: love a jest:
A commick Poesy: the soul of man is rotten
Even to the core no sound affection.
Our love is hollow vaulted, stands on proppes,
Of circumstance, profit or ambitious hopes.
The other tissue Gown or Chain of pearl
Makes my coy minx to nussell twixt the breasts
Of her lulled husband, tother Carkanet,
Deflowres that Ladies bed: one hundred more
Marries that loathed blowze, one ten pound odds
In promised jointure makes the hard palmed sire,
Enforce his daughters tender lips to start
At the sharpe touch of some loathed stubbed beard,
The first pure time the golden age is fled,
Heaven knows I lie tic now the age of gold,
For it all mars and even virtues sold.
Master will you trust me and Isle.
Yes boy Isle trust thee, babes &amp; fools isle trust
But servants faith, wives love, or femalls lust,
A usurer and the devil sooner. Now were I dead,
Me thinks I see a huff-cap swaggering sir,
Pawning my plate, my jewels, mortgage? Nay
Selling out right the purchase of my brows,
Whilst my poor fatherless lean totterd son,
My gentries relics, my houses only prop,
Is sawed a sunder, lies forlorn, all bleak,
Unto the griefs of sharpe Necessities,
Whilst his father in law, his father in Devil, or d d d d Devil,
f f f father,
Or who who who who; What you will,
When is the marriage morn?
Even next rising son.
Good, good, good, go to my brother Adrian,
Tell him Isle lurk, stay, tell him Isle lurk, stay,
Now is Albinos marriage bed new hung
With fresh rich Curtains, now are my valence up,
Embossed with orient Pearl, my Gransires gift,
Now are the Lawn sheets fumed with Violets,
To fresh the pawld lascivious appetite,
Now work the Cooks, the pastry sweates with slaves,
The March-panes glitter, now now the musicians
Hover with nimble sticks ore squeaking crowds,
Ticling the dried guts of a Mewing Catt,
The Taylors, Starchers, Semsters, Butchers, Pulterors, Mercers, all, all, all, now now now, none think a me, the f f f French is te f f f fine man, de p p p pock man, de—
Peace, peace, stand concealed, yonder by all descriptions is he would be husband of my Mistress: your wife ho meat ho.
Vds so, so, so, soul thats my velvet cloak.
O peace, observe him, ho.
It is most true Sir, I heard all, I saw all, I tell all, and I hope you believe all, the sweet Francisco Soranza, the Perfu∣mer is by your rival Iacomo, and your two brothers that must be, when you have married your wife, that shall be.
With the grace of Heaven.
Disguised so like the drowned Albino to cross your suit, that by my little honesty it was great consolation to me to observe them, passion of joy, of hope. O excellent cried An∣drea, passingly cried Randolfo; unparalleled lisps Iacomo, good, good, good, says Andrea, now stut says Iacomo, now stut says Randolfo, whilst the ravished Perfumer had like to have waterd the seames of his breeches for extreme pride of their applause.
Sest, Isle to Celia, and maugre the nose of her friends, wed her: bed her, my first son shall bee a Captain, and his name shall bee what it please his God-fathers, the second if hee have a face bad enough, a Lawyer, the third a Merchant, and the fourth if he bee maimd, dull brained, or hard shaped, a scholar, for thats your fashion.
Get them, get them man first; now by the wantonness of the night, and I were a wench I would not ha-thee, were thou an heir, nay (which is more) a fool.
Why I can rise high, a straight leg, a plump thigh, a full vain, a round cheek, and when it pleases the fertility of my chin to be delivered of a beard, twill not wrong my kiss∣sing, for my lips are rebels, and stand out.
Ho but ther's an old fusty Proverb, these great talkers are never good dooers.
Why what a babel arrogance is this?
Men will put by the very stock of fate,
Theyle thwart the destiny of marriage,
Strive to disturb the sway of providence,
Theile do it?
Come, you'll be snarling now.
As if we had free-will in supernatural
Effects, and that our love or hate
Depended not on causes above the reach
Of human stature.
I think I shall not lend you forty shillings now.
Dirt upon dirt, fear is beneath my shoe,
Dreadlesse of rackes, strappados, or the sword,
Maugre Informer and sly intelligence,
Isle stand as confident as Hercules,
And with a frightlesse resolution,
Rip up and lance our times impieties.
Vds so peace.
Open a bounteous ear for Isle be free,
Ample as Heaven, give my speech more room,
Let me unbrace my breasts, strip up my sleeves,
Stand like an executioner to vice,
To strike his head off with the keener edge,
Of my sharpe spirit.
Room and good licence, come on, when, when.
Now is my fury mounted, fix your eyes,
Intend your senses, bend your listening up,
For Isle make greatness quake, Isle tawe the hide
Of thick-skind Hugeness.
Tic most gracious weal observe thee calmly.
Hang on thy tongs end, come on prithee doe.
Isle see you hanged first, I thank you Sir, Isle none,
This is the strain that chokes the theaters:
That makes them crack with full stuffed audience,
This is your humour only in request
Forsooth to rail, this brings your ears to bed▪
This people gape for, for this some doe stare
This some would hear, to crack the Authors neck,
This admiration and applause pursues,
Who cannot rail, my humours changed it is clear,
Pardon Isle none, I prise my joints more dear.
Moister, Moister, I ha descried the Perfumer in Albinos disguise, look you, look you, rare sport, rare sport.
I can contain my impatience no longer, you Moun∣sieur Cauelere, Saint Dennis, you Caprichious Sir, Senior Caran∣to French brawl, you that must marry Celia Galanto, is Albino drowned now? go wander, avaunt Knight, errant Celia shall bee no Cuck-queane, my heir no beggar, my plate no pawn, my land no mortgage, my wealth no food for thy luxuries, my house no harbour for thy Comrades▪ my bed no booty for thy lusts, my any thing shall bee thy no∣thing, go hence pack, pack, avaunt, caper, caper, alone, alone, pass by, pass by, cloak your nose, away, vanish, wander de∣part, slink by away.
Hark you perfumer, tell Iacomo Randulfo, and Adrian, twill not do, look you say no more, but twill not doe.
What perfumer? what Iacomo?
Nay assure thee honest Perfumer good Francisco, wee know all man, go home to thy Civet Box, look to the pro∣fit, commodity or emolument of thy Mus-cats tail, go clap on your round Cap, my what do you lack sir, for in faith good rogue alls descried.
What Perfumer? what Mus-cat? what Francisco, what do you lack, first not enough that you kissed my wife?
Enough.
I enough, and may be, I fear me too much, but you must flout me, deride me, scoff me, keep out, touch not my porch, as for my wife—
Stir to the door: dare to disturb the match, And by the—
My sword: menace Albino fore his own doors.
No not Albino but Francisco, thus, Perfumer, Isle make you stink if you stir a; for the rest: well via via.
Iesu, Iesu, what intends this? ha?
O God Sir, you lye as open to my understanding as a Courtesan, I know you as well—
Some body knows me yet, praise heaven some body knows me yet.
Why look you Sir, I ha paid for my knowing of men and women too in my days, I know you are Francisco Soranza the Perfumer, I maugre Senior Satin I.
Do not tempt my patience, go to, doe not.
I know you dwell in Saint Marks lane, at the sign of the Mus-cat as well—
Fool, or mad, or drunk no more.
I know where you were dressed, where you were—
Nay then take all, take all, take all—
And I tell not my father, if I make you not loose your office of gutter Maister-ship; and you bee Skauenger next
year well: Come Holifernes come good Holifernes, come servant.
Francisco Soranza and perfumer and muscat, and gut∣la moister hay, hay, hay, go, go, go, gods f, f, f, foot; Isle to the Duke and Isle so ti, ti, ti, tickle them.
Precious, what means he to go out so soon,
Before the dusk of twilight might deceive
The doubtful priors. What holla.
Whop what devil now?
Isle fine I know him not, what business fore those doors.
Whats that to thee
You come to wrong my friend Sir Lauerdure
Confess or—
My sword boy s, s, s, s, soul my sword.
O my dear rogue thou art a rare dissembler.
See see.
Francisco did I not help to cloth thee even now
I would has worn thee Albino my good sweet slave.
See, see, Iesu, Iesu, impostors, connicatchers, Sancta Maria?
Look you, he walks he fains most excellent.
Accost him first as if you were ignorant
Of the deceit.
O dear Albino now thrice happy eyes
To view the hope-lesse presence of my brother.
Most loved kinsman praise to Heaven yet,
You know Albino, but for yonder slaves—well.
Success could not come on more gracious.
Had not you come (dear brother Adrian)
I think not one would know me. Vlisses dog
Had quicker sconce then my dull Countrymen,
Why none had known me.
Doubt you of that? would I might die,
Had I not known the guile I would ha sworn
Thou had bin Albino, my nimble couzning knave.
Whip, whip, Heaven preserve al Saint Mark Saint Mark.
Brother Adrian, be frantic prithee be
Say I am a Perfumer Francisco, hay hay
First not some feast day you are all rank drunk
Rratts ra, ra, ra, rats knights of the be, be, be, bell, be, be, bell.
Go go proceed thou dost it rare farewell.
Farewell? ha? first even so? boy who am I?
My Lord Albino,
By this breast you lie
The Simian faith is true, true, I was drowned
And now my soul is skipped into a perfumer a gutter-master.
Believe me sir —
No no Isle believe nothing, no,
The disadvantage of all honest hearts
Is quick credulity, perfect state policy
Can crosse-bite even sense, the worlds turned Juggler,
Castes mists before our eyes Haygh pass re pass
Isle credit nothing.
Good Sir.
Hence ass.
Doth not Opinion stamp the currant pass,
Of each mans value, virtue, quality?
Had I engrossed the choice commodities
Of heavens traffic, yet reputed vile
I am a rascal; O dear unbelief,
How wealthy dost thou make thy owners wit?
Thou train of knowledge, what a privilege
Thou giu'st to thy possessor: anchorst him,
From floating with the tide of vulgar faith:
From being damned with multitudes dear unbelief,
I am a Perfumer, I, think thou my blood,
My brothers know not right Albino yet?
Away tic faites, if Albinos name,
Were liable to sconce, that I could taste or touch
Or see, or feel it, it might tice belief,
But since tic voice, and ayre, come to the Muscat boy,
Francisco, thats my name tic right, I, I,
What do you lack? what first you lack right that's my cry.
Proclaim our titles
Bosphoros Cormelydon Honorificacuminos Bidet.
I think your Majesties a Welshman, you have a whore∣rible long name.
Death or silence proceed.
Honorificacuminos Bidet Emperor of Cracks, Prince of Pages, Marks of Mumchance, and sole regent over a bale of false dice, to all his under Ministers health, Crowns, Sack, Tobacco, and stockings vncrakt aboue the shoe.
Our self will give them their charge, Now let me stroke my beard and I had it, &amp; speak wisely if I knew how: most vnconsionable, honest little, or little honest good subjects, inform our person of your several qualities and of the pre∣iudice that is foisted upon you that our self may peruew, pre∣uent, and preoccupy the pustulent dangers incident to all your cases.
Here is a petition exhibited of the particular greeuan∣ces of each sort of pages.
We will vouchsafe in this our public session to per∣use them, pleases your excellent wagship to bee informed that the division of pages is tripartite (tripartite) or three fold, of pages, some be Court pages, others Ordinary gallants pages, &amp; the third-apple squires, basket-bearers or pages of the placket, with the last we will proceed first, stand forth page of the plac∣ket, what is your mistress?
A kind of puritan.
How live you?
Miserably cōplayning to your crack-ship though we have light Mistresses we are made the Children and servants of dark∣nes, what profane use we are put to, al these gallants more fee∣lingly know then we can lively express, it is to be comiserated
and by your royal insight only to bee prevented that a male Monkey and the diminutive of a man should bee Synonima &amp; no sconce. Though wee are the dross of your subjects, yet be∣ing a kind of page, let vs find your Celsitude kind and respec∣tiue of our time-fortunes and births abuse, and so in the name of our whole tribe of empty basket-bearers, I kiss your little hands.
Your case is dangerous and almost desperate stand forth ordinary gallants page, what is the nature of your Master?
He eats well and right slovenly, and when the dice favour him goes in good clothes, and scowers his pink colour silk stockings: whē he hath any money he bears his crowns, whē he hath none I carry his purse, he cheats well, swears better, but swaggers in a wantons Chamber admirably, hee loves his boy and the rump of a crammed Capon, and this summer hath a passing thrifty humour to bottle ale: as contemptuous as Lucifer, as arrogant as ignorāce can make him, as libidinous as Priapus, hee keeps me as his adamant to draw mettell after to his lodging, I curl his periwig, paint his cheeks, perfume his breath, I am his froterer or rubber in a Hot-house, the prop of his lies, the bearer of his false dice, and yet for all this like the Persian Louse that eats biting, and biting eats, so I say si∣thing and sithing say my end is to paste up a Si quis my Masters fortunes are forced to cashier me and so six to one I fall to be a Pippin squire. Hic finis priami, this is the end of pick pockets.
Stand forth Court-page, thou lokest pale and wan.
Most ridiculous Emperor.
O say no more, I know thy miseries, what betwixt thy Lady, her Gentlewoman and thy Masters late gaming thou moist look pale. I know thy miseries and I condole thy calami∣ties, thou art borne well, bred ill, but die worst of al, thy blood most commonly gentle, thy youth ordinarily idle, and thy age to often miserable. When thy first suit is fresh, thy cheeks clear of Court soils, and thy Lord fallen out with his Lady, so lunge may be heel chuck thee under the chin, call thee good pretty ape and give thee a scrap from his own trencher, but after he never beholds thee, but when thou squierst him with a torch to a wantons sheets, or lights his Tobacco pipe. Never
uses thee but as his pander never, regards thee but as an idle bur that stickst upon the nap of his fortune, and so naked thou came into the world and naked thou must return; whom serve you.
A fool.
Thou art my happiest subject, the service of a fool is the only blessedest slavery that ever put on a chain and a blew cote, they know not what nor for what they give, but so they give tic good, so it be good they give: fortunes are ordained for fools, as fools are for fortune, to play with all not to use, hath hee taken an oath of allegiance is hee of our brother∣hood yet?
Not yet right venerable Honorificac cac cac cacuminos Bidet: but as little an infant as I am I will, and with the grace of wit I will deserve it.
You must perform a valorous Virtuous, and religi∣os exploit first in desert of your order.
What first?
Cousin thy master, hee is a fool, and was created for men of wit such as thy self to make use of.
Such as my self. Nay faith for wit I think for my age or so, but on, sir.
That thou moist the easier purge him of superfluous blood I will describe thy Masters constitution, he loves and is beloved of himself and one more; his dog. There is a company of unbraced untrust, rutters in the town, that crinkle in the hams swearing their flesh is their only living, and when they have any crowns, cry god a mercy Mole, and shrugging let the Cockholds pay fort: intimating that their maintenance flows from the wantonness of Merchants wives, when in truth the plain troth is, the plain and the stand, or the plain stand and deliver, delivers them all their living. These comrades have persuaded thy Moister that ther's no way to redeem his peach colour satin suit from pawn but by the love of a Cyti∣zens wife, hee believes it, they slout him he feeds them, and now tic our honest and religious meditation that hee feed vs.
Holyfernes Puppi.
Pippo and shall please you.
Pippo tic our will and pleasure thou suit thy self like a Merchants wife, leave the managing of the sequence unto our prudence.
Or unto our Prudence truly she is a very witty wench and hath a stammel petticoat with three guards for the nonce; but for your Merchants wife alas I am to little, speak to small, go to gingerly, by my troth I fear I shall look to fair.
Our majesty dismounted, and wee put of our great∣ness, and now my little knaves I am plain Crack, as I am Boss∣phoros Carmelidon Honorificacuminos Bidet I am imperious: ho∣nor sparkles in mine eyes; but as I am Crack I will convey cross∣bite and cheat upon Simplicius, I will feed, satiate and fill your panches: replenish, stuff or furnish your purses, wee will laugh when others weep, sing when others sith, feed when others starve, and be drunk when others are sober, this my charge at the loose, as you love our brother-hood, avoid true speech square dice, small liquor, and aboue all, those to vngentleman∣like protestations of indeed and verily, and so gentle Appollo touch thy nimble string our scene is donne yet fore wee cease wee sing.
Faith sister I long to play with a feather,
Prithee Lucia bring the shuttle-cock.
Out on him light pated Fantastic, he's like one of our gallants at. —
I wonder who thou speak well of?
Why of my self, for by my troth I know none else will.
Sweet sister Meletza lets sit in judgment a little, faith of my servant Monsieur Lauerdure.
Troth well for a servant, but for a husband (figh) I.
Why why?
Why he is not a plain fool, nor fair, nor fat, nor rich, rich fool. But he is a knight, his honour will give the pas∣sado in the presence to morrow night, I hope he will deserve: Al I can say is as, as the common fiddlers will say in their God send you well to do.
How think thou of the amorous Iacomo.
Iacomo why on my bare troth.
Why bare troth.
Because my troth is like his chin tath no hair on it; gods me his face looks like the head of a taber, but trust me he hath a good wit.
Who told you so.
One that knows, one that can tell?
Whose that.
Him self.
Well wench, thou had a servant one Fabius what hast thou done with him.
I donne with him? out of him puppy, by this feather his beard is directly brick colour, and perfectly fashioned like the husk of a cheessnut, hee kisses with the driest lip; figh on him.
O but your servant Quadratus the absolute Courtier.
Fie, fie, speak no more of him, he lives by begging?
He is a fine Courtier flatters admirable, kisses
Fair Madam, smells surpassing sweet, wears
And holds up the arras, supports the tapestry,
When I pass into the presence very gracefully and
I assure you.
Madam here is your shuttle-cock
Sister is not your weighting wench rich?
Why sister why?
Because she can flatter: prithee call her not,
She has 24. hours to Madam yet; come you
You prate in faith Isle toss you from post to pillar.
You post and I pillar.
No, no, you are the only post, you must support
prove a wench and bear, or else all the building of your de∣light will fall —
Down.
What must I stand out?
I by my faith till you be married.
Why do you toss then?
Why I am wed wench.
Pree thee to whom.
To the true husband right head of a woman, my will, which vows never to marry till I mean to be a fool, a slave, starch cambric ruffs, and make candells (pur) tic down serve again good wench.
By your pleasing cheek you play well.
Nay good creature pree thee doe not flatter me, I thought it was for something you go casd in your velvet skab∣berd, I warrant these laces were ne'er stiched on with true stich, I have a plain weighting wench she speaks plain, and faith, she goes plain, she is virtuous and because she should go like virtue by the consent of my bounty she shall never have a¦above two smocks to her back, for thats the fortune of desert, &amp; the maine in fashion or reward of merit (pur)just thus do I use my servants, I strive to catch them in my racket, and no sooner caught but I toss them away, if he fly well and have good fee∣theirs I play with them till he be down, and then my maid serves him to me again, if a slug and weak winged if hee bee down there let him lie.
Good Mell I wonder how many servants thou hast.
Troth so do I, let me see Dupatzo.
Dupatzo which Dupatzo.
Dupatzo the elder brother the fool, he that bought the half penny rib and wearing it in his ear▪ swearing it was the duchess of Millans favour, hee into whose head a man may travel 10. leagues before hee can meet with his eyes, then ther's my chub my Epicure Quadratus, that rubs his guts, clappes his paunch &amp; cries Riuo, entertaining my ears perpe∣tually with a most strong discourse of the praise of bottle ale &amp;
red Herrings, then ther's Simplicius Faber.
Why he is a fool.
True or else he would ne'er be my servant, then ther's the cap cloaked Courtier Baltazar hee wears a double treble quadruple ruff, I in the summer time, faith I ha servants enough and I doubt not but by my ordinary pride and extraordinary cunning to get more. Monsieur Lauerdure with a troupe of gal∣lants is entering.
He capers the lascivious blood about
Within heart pantes, nor leaps the eye nor lips:
Prepare your selves to kiss for you must be kissed.
By my troth tic a pretty thing to be towards marriage, a pretty loving: look where he comes ha ha.
Good day sweet love.
Wish her good night man.
God morrow sister.
A curse to you caper, to morrow morn Isle call you brother.
But much much falls betwixt the cup and lip.
Be not to confident the knot may slip.
Bounty, blessedness, and the spirit of wine attend my Mistress.
Thanks good chub.
God ye god morrow heartily mistress, and how do you since last I saw you.
Gods me you must not inquire how she does, thats privy counsel, fie, ther's manners indeed.
Pray you pardon my incivility, I was somewhat bold with you, but believe me Isle never be so saucy to ask you how you do again, as long as I live la.
Square chub, what sullen black is that.
A tassel that hangs at my purse strings, hee dogs me and I give him scraps and pay for his ordinary, feed him, hee li∣quors himself in the juice of my bounty, and when hee hath sucked up strength of spirit he squeezed it in my own face, when I have refined and sharp'd his wits with good food, hee cuts my
fingers, and breaks jests upon me, I bear them, and beat him: but by this light the dull eyed thinks he dos well, dos very well, and but that hee and I are of two faiths—I fill my belly, and feeds his brain, I could find in my heart to hug him, to hug him.
Prithee persuade him to assume spirit and salute vs.
Lampatho, Lampatho, art out of countenance, for wits sake salute these beauties, how dost like them?
Vds foot, I can liken them to nothing, but great men's great horse upon great days, whose tails are trust up in silk and silver.
To them man, salute them.
Bless you fair Ladies, God make you all his servants.
God make you all his servants.
Hee is helped well had need of you, for bee it spoken without prophanisme hee hath more in this train, I fear me you ha more servants then he, I am sure the Devil is an Angel of darkness.
I but those are Angels of light.
Light Angels, prithee leave them, with-draw a little and hear a Sonnet prithee, hear a Sonnet.
Made of Albinos widow that was, and Monsieur Lauerdures wife that must be.
Come leave his lips and command some liquor, if you have no Bottle-Ale, command some Claret-wine and Bourrage, for that's my predominate humour sleek billid Bacchus, lets fill thy guts.
Nay hear it, and relish it iuditiously.
I do relish it most iuditially.
Adored excellence, delicious sweet.
Delicious sweet good, very good.
If thou can taste the purer juice of love.
If thou can taste the purer juice, good still, good still.
I doe relish it, it tastes sweet.
Is not the metaphor good, first not well followed?
Passing good, very pleasing.
First not sweet.
Let me see it Isle make it sweet,
Isle soak it in the juice of Helicon.
Bear Lady, passing sweet, good, passing sweet.
You wrong my Muse.
The Irish flux upon thy Muse, thy whorish Muse,
Here is no place for her loose brothelry,
We will not deal with her, go, away, away,
Isle be revenged.
How prithee in a play? come, come, be sociable
In private severance from society,
Here leaps a vain of blood inflamed with love,
Mounting to pleasure, all adict to mirth,
Thoult read a Satire or a Sonnet now,
Clagging their aerie humour with—
Lamp oil, watch Candles, Rug-gownes &amp; small juice,
Thin commons, four a clock rising, I renounce you all,
Now may I ternally abandon meat
Rust fusty you which most embraced disuse,
You a made me an Ass, thus shaped my lot,
I am a mere Scholar, that is a mere sot.
Come then Lamp, isle power fresh Oil into thee,
Apply thy spirit that it may nimbly turn,
Unto the habit, fashion of the age,
Isle make thee man the Scholar, enable thy behaviour,
Apt for the entertain of any presence:
Isle turn thee gallant, first thou shalt have a Mistress,
How is thy spirit raised to yonder beauty?
She with the sanguine cheek, the dimpled chin,
The pretty amorous smile that clips her lips,
And dallies bought her cheek—
She with the speaking eye,
That castes out beams as ardent as those flakes,
Which singed the world by rash brained Phaeton,
She with the lip, O lips! she for whose sake,
A man could find in his heart to in-hell himself,
There's more Philosophy, more theorems,
More demonstrations, all invincible,
More clear divinity drawn on her cheek,
Then in all volumes tedious paraphase,
Of musty old, O who would staggering doubt,
The souls eternity, seeing it hath
Of heavenly beauty, but to case it up,
Who would distrust a supreme existence,
Able to confound when it can creale,
Such heaven on earth able to entrance,
Amaze: O I it is providence, not chance.
Now by the front of Jove me thinks her eye
Shoots more spirit in me, O beauty feminine!
How powerful art thou, what deep magic lies
Within the circle of thy speaking eyes.
Why now could I eat thee, thou dost please mine ap∣petite, I can desist thee, God made thee a good fool, and happy and ignorant, and amorous, and rich and frail, and a Satyrist, and an Essayist, and sleepy, and proud, and indeed a fool and then thou shalt bee sure of all these. Doe but scorn her she is thine own, accost her carelessly, and her eye promises she will be bound to the good abbearing.
Now sister Meletza dost mark their craft, some strag∣gling thoughts transport thy attentiveness from his discourse, wast Iacomos or our brothers plot?
Both, both, sweet Lady, my Page heard all, we met the rogue, so like Albino, I beat the rogue.
I but when you were gone the rogue beat me.
Now take my counsel, listen.
A pretty youth, a pretty well shaped youth, a good leg, a very good eye, a sweet ingenious face, and I warrant a good wit, nay which is more, if hee bee poor I assure my soul hee is chaste and honest, good faith I fancy, I fancy him, I and I may chance, well Isle think the rest.
I say bee careless still, court her without complement take spirit.
Were not a pleasing jest for me to cloth
Another rascal like Albino, say
And rumour him returned without all deceit,
Would not beget errors most ridiculous.
Meletza bella belletza, Madonna, bella bella genteletza prithee kiss this initiated gallant.
How would it please you I should respect ye.
As any thing, What you will as nothing.
As nothing, how will you value my love.
Why just as you respect me, as nothing, for out of no∣thing, nothing is bred, so nothing shall not beget any-thing, any-thing bring nothing, nothing bring any-thing, any-thing &amp; nothing shall be What you will, my speech mounting to the valieu of my self which is.
What sweet—
Your nothing light as your self scencelesse as your sex, and just as you would ha me, nothing.
Your wit skips a morisco, but by the brightest span∣glee of my tier, I vouchafe you entire vnaffected favour, were this gentle spirit be not proud.
Believe it youth slow speech, swift love doth often shroud.
My soul's entranced your favour doth transport,
My sconce past sconce, by your adored graces,
I dote, am rapt.
Nay if you fall to passion and past sconce,
My breasts no harbour for your love, go pack, hence.
Vds foot thou gull, thou inky scholar, ha, thou whore∣son fop,
Wilt not thou clap into our fashioned gallantry,
Could not be proud and skornfull, aloof and vain
Gods my hearts object, what a plague is this:
My soul's entranced, foot could not clip and kiss,
My soul's entranced, ten thousand crowns at least
Lost lost, my soul's entranced, loves life O beast!
Celia open, open Celia, I would enter, open Celia.
Celia, open, open Celia, I would enter open Celia.
What Celia let in thy husband Albino what Celia.
What Celia let in thy husband Albino what Celia
Vds f, f, f, foot let Albino enter.
Vds f, f, f, foot let Albino enter.
Sweet breast you ha played the wag in faith.
Believe it sweet not I.
Come you have attired some fiddler like Albino to fright the perfumer, ther's the jest.
Good fortunes to our sister.
And a speedy marriage.
Then we must wish her no good fortunes.
For shame, for shame straight clear your house; sweep out this dust, fling out this trash, return to modesty your hus∣band I say your husband Albino that was supposed drowned is returned I and at the door.
Ha ha, my husband, ha ha.
Laugh you, shameless? laugh you?
Come, come, your plots discovered, good faith kinsmen I am no scold: to shape a Perfumer like my husband, O sweet jest.
Last hopes all known.
For penance of your fault will you maintain a jest now, my love hath tired some fiddler like Albino, like the Perfumer.
Not I by blessedness not I.
Come tic true, do but support the jest and you shall sir∣fet, with laughter.
Faith we condescend, twill not be crossed I see,
Marriage and hanging go by destiny.
B, b, b, bar out Albino, O Adulterous impudent.
B, b, b, bar out Albino, O thou matchless g, g, g, giglet.
Let them in, let them in, now, now, now observe, observe, look, look, look.
That sames a fiddler, shaped like thee, fear nought, bee confident thou shalt know the jest hereafter, be confident; fear nought, blush not, stand firm.
Now brothers, now gallants, now sisters now call a Perfumer a gutter-maister, bar me my house, beat me: baffle
me, scoff me, deride me, ha that I were a young man again, by the mas I would ha you all by the ears, by the mas law; I am Francisco Soranza am I not giglet: strumpet, cutters, swag∣gerers, brothel haunters, I am Francisco, O god, O slaves, O dogs, dogs, cures.
No sir pray you pardon vs, we confess you are not Fran∣cisco nor a Perfumer, but even.
But even Albino.
But even a fiddler, a miniken tickler, a pum, pum.
A scraper, scraper.
Art not ashamed before Albinos face,
To clip his spouse, O shameless impudent!
Well said perfumer.
A fiddler a scraper, a miniken tickler, a pum, a pum, even now a Perfumer, now a fiddler, I will be even What you will, do, do do, k, k, k, kiss my wife be, be, be, be, fore.
Why would have him kiss her behind?
Before my own f, f, f, face.
Well done fiddler.
Isle f, f, fiddle ye.
Dost f, f, flout me.
Dost m, m, m, mock me.
Isle to the Duke Isle p, p, p, paste up infamies on every post.
It was rarely, rarely done, away, away.
Isle f, f, follow, though I st, st, st, stut, isle stumble to the Duke in p, p, plain language, I pray you use my wife well, good faith she was a kind soul and an honest woman once, I was her husband and was called Albino before I was drowned, but now after my resurrection I an I know not what indeed bro∣theirs, and indeed sisters and in deed wife I am: What you will, dost thou laugh, dost thou ge, ge, ge, gerne; a p, p, p, perfumer a fiddler, a Diabalo, matre de Dios, Isle f, f, f, firk you by the Lord now, now I will.
Ha ha tic a good rogue, a good rogue.
A good rogue ha, I know him not.
No good sweet love come come dissemble not,
Nay if you dread nothing happy be my lot
Come Via sest, come fair cheeks, come lets dance,
The sweets of love is amorous dalliance.
All friends, all happy friends, my veins are light,
Thy prayers are now god send it quickly night.
And then come morning.
I thats the hopeful day▪
I there thou hitst it.
Pray God he hit it.
Play.
They say ther's revels and a Play at Court.
A Play to night?
I tic this gallants wit,
First good first good?
I fear twill hardly hit.
I like thy fear, well, twil have better chance,
Ther's nought more hateful then rank ignorance.
Come gallants the table spread will you to dinner?
Yes first a maine at dice and then weal eat.
Truly the best wits have the bad fortune at dice still.
Whole Play, whole play.
Not I, in truth I have still exceeding bad fortune at dice.
Come shall we in, infayth thou art sudden sad,
Dost fear the shadow of my long dead Lord.
Shadow ha I cannot tel
Time tries all things well. well, well.
Would I were time then, I thought it was for some thing that the old fornicator was bald behind; go pass on pass on.
Feed and be fat my fair Calipolis,
Riuo heir's good juice, fresh Burrage boy?
I commend, commend my self to ye Lady.
In troth Sir you dwell far from neighbours that are enforced to commend your self.
Why Simplicius, whether now man, for good fashions sake stir not, fit still, sit still.
I must needs rise, much good do it you.
Dost thou think thy rising will do them much good, sit still, sit still, carve me of that good Melletza: fill Bacchus fill.
I must needs bee gone, and you'll come to my Chamber to morrow morning, Isle send you a hundred crowns.
In the name of Prosperity, what tide of happiness so suddenly is flou'd upon thee.
Isle keep a horse and four boys with grace of for∣tune now.
Now then in faith get up and ride.
And I do not? Isle thwack a Jerkin till he groan again with Gold lace: let me see, what should I desire of God, mary a Cloak lined with rich Taffeta, white Satin suit, and my gilt Rapier from pawn, nay she shall give me a Chain of Pearl that shall pay for all, good boy, good Senior, good boy, good Senior.
Why now, thou speaks in the most embraced fashion that our time hugges, no sooner a good fortune, or a fresh suit falls upon a fellow that would ha been gulled to ha should into your society, but and he met you he fronts you with a faint eye, throws a squint glance over a wried shoulder and cries
twixt the teeth, as very parsimonious of breath, good boy, good Senior, good boy, good Senior death: I will search the life blood of your hopes.
And a fresh Pearle-colour silk stocking o IIII, Isle go to the half crown ordinary every meal, Isle have my Ivory box of Tobacco, Isle converse with none but Counts and Cour∣tiers—now good boy, good Senior, a pair of massy silver Spurs, to a hatch short sword, and then your imbroderd hanger, and good Senior.
Shut the windows, darken the room, fetch whips, the fellow is mad, hee raves, hee raves, talks idly, lunatic, who procures thy—
One that has eat fat Capon, sucked the boiled Chicken, &amp; let out his wit with the fool of bounty, one Fabius, isle scorn him, hee goes upon Fridays in black satin.
Fabius, by this light, a cogging Chetor, he lives on love of Merchants wives, hee stands on the base, of mains, hee furnishes your ordinary, for which he feeds scot-free, keeps fair gold in his purse, to put on upon mains, by which he lives and keeps a fair boy at his heals, he is damned Fabius.
He is a fine man law, and has a good wit for when he list he can go in black Satin, I and in a cloak lined with unshorn Velvet.
By the salvation of humanity he's more pestilent then the plague of Lice that fell upon Egipt, thou hast bin knave if thou credit it, thou art an Ass if thou follow it, &amp; shalt be a perpetual Idiot if thou pursue it, renounce the world, the flesh, the Devil, and thy trust in men's wives for they will double with thee, and so I betake my self to the sucking of the juice Capon, my ingle Bottle-ale, &amp; his Gentleman usher that squires him red herring, a fool I found thee &amp; a fool I leave thee, bear record heauē tic against the providence of my speech, God boy good Senior.
Ha, ha, ha, God boy good Senior, what a fool it is, ha, ha, what an Ass it is, save you young Gentlemen, is she coming, will she meet me, shal's encounter ha?
You were not lapped in your Mothers smock, you ha not a good cheek, an enticing eye, a smooth skin, a well shaped leg, a fair hand, you cannot bring a wench into a fools paradise for you?
Not I by this garter, I am a fool, a very Ninny I, how call you her? how call you her?
Call her, you rise on your right side to day marry, call her, her name is Mistress Perpetuana, she is not very fair, nor goes extraordinary gay.
She has a good skin?
A good skin? she is wealthy, her husbands a fool, sheele make you, she wears the breeches: sheele make you.
Isle keep two men and they shall be Taylors, they shall make suits continually, and those shall be cloth of silver.
You may go in beaten precious Stones every day, marry I must acquaint you with some obseruances which you must pursue most religiously, she has a fool, a natural fool weights on her, that is indeed her pander to him, at the first you must be bounteous, what-so-ere hee craves, bee it your Hat, Cloak, Rapier, Purse, or such trifle, gived, gived, the night will pay all: and to draw all suspect, from pursuing her love for base gain sake.
Gived by this light, Isle gived, were, gain, I care not for her Chain of Pearl, only her love; gain? the first thing her boūty shall fetch is my blush colour Satin suit frō pawn: gain?
When you hear one wind a Cornet, she is coming down Saint Marks street, prepare your speech, suck your lips, lighten your spirits, fresh your blood, sleek your cheeks, for now thou shalt be made for ever (a perpetual and eternal gull)
I shall so ravish her with my court-ship, I have such va∣riety of discourse, such copy of phrase to begin, as this; sweet Lady Vlisses Dog after his Masters ten years travel, I shall so tickle her, or thus, Pure beauty there is a stone.
Two stones man.
Called, it is no matter what; I ha the eloquence, I am not to seek I warrant you.
Sweet Lady Vlisses dog, there's a stone called—, O Lord what shall I say.
Is all your eloquence come to this?
The glorious radiant of your glimmering eyes, your glit∣tering beauties blind my wit, and dazzled my—
Isle put on my mask and please you, pray you wink, pray you.
O fine man, my mistress loves you best, I dreamt you ga me this sword and dagger, I love your Hat and Feather, O.
Do not cry man, do not cry man, thou shalt ha them I and they were—
O that purse with all the white pence in it, fine man I love you, give you the fine red pence soon at night, he, I thank you whore's the fool now?
He has all my money, I have to keep my self, and—
Poght.
Sir the fool shall lead you to my house, the fool shall not, at night I expect you, till then take this seal of my af∣fection.
What Simplicius.
I come Quadratus, Gentlemen as yet I can but thank you, but I must bee trusted for my ordinary soon at night, or stay Isle—the fool has vnfurnisht me, but twill come again, good boy.
What ho Simplicius?
Good boy, good boys, I come, I come, good boys, good boys.
The fool shall weight on thee, Now do I merit to bee yclipped Bosphoros Carmelydon Honorificacuminos Bidet, who who has any square Dice?
Marry Sir that have I.
Thou shalt loose thy share for it in our purchase.
I pray you now, pray you now.
Sooner the whissell of a Mariner,
Shall sleek the rough curbs of the Ocean back,
Now speak I like my self thou shalt loose thy share.
Ha take all then, ha.
Without cloak or hat or rapier figh,
Gods me, look yonder, who gave you these things?
Mistress Perpetuanos fool.
Mistress Perpetuanos fool, ha, ha, there lies a jest, Senior the fool promised me he would not leave me.
I know the fool well, he will stick to you, dos not use to for-sake any youth that is inamord on an other mans wife, hee strives to keep company with a crimson satin suit continually, he loves to be al one with a Critique, a good wit self conceited, a hake bearer, a dog keeper, and great with the nobility, hee dotes upon a mere scholar an honest flat fool, but aboue all hee is all one with a fellow whose cloak hath a better inside then his out-side, and his body richer lined then his brain.
Vds so I am cosoned.
Pray you moister pardon me, I must loose my share.
Give me my purse again.
You gave it me and Isle kept.
Well done my honest crack thou shalt be my ingle fort.
He shall keep all maugre thy beardless chin thy eyes.
I may go starve till Midsomer quarter.
Fool get thee hence,
Isle to school again that I will, I left in Ass in presenti, and Isle begin in Ass in presenti and so good night fair gentry.
The triple Idiots coxcomb crowns thee,
Bitter epigrams confound thee.
Cucold be when ere thou bride thee,
Through every comic scene be drawn,
Never come thy clothes from pawn.
Never may thy shame be sheathed,
Never kiss a wench sweet breathed.
Seace the Duke approaches tic almost night,
For the Dukes up, now begins his day
Come grace his entrance; lights lights now gins our play.
Still these same bawling pipes, sound softer strains
Slumber our sconce, tut these are vulgar strains,
Cannot your trembling wiers throw a chain
Of powerful rapture bout our missed sconce
Why is our chair thus cushioned tapestry
Why is our bed tired with wanton sports?
Why are we clothed in glistering attiers,
If common bloods can hear, can, feel,
Can sit as soft, lie as lascivious
Stut all as rich as the greatest Potentate,
Soul, and you cannot feast my thrifting ears
With aught but what the lip of common berth can taste,
Take all away your labours idly wast
What sport for night.
A Commedy, entitled Temperance.
What sot elects that subject for the Court,
What should dame Temperance do here, away,
The itch on Temperance your moral play.
Duke, Prince, royal blood, thou that hast the best means to be damned of any Lord in Veins, thou great man, let me kiss thy flesh, I am fat and therefore faithful, I will do that which few of thy subjects do; love thee, but I will never do, that which all thy subjects do; flatter thee, thy humours real, good, a Commedie?
No and thy sconce would banquet in delights,
Appropriate to the blood of Emperors;
Peculiar to the state of Majesty,
That none can relish but dilated greatness.
Vouchafe to view the structure of a scene
That stands on tragike solid passion,
O thats fit traffic to commerce with births:
Strained from the mud of base vnble brains,
Give them a scene may force their struggling blood
Rise up on tiptoe in attention,
And fill their intellect with pure elixed wit,
O thats for greatness apt, for Princes fit.
Dare thou then undertake to suit our ears,
With such rich vestment.
Dare; yes my Prince I dare, nay more, I will,
And Isle present a subject worth thy soul:
The honoured end of Cato Vtican.
Whole personate him.
Marry that will I on sudden without change.
Thou want a beard.
Tush a beard ne'er made Cato, though many men's Cato hang only on their chin.
Suppose this flower the City vtica,
The time the night that prolonged Catos death:
Now being placed moung his Philosophers,
These first discourse the souls eternity.
Cato grants that I am sure, for he was valiant, and ho∣nest, which an Epicure ne'er was, and a coward never will be.
Then Cato holds a distinct notion,
Of individual actions after death:
This being argued his resolve maintains,
A true magnanimous spirit should give up dirt
To dirt, and with his own flesh dead his flesh,
Fore chance should force it crouch unto his foe:
To kill ones self some I, some hold it no,
O these are points would entice away ones soul:
To breaks indenture of base prentisage,
And run away from his body in swift thoughts
To melt in contemplation lushious sweets,
Now my voluptious Duke isle feed thy sconce,
Worth his creation: give me audience.
My leidge my royal leidge, hear, hear my suit.
Now may thy breath ne'er smell sweet as long as thy longs can pant for breaking my speech, thou Muscouite, thou stinking perfumer.
Is not this Albino our some times Courtier?
No troth but Francisco your always perfumer.
Lorenzo Celso our brave Venice Duke, Albino Belletzo, thy Merchant, thy soldier, thy Courtier, thy slave, thy any-thing, thy What thou wilt, kisses thy noble blood, doe me right or else I am canonised a cuckold, canonised a cuckold, I am abused, I am abused, my wives abused, my clothes abused, my shape, my house my all abused, I am sworn out of my self, beated out of my self baffled, geird at, laughed at, bard my own house, de∣bard my own wife, whilst others swill my wines, gurmandize my meat, meat, kiss my wife, O gods, O gods, O gods, O gods, O gods.
Who first? who first?
Come sweet this is your waggery in faith, as if you knew him not.
Yes I fear I do too well, would I could slide away invisible.
Assured this is hee.
My worthy leidge the jest comes only thus.
Now to stop and cross it with mere like deceit:
All being known the French knight hath disguised,
A fiddler like Albino too, to fright the perfumer, this is all.
Art sure tic true.
Tic confessed tic right.
It is right, tic true, right, I am a fiddler, a fiddler, a fid∣ler vds foot a fiddler; Isle not believe thee thou art a woman, and tic known veritas non queried angulos, truth seeks not to lurk under varthingalls, veritas non queried angulos, a fiddler?
Worthy sir pardon, and permit me first to confess your self, your deputation dead hath made my love live, to offend you.
I, mock on, scoff on, flout on, do do do.
Troth sir in serious.
I good, good, come hither Celia,
Burst breast, rive heart a sunder? Celia
Why startest thou back: see thou this Celia
O me how often with lascivious touch thy lip,
Hath kissed this mark? how oft this much wronged breast
Hath borne the gentle weight of thy soft cheek?
O me my dearest Lord, my sweet, sweet love.
What a fiddler, a fiddler? now thy love.
I am sure thou skornst; it nay Celia, I could tell
What on the night before I went to sea,
And took my leave with Hymeneal rights
What, thou lispsd
Into my ear, a fiddler and perfumer now.
And —
Dear brother.
Most respected Senior,
Believe it by the sacred end of love,
What much, much wrong hath forced your patience
Proceeded from most dear affied love,
Devoted to your house.
Believe it brother.
Nay your self when you shall hear the occurrences will say tic happy, commicall.
Assure thee brother.
Shall I be brave, shall I be my self now, love, give me thy love, brothers give me your breasts, French knight reach me thy hand, perfumer thy fist. Duke I inuit thee, love I forgive thee: Frenchman I hug thee, Isle know all, isle pardon all, and Isle laugh at all.
And isle curse you all.
O ye ha interrupt a scene.
Quadratus we will hear these points discussd,
With apter and more calm affected hours.
Well, good, good.
Wast even so in faith why then caprichious mirth,
Skip light moriscoes in our frolic blood,
Flaggd veins, sweet, plump with fresh infused joys:
Laughter pucker our cheeks, make shoulders shog,
With chucking lightness, love once more thy lips,
For ever clasp our hands, our hearts, our Crests,
Thus front, thus eyes, thus cheek, thus all shall meet.
Shall clip, shall hug, shall kiss, my dear, dear sweet,
Duke wilt thou see me revel, come love dance,
Court gallants court; suck amorous dalliance.
Beauty your heart.
First sir accept my hands.
She leaps too rash, that falls in sudden bands.
Shall I despair? never will I love more.
No sea so boundless vast but hath a shore.
Why marry me.
Thou can have but soft flesh, good blood, sound bones.
And that which fills up all your bracks, good stones.
Stones, Trees and beasts in love still firmer prove,
Then man, Isle none no hold-fastes in your loves.
Since not the Mistress, come on Faith the maid:
Ten thousand Ducats too to boat are laid.
Why then wind Cornets▪ lead on jolly lad.
Excuse me gallants though my legs lead wrong▪
It is my first footing, wind out nimble tongue.
It is well, it is well, how shall we spend this night▪
Gulp 〈◊〉 Wine my liedge▪ let our paunch 〈◊〉▪
Suck merry Jellies, preuiew but not prevent
No mortal can the miseries of life.
I home inuit you all, come sweet, sweet wife,
My liedge vouchsafe thy presence, drink till the ground look blew, boy.
Live still springing hopes, still in fresh new joys,
May your loves happy hit in fair cheeked wives,
Your flesh still plump with sap'd restoratives,
That's all my honest frolic heart can wish,
A Fico for the mew and Envious pish,
Till night, I wish good food and pleasing day,
But then found rest so ends or slight writ play.

I Mary Sir, the only rising up in Arms, is in the arms of a woman: peace (I say still) is your only Paradise, when every Adam may have his Christmas Eve: and you take me lying any more by the cold sides of a brazen-face field-peice unless I have such a Down pillow under me, Isle give you leave to knock up both my golles in my Fathers hall, and hang hats upon these ten-penny nails.
And yet brother, when with the sharpest hooks of my wit I laboured to pull you from the wars, you broke loose, like a horse that knew his own strength, and vowed, nothing but a man of war should back you.
I have been backed since and almost vnbackt too.
And swore that honour was never dyed in grain, till it was dipped in the colours of the field.
I am a new man Sister, and now cry a pox a that ho∣nor, that must have none but Barber-Surgions to waite upon it, and a band of poor straggling rascals, that every twinkling of an eye, forfeit their legs and arms into the Lords hands Wenches by Mars his sweaty Buff Jerkin, (for now all my 〈◊〉 must smell a the Soldado) I have seen more men's head 〈◊〉 up
and down like foote-balles at a breake-fast, after the hungry Cannons had picked them; than are Maiden-heads in Venice: and more legs of men served in at a dinner, then ever I shall see legs of Capons in one platter whilst I live.
Perhaps all those were Capons legs you did see.
Nay mistress Isle witness against you for some of them.
I doe not think for all this, that my brother stood to it so lustily as he makes his brags for.
No, no, these great talkers are never great doers.
Faith brother how many did you kill for your share?
Not so many as thou hast done with that villainous eye by a thousand.
I thought so much that's just none.
Tic not a Soldiers glory to tell howe many lives hee has ended, but how many he has saved: in both which honours the noble Hipolito had most excellent possession. Believe it my fair Mistress, tho many men in a battle have done more, your brother in this equalled him who did most: he went from you a worthy Gentleman, he brings with him that title that makes a Gentleman most worthy; the name of a Soldier, which how well and how soon he hath earned, would in me seem glorious to rehearse, in you to hear: but because his own ear dwells so near my voice, I will play the ill neighbour, and cease to speak well of him.
An argument that either you dare not, or love not to flatter.
No more then I dare or love to doe wrong; yet to make a Cronicle of my friends nobly-acted deeds, would stand as far from flattery in me, as cowardice did from him.
S'foote if all the wit in this company have nothing to set it self about, but to run Division upon me, why then Even burn off mine ears indeed, but my little Mer-maides, Sign∣or Camillo does this, that I now might describe the Niniuiticall motion of the whole battle, and so tell what hee has done: and come, shall I begin?
O for beauties love, a good motion.
But I can tell you one thing, I shall make your hair stand up an end at some things.
Prithee good brother Soldier keep the peace, our hair stand an end? pity a my hart, the next end would be of our wits: we hang out a white flag most terrible Tamberlaine, and beg mercy; come, come, let vs neither have your Niniuiticall mote∣once nor your swaggering battles: why my Lord Camillo, you invited me hither to a banquet, not to the Ballad of a pitched field.
And here it stands bright Mistress, sweetly attending what doom your lips wily upon it.
I marie Sir, let our teeth describe this Motion.
We shall never describe it well, for fumbling in the mouth.
Yes, yes, I have a trick to make vs understand one an∣other and we fumble never so—
Meddle not with his tricks sweet heart; under pardon my Lord, tho I am your guest, Isle bestow my self, sit dear beauties: for the men, let them take up places themselves; I prithee brother fighter sit, &amp; talk of any subject, but this lang∣ling law at Arms.
The law at logs then.
Will you be so lusty? no nor legs neither, we'll have them tied up too, since you are among Ladies: gallants, handle those things only that are fit for Ladies.
Agreed so that we go not out of the compass of those things that are fit for Lords.
Be it so, what's the Theme then?
Beauty, that fits vs best.
And of Beauty what tongue would not speak the best? since it is the Jewel that hangs upon the brow of heaven, the best cullor that can be laid upon the cheek of earth: beauty makes men Gods immortal, by making mortal men to live e∣for in love. (for love.
Ever▪ not so, I have heard that some men have dyed
So have I, but I could never see it: Id ride forty miles
to follow such a fellow to Church, and would make more of a sprig of Rosemary at his burial, than of a gilded Bride-branch at mine own wedding.
Take you such delight in men that dye for love?
Not in the men nor in the death, but in the deed; troth I think he is not a sound man that will dye for a woman, and yet I would never love a man soundfie, that would not knock at deaths door for my love.
Id knock as long as I thought good, but have my brains knocked out when I entered, if I were he.
What Uenetian Gentleman was there; that having this in his Burgonet, did not (to prove his head worthy of the honour) doe more than defy death to the very face? trust vs Ladies, our Signiory stands bound in greater sums of thanks to your beauties for victory, than to our valour: my dear Uioletta one kiss to this picture of your whitest hand, when I was even faint, (with giving and receiving the doale of war)
Set a new edge on my sword: in so much that,
I singled out a gallant Spirit of France,
And charged him with my Lance in full career,
And after rich exchange of noble courage,
(The space of a good hour on either side)
At last crying, now for Uiolettaes honour,
I vanquished him, and him (dismounted) took
Not to my self, but prisoner to my love.
I have heard much praise of that French gallant, good my Lord, bring him acquainted with our eyes.
I will, go boy fetch noble Fontinell.
Will your French prisoner drink well? or else cut his throat.
Oh no he cannot brooke it.
The pox he can, s'light me thinks a French man should have a good courage to wine, for many of them be exceeding hot fiery whoresons, and resolute as Hector, and as valiant as Troilus; then come off and on bravely and lye by it, and sweat fort too, upon a good and a military advantage.
Prithee have done here comes the prisoner.
My Lord Camillo, is this the Gentleman,
Whose valour, by your valour is subdued?
It is fair Lady, and I yield him up,
To be your beauties worthy prisoner:
Lord Fontinell, think your captivity
Happy in this, she that hath conquered me,
Receives my conquest, as my loves fair fee.
Fair stranger droop not, since the chance of wars
Brings to the Soldier death, restraint, or scars.
Lady, I know the fortune of the field,
Is death with honour, or with shame to yield,
As I have done.
In that no scandal lies,
Who dyes when he may live, he doubly dyes.
My reputation's lost.
Nay thats not so,
You flee not but were vanquished by your foe,
The eye of war respects not you nor him,
It is our fate will have vs loose or win,
You will disdain if I you prisoner call?
No, but reioyee, since I am beauties thrall.
Enough of this, come wenches shake your heals.
Music advance thee on thy golden wing,
And dance division from sweet string to string.
Camillo I shall curb thy tyranny,
In making me that Ladies prisoner:
She has an Angels body, but within't,
Her coy heart says there lies a heart of flint,
Such beauty be my Jailer? a heavenly hell!
The darkest dungeon, which spite can devise,
To throw this carcass in, her glorious eyes
Can make as lightsome, as the fairest chamber
In Paris Louure: come captivity,
And chain me to her looks; how am I tossed?
Being twice in mind, as twice in body lost.
Not the measure out fair Mistress?
No, fair servant, not the measure out, I have on the so∣deign a foolish desire to be out of the measure.
What breeds that desire?
Nay I hope it is no breeding matter, tush, tush, by my maiden-head I will not, the music likes me not, and I have a shoe wrings me to'th heart; besides I have a women's reason, I will not dance, because I will not dance: prithee dear He∣to take my prisoner there into the measure; fie I cannot abide to see a man sad nor idle, Isle bee out once, as the Music is (in mine care)
Lady, bid him whose heart no sorrow feels,
Tickle the rushes with his wanton heals,
I have too much lead at mine.
Isle make it light.
How?
By a nimble dance.
You hit it right.
Your Keeper bids you dance.
Then I obey,
My heart I feel grows light, it melts away.
In troth a very pretty French man, the carriage of his body likes me well; so does his footing so does his face, so does his eye aboue his face, so does himself, aboue all that can bee a∣above himself.
Camillo thou hast plaide a foolish part,
Thy prisoner makes a slave of thy loves heart.
Shall Camillo then sing willow, willow, willow? not for the world: no, no, my French prisoner; I will use thee Cupped knows how, and teach thee to fall into the hands of a woman: if I doe not
feed thee with fair looks, ne'er let me live: if thou get out of my fingers till I have thy very heart, ne'er let me love; nothing but thy life shall serve my turn, and how otherwise Isle plague thee, Monsieur you and Isle deal, only this, because Isle be sure he shall not start, Isle locke him in a little low room besides himself, where his wanton eye shall see neither Sun nor Moon: So, the dance is done, and my heart has done her worst, made me in love: farewell my Lord, I have much hast, you have many thanks, I am angered a little, but am greatly pleased: if you wonder that I take this strange leave; excuse it thus, that women are strange fools, and will take any thing.
Tricks: tricks? kerry merry buff; how now lad, in a trance?
Strange farewell: after, dear Hippolito,
O what a maze is love of joy and woe!
Strange frenzy; after wretched Fontinell,
Oh what a heaven is love! oh what a hell!
Boy, I am melancholy because I burn.
And I am melancholy because I am a cold.
I pine away with the desire of flesh.
It's neither flesh nor fish that I pine for, but for both.
Pilcher, Cupped hath got me a stomach, and I long for laced mutton.
Plain mutton without a lace would serve me.
For as your tame Monkey is your only best, &amp; most only beast to your Spanish Lady: or, as your Tobacco is your only smoker away of room, and all other rewmeticke disea∣ses: or as your Irish louse does bite most naturally fourteen weeks, after the change of your Saffron seamed shir•• or, as the commodities which are sent out of the Low-countries (and put in vessels called mother Corneliu• dry-fats) are most common in France: so it pleases the destinies, that I should thirst to drink out of a most sweet Italian vessel, being a Spaniard.
What vessel is that Signiort
A Woman Pilcher, the moist handed Madonna Empery, a most rare and divine creature.
A most rascally damned Courtesan.
Boy, hast thou foraged the Country for a new lodge∣ing? for I have sworn to lay my bones in this Chittie of Ue∣nice.
Any man that sees vs will swear that we shall both lay our bones, and nothing but bones, and we stalk here longer; they tell me Signior, I must go to the Constable, and he is to see you lodged.
Inquier for that busie-member of the Chitty.
I will, and here come a leash of Informers: save you plump youths.
And thee my lean stripling.
Which is the Constables house?
That at the sign of the browne Bill.
Farewell.
Why, and farewell; the roague's made of pye-crust he's so short.
The Officious Gentleman inherits here.
Knock, or enter, &amp; let thy voice pull him out by the ears.
Slid Dandiprat, this is the Spanish curtal that in the last battle, fled twenty miles ere he looked behind him.
Doyt, he did the wiser: but sir, this block shall bee a rare threshold for vs to whet our wits upon; come, lets about our business, and if here we find him at our return, he shall find vs this month in knavery.
What ho, no body speaks, where dwells the Constable?
Here dwells the Constable; call assistance, give them my full charge, raise (if you see cause) now sir, what are you sir?
Follower to that Spanish-leather Gentleman.
And what are you sir, that cry out upon me? look to his tools. What are are you sir? speak, what are you? I charge you what are you?
Most clear Mirror of Magistrates, I am a servitor to God Mars.
For your serving of God I am not to meddle, why doe you raise me?
I desire to have a wide room in your favour: sweet blood, cast away your name upon me; for I neither know you by your face, nor by your voice
It may be so Sir; I have two voices in any company: one, as I am Master Constable: another, as I am Blurt: and the third, as I am Blurt Master Constable.
I understand, you are a mighty pillar or post in the Chittie.
I am a poor post, but not to stand at every mans door, without my bench of Bill-men: I am (for a better) the Dukes own Image and charge you in his name to obey me.
I doe so.
I am to stand Sir in any bawdy house, or sink of wick∣oddness: I am the Dukes own grace, and in any fray or resurrec∣tion, am to besturre my stumps as well as he; I charge you know
Turn the Arms to him. (this staff.
Upon this may I lean &amp; no man say black's mine eye
Who so ever says you have a black eye, is a Camooche. most great Blurt; I doe vnpent-house the roof of my carcass &amp; touch the knee of thy Office in Spanish complement, I desire to sojourn in your Chitty.
Sir, sir, for fault of a better, I am to charge you, not to keep a Soldiering in our City without a Precept: besides, by my office I am to search &amp; examine you: have you the Dukes hand to pass? (fingers.
Signior no, I have the Generals hand at large, and all his
Except it be for the general good of the Cōmonwealth, the General cannot lead you up and down our City.
I have the Generals hand to pass through the world at my pleasure.
At your pleasure? thats rare; then rowlie, poly, our wives shall lye at your command: your General has no such authority in my Precinct, and therefore I charge you pass no further.
I tell thee, I will pass through the world, thou little morsel of Justice, and eat twenty such as thou art.
Sir, sir, you shall find Uenice out of the world: Isle tickle you for that.
I will pass through the world, as Alexander Magnus did, to Conquer.
As Alexander of Saint Magnus did? that's another mat∣la, you might have informed this at the first, &amp; you never need∣ed to have come to your answer: let me see your Pass, if it bee not the Dukes hand, Isle tickle you for all this: quickly I pray▪ this staff is to walk in other places.
There it is.
Slubber, read it over.
Read it your self, what Besonian is that?
This is my Clarke sir, he has been Clarke to a good ma∣ny bonds and Bills of mine, I keep him only to read, for I cannot, my Office will not let me.
Why doe you put on your Spectacles then?
To see that hee read right: how now Slubber, first the Dukes hand? Isle tickle him else.
Mastis not like his hand.
Look well, the Duke has a wart on the back of his hand.
Heere's none on my word Master Constable, but a little blot.
Blot? lets see lets see; ho that stands for the wart, doe you see the trick of that? Stay stay, is there not a little prick in the hand for the Dukes hand had a prick in it when I was with him, with opening Oysters.
Yes mas her's one, besides tic a goodly great long hand.
So has the Duke a goodly huge hand, I have shook him by it, (God forgive me) ten thousand times: hee must pass like Alexander of Saint Magnus; Well Sir, (tic your duty to stand bare) the Duke has sent his fist to me, and I were a Jew if I should shrink for it; I obey, you must pass, but pray take heed with what dice you pass, I mean what company, for Satan is most busy, where he finds one like himself▪ your name Sir?
Lazarillo de Tormes in Castle, cozen Germaine to the Adolantado of Spain.
Are you so Sir? Gods blessing on your heart: your name again Sir, if it be not too tedious for you?
Lazarillo de Tormes in Castle, Cozen-germaine to the Spanish Adolantado.
I warrant he's a great man in his own Country.
Has a good name, Slubber set it down: write, Lazarus in torment at the Castle, and a cozning Germaine, at the sign of the Palantido diddle in Spain: So Sir you are engrossed, you must give my Officer a groat it's nothing to me Signior.
I will cancel when it comes to a sum.
Well Sir, well he shall give you an Item for it, make a bill and he will tear it he says.
Most admirable Blurt, I am a man of war and profess fighting.
I charge you in the Dukes name keep the peace.
By your sweet favour most dear Blurt, you charge too fast, I am a hanger on upon Mars, and have a few Crowns.
Two: his own and mine.
And dezier you to point out a fair lodging for me and my Train.
Tic my Office Signior to take men up a nights, but if you will, my Maids shall take you up a mornings, since you pro∣fesse fighting; I will commit you Signior to mine own house, but will you pitch and pay, or will your Worship run—
I scorn to run from the face of Thamer C•am.
Then Sir, you mean not to run?
Signior no.
Bear witness Slubber, that his answer is Signior no: So now if he runs upon the score, I have him strait upon Signior no; this is my house Signior, enter.
March excellent Blurt: attend Pilcher.
Upon your trencher Signior, most hungerly.
Now sir whore's thy Master?
The Constable has pressed him.
What, for a Soldier?
I, for a Soldier; but ere he'll go, I think indeed, he &amp; I together shall press the Constable.
No matter, squeze him, and leave no more liquor in him, than in a dried Neates tongue: Sir thin-gut, what's thy name?
My name? you chops, why I am of the blood of the Pilchers.
Nay s'foote, if one should kill thee, hee could not bee hanged for it, for hee would shed no blood, ther's none in thee: Pilcher? you are a most pitiful dried one.
I wonder thy master does not slice thee, and swallow thee for an Anchoues.
He wants wine Boy to swallow me down, for he wants money to swallow down wine: but farewell, I must dog my master.
As long as thou dog'st a Spaniard, thou'lt ne'er be fatter; but stay, our hast is as great as thine, yet to endear our selves in∣to thy lean acquaintance cry Riuo Hogh, laugh and be fat, and for joy that we are met we'll meet and be merry, sing:
Isle make a shift to squeak.
And I.
And I, for my profession is to shift as well as you, hem:
What meat eats the Spaniard?
Dried Pilchers and poor Iohn:
Alas thou art almost mart.
My cheeks are fallen and gone.
Would thou not leap at a piece of meat?
O how my teeth doe water, I could eat
For the heavens; my flesh is almost gone
With eating of Pilcher and poor Iohn.
Am I so happy then?
Nay sweet Monsieur.
O, boy thou hast new winged my captived soul,
Now to my Fortune all the Fates may yield,
For I have won where first I lost the field.
Why sir, did my Mistress prick you with the Spanish needle of her love, before I summoned you (from her) to this parley?
Doubts thou that boy▪
Of mine honesty I doubt extremely, for I cannot see the little Gods tokens upon you: there is as much diffe∣rinse between you and a Lover, as between a Cuckold and a Unicorn.
Why boy?
For you doe not wear a pair of ruffled, frowning, un∣gartred Stockings, like a Gallant that hides his small timbered legs, with a quaile-pipe boot: your hose stands upon too ma∣ny points, and are not troubled with that falling sickness, which follows pale, meager, miserable, melancholy Lovers: your hands are not groping continually.
Where my little observer?
In your greasy pocket sir, like one that wants a Cloak for the rain, and yet is still weather-beaten: your hat nor head are not of the true hey-ho-blocke, for it should be broad brimmed, limber, like the skin of a white pudding when the meat is out: the Facing fatty: the Felt dusty,
and not entered into any band, but your hat is of the nature of a loose, light, heauie-swelling wench, too strait laced: I tell you Monsieur, a Lover should be all loose from the sole of the foot rising upward; and from the Bases, or confines of the Slop, fall∣ling downwards: if you were in my Mistresses Chamber, you should find other-gates privy signs of love hanging out there.
Have your little eyes watched so narrowly?
Oh sir, a Page must have a Cats eye, a Spaniels leg, a whoores tongue (a little tasting of the Cog) a Catch-poles hand, what he gripes is his own; and a little little bawdy.
Fair Violetta I will wear thy love,
Like this French order, near unto my heart,
Via for fate, Fortune, lo this is all,
At griefs rebound Isle mount, although I fall.
Now by Saint Mark he's a most treacherous villain,
Dare the base French-mans eye gaze on my love?
Nay sweet rogue, wh• would thou make his face a vizard, to have two loope-holes only? when he comes to a good face, may he not doe with his eyes what he will: s'foote if I were as he, Id pull them out, and if I wist they would anger thee.
Thou add heate to my rage, away, stand back,
Dishonoured slave, more tretch•rous then base,
This is the instance of my scorned disgrace.
Thou ill advised Italian whence proceeds
This sudden fury?
Villain from thee.
Hercules stand between them.
Villain by my blood;
I am as free borne as your Uenice Duke.
Villain, Saint Dennis and my life to boot,
Thy lips shall kiss this pavement or my foot.
Your foot with a pox? I hope you're no Pope Sir, his lips shall kiss my Sisters soft lip: and thine, the tough lips of this: nay Sir, I doe but show you that I have a tool; doe you heate Saint Dennis, but that we both stand upon the nar∣row bridge of Honour, I should cut your throat now, for pure love you bear to my Sister, but that I know you would set out a throat.
Wilt thou not Stab the peasant,
That thus dishonours both thy self and me?
Saint Mark set his marks upon me then: stab? Isle have my shins broken, ere Isle scratch so much as the skin off, a the law of Arms: shall I make a French-man cry oh, before the fall of the Leaf? not I by the Cross of this, Dandy∣prat.
If you will Sir you shall coin me into a shilling.
I shall lay too heavy a cross upon thee then.
Is this a time to jest• boy call my servants.
Gentlemen to the dresser.
You rogue what Dresser? cease on Fontenell,
And lodge him in a Dungeon presently.
He steps upon his death that stirs a foot.
That shall I try, as in the field before
I made thee stoop, so here Isle make thee bow.
Thou plaidst the Soldier then, the villain now.
Treacherous Italians.
Hale him to a Dungeon,
There if your thoughts can apprehend the form,
Of Uioletta; dote on her rare feature,
Or if your proud flesh with a sparing diet,
Can still retain her swelling spritefulnes;
Then Court (instead of her) the croaking vermin,
That people, that most solitary vault.
But sir Camillo, wilt thou play the wise and venerable bearded Master Constable, and commit him indeed, because he would be meddling in thy Precinct and will not put off the cap of his Love to the browne-bill of thy desires? Well, thou hast given the Law of Arms a broken pate already, therefore if thou wilt needs turn Broker, and be a cut-throat too, doe: for my part, Isle go get a sweet ball, and wash my hands of it.
Away with him, my life shall answer it.
To prison must I then? well, I will go,
And with a light-wing'd spirit insult ore woe,
For in the darkest hell on earth, Isle find
Her fair Idea to content my mind,
Yet France and Italy with blistered tongue,
Shall publish thy dishonour in my wrong
Oh now how happy were thou, could thou lodge me
Where I could leave to love her?
By heaven I can.
Thou can: Oh happy man!
This a kind of new invented law,
First feed the Axe, after produce the Saw,
Her heart no doubt will thy affections feel;
For thou'lt plead sighs in blood, and tears in steel.
Boy tell my love, her love thus sighing spake:
Isle veil my crest to death, for her dear sake.
Boy: what boy is that?
First you Sir Pandarus, the broking Knight of Troy, are your two legs the pair of trestles, for the French-man to getup upon my Sister?
By the nine Worthies, worthy Gallants not I; I a Gen∣tleman for Conveyance? I Sir Pandarus? would Troy then were in my breeches, and I burnt worse then poor Troy: sweet Sig∣nior you know, I know, and all Uenice knows, that my Mistress scorns double dealing with her heals.
With her heals? O heir's a sure pocket Dag, and my Sister shoots him off snipsnap at her pleasure. Sir Mephosto∣philes,
did not you bring letters from my Sister to the French-man?
Signior no.
Did not you fetch him out of the Tennis Court?
No point per mafoy, you see I have many tongues speak for me.
Did not he follow your cracke-ship, at a beck given?
Ita, true, certes, he spied, &amp; I spitting thus, went thus.
But were staide thus.
You hold a my side, and therefore I must needs stick to you, tic true: I going, hee followed; and following, fingered me, just as your worship does now: but I struggled and stragled, and wragled and wragled, and at last cried Vale valet, as I doe now, with this fragment of a rime:
My Lady is grossly fallen in love, and yet her waste is slender,
Had I not slipped away, you wold have made my buttocks tēder.
Shall Doyt &amp; I play the Bloud-hounds &amp; after him?
No, let him run.
Not for this wager of my Sisters love, run; away Dandi∣part, catch True-penny, &amp; hold him, thy self shall pass more cur∣rant.
I fly Sir, your Dandiprat is as light as a clipped Angel.
Nay Gods lid after him Camillo, reply not but away.
Content, you know where to meet:
For I know that the only way to win a wench, is not to woe her: the only way to have her fast, is to have her loose: the only way to triumph over her, is to make her fall; and the way to make her fall,—
Is to throw her down.
Are you so cunning Sir?
O▪ Lord Sir; and have so perfect a Master.
Well Sir, you know the Gentlewoman that dwells in the midst of Saint Marks street.
Midst of S. Marks street Sir?
A pox on you; the flea-bitten faced Lady.
Oh Sir, the freckle check Madonna, I know her Signior, as well—
Not as I doe, I hope Sir.
No Sir I de be loath to have such inward acquaintance with her as you have.
Well sir slip go presently to her, and from me deliver to her own white hands, Fontinels picture.
Indeed Sir she loves to have her chamber hung with the pictures of men.
She does, le keep my sisters eyes and his painted face a sunder; tell her besides, the Mask holds and this the night, &amp; nine the hour; say we are all for her away.
And shoe's for you all, were you an Army.
F•e, fie, fie, fie, by the light oath of my Fan, the wea∣there is exceeding tedious and faint: Triuia, Simperina, stir, stir, stir, one of you open the Case-ments, t'other take a ventoy and gently cool my face: fie, I ha such an exceeding hye culler, I so sweat; Simperina, dost hear? prithee be more compendious: why Simperina!
Here Madame.
Press down my ruff before; away, fie, howe thou blowst upon me, th• breath (gods me) thy breath, fie, fie, fie, fie, it takes off all the painting and culler from my cheek: In good faith I care not if I go and be sick presently; hey ho, my head so aches with carrying this Bodkin: in troth Isle try if I can bee sick.
Na good sweet Lady.
You know a company of Gallants will be here at night be not out of temper sweet mistress.
In good troth if I bee not sick I must be melancholy then: this same gown never comes on but I am so melancholy, &amp; so hart-burnt: tic a strange garment, I warrant Simperina the
foolish Taylor that made it, was troubled with the stitch, when he composed it.
That's very likely Madame, but it makes you have oh a most in-conie body.
No, no no, no by Saint Mark the waste is not long en∣ough, (for I love a long &amp; tedious waste, besides, I have a most ungodly middle in it; and fie, fie, fie, fie, it makes me bend in the back: oh let me have some Music.
That's not the fault in your gown Madame, but of your bawdy.
Fa la la fa la la, indeed the bending of the back is the fault of the body la, la, la, la; fa la la, fa la la, la la lah.
O rich!
O rare!
No, no, no no, no: tic slight and common all that I do, prithee Simperina doe not Ingleme; doe not flatter me Triuia, I ha never a cast gown till the next week, fa la la, la la la, fa la la, fa la la &amp;c. This stirring too and fro has done me much good; a song I prithee, I love these French mo•uings; oh they are so clean if you tread them true, you shall hit them to a hair; sing, sing, sing some odd and fantastical thing, for I cannot abide these dull and lumpish tunes, the Musician stands longer a prick∣ing them then I would doe to hear them: no, no no giuemee your light ones that go nimbly and quick, and are full of champion∣ges and carry sweet division; ho prithee sing, stay, stay, stay, heir's Hipolitoes Sonnet, first read it and then sing it.
In a fair woman what thing is best?
I think acurrall lip.
No no you jest,
She has a better thing.
Then tic a pretty eye.
Yet tic a better thing,
Which more delight does bring.
Then tic a cherry cheek.
No, no, you l ye.
Were neither lip, nor cheeks currall, nor cherry eyes,
Were not her swelling breast stuck with strawberries,
Nor had smooth hand, soft skin, white neck, pure eye,
Yet she at this alone your love can tie.
It is, O tic the only joy to men,
The only praise to women; what first then?
This it is, O this it is, and in a women's middle it is placed,
In a most beauteous body, a hart most chaste:
This is the Jewel Kings may buy,
If women sell this Jewel, women bye.
Who the pox knocks?
One that will knock thy coxcomb if he doe not enter.
If thou dost not enter, how can thou knock me?
Why then Isle knock thee when I doe enter.
Why then thou shalt not enter, but instead of me knock thy heals.
Fresco I am Doyt Hypollitoes Page:
And I am Fresco, Squire to a bawdy house.
I have a Jewel to deliver to thy Mistress.
First set with precious stones?
Thick, thick thick.
Why enter then thick, thick, thick.
Fie, fie, fie, fie, fie who makes that yowling at door?
Heir's Signtor Hipolitoes man (that shall be) come to hang you.
Triuia, strip that villain; Simperina pinch him, slit his wide nose; fie, fie, fie, Isle have you gelded for this lustiness.
And she threatens to geld me unless I bee lusty; what shall poor Fresco doe?
Hang me.
Not I, hang me if you will, and set up my quarters too.
Hypolitoes boy come to hang me?
to hang you with Jewels, sweet and gentle; that's Fris∣coes meaning, and that's my coming.
Keep the door.
That's my Office indeed, I have bin your doore-keep∣er so long, that al the hindges, the spring-lockes and the ring, are worn to pieces; how if any body knock at the door?
Let them enter, fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, his great tongue does so run through my little ears; tic more harsh then a younger∣bothers courting of a Gentlewoman, when he has no crowns, Boy?
At your service.
My service? alas alas, thou can doe me small service, did thy Master send this painted Iyntle man to me?
This painted Iyntleman to you.
Well, I will hang his picture up by the walls, till I see his face, and when I see his face, Isle take his picture down: hold it Triuia.
It's most sweetly made.
Hang him up Simperina.
It's a most sweet man.
And does the Mask hold? let me see it again.
If their vizards hold, here you shall see all their blind cheeks; this is the night, nine the hour, and I the lack that gives warning.
He gives warning Mistress, shall I set him out?
You shall not need, I can set out my self.
Flaxen hair, &amp; short too, oh that's the French Cu! but fie, fie, fie, this Flaxen haired men are such pu-lers, and such peddlers, and such Chicken-heartes (and yet great quarrellers) that when they Court a Lady, they are for the better part bound to the peace: no, no, no, no, your black haired man (so hee bee fair) is your only sweet man, &amp; in any service, the most active: a banquet Triuia;
quick, quick, quick.
In a twinkling; s'lid my Mistress cries like the rod-wo∣man: quick quick, quick, buy any Rosemary and Baize?
A little face, but a lovely face; fie, fie, fie, no matter what face he make, so the other parts be Legitimate, and go upright: stir, stir Simperina, be doing, be doing, quickly; move, move, move.
Most incontinently, move, move, move: ô sweet!
Hey ho, as I live I must love thee, and suck kisses from thy lips; alack that women should fall thus deeply in love, with dumbethings, that have no feeling? but they are women's crosses, and the only way to take them is to take them patiently; hey ho! set Music Fresco.
Music, if thou hast not a hard heart, speak to my Mistress.
Say he scorn to marry me, yet hee shall stand me in some steed, by being my Ganimede: if he be the most decayed Gallant in all Uenice, I will my self undo my self, and my whole state to set him up again: though speaking truth would save my life, I will lye to doe him pleasure: yet to tell lies may hurt the soul: fie no no, no, souls are things to be trodden un∣der our feet, when we dance after loves Pipe; therefore here hang this counterfeit at my beds feet.
If he bee ounterfeit, nail him up upon one of your posts.
By the moist hand of love I swear, I will be his Lot∣rye, and he shall never draw, but it shall be a prize.
Who knocks?
Why tic I knave.
Then knave knock there still.
Wut open door?
Yes when I list I will.
Heir's money.
Much:
Heir's gold.
Away:
Knave open.
Call to our maids, God night, we are all a slopen.
Mistress, if you have ever a Pinnace to set out, you may now have it manned and rigged; for Signior Curuetto, he that cries, I am an old Courtier, but lye close, lye close, when our Maids swear hee lies as wide as any Courtier in Italy.
Doe we care how he lies?
Anon, anon, anon, this old hoary red Dear, serves him∣self in at your key-hole.
What Fresco?
Hark, shall he enter the breach?
Fie, fie, fie, I wonder what this Gurnets head makes here: yet bring him in, he will serve for picking meat; let Mu∣sick play, for I will feyne my self to be a sleep.
Three pence, and heere's a teston, yet take all,
Coming to Jump, we must be prodigal:
Hem, I am an old Courtier, and I can lye close;
Put up Fresco, put up, put, up, put up.
Any thing at your hands sir, I will put up, because you seldom pull out any thing.
Softly sweet Signior Curuetto, for shoe's fast.
Ha, fast? my Robe fast? and but young night:
Shoe's wearied, wearied, ah ha, hit I right?
How sir, wearied? marie foh.
Wearied Sir? mary muff.
No words, here mouse, no words, no words sweet rose,
I am an hoary Courtier, &amp; lye close, lye close, hem:
An old hoary Courtier? why so has a Jowl of Ling, and a musty Whiting bin (time out of mind) me thinks Signior, you should not be so old by your face:
I have a good heart knave; and a good heart
Is a good face-maker, I am young, quick, brisk,
I was a Reveller in a long stock;
(There's not a gallant now filles such a stock)
Plump hose, pained, stuffed with hair (hair then was held
The lightest stuffing) a fair Codpiece: ho,
An Eele-skin sleeve, lashed here and there with lace,
Hye collar, lashed again: breech lashed also:
A little simpering ruff, a dapper Cloak,
With Spanish buttoned Cape: my Rapier here,
Gloves like a Burgomaster here; hat here,
(Stuck with some ten-groate brooch:) and over al,
A goodly, long thick, Abram-colour'd beard;
Ho God, Ho God, thus did I Revel it.
When Mousieur Mot lay here Ambassador.
But now those beards are gone, our Chins are bare;
Our Corters now doe all against the hair.
I can lye close and see this, but not see,
I am hoary, but not hoary as some be.
Hey ho; who's that? Signior Curuetto? by my virginity—
Hem, no more,
Swear not so deep at this years, men have eyes,
And though the most are fools, some fools are wise.
Fie, fie, fie, and you meet me thus at half weapon, one must down.
She for my life.
Some body shall pay for it.
He for my head.
Doe not therefore come over me so with cross blows, no, no, no, I shall be sick, if my speech be stopped: by my Verge∣night I swear: and why may not I swear by that I have not, as well as poor musty Soldiers doe by their honour: Brides, at four &amp; twenty: ha, ha, ha, by their Maiden-heads: Citizens, by their faith, and Brokers as they hope to be saved: by my Virginity I swear, I dreamed that one brought me a goodly Codshead, and in one of the eyes, there stuck (me thought)
the greatest precious stone, the most sparkling Diamond: oh fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, that Diamonds should make women such fools.
A Codshead and a Diamond, ha, ha, ha,
Tic common, common, you may dream as well
Of Diamonds and of Codsheads, whore's not one,
As swear by your Virginity whore's none.
I am that Codshead, she has spied my stone,
My Diamond: noble wench, but nobler no see;
I am an old Courtier, and lye close, lye close.
No, no, no, if you shrink from me I will not love you: stay.
I am conjured, and will keep my circle.
Fie, fie, fie, by the neat tongue of eloquence, this measure is out of measure, tic too hot, too hot, gallants bee not ashamed to show your own faces: Ladies vnapparell your dear beau∣ties: So, so, so, so, here is a banquet; sit, sit, sit Signior Curuetto, thrust in among them, soft Music there, doe, doe, doe.
I will first salute the men, close with the women, and last sit.
But not sit last: a banquet? and have these Suckets here? oh I have a crew of Angels prisoners in my pocket, and none but a good bale of dice can fetch them out: Dice ho; come my little lecherous Baboon, by Saint Mark, you shall venture your twenty crowns.
And have but one.
I swore first.
Right, you swore,
But oaths are now like Blurt our Constable,
Standing for nothing, a mere plot, a trick,
The Mask dogged me, I hit it in the nick;
A fetch to get my Diamond, my dear stone,
I am a hoary Courtier, but lye close, close, close;
Isle play Sir.
Come.
But in my to'ther hose.
Curuetto?
Let him go, I knew what hook would choke him, and therefore baited that for him to nibble upon: an old comb∣pecked rascal, that was beaten out a'th Cocke-pit, when I could not stand a hye-lone without I held by a thing, to come crow∣ing among vs: hang him lobster; come, the same oath that your Fore-man took, take all, and Sing.
Love is like a Lamb, and Love is like a Lyon,
Fly from Love, he fights; fight, then does he fly on:
Love is all in fire, and yet is ever freezing,
Love is much in winning, yet is more in leezing.
Love is ever sick, and yet is never dying,
Love is ever true, and yet is ever lying.
Love does dote in liking, and is mad in loathing,
Love indeed is any thing, yet indeed is nothing.
Mars armipotent with his Court-of-guard, give sharp∣nes to my Toledo, I am beleager'd, ô Cupped grant that my blushing prove not a Linstocke, and give fire too suddenly to the roaring Meg of my desires; most Sanguine cheeked La∣dyes.
S'foote how now Don Dego; Sanguine cheeked? dost think their faces have been at Cutlers? out you roring-tawny∣faced rascal, it were a good deed to beat my hilts about's coxcomb, and then make him Sanguine cheeked too.
Nay good Hipolito.
Fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, tho I hate his company, I wot not have my house to abuse his countenance: no, no, no, bee not so
Contagious, I will send him hence with a flea in's ear.
Doe, or Isle turn him into a flea, and make him skip un∣der some of your petticoats.
Signior Lazarillo:
Most sweet face you need not hang out your silken tongue as a Flag of truce: for I will drop at your feet, ere I draw blood in your Chamber; yet I shall hardly drink up this wrong, for your sake I will wipe it out for this time: I would deal with you in secret (so you had a void room) about most deep and serious matters.
Isle send these hence; fie, fie, fie, I am so choked still with this man of Ginger-bread, and yet I can never be rid of him, but hark Hipolito.
Good draw the Curtains, put out Candles, and girls to bed.
Venus, give me suck, from thine own most white and tender dugs, that I may batten in love: dear instrument of ma∣no men's delight, are all these women?
No no, no, they are half men and half women.
You apprehend too fast, I mean by women, wives: for wives are no maids, nor are maids women: If those vnbear∣ded Gallants keep the doors of their Wedlock, those Ladies spend their hours of pastime but ill, (ô most rich armefull of beauty) but if you can bring all those Females into one ring, into one private place: I will read a Lecture of discipline, to their most great and honourable ears; wherein I will teach them, so to carry their white bodies, either before their husbands or be∣fore their Lovers, that they shall never fear to have milk thrown in their faces; nor I, wine in mine, when I come to sit up∣on them in courtesy.
That were excellent, Isle have them all here at your pleasure.
I will show them all the tricks and garbs of Spanish Dames, I will study for apt and legant phrase to tickle them with; and when my devise is ready I will come: will you inspire into your most divine spirits, the most divine soul of Tobacco?
No, no, no; fie, fie, fie, I should be choaktvp if your pipe should kiss my vnder-lip.
Hence forth, most deep stamp of Feminine perfect∣on, my Pipe shall not bee drawn before you, but in se∣cret.
Lament my case since thou can not provoke,
Her nose to smell, love fill thine own with smoke.
The wooden picture you sent her, hath set her on fire; and she desires you as you pity the case of a poor des∣pirate Gentlewoman, to serve that Monsieur in at Supper to her.
The Frenchman, Saint Dennis, let her carve him up: Stay, heir's Camillo; now my fool in fashion, my sage Idiot, up with this brims, down with this devil (Melancho∣lie) are you decayed concupiscentious Inamorato? news, news, Empery dotes on Fontinell.
What comfort speaks her love to my sick heart?
Mary this Sir; heere's a Yellow-hammer flew to me with thy water, and I cast it, and find, that his Mistress be∣ing given to this new falling-sicknesse, will cure thee: the Frenchman you see has a soft Mermaladie heart, and shall no sooner feel Imperiaes liquerish desire to like at him, but straight he will stick the brooch of her longing in it: then Sir, may you sir, come upon my Sister sir, with a fresh charge Sir; Sa, sa, sa, sa, once giving back, and thrice coming forward, she yield and the town of Breast is taken.
This hath some taste of hope, is that the Mercury
Who brings you notice of his Mistress love?
I may be her Mercury, for my running of errands; but
troth is Sir, I am Cerberus, for I am porter to hell.
Then Cerberus play thy part, here, search that hell,
There find, &amp; bring forth that false Fontinell,
If I can win his strayed thoughts to retire,
From her encountered eyes, whom I have singled
In Hymens holy Battle: he shall pass
From hence to France, in company and guard
Of mine own heart: he comes Hipolito.
Still looks he like a Lover, poor Gentleman,
Love is the minds strong physic, and the pill,
That leaves the heart sick, and ore-turnes the will.
O happy persecution I embrace thee
With an vnfettered soul; so sweet a thing
Is it to sigh upon the rack of love,
Where each calamity is groaning: witness
Of the poor Martirs faith: I never heard
Of any true affection, but t'was nipped
With care; that (like the Catter-piller) eats
The leaves off the springs sweetest book, (the Rose)
''Loue bred on earth, is often noure'd in hell.
bye rote it reads woe, ere it learn to spell.
God morrow French Lord.
Boneioure Monsieur.
To your secure and more then happy self,
I tender thanks, for you have honoured me;
You are my Jailer, and have pend me up,
Least the poor fly (your prisoner) should alight
Upon your Mistress lip; and thence derive,
The dimpled print of an infectiue touch.
Thou secure tyrant, (yet unhappy lover)
Could thou chain Mountains to my captive feet,
Yet Uiolettaes heart and mine should meet.
Hark swaggerer, there's a little dapple-colour'd rascal: ho
a Bone Robe; her name's Empery, a Gentlewoman by my faith of an ancient house, and has goodly rents, and comminges in of her own, and this Ape would fine have thee chained to her in the holy state: Sir, shoe's fallen in love with thy picture, yes faith too her, woo her, and win her: leave my Sister, &amp; thy ran∣some's paid; ell's paid Gentlemen; bi'th Lord Empery is as good a girl as any is in Uenice.
Upon mine honour Fontinell tic true,
The Lady dotes on thy perfections,
Therefore resign my Uiolettaes heart,
To me the Lord of it: and I will send thee—
O whether, to damnation? wilt thou not?
Think thou the purity of my true soul
Can taste your lepperous counsel? no, I defy you,
Inconstancy dwell on his rivaled brow,
That weddes for dirt; or on thin-forced heart,
That lags in Rereward of his Fathers charge,
When to some negro-gelderling hoe's clogged,
By the Injunction of a golden fee:
When I call back my vows to Violetta,
May I then slip into an obscure grave,
Whose mould (vnprest with stony monument)
Dwelling in open ayre, may drink the tears
Of the inconstant clouds to rot me soon,
Out of my private linen Sepulchre.
I, is this your settled resolution?
By my loves best divinity it is.
Then bear him to his prison back again,
This tune must alter ere thy lodging mend,
To death fond French-man, thy slight love doth tend.
Then constant heart, thy fate with joy pursue,
Draw wonder to thy death expiring true.
After him Fresco, enforce thy Mistresses passion, thou shalt have access to him, to bring him loue-tokens: if they prevail not, yet thou shalt still be in presence, be it but to spite him: In honest Fresco.
Isle vex him to the heart Sir, fear not me,
Yet heir's a trick perchance may set him free.
Come, wilt thou goelaugh, and lye down? now sure there be some rebels in thy belly, for thine eyes doe nothing but watch and ward, tho'ast not slept these three nights.
Alas how can I? he that truly loves
Burns out the day in idle fantasies,
And when the Lamb bleating, doth bid Godnight
Unto the closing day; then tears begin
To keep quick time, unto the Owl, whose voice
Shrieks, like the Bell-man in the Lovers ears:
Loves eye the jewel of sleep, oh seldom wears!
The early Lark is wakened from her bed,
Being only by Loves plaints disquieted,
And singing in the mornings ear, she weeps
(Being deep in love) at lovers broken sleeps:
But say a golden slumber chance to tie,
With silken strings the cover of loves eye:
Then dreams (Magitian-like) mocking present
Pleasures, whose fading, leaves more discontent.
Have you these golden charms?
We have my Lord.
Bestow them sweetly; think a Lovers heart
Dwells in each instrument and let it melt
In weeping strains: yonder direct your faces,
That the soft summons of a frightles parley,
May creep into the Casement: So, begin;
Music speak moouinglye, assume my part,
For thou must now plead to a stony heart.
Pity, pity, pity,
Pity, pity, pity,
That word begins that ends a true-loue Ditty,
Your blessed eyes (like a pair of Suns,)
Shine in the sphere of smiling,
Your pretty lips (like a pair of Doves)
Are kisses still compiling.
Mercy hangs upon your brow, like a precious Jewel,
O let not then,
(Most lovely maid, best to be loved of men:)
Marble, lye upon your heart, that will make you cruel:
Pity, pity, pity,
Pity, pity, pity:
That word begins that ends a true-loue ditty.
Who owes this salutation?
Thy Camillo.
Is not your shadow there too, my sweet bother?
Here sweet Sister.
I dreamt so: ô I am much bound to you,
For you my Lord have used my love with honour.
Ever with honour.
Indeed, indeed you have.
S'light, she means her French garsoon.
The same, good night, trust me tic somewhat late,
And this bleak wind nippes dead all idle prate.
I must to bed, good night.
The God of rest,
Play music to thine eyes, whilst on my breast
The furies sit and beat, and keep care waking.
You will not leave my friend in this poor taking:
Yes by the velvet brow of darkness.
You scurvy Tyt: s'foote, scurvy anything,
Doe you hear Suzanne: you, puncke, if I geld not your Muske-Cat; Isle do it by Iesu; lets go Camillo.
Nay but pure swaggerer, ruffiin; doe you think
To fright me with your bug-beare threats? go by;
Hark tosse-pot in your ear, the French-man's mine,
And by these hands Isle have him.
Rareroage! fine!
He is my prisoner, (by a deed of gift)
Therefore Camillo you have wronged me much,
To wrong my prisoner: by my troth I love him,
The rather for the baseness he endures,
For my unworthy self: Isle tell you what;
Release him, let him plead your love for you;
I love a life to hear a man speak French,
Of his complexion: I would vnder-goe
The instruction of that language rather far,
Than be two weeks unmarried (by my life)
Because Isle speak true French, Isle be his wife.
O scorn to my chaste love, burst heart.
Swounds hold.
Come (gentle friends) tie your most solemn tunes,
By silver strings unto a leaden pace;
False fair, enjoy thy base-belou'd: adieu,
Hoe's far less noble, and shall prove less true.
Lady Empery (the Courtesans Zani) hath brought you this letter, from the poor Gentleman in the deep dungeon, but would not stay till he had an answer.
Her groom employed by Fontinell? O strange!
I wonder how he got access to him:
Isle read, and (reading) my poor heart shall ache,
''True-loue is jealous, fears the best love shake.
Meet me at the end of the old Chapel, next Saint Lorenzos Monastery, furnish your company with a Friar, that there he may consummate our holy vows, till midnight: farewell.
Hath he got opportunity to scope?
O happy period of our separation,
Blessed night, wrap Cynthia in a sable sheet:
That fearful lovers may securely meet.
Play you my part bravely; you must look like a slave, and you shall see, Isle counterfeit the Frenchman most knauishl•; my Mistress (for your sake) charged me on her blessing to fall to these shifts; I left her at Cards, she'll sit up till you come, be∣cause she'll have you play a game at Noddy; you'll to her pre∣sentlie:
I will upon mine honour.
I think she does not greatly care whether you fall to her upon your honour, or no: So, ell's fit, tel my Lady that I go in a suite of Durance for her sake; that's your way, and this Pit∣hole's mine; if I can scope hence, why so; if not, hee that's hanged. is nearer to heaven by half a score steps then hee that dyes in a bed, and so adieu Nonsieur.
Farewell dear trusty slave; shall I profane
This Temple with an Idol of strange love?
When I doe so let me dissolve in fire;
Yet one day will I see this Dame, whose heart
Talks off my misery, Isle not be so rude,
To pay her kindness with ingratitude.
My dearest Fontinell.
My Violetta, oh God!
Oh God!
Where is this reverend Friar?
Here, over joyed, young man.
How did thou scope?
How came Imperiaes man?
No more of that.
When did Empery?—
Questions now are thieves,
And lies in Ambush to surprise our joys,
My most happy stars shine still, shine on,
Away, come, love beset, had need be gone.
I must not stay thou say:
Gods me, away.
Bus, bus, again; heere's sixepence; bus again,
Farewell, I must not stay then.
Foh.
Farewell;
At ten a clock thou say, and ring a Bell
Which thou wilt hang out at this window.
Lord I she'll hear this fiddling.
No, close on my word:
Farewell just ten a clock, I shall come in,
Remember to let down the Corde; just ten
Thou'lt open mouse? pray God thou dost, Amen, Amen, Amen,
I am an old Courtier wench but I can spy
A young Duck: close mum; ten; close, tic not I.
Mistress, sweet Ladies.
Is his old rotten Aqua-vitae bottle stoptvp? is hee gone? fie, fie, fie, fie, he so smells of Ale and Onions, and Rosa-so∣lis, fie; bolt the door, stop the key-hole least his breath peep in, burn some Perfume: I doe not love to handle these dried stocke-fishes that ask so much tawing, fie, fie, fie.
Nor I, trust me Lady, fih!
No, no no no, stools and cushions, lowe stools, lowe stools, sit, sit, sit, round Ladies round; So, so, so, so let, oursweet beauties be spread to the full and most mooing advantage, for we are fallen into his hands, who they say, has an A B C, for the sticking in of the least white pin in any part of the body.
Madame Empery, what stuff is he like to draw out
before vs?
Nay, nay, nay, tic Greek to me, tic Greek to me, I never had remnant of his Spanish leather learning: here he comes, your ears may now fit themselves out of the whole piece.
I doe first deliver to your most Skreete, &amp; long-fingred hands, this head (or top of all the members) bare and vncomb'd, to show how deeply I stand in reverence of your naked Female beauties. Bright and vnclipt Angels, if I were to make a disco∣rye of any new-found land (as Virginia or so) to Ladies &amp; Cour∣tiers, my speech should hoist up Sails, fit to bear up such lofty and well rigged vessels: but because I am to deal only with the civil Chittie Matron; I will not lay upon your blushing and delicate cheek, any other colours, than such as will give luster to your chittie faces, in &amp; to that purpose, our Thesis is taken out of that most plentiful, but most precious book: Entitled, the Economical Cornacopia.
The what?
The Economical Cornucopia; thus,
Wise is that wife, who (with apt wit) complains,
That shoe's kept under, yet rules all the rains.
Oh again sweet Signior? Complains.
That shoe's kept under? what follows?
Yet rules all the rains:
Wife is that wife, who (with apt wit) complains,
That shoe's kept under, yet rules all the rains.
Most pure and refined plants of nature, I will not (as this Dis∣tinction entices) take up the parts as they lye here in order: As first, to touch your wisdom, it were folly: next, your complain∣ing, tic too common: thirdly, your keeping under, tic aboue my capachitie: and lastly, the rains in your own hands, that is the A-per-se of all, the very cream of all, and therefore how to skim off that only, only listen: a wife wise, no matter: apt wit; no matter: complaining, no matter: kept under, no great matter: but to rule the roast, is the matter.
That ruling of the roast goes with me.
And me.
And me, Isle have a cut of that roast.
Since then, a women's only desire is to have the rains in her own white hand; your chief practise (the very same day that you are wived) must be to get hold of these rains, &amp; being fully gotten, or wound about; yet to complain (with apt wit) as tho you had them not.
How shall we know Signior, when wee have them all or not?
I will furnish your capable understandings, out of my poor Spanish store, with the chief implements, and their ap∣purtenances: Observe, It shall be your first and finest praise, to sing the note of every new fashion, at first sight; and (if you can) to stretch that note aboue Eel.
Good.
The more you pinch your Servants bellies for this, the smoother will the fashion sit on your back: But if your good man, like not this Music, (as being too full of Crochets) your only way is, to learn to play upon the Virginals, and so nail his ears to your sweet humours: if this bee out of time too, yet your labour will quit the cost; for by this means your secret friend may have free and open access to you, under the colour of pricking you lessons: Now, be∣cause you may tie your husbands love in most sweet knots, you shall never give over labouring, till out of his purse you have dug a garden: and that garden must stand a pretty distance from the Chittie; for by repairing thither, much good fruit may be grafted.
Mark that.
Then (in the after noon) when you address your sweet perfumed body, to walk to this garden, there to gather a nose-gay, sops-in-wine, cowslips, columbines, hearts-ease; &amp;c. The first principle to learn is, that you stick black patches for the room on your delicate blew Temples, tho there bee no room for the room; black patches are comely in most womē, &amp; being well fastened, draw men's eyes to shoot glances at you:
Next, your ruff must stand in print, and for that purpose, get poking sticks with fair and long handles, least they scorch your lily sweating hands: then your Hat with a little brim (if you have a little face) if otherwise, otherwise. Besides, you must play the wag with your wanton Fan; have your Dog (called Pearl or Min, or why ask you? or any other pretty name) dance along by you: your Embroidered Muff before you, on your ravishing hands; but take heed who thrusts his fingers into your Fur.
We'll watch for that.
Once a quarter take state upon you, and be chic; be∣ing chic, (thus politically) lye at your garden; your lip-sworne servant may there visit you as a Physician: where otherwise, (if you languish at home) be sure your husband will look to your water: This chicknes may be increased, with giving out that you breed yongbones; and to stick flesh upon those bones, it shall not bee amiss, if you long for Pescods, at ten groats the Cod; and for Cherries at a crown the Cherry.
O dear Tutor!
Interrupt him not.
If while this pleasing fit of chicknes hold you, you be invited forth to supper, whimper and seem unwilling to go; but if your good man (bestowing the sweet duck, &amp; kiss upon your moist lip) entreat, go: marie my counsel is, you eat little at Table, because it may bee said of you, you are no cormorant; yet at your coming home you may counterfeit a qualm, &amp; so devour a posit: your husband need not have his nose in that posit: no, trust your Chamber-maide only in this; and scarcely her, for you cannot be too careful into whose hands you commit your secrets.
That's certain.
If you have Daughters capable, marry them by no means to Chittizens, but choose for them some smooth chin∣ned curld-headed Gentleman; for Gentlemen will lift up your daughters to their own content: and to make these curl'd-pa∣ted Gallants come off the more roundly, make your husband go to the Herald for Arms; and let it be your daily care, that
hee have a fair and comely Crest; yea, go all the ways your selves you can to be made Ladies, especially if (without danger to his person, or for love or money) you can procure your hus∣band to be dubbed: The Goddess of memory locke up these Jewels which I have bestowed upon you, in your sweet brains: let these be the rules to square out your life by, tho you ne'er go level, but tread you shoes awry: If you can get these rains into your Lilly hand you shall need no Coaches, but may drive your husbands: put it down, and according to that wise saying of you, be Saints in the Church, Angels in the street, devils in the Kitchen, and Apes in your bed; upon which, leaving you tumbling; pardon me that thus abruptly and openly I take you all up.
You have got so far into our books Signior, that you cannot scope without a pardon here, if you take vs up never so snappishlie.
Music there to close our Stomachs: how doe you like him Madonna?
O trust me, I like him most profoundly: why, hoe's able to put down twenty such as I am.
Let them build upon that; nay more, we'll hence∣forth never go to a cunning woman, since men can teach vs our lerrie.
We are all fools to him, and our husbands (if we can hold these rains fast) shall be fools to vs.
If we can keep but this Bias wenches, our good men may perchance once in a month, get a fore-game of vs: but if they win a rubbers, let them throw their caps at it.
No, no, no, dear features, hold their noses to the grind∣stone and they're gone; thanks worthy Signior: fie, fie, fie, you stand bare too long: come bright Mirrors, will you withdraw into a gallery, and taste a slight banquet?
Wee shall cloy ourselves with sweets, my sweet Madonna.
Troth I will not Madonna Empery.
No, no, no, fie, fie, fie, Signior Lazarillo, either bee you
our Fore-man, or else put in these Ladies (at your discretion) nto the Gallery and cut of this striving.
It shall be my Office, my Fees being (as they pass) to take told of their Alabaster hands.
Empery stays. Admired creature, I summon you to a parley, you remember this is the night?
So, so, so, I doe remember; here is a key, that is your Chamber; lights Simperina: about twelve a clock you shall take my beauty prisoner; fie, fie, fie, how I blush? at 12. a clock.
Rich Argosy of all golden pleasure.
No, no, no, put up, put up your joys till anon, I will come by my virginity; but I must tel you one thing, that all my cham∣bers are many nights haunted; with what sprites none can see: but sometimes wee hear Birds singing; sometimes Music playing; sometimes voices laughing, but stir not you, nor bee frighted at any thing.
By Hercules, if any spirits rise, I will conjure them in their own Circles with Toledo. (ready?
So, so, so, lights for his chamber: is the Trap-doore
Tic set sure.
So, so, so, I will bee rid of this broilde red Sprat that stinks so in my stomach, fih; I hate him worse, than to have a Tailor come a wooing to me: Gods me, the sweet Ladies, the banquet, I forget: fie, fie, fie, follow dear Signior.
The trap door Simperina.
Signior come away.
Cupped I kiss the neck of thy sweet bow,
A woman makes me yield, Mars could not so.
Just ten? tic ten just, that's the fixed hour,
For payment of my loves due fees; that broke:
I forfeit a huge sum of joys: ho love,
Isle keep time just to a minute, I,
A sweet guides loss, is a deep penalty.
A night's so rich a venture to taste wrack,
Would make a Lover banckrupt, break his back:
Noh, if to sit up late, early to rise,
Or, if this Gold-finch, that with sweet notes flies,
And wakes the dull eye even of a puritaine;
Can work, then wenches Curuetto is the man;
I am not young, yet have I youthful tricks,
Which peering day must not see; noh, close, close:
Old Courtier, perilous fellow; I can lye
Hug in your bosom, close; yet none shall spy.
Stay, heir's the door, the window; ho, this, this,
Cord? vmh? dear Cord, thy blessed knot I kiss:
None peepes I hope, night clap thy velvet hand
Upon all eyes, if now my friend thou stand:
Isle hang a Jewel at thine ear sweet night,
And here it is, Lantern and candle-light.
A peal, a lusty peal, set, ring loves knell,
Isle sweat, but thus Isle bear away the bell.
Signior, who's there, Signior Curuetto?
Vmh! drowned? Noahs flood? duckt over head &amp; ears?
O sconce! &amp; ô sconce! an old soaker, oh
I sweat now till I drop, what villains; oh?
Punckes, punkateeroes, nags, hags, I will ban,
I have caught my bane.
Who's there?
A Water-man.
Who rings that scolding peal? (by th'ounce
I am wringing wet, I am washed; foh, heir's Rose-water sold
This sconce shall batter down those windows. Bounce:
What doe you mean? why doe you beat our doors?
What doe you take vs for?
You're all damned whoores.
Signior Curuetto?
Signior coxcomb, no;
What makes you be so hot?
You lye, I am cool,
I am an old Courtier, but stinking fool, foh!
Gods my life what have you done? you are in a sweet pickle if you pulled at this rope:
Hang thy self in it, and Isle pull once again.
Mary Muff, will you up and ride, you're mine elder: by my pure Maiden-head heir's a jest: why this was a water-worke to drown a Ratte that uses to creep in at this window.
Fire on your Water-workes, catch a drowned Rat:
That's me, I have it god-amercie head,
Rat? me; I smell a rat, I strike it dead.
You smell a sodden sheep shed; a Rat? I a Rat, and you will not believe me marie foh; I have been believed of your betters, marie sneck up.
Simp, nay sweet Simp, open again, why Simperina?
Go from my window go, go from, &amp;c. away, go by old Ieronimo; nay and you shrink in the wetting, walk, walk, walk.
I cry thee mercy, if the bowl were set,
To drown a Rat; I shrink not am not wet.
A Rat by this hemp, and you could ha smelt; hark you, heir's the bell, ting, ting, ting; would the clapper were in my belly, if I am not mad at your foppery; I could scratch, fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, (as my Mistress says) but go, hye you home; shift you, come back presently; here you shall find a ladder of cords, climb up, Isle receive you, my Mistress lies alone, shoe's yours, a∣way.
O Simp!
Nay scud, you know what you promised me: I shall have simple yowling for this, be gone and Mum.
Thanks, mum dear girl; I am gone, it was for a Rat,
A Rat upon my life; thou shalt have gifts,
I love thee tho thou puts me to my shifts:
I know I could be ouer-reacht by none,
A Paulons head, lye close, lye close, I am gone.
Saint Iaques and the seven deadly sins (that is, the se∣uen wise Masters of the world) pardon me for this night, I will kill the devil.
Ha ha ha.
Thou Prince of Black-amoores, thou shalt have small cause to laugh, if I run thee through: this chamber is haunted, would I had not been brought a bed in it, or else were well delivered: for my heart tells me tic no good luck, to have any thing to doe with the devil, hoe's a paltry merchant.
Midnights bell goes ting, ting, ting, ting, ting,
Then dogs doe howl, and not a bird does sing:
But the Nightingale, and she cries twit, twit, twit, twit:
Owls then on every bow doe sit.
Ravens Croake on Chimneys tops,
The Cricket in the Chamber hoppes:
And the Cats cry mew, mew, mew,
The nibbling Mouse is not a sleep
But he goes, peep, peep, peep, peep, peep,
And the Cats cries, mew, mew mew,
And still the Cats cries mew, mew, mew.
I shall be mowz'd by pusse-cattes: but I had rather dye a dogs death; they have nine lives (a piece like a woman) and they will make it up ten lives, if they and I fall a scratching: Bright Helena of this house, wot thy Troy were a fire, for I am a cold; or else wot I had the Greeks wooden Curtal, to ride away: most Ambrosian-lipt creature, come away quickly, for this nights lodging lies cold at my heart.
The Spanish Pain: I thought the devil could not understand Spanish: but since thou art my countryman, ô thou tawny Satin, I will dance after thy pipe.
He dances the Spanish Pain.
Ho sweet devil, ho thou wilt make any man weary of thee, tho he deal with thee in his shirt,
Sweet beauty; she'll not come, Isle fall to sleep,
And dream of her, loue-dreames are ne'er too deep.
Ha, ha, ha.
Ho, ho, Fresco, Madonna, I am in hell, but heer is no fire; Hell fire is all put out; what ho? so ho ho? I shall bee drowned; I beseech thee, dear Fresco, raise Blurt the Constable, or some Scauinger, to come and make clean these kennels of hell, for they stink so, that I shall cast away my precious self.
Is he down Fresco?
Hoe's down, he cries out he's in hell, it's heaven to me to have him cry so.
Fie, fie, fie, let him lye, and get all to bed.
Not all, I have fatting knavery in hand,
He cries he's damned in hell; the next shall cry,
Hoe's climbing up to heaven, and heir's the gin:
One woodcocke'staine, Isle have his brother in.
Brisk as a capering Taylor; I was washed,
But did they shave me? noh, I am too wise;
Lye close in the bosom of their knaveries,
I am an old hoary Courtier, and strike dead:
I hit my marks: ware, ware, a perilous head.
Cast, I must find a ladder made of roapes,
Ladder and rope, what follow? hanging;
But where? ah ha, there does the riddle lye.
I have escaped drowning; but, but, but, I hope,
I shall not scope the ladder and the rope.
Yonder's a light Master Constable.
Peace woodcock the sconce approaches.
Whew:
I, whisling? Slubber Iog the watch, &amp; give the Lantern a flap.
Whew, Symp, Symperina?
Who's there?
Who's there?
Signior Curuetto heir's the ladder, I watch to doe you a good turn, I am Fresco, is not Blurt abroad and his Bill-men?
No matter if they be, I hear none ny:
I will snug close; out goes my candles eye,
My sconce takes this in snuff, ell's one I care not.
Why when?
I come, close, close, hold rope and spare not.
Now the candle's out.
Peace.
Fresco, light, light, my foot is slipped, call help:
Help, help, help, thieves, thieves, help, thieves, &amp;c.
Thieves, where? follow close: Slubber the Lantern, hold; I charge you in the Dukes name stand: Sir, you're like to hang for this: down with him.
Master Blurt, Master Constable, heir's his ladder, hee comes to rob my mistress, I have bin scared out of my wits, aboue seven times by him, and it's forty to one, if ever they come in a∣gen, I lay felony to his charge.
Felony? you cunny-catching slave.
Cunny-catching will bear an action; Isle cunny-catch you for this; if I can find our key I will aid you: Master Blurt, if not, look to him, as you will answer it upon your death-bed.
What are you?
A Venetian Gentleman.
Woodcock, how dost thou Woodcock?
Thank your worship.
Woodcock, you are of our side now, and therefore your acquaintance cannot serve, and you were a Gentleman of vel∣uet I would commit you.
Why, what are you sir?
What am I sir? doe not you know this staff? I am sir the Dukes own Image; at this time the Dukes tongue (for fault of a better) lies in my mouth; I am Constable sir.
Constable, and commit me? marie Blurt Master Con∣stable.
Away with him.
It's folly to strive,
I say away with him, Isle Blurt you, Isle teach you to stand covered to Authority; your hoary head shall bee knocked when this staff is in place.
I but Master Constable—
No, pardon me, you abuse the Duke, in me that am his Cipher, I say away with him; Gulch, away with him; Woodcock, keep you with me, I will be known for more then Blurt.
Thou honest fellow (the man in the Moon) I beseech thee set fire on thy bush ofthornes, to light and warm me, for I am dung wet: I fell like Lucifer I think into hell, and am crauld out, but in worse pickle than my lean Pilcher: here a∣bout is the Hot-house of my love, ho, ho? why ho there?
Who's that? what Devil stands hohing at my door so late?
I beseech thee Fresco take in Lazarilloes ghost.
Lazarilloes ghost? haunt me not I charge thee, I know thee not, I am in a dream of a drie-Summer, therefore appear not to me.
Is not this the mention of the cherrie-lipt Madonna Empery?
Yes, how than? you Fly-blowne rascal, what art thou?
Lazarilla de Tormes: sweet blood, I have a poor Spa∣nish suite, depending in your house; let me enter most precious Fresco, the Mistress of this mansion is my beautiful Hostess.
How? you Turpentine pill, my wife your Hostess? a∣way you Spanish vermin.
I beseech thee (most pitiful Fresco) allow my lemon∣tation.
And you lament here, Isle stone you with Brick-bats, I am a sleep.
My Slop and Mandillion lye at thy mercy (fine Fresco) I beseech thee let not my case bee thine, I must and will la∣meant.
Must you? Isle wash off your tears; away you hogs∣face.
Thou hast soused my poor hogs-face: O Fresco, thou art a scurvy Doctor, to cast my water no better; it is most rammish Urine, Mars shall not save thee, I will make a browne toast of thy heart, and drink it in a pot of thy strong blood.
Such fellows must be taken down, stand: what white thing is yonder?
Who goes there? come before the Constable.
My dear host Blurt:
You have Blurted fair, I am by my Office to examine you, where you have spent these two nights?
Most big Blurt, I answer thy great Authority, that I have been in hell, and am scratched to death with Pusse-Cattes.
Doe you run a'th score at an Officers house, &amp; then run aboue twelve score off?
I did not run my sweet-fac'd Blurt; the Spanish fleet is bringing gold enough to discharge all, from the Indies: lodge
me most pitiful Bill-man.
Marie and will: I am (in the Dukes name) to charge you with despicious of felony: and Burglary is commit∣ted this night, and we are to reprehend any that we think to bee faulty; were not you at Madonna freckle-faces house?
Signior sec.
Away with him, clap him up.
Most thundering Blurt doe not clap me,
Most thundering Blurt doe not clap me.
Master Lazarns, I know you are a sore fellow where you take, and therefore I charge you (in the Dukes name) to go without wrasling, though you be in your shirt.
Commendable Blurt.
The end of my commendations is to commit you.
I am kin to Don Dego the Spanish Adelantado.
If you he kin to Don Dego (that was smelt out in Paules) you pack; your Lantedoes nor your Lanteeroes cannot serve your turn: I charge you, let me commit you to the tuition.—
Worshipful Blurt, doe not commit me into the hands of dogs.
Dogs?
Master Lazarus, ther's not a dog shall bite you, these are true Bill-men, that fight under the common wealths flag.
Blurt—
Blurt me no Blurts, Isle teach all Spaniards how to med∣dl with whoores.
Most cunning Constable, all Spaniards know that al∣ready, I have meddled with none.
Your being in your shirt berayes you.
I beseech thee most honest Blurt, let not my shirt be∣ray me.
I say away with him: Music, that's in the Courtesans; they are about some ungodly Act, but Isle play a part in it ere
morning: away with Lazarus.
Come Spaniard.
Thy kites and thee, for this shall watch in dirt to feed on carrion.
Hence, ptrooh.
O base Blurt! O base Blurt! O base Blurt!
Gentlemen and Noble Italians, whom I love best; who know best what wrongs I have stood under: being lay de on by him, who is to thank me for his life, I did bestow him (as the prize of mine honour) upon my Love, the most fair Vi∣oletta: my loves merit was basely sold to him, by the most false Violetta: not content with this Felony, he hath dared to add the sweet theft of Ignoble marriage; shoe's now, nones but his, and hee (treacherous villain) any ones, but hers; hee dotes (my honoured friends) on a painted Courtesan, and in scorn of our I∣talian laws, our family, our revenge, loathes Violettaes bed, for a harlots bosom: I conjure you therefore, by all the bonds of Gentility, that as you have solemnly sworn a most sharpe; so let the revenge be most sudden.
Be not your self a bar, to that sodainnes, by this pro∣traction.
Away Gentlemen, away then.
As for that light Hobby-horse my Sister, whose foul name, I will race out with my Poniard; by the honour of my Family (which her lust hath profaned) I swear (and Gentlemen be in this, my sworn brothers) I swear that as all Uenice does admire her beauty, so all the world shall be amazed at her punishment, follow therefore.
Stay, let our resolutions keep together: whether go; we first?
To the Strumpet Imperiaes.
Agreed, what then?
There to find Fontinell; found, to kill him.
And killed, to hang out his reeking body, at his Harlots window.
And by his body, the strumpets.
And between both, my Sisters.
The Tragedy is just: on then, begin.
As you go, every hand pull in a friend, to strengthen vs against all opposites: he that has any drop of true Italian blood in him, thus vow (this morning) to shed others, or let out his own; if you consent to this, follow me.
Via, away, the treacherous Frenchman dyes.
At so, Saint Mark my Pistol, thus death flies.
Ah you little effeminate sweet Cheueleere, why dost thou not get a loose Periwig of hair on thy chin, to set thy French face off, by the panting pulse of Uenus: thou art well∣come a thousand degrees beyond the reach of Arithmetic: Good, good, good, your lip is moist &amp; mooing; it hath the truest French close, even like Mapew; la, la, la &amp;c.
Dear Lady, ô life of love, what sweetness dwells
In loves variety? the soul that plods
In one harsh book of beauty; but repeats
The stale and tedious learning, that hath oft
Faded the senses: when (in reading more)
We glide in new sweets, and are starved with store,
Now by the heart of love, my Violet
Is a foul weed (ô pure Italian flower!)
She, a black Negro, to the white compare,
Of this unequalled beauty: O most accursed!
That I have given her leave to challenge me:
But Lady, poison speaks Italian well,
And in a loathed kiss, Isle include her hell.
So, so, so doe, doe, doe, come, come, come; will you con∣damn the mute rushes to be pressed to death by your sweet by∣die? down, down, down, here, here, here; lean your head upon the lap of my gown; good, good good: O Saint Mark! Here is a loue-marke ableto wear more Ladies eyes for Jew∣else then—oh! lye still, lye still, I will level a true Venetian kiss over your right shoulder.
Shoot home (fair Mistress) and as that kiss flies,
From lip to lip, wound me with your sharpe eyes.
No, no, no, Isle beat this Cherry-tree thus, &amp; thus, and thus; and you name wound.
I will offend so, to be beaten still.
Doe, doe, doe, and if you make any more such lips, when I beat you, by my Virginity you shall bus this rod: Music: I pray thee bee not a puritaine. Sister to the rest of the Sciences, I knew the time when thou could abide handling.
Oh, fie, fie, fie, forbear, thou art like a punie-Barber (new come to the trade) thou pick'st our ears too deep: So, so, so, will my sweet prisoner entertain a poor Italian Song?
O most willingly my dear Madonna.
I care not if I persuade my bad voice to wrestle with this Music and catch strain; so, so, so, keep time, keep time, keep time.
Love for such a cherry lip,
Would be glad to pawn his arrows:
Venus here to take a Sip,
Would sell her Doves and teem of Sparrow.
But they shall not so,
Hey nony nony no:
None but I this lip must owe,
Hey nony nony no.
Your voice does teach the Music,
No, no, no.
Again, dear Love.
Hey nony nony no:
Did Jove see this wanton eye,
Ganimede must waite no longer:
Phoebe here one night did lye,
Would change her face and look much younger.
But they shall not so,
Hey nony nony no:
None but I this lip must owe,
Hey nony nony no.
O Madonna! Mistress! Madonna!
Case up this Gentleman, ther's rapping at door; and one in a small voice, says, ther's Camilla and Hippolito.
And they will come in.
Upon their deaths they shall, for they seek mine.
No, no, no, locke the doors fast, Triuia, Simperina, stir.
Alas!
Come they in shape of Devils, this Angel by:
I am armed, let them come in; vds foot, they dye.
Fie, fie, fie, I will not have thy white body—
What ho; Madonna?
O hark! not hurt for the Rialta; go, go, go, put up: by my Virginity you shall put up.
Here are Camilla and Hippolito.
Into that little room, you are there as safe as in France, or
the Low Countries.
Oh God!
So, so, so, let them enter; Triuia, Simperina, smooth my gown, tread down the rushes, let them enter; doe, doe, doe, no words pretty darling: la, la, la, hey nony nony no.
Are two men transformed into one woman?
How now? what motion's this?
By your leave sweet beauty, pardon my excuse, which under the mask of Camilloes and my brothers names, sought entrance into this house: good Sweetness, have you not a proper∣tie here, improper to your house, my husband?
Ho; your husband here?
Nay be as you seem to be (white Dove) without gall.
Gall? your husband? ha, ha, ha; by my ventoy (yellow Lady) you take your mark improper, no, no, no, my Suger-can∣die Mistress) your good man is not here I assure you; here? ha ho.
Here?
Much husbands here.
Doe not mock me fairest Venetian; come, I know hoe's here: good faith I doe not blame him, for your beau∣tie glides over his error; troth I am right glad that you (my Country woman) have received the pawn of my affections: you cannot bee hard-harted, loving him, nor hate me, for I love him too: since wee both love him, let vs not leave him, till wee have called home the ill hus∣bandrie of a sweet Straggler; prithee (good wench) use him well.
So, so, so.
If he deserve not to bee used well (as Id bee loath he should deserve it) Isle engage my self (dear beauty) to thine ho∣nest hart; give me leave to love him, and Isle give him a kind of leave to love thee: I know he heir's me; I prithee try mine eyes,
if they know him, that have almost drowned themselves in their own salt water, because they cannot see him: In troth Isle not chide him; if I speak words rougher then soft kisses, my penance shall bee to see him kiss thee, yet to hold my peace.
And that's torment enough, alas poor wench.
Shoe's an Ass, by the crown of my Mayden-head,
Id scratch her eyes out, if my man stood in her Tables.
Good partener, lodge me in thy private bed,
Where (in supposed folly) he may end,
Determined sin; thou smile, I know thou wilt;
What looseness may term dotage (truly read)
Is love ripe gathered, not soon withered.
Good troth (pretty wed-locke) thou makst my little eyes smart, with washing themselves in brine; I keep your Cock from his own roost? and mar such a sweet face? and wipe off that dainty red? and make Cupped told the bell for your loue-sicke hart no, no, no, if he were Ioues own Ingle (Ganimed) fie, fie, fie, Isle none; your Chamber-fellow is within, thou shalt enjoy my bed, and thine own pleasure this night: Simperina conduct in this Lady; Fresco silence, ha, ha, ha; I am sorry to see a woman so tame a fool; come, come, come.
Star of Venetian beauty, thanks; ô who
Can bear this wrong, and be a woman too?
We are dishonoured, give vs way, he dyes, he dyes.
I charge you by your duties to the State,
And love to gentry, sheath your weapons.
Stand, I charge you put up your naked weapons, and we'll put up our rusty Bills.
Up to the hilts, we will in his French body.
My Lord, we charge you by the ravished honour
Of an Italian Lady: by our wrongs,
By that eternal blot (which if this slave
Pass free without revenge) like Leprosy,
Will run over all the body of our fems;
Give open way to our just wrath, least bared—
Gentlemen—
Breaking the bonds of honour and of duty;
We cut a passage through you with our swoords.
He that withstands vs, run him through.
I charge you in the Dukes name (before his own face) to keep the peace.
Keep thou the peace, that hast a Peasants heart.
Peasant?
Our peace must have her cheeks painted with blood.
Away, through—
Sweet Gentlemen: though you have called the Dukes own ghost Peasant, for I walk for him in the night: (Kilderkin &amp; Pisse-breech hold out) yet here me, (dear bloods) the Duke here for fault of a better and my self; (Cuckoo fly not hence) for fault of a better, are to lay you by the heals, if you go thus with fire and sword; for the Duke is the head, and I Blurt, am the purtenaunce: Woodcock keep by my side: Now sir—
A plague upon this Woodcock; kill the Watch.
Now in the name of manhood I conjure ye,
Appear in your true shapes; Italians,
You kill your honours more in this revenge,
Than in his murder: Stay, stand, heir's the house.
Right Sir, this is the whoore-house, here hee calls and sets in his staff.
Sheath all your weapons worthy Gentlemen,
And by my life I swear, if Fontinell
Have stained the honour of your Sisters bed,
The fact being death, Isle pay you his proud head,
Arrest him then before our eyes; and see!
Our fury sleeps.
This honest Officer—
Blurt sir.
Shall fetch him forth: go sir, in our name
Attach the French Lord.
Garlic and the rest follow strongly.
O what a scandal were it to a State,
To have a stranger, (and a prisoner)
Murdered by such a troop? Besides, through Uenice
Are numbers of his Country-men dispersed;
Whose rage (meeting with yours) none can prevent
The mischief of a bloody consequent.
The Duke is within an Inch of your nose, and therefore
I dare play with it, if you put not up; deliver I advise you.
Yield up my weapons and my foe so ny?
My self and weapons shall together yield,
Come any one, come all.
Kill, kill the Frenchman, kill him.
Be satisfied my noble Countrymen,
Isle trust you with his life, so you will pawn
The faiths of Gentlemen, no desperate hand
Shall rob him of it; otherwise, he runs
Upon this dangerous point, that dares oppose
His rage against our authority: French Lord,
Yield up this strength, our word shall be your Guard.
Who defies death, needs none, hoe's well prepared.
My honest fellow, with a good defence,
Enter again, fetch out the Courtesan,
And all that are within.
Isle tickle her; it shall ne'er bee said that a browne Bill looked pale.
Frenchman, thou art indebted to our Duke.
For what?
Thy life, for (but for him) thy soul
Had long ere this hung trembling in the ayre,
Being frighted from thy bosom with our swoords.
I doe not thank your Duke; yet (if you will)
Turn bloody Executioners: who dyes
For so bright beauty, is a bright Sacrifice.
The beauty you adore so, is profane,
The breach of wedlock (by our law) is death.
Law give me law.
With all severity.
In my Loves eyes immortal joys doe dwell,
She is my heaven; she from me, I am in hell:
Therefore your Law, your Law:
Make way, she comes.
Fie, Fie, Fie.
Your fie, fie, fie, nor your foh, foh, foh, cannot serve your turn; on must now bear it off with head and shoulders.
Now fetch Curuetto, and the Spaniard heather,
Their punishments shall lye under one doom,
What is she maskt?
A puncke too; follow fellows, Slubber before:
She that is maskt, is leader of this Mask,
What's here? Bows, Bills and Guns? noble Camillo,
I am sure you are Lord of all this misrule: I pray
For whose sake doe you make this swaggering fray?
For yours, and for your own we come resolved,
To murder him, that poisons your chaste bed;
To take revenge on you, for your false heart:
And (wanton Deign) our wrath here must not sleep,
Your sin being deep'st, your share shall be most deep.
With pardon of your grace, my self (to you all)
At your own weapons, thus doe answer all.
For paying away my heart, that was my own,
Fight not to win that, in good troth tic gone,
For my dear loves abusing my chaste bed,
And her sweet theft: Alack, you are misled,
This was a plot of mine, only to try
Your loves strange temper; sooth I doe not lye.
My Fontinell ne'er dallied in her arms;
She never bound his heart with amorous charms,
My Fontinell ne'er loathed my sweet embrace,
She never drew loves picture by his face;
When he from her white hand would strive to go,
She never cried fie, fie, nor no, no, no.
With prayers and bribes, we hired her (Both) to lye
Under that roof; for this must my love dye?
Who dare be so hard hearted? look you, we kiss,
And if he loath his Uioletta; judge by this.
O sweetest Violet; I blush—
Good figure,
Wear still that maiden blush, but still be mine.
I seal my self thine own, with both my hands,
In this true deed of gift: Gallants, here stands
This Ladies Champion, at his foot Isle lye,
That dares touch her: who taints my constancy,
I am no man for him, fight he with her,
And yield, for shoe's a noble conqueror.
This combat shall not need; for see, ashamed,
Of their rash vows, these Gentlemen here break,
This storm; and doe with hands, what tongues should speak,
All friends?
All friends.
Puncke you may laugh at this,
Heir's tricks, but mouth Isle stop you with a kiss.
Room, keep al the scabs back, for heer comes Lazarus.
Oh heir's our other spirits that walk in the night,
Signior Curuetto, by complaint from her,
And by your writing here, I reach the depth
Of your offence; they charge your climbing up
To be to rob her: if so, then by law
You are to dye unless she marry you.
I, Fie fie, fie, I will be burnt to ashes first.
How? dye? or marie her? then call me Daw,
Marry her? shoe's more common then the law,
For boys to call me Ox? noh, I am not drunk,
Isle play with her, but (hang her) wed no puncke.
I shall be a hoary Courtier then indeed,
And have a perilous head, then I were best.
Lye close, lye close, to hide my forked crest.
Noh; fie, fie, fie, hang me before the door,
Where I was drowned ere I marry with a whore.
Well Signior, for we rightly understand,
From your accusers, how you stood her guest,
We pardon you and pass it as a jest:
And for the Spaniard sped so hardly too,
Discharge him Blurt, Signior we pardon you.
Sir, hoe's not to bee discharged, nor so to bee shot off, I have put him into a new suite, and have entered into him which an action, he owes me two and thirty shillings.
It is thy honour to have me dye in thy debt.
It would be more honour to thee to pay me before thou die; twenty shillings of this debt came out of his nose.
Bear witness great Duke, hoe's paid twenty shillings.
Signior no, you cannot smoke me so; he took twen∣tie shillings of it in a fewme, and the rest I charge him with for his lying.
My lying (most pitiful Prince) was abominable.
He did lye (for the time) as well as any Knight of the Post did ever lye.
I doe here put off thy suite, and appeal; I warn thee to the Court of Conscience, and will pay thee by two pence a week, which I will rake out of the hot embers of Tobacco ashes, and then travail on foot to the Indies for more gold, whose red cheeks I will kiss, and beat thee Blurt if thou watch for me.
There be many of your Countrymen in Ireland Sign∣or, travail to them.
No, I will fall no more into bogs.
Sir, his debt, our self will satisfy.
Blurt (my Lord dare take your word for as much more.
And since this heate of fury is all spent,
And Tragic shapes meet Comical event:
Let this bright morning, merrily be crowned
With dances, banquets, and choice Musickes sound.

PRoceed Solinus to procure my fall,
And by the doom of death end woes and all.
Merchant of Siracusa, plead no more.
I am not partial to infringe our Laws;
The enmity and discord which of late
Sprung from the rancorous outrage of your Duke,
To Merchants our well-dealing Countrymen,
Who wanting guilders to redeem their lives,
Have sealed his rigorous statutes with their bloods,
Excludes all pity from our threatening looks:
For since the mortal and intestine jars
Twixt thy seditious Countrymen and vs,
It hath in solemn Synods been decreed,
Both by the Siracusians and our selves,
To admit no traffic to our adverse towns:
Nay more, if any borne at Ephesus
Be seen at any Siracusian Marts and Fairs:
Again, if any Siracusian borne
Come to the Bay of Ephesus, he dies:
His goods confiscate to the Dukes dispose,
Unless a thousand marks be levied
To quit the penalty, and to ransom him:
Thy substance, valued at the highest rate,
Cannot amount unto a hundred Marks,
Therefore by Law thou art condemned to die.
Yet this my comfort, when your words are done,
My woes end likewise with the evening Son.
Well Siracusian; say in brief the cause
Why thou departed from thy native home?
And for what cause thou came to Ephesus.
A heavier task could not have been imposed,
Then I to speak my griefs unspeakable:
Yet that the world may witness that my end
Was wrought by nature, not by vile offence,
Isle utter what my sorrow gives me leave.
In Syracusa was I borne, and wed
Unto a woman, happy but for me,
And by me; had not our hap been bad:
With her I lived in joy, our wealth increased
By prosperous voyages I often made
To Epidamium, till my factors death,
And he great care of goods at random left,
Drew me from kind embraces of my spouse;
From whom my absence was not six months old,
Before her self (almost at fainting under
The pleasing punishment that women bear)
Had made provision for her following me,
And soon, and safe, arrived where I was:
There had she not been long, but she became
A joyful mother of two goodly sons:
And, which was strange, the one so like the other,
As could not be distinguished but by names.
That very hour, and in the selfsame Inn,
A mean woman was delivered
Of such a burden Male, twins both alike:
Those, for their parents were exceeding poor,
I bought, and brought up to attend my sons.
My wife, not meanly proud of two such boys,
Made daily motions for our home return:
Unwilling I agreed, alas, too soon wee came aboard.
A league from Epidamium had we sailed
Before the always winde-obeying deep
Gave any Tragic Instance of our harm:
But longer did we not retain much hope;
For what obscured light the heavens did grant,
Did but convey unto our fearful minds
A doubtful warrant of immediate death,
Which though my self would gladly have embraced,
Yet the incessant weepings of my wife,
Weeping before for what she saw must come,
And piteous playnings of the pretty babes
That mourned for fashion, ignorant what to fear,
Forced me to seek delays for them and me,
And this it was: (for other means was none)
The Sailors sought for safety by our boat,
And left the ship then sinking ripe to vs.
My wife, more careful for the latter borne,
Had fastened him unto a small spare Mast,
Such as sea-faring men provide for storms:
To him one of the other twins was bound,
Whilst I had been like heedful of the other.
The children thus disposed, my wife and I,
Fixing our eyes on whom our care was fixed,
Fastened our selves at either end the mast,
And floating straight, obedient to the stream,
Was carried towards Corinth, as we thought.
At length the son gazing upon the earth,
Dispersed those vapours that offended vs,
And by the benefit of his wished light
The seas waxed calm, and we discovered
Two ships from far, making amain to vs:
Of Corinth that, of Epidarus this,
But ere they came, oh let me say no more,
Gather the sequel by that went before.
Nay forward old man, doe not break off so,
For we may pity, though not pardon thee.
Oh had the gods done so, I had not now
Worthily termed them merciless to vs:
For ere the ships could meet by twice five leagues,
We were encountered by a mighty rock,
Which being violently borne up,
Our helpefull ship was splitted in the midst;
So that in this unjust divorce of vs,
Fortune had left to both of vs alike,
What to delight in, what to sorrow for,
Her part, poor soul, seeming as burdened
With lesser weight, but not with lesser woe,
Was carried with more speed before the wind,
And in our sight they three were taken up
By Fishermen of Corinth, as we thought.
At length another ship had seized on vs,
And knowing whom it was their hap to save,
Gave healthful welcome to their shipwrecked guests,
And would have reft the Fishers of their prey,
Had not their back been very slow of sail;
And therefore homeward did they bend their course.
Thus have you heard me severed from my bliss,
That by misfortunes was my life prolonged,
To tell sad stories of my own mishaps.
And for the sake of them thou sorrow for,
Doe me the favour to dilate at full,
What have befallen of them and they till now.
My youngest boy, and yet my eldest care,
At eighteen years became inquisitive
After his brother; and importuned me
That his attendant, so his case was like,
Reft of his brother, but retained his name,
Might bear him company in the quest of him:
Whom whilst I laboured of a love to see,
I hazarded the loss of whom I loved.
Five Summers have I spent in farthest Greece,
Roaming clean through the bounds of Asia,
And coasting homeward, came to Ephesus:
Hopeless to find, yet loath to leave unsought
Or that, or any place that harbours men:
But here must end the story of my life,
And happy were I in my timely death,
Could all my travels warrant me they live.
Haplesse Egeon whom the fates have marked
To bear the extremity of dire mishap:
Now trust me, were it not against our Laws,
Against my Crown, my oath, my dignity,
Which Princes would they may not disanull,
My soul should sue as advocate for thee:
But though thou art adjudged to the death,
And passed sentence may not be recal'd
But to our honours great disparagement:
Yet will I favour thee in what I can;
Therefore Merchant, Isle limit thee this day
To seek thy help by beneficial help,
Try all the friends thou hast in Ephesus,
Beg thou, or borrow, to make up the sum,
And live: if no, then thou art doomed to die:
Jailer, take him to thy custody.
I will my Lord.
Hopeless and helpless doth Again wend,
But to procrastinate his lifeless end.
Therefore give out you are of Epidamium,
Lest that your goods too soon be confiscate:
This very day a Syracusian Merchant
Is apprehended for a rival here,
And not being able to buy out his life,
According to the statute of the town,
Dies ere the weary sun set in the West:
There is your money that I had to keep.
Go bear it to the Centaur, where we host,
And stay there Dromio, till I come to thee;
Within this hour it will be dinner time,
Till that Isle view the manners of the town,
Peruse the traders, gaze upon the buildings,
And then return and sleep within mine Inn,
For with long travail I am stiff and weary.
Get thee away.
Many a man would take you at your word,
And go indeed, having so good a mean.
A trusty villain sir, that very oft,
When I am dull with care and melancholy,
Lightens my humour with his merry jests:
What will you walk with me about the town,
And then go to my Inn and dine with me?
I am invited sir to certain Merchants,
Of whom I hope to make much benefit:
I crave your pardon, soon at five a clock,
Please you, Isle meet with you upon the Mart,
And afterword consort you till bed time:
My present business calls me from you now.
Farewell till then: I will go loose my self,
And wander up and down to view the City.
Sir, I commend you to your own content.
He that commends me to mine own content,
Commends me to the thing I cannot get:
I to the world am like a drop of water,
That in the Ocean seeks another drop,
Who falling there to find his fellow forth,
(Unseen, inquisitive) confounds himself.
So I, to find a Mother and a Brother,
In quest of them (unhappy a) loose my self.
Here comes the almanac of my true date:
What now? How chance thou art returned so soon.
Returned so soon, rather approached too late:
The Capon burns, the Pig false from the spit;
The clock hath stricken twelve upon the bell:
My Mistress made it one upon my cheek:
She is so hot because the meat is cold:
The meat is cold, because you come not home:
You come not home, because you have no stomach:
You have no stomach, having broke your fast:
But we that know what it is to fast and pray,
Are penitent for your default to day.
Stop in your wind sir, tell me this I pray?
Where have you left the money that I gave you.
Oh six pence that I had a wensday last,
To pay the Sadler for my Mistress crupper:
The Sadler had it Sir, I kept it not.
I am not in a sportive humour now:
Tell me, and dally not, where is the money?
We being strangers here, how dare thou trust
So great a charge from thine own custody.
I pray you jest sir as you sit at dinner:
I from my Mistress come to you in post:
If I return I shall be post indeed.
For she will scour your fault upon my pate:
Me thinks your maw, like mine, should be your ???ooke,
And strike you home without a messenger.
Come Dromio, come, these ???acts are out of season,
Reserve them till a merrier hour then this:
Where is the gold I gave in charge to thee?
To me sir? why you gave no gold to me?
Come on sir knave, have done your foolishness,
And tell me how thou ha???t disposed thy charge???
My charge was but to fetch you f???o?? the Mart
Home to your house, the Phoenix sir, to dinner;
My Mistress and her sister stays for you.
Now as I am a Christian answer me,
In what safe place you have bestowed my money;
Or I shall break that merry sconce of yours
That stands on tricks, when I am vndispos'd:
Where is the thousand Marks thou had of me?
I have some marks of yours upon my pate:
Some of my Mistress marks upon my shoulders:
But not a thousand marks between you both.
If I should pay your worship those again,
Perchance you will not bear them patiently.
Thy Mistress marks? what Mistress slave hast thou?
Your worships wife, my Mistress at the Phoenix;
She that doth fast till you come home to dinner:
And prays that you will hie you home to dinner.
What wilt thou flout me thus unto my face
Being forbid? There take you that sir knave.
What mean you sir, for God sake hold your hands:
Nay, and you will not sir, Isle take my heals.
Upon my life by some devise or other,
The villain is ore-wrought of all my money.
They say this town is full of cosenage:
As nimble Jugglers that deceive the eye:
Dark working Sorcerers that change the mind:
Soule-killing Witches, that deform the body:
Disguised Cheaters, prating Mountebanks;
And many such like-liberties of sin:
If it prove so, I will be gone the sooner:
Isle to the Centaur to go seek this slave,
I greatly fear my money is not safe.
Neither my husband nor the slave returned,
That in such haste I sent to seek his Master?
Sure Luciana it is two a clock.
Perhaps some Merchant hath invited him,
And from the Mart he's somewhere gone to dinner:
Good Sister let vs dine, and never fret;
A man is Master of his liberty:
Time is their Master, and when they see time,
They'll go or come; if so, be patient Sister.
Why should their liberty then ours be more?
Because their business still lies out adore.
Look when I serve him so, he takes it thus.
Oh, know he is the bridle of your will.
There's none but asses will be bridled so.
Why, headstrong liberty is lashed wi???h woe:
There's nothing situate under ???ens eye,
But hath his bound in earth, in ???ea, in sky.
The beasts, the fishes, and the winged fowls
Are their males subjects, and at ???he???r controls:
Man more divine, the Master of all these,
Lord of the wide world, and wilde watery seas,
Endued with intellectual sense and souls,
Of more pre-eminence then fish and fowls,
Are masters to their females, and their Lords:
Then let your will attend on their accords.
This servitude makes you to keep vnwed.
Not this, but troubles of the marriage bed.
But were you wedded, you wold bear some sway
Ere I learned love; Isle practise to obey.
How if your husband start some other where?
Till he come home again, I would for bear.
Patience vnmou'd, no marvel though she pause,
They can be meek, that have no other cause:
A wretched soul bruised with adversity,
We bid be quiet when we hear it cry.
But were we burdened with like weight of pain,
As much, or more, we should our selves complain:
So thou that hast no unkind mate to grieve thee,
With urging helpless patience would relieve me;
But if thou live to see like right bereft???,
This foole-beg'd patience in thee will be left.
Well, I will marry one day but to try:
Here comes your man, now is your husband no.
Say, is your tardy master now at hand?
Nay, hoe's at too hands with me, and that my two ears can witness.
Say, did thou speak with him? know thou his mind?
I, I, he told his mind upon mine ear,
Beshrew his hand, I scarce could understand it.
Spake hee so doubtfully, thou could not feel his meaning.
Nay, hee struck so plainly, I could too well feel his blows; and withal so doubtfully, that I could scarce understand them.
But say, I prithee, is he coming home?
It seems he hath great care to please his wife.
Why Mistress, sure my Master is horn mad.
Horn mad, thou villain?
I mean not Cuckold mad,
But sure he is stark mad:
When I desired him to come home to dinner,
He asked me for a hundred marks in gold:
It is dinner time??? quoth I: my gold, quoth he:
Your meat doth burn, quoth I: my gold quoth he:
Will you come, quoth I: my gold, quoth he;
Where is the thousand marks I gave thee villain?
The Pig quoth I, is burned: my gold, quoth he:
My mistress, sir, quoth I: hang up thy Mistress:
I know not thy mistress, out on thy mistress.
Quoth who?
Quoth my Master, I know quoth he, no house, no wife, no mistress: so that my arrant due unto my tongue, I thank him, I bare home upon my shoulders: for in conclusion, he did beat me there.
Go back again, thou slave, &amp; fetch him home.
Go back again, and be new beaten home???
For Gods sake send some other messenger.
Back slave, or I will break thy pate across.
And he will bless yt cross with other beating???
Between you, I shall have a holy head.
Hence prating peasant, fetch thy Master home.
Am I so round with you, as you with me,
That like a foot-ball you doe spurn me thus:
You spurn me hence, and he will spurn me hither,
If I last in this service, you must case me in leather.
Fie how impatience lowreth in your face.
His company must do his minions grace,
Whilst I at home starve for a merry look:
Hath homely age the alluring beauty took
From my poor check? then he hath wasted it.
Are my discourses dull? Barren my wit,
If voluble and sharpe discourse be mared,
Unkindness blunts it more then marble hard.
Doe their gay vestments his affections bait?
That's not my fault, hoe's master of my state.
What ruins are in me that can be found,
By him not ruined? Then is he the ground
Of my defeatures. My decayed fair,
A sunny look of his, would soon repair.
But, too unruly Dear, he breaks the pale,
And feeds from home; poor I am but his stale.
Selfe-harming Jealousy; fie beat it hence.
Unfeeling fools can with such wrongs dispense:
I know his eye doth homage other-where,
Or else, what lets it but he would be here?
Sister, you know he promised me a chain,
Would that alone, a love he would detain,
So he would keep fair quarter with his bed:
I see the Jewel best enamelled
Will loose his beauty: yet the gold bides still
That others touch, and often touching will,
Where gold and no man that hath a name,
By falsehood and corruption doth it shame:
Since that my beauty cannot please his eye,
Isle weep (what's left away) and weeping die.
How many fond fools serve mad Jealousy?
The gold I gave to Dromio is laid up
Safe at the Centaur, and the heedful slave
Is wandered forth in care to seek me out
By computation and mine hosts report.
I could not speak with Dromio, since at first
I sent him from the Mart? see here he comes.
How now sir, is your merry humour altered?
As you love strokes, so jest with me again:
You know no Centaur? you received no gold?
Your Mistress sent to have me home to dinner?
My house was at the Phoenix? Wast thou mad,
That thus so madlie thou did did answer me?
What answer sir? when spake I such a word?
Even now, even here, not half an hour since.
I did not see you since you sent me hence
Home to the Centaur with the gold you gave me.
Villain, thou did deny the golds receipt,
And toldst me of a Mistress, and a dinner,
For which I hope thou feltst I was displeased.
I am glad to see you in this merry vain,
What means this jest, I pray you Master tell me?
Yea, dost thou ieere &amp; flowt me in the teeth?
Think you I jest? hold, take thou that, &amp; that. Beats Dro.
Hold sir, for Gods sake, now your jest is earnest,
Upon what bargain do you give it me?
Because that I familiarlie sometimes
Doe use you for my fool, and chat with you,
Your sauciness will jest upon my love,
And make a Common of my serious hours,
When the sun shines, let foolish gnats make sport,
But creep in crannies, when he hides his beams:
If you will jest with me, know my aspect,
And fashion your demeanour to my looks,
Or I will beat this method in your sconce.
Sconce call you it? so you would leave bat???ring, I had rather have it a head, and you use these blows long, I must get a sconce for my head, and Ensconce it to, or else I shall seek my wit in my shoulders, but I pray sir, why am I beaten?
Dost thou not know?
Nothing sir, but that I am beaten.
Shall I tell you why?
I sir, and wherefore; for they say, every why hath a wherefore.
Why first for flouting me, and then wherefore, for urging it the second time to me.
Was there ever any man thus beaten out of season, when in the why and the wherefore, is neither rime nor reason. Well sir, I thank you.
Thank me sir, for what?
Marry sir, for this something that you gave me for nothing.
Isle make you amends next, to give you nothing for something. But say sir, is it dinner time?
No sir, I think the meat wants that I have.
In good time sir: what's that?
Basting.
Well sir, then twill be dry.
If it be sir, I pray you eat none of it.
Your reason?
Lest it make you choleric, and purchase me another dry basting.
Well sir, learn to jest in good time, there's a time for all things.
I durst have denied that before you were so choleric.
By what rule sir?
Marry sir, by a rule as plain as the plain bald pate of Father time himself.
Let's hear it.
There's no time for a man to recover his hair that grows bald by nature.
May he not doe it by fine and recovery?
Yes, to pay a fine for a periwig, and recover the lost hair of another man.
Why, is Time such a niggard of hair, being (as it is) so plentiful an excrement?
Because it is a blessing that hee bestows on beasts, and what he hath scanted them in hair, hee hath given them in wit.
Why, but theres many a man hath more hair then wit.
Not a man of those but he hath the wit to lose his hair.
Why thou did conclude hairy men plain dea???lers without wit.
The plainer dealer, the sooner lost; yet he loo???seth it in a kind of jollity.
For what reason.
For two, and sound ones to.
Nay not sound I pray you.
Sure ones then.
Nay, not sure in a thing falsing.
Certain ones then.
Name them.
The one to save the money that he spends in trying: the other, that at dinner they should not drop in his porrage.
You would all this time have proved, here is no time for all things.
Marry and did sir: namely, in no time to re???cover hair lost by Nature.
But your reason was not substantial, why there is no time to recover.
Thus I mend it: Time himself is bald, and therefore to the worlds end, will have bald followers.
I knew it would be a bald conclusion: but soft, who wafts vs yonder.
I, I. Antipholus, look strange and frown,
Some other Mistress hath thy sweet aspects:
I am not Adriana, nor thy wife.
The time was once, when thou vn-vrg'd would vow,
That never words were music to thine ear,
That never object pleasing in thine eye,
That never touch well welcome to thy hand,
That never meat sweet-fauour'd in thy taste,
Unless I spake, or looked, or touched, or carved to thee.
How comes it now, my Husband, oh how comes it,
That thou art then estranged from thy self?
Thy self I call it, being strange to me:
That vndiuidable Incorporate
Am better then thy dear selfes better part.
Ah doe not tear away thy self from me;
For know my love: as easy moist thou fall
A drop of water in the breaking gulf,
And take vnmingled thence that drop again
Without addition or diminishing,
As take from me thy self, and not me too.
How dearly would it touch thee to the quick,
Should thou but hear I were licentious?
And that this body consecrate to thee,
By Ruffian Lust should be contaminate?
Would thou not spit at me, and spurn at me,
And hurl the name of husband in my face,
And tear the stained skin of my Harlot brow,
And from my false hand cut the wedding ring,
And break it with a deepe-diuorcing vow?
I know thou can, and therefore see thou doe it.
I am possessed with an adulterate blot,
My blood is mingled with the crime of lust:
For if we two be one, and thou play false,
I doe digest the poison of thy flesh,
Being strumpeted by thy contagion???
Keep then fair league and truce with thy true bed,
I live distained, thou vndishonoured.
Plead you to me fair dame? I know you not:
In Ephesus I am but two hours old,
As strange unto your town, as to your talk,
Who every word by all my wit being scened,
Wants wit in all, one word to understand.
Fie brother, how the world is changed with you:
When were you wont to use my sister thus?
She sent for you by Dromio home to dinner.
By Dromio?
By me.
By thee, and this thou did return from him.
That he did buffet thee, and in his blows,
Denied my house for his, me for his wife.
Did you converse sir with this gentlewoman:
What is the course and drift of your compact?
I sir? I never saw her till this time.
Villain thou least, for even her very words,
Did thou deliver to me on the Mart.
I never spake with her in all my life.
How can she thus then call vs by our names?
Unless it be by inspiration.
How ill agrees it with your gravity,
To counterfeit thus grossly with your slave,
Abetting him to thwart me in my mood;
Be it my wrong, you are from me exempt,
But wrong not that wrong with a more contempt.
Come I will fasten on this sleeve of thine:
Thou art an Elm my husband, I a Vine:
Whose weakness married to thy stranger state,
Makes me with thy strength to communicate:
If ought possess thee from me, it is dross,
Usurping Ivy, Brier, or idle Moss,
Who all for want of pruning, with intrusion,
Infect thy sap, and live on thy confusion.
To me she speaks, she moves me for her theme;
What, was I married to her in my dream?
Or sleep I now, and think I hear all this?
What error drives our eyes and ears amiss?
Until I know this sure uncertainty,
Isle entertain the freed fallacy.
Dromio, go bid the servants spread for dinner.
Oh for my beads, I cross me for a sinner.
This is the Fairy land, oh spite of spights,
We talk with Goblins, Owls and Sprights;
If we obey them not, this will ensue:
They'll suck our breath, or pinch vs black and blew.
Why prat'st thou to thy self, and answer not?
Dromio, thou Dromio, thou snail, thou slug, thou sot.
I am transformed Master, am I not?
I think thou art in mind, and so am I.
Nay Master, both in mind, and in my shape.
Thou hast thine own form.
No, I am an Ape.
If thou art changed to ought, it is to an Ass.
It is true she rides me, and I long for grass.
It is so, I am an Ass, else it could never be,
But I should know her as well as she knows me.
Come, come, no longer will I be a fool,
To put the finger in the eye and weep;
Whilst man and Master laughs my woes to scorn:
Come sir to dinner, Dromio keep the gate:
Husband Isle dine aboue with you to day,
And shrive you of a thousand idle pranks:
Sir, if any ask you for your Master,
Say he dines forth, and let no creature enter:
Come sister, Dromio play the Porter well.
Am I in earth, in heaven, or in hell?
Sleeping or waking, mad or well advised:
Known unto these, and to my self disguised:
Isle say as they say, and persevere so:
And in this mist at all adventures go.
Master, shall I be Porter at the gate?
I, and let none enter, least I break your pate.
Come, come, Antipholus, we dine to late.
Good signior Angelo you must excuse vs all,
My wife is shrewish when I keep not hours;
Say that I lingerd with you at your shop
To see the making of her Carkanet,
And that to morrow you will bring it home.
But here's a villain that would face me down
He met me on the Mart, and that I beat him,
And charged him with a thousand marks in gold,
And that I did deny my wife and house;
Thou drunkard thou, what did thou mean by this?
Say what you will sir, but I know what I know,
That you beat me at the Mart I have your hand to show;
If ye skin were parchment, &amp; ye blows you gave were ink,
Your own hand-writing would tell you what I think.
I think thou art an ass.
Marry so it doth appear
By the wrongs I suffer, and the blows I bear,
I should kick being kicked, and being at that pass,
You would keep from my heals, and beware of an ass.
Y' are sad signior Balthazar, pray God our cheer
May answer my good will, and your good welcome here.
I hold your dainties cheap sir, &amp; your welcome deer.
Oh signior Balthazar, either at flesh or fish,
A table full of welcome, makes scarce one dainty dish.
Good meat sir is common that every churl affords.
And welcome more common, for thats nothing but words.
Small cheer and great welcome, makes a mer???rye feast.
I, to a niggardly Host, and more sparing guest:
But though my cates be mean, take them in good part,
Better cheer may you have, but not with better hart.
But soft, my door is locked; go bid them let vs in.
Maud, Briget, Marian, Cicely, Gillian, Ginn.
Mom, Malthorse, Capon, Coxcomb, Id???ot, Patch,
Either get thee from the door, or sit down at the hatch:
Dost thou conjure for wenches, that you call for such store,
When one is one too many, go get thee from the door.
What patch is made our Porter? my Master stays in the street.
Let him walk from whence he came, lest hee catch cold on's feet.
Who talks within there? hoe, open the door.
Right sir, Isle tell you when, and you'll tell me wherefore.
Wherefore? for my dinner: I have not dined to day.
Nor to day here you must not come again when you may.
What art thou that keep me out from the hows I owe?
The Porter for this time Sir, and my name is Dromio.
O villain, thou hast stolen both mine office and my name,
The one ne'er got me credit, the other mickle blame:
If thou had been Dromio to day in my place,
Thou would have changed thy face for a name, or thy name for an ass.
What a coil is there Dromio? who are those at the gate?
Let my Master in Luce.
Faith no, hee comes too late, and so tell your Master.
O Lord I must laugh, have at you with a Pro???uerbe,
Shall I set in my staff.
Have at you with another, that's when? can you tell?
If thy name be called Luce, Luce thou hast an???swer'd him well.
Doe you hear you minion, you'll let vs in I hope?
I thought to have asked you.
And you said no.
So come help, well struck, there was blow for blow.
Thou baggage let me in.
Can you tell for whose sake?
Master, knock the door hard.
Let him knock till it ache.
You'll cry for this minion, if I beat the door down.
What needs all that, and a pair of stocks in the town?
Who is that at the door yt keeps all this noise?
By my troth your town is troubled with un???ruly boys.
Are you there Wife? you might have come before.
Your wife sir knave? go get you from the door.
If you went in pain Master, this knave wold go sore.
Here is neither cheer sir, nor welcome, we would fine have either.
In debating which was best, wee shall part with neither.
They stand at the door, Master, bid them welcome hither.
There is something in the wind, that we can???not get in.
You would say so Master, if your garments were thin.
Your cake here is warm within: you stand here in the cold.
It would make a man mad as a Buck to be so bought and sold.
Go fetch me something, Isle break op the gate.
Break any breaking here, and Isle break your knaves pate.
A man may break a word with your sir, and words are but wind;
I and break it in your face, so he break it not behind.
It seems thou want breaking, out upon thee hind.
Here's too much out upon thee, I pray thee let me in.
I, when fowls have no feathers, and fish have no sin.
Well, Isle break in: go borrow me a crow.
A crow without feather, Master mean you so;
For a fish without a finn, ther's a foul without afether,
If a crow help vs in sir, we'll pluck a crow together.
Go, get thee gon, fetch me an iron Crow.
Have patience sir, oh let it not be so,
Herein you war against your reputation,
And draw within the compass of suspect
The vnuiolated honour of your wife.
Once this your long experience of your wisdom,
Her sober virtue, years, and modesty,
Plead on your part some cause to you unknown;
And doubt not sir, but she will well excuse
Why at this time the doors are made against you.
Be ruled by me, depart in patience,
And let vs to the Tiger all to dinner,
And about evening come your self alone,
To know the reason of this strange restraint:
If by strong hand you offer to break in
Now in the stirring passage of the day,
A vulgar comment will be made of it;
And that supposed by the common rowt
Against your yet vngalled estimation,
That may with foul intrusion enter in,
And dwell upon your grave when you are dead;
For slander lives upon succession;
For ever housed, where it gets possession.
You have prevailed, I will depart in quiet,
And in despite of mirth mean to be merry:
I know a wench of excellent discourse,
Pretty and witty; wilde, and yet too gentle;
There will we dine: this woman that I mean
My wife (but I protest without desert)
Hath oftentimes upbraided me withal:
To her will we to dinner, get you home
And fetch the chain, by this I know it is made,
Bring it I pray you to the Porpentine,
For there's the house: That chain will I bestow
(Be it for nothing but to spite my wife)
Upon mine hostess there, good sir make haft???
Since mine own doors refuse to entertain me,
Isle knock else-where, to see if they'll disdain me.
Isle meet you at that place some hour hence.
Do so, this jest shall cost me some expense.
And may it be that you have quite forgot
A husbands office? shall Antipholus
Even in the spring of Love, thy Loue-springs rot?
Shall love in buildings grow so ruinate?
If you did wed my sister for her wealth,
Then for her wealths-sake use her with more kindness:
Or if you like else-where doe it by stealth,
Muffle your false love with some show of blindness:
Let not my sister read it in your eye:
Be not thy tongue thy own shames Orator:
Look sweet, speak fair, become disloyalty:
Apparel vice like virtues harbinger:
Bear a fair presence, though your heart be tainted,
Teach sin the carriage of a holy Saint,
Be secret false: what need she be acquainted?
What simple thief brags of his own attain?
It is double wrong to truant with your bed,
And let her read it in thy looks at board:
Shame hath a bastard fame, well managed,
Ill deeds is doubled with an evil word:
Alas poor women, make vs not believe
(Being compact of credit) that you love vs,
Though others have the arm, show vs the sleeve:
We in your motion turn, and you may move vs.
Then gentle brother get you in again;
Comfort my sister, cheer her, call her wise;
It is holy sport to be a little vain,
When the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife.
Sweet Mistress, what your name is else I know not;
Nor by what wonder you do hit of mine:
Less in your knowledge, and your grace you show not,
Then our earths wonder, more then earth divine.
Teach me dear creature how to think and speak:
Lay open to my earthy gross conceit:
Smothered in errors, feeble, shallow, weak,
The folded meaning of your words deceit:
Against my souls pure truth, why labour you,
To make it wander in an unknown field?
Are you a god? would you create me new?
Transform me then, and to your power Isle yield.
But if that I am I, then well I know,
Your weeping sister is no wife of mine,
Nor to her bed no homage doe I owe:
Far more, far more, to you doe I decline:
Oh train me not sweet Mermaid with thy note,
To drown me in thy sister flood of tears:
Sing Siren for thy self, and I will dote:
Spread ore the silver waives thy golden hairs;
And as a bud Isle take thee, and there lie:
And in that glorious supposition think,
He gains by death, that hath such means to die:
Let Love, being light, be drowned if she sink.
What are you mad, that you doe reason so?
Not mad, but mated, how I doe not know.
It is a fault that springs from your eye.
For gazing on your beams fair sun being by.
Gaze when you should, and that will clear your sight.
As good to wink sweet love, as look on night.
Why call you me love? Call my sister so.
Thy sisters sister.
That's my sister.
No: it is thy self, mine own selfes better part:
Mine eyes clear eye, my dear hearts dearer heart;
My food, my fortune, and my sweet hopes aim;
My sole earths heaven, and my heavens claim.
All this my sister is, or else should be.
Call thy self sister sweet, for I am thee:
Thee will I love, and with thee lead my life;
Thou hast no husband yet, nor I no wife:
Give me thy hand.
Oh soft sir, hold you still:
Isle fetch my sister to get her good will.
Why how now Dromio, where run'st thou so fast?
Doe you know me sir? Am I Dromio? Am I your man? Am I my self?
Thou art Dromio, thou art my man, thou art thy self.
I am an ass, I am a women's man, and besides my self.
What women's man? and how besides thy self?
Marry sir, besides my self, I am due to a woman:
One that claims me, one that haunts me, one that will have me.
What claim lays she to thee?
Marry sir, such claim as you would lay to your horse, and she would have me as a beast, not that I bee???ing a beast she would have me, but that she being a ve???rye beastly creature lays claim to me.
What is she?
A very reverent body: I such a one, as a man may not speak of, without he say sir reverence, I have but lean luck in the match, and yet is she a wondrous fat marriage.
How dost thou mean a fat marriage?
Marry sir, she's the Kitchen wench, &amp; al grease, and I know not what use to put her too, but to make a Lamp of her, and run from her by her own light. I warrant, her rags and the Tallow in them, will burn a Poland Winter: If she lives till doomsday, she'll burn a week longer then the whole World.
What complexion is she of?
Answered like my shoo, but her face nothing like so clean kept: for why? she sweats a man may go o???uer-shooes in the grime of it.
That's a fault that water will mend.
No sir, it is in grain, Noahs stood could not do it.
What's her name?
Nil Sir: but her name is three quarters, that's an Ell and three quarters, will not measure her from hip to hip.
Then she bears some breadth?
No longer from head to foot, then from hipp to hipp: she is spherical, like a globe: I could find out Countries in her.
In what part of her body stands Ireland?
Marry sir in her buttocks, I found it out by the bogs.
Where Scotland?
I found it by the barrenness, hard in the palm of the hand.
Where France?
In her forehead, armed and reverted, making war against her heir.
Where England?
I looked for the chalkle Cliffs, but I could find no whiteness in them. But I guess, it stood in her chin by the salt theume that ran between France, and it.
Where Spain?
Faith I saw it not: but I felt it hot in her breath.
Where America, the Indies?
Oh sir, upon her nose, all ore embellished with Rubies, Carbuncles, Sapphires, declining their rich As???pect to the hot breath of Spain, who sent whole Are???madoes of Corrects to be ballast at her nose.
Where stood Belgia, the Netherlands?
Oh sir, I did not look so low. To conclude, this drudge or Diviner laid claim to me, called me Dromio, swore I was assured to her, told me what privy marks I had about me, as the mark of my shoulder, the Mole in my neck, the great Wart on my left arm, that I amazed ran from her as a witch. And I think, if my breast had not been made of faith, and my heart of steel, she had transformed me to a Curtull dog, &amp; made me turn in th wheel.
Go hie thee presently post to the rode,
And if the wind blow any way from shore,
I will not harbour in this Town to night.
If any Bark put forth, come to the Mart,
Where I will walk till thou return to me:
If every one knows vs, and we know none,
It is time I think to trudge, pack, and be gone.
As from a Bear a man would run for life,
So fly I from her that would be my wife.
There's none but Witches do inhabit here,
And therefore it is hie time that I were hence:
She that doth call me husband, even my soul
Doth for a wife abhor. But her fair sister
Possessed with such a gentle sovereign grace,
Of such enchanting presence and discourse,
Hath almost made me Traitor to my self:
But least my self be guilty to self wrong,
Isle stop mine ears against the Mermaids song.
Mr Antipholus.
I that's my name.
I know it well sir, lo here's the chain,
I thought to have tan you at the Porpentine,
The chain unfinished made me stay thus long.
What is your will that I shall do with this?
What please your self sir: I have made it for you.
Made it for me sir, I bespoke it not.
Not once, nor twice, but twenty times you have:
Go home with it, and please your Wife withal,
And soon at supper time Isle visit you,
And then receive my money for the chain.
I pray you sir receive the money now,
For fear you ne'er see chain, nor money more.
You are a merry man sir, fare you well.
What I should think of this, I cannot tell:
But this I think, there's no man is so vain,
That would refuse so fair an offered Chain.
I see a man here needs not live by shifts,
When in the streets he meets such Golden gifts:
Isle to the Mart, and there for Dromio stay,
If any ship put out, then straight away.
You know since Pentecost the sum is due,
And since I have not much importuned you,
Nor now I had not, but that I am bound
To Persia, and want Guilders for my voyage:
Therefore make present satisfaction,
Or Isle attach you by this Officer.
Even just the sum that I do owe to you,
Is growing to me by Antipholus,
And in the instant that I met with you,
He had of me a Chain, at five a clock
I shall receive the money for the same:
Pleases you walk with me down to his house,
I will discharge my bond, and thank you too.
That labour may you save: See where he comes.
While I go to the Goldsmiths house, go thou
And buy a ropes end, that will I bestow
Among my wife, and their confederates,
For locking me out of my doors by day:
But soft I see the Goldsmith; get thee gone,
Buy thou a rope, and bring it home to me.
I buy a thousand pound a year, I buy a rope.
A man is well help up that trusts to you,
I promised your presence, and the Chain,
But neither Chain nor Goldsmith came to me:
Belike you thought our love would last too long
If it were chained together: and therefore came not.
Saving your merry humour: here's the note
How much your Chain weighs to the utmost character,
The fineness of the Gold, and chargefull fashion,
Which doth amount to three odd Ducats more
Then I stand debted to this Gentleman,
I pray you see him presently discharged,
For he is bound to Sea, and stays but for it.
I am not furnished with the present money:
Besides I have some business in the town,
Good Signior take the stranger to my house,
And with you take the Chain, and bid my wife
Disburse the sum, on the receipt thereof,
Perchance I will be there as soon as you.
Then you will bring the Chain to her your self.
No bear it with you, least I come not time e???nough.
Well sir, I will? Have you the Chain about you?
And if I have not sir, I hope you have:
Or else you may return without your money.
Nay come I pray you sir, give me the Chain:
Both wind and tide stays for this Gentleman,
And I too blame have held him here too long.
Good Lord, you use this dalliance to excuse
Your breach of promise to the Porpentine,
I should have chid you for not bringing it,
But like a shrew you first begin to brawl.
The hour steals on, I pray you sir dispatch.
You hear how he importunes me, the Chain.
Why give it to my wife, and fetch your money.
Come, come, you know I gave it you even now.
Either send the Chain, or send me by some token.
Fie, now you run this humour out of breath,
Come whore's the Chain, I pray you let me see it.
My business cannot brooke this dalliance,
Good sir say, who're you'll answer me, or no:
If not, Isle leave him to the Officer.
I answer you? What should I answer you.
The money that you owe me for the Chain.
I owe you none, till I receive the Chain.
You know I gave it you half an hour since.
You gave me none, you wrong me much to say so.
You wrong me more sir in denying it.
Consider how it stands upon my credit.
Well Officer, arrest him army suite.
I do, and charge you in the Dukes name to o???bay me.
This touches me in reputation.
Either consent to pay this sum for me,
Or I attach you by this Officer.
Consent to pay thee that I never had:
Arrest me foolish fellow if thou dare.
Here is thy fee, arrest him Officer.
I would not spare my brother in this case,
If he should scorn me so apparently.
I do arrest you sir, you hear the suite.
I do obey thee, till I give thee bail.
But sirrah, you shall buy this sport as dear,
As all the mettle in your shop will answer.
Sir, sir, I shall have Law in Ephesus,
To your notorious shame, I doubt it not.
Master, there's a Bark of Epidamium,
That stays but till her Owner comes aboard,
And then sir she bears away. Our freightage sir,
I have conveyed aboard, and I have bought
The Oil, the Balsamum, and Aqua-vitae.
The ship is in her trim, the merry wind
Blows fair from land: they stay for nought at all,
But for their Owner, Master, and your self.
How now? a Madman? Why thou peevish sheep
What ship of Epidamium stays for me.
A ship you sent me too, to hier waftage.
Thou drunken slave, I sent thee for a rope,
And told thee to what purpose, and what end.
You sent me for a ropes end as soon,
You sent me to the Bay sir, for a Bark.
I will debate this matter at more leisure
And teach your ears to list me with more heed:
To Adriana Villain hie thee straight:
Give her this key, and tell her in the Desk
That's covered o'er with Turkish Tapestry,
There is a purse of Ducats, let her send it:
Tell her, I am arrested in the street,
And that shall bail me: hie thee slave, be gone,
On Officer to prison, till it come.
To Adriana, that is where we dined,
Where Dowsabell did claim me for her husband,
She is too big I hope for me to compass,
Thither I must, although against my will:
For servants must their Masters minds fulfil.
Ah Luciana, did he tempt thee so?
Might thou perceive austerely in his eye,
That he did plead in earnest, yea or no:
Looked he or red or pale, or sad or merrily?
What observation made thou in this case?
Oh, his hearts Meteors tilting in his face.
First he denied you had in him no right.
He meant he did me none: the more my spite
Then swore he that he was a stranger here.
And true he swore, though yet forsworn hee were.
Then pleaded I for you.
And what said he?
That love I begged for you, he begged of me.
With what persuasion did he tempt thy love?
With words, that in an honest suit might move.
First, he did praise my beauty, then my speech.
Did speak him fair?
Have patience I beseech.
I cannot, nor I will not hold me still,
My tongue, though not my heart, shall have his will.
He is deformed, crooked, old, and sere,
Ill-fac'd, worse bodied, shapeless every where:
Vicious, ungentle, foolish, blunt, unkind,
Stigmatical in making worse in mind.
Who would be jealous then of such a one?
No evil lost is wailed, when it is gone.
Ah but I think him better then I say:
And yet would herein others eyes were worse:
Far from her nest the Lapwing cries away:
My heart prays for him, though my tongue doe curse.
Here go: the desk, the purse, sweet now make haste.
How hast thou lost thy breath?
By running fast.
Where is thy Master Dromio? Is he well?
No, he's in Tartar limbo, worse then hell:
A devil in an everlasting garment hath him;
On whose hard heart is buttoned up with steel:
A Fiend, a Fairy, pitiless and ruff:
A Wolf, nay worse, a fellow all in buff???
A back friend, a shoulder-clapper, one that counterma??ds
The passages of allies, creeks, and narrow lands:
A hound that runs Counter, and yet draws drifoot well,
One that before the Iudgme??t carries poor souls to hell.
Why man, what is the matter?
I doe not know the matter, hee is rested on the case.
What is he arrested? tell me at whose suite?
I know not at whose suite he is arrested well; but is in a suite of buff which rested him, that can I tell, will you send him Mistress redemption, the money in his desk.
Go fetch it Sister: this I wonder at.
Thus he unknown to me should be in debt:
Tell me, was he arrested on a band?
Not on a band, but on a stronger thing:
A chain, a chain, doe you not here it ring.
What, the chain?
No, no, the bell, it is time that I were gone:
It was two ere I left him, and now the clock strikes one.
The hours come back, that did I never here.
Oh yes, if any hour meet a Sergeant, a turns back for very fear.
As if time were in debt: how fondly dost thou reason?
Time is a very bankrupt, and owes more then he's worth to season.
Nay, he's a thief too: have you not heard men say,
That time comes stealing on by night and day?
If I be in debt and theft, and a Sergeant in the way,
Hath he not reason to turn back an hour in a day?
Go Dromio, there's the money, bear it straight,
And bring thy Master home immediately.
Come sister, I am pressed down with conceit:
Conceit, my comfort and my injury.
There's not a man I meet but doth salute me
As if I were their well acquainted friend,
And every one doth call me by my name:
Some tender money to me, some inuit me;
Some other give me thanks for kindnesses;
Some offer me Commodities to buy.
Even now a' tailor called me in his shop,
And showed me Silks that he had bought for me,
And therewithal took measure of my body.
Sure these are but imaginary wiles,
And lapland Sorcerers inhabit here.
Master, here's the gold you sent me for: what have you got the picture of old Adam new apparelled?
What gold is this? What Adam dost thou mean?
Not that Adam that kept the Paradise: but that Adam that keeps the prison; hee that goes in the calf-skin, that was killed for the Prodigal: hee that came behind you sir, like an evil angel, and bid you for???sake your liberty.
I understand thee not.
No? why it is a plain case: he that went like a Base-Viole in a case of leather; the man sir, that when gentlemen are tired gives them a sob, and rests them: he sir, that takes pity on decayed men, and gives them suites of durance: he that sets up his rest to doe more ex???ploits with his Mace, then a Moris Pike.
What thou mean an officer?
I sir, the Sergeant of the Band: he that brings any man to answer it that breaks his Band: one that thinks a man always going to bed, and says, God give you good rest.
Well sir, there rest in your foolery:
Is there any ships puts forth to night? may we be gone?
Why sir, I brought you word an hour since, that the Bark Expedition put forth to night, and then were you hindered by the Sergeant to tarry for the Hoy Delay: Here are the angels that you sent for to deliver you.
The fellow is distract, and so am I,
And here we wander in illusions:
Some blessed power deliver vs from hence.
Well met, well met, Master Antipholous:
I see sir you have found the Gold-smith now:
Is that the chain you promised me to day.
Satan avoid, I charge thee tempt me not.
Master, is this Mistress Satan?
It is the devil.
Nay, she is worse, she is the devils dam: And here she comes in the habit of a light wench, and thereof comes, that the wenches say God dam me, That's as much to say, God make me a light wench: It is writ???ten??? they appear to men like angels of light, light is an effect of fire, and fire will burn: ergo, light wenches will burn, come not near her.
Your man and you are marvelous merry sir.
Will you go with me, we'll mend our dinner here?
Master, if do expect spoon-meate, or bespeak a long spoon.
Why Dromio?
Marry he must have a long spoon that must eat with the devil.
Avoid then fiend, what tel'st thou me of sup???ping?
Thou art, as you are all a sorceress:
I conjure thee to leave me, and be gon.
Give me the ring of mine you had at dinner,
Or for my Diamond the Chain you promised,
And Isle be gone sir, and not trouble you.
Some devils ask but the parings of ones nail,
a rush, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin, a nut, a cherry???stone: but she more covetous, wold have a chain: Ma???ster be wise, and if you give it her, the devil will shake her Chain, and fright vs with it.
I pray you sir my Ring, or else the Chain,
I hope you do not mean to cheat me so?
Avaunt thou witch: Come Dromio let vs go.
Fly pride says the Pea-cocke, Mistress that you know.
Now out of doubt Antipholus is mad,
Else would he never so demean himself,
A Ring he hath of mine worth forty Ducats,
And for the same he promised me a Chain,
Both one and other he denies me now:
The reason that I gather he is mad,
Besides this present instance of his rage,
Is a mad tale he told to day at dinner,
Of his own doors being shut against his entrance.
Belike his wife acquainted with his fits,
On purpose shut the doors against his way:
My way is now to hie home to his house,
And tell his wife, that being Lunatic,
He rushed into my house, and took perforce
My Ring away. This course I fittest choose,
For forty Ducats is too much to loose.
Fear me not man, I will not break away,
Isle give thee ere I leave thee so much money
To warrant thee as I am rested for.
My wife is in a wayward mood to day,
And will not lightly trust the Messenger,
That I should be attached in Ephesus,
I tell you twill sound harshly in her ears.
Here comes my Man, I think he brings the money.
How now sir? Have you that I sent you for?
Here's that I warrant you will pay them all.
But whore's the Money?
Why sir, I gave the Money for the Rope.
Five hundred Ducats villain for a rope?
Isle serve you sir five hundred at the rate.
To what end did I bid thee hie thee home?
To a ropes end sir, and to that end am I re???turned.
And to that end sir, I will welcome you.
Good sir be patient.
Nay it is for me to be patient, I am in aduer???sitie.
Good now hold thy tongue.
Nay, rather persuade him to hold his hands.
Thou whoreson senseless Villain.
I would I were senseless sir, that I might not feel your blows.
Thou art sensible in nothing but blows, and so is an Ass.
I am an Ass indeed, you may prove it by my long ears. I have served him from the hour of my Nativity to this instant, and have nothing at his hands for my service but blows. When I am cold, he heats me with beating: when I am warm, he cools me with beating: I am waked with it when I sleep, raised with it when I sit, driven out of doors with it when I go from home, welcomed home with it when I return, nay I bear it on my shoulders, as a beggar wont her brat: and I think when he hath lamed me, I shall beg with it from door to door.
Come go along, my wife is coming yon???der.
Mistress respice finem, respect your end, or ra???there the prophecy like the Parrot, beware the ropes end.
Wilt thou still talk?
How say you now? Is not your husband mad?
His incivility confirms no less:
Good Doctor Pinch, you are a Conjurer,
Establish him in his true sense again,
And I will please you what you will demand.
Alas how fiery, and how sharpe he looks.
Mark, how he trembles in his ecstasy.
Give me your hand, and let me feel your pulse.
There is my hand, and let it feel your ear.
I charge thee Satan, housed within this man,
To yield possession to my holy prayers,
And to thy state of darkness hie thee straight,
I conjure thee by all the Saints in heaven.
Peace doting wizard, peace; I am not mad.
Oh that thou were it not, poor distressed soul.
You Minion you, are these your Customers?
Did this Companion with the saffron face
Revel and feast it at my house to day,
Whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut,
And I denied to enter in my house.
O husband, God doth know you dined at home
Where would you had remained until this time,
Free from these slanders, and this open shame.
Dined at home? Thou Villain, what say thou?
Sir sooth to say, you did not dine at home.
Were not my doors locked up, and I shut out?
Party, your doors were locked, and you shut out.
And did not she her self revile me there?
Sans Fable, she her self reviled you there.
Did not her Kitchen maid rail, taunt, and scorn me?
Certis she did, the kitchen vestal scorned you.
And did not I in rage depart from thence?
In verity you did, my bones bears witness,
That since have felt the vigour of his rage.
Is it good to sooth him in these crontraries?
It is no shame, the fellow finds his vain,
And yielding to him, humours well his frenzy.
Thou hast suborned the Goldsmith to arrest me.
Alas, I sent you Money to redeem you,
By Dromio here, who came in hast for it.
Money by me? Heart and good will you might,
But surely Master not a rag of Money.
Went not thou to her for a purse of Ducats.
He came to me, and I delivered it.
And I am witness with her that she did:
God and the Rope-maker bear me witness,
That I was sent for nothing but a rope.
Mistress, both Man and Master is possessed,
I know it by their pale and deadly looks,
They must be bound and laid in some dark room.
Say wherefore did thou locke me forth to day,
And why dost thou deny the bag of gold?
I did not gentle husband locke thee forth.
And gentle Mr I received no gold:
But I confess sir, that we were locked out.
Dissembling Villain, thou speak false in both
Dissembling harlot, thou art false in all,
And art confederate with a damned pack,
To make a loathsome abject scorn of me:
But with these nails, Isle pluck out these false eyes,
That would behold in me this shameful sport.
Oh bind him, bind him, let him not come near me.
More company, the fiend is strong within him
Aye me poor man, how pale and wan he looks.
What will you murder me, thou Jailer thou?
I am thy prisoner, wilt thou suffer them to make a res???cue?
Masters let him go: he is my prisoner, and you shall not have him.
Go bind this man, for he is frantic too.
What wilt thou do, thou peevish Officer?
Hast thou delight to see a wretched man
Do outrage and displeasure to himself?
He is my prisoner, if I let him go,
The debt he owes will be required of me.
I will discharge thee ere I go from thee,
Bear me forthwith unto his Creditor,
And knowing how the debt grows I will pay it.
Good Master Doctor see him safe conveyed
Home to my house, oh most unhappy day.
Oh most unhappy strumpet.
Master, I am here entered in bond for you.
Out on thee Villain, wherefore dost thou mad me?
Will you be bound for nothing, be mad good Master, cry the devil.
God help poor souls, how idly doe they talk.
Go bear him hence, sister go you with me:
Say now, whose suite is he arrested at?
One Angelo a Goldsmith, do you know him?
I know the man: what is the sum he owes?
Two hundred Ducats.
Say, how grows it due.
Due for a Chain your husband had of him.
He did bespeak a Chain for me, but had it not.
When as your husband all in rage to day.
Came to my house, and took away my Ring,
The Ring I saw upon his finger now,
Straight after did I meet him with a Chain.
It may be so, but I did never see it.
Come Jailer, bring me where the Goldsmith is,
I long to know the truth hereof at large.
God for thy mercy, they are loose again.
And come with naked swords,
Let's call more help to have them bound again.
Away, they'll kill vs.
I see these Witches are afraid of swords.
She that would be your wife, now ran from you.
Come to the Centaur, fetch our stuff from thence:
I long that we were safe and sound aboard.
Faith stay here this night, they will surely do vs no harm: you saw they speak vs fair, give vs gold: me thinks they are such a gentle Nation, that but for the Mountain of mad flesh that claims marriage of me, I could find in my heart to stay here still, and turn Witch.
I will not stay to night for all the Town,
Therefore away, to get our stuff aboard.
I am sorry Sir that I have hindered you,
But I protest he had the Chain of me,
Though most dishonestly he doth deny it.
How is the man esteemed here in the City?
Of very reverent reputation sir,
Of credit infinite, highly beloved,
Second to none that lives here in the City:
His word might bear my wealth at any t???me.
Speak softly, yonder as I think he walks.
It is so: and that self chain about his neck,
Which he forswore most monstrously to have.
Good sir draw near to me, Isle speak to him:
Signior Antipholus, I wonder much
That you would put me to this shame and trouble,
And not without some scandal to your self,
With circumstance and oaths, so to deny
This Chain, which now you wear so openly.
Beside the charge, the shame, imprisonment,
You have done wrong to this my honest friend,
Who but for staying on our Controversy,
Had hoisted sail, and put to sea to day:
This Chain you had of me, can you deny it?
I think I had, I never did deny it.
Yes that you did sir, and forswore it too.
Who heard me to deny it or forswear it?
These ears of mine thou know did hear thee:
Fie on thee wretch, it is pity that thou liu'st
To walk where any honest men resort.
Thou art a Villain to impeach me thus,
Isle prove mine honour, and mine honesty
Against thee presently, if thou dare stand:
I dare and do defy thee for a villain.
Hold, hurt him not for God sake, he is mad,
Some get within him, take his sword away:
Bind Dromio too, and bear them to my house.
Run master run, for Gods sake take a house,
This is some Priory, in, or we are spoiled.
Be quiet people, wherefore throng you hither?
To fetch my poor distracted husband hence,
Let vs come in, that we may bind him fast,
And bear him home for his recovery.
I knew he was not in his perfect wits.
I am sorry now that I did draw on him.
How long hath this possession held the man.
This week he hath been heavy, sower sad,
And much different from the man he was:
But till this afternoon his passion
Ne'er brake into extremity of rage.
Hath he not lost much wealth by wrack of sea,
Buried some dear friend, hath not else his eye
Strayed his affection in unlawful love,
A sin prevailing much in youthful men,
Who give their eyes the liberty of gazing.
Which of these sorrows is he subject too?
To none of these, except it be the last,
Namely, some love that drew him oft from home.
You should for that have reprehended him.
Why so I did.
I but not rough enough.
As roughly as my modesty would let me.
Happily in private.
And in assemblies too.
I, but not enough.
It was the copy of our Conference.
In bed he slept not for my urging it,
At board he fed not for my urging it:
Alone, it was the subject of my Theme:
In company I often glanced it:
Still did I tell him, it was wild and bad.
And thereof came it, that the man was mad.
The venom clamours of a jealous woman,
Poisons more deadly then a mad dogs tooth.
It seems his sleeps were hindered by thy railing,
And thereof comes it that his head is light.
Thou say his meat was sauced with thy upbraidings,
Unquiet meals make ill digestions,
Thereof the raging fire of fever bred,
And what's a Fever, but a fit of madness?
Thou say his sports were hindered by thy brawls.
Sweet recreation barred, what doth ensue
But moody and dull melancholy,
Kinsman to grim and comfortless despair,
And at her heals a huge infectious troop
Of pale distemperatures, and foes to life?
In food, in sport, and life-preseruing rest
To be disturbed, would mad or man, or beast:
The consequence is then, thy jealous fits
Hath scared thy husband from the use of wits.
She never reprehended him but mildly,
When he demeaned himself, rough, rude, and wildly,
Why bear you these rebukes, and answer not?
She did betray me to my own reproof,
Good people enter, and lay hold on him.
No, not a creature enters in my house.
Then let your servants bring my husband forth
Neither: he took this place for sanctuary,
And it shall privilege him from your hands,
Till I have brought him to his wits again,
Or loose my labour in assaying it.
I will attend my husband, be his nurse,
Diet his sickness, for it is my Office,
And will have no attorney but my self,
And therefore let me have him home with me.
Be patient, for I will not let him stir,
Till I have used the approved means I have,
With wholesome sirrups, drugs, and holy prayers
To make of him a formal man again:
It is a branch and parcel of mine oath,
A charitable duty of my order,
Therefore depart, and leave him here with me.
I will not hence, and leave my husband here:
And ill it doth beseem your holiness
To separate the husband and the wife.
Be quiet and depart, thou shalt not have him.
Complain unto the Duke of this indignity.
Come go, I will fall prostrate at his feet,
And never rise until my tears and prayers
Have won his grace to come in person hither,
And take perforce my husband from the Abbess.
By this I think the Dial points at five:
Anon In me sure the Duke himself in person
Comes this way to the melancholy vale;
The place of depth, and sorry execution,
Behind the ditches of the Abbey here.
Upon what cause?
To see a reverent Siracusian Merchant,
Who put unluckily into this Bay
Against the Laws and Statutes of this Town,
Beheaded publicly for his offence.
See where they come, we will behold his death.
Kneel to the Duke before he pass the Abbey.
Yet once again proclaim it publicly,
If any friend will pay the sum for him,
He shall not die, so much we tender him.
Justice most sacred Duke against the Abbess.
She is a virtuous and a reverend Lady,
It cannot be that she hath done thee wrong.
May it please your Grace, Antipholus my husba??d,
Who I made Lord of me, and all I had,
At your important Letters this ill day,
A most outrageous fit of madness took him:
That desperately he hurried through the street,
With him his bondsman, all as mad as he,
Doing displeasure to the Citizens,
By rushing in their houses: bearing thence
Rings, Jewels, any thing his rage did like.
Once did I get him bound, and sent him home,
Whilst to take order for the wrongs I went,
That here and there his fury had committed,
Anon I wot not, by what strong escape
He broke from those that had the guard of him,
And with his mad attendant and himself,
Each one with ireful passion, with drawn swords
Met vs again, and madly bent on vs
Chased vs away: till raising of more aide
We came again to bind them: then they fled
Into this Abbey, whether we pursued them,
And here the Abbess shuts the gates on vs,
And will not suffer vs to fetch him out,
Nor send him forth, that we may bear him hence.
Therefore most gracious Duke with thy command,
Let him be brought forth, and borne hence for help.
Long since thy husband served me in my wars
And I to thee engaged a Princes word,
When thou did make him Master of thy bed,
To do him all the grace and good I could.
Go some of you, knock at the Abbey gate,
And bid the Lady Abbess come to me:
I will determine this before I stir.
Oh Mistress, Mistress, shift and save your self,
My Master and his man are both broke loose,
Beaten the Maids arrow, and bound the Doctor,
Whose beard they have singed off with brands of fire,
And ever as it blazed, they threw on him
Great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair;
My Mr preaches patience to him, and the while
His man with Cizers nicks him like a fool:
And sure (unless you send some present help)
Between them they will kill the Conjurer.
Peace fool, thy Master and his man are here,
And that is false thou dost report to vs.
Mistress, upon my life I tel you true,
I have not breathed almost since I did see it.
He cries for you, and vows if he can take you,
To scorch your face, and to disfigure you:
Hark, hark, I hear him Mistress: fly, be gone.
Come stand by me, fear nothing: guard with Halberds.
Ay me, it is my husband: witness you,
That he is borne about invisible,
Even now we housed him in the Abbey here.
And now he's there, past thought of humane reason.
Justice most gracious Duke, oh grant me in???stice,
Even for the service that long since I did thee,
When I be???rid thee in the wars, and took
Deep scars to save thy life; even for the blood
That then I lost for thee, now grant me justice.
Unless the fear of death doth make me door, I see my son Antipholus and Dromio.
Justice (sweet Prince) against yt Woman there:
She whom thou gau'st to me to be my wife;
That hath abused and dishonoured me,
Even in the strength and height of injury:
Beyond imagination is the wrong
That she this day hath shameless thrown on me.
Discover how, and thou shalt find me just.
This day (great Duke) she shut the doors upon me,
While she with Harlots feasted in my house.
A grievous fault: say woman, did thou so?
No my good Lord. My self, he, and my sister,
To day did dine together: so befall my soul,
As this is false he burdens me withal.
Ne'er may I look on day, nor sleep on night,
But she tells to your Highness simple truth.
O perjured woman! They are both forsworn,
In this the Madman justly charge them.
My Liege, I am advised what I say,
Neither disturbed with the effect of Wine,
Nor headie-rash prouoak'd with raging ire,
Albeit my wrongs might make one wiser mad.
This woman locked me out this day from dinner;
That Goldsmith there, were he not packed with her,
Could witness it: for he was with me then,
Who parted with me to go fetch a Chain,
Promising to bring it to the Porpentine,
Where Balthazar and I did dine together.
Our dinner done, and he not coming thither,
I went to seek him. In the street I met him,
And in his company that Gentleman.
There did this perjured Goldsmith swear me down,
That I this day of him received the Chain,
Which God he knows, I saw not. For the which,
He did arrest me with an Officer.
I did obey, and sent my Peasant home
For certain Ducats: he with none returned.
Then fairly I bespoke the Officer
To go in person with me to my house.
By 'th 'way, we met my wife, her sister, and a rabble more
Of wild Confederates: Along with them
They brought one Pinch, a hungry leane-fac'd Villain;
A mere Anatomy, a Mountebank,
A thred-bare Juggler, and a Fortune-teller,
A needy-hollow-ey'd-sharpe-looking-wretch;
A living dead man. This pernicious slave,
Forsooth took on him as a Conjurer:
And gazing in mine eyes, feeling my pulse,
And with no-face (as it were) out-facing me,
Cries out, I was possessed. Then altogether
They fell upon me, bound me, bore me thence,
And in a dark and dank vault at home
There left me and my man, both bound together,
Till gnawing with my teeth my bonds in sunder,
I gained my freedom; and immediately
Ran hither to your Grace, whom I beseech
To give me ample satisfaction
For these deep shames, and great indignities.
My Lord, in truth, thus far I witness with him:
That he dined not at home, but was locked out.
But had he such a Chain of thee, or no?
He had my Lord, and when he ran in here,
These people saw the Chain about his neck.
Besides, I will be sworn these ears of mine,
Heard you confess you had the Chain of him,
After you first forswore it on the Mart,
And thereupon I drew my sword on you:
And then you fled into this Abbey here,
From whence I think you are come by Miracle.
I never came within these Abbey walls,
Nor ever did thou draw thy sword on me:
I never saw the Chain, so help me heaven:
And this is false you burden me withal.
Why what an intricate impeach is this?
I think you all have drunk of Circes cup:
If here you housed him, here he would have bin.
If he were mad, he would not plead so coldly:
You say he dined at home, the Goldsmith here
Denies that saying??? Sir, what say you?
Sir he dined with her there, at the Porpen???tine.
He did, and from my finger snatched that Ring.
Tic true (my Liege) this Ring I had of her.
Saw thou him enter at the Abbey here?
As sure (my Liege) as I do see your Grace.
Why this is strange: Go call the Abbess hi???there.
I think you are all mated, or stark mad.
Most mighty Duke, vouchsafe me speak a word:
Happily I see a friend will save my life,
And pay the sum that may deliver me.
Speak freely Siracusian what thou wilt.
Is not your name sir called Antipholus?
And is not that your bondsman Dromio?
Within this hour I was his bondsman sir,
But he I thank him gnawed in two my cords,
Now am I Dromio, and his man, unbound.
I am sure you both of you remember me.
Our selves we do remember sir by you:
For lately we were bound as you are now.
You are not Pinches patient, are you sir?
Why look you strange on me? you know me well.
I never saw you in my life till now.
Oh! grief hath changed me since you saw me last,
And careful hours with times deformed hand,
Have written strange defeatures in my face:
But tell me yet, dost thou not know my voice?
Neither.
Dromio, nor thou?
No trust me sir, nor I.
I am sure thou dost?
I sir, but I am sure I do not, and whatso???ever a man denies, you are now bound to believe him.
Not know my voice, oh times e???tremity
Hast thou so cracked and splitted my poor tongue
In seven short years, that here my only son
Knows not my feeble key of untuned cares?
Though now this greened face of mine be hid
In sap-consuming Winters drizzled snow,
And all the Conduits of my blood froze up:
Yet hath my night of life some memory:
My wasting lamps some fading glimmer left;
My dull deaf ears a little use to hear:
All these old witnesses, I cannot err.
Tell me, thou art my son Antipholus.
I never saw my Father in my life.
But seven years since, in Siracusa boy
Thou know we parted, but perhaps my son,
Thou sham'st to acknowledge me in misery.
The Duke, and all that know me in the City,
Can witness with me that it is not so.
I ne'er saw Siracusa in my life.
I tell thee Siracusian, twenty years
Have I bin Patron to Antipholus,
During which time, he ne'er saw Siracusa:
I see thy age and dangers make thee dote.
Most mighty Duke, behold a man much wronged.
I see two husbands, or mine eyes deceive me.
One of these men is genius to the other:
And so of these, which is the natural man,
And which the spirit? Who deciphers them?
I Sir am Dromio, command him away.
I Sir am Dromio, pray let me stay.
Egeon art thou not? or else his ghost.
Oh my old Master, who hath bound him here?
Who ever bound him, I will lose his bonds,
And gain a husband by his liberty:
Speak old Egeon, if thou be the man
That had a wife once called Aemilia,
That bore thee at a burden two fair sons?
Oh if thou be the same Egeon, speak:
And speak unto the same Aemilia.
Why here begins his Morning story right:
These two Antipholus, these two so like,
And these two Dromio's, one in semblance:
Besides her urging of her wrack at sea,
These are the parents to these children,
Which accidentally are met together.
If I dream not, thou art Aemilia,
If thou art she, tell me, where is that son
That floated with thee on the fatal raft.
By men of Epidamium, he, and I,
And the twin Dromio, all were taken up;
But by and by, rude Fishermen of Corinth
By force took Dromio, and my son from them,
And me they left with those of Epidamium.
What then became of them, I cannot tell:
I, to this fortune that you see me in.
Antipholus thou came from Corinth first.
No sir, not I, I came from Siracuse.
Stay, stand apart, I know not which is which.
I came from Corinth my most gracious Lord
And I with him.
Brought to this Town by that most famous Warrior,
Duke Menaphon, your most renowned Uncle.
Which of you two did dine with me to day?
I, gentle Mistress.
And are not you my husband?
No, I say nay to that.
And so do I, yet did she call me so:
And this fair Gentlewoman her sister here
Did call me brother. What I told you then,
I hope I shall have leisure to make good,
If this be not a dream I see and hear.
That is the Chain sir, which you had of me.
I think it be sir, I deny it not.
And you sir for this Chain arrested me.
I think I did sir, I deny it not.
I sent you money sir to be your bail
By Dromio, but I think he brought it not.
No, none by me.
This purse of Ducats I received from you,
And Dromio my man did bring them me:
I see we still did meet each others man,
And I was tan for him, and he for me,
And thereupon these errors are arose.
These Ducats pawn I for my father here.
It shall not need, thy father hath his life.
Sir I must have that Diamond from you.
There take it, and much thanks for my good cheer.
Renowned Duke, vouchsafe to take the pains
To go with vs into the Abbey here,
And hear at large discoursed all our fortunes,
And all that are assembled in this place:
That by this sympathised one days error
Have suffered wrong. Go, keep vs company,
And we shall make full satisfaction.
Thirty three years have I but gone in travail
Of you my sons, and till this present hour
My heavy burden are delivered:
The Duke my husband, and my children both,
And you the Calendars of their Nativity,
Go to a Gossips feast, and go with me,
After so long grief such Nativity.
With all my heart, Isle Gossip at this feast.
Mast??? shall I fetch your stuff from shipbord?
Dromio, what stuff of mine hast thou embarked
Your goods that lay at host sir in the Centaur.
He speaks to me, I am your master Dromio.
Come go with vs, we'll look to that anon,
Embrace thy brother there, rejoice with him.
There is a fat friend at your masters house,
That kitchened me for you to day at dinner:
She now shall be my sister, not my wife.
Me thinks you are my glass, &amp; not my brother:
I see by you, I am a sweet-fac'd youth,
Will you walk in to see their gossipping?
Not I sir, you are my elder.
That's a question, how shall we try it.
We'll draw Cuts for the Signior, till then, lead thou first.
Nay then thus:
We came into the world like brother and brother:
And now let's go hand in hand, not one before another.

THe fortune of a Stage (like Fortunes: self)
Amazes greatest judgements: And none knows
The hidden causes of those strange effects,
That rise from this Hell, or fall from this Heaven:
Who can show cause, why your wits, that in-ayme
At higher Objects, scorn to compose Plays;
(Though we are sure they could, would they vouchsafe it?)
Should (without means to make) judge better far,
Then those that make, and yet ye see they can;
For without your applause, wretched is he
That undertakes the Stage, and he's more blessed,
That with your glorious favours can contest.
Who can show cause, why th'ancient Comic vain
Of Eupolis and Cratinus (now reuin'd,
Subject to personal application)
Should• be exploded by some bitter splines?
Yet merely Comical, and harmless jests
(Though ne'er so witty) be esteemed but toys,
If void of th other satyrismes sauce?
Who can show cause why quick Uenerian jests,
Should sometimes ravish? sometimes fall far short,
Of the just length and pleasure of your ears?
When our pure Dames, think them much less obscene,
Then those that win your Panegyric spline?
But our poor dooms (alas) you know are nothing;
To your inspired censure, ever we
Must needs submit, and there's the mystery.
Great are the gifts given to united heads,
To gifts, attire, to fair attire, the stage
Helps much, for if our other audience see
You on the stage depart before we end,
Our wits go with you all, and we are fools;
So Fortune governs in these stage events,
That merit bears least sway in most contents.
Auriculas Asini quis non habit?
How we shall then appear, we must refer
To Magic of your dooms, that never err.
CAn one self cause, in subjects so a like
As you two are, produce effect so unlike?
One like the Tu•le, all in mournesull strains,
Wailing his fortunes? The other like the Lark
Mounting the sky in shrill and cheerful notes,
Chanting his joys aspired, and both for love:
In one, love raises by his violent heate,
Moist vapours from the heart into the eyes,
From whence they drown his breast in daily showers;
In the other, his divided power infuses
Only a temperate and most kindly warmth,
That gives life to those fruits of wit and virtue,
Which the unkind hand of an uncivil father,
Had almost nipped in the delightsome blossom.
O brother love rewards our services
With a most partial and injurious hand,
If you consider well our different fortunes:
Valerio loves, and joys the dame he loves:
I love, and never can enjoy the sight
Of her I love, so far from conquering
In my desires assault, that I can come
To lay no battery to the Fort I seek;
All passages to it, so strongly kept,
By strait guard of her Father.
I dare swear,
If just desert in love measured reward,
Your fortune should exceed Valerios far:
For I am witness (being your Bed fellow)
Both to the daily and the nightly service,
You doe unto the d•tie of love,
In vows, sighs, tears, and solitary watches,
He never serves him with such sacrifice,
Yet hath his Bow and shaftes at his command:
Loves service is much like our humorous Lords;
Where Minions carry more then S•ruitors,
The bold and careless servant still obtains:
The modest and respective, nothing gains;
You never see your love, unless in dreams,
He, Hymen puts in whole possession:
What different stars reigned when your loves were borne,
He forced to wear the Willow, you the horn?
But brother, are you not ashamed to make
Your self a slave to the base Lord of love,
Be got of Fancy, and of Beauty borne?
And what is Beauty? a mere Quintessence,
Whose life is not in being, but in seeming;
And therefore is not to all eyes the same,
But like a cousoning picture, which one way
Shows like a Crow, another like a Swan:
And upon what ground is this Beauty drawn?
Upon a Woman, a most brittle creature,
And would to God (for my part) that were all.
But tell me brother, did you never love?
You know I did, and was beloved again,
And that of such a Dame, as all men deemed
Honoured, and made me happy in her favours,
Exceeding fair she was not; and yet fair
In that she never studied to be say•r
Then Nature made her; Beauty cost her nothing,
Her virtues were so rare, they would have made
An Aethyop beautiful: At least, so thought
By such as stood aloof, and did observe her
With credulous eyes? But what they were indeed
Isle spare to blaze, because I loved her once,
Only I found her s•, 〈◊〉 for her sake
I vow eternal wars against their whole sex,
Inconstant shuttle-cocks, loving fools, and 〈◊〉;
Men rich in dirt, and tytles sooner won
With the most vile, then the most virtuous:
Found true to none: if one amongst whole hundred•
Chance to be chaste, she is so proud withal,
Way ward and rude, that one of unchaste life,
Is ostentimes approved, a worthier wife:
Undressed, sl•each, nasty, to their husbands,
Spunged up, adorned, and painted to their lovers:
All day in cesse less uproar with their households,
If all the night their husbands have not pleased them,
Like hounds, most kind, being beaten and abused,
Like wolves, most cruel, being kindelyest used.
Fie, thou prophan'st the deity of their sex.
Brother I read, that Aegipt heretofore,
Had Temples of the riches frame on earth;
Much like this goodly edifice of women,
With Alabaster pillars were those Temples,
Upheld and beautified, and so are women:
Most curiously glazed, and so are women;
Cunningly painted too, and so are women;
In out-side wondrous heavenly, so are women:
But when a stranger viewed those phones within,
In stead of Gods and Goddesses, he should find
A painted foul, a fury, or a serpent,
And such celestial inner parts have women.
Rynaldo, the poor Fox that lost his tail,
Persuaded others also to loose theirs:
Thy self, for one perhaps that for desert
Or some defect in thy attempts refused thee,
Reuil'st the whole sex, beauty, love and all:
I tell thee, Love, is Natures second son,
Causing a spring of virtues where he shines,
And as without the Sun, the Worlds great eye,
All colours, beauties, both of Art and Nature,
Are given in vain to men, so without love
All beauties bred in women are in vain;
All virtues borne in men lye buried,
For love informs them as the Sun doth colours,
And as the Sun reflecting his warm •eames
Against the earth, begets all fruits and flowers:
So love, fair shining in the inward man,
Brings forth in him the honourable fruits
Of valour, wit, virtue, and haughty thoughts,
Brave resolution, and divine discourse:
O tic the Paradise, the heaven of earth,
And did thou know the comfort of two hearts,
In one delicious harmony united?
As to joy one joy, and think both one thought,
Live both one life, and therein double life:
To see their souls met at an enter-view
In their bright eyes, at parley in their lips,
Their language kisses: And t'obserue the rest,
Touches, embraces, and each circumstance
Of all loves most unmatched ceremonies:
Thou would abhor thy tongue for blasphemy,
O who can comprehend how sweet love tastes,
But he that hath been present at his feasts?
Are you in that vain too Valerio?
It were fitter you should be about your charge,
How Plow and Cart goes foe•ward: I have known
Your joys were all employed in husbandry,
Your study was how many loads of hay
A meadow of so many acres yielded;
How many Oxen such a close would •at?
And is your rural service now converted
From Pan to Cupped? and from beasts to women?
O if your father knew this, what a lecture
Of bitter castigation he would read you?
My father? why my father? does he think
To rob me of my self? I hope I know
I am a Gentleman, though his covetous humour
And education hath transformed me Bailey,
And made me ou•rseer of his pastures,
Isle be my self, in spite of husbandry.
And see bright heaven here comes my husbandry,
Here shall my cattle graze, here Nectar drink,
Here will I hedge and ditch, here hide my treasure,
O poor Fortunio, how would thou triumph,
If thou enioy'dst this happiness with my Sister?
I were in heaven if once it were come to that.
And me thinks tic my heaven that I am past it,
And should the wretched Macheuilian,
The covetous knight your father see this sight
Lusty Valerio.
Sfoote Sir if he should,
He sh•ll perceive ere long my skill extends
To something more, then sweaty husbandry.
Isle bear thee witness, thou can skill o• dice,
Cards, tennis, winching, dancing, and what not?
And this is something more then husbandry:
You are known in Ordinaries, and Tobacco shops,
Trusted in Taverns and in vaulting houses,
And this is something more then husbandry:
Yet all this while, thy father apprehends thee
For the most tame and thrifty Groom in Europe.
Well, he hath ventured on a marriage
Would quite undo him, did his father know it.
Know it? alas Sir where can he bestow
This poor Gentlewoman he hath made his wife,
But his inquisitive father will hear of it?
Who, like the dragon to th'esperean fruit,
Is to his haunts? slight hence, the old knight comes.
Rynaldo.
Whose that calls? what Sir Gostanzo?
How fares your Knighthood Sir?
Say who was that
Shrunk at my entry here? was it not your brother?
He shrunk not sir, his business called him hence.
And was it not my son that went out with him?
I saw not him, I was in serious speech
About a secret business with my brother.
Sure it was my son, what made he here? I sent him
About affairs to be dispacht in hast.
Well sir, lest silence breed unjust suspect,
Isle tell a secret I am sworn to keep,
And crave your honoured assistance in it.
What first Rynaldo?
This sir, it was your son.
And what young gentlewoman grac'st their company?
Thereon depends the secret I must utter:
That gentle woman hath my brother married.
Married? what is she?
Faith sir, a gentlewoman:
But her vnusering dowry must be told
Out of her beauty.
Is it true Rynaldo?
And does your father understand so much?
That was the motion sir, I was entreating
Your son to make to him, because I know
He is well spoken, and may much prevail
In satisfying my father, who much loves him,
Both for his wisdom and his husbandry.
Indeed he's one can tell his tale I tell you,
And for his husbandry.
O sir, had you heard,
What thrifty discipline he gave my brother,
For making choice without my fathers knowledge,
And without riches, you would have admired him.
Nay, nay, I know him well, but what was it?
That in the choice of wives men must respect
The chief wife, riches, that in every course
A mans chief Load-starre should shine out of riches,
Love nothing heartily in this world but riches;
Cast off all friends, all studies, all delights,
All honesty, and religion for riches:
And many such, which wisdom sure he learned
Of his experient father; yet my brother,
So soothes his rash affection, and presumes
So highly on my fathers gentle nature,
That he's resolved to bring her home to him,
And like enough he will.
And like enough.
Your silly father too, will put it up,
An honest knight, but much too much indulgent
To his presuming children.
What a difference
Doth 〈◊〉 it self, twixt him and you?
Had your son used you thus?
My son? alas
I hope to bring him up in other fashion,
Follows my husbandry, sets early foot
Into the world; he comes not at the city,
Nor knows the city Arts.
But dice and winching.
Acquaints himself with no delight but getting,
A perfect pattern of sobriety,
Temperance and husbandry to all my household,
And what's his company I pray? not wenches.
Wenches? I 〈◊〉 besworn he never smelt a wenches breath
Yet, but me thinks it were fit you sought him out a wife.
A wife Rynaldo?
He dares not look a woman in the face.
Sfoote hold him to one, your son such a sheep?
Tic strange in earnest.
Well sir, though for my thriftless brothers sake,
I little care how my wronged 〈◊〉 takes it,
Yet for my fathers quiet, if your self
Would join hands with your wife and toward Son,
I should deserve it some way.
Good Rynaldo,
I love you and your father, but this matter
Is not for me to deal in: And tic needless,
You say your brother is resolved, presuming
Your father will allow it.
See my father, since you are resolute not to move him Sir,
In any case conceal the secret Absconditse,
By way of an atonement let me pray you will.
Upon mine honour.
Thanks Sir.
God save thee honourable Knight Gostanzo.
Friend Marc. Antonio? welcome, and I think
I have good news to welcome you withal.
He cannot hold.
What news I pray you Sir?
You have a forward, valiant eldest Son,
But wherein is his forwardness, and valour?
I know not where in you intend him so.
Forward before, valiant behind, his duty,
That he hath dared before your due consent
To take a wife.
A wife sir? what is she?
One that is rich enough, her hair pure Amber,
Her forehead mother of pearl, her fair eyes
Two wealthy diamants: her lips, mines of Rubies:
Her t•th, are orient pearl; her neck, pure Ivory.
Jest not good Sir, in an affair so serious,
I love my son, and if his youth reward me
With his contempt of my consent in marriage▪
T• to be feared that his presumption builds not
Of his good choice, that will bear out it self,
And being bad, the news is worse then bad.
What call you bad? is it bad to be poor?
The world accounts it so; but if my soon
Have in her birth and virtues held his choice,
Without disparagement, the salt is less.
Sits the wind there▪ blows there so calm a gale
From a contemned and deserved anger?
A•e you so easy to be disobeyed?
What should I doe? if my enamou•'d son
Have been so forward; I assure my self
He did it more to satisfy his love,
Then to incense my hate, or to neglect me.
A passing kind construction; suffer this,
You op him doors to any villainy,
He'll dare to sell, to pawn, run ever riot,
Despise your love in all, and laugh at you:
And that knights competency you have gotten
With care and labour; he with lust and idleness
Will bring into the •ypend of a beggar;
All to maintain a wanton whirly▪gig,
Worth nothing more then she brings on her back,
Yet all your wealth too little for that back:
By heaven I p•y your declining state,
For be issue•'d your son hath set his foot,
In the right path-way to consumption:
Up to the heart in love; and for that love,
Nothing can be too dear his love desires:
And how i•satiate and unlimited,
Is the ambition and the beggarly pride
Of a dame hoised from a beggars state,
To a state competent and plentiful,
You cannot be so simple not to know.
I must con•esse the mischief: But alas
Where is in me the power of remedy?
Where? in your just displeasure: cast him off,
Receive him not, let him endure the use
Of their en•orced kindness that must trust him
For meat and money, for apparel, house,
And every thing belongs to that estate,
Which he must learn with want of misery,
Since pleasure and a full estate hath blinded
His dissolute desires.
What should I doe?
If I should banish him my house and sight,
What desperate resolution might it breed?
To run into the wars, and there to live
In want of competencie and p•rhaps
Taste th'vnrecouerable loss of his chief limbs,
Which while he hath in peace, at home with me,
May with his spirit, ransom his estate
From any loss his marriage can procure.
First true? No let him •nne into the war,
And lose what limbs he can: better one branch
Be lopped away, then all the whole tree should perish:
And for his wants, better young want then old,
You have a younger son at Padoa,
I like his learning well, make him your heir,
And let your other walk: let him buy wit
Att's own charge, not it's fathers, if you loose him,
You loose no more then that was lost before,
If you recover him, you find a son.
I cannot part with him.
If it be so, and that your love to him be so extreme,
In needful dangers, ever choose the least:
If he should be in mind to pass the Seas,
Your son Rynaldo (who told me all this)
Will tell me that, and so we shall prevent it:
If by no sterne cou•se you will venture that,
Let him come home to me with his fair wife:
And if you chance to see him, shake him up,
As if your wrath were hard to be reflected,
That he may fear hereafter to offend
In other dissolute courses: At my house
With my advice and my sons good example,
Who shall serve as a glass for him to see
His faults, and mend them to his president:
I make no doubt but of a dissolut Son
And disobedient, to send him home
Both dutiful and thrifty,
O Go• 〈◊〉!
Could you do this, you should pres•rue your self,
A perfect friend of me, and me a Son.
Remember you your part, and fear not mine:
Rate him, reu•le him, and renounce him too:
Speak, can you do it man?
Isle do all I can.
Alas good man, how Nature ouer-wayes him.
God save you Sir.
Rynaldo, All the News
You told me as a secret, I •ceiue
Is passing common; for your Father knows it,
The first thing he related, was the Marriage.
And was extremely moved▪
Beyond all measure:
But I did all I could to quench his fury:
Told him how easy t'was for a young man
To run that Amorous course: and though his choice
Were nothing rich, yet she was gently borne,
Well qualified and beautiful: But hee still
Was quite relentless, and would needs renounce him.
My Brother knows it well, and is resolved
To trail a Pike in Field, rather then bide
The more feared push of my vexed Fathers fury.
Indeed that's one way: but are no more means
Left to his fine wits, then t'incence his Father
With a moreviolent rage, and to redeem
A great offence with greater?
So I told him▪
But to a desperate mind all breath •s lost,
Go to, let him be wise, and use his friends,
Amongst whom, Isle be foremost to his Father:
Without this desperate error he intends
Joined to the other▪ Isle not doubt to make hi•
Easy return into his Fathers favour:
So he submit himself, as duty binds him▪
For Fathers will be known to be them selu•,
And often when their angers are not deep,
Will paint an outward Rage upon their looks.
All this I told him Sir ▪ but what says hee▪
I know my Father will not be reclaymde,
Heel think that if he wi•ke at this offence,
T'will open doors to any villainy:
Isle dare to sell to pawn, and run all riot,
To laugh at all his patience, and consume
All he hath purchased to an honoured purpose,
In maintenance of a wanton Whirligigg,
Worth nothing more then she wears on her back.
The very words I used t'incense his Father,
But good Rinoldo l• him be advised▪
How would his Father grieve, should he be mind,
Or quite miscarry in the ruthless war?
I told him so; but better far (said hee)
One branch should utterly be lopped away,
Then the whole Tree of all his race should perish:
And for his wants, better young want, then old.
By heaven the same words still I used t'his Father.
Why comes this about? Well, good Rinaldo,
If hee dare not endure his Fathers looks,
Let him and his •air wife come home to me,
Till I have qualified his Fathers passion,
He shall be kindly welcome, and be sure
Of all the intercession I can use.
I thank you sir, Isle try what I can doe,
Although I fear •e I shall strive in vain.
Well, try him, try him.
Thanks •r, so I will▪
See, this old politic dissembling Knight,
Now he perceive•s •y Father so affectionate,
And that my brother may herea• live
By him and his, with equal use of either,
He will put on a face of hollow friendship.
But this will prove an excellent ground to so•
The seed of o• amongst v•; 〈◊〉 go seek
Valerio and my brother, and tell them
Such news of their affairs, as they'll admire.
How happy are your fortunes aboue mine▪
Both still being wood and courted• still so feeding▪
On the delights of love, that still you find
An appetite to more▪ where I am cloyed,
And being bound to love sports, care not for them.
That is your fault Gazette, we have Lou•
And wish continual company with the•.
In honoured marriage rites, which you enjoy.
But seld or never can we get a look
Of those we love, F•rtunio my dear 〈◊〉
Dare not be known to love me, nor come near
My Fathers house, where I as in a prison
Consume my lost days, and the tedious nights,
My Father guarding me for one I 〈◊〉▪
And Gratiana here my brothers love,
Joys him by so much 〈◊〉, that vehement fear
Drinks up the sweetness of their stolen deligh•▪
Where you enloye a husband, and may freely
Perform all obsequies you d•e to love.
Indeed I hane a husband, and his 〈◊〉
Is more then I desire, being vainly ielouse:
Extremes, though contrary, have the like effects,
Extremes heate mortifies like extreme cold:
Extreme love breeds 〈◊〉 as well
As extreme Hatred: and too violent rigour,
Tempts Chastity as much, as too much Licence:
There's no mans eye fixed on me but doth pierce
My Husbands soul: If any •ke my wel-fare?
Hee straight doubts Treason pra• to his bed:
Fancies but to himself all likelihoods
Of my wrong to him, and •ayes all on me
For certain truss▪ yet se• he with his best,
To put Disguise on all his Jealousy,
Fearing perhaps, least it may teach me that,
Which otherwise• I should not dream upon:
Yet lives he still abroad, at great expense,
Turns merely Gallant from his Farmers state,
Uses all Games and recreations▪
Runs Races with the 〈◊〉 of the Court,
Feasts them at home, and entertains them costly,
And then upbraids me with their company:
See see, wee shall be troubled with him now.
Now La•▪ what plots have we now in hand?
They say, when only one Dame is alone,
She plots some mischief; but if three together,
They plot three hundred: Wife, the Ayre is sharpe,
Y'ad best to take the house least you take cold.
Alas this time of year yields no such danger,
Go, in I say; a friend of yours attends you.
Hee is of your bringing, and may stay.
Nay stand not chopping Logic; in I pray.
Ye see, Gentle women, what my happiness is,
These humours reign in mar•age; humours, humours.
Now by my Sooth I am no fortune teller,
And would be loath to prove so; yet pronounce
This at adventure, that it were indecorum
This Heffer should want horns.
Fie on this Love,
I rather wish to want, then purchase so.
In deed such Love is like a Smoky fire
In a cold morning; though the Fire be cheerful,
Yet is the Smoke so sour and cumbersome,
It were better lose the Fire, then find the Smoke:
Such an attendant then as Smoke to Fire,
Is Ielo• to Love: Better want both,
Then have both.
Come Fortunio, now take hold
On this occ•▪ as my self on this:
One couple more would make a Barly-breake.
I fear Valerio, wee shall break too soon,
Your Fathers Jealousy Spy-all, will displease 〈◊〉▪
Well Wench, the day will come his Argus eyes
Will shut, and thou shalt open: Sfoote, I think
Dame Natures memory begins to fail her▪
If I write but my Name in Mercers Books,
I am as sure to have at six months end
A Rascole at my elbow with his Mace,
As I am sure my Fathers not far hence:
My Father yet hath ought Dame Nature debt
These threescore years and ten, yet cal• not on him:
But if she turn her Debt-booke over once,
And finding him her debtor, do but send
Her Serge•ant Iohn Death to arrest his body,
Our Souls shall rest Wench then, And the free Light
Shall triumph in our faces; where now Night,
In imitation of my Fathers frowns,
Lours at our meeting:
See where the Scholar comes.
Down on your 〈◊〉; poor lovers reverence learning
I pray thee why Rinaldo?
Mark what cause
Flows from my depth of knowledge to your lou•,
To make you •neele and bl•e me while you live.
I pray thee good Scholards give vs cause.
Mark then, •ect your ears: you know what horror
Would fly on your love from your fathers frowns,
If he should know it. And your sister here▪
(My brothers sweet hart) knows as well what 〈◊〉
Would seas his powers for her, if he should know▪
My brother wooed her, or that she loved him,
Is not this true? speak all.
All this is true.
It is as true that now you meet by stelth
In depth of midnight, kissing out at grates,
Clime over walls. And all this 〈◊〉 reform.
By Lo•.
Well sir, you shall have all means
To live in one house, eat and drink together,
Meet and kiss your fills.
All this by learning▪
I, and your frowning father know all this.
I marry, small learning may prove that.
Nay he shall know it, and desire it too,
W•lcome my Brother to him, and your wife,
Entreating both to come and dwell with him.
Is not this strange▪
I too strange to be true.
Tic in this head shall work it: Therefore hear;
Brother this Lady you must call your wife,
For I have told her sweet harts Father here
That •e is your wife; and because my Father
(Who now b•ues it) must b• quieted
Before you see him, you must live a while
As husband to her, in his Fathers house▪
Ualerio here's a simple mean for you
To lie• at rack and manger with your wedlock
And brother, for your self to meet as freely.
With this your long desired and barred love.
You make vs wonder.
Peace, be ruled by me,
And you shall see to what a perfect shape
•e bring this rude Plo•, which blind Chance (the Ape
Of Cou• •d advice) hath brought forth blind.
Ualerio, can your heat of love forbear
Before your Father, and allow my Brother
To use some kindness to your wife before him▪
I before him, I do not greatly care,
Nor any where in deed; my Sister here
Shall be my spy• if she will wrong her self,
And give her right to my wife, I am pleased.
My dearest life I know, will never fear
Any such will or thought in all my powers▪
When I court her then, think I think tic th•▪
When I •brace her, hold thee in mine Arms:
Come, let vs practise against wee see your Father.
Soft Sir, I hope you need not do it yet,
Let me take this time.
Come, you must not touch her.
No not before my Father?
No nor now,
Because you are so soon to practise it▪
For I must bring them to him presently.
Take her Fortunio; go, hence man and wife,
Wee will attend you rarely with fixed faces.
Valerio keep your co•ounce, and conceive
Your Father in your forged sheepishness,
Who thinks thou dare not look upon a Wench,
Nor know at which end to begin to kiss her.
It is your own too simple lenity,
And doting indulgence shown to him still
That thus hath taught your Son to be no Son,
As you have used him, therefore so you have him:
Durst my Son thus turn rebel to his duty,
Steal up a match vnshuting his estate
Without all knowledge of or friend or father;
And to make that good with a worse offence
resolve to run beyond Sea to the wars.
Durst my Son serve me thus? well, I have stayed him,
Though much against my disposition,
And this hour I have set for his repair,
With his young mistress and concealed wife,
And in my house here they shall sojourn both
Till your black angers storm be ouer-blowne.
My angers storm? Ah poor Fortunio,
One gentle word from th• would soon resolve
The storm of my rage to a shower of tears▪
In that vain still? well Marcantonio,
Gur old acquaintance and long neighbourhood
Ties my affection to you, and the good
Of your whole house▪ in kind regard whereof
I have advised you for your credit sake,
And for the tender welfare of your son,
To frown on him a little; if you do not
But at •rst parley take him to your favour,
I protest utterly to renownce all care
Of you and yours, and all your amities.
They say hoe's wretched that out of himself
Cannot draw counsel to his proper weal,
But h•'s thrice wretched that has neither counsel
Within himself, nor apprehension
Of counsel for his own good, from another.
Well, I will arm my self against this weakness
The best I can; I long to see this Hellene
That hath enchanted my young Paris thus,
And's like to set all our poor Trop• on fire.
Here comes my Son; withdraw, take up your stand,
You shall hear odds betwixt your Son and •in.
Tell him I can not do it: Shall I be made
A foolish Novice, my Purse set a brooch
By every cheating come you seven? to lend
My Money and be laughed at? tell him plain
I profess Husbandry, and will not play
The Prodigal like him, against my profession.
Here's a Son.
An admi•able spark.
Well sir, Isle tell him so.
Sfoote, let him lead
A better Husbands life, and live not idly,
Spending his time, his coin, and self on Wenches.
Why what's the matter Son?
Cry mercy Sir; why there comes messengers
From this and that brave Gallant▪ and such Gallants,
As I protest I saw but through a Grate.
And what's this Message?
Faith Sir, h•'s disappointed
Of payments▪ and disfurnisht of means present▪
If I would do him the kind office therefore
To trust him but some seven-night with the keeping▪
Of forty Crowns for m•e, h• deeply swear▪
As hoe's a Gentleman, to discharge his trust,
And that I shall eternally endear him
To my wished service, he protestes and contests.
Good words Ualerio; but thou art too 〈◊〉
To be decein'd by breath: Isle turn thee loose
To the most cunning Cheater of them all.
Sfoote, Hoe's not ashamed besides to charge me
With a late Promise: I must yield in deed,
I did (to shift him with some contentment)
Make such a friuall promise.
I, well done,
Promises are no Fetters: with that tongue
Thy promise past, vnpromise it again.
Wherefore has Man a Tongue, of power to speak,
But to speak still to his own private purpose?
Beasts utter but one sound; but Men have change
Of speech and Reason, even by Nature given them:
Now to say one thing, and an other now,
As best may serve their profitable ends.
Ber-Ladie sound instructions to a Son.
Nay Sir, he makes his claim by debt of friendship.
Tush, Friendship's but a Term boy: the fond world
Like to a doting Mother glases over
Her Childrens imperfections with fine terms:
What she calls Friendship and true humane kindness,
Is only want of true Experience:
Honesty is but a defect of Wit,
Respect but mere Rusticity and Clownerie.
Better and better.
Soft, here comes my Son.
Fortunio, keep your countenance: See sir here
The poor young married couple, which you pleased
To send for to your house.
Fortunio welcome,
And in that welcome I employ your wives,
Who I am sure you count your second self.
Sir, your right noble favours do exceed
All power of worthy gratitude by words,
That in your care supply my Fathers place.
Fortunio, I can not choose but love you,
Being Son to him who long time I have loved:
From whose just anger, my house shall protect you,
Till I have made a calm way to your meetings.
I little thought Sir, that my Fathers love
Would take so ill, so slight a fault as this.
Call you it slight? Nay though his spirit take it
In higher manner then for your loved sake,
I would have wished him; yet I make a doubt,
Had my Son done the like, if my affection
Would not have turned to more spleen, then your Fathers:
And yet I qualify him, all I can,
And doubt not but that time and my persuasion,
Will work out your excuse: since youth and love
Were th'vnresisted organies to seduce you:
But you must give him leave, for Fathers must
Be won by penitence and submission▪
And not by force or opposition.
Alas Sir, what advise you me to doe?
I know my Father to be highly moved,
And am not able to endure the breath
Of his expressed displeasure, whose hot flames
I thy•ke my absence soonest would have quenched.
True Sir, as fire with oil, or else like them
That quench the sire with pulling down the house,
You shall remain here in my house concealed
Till I have won your Father to conceive
Kinder opinion of your oversight.
Ualerio entertain Fortunio
And his 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, and give them conduct in.
You're welcome sir.
What 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 that all▪
No entertainment to the Gentlewoman?
Forsooth you're welcome by my Fathers leave.
What no more complement?
Kiss her you sheepes-head,
Why when? Go go Sir, call your Sister hither. 
Lady, you'll pardon our gross bringing up?
Wee dwell far off from Court you may perceive:
The sight of such a blazing Star as you,
Dazzles my rude Sons wits.
Not so good Sir,
The better husband, the more courtly ever.
In deed a Courtier makes his lips go far,
As he doth all things else.
Daughter reciue
This Gentlewoman home, and use her kindly.
My Father bids you kindly welcome Lady,
And therefore you must needs come well to me.
Thank you for-soth.
Go Dame, conduct-am in.
Ah errant Sheepes-head, hast thou lived thus long,
And dare not look a Woman in the face?
Though I desire especially to see
My Son a Husband, Shall I therefore have him
Turn absolute Cullion? Lets see, kiss thy hand.
Thou kiss thy hand? thou wip'st thy mouth by th'masse.
Fie on thee Clown; They say the world's grown finer,
But I for my p•rt, never saw Young man
Worse fashin'd and brought up then now adays.
Sfoote, when my self was young, was not I kept
As far from Court as you? I think I was:
And ye• my Father on a time invited
The Duchess of his thou•e; I be•ing then
About some five and twenty years of age,
Was thought the only man to entertain her:
I had my Conge; plant my self of one leg,
Draw back the tother with a deep fetched honour:
Then with a Bell regard aduant mine eye
With boldness on her very visnomie.
Your Dancers all were counterfeits to me:
And for discourse in my fair Mistress presence,
I did not as you barren Gallants doe,
Fill my discourses up drinking Tobacco;
But on the present furnished ever more
With tales and practiced speeches; as some times
What first a clock? What stuff's this Petticoat?
What cost the making? What the Frindge and all?
And what she had under her Petticoat?
And such like witty complements: and for need,
I could have written as good Prose and Verse,
As the most beggarly Poet of am all,
Either accrostique, Exordion,
Epithalamious, S••yres, Epigrams,
Sonnets in Doozens, or your Quatorzanies,
In any Rime Masculine, Feminine,
Or Sdrnciolla, or cooplets, Blank Verse,
You're but bench-whistlers now a days to them
That were in our times▪ well, about your Husbandry,
Go, for I'fayth you are fit for nothing else.
B••-Ladie you have plaide the Courtier rarely.
But did you ever see so blank a Fool,
When he should kiss a Wench, as my Son is?
Alas tic but a little bashfulness,
You let him keep no company, nor allow him
Money to spend at Fence and Dauncing-scholes,
You're too seueere y'faith.
And you too supple.
Well Sir, for your sake I have staide your Son
From flying to the wars: now see you rate him,
To stay him yet from more expencefull courses,
Wherein your lenity will encourage him.
Let me alone, I thank you for this kindness.
So, are they gone? Now tell me brave Ualerio
Have I not won the wreath from all your wits,
Brought thee t'enioy the most desired presence
Of thy dear love at home? and with one labour
My brother t'enioy thy sister, where
It had been her undoing t'haue him seen,
And make thy father crave what he abhors:
T'entreate my brother home t'enioy his daughter,
Command thee kiss thy wench, chide for not kissing,
And wo•ke all this out of a Macheuil▪
A miserable Politician?
I think the like was never plaid before▪
Indeed I must commend thy wit of force,
And yet I know not whose deserves most praise
Of thy•e, or my wit: thine for plotting well,
Mi•, that durst undertake and carry it
With such true form.
Well, th'euening crowns the day,
Persevere to the end, my wit hath put
Blind Fortune in a string into your hand,
Use it discreetly, keep it from your Father,
Or you may bid all your good days good night.
Let me alone boy.
Well sir, now to vary
The pleasures o• our wits, thou know Valerio
Here is the new turned Gentleman's fair wife,
That keeps thy wife and sister company;
With whom the amorous Courtier Do•to
Is far•e in love, and of whom her sour husband
Is passing 〈◊〉, puts on Eagles eyes
To 〈◊〉 into her carriage. Shall wee see.
If he be now from home, and visit her.
See, see, the prisoner comes.
But soft Sir, see
Her jealous Jailer follows at her heals▪
Come, we will watch some fitter time to board her,
And in the mean time seek out our mad crew.
My spirit 〈◊〉 to swagger.
Go• too youth, walk not too boldly, if the Ser∣geants meet you;
You may have swaggering work your belly full.
No better Copesmates,
Isle go seek im out with this light in my hand,
The slaves grow proud with seeking out of vs.
A pretty work, I pray what flowers are these▪
The Pansy this.
O thats for lovers thoughts.
Whats that, a Columbine?
No, that thankless Flower fits not my Garden.
Him? yet it may mine▪
This were a pretrie present for some friend,
Some gallant Courtier, as for Doriotto,
One that ado• you in his soul I know.
Me? why me more then your self I pray▪
O ye•, h• adores you, and adhornes me▪
Y faith deal plainly, Doe not his kisses relish
Much better then such Peasants as I am?
Whose kisses?
Doriottoes; does he not?
The thing you wot on?
What thing good Lord?
Why Lady, lie with you?
Lie with me?
I with you.
You with me indeed.
Nay I am told that he lies with you too,
And that he is the only Whore-maister
About the City.
If he be so only,
Tic a good hearing that there are no more,
Well Mistress well, I will not be abused,
Think not you dance in Nets; for though you do not
Make broad profession of your love to him,
Y et do I understand your darkest language,
Your treads ath'toe, your secret jogs and wrings:
Your enter course of glances: every tittle
Of your close Amorous rites I understand,
They speak as loud to me, as if you said,
My dearest Dariotto, I am thine.
Iesus what moods are these? did ever Husband
Follow his Wife with Jealousy so vniu•?
That once I loved you, you your self will swear.
And if I did, where did you lose my Love▪
In deed this strange• and undeserved usage,
Hath power to shake a heart were ne'er so s•led:
But I protest all your unkindness, never
Had strength to make me wrong you, but in thought.
No, not with Doriotto?
No by heaven.
No Letters past, nor no designs for meeting?
No by my hope of heaven.
Well, no time past,
Go go; go in and sow▪
Well, bee it so.
Suspicion is (they say) the •st degree
Of deepest wisdom: and how ever others
•ygh against this mood of Jealousy,
For my part I suppose it the best curb,
To check the ranging appetites that reign
In this weak sex: my neighbours point at me
For this my jealousy; but should I doe
As most of them doe; let my wife fly out
To feasts and revels, and in•te home Gallants,
Play Menelaus, give them time and place,
While 〈◊〉 •t like a well-taught wayting-woman,
Turning h•r eyes upon some work or picture,
Read in a Book, or take a feigned nap,
While her •end Lady takes one to her lap?
No, let me still be pointed at, and thought
A ielouse Ass, and not a wittily Knave.
I have a show of Courtiers haunt my house,
In show my friends, and •or my profit too:
But I perceive um, and will mock their aims,
With looking to their mark, I warrant um:
I am content to ride abroad with them,
To revel, dice, and fit their other sports;
But by their leaves isle have a vigilant eye
To the mayne chance still. See my brave Comrades.
Well, wag, well, wilt thou still deceive thy father,
And being so simple a poor soul before him,
Turn swaggerer in all companies besides?
Had thou bin rested, all would have come forth.
Soft, 〈◊〉, there lies the point; I do not doubt,
But t'haue my penny words of these Rascals one day:
Isle smoke the buzzing Hornets from their nests,
Or else isle make their leather •kins stay.
The whoreson hungry Horse-flyes; Foot, a man
Cannot so soon, for want of Almanacs,
Forget his day but three or four bare months,
But strait he fees a sort of Corporals,
To lye in Ambuscado to surprise him.
Well, thou had happy fortune to escape v•.
But they thought 〈◊〉 was happier to scope me.
I walking in the place, where men's law suites
Are heard and pleaded, not so much as dreaming
Of any such encounter, steps me forth
Their va•ant fore-man, with the word, I rest you.
I made no more ado, but laid these paws
Close on his shoulders, tumbling him to earth;
And there sate he on his posteriors,
Like a Baboon; and turning me about,
I 〈◊〉 •pied the whole troop issuing on me.
I stepped me back, and drawing my old friend here,
Made to the midst of them, and all unable
T'endure the shock, all rudely sell •n rout,
And down the stayres they ran with such a fury,
As meeting with a troop o• Lawyers there,
Manned by their Clients: some with ten, some with twenty,
Some five, some three; he that had least, had one:
Upon the stayres they bore them down before them:
But such a rattling then was there amongst them
Of 〈◊〉 Declarations, Replications,
Reioynders and Petitions; all their books
And writings torn and trod on, and •ome lost,
That the poor Lawyers coming to the Bar,
Could say nought to the matter, but instead,
Were fain to rail and talk besides their books
Without all order.
Faith, that same vain of railing became
Now most applausiue; your best Poct, is
He that rails gro•st.
True, and your best fool
Is your broad railing fool.
And why not, sir?
For by the gods, to tell the naked truth,
What objects see men in this world, but such
As would yield matter to a railing humour?
When he that last year ca•yed after one
An empty Buckram bag, now fills a Coach,
And crowds the Senate with such troops of Clients,
And servile followers, as would put a mad spleen
Into a Pigeon.
Come, pray leave these cross capers,
Let's make some better use of precious time.
See, here's Cornelio: come, Lad, shall we to dice?
Any thing I.
Well said, how does thy wife?
In health, God save her.
But where is she, man?
Abroad about her business.
Why, not at home?
Foot, my 〈◊〉, take her to the Court,
And this rare Lad her husband: and doest hear?
Play me no more the •rabble Farmer,
But be a•de by friends, sell all •h country,
Be a flat Co•r, follow some great man,
Or bring thy 〈◊〉 there, and sheele make thee great.
What, to the Court? then take me for a Gull.
Nay, never shun it to be called a Gull:
For I see all the world is but a Gull:
One man Gull to another in all kinds:
A Merchant to a Courtier is a Gull:
A Client to a Lawyer is a Gull:
A married man to a Bachelor, a Gull:
A Bachelor to a Cuckold is a Gull:
All to a Poct, or a Poct to himsel•e.
Ha• 〈◊〉, shall we gull this Guller?
He gulls his father, man, we cannot gull him.
Let me alone. Of all men's 〈◊〉 alive,
I most admire Valerioes, that hath stolen,
By his mere industry, and that by spurts,
Such qualities, as no wit else can match,
With plodding at perfection every hour;
Which, if his father knew eche gift he has,
Were like enough to make him give all from him:
I mean besides his dyeing and his winching,
He has stolen languages, the Italian, Spanish,
And some spice of the French, besides his dancing,
Singing, playing on choice Instruments:
These has he got, almost against the hair.
But hast thou stolen all these, Valerio?
Toys, toys, a pox; and yet they be such toys,
As every Gentleman would not be without.
Vain glory makes ye judge on lyte in faith.
A fore heaven I was much deceived in him:
But hoe's the man indeed that hides his gifts,
And sets them not to sale in every presence.
I would have sworn, his soul were far from music;
And that all his choice music was to hear
His fat beasts bellow.
Sir, your ignorance
Shall est soon be confuted. Prithee Val,
Take thy Theorbo for my sake a little.
By heaven, this month I touched not a Theorbo.
Touched a Theorbo? mark the very word.
Sir, go fetch.
If you will have it, I must needs confess,
I am no husband of my qualities.
See what a Caper there was!
See again.
The best that ever; and how it becomes him!
O that his father saw these qualities!
Nay, that's the very wonder of his wit,
To carry all without his fathers knowledge.
Why, we might tell him now.
No but we could not,
Although we think we could: his wit doth charm vs.
Come sweet Val, touch and sing.
Foot, will you hear
The worst voice in Italy?
O God, sir. He sings. Courtiers, how like you this?
Believe it excellent.
Is it not natural?
If my father heard me,
Foot, he would renounce me for his natural son.
By heaven, Valerio, and I were thy father,
And loved good qualities as I doe my life,
Id disinherit thee: for I never heard
Dog howl with worse grace.
Go to, Signeur Courtier,
You deal not courtly now to be so plain,
Nor nobly, to discourage a young Gentleman,
In virtuous qualities, that has but stolen um.
Call you this touching a Theorbo? Omn. ha, ha, ha.
How now, what's here?
Zoones, a plot laid to gull thee.
Could thy wit think the voice was worth the hearing?
This was the Courtiers and the Cuckolds project.
And first •en so? tic very well, mast Courtier, &amp; Dan Cornuto, isle cry quit with both: And first, isle cast a jar betwixt them both, with firing the poor cuckolds jealousy.
I have a tale will make him mad,
And turn his wife divorced loose amongst vs▪
But first let's home, and entertain my wife.
O father, pardon, I was borne to gull thee.
How happy am I, that by this sweet means
I gain accesle to your •oct loved sight,
And there withal to vtt•r my full love,
Which but for vent would burn my entrails up!
Byth masle they talk too so•lie.
Little thinks
The 〈◊〉 mind my thrifty father bears,
That I am vo•d to you, and so am bound
From him: who for more riches he would force
On my disl•king fancy.
Tic no fault,
With •st d•ds to defraud an injury.
My daughter is persuading him to yield
In dutiful 〈◊〉 to his 〈◊〉.
Do I not dream? do I be hold this sight
With waking eyes? or •rome the J•ory gate
Hath Morpheus sent a vision to delude me?
〈◊〉 possible that I a mortal man,
Should shrine within mine arms so bright a Goddess,
The fair Gratiana, beauties little world!
What have we he•re?
My dearest Mine of Gold,
All this that thy white arms enfold,
Account it as thine own free-hold.
Gods my dear soul, what sudd• change is here!
I 〈◊〉 •ll how this gear will fall out •yth.
F•rtunio, sist•r; come, l•t's to the garden.
Sits the wind there in faith? s•e what •xample
Will work upon the •ullest appetite.
My son last day so bas•ull, that he d•st not
Look on a wench, now courts her; and by•lady,
Will make his friend Fortune• wear his head
Of the right mod•rne fashion. What R•naldo.
I fear I interrupt your privacy.
Welco•e, Rinaldo, would 'thad bin your hap
To come a little sooner, that you might
H•ue seen a handsome sight. but let that pass,
The short is, that your sister Gratiana
Shall stay no longer here.
No longer, sir?
Repent yo• then so soon your favour to her,
And to my brother?
No• so, good Rinaldo;
But to prevent a mischief that I see
H•ngs over your abused brothers head.
In brief, my son has learned b•t too much courtship.
It was my chance even now to cast mine eye
Into a place whereto your sister entered:
My 〈◊〉 •on: I must cons•le
What I saw there: but to be play•e, I saw
More then I would see: I had thought to make
My house a kind receipt for your kind brother;
But id be l•th his 〈◊〉 should find more kindness,
Then •he had cause to like of.
What's the matter?
Perhaps a little comple•ent or so.
W•l, sir, such complement perhaps may cost
Married For•nio the se•ting on:
Nor can I keep my knowledge; He that lately
Before my face I could not get to look
Upon your sister; by this light, now kissed her,
Embraced and courted with as good a grace,
As any Courtier could: and I can tell you
(Not to disgrace her) I perc•yu'd the Dame
Was as far forward as himself, byth mass.
You should have schooled him for'•.
No, Isle not se•'t:
For shame once found, is lost; Isle have him think
That my opinion of him is the same
That it was ever; it will be a mean,
To bridle this fresh humour bred in him.
Let me then school him; foot, isle rattle him up▪
No, no, Rinaldo, th'onely remedy,
I• to remove the cause; carry the object
From his late tempted eyes.
Alas, sir, whither?
You know, my father is incensed so much,
Heel not receive her.
Place her with some friend
But for a time, till I reclaim your father:
Mean time your brother shall remain with me.
The care's the less then, he has still his longing,
To be with this Gulls daughter.
What resolve you?
I am resolved she lodges here no more:
My friends son shall not be abused by mine.
T'roth, sir, isle tell you what a sudden toy comes in my head; what think you if I brought her home to my fathers house?
I mary, sir;
Would he receive her?
Nay, you hear not all:
I mean, with use of some device or other.
As how, Rinaldo?
Mary sir, to say,
She is your sons wife, married past your knowledge.
I doubt, last day he saw her, and will know her to be Fortunioes wife▪
Nay, as for that
I will pretend she was even then your sons wife,
But faint by me to be Fortunioes,
Only to try how he would take the matter.
Before heaven it were pretty.
Would it not doe well?
Exceeding well in sadness.
Nay, good sir,
Tell me unfeignedly, do ye liked indeed.
The best that ere I heard.
And do you think
Heel swallow down the Gudgion?
A my life
It were a gross gob would not down with him,
An honest knight, but simple, not acquainted
With the fine slights and policies of the world,
As I my self am.
Isle go fetch her strait:
And this iestthriue, twill make vs princely sport:
But you must keep our counsel, second all,
Which to make likely, you must needs sometimes
Give your son leave (as if you knew it not)
To steal and see her at my fathers house.
I, but see you then that you keep good guard
Over his forward new begun affections:
For by the Lord, heel teach your brother else,
To sing the Cuckoos note: spirit will break out,
Though never so suppressed and pinioned.
Especially your sons: what would he be,
If you should not restrain him by good counsel▪
Isle have an eye on him, I warrant thee.
Isle in and warn the Gentlewoman to make ready.
Well, sir, &amp; isle not be long after you. 
Heaven, heaven, I see these Politicians
(Out of blind Fortunes hands) are our most fools.
Tic she that gives the lustre to their wits,
Still plodding at traditional devices:
But take um out of them to present actions,
A man may grope and tickle um like a Trowt,
And take um from their close dear holes, as fat
As a Physician; and as giddy-headed,
As if be miracle heaven had taken from them,
Even that which commonly belongs to fools.
Well, now let's note what black ball of debate,
Valerio•s wit hath cast betwixt Cornelio,
And the enamoured Courtier; I believe
His wife and he will part: his jealousy
Hath ever watched occasion of divorce,
And now Valerioes villainy will present it.
See, here comes the twyn-Courtier his companiō.
Rinaldo, well encountered.
Why? what news?
Most sudden and unfortunate, Rinaldo:
Cornelio is incensed so against his wife,
That no man can procure her quiet with him.
I have assayed him, and made Marc Antonio,
With all his gentle Rethorike second me,
Yet all I fear me will be cast away.
See, see, they come: join thy wit, good Rinaldo,
And help to pacify his yellow fury.
With all my heart, I consecrate my wit
To the wished comfort of distressed Ladies.
Will any man assure me of her good behaviour?
Who can assure a jealous spirit? you may be afraid of the shadow of your ears, &amp; imagine thē to be horns: if you will assure your self, appoint keepers to watch her.
And who shall watch the keepers?
To be sure of that, be you her keeper.
Well said, and share the horns your self:
For that's the keepers fee.
But say I am gone out of town, &amp; must trust others; how shall I know if those I trust be trusty to me?
Mary, sir, by a singular instinct, given naturally to all you married men, that if your wives play legerdeheele, though you bee a hundred miles off, yet you shall be sure instantly to find it in your forheads.
Sound doctrine I warrant you: I am resolved in faith.
Then give me leave to speak, sir, that hath all this while been silent: I have heard you with extreme pati∣ence, now therefore prick up your 〈◊〉, and vouchsafe me audience.
Go• boy, a mine honour.
Pray what are you, sir?
I am here, for default of better, of counsel with the fair Gazette, and though her self had been best able to defend her self, if she had bin here, and would have pleased to put forth the Buckler, which Nature hath given all wo∣men, I mean her tongue.
Excellent good boy.
Yet since •he either vouchsafes it not, or thinks her innocence a sufficient shield against your jealous accusati∣once, I will presume to undertake the defence of that absent &amp; honourable Lady, whose sworn Knight I am; and 〈◊〉 her of all that name (for Lady is grown a common name to their whole sex) which sex I have ever loved frō my youth, and shall never cease to love, till I want wit to admire.
An excellent spoken boy.
Give •re, Corneal•o, heer• is a young 〈◊〉 sent to persuade thee.
Well, sir, let him say on.
It is a hey•y case, to see how this light sex is tūbled and tossed from post to pillar, under the un•uory breath of every humorous Peasant: Gaz•, you said, is unchaste, distoyall, and I wot not what; Alas, is it her fault? is she not a woman▪ did she not suck it (as others of her sex doe) from her mothers breast? and will you condemn that, as her fault, which is her Nature? Alas, sir, you must con∣cider, a woman is an unfinished Creature, delivered ha∣styli to the world, before Nature had set to that 〈◊〉 which should have made them per•ct. Faults they have (no doubt) but are wee free? Turn your eye into your self (good Signeur Cor•) and weigh your own imperfection• with hers: If she be wanton abroad, are
not you wanting at home? if she be 〈◊〉, are not you 〈◊〉? If she be high set, are not you taken down? If she b• a Courtesan, are not you a Cuckold?
Out you rogue.
On with thy speech boy.
You doe not well, Cornelio, to dis•urage the bashful youth.
Forth, boy, I warrant thee.
But if our own imperfections will not teach vs to bear with theirs; yet let their virtues persuade vs: let vs endure their bad qualities for their good; allow the prickle for the Rose; the brack for the Velvet; the paring for the cheese, and so forth: if you say they range abroad, consider it is nothing but to avoid idleness at home: their nature is still to be doing: keep um a doing at home; let them practise one good quality or other, either sowing, singing, playing, chiding, dancing or so, &amp; these will put such idle toys out of their heads into yours: but if you cannot find them variety of business within doors, yet at least imitate the ancient wise Citizens of this City, who used carefully to provide their wives gardens near the town, to plant, to graft in, as occasion served, only to keep um from i∣dlenesse.
Everlasting good boy.
I 〈◊〉 your knavery, sir, and will yet have pa∣tience.
Forth, my brave Curio.
As to her unquietness (which some have rudely termed shrewishness) though the fault be in her, yet the cause is in you. What so cal•e as the sea of it own nature? Art was never able to equal it: your dicing tables, nor your bowling alleys are not comparable to it; yet if a blast of wind do but cross it, not so turbulent &amp; violent an eel∣meant in the world: So (nature in lieu of women's scarcity of wit, having endued them with a large portion of will) if they may (without impeach) enjoy their wills, no quieter creatures under heaven: but if the breath of their husbāds
mouths once cross their wills, nothing more tempestuous. Why thē, sir, should you husbands cross your wives wills thus, considering the law al•owes thē no wills at all at their deaths, because it intended they should have their wills while they lived?
Answer him but that, Cornelio.
All shall not serve her turn, I am thinking of o∣there matters.
Thou hast half won him, Wag; ply him yet a little further.
Now (s•r) for these Cuckooish songs of yours, of Cuckolds, horns, grafting, and such like; what are they, but mere imaginary toys, bred out of your own heads, as your own, and so by tradition delivered from man to man, like Scar-crowes, to terrify fools from this earthly paradise of wedlock, coin▪d at first by some spent Poets, superannated Bachelors, or some that were scarce men of their hands; who, like the Fox, having lost his tail, would persuade others to lose theirs for company? Again, for your Cuckold, what is it but a mere fiction? show me any such creature in nature; if there be, I could never see it, neither could I ever find any sensible difference betwixt a Cuckold and a Christen creature. To conclude, let Po∣ets coin, or fools credit what they list; for mine own part, I am clear of this opinion, that your Cuckold is a mere Chym•ra, and that there are no Cuckolds in the world, but those that have wives: and so I will leave them.
Tic excellent good, sir; I do take you, sir, do ye see? to be, as it were bastard to the saucy Courtier, that would have me father more of your fraternity, do ye see? &amp; so are instructed (as we hear) to second that villain with your tongue, which he has acted with his Tenure piece, do ye see?
No such matter, a my credit, sir.
Well, sir, be as be may, I scorn to set my head against yours, do ye see? when in the mean time I will fircke your
father, whether you see or no.
Gods my life, Corn•.
H• at your father in faith, boy, if he can find him.
See, he comes here, he has mist him.
How now, my hearts, what, not a wench amongst you?
Tic a sign you're not in the grace of wenches,
That they will let you be thus long alone.
Well, Dariotto, glory not too much,
That for thy brisk attire and lips perfumde,
Thou play est the Stally on ever where thou come;
And like the husband of the flock, run through
The whole town heard, and no mans bed secure:
No women's honour unattempted by thee.
Think not to be thus fortunate for ever:
But in thy amorous conquests at the last
Some wound will slice your miser: Mars himself
Fell into 〈◊〉 •are, and so may you.
Alas, alas, faith I have but the name:
I love to court and win; and the consent,
Without the act obtained, is all I seek.
I love the victory that draws no blood.
O, tic a high desert in any man
To be a secret Lecher; I know some,
That (like thy self) are true in nothing else.
And, me thinks, it is nothing, if not told;
At least the joy is never full before.
Well, Dariotto, th'had• as good confess,
The Sun shines broad upon your practises.
Vulcan will wake and intercept you one day.
Why, the more jealous knave and coxcomb he.
What, shall the shaking of his bed a little
Put him in motion? It becomes him not;
Let him be duld and stald, and then be quiet.
The way to draw my costome to his house,
Is to be mad and jealous; tic the sauce
That whets my appetite.
Or any 〈◊〉:
Sine p•culo 〈◊〉 •suss.
They that are jealous, use it still of purpose
To draw you to their houses.
I, by heaven,
I am of that opinion. Who would steal
Out of a common Orchard? Let me gain
My love with labour, and inioy't with fear,
Or I am gone.
What, Dariotto here?
Foot, dare thou come near C•os house?
Why? is the Bull run mad? what ails h•, trow?
I know not what he ails; but I would wish you
To keep out of the reach of his sharpe horns:
For by this hand heel gore you.
And why me,
More then thy self, or these two other when•?
You all have basted him as well as I.
I wonder what's the cause.
Nay, that he knows,
And swears withal, that wheresoever he meets you,
Heel mark you for a marker of men's wines.
Pray heaven he be not jealous by some tal•
That have bin told him lately: did you never
Attempt his wife? hath no Loves Harbinger,
No looks, no letters past twixt you and her?
For look I cannot answer; I bestow them
At large, and carelessly, much like the Sun:
If any be so foolish to apply them
To any private fancy of their own,
(As many doe) it's not my fault, thou know.
Well, Dariotto, this set face of thine
(If thou be guilty of offence to him)
Comes out of very want of wit and feeling
What danger haunts thee: for Cor•
〈◊〉 a tall man, I tell you; and it were best
You shunt his sight awhile, till we might get
His patience, or his pardon: for past doubt
Thou die if he but see thee.
Foot, he comes.
Is this the Cockatrice that kills with 〈◊〉?
How doest thou boy? ha?
Well.
What, lingering still
About this paltry town? had thou bin ruled•
By my advice, thou had by this time b•
A gallant Courtier, and at least a Knight:
I would have got thee dubbed by this time •ertayne.
And why then did you not your self that honour▪
Tush, tic more honour still to make a Knight,
Then tic to be a Knight: to make a Cuckold,
Then tic to be a Cuckold.
You're a villain.
God shield man: villain?
I, isle prove thee one.
What, wilt thou prove a villain?
By this light thou dec•yu'st me then.
Well, sir, thus I prove it.
Hold, hold, raise the streets.
Corn•o.
Hold, Darioto, hold.
What, a• thou hurt?
A scratch, a scratch.
Go sir, fetch a Surgeon.
You'll set a badge on the jealous fools head, sir;
Now set a Coxcomb on your own.
What's the cause of these wars, D•?
Foot, I know not.
Well, si•, know and spare not; I will presently bee divorced, and then take her amongst ye.
Divorced• nay good Cor•.
By this sword I will, the world shall not dissuade me.
Why this has bin your fault now Darioto,
You youths have fashions when you have obtei'nd:
A Ladies favour, straight your hat must we• it,
Like a Iacke-daw that when he lights upon
A dainty morsel •aas and makes his brags,
And then some kite doth scoop it from him straight,
Where if he fed without his dawish noise,
He might fare better, and have less disturbance:
Forbear it in this case; and when you prove,
Victorious over fair Gazettes Forte,
Doe not for pity sound your trump for joy,
But keep your valour close, and 〈◊〉 your honour.
God save you Signior Darioto,
I know you not Sir, your name I pray?
My name is Pock Sir; a practitioner in Surge•,
Pock the Surgeon, you're welcome Sir, I know a Doctor of your name moister Pocke.
My name has made many Doctors Sir.
Indeed tic a worshipful name.
Mary is it, and of an ancient descent.
Faith Sir I could fetch my pedigree far, if I were so disposed.
Out of France at least.
And if I stood on my arms as others doe,
No doe not Pock, let other stand a their arms, and thou a thy legs as long as thou can.
Though I live by my bare practise, yet I could show good cards for my Gentility.
Tush thou can not shake off thy gentry Pock, tic bred in the bone; but to the maine Pock; what think thou of this gentleman's wound, Pock can thou cure it Pock.
The incision is not deep, nor the Orifice exorbitant, the Pericranion is not dislocated, I warrant his life for forty crowns, without perishing of any 〈◊〉.
Faith Pock, tic a joint I would be loath to loose, for the best joint of Mutton in Italy.
Would such a scratch as this hazards a mans head?
I Byr-lady Sir, I have known some have lost there
heads for a less matter I can tell you, therefore sir you must keep good diet: if you please to come home to my house till you be perfectly cured, I shall have the more care on you.
Thats your only course to have it well quickly.
By what time would he have it well sir.
A very necessary question, can thou limit the time.
O sir, cures are like causes in law, which may be length∣ned or shortened at the discretion of the Lawyer, he can either keep it greene with replications or reioinders, or sometimes skin it fair a'th outside for fashion sake, but so he may be sure twill break out again by a wrote of error, and then has he his suite new to begin, but I will covenant with you, that by such a time Isle make your head as sound as a Bell, I will bring it to suppuration, and after I will make it coagulate and grow to a perfect Cicatrice, and all within these ten days, •o you keep a good diet.
Well come Pock, weal talk farther on it within, it draws near dinner time; what's a clock boy?
By your clock sir it should be almost one, for your head rung noon some half hour ago.
First true sir?
Away let him alone, though he came in at the window he sets the gates of your honour open I can tell you.
Come in Pock, come, apply; and for this deed
Isle give the Knave a wound shall never bleed:
So sir I think this knock rings loud acquittance,
For my ridiculous.
Well sir to turn our heads to salve your licence,
Since you have used the matter so unwisely,
That now your father has discerned your humour,
In your too careless usage in his house,
Your wife must come from his house to Antonio•,
And he, to entertain her must be told
She is not wife to his son, but to you:
Which news will make his simple wit triumph
Over your father; and your father thinking
He still is gulled, will still account him simple:
Come sir, prepare your villainous wit to fine
A kind submission to your fathers fury,
And we shall see what hearty policy,
He will discover, in his fained Anger,
To blind Antonios eyes, and make him think,
He thinks her heartily to be your wife.
O I will gull him rarely with my wench,
Lowe kneeling at my heals before his fury,
And injury shall be salu'd with injury.
You see how too much wisdom 〈◊〉,
Out-shootes the truth: you were so forwards still,
To tax my ignorance, my greene experience
In these gray hairs, for giving such ad•ntage,
To my sons spirit, that he durst undertake
A secret match, so far short of his worth:
Your son so seasoned with obedience,
Even from his youth, that all his actions relish
Nothing but duty, and your angers fear,
What shall I say to you, if it fall out
That this most precious son of yours, has plaide
A part as bad as this, and as rebellious:
Nay more has grossly gulled your wit withal.
What if my son has undergone the blame
That appertained to yours? and that this wench
With which my son is charged, may call you father:
Shall I then say you want experience?
You're• greene, you're• credulous; easy to be blinded.
Ha, ha, ha, good Marc-Antonio,
When't comes to that; laugh at me, call me fool, proclai• me so,
Let all the world take knowledge I am an Ass.
O the good God of Gods,
How blind is Pride? what Eagles we are still,
In matters that belong to other men?
What Beetles in our own? I tell you Knight,
It is consest to be as I have told you;
And Gratiana, is by young Rinaldo,
And your white son, brought to me as his wife:
How think you now Sir?
Even just as before,
And have more cause to think honest Credulity,
Is a true Loadstone to draw on Decrepity:
You have a hart to open to embrace,
All that your ear receives: alas good man,
All this is but a plot for entertainment
Within your house, for your poor sons young wife
My house without huge danger cannot hold:
First possible, what danger Sir I pray?
〈◊〉 tell you Sir, it was time to take her thence:
My son that last day you saw could not frame,
His looks to entertain her, now byr'lady
Is groan a Courtier: for my self unseen,
Saw when he courted her, embraced and kissed her,
And I can tell you left not much undone,
That was the proper office of your son.
What world is this?
I told this to Rinaldo,
Advising him to fetch her from my house,
And his young wit not knowing where to lodge her
Unless with you: and saw that could not be,
Without some while: I presently suggested
This quaint devise, to say she was my sons:
And all this plot, good Marc-Antonio,
Flowed from this fount, only to blind our eyes.
Out of how sweet a dream have you awaked me?
By heaven, I durst have laid my part in heaven
All had bin true; it was so lively handled,
And drawn with such a seeming face of truth:
Your son had cast a perfect veil of gre•
Over his face, for his so rash offence,
To seal his love with act of marriage,
Before his father had subscribed his choice:
My son (my circumstance lessening the fact)
Entreating me to break the matter to you,
And joining my effectual persuasions,
With yoursonnes penitent submission,
Appease your •ury; I at first assented,
And now expect their coming to that purpose.
T'was well▪ t'was well, see me to believe it still,
Let Art end what Credulity began,
When they come, suire your words and looks to theirs,
Second my sad Sons feigned submission,
And see in all points how my brain will answer,
His disguised gre•▪ with a set countenance
Ofrage and choler; now observe and learn
To school your son by me.
On with your mask; here come the other ma•cares sir,
Come on I say,
Your Father with submission will be calmed; come on; down a your knees:
Villain durst thou
Presume to gull thy Father? dost thou not
Tremble to see my bent and cloudy brows
Ready to thunder on thy graceless head,
And with the bolt of my displeasure cut
The thread of all my living from thy life,
For taking thus a beggar to thy wife?
Father, if that part I have in your blood,
If tears, which so abundantly distill
Out of my inward eyes: and for a need,
Can drown these outward (lend me thy hand-kercher)
And being indeed as many drops of blood,
Issuing from the Creator of my hart,
Be able to beget so much compassion,
Not on my life, but on this lovely Dam•▪
Whom I hold dearer?
Out upon thee villain.
Nay good Gostanzo, think you are a Father.
I will not hear a word; out, out upon thee:
Wed without my advise, my love, my knowledge,
I, and a beggar too, a trull, a blowse?
You thought not so last day, when you offered he•
A twelve months board for one nights lodging with her.
Go too, no more of that, peace good Rinaldo,
It is a fault that only she and you know.
Well sir, go on I pray.
Have I fond wretch,
With utmost care and labour brought thee up,
Ever instructing thee, omitting never
The office of a kind and careful Father,
To make thee wise and virtuous like thy father:
And hast thou in one act averted all?
Proclaimed thy self to all the world a fool?
To wed a beggar?
Father, say not so,
Nay shees thy own, here, rise fool, take her to thee,
Live with her still, I know thou countst thy self
Happy in soul, only in winning her:
Be happy still, here, take her hand enjoy her,
Would not a son hazard his Fathers wrath,
His reputation in the world? his birth-right,
To have but such a mess of broth as this?
Be not so violent, I pray you good Gostanzo,
Take truce with passion, licence your sad son,
To speak in his excuse.
What? what excuse?
Can any orator in this case excuse him?
What can he say? what can be said of any?
Alas sir, hear me, all that I can say
In my excuse, is but to show loves warrant.
Notable wag.
I know I have committed
A great impiety, not to move you first
Before the dame, I meant to make my wi•
Consider what I am, yet young, and greene,
Behold what she is, is there not in her
I, m her very eye, a power to conquer,
Even age it self and wisdom, call to mind
Sweet Father, what your self being young have bin,
Think what you may be, for I doe not think
The world so far spent with you, but you may
Look back on such a beauty, and I hope
To see you young again▪ and to live long
With young affections, wisdom makes a man
Live young for ever: and where is this wisdom
If not in you? alas I know not what
Rests in your wisdom to subdue affections,
But I protest it wrought with me so strongly,
That I had quite bin drowned in seas of tears
Had I not taken hold in happy time
Of this sweet hand, my hart had been consumed
T'a heap of Ashes with the flames of love,
Had it not sweetly bin assuaged and cooled,
With the moist kisses of these sugared lips.
O puissant wag, what huge large thongs he cuts
Out of his friend Fortunios stretching leather.
He knows he does it but to blind my eyes.
O excellent, these men will put up any thing.
Had I not had her, I had lost my life,
Which life indeed I would have lost before,
I had displeased you, had I not received it
From such a kind, a wise, and honoured Father.
Notable Boy.
Yet doe I here renounce
Love, life and all, rather then one hour longer
Endure to have your love eclipsed from me.
O I can hold no longer, if thy words
Be used in earnest my Valerio,
Thou woundst my hart, but I know test in lest.
No isle be sworn she has her lyripoope too.
Did thou not swear to love me, spite of Father, &amp; all the world
That nought should sever vs but death it self.
I did, but if my father
Will have his son foresworne, upon his soul,
The blood of my black perjury shall lye,
For I will seek his favour though I dye.
No, no, live still my son, thou well shalt know,
I have a fathers hart, come join your hands,
Still keep thy vows, and live together still▪
Till cruel death set foot betwixt you both.
O speak you this in earnest?
I by heaven.
And never to recall it?
Not till death.
Excellent sir, you have done like your self:
What would you more Valerio?
Worshipful Father.
Come sir, come you in, and celebrate your joys.
O Marc-Antonio,
Had I not armed you with an expectation,
Would not this make you pawn your very soul,
The wench had bin my sons wife?
Yes by heaven:
A knavery thus effected might deceive
A wiser man then I, for I ah las,
Am no good politician, plain believing
Simple honesty, is my policy still.
The visible matkes of folly, honesty, and quick Credu∣litie his younger brother.
I tell you Marc-Antonio there is much
In that young boy my Son.
Not much honesty, if I may speak without offence to his father.
O God you cannot please me better sir,
He has honesty enough to serve his turn,
The less honesty ever the more wit,
But go you home, and use your daughter kindly,
Mean time Isle school• your son: and do you still
Dissemble what you know, keep off your son,
The wench at home must still be my sons wife,
Remember that, and be you blinded still.
You must remember too, to let your son
Use his accustomed visitations,
Only to blind my eyes.
He shall not fail:
But still take you heed, have a vigilant eye,
On that sl• child of mine, for by this light,
Heel be too bold with your sons forehead else.
Well sir let me alone, Isle bear a brain.
Come they are gone.
Gone, they were far gone here.
Gulled I my father, or gulled he himself?
Thou toldst him Gratiana was my wife,
I have confessed it, he has pardoned it.
Nothing more true, enough can witness it.
And therefore when he comes to learn the truth,
(As certainly for all these sly disguises,
Time will strip Truth into her nakedness)
Thou hast good plea against him to confess,
The honoured Action, and to claim his pardon.
Tic true, for all was done he deeply swore
Out of his hart.
He has much faith the whiles,
That swore a thing, so quite against his hart:
Why this is policy.
Well see you repair,
To Gratiana daily, and enjoy her
In her true kind; and now we must expect
The resolute, and ridiculous divorce,
Cornelio hath sued against his wedlock.
I think it be not so; the Ass dotes on her.
It is too true, and thou shalt answer it,
For setting such debate twixt man and wife:
See, we shall see the solemn manner of it.
Good Signior Cornelio let vs poor Gentlewomen entreat you to forbear.
Talk no more to me, Isle not be made Cuckold in my own house: Notary read me the divorce.
My dear Cornelio, examine the cause better before you condemn me.
Sing to me no more Siren, for I will hear thee no more, I will take no compassion on thee.
Good Signior Cornelio be not too mankind against
your wife, say you're a cuckold (as the best that is may be so at 〈◊〉 time) will you make a trumpet of your own horns?
Go too sir, you're a rascal, •e give you a fee for plea∣ding for her one day, Notary doe you your office.
Go too Sighior look better to your wife, and be bet∣la advised, before you grow to this ex•remitie.
Extremity? go too, I deal but too mercifully with her, If I should use extreme•e with her I might hang her, and her copesmate my drud•e here, how say you M. Notary, might I not doe it by law?
Not hang am, but you may bring them both to a white sheet.
Nay by the mass they have had too much of the sheet already.
And besides you may set capital letters on their fore∣heads.
W•'s that to the capital letter thats written in mind, I say for all your law, moister Notary that I may hang am, may I not hang him that robs me of mine honour, as well as he that robs me of my horse?
No sir your horse is a chattel.
So is honour, a man may buy it with his penny, and if I may hang a man for stealing my horse (as I say) much more for robbing me of my honour; for why? if my ho•se be stolen, it may bee my own fault; for why? either the stable is not st•ong enough, or the pasture not well fenc't, or watched, or so forth: But for your wife that keeps the sty∣ble of your honour: Let her be lo• in a brazen tower, let Are∣gus himself keep her, yet can you never bee secure of your honour, for why? she can run through all with her serpent nodle: besides you may hang a locke upon your horse, and so can you not upon your wife.
But I pray you Sir what are the presumptions on which you would build this divorce?
Presumption enough Sir, for besides their intercourse, or commerce of glances that past betwixt this cockrill-drone, and her, at my table the last Sunday night at supper, their winckes, their beckes, due guard,
their treads a'the toe (as by heaven I swear she trod once up∣on my toe instead of his) This is chiefly to be no•ed, the same night she would needs lie alone; and the same night her dog bark•, did not you hear him Ualerio?
And understand him too, Isle be sworn of a book.
Why very good, if these be not mani• pre∣sumptions now, let the wo•lt be judge: Therefore without mo•e ceremony, Maize•er Notary pluck out your Instru∣meant.
I will sir, if there be no remedy.
Have you made it strong in law Moister Notary? have you put in worcester•s enough?
I hope •o sir, it has taken me a whole skin of Parchment you see.
Very good, and is Egress and Regress in?
Isle warrant you sir, it is form• Iuris.
Is there no whole to be found in the Ortography•
None in the world sir.
You have written Sunt with an S have you not?
Yes that I have.
You have done the better for quietness sake: and are none of the 〈◊〉 dashes over the head left out? if there be Moister Notary an error will lye out.
Not for a dash over head sir I warrant you, if I should oversee; I have s•no that tried in Butiro &amp; Cas•o, in Butler and Casons case, Decimo sexto of Duke Ano∣nimo.
You've gotten a learned Notary Signior Cornelio.
Hes a shroad fellow indeed, I had as leeue have his head in a matter of felony, or Treason, as any Notary in Floe∣rinse, read out Moister Notary, harken you mistress, Gentle∣men mark I beseech you.
We will all mark you sir, I warrant you.
I think it would be something tedious to read all, and therefore Gentlemen the sum is this: That you Signior Corn•leo Gentleman, for divers &amp; sundry weighty and mature considerations, you especially moving, specifying all the parti∣culars of your wives enormities in a schedule here unto annexed,
the transcript whereof is in your own tenure, cu•ode, occu∣potion, &amp; keeping: That for these the aforesaid premises, I say, you renounce, disclaim and discharge Gazette frō being your leeful, or your lawful wife: And that you eftsoones divide, dis∣join, separate, remove, &amp; finally eloigne, sequester, &amp; divorce her, frō your bed &amp; your board; That you forbid her all access, repair, egress or regress to your person, or persons, mansion or mansions, dwellings, habitations, remainenances or abodes, or to any shop, cellar, Sollar, easements chamber, dormer, and so forth, now in the •nure, custody, occupation or keeping of the said Cornelio; notwithstanding all former contracts, cove∣nants, bargains, conditions, agreements, compacts.
Promises, vows, affiances, assurances, bonds, bills, inden∣tures, pole-deedes, deeds of gift, defesances, feoffments, en∣dowments, vouchers, double vouchers, privy entries, actions, declarations, explications, reioinders, surreioinders, •ghts, inte∣res•, demands, claims, or titles whatsoever, heretofore be∣twixt the one and the other party, or parties, being had, made, past, covenanted &amp; agreed, from the beginning of the world, till the day of the date hereof, given the 17. of November 1500. and so forth, here Sir you must set to your hand.
What else moister Notary, I am resolute in faith.
Sweet husband forbear.
Avoid, I charge thee in name of this divorce: Thou might have looked to it in time, yet this I will doe for thee; if thou can spy out any other man that thou would cuckold, thou shalt have my letter to him: I can do no more: more Ink moister Notary, I wright my name at large.
Here is more Sir.
Ah ass that thou could not knowthy happiness till thou had lost it, how now? my nose bleed? shall I write in blood? what only three drops? Sfoote thi's Omninous: I will not set my hand toot now certain, moister Notary I like not this abodement: I will defer the setting too of my hand till the next court day: keep the divorce I pray you, and the wo∣man in your house together.
Burn the divorce, burn the divorce.
Not so Sir, it shall not serve her turn M. Notary, keep
it at your peril, &amp; gentlemen you may be gone a Gods name, what have you to doe to flock about me thus? I am neither Howlet, nor Cuckoo: gentlewomen for gods sake meddle with your own cases, it is not fit you should haunt these public as∣sembles.
well, farewell Corn•leo.
Use the gentlewoman kindly moister Notary,
As mine own wise, I assure you Sir.
Signior Cornelio I cānot but in kindness tell you that Balerio by counsel of Rinaldo hath whispered all this 〈◊〉 into your ears, not that he knew any just cause in your wise, but only to be revenged on you, for the gull, you put upon him, when you drew him with his glory to touch the Theorbo.
May I believe this?
As I am a gentleman: and if this accident of your nose had not fallen out, I would have told you this before you set too your hand.
It may well be, yet have I cause enough
To perfect my divorce, but it shall rest,
Till I conclude it with a Counterbuffe,
given to these noble rascals: Claudio thanks:
What comes of this, watch but my brain a little,
And ye shall see, if like two parts in me,
I leave not both these gullers wits Imbrierd,
Now 〈◊〉 perceive well where the wilde wind sits,
Here is Gull for Gull and wits at war with wits.
Fortune the great commandress of the world▪
Hath divers ways to advance her followers:
To some she gives honour without deserving,
To other some deserving without honour,
Some wit, some w•alth: and some wit without wealth:
Some wealth without wit, some, nor wit nor wealth
But good smocke-faces: or some qualities,
by nature without judgment, with the which
They live in sensual acceptance,
And make show only, without touche of substance;
My fortune is to win renown by Gulling,
Gostanzo, Darioto, and Cornelio:
All which suppose in all their different kinds,
Their wits entire, and in themselves no piece,
All at one blow; my helmet yet vnbruisde,
I have unhorsed, laid flat on earth for Gulls;
Now in what taking poor Cornelio is,
Betwixt his large divorce, and no divorce,
I long to see, and what he will resolve:
I lay my life he cannot chew his meat,
And looks much like an Ap• had swallowed pills,
And all this comes of bootless jealousy:
And see where bootless ieal oozy appeates. 
Isle board him straight; how now Cornelio?
Are you resolved on the divorce or no?
What's that to you? look to your own affairs,
The time requires it; are not you engaged
In some bonds forfeit for V•lerio?
Yes, what of that?
Why so am I my self,
And both our dangers great, he is arrested
On a recognisance, by a vsuring slave.
Arres•ed? I am sorry with my hart,
It is a matter may import me much,
May not our bail suffice to free him think you?
I think it may, but I must not be seen in it,
Nor would I wish you, for we both are parties,
And liker 〈◊〉 to bring our selves in trouble,
Then bear him out: I have already made
Mean•s to the officers to sequester him
In private for a time, till some in •cret
Might make his Father understand his state,
Who would perhaps take present order for him,
Rather then suffer him t'endure the shame
Of his imprisonment; Now, would you but go
And break the matter closely to his Father,
(As you can wisely do it) and bring him to him,
This were the only way to save his credit,
And to keep off a shroud blow from our selves.
I know his Father will be m•ou'd past 〈◊〉.
Nay if you stand on such nice ceremonics,
Fa•ewell our substance: 〈◊〉 diseases
Ask extreme 〈◊〉, better he should storm
Some littletime, then we be beat for ever
Under the horrid shelter of a prison,
Where is the place?
Tic at the half Moon Tavern,
Hast, for the matter will abide no staye.
Heaven send my speed be equal with my hast.
Go shallow scholar, you that make all Gulls,
You that can out-see cleere-ey'd icolousie,
Yet make this slight a Millstone, where your brain
Sticks in the midst amazed: This Gull to him
And to his sellow Guller, shall become
More bitter then their baiting of my humour:
Here at this Tavern shall Gostanzo find,
Fortuuio, Darioto, Claudio,
And amongst them, the ringleader his son
His husband, and his Saint Valerio,
That knows not of what fashion Dice are made,
Nor e•r yet looked towards a red Lattice,
(Thinks his blind Sire) at drinking and at Dice,
Withal their wenches, and at •ull discover
His own gross folly, and his sons distempers,
And both shall know (although I be no scholar)
Yet I have thus much Latin, as to say
Jam sumus ergo pares.
Set me the Table here, we will shift rooms,
To see if Fortune will shift chances with vs:
Sit Ladies, fit, Fortunio place thy wench,
And Claudio place you Dariotos mistress,
I wonder where that neat spruce •aue becomes:
I think he was some Barbers son by th'masse,
Tic such a picked fellow, not a hair
About his whole Bulk, but it stands in print,
Each Pin hath his due place, not any point,
But hath his perfect tie, fashion, and grace,
A thing whose soul is specially employed
In knowing where best Gloves, best Stockings, Wasecotes,
Curiously wrought are sold; sacks Milliners shop•
For all new tyres and fashions, and can tell ye
What new devices of all sorts there are:
And that there is not in the whole Rialto,
But one new-fashion'd Wast-cote, or one Night-cap,
One pa•te of Gloves, pretty or well perfumed,
And from a pair of Gloves of half a crown,
To twenty crowns: will to a very scut
Smell out the price: and for these womanly parts
He is esteemed a witty Gentleman.
See where he comes.
God save you lovely Ladies.
I well said lovely Paris, your wall eye,
Must ever first be gloting on men's wives,
You think to come upon vs, being half drunk,
And so to part the freshest man amongst vs,
But you shall ouer-take vs, Isle be sworn.
Tush man where are your dice? lets fall to them.
We have bin at am, Drawer, call for more.
First lets have Wine, Dice have no perfect edge,
Without the liquid whetstone of the Syrup.
True, and to welcome Darioto's latenes,
He shall (•pledged) carouse one crowned cup
To all these Ladies health.
I am well pl•asd.
Come on, let vs vary our sweet time
With sund•y excercises, Boy? Tobacco.
And Drawer, you must get vs musique too,
Calls in a cleanly noise, the slaves grow lousy.
You shall have such as we can get you sir.
Let's have some Dice: I pray thee, they are cleanly▪
Page, L•t me see that 〈◊〉▪
Itis not Leaf Sir, Tic pudding cane Ta•
But I mean, your •slock sir, what lease is that I pray
I pray you see sir, for I cannot read.
〈◊〉 a rank stinking Satire: this had been
Enough to have poi•ned every man of vs.
And now you sp•ache of that, my Boy o•e li•d
A pipe of Cane Tobacco with a p•ce
Of a wild B•llad, and Isle swear I had
A singing in my head a whole week after.
Well, th'old verse is, A Ap•tibus incipe io-•.
Drawer, fill out this Gentleman's Carouse,
And harden him for our society.
Well Ladies here is to your honoured healths.
What Dariotto, without hat or knee?
Well said Fortunio, O you're a rar• Courtier,
Your knee good Signior, I beseech your knee.
Nay pray you, lets take it by degrees Ualerio; on our feet first, for this will bring's too soon upon our 〈◊〉.
Sir, there are no degrees of order in a Taue•,
Here you must, I charged ye run all a head,
Slight, Courtier, down;
I hope you are no Elephant, you have Joints?
Well Sir, heere's to the Ladies on my knees.
Isle be their pledge.
Not yet Valerio,
This hee must drink v•dgd.
Hee shall not, I will go• him this ad•antage.
How now? whats h•re are these the Officers?
Slight, I would all were well.
H• is his pl•dge:
H•re's to our common friend Corn• health.
Health to Gazette, Poison to her husband.
Excellent Guests: these are my daily Guests.
Drawer make even th'impartiall skales of Justice,
Give it to C•audio, and from him fill round.
Come Dariotto, set me, let me rest,
Come in when they have done the Ladies right.
Set me, doe you know what belongs to setting?
What a dull slave was I to be thus gulled.
Why Rinald, what meant you to entrap your friend,
And bring his Father to this spectacle?
You are a friend in deed.
Tic very good Sir,
Perhaps my friend, or I, before wee part,
May make even with you.
Come, lets set him round.
Doe so: at all. A plague upon these Dice.
Another health, sfoote I shall have no luck,
Till I be drunk: come on, heere's to the comfort,
The Cavalier my Father should take in me,
If he now saw me, and would do me right.
•e pledge it, and his health Valeri•.
Heere's a good Husband.
I pray you have patience Sir.
Now have at all, and•were a thousand pound.
Hold Sir, I barr the Dice.
What Sir, are you there?
Fill's a fresh pottle, by this light, Sir Knight,
You shall do right.
O thou ungracious villain,
Come, come, wee shall have you now thunder forth
Some of your thrifty sentences, as gravely:
For as much V•lerius as every thing has time, and a Pudding has two: yet ought not satisfaction to swerve so much from defalcation of well disposed people, as that indemnity should prejudice what security doth insinuate: a try all yet once again.
Heere's a good sight, you're well encountered sir,
Did not I tell you you'd oreshoote your self
With too much wisdom▪
Sir, your wisest do so.
Fill the old man some wine.
Heere's a good Infant.
Why Sir: Alas Isle wager with your wisdom,
His consorts drew him to it, for of him self
He is both virtuous, bashful, innocent:
Comes not at City: knows no City Art,
But plies your Husbandry; dares not view a Wench.
Father, hee comes upon you▪
Heere's a Son.
Whose wife is Gratiana now I pray?
Sing your old song no more, your braine's too short
To reach into these policies.
Tic true,
Mine eyes soon blinded: and your self would say so,
If you knew all: Where lodged your Son last night?
Doe you know that with all your policy?
You'll say he lodged with you, and did not I
Foretell you: all this must for colour sake
Be brought about, only to blind your eyes?
By heaven I chaunc'• this morn, I know not why
To pass by Gre•anise bed-chamber,
And whom saw I fast by her naked side,
But your Ualerio?
Had you not warning given?
Did not I bid you watch my Courtier well,
Or hee would set a Crest a your Sons head?
That was not all, for by them on a stool,
My Son sate laughing, to see you so gulled,
Tic too too plain▪
Why Sir, do you suspect it the more for that?
Suspect it? is there any
So gross a wittoll, as if it were his wife,
Would sit by her so tamelie?
Why not Sir, To blind my eyes?
Well Sir, I was deceived,
But I shall make it prove a dear deceit to the deceiver.
Nay Sir, lets not have
A new infliction, set on an old fault:
Hee did confess his fault upon his knees,
You pardned it, and swore it was from your hart.
Swore; a great piece of work, the wretch shall know
I have a Daughter here to give my land too,
Isle give my Daughter all: the prodigal
Shall not have one poor House to hide his head in.
I humbly thank you Sir, and vow all duty
My life can yield you.
Why are you so thankful?
For giving to your Daughter all your Lands,
Who is my Wife, and so you gave them me,
Better, and better.
Pray Sir be not moved,
You drew me kindly to your house, and gave me
Access to woe your Daughter, whom I loved:
And since (by honoured marriage) made my wife.
Now all my Choler fly out in your wits:
Good tricks of Youth y'faith, no Indecorum,
Knights son, Knights daughter; Marc. Antonio
Give me your hand, There is no remedy,
Marriage is ever made by Destiny.
Silence my Masters, now here all are pleased,
Only but Cornelio: who lacks but persuasion
To reconcile himself to his fair wife:
Good Sir will you (of all men our best speaker)
Persuade him to receive her into grace?
That I will gladly, and he shall be ruled good Cornelio: I have heard of your wayward Jealousy, and I must tell you plain as a friend, you're an Ass: you must pardon me, I knew your Father.
Then you must pardon him, indeed Sir.
Understand me: put case Dariotto lo•'d your wife, whereby you would seem to refuse her; would you desire to have such a Wife as no man could love but your self?
Answer but that Cornelio.
Understand me: Say Dariotto hath kissed your wife, or performed other offices of that nature, whereby they did converse together at bed and at board, as friends may seem to doe:
Mark but the now understand me.
Yet if there come no proofs, but that her actions were cleanly, or indiscreet private, why t'was a sign of modesty: and will you blow 〈◊〉 Horn your self, when you may keep it to your self? Go to, you are a Fool, understand me?
Doe understand him Corneli•.
Nay Cornalio I tell you again, I knew your Father; Hee was a wise Gentleman, and so was your Mother: me thinks I see her yet, a lusty stout Woman, bore great I will∣drone, you were the very skundrell of am all; but let that pass: As for your Mother, she was wise, a most slippant tong•e she had, and could set out her Tail with as good grace as any she in Florence, come cut and long-tayle; and she was honest enough too: But yet by your leave she would tickle Dob now and then, as well as the best on am; By Jove it's true Cornelio, I speak it not to slatter you: your Fa∣there knew it well enough, and would he do as you do think you? set Rascals to undermine her, or look to her water, (as they say)? No, when he saw it was but her humour (for his own quietness sake) h•e made a Backe-doore to his house for convenience, got a Bell to his fore door, and had an odd fashion in ringing, by which she and her Maid knew him; and would stand talking to his next neighbour to pro∣long time, that all things might be rid cleanly out a the way before he came, for the credit of his Wi•e: This was wisdom now, for a mans owne-quiet.
Here was a man Cornelio.
What I say? Young men think old men are fools; but old men know young men are fools.
Why hark you, you two Knights; Doe you think I will forsake Gazette?
And will you not?
Why theet's your wisdom; why did I make show of Divorce think you?
Pray you why Sir?
Only to bridle her stout stomach: and how did I draw on the colour for my divorce? I did train the Wood∣cock Dariotto into the net, drew him to my house, gave him opportunity with my wife (as you say my Father dealt with his wives friends) only to train him in: let him alone with my wife in her bed-chamber; and sometimes found him a bed with her, and went my way back again softly, only to draw him into the Pit.
This was well handled in deed Cornelio.
I marry Sir, now I commend your wisdom.
Why, if I had been so minded as you think, I could have flung his Pantable down the stairs, or done him some other disgrace: but I winckt at it, and drew on the good fool more and more, only to bring him within my com∣pass.
Why, this was policy in grain.
And now shall the world see I am as wise as my father.
Is it come to this? then will I make a speech in praise of this reconcilement, including therein the praise and honour of the most fashionable and autenticall HORN: stand close Gentles, and be silent.
Come on, lets hear his wit in this potable humour.
THe course of the world (like the life of man) is said to be divided into several ages: As wee into Infancy, Childhood, Youth, and so forward to Old-age: So the World into the Golden age, the Silver, the Brass, the
Iron, the Leaden, the Wooden; and now into this present age, which wee term the Hornedage: not that but former ages have enjoyed this ben•ite as well as our times; but that in ours it is more common, and nevertheless precious. It is said, that in the Golden age of the world, the use of Gold was not then known: an argument of the simplicity of that age, least therefore succeeding ages should hereafter impute the same fault to vs, which wee lay upon the •erst age; that wee living in the Horned age of the world, should not under∣stand the use, the virtue, the honour, and the very royalty of the Horn; I will in brief sound the praises thereof, that they who are already in possession of it, may bear their heads alost, as being proud of such lofty a cowtrementes: And they that are but in possibility, may be ravished with a desire to bein possession.
A Trophy so honourable, and vnmatchably powerful, that it is able to raise any man from a Beggar to an Empe∣rours fellow, a Dukes fellow, a Noble-mans fellow, Alder∣mans fellow; so glorious, that it deserves to be worn (by most opinions) in the most conspicuous place about a man: For what worthier Crest can you bear then the Horn? which if it might be seen with our mortal eyes, what a wonderful spectacle would there be? and how highly they would ravish the beholders? But their substance is incorporall, not falling under sense, nor mixed of the gross concretion of Elements, but a quintessence beyond them; a spiritual essence invisible, and everlasting.
And this hath been the cause that many men have called their being in question, whether there be such a thing in verum na•ur, or not; because they are not to be seen: as though nothing were that were not to be seen? Who ever saw the Wind? yet what wonderful •ffectes are seen of it? It drives the clouds, yet no man sees it: It rocks the House, bears down Trees, Castles, Steeples, yet who sees it? In like sort does your Horn, it swells the Forehead, yet none sees it: it rocks the Cradle, yet none sees it: so that you
plainly perceive Sense, is no Judge of Essence. The Moon to any mans sense, seems to be Horned; yet who knows not the Moon to be ever perfectly round: So likewise your Heads seem ever to be round, when in deed they are often∣times Horned: for their original, it is unsearchable: Natu∣rall they are not; for there is Beast borne with Horns, more then with Teeth: Created they were not, for Ex nihilo nihil sit; Then will you ask me, How came they into the world? I know not; but I am sure Women brought them into this part of the world, howsoever some Doctors are of opinion that they came in with the Devil: and not unlike; for, as the Devil brought Sin into the world; but the Woman brought it to the Man: so it may very well be that the Devil brought Horns into the world; but the Woman brought them to the man,
For their power it is general over the world, no Nation so barbarous, no Country so proud, but doth equal ho∣mage to the Horn. Europe when she was carried through the Sea by the S•turnian Bull, was said (for fear of falling) to have held by the Horn: and what is this but a plain showing to vs, that all Europe, which took name from that Europe, should likewise hold by the Horn: So that I say, it is vniuer∣sall over the face of the world, general over the face of Europe, and common over the face of this Country. What City, what Town, what Village, what Street? nay what House can quit it self of this prerogative? I have read that the Lion once made a Proclamation through all the Forest, that all Horned Beasts should depart forthwith upon pain of death: If this Proclamation should be made through our Forest, Lord what pressing, what running, what slying, would there be even from all the parts of it? he that had but a bunch of Flesh in his head would away: and some foolishly fearful, would imagine the shadow of his Ears to be Horns: Alas how desert woul• this Forest be left?
To conclude for there force it is irreu•table, for were they not irreuitable, then might either propernesse of person secure a man, or wisdom prevent am; or greatness exempt, or riches redeem them, but present experience hath taught vs, that in this case, all these stand in no stead: for we see the properst men take part of them, the best wits cannot avoid them (for then should Poets be no cuckolds) nor can money redeem them, for then would rich-men fine for their horns, as they do for offices: But this is held for a maxim, that there are more rich cuckolds then poor, lastly for continuance of the horn it is vndeterminable till death: Neither doe they determine with the wives death, (howsoever ignorant writers hold o∣pinion they doe) For as when a knight dies, his Lady still re∣taines the title of Lady; when a company is cast yet the Captain still retains the title of Captain; So though the wife die by whom this title came to her husband, yet by the courtesy of the City, he shall be a cuckold during life, let all igno∣rant asses prate what they list.
Notable wag, come sir shake hands with him,
In whose high honour you have made this speech:
And you sir come, join hands, you're one amongst thē.
Very well done, now take your several wives,
And spread like wilde-geese, though you now grow tame:
Live merrily together and agree,
Horn• cannot be kept off with jealousy.
SInce all our labours are as you can like,
We all submit to you; nor dare presume,
To think ther's any real worth in them:
Sometimes feasts please the Cookos, and not the guests,
Sometimes the guests, and curious Cooks contemn them,
Our dishes we entirely d•icate
To our kind guests, but since ye differ so,
Some to like only mirth without taxations,
Some to count such works tri•, and such like,
We can but bring you meat, and set you stools,
And to our best cheer say, you all are welcome.

THe Proverb is, How many men, so many minds.
Which makes proof, how hard a thing it is,
Of sundry minds to please the sundry kinds.
In which respect, I have inferred this,
That where men's minds appear so different,
No play, no part, can all alike content.
The grave Divine calls for Divinity;
The Civil student, for Philosophy:
The Courtier craves some rare found history:
The baser sort, for knacks of pleasantry.
So every sort desires specially,
What thing may best content his fantasy.
But none of these our barren toy affords.
To pulpits we refer Divinity:
And matters of Estate, to Council boards.
As for the quirkes' of sage Philosophy,
Or points of squirgliting scurrilitie;
The one we shun, for childish years too rare,
The other unfit, for such as present are.
But this we bring, is but to serve the time,
A poor device, to pass the day withal:
To loftier points of skill we dare not clime,
Lest perking ouer-hie, with shame vvee fall.
Such as doth best beseem such as we be,
Such we present, and crave your curtsy:
That curtsy, that gentleness of yours,
Which wonted is, to pardon faults of ours:
Which granted, we have all that we require:
Your only favour, only our desire.
IN words, to make description of my name,
My nature or conditions, were but vain,
Sith this attire so plainly shows the same,
As showed cannot be in words more plain.
For lo, thus round about in feathers dight,
Doth plainly figure mine inconstancy,
As feathers, light of mind, of wit as light,
Subjected still to mutability.
And for to paint me forth more properly,
Behold each feather decked gorgeously,
With colours strange in such variety,
As plainly pictures perfect Vanity.
And so I am to put you out of doubt,
Even Vanity wholly, within, without,
In head, in heart, in all parts round about:
But whence I come, and why I hither come,
And upon whom I daily do attend,
In brief, to show you in a little sum,
My special meaning is, and so an end.
I came from Fortune, my most sovereign dame,
Amongst whose chiefest servants I am one,
Fortune that earthly goddess great of name,
To whom all suites I doe prefer alone,
She minding in this place forthwith t'appeare,
In her most gorgeous pomp, and Princely port,
Sends me to see all things in Presence here,
Prepared and furnished in the bravest sort.
Here will she mount this stately sumptuous throne,
As she is wont to hear each mans desire:
And who so wins her favour by his moan,
May have of her, the thing he doth require.
And yet another Dame there is, her enemy,
Twixt whom remains continual emulation;
Virtue, who, in respect of Fortunes sovereignty,
Is held, God wot, of simple reputation:
Yet hither comes (poor soul) in her degree,
This other seat half forced to supply:
But twixt their states, what difference will be,
Your selves shall judge, and witness when you see:
Therefore I must go deck up handsomely,
What best beseems Dame Fortunes dignity.
Postilion, stay, thou drugst on like an Ass.
Lo, here's an Inn, which I cannot well pass:
Here will we bait, and rest our selves a while.
Why sir, you have to go but six small mile.
The way is fair, the moon shines very bright,
Best now go on, and then rest for all night.
Tush, Postil. fair or foul, or far or near,
My weary bones must needs be rested here.
Tic but a paltry Inn, there's no good cheer:
Yet shall you pay for all things passing dear.
I care not for all that: I love mine ease.
Well, Sir, a Gods name then, doe what you please?
Knock then at the gate.
Ho, who's at home? rip, rap. hostler, chamberlain, tipster.
Ho, take in Gentlemen. rip, rap. knave, slave, host, hostess, ho.
What, is there none that answers? Tout a la mort?
Sir, you must make entrance at some other port:
For here is no passage.
No? let me come, Isle knock a little harder.
Here must I inn, for sure I will no farther: rip, rap, rap, rap.
Ho, who dwells here? rip, rap, rap. Isle call on the women another while. Ho Butter-wench, Dairy-mayd, Nurse, Laundress, Cook, host, hostess, any body, ho?
Whostere?
Up, sir, with a horse night-cap: what, are ye all in a drunken dream? can ye not hear?
Not a word more: hee is fast asleep again, I fear: what ho?
How now?
How now? now the devil take thee. Can calling, nor knoc???king, nor nothing awake thee?
Now sir, what lack ye?
Lodging.
What are you?
Gentlemen: see thou not?
Whence come ye?
What skils that? open the gate.
Nay, soft a while, I am not wont so late
To take in ghosts; I like ye not: away.
Nay, stay awhile, mine host, I pray thee stay,
Open the gate, I pray thee heartily,
And what we take, we will pay thee royally.
And would ye have lodging then?
Yea rather then my life.
Then stay a while, isle first go ask my wife.
Nay, nay, send her rather to me:
If she be a pretty wench, we shall soon agree.
Now a bots on him and his wife both for me.
Then you would have lodging, belike sir?
Yea, I pray thee come quickly.
What's your name, and please you?
Prodigality.
And will you indeed spend lustily?
Yea that I will.
And take that ye find, patiently?
What else?
And pay what I ask, willingly?
Yea, all reckonings, unreasonably.
Well, go to, for this once I am content to re???ceyue ye: come on, sir, I dare say, you are almost weary.
Thou moist swear it.
Oh most unhappy state, of rechlesse humane kind!
Oh dangerous race of man, vnwitty, fond, and blind!
Oh wretched worldlings, subject to all misery,
When fortune is the prop of your prosperity!
Can you so soon forget, that you have learned of yore,
The grave divine precepts, the sacred wholesome lore,
That wise Philosophers, with painful industry
Had written and pronounced, for mans felicity?
Meanwhile hath bin taught that fortunes hold is tickle,
She bears a double face, disguised, false, and fickle,
Full fraughted with all sleights, she plays on the pack,
On whom she smiles most, she turns most to wrack.
The time hath bin, when virtue had the sovereignty
Of greatest price, and placed in chiefest dignity:
But topsie-turuy now, the world is turned about:
Proud Fortune is preferred, poor Virtue clean thrust out:
Manssence so dulled is, so all things come to pass,
Aboue the massy gold, t'esteeme the brittle glass.
Madam, have patience, dame Virtue must sustain,
Until the heavenly powers doe otherwise ordain.
Equity, for my part, I envy not her state,
Nor yet mislike the meanness of my simple rate.
But what the heavens assign, that doe I still think best:
My fame was never yet, by Fortunes frown oppressed:
Here therefore will I rest, in this my homely bower,
With patience to abide the storms of every shower.
By gogs bores, these old stumps are stark tyred.
Chaue here round about for life conquered,
Where any posting nags were to be hired,
And can get none, would they were all fired.
Cham come too late for money, I hold a penny,
Suitors to Vortune there are so many;
And all for money, chill gage a round sum:
Money's gone before Tenacity come:
Then am I dressed even to my utter shame:
A fool returned, like as a fool I came.
Cham sure chaue come, forty miles and twenty,
With all these bags you see, and wallets empty:
But when chaue sud to Vortune vine and deynty,
Each hope to will them up with money plenty:
But here is one of whom each will conquer,
Whelk way che might attain to my desire.
God speed, my zonne.
What, father Crossed, whither post you so fast?
Nay, bur lady zonne, each can make no haste:
For che may say to thee, cham tyred clean.
More shame for you, to keep your ass so lean: But whither go you now?
To a goodly Lady, whom they call her, Vortune.
And wherefore?
For money, zonne, but iche veare che come too late.
Indeed it seems by thy beggars state,
Thou hast need of money, but let me hear,
How or by whom think thou to get this gear?
I will speak her vaire, chill make lowe curse.
That's somewhat, but how wilt thou come at her??????
Bur Lady, zonne, zest true, there lies the matter.
I will make some friend.
Whom?
Some man of hers that near her doth attend.
Who is that?
Each know not, chud that vnqueere of thee:
And therefore if thou know, tell it me.
What, in such haste forsooth, so suddenly,
And so good cheap, without reward or fee?
Poor men, dear zonne, must crave of curtsy:
Get I once money, thou shalt rewarded be.
Go to then, i'll tell thee: his name is Vanity.
And where is a?
No more ado, ask but for Vanity,
Reward him well, he will help thee to money.
But where?
Why here in this place: this is Lady Fortunes palace.
Is this? Ah goodly Lord, how gay it is!
Now hope I sure of money not to miss.
So law, my zonne, each will go rest my self a while,
And come again.
Do so. Now sure this Coistrel makes me smile,
To see his greedy gaping thus for gain,
First hardly got, then kept with harder payne,
As you ever long by proof shall see full plain.
This is mine old Inn, here chill knock. Holla ho.
What Roister have we there that rappeth so?
How now, sir, what lack you?
Lodging.
Lodging? there is none: all is full.
How so?
Tan up by Gentlemen long ago.
Let me yet have some room for mine ass.
Asinus super asinum, volitate ad furcas.
Who is that thou prate there-withall?
Look forth and see, a lubber, fat, great, and tall,
Upon a tyred ass, bare, short, and small.
O ho, it is Tenacity my old acquaintance,
And to my wife of near alliance.
Father Tenacity!
Mine Host, God speed: how do you? Take in, Ostler.
Anon, sir.
Chamberlain, waite upon my kindred here.
Well, sir.
AS light as a fly,
In pleasant jollity:
With mirth and melody,
Sing money, money, money.
Money, the minion, the spring of all joy,
Money, the medicine that heales each annoy,
Money, the level that man keeps in store,
Money, the Idol that women adore.
That money am I, the fountain of bliss,
Whereof who so ?????????, doth never amiss.
Money, money, money:
Sing money, money, money.
What, Money, sing you so lustily?
I have none other cause: who would not sing merrily,
Being as I am, in such felicity,
The God of this world, so mighty of power,
As makes men, and mars men, and al in an hour?
Yea where I am, is all prosperity,
And where I want, is nought but misery.
Money saith reason, for so doth it fare,
Money makes masteries, old proverbs declare.
But, Money, Of Fortune our sovereign dame,
What news?
Marry sir, of purpose I hither came,
To let thee know she will forth-with be here:
And lo, already see she doth appear.
Tistrue; now must I show my diligence.
Down Ladies, stoup, do your reverence.
Reverence, due reverence, fair dames do reverence,
Unto this Goddess great do humble reverence:
Do humble reverence.
Fortune of worldly state the governess,
Fortune of mans delight the Mistress,
Fortune of earthly bliss the patronise,
Fortune the spring of joy and happiness:
Lo, this is she, with twinkling of her eye,
That misers can advance to dignity,
And Princes turn to misers misery.
Reverence, due reverence.
Report hath spread, that Virtue here in place
Arrived is, her silly courtto hold:
And therefore I am come with faster pace,
Tencounter her, whose countenance is so bold.
I doubt not, but by this my pompous show,
By vestures wrought with gold so gorgeously,
By reverence done to me of high and lowe,
By all these ornaments of bravery,
By this my train that now attends me so,
By Kings that hale my Chariot to and fro,
Fortune is known the Queen of al renown,
That makes, that mars, sets up, and throws down.
Well is it known, what contrary effects,
Twixt Fortune and dame Virtue hath been wrought:
How still I her contemn, she me reiects;
I her despise, she sets me at nought:
So as great wars are grown for sovereignty,
And strife as great, twixt vs for victory.
Now is the time of trial to be had,
The place appointed, eke in present here:
So as the truth to all sorts, good and bad,
More clear then light, shall presently appear.
It shall be seen, what Fortunes power can doe,
When Virtue shall be forced to yield thereto.
It shall be seen when Virtue cannot bide,
But shrink for shame, her silly face to hide.
Then Fortune shall advance her self before
All harms to help, all losses to restore.
But why do I my self thus long restrain,
From executing this I do entend?
Time posts away, and words they be but vain,
For deeds (indeed) our quarrel now must end.
Therefore in place I will no longer stay,
But to my stately throne my self convey.
Reverence, due reverence, &amp;c.
HOw seldom is it seen, that Virtue is regarded,
Or men of virtuous sort, for virtuous deeds rewarded?
So wonts the world to pamper those that nought deserve,
Whiles such as merit best, without relief do starve.
Great imperfections are in some of greatest skill,
That colours can discern, white from black, good from ill.
O blind affects of men, how are you led awry,
To leave assured good, to like frail Vanity!
If some of Virtues train, for Prince and Countries good,
To show their faithful hearts, shall hazard life and blood,
And guerdonlesse depart, without their due reward,
Small is th'encouragement, th'example very hard.
Where any well deserve, and are rewarded well,
There Prince and people both, in safety sure do dwell.
Where he that truly serves, hath nothing for his pain,
More hearts are lost, then pecks of gold can ransom home again.
Let States therefore that wish to maintain stately dignity,
Seek to acquaint themselves with Liberality:
For that is it which wins the subjects faithful love,
Which faithful love, all harms from them and theirs remove.
Liberality am I, Virtues Steward here,
Who for the virtuous sort, do nothing hold too dear.
But few to Virtue seek, all sorts to Fortune fly,
There seeking to maintain their chief prosperity.
But whosoever marks the end, shall be enforced to say,
O Fortune, thou art blind: let Virtue lead the way.
But who comes here? It seems old Tenacity.
I must away; for contraries cannot agree.
Well, since che see there is none other boot,
Chill now take pains to go the rest afoot:
For Broke mine Ass is saddle-pincht vull sore,
And so am I, even here: chill say no more.
But yet I must my business well apply,
For which each came, that is, to get money.
Chose told that this is Lady Vortunes place:
I will go boldly to her, that's a vlat case;
For if che speed not now at this first glance,
Cham sure to be dashed quite our of countenance
By certain lusty gallon lads hereby,
Seeking Vortunes favour as well as I.
Oh knew I where to find Mast Fanity,
Vortunes servant. Of mine honesty,
Look where he comes in time as fine and trim,
As if che held him all this while by the chin.
Tic he in deed: what say you to him?
Marry sir, cham now come for money.
For money man? what, still so hastily?
Yoo by gisse, sir, tic high time che for ye,
Cham averd another will ha'te before me.
Why so? who is it thou fairest? tell me.
Marry sir, they call him Mast Prodigality.
Prodigality, is it true? young, wasteful, roysting Prodigality,
To encounter old, sparing, covetous niggard, Tenacity!
Sure such a match as needs must yield vs sport:
Therefore until the time that Prodigality resort,
Isle entertain this Crossed, with some device.
Well, father, to be sped of money with a trice,
What will you give me?
Cha for thee, son, do rid me quickly hence,
Chill give thee a vaire piece of threehalpence.
Indeed?
Here's my hand.
Now, sir, in sooth you offer so bountifully,
As needs you must be used accordingly.
But tell me, know you him that comes here?
Cocks ?????????, tic Prodigality, tic he I did fear.
Cham afraid che may go whistle now for money.
Tush man, be of good cheer, I warrant thee,
He speeds best, that best rewards me.
Sir, Now your reckoning is made even, isle trust no more.
No.
No, sure.
Set cock on hoop then: by some means, good or bad,
There is no remedy but money must be had.
By the body of an Ox, behold here this Ass,
Will be my familiar, wheresoever I pass.
Why, goodman Crossed, tell me, is there no nay,
But where I go, you must forestall my way?
By gogs flesh and his flounders, sir, che hope the Queens highway is free for every man, for thee as me, for me as thee, for poor Tenacity, as for proud Prodigality; chill go in the Queens peace about my business.
This way?
Yea.
To whom?
To Vortune my mustrisse.
Wherefore?
That's no matter to you.
No matter, sir? but by your Croustship, ere you go,
Tic a plain case, Prodigality will know:
And therefore be round, come of, and tell me quickly.
And you would so vain know, chogoe for money.
Out upon thee, villain, traitor, thief, pickpurse,
Thou penurious knave, caterpillar, and what's worse?
Hast thou heard me say, that for money I went,
And could thou creep so closely my purpose to prevent?
By the life I live, thou shalt die the death.
Where shall I first begin? aboue or beneath?
Say thy prayers, ?????????.
How now, my friends, what needs this variance?
Money comes not by force, money comes by chance:
And sith at one instant, you both seek for money,
Appeal both to Fortune, and then shall you try,
Whether either or neither may hit to have money.
Gentleman, you say well, I know not your name,
But indeed for that purpose to Fortune I came;
For furtherance whereof if I might obtain
Your friendly help, I would quite your pain.
I am your old acquaintance, sir, remember me.
Thee, quoth a, for thy large offers I may not forget thee.
You be both my friends, and therefore, indifferently,
I will commend you both to Fortunes courtesy.
Lady most bright, renowned goddess fair,
Unto thy stately throne, here doe repair
Two suitors of two several qualities,
And qualities indeed that be mere contraries;
That one is called, wasteful Prodigality;
That other cleaped, covetous Tenacity;
Both at once unto your royal majesty,
Most humbly make their suites for money.
Let's hear what they can say.
Divine Goddess, behold, with all humility,
For money I appeal unto thy ?????????;
Which in high honour of thy majesty,
I mean to spend abroad most plentifully.
Sweet mustrisse, grant to poor Tenacity,
The keeping of this golden darling money:
Chill vow to thee, so long as life shall dure,
Under strong locke and key, i will keep him ????????? &amp; sure,
Nay, pleases then your pleasant fantasy,
To hear them plead in musical harmony?
It likes me.
None better.
Well, though my singing be but homely,
Chill sing and spring to, ????????? chud lose money.
Well, to it a Gods name, let saying go than,
And eche sing for himself the best he can.
THe Princely heart, that freely spends,
Relieves full many a thousand more,
He gets praise, he gains friends,
And peoples love procures therefore.
But pinching fist, that spares all,
Of due relief the needy robs,
Nought can be caught, where nought doth fall,
There comes no good of greedy Cobs:
This issue therefore doe I make,
The best deserver draw the stake.
whilst thou dost spend with friend and foe,
At home che hold the plough by the tail:
Che dig, che delve, che get, che zow,
Che mow, che reap, che ply my flail.
A pair of dice is thy delight,
Thou liu'st for most part by the spoil:
I truly labour day and night,
To get my living by my toil:
Chill therefore sure, this issue make,
The best deserver draw the stake.
Hola, satis disputatum.
Nay, by my fathers soul, friend, now chaue one begun,
Lett'ym too't, che pass not when che done.
Lo, Lady, you have heard our reasons both expressed,
And thereby are resolved, I hope, who merits best.
Dame Fortune deals not by merit, but by chance:
He hath it but by hap, whom Fortune doth advance;
And of his hap as he hath small assurance:
So in his hap likewise is small continuance.
Therefore at a venture, my dear son Money,
I doe commit you unto Prodigality.
To Prodigality? ah poor Money, I pity thee;
Continual unrest must be thy destiny:
Each day, each hour, yea, every minute tossed,
Like to a tennis ball, from pillar to post.
I am where I like.
And is there then no other remedy?
Must poor Tenacity put up the injury?
Your time is not yet come.
When will it come, trow ye?
At the next turning water happily.
And che wist that, chud the more quietly depart,
And keep therewhile a hungry hoping heart.
How say thou vrend Fanitie?
No doubt but tic best.
Then varewell to all at once.
Good night, and goodrest.
And now will I likewise with my sweet Money,
Go hunt abroad for some good company.
Vanity, for thy pains I will not grease thy fist,
Peltingly with two or three ????????? but when thou list,
Come boldly unto Prodigalities chest,
And take what thou wilt, it's ever open.
I thank you, sir, tic honourably spoken.
Yet ere I go, with song of ioyfulnesse,
Let me to Fortune show my thankfulness.
THou that dost guide the world by thy direction,
Thou that dost conquer states to thy subjection,
Thou that dost keep each King in thy correction,
Thou that preseruest all in thy protection,
For all thy gifts, unto thy majesty,
I yield both thanks and praise immortally:
To mighty Fortune, &amp;c.
SWeet Money, the minion that sails with all winds,
Sweet Money, the minstrel that makes merry minds,
Sweet Money, that gables of bondage vnbindes,
Sweet Money, that maintains all sports of all kinds,
This is that sweet Money, that rules like a King,
And makes me all praises of Money to sing.
NOw ????????? ye little peevish harlotry,
????????? one day make you spit your meat more handsome???lie.
By my truth truly, had I not come in the rather,
She had laid me to the fire, the loin of veale and Capon both together,
Not weighing, (like an vnwitty girlish mother)
That the one would ask more rosting then the other;
So that either the Veale had been left stark raw,
Or else the Capon burnt, and so not worth a straw;
And that had been pity: for I assure you at a word,
A better bird, a fairer bird, a finer bird,
A sweeter bird, a younger bird, a tenderer bird,
A daintier bird, a crisper bird, a more delicate bird,
Was there never set upon any Gentleman's board.
But I lack my ghosts, that should pay for this gear:
And sure my mind gives me, I should find them here,
Two of mine acquaintance, familiar grown,
The third to me yet a Gentleman unknown,
More then by hearesay, that he is fresh and lusty,
Full of money, and by name Prodigality.
Now, sir, to link him sure to his Hostess Dandaline,
Dandaline must provide to have all things very fine.
And therefore already it is definitum,
The Gentleman shall want nothing may please his appetitum.
And because most meates vnsawced, are motives to drouth,
He shall have a Leman to moisten his mouth,
A Lemon I mean, no Leman I trow:
Take heed, my fair maids, you take me not so:
For though I go not as grave as my Grandmother,
Yet I have honesty as well as another.
But hush, now shall I hear some news.
Fellow Tomkin, I think this world is made of flint;
Ther's neither money, nor wares, worth money in it.
Hold thy peace Dicke, it cannot still keep at this stint:
We are now lighted upon such a mynt,
As follow it well, I dare warrant thee,
Thy turn shall be served in every degree.
Dick boy, mine own boy, how dost thou? what cheer?
What Dandeline mine Hostess, what make you here?
I came of purpose to enquire for thee.
And I came of purpose to seek Prodigality.
What, he you told me ?????????? indeed is it he?
I of my fidelity.
A good boy of mine honesty.
But when come ye?
As soon as I can find him.
Seek him, good Dick, and find him speedily:
For this I assure ye, your Supper is ready.
Goo home before, make all things very fine.
I will, farewell.
Farewell.
Farewell to Tomkin too.
Farewell, sweet Dandeline.
But hear ye? bring him.
Who?
Tush a Gods name, you know who I mean, the Gentle???man.
????????? to, go to.
Tom, now to the purpose where first we began.
Cast care away, Dick, Isle make thee a man.
A gospel in thy mouth, Tom, for it never went worse.
Master money hath left me never a penny in my purse.
Twill be better, Dicke, shalt see very shortly.
I pray thee tell me, is this brave Prodigality,
So full of money as he is said to be?
Full quoth? he is too full, I promise thee.
And will he lash it out so lustily?
Exceedingly, unreasonably, vnmeasureably.
Then may such mates as we that be so bare,
Hope some way or other to catch a share.
Assure thy self that: but whist, he comes here:
Let's entertain him with familiar chere.
In order then bravely.
How first, my sweet Money, shall we be lusty now?
Be as lusty as you will, Isle be as lusty as you.
Who lacks money hoo, who lacks money?
But ask and have, money, money, money.
Sir, here be they that care not for your money,
So much as for your merry company.
And company is it I seek assuredly.
Then here be companions to fit your fantasy,
And at all assays to answer your desire:
To go, to run, to stay, to doe, as you require.
What can I wish more? well then, I pray,
What sports, what pastimes shall we first assay?
Marry first, sir, we both pray you heartily,
To take a poor supper with vs here hard by,
Where we will determine by common consent,
What pastimes are fittest, for vs to frequent.
I grant.
Then if you please, with some sweet roysting harmony,
Let vs begin the vtas of our jollity.
Thou hitst my hand pat. Money, what say thou?
I say, that I like it: go to it, I pray you.
Shall I begin?
Yea.
Then surely shall it be,
To thee, for thee, and in honour of thee.
Sweet money the minion, that sails with all winds,
Sweet money the minstrel, that makes merry minds.
The more a man with virtuous dealing doth himself in???ur,
The less with worldly business, he is molested sure,
Which makes proof, that as turmoils still toss the worldly mind:
So minds exempt from worldly toil, desired quiet find.
And chiefly where the life is led in virtuous exercise,
There is no toil, but ease, and contentation to the wise:
But what account, how slight regard, is had of virtue here,
By actions on this worldly stage, most plainly doth appear.
Men see without most just desert, of virtue nought is got,
To Fortune therefore fly they still, that gives all by lot;
And finding Fortunes gifts, so pleasant, sweet and savoury,
They build thereon, as if they should ondure perpetually.
But this is sure, and that most sure, that Fortune is unsure,
Her self most frail, her gifts as ?????????, ????????? to every shower:
And in the end, who builds most upon her suerty,
Shall find himself cast headlong down, to depth of ?????????.
Then having felt the crafty sleights of Fortunes fickle train,
Is forced to seek by virtues aid, to be relieved again.
This is the end, run how he list, thus man of force must doe,
Unless his life be clean cut off, this man must come unto:
In time therefore man might doe well, to ????????? for his estate,
Lest let by extremity, repentance come too late.
Sir, I beseech you speak a good word for me to the Prince,
That by her letters, I may be commended to some Province,
Where service is to be had, either there to die with fame,
Or elsto get me somewhat, whereon to live without shame:
For beg I cannot, and steal I may not, the truth is so;
But need doth make, the Proverb saith, th'old wife to trot for woe.
Yet whom stark need doth pinch, at length the devil drives to go:
Therefore, I beseech you, pity his extremity,
That would not make this suit without necessity.
Who be you, my friend?
By birth a Gentleman, by profession a soldier,
Who, though I say it, in all our Sovereigns war,
With hazard of my blood and life, have gone as far,
As happily some others, whole fortunes have bin better:
But I in service yet, could ????????? be a getter,
No can ????????? it but to mine own destiny:
For well I know, the Prince is full of liberality,
What is your name, sir?
My name is, Wel-don.
Are you Captain Wel-don?
Though unworthy, sir, I bear that name.
Give me your hand, Captain Wel-don, for your fame,
In feats of Arms, and service of your Country,
I have heard oft, you have deserved greatly:
Therefore think this, that as you ????????? much,
So the consideration thereof shall be such,
As duly doth pertain to your desert.
Trust me, the Prince her self, ????????? of my part,
????????? dutiful service hath specially regarded,
And expressly commands that it be well rewarded:
Wherefore you shall not need to seek service abroad.
I exhort you at home still to make your abode:
That if in this realm occasion of wars be offered,
You and others your like may be employed.
My duty binds me to obey.
Then for this time you shall not need to stay.
As for your ????????? I will remember it,
And see it helped too as shall be fit.
Truly, if I should not have care of this mans necessity,
I should both swerve from virtue and from honesty.
Sir, I humbly beseech you help to prefer my suite.
What is it?
There is an office fallen, which I would gladly ?????????.
Who be you?
A servant here in Court.
Doe you serve the Prince?
No and please you.
Whom then?
A noble man near about her Majesty.
In what degree.
Forsooth, sir, as his Secretary.
How long have you served?
A year or twain.
And would you so soon be preferred?
In ?????????, my friend, I would be glad, as I may,
To ????????? you any good: but this I say,
Who seeks by virtue, ???????????????;
In virtuous proceeding must ???????????????,
Then can be well taken in a ???????????????:
For time gives experience of every mans deeds,
And each man by merit accordingly speeds.
Go forward, my friend, in virtue with diligence,
And time, for your service, shall yield you recompense.
Your Lord and Master is very honourable,
And him in your suits you shall find favourable:
And as for my part, as erst I did say,
I never will hinder, where further I may.
Let this for this time be your answer.
Sir, with my boldness, I beseech you to ?????????.
God be with you.
Some men deserve, and yet doe want their due;
Some men again, on small deserts doe sue,
It therefore stands Princes Officers in hand,
The state of every man rightly to understand,
That so by balance of equality,
Each man may have his hire accordingly.
Well, since dame virtue, unto me, doth charge of many things refer,
I must go doe that best beseems a faithful officer.
Liberty, liberty, now I cry liberty:
Catch me again when you can, Prodigality.
Never was there poor soul so cruelly handled:
I was at the first, like a Cockney dandled,
Stroked on the head, kissed and well cherished,
And so thought surely I should have continued:
But now how my case is altered suddenly;
You would not believe, unless you saw it apparently.
In faith ????????? ye saw me, I ???????????? turmoiled
From post to pillar: see how I am spoiled.
The villains among them provided the roft,
But Money was forced to pay for the cost,
Both of their feasting, and of their chamber cheer,
Yea in every place, they have fleec't me so near,
He a fleece and she a fleece; that nothing could I keep,
But glad to run away like a new shorn ?????????.
And though I have ????????? pinched very near,
I am glad to see you in good health every one here:
And now I have escaped the traitorous treachery
Of such a thriftless Roysting company,
To my mother in haste again I will get me,
And keep at home safely: from thence let ????????? fet me.
What, master Money, how goes the world with you?
Look but upon me, thou ????????? quickly judge how.
Why, where the avenge??ce, where the devil hast thou ????????? Among brambles, or briars, or spirits sure, I wean.
Both wean it, and wot it, I have past a wilderness
Of most mischievous and miserable distress;
Sharpe brambles, sharpe briars, and terrible scratchers,
Bears, Wolves, Apes, Lyons, most ravening snatchers,
Thorns, thistles, and nettles most horrible stingers,
Ravens, gripes, and gryphons, oh vengible wringers,
Yea through my whole passage such damnable sights,
As I cannot but judge them most damnable sprites.
Ho, ho, ha, ha.
Laugh ye, my friend? It is no laughing toy.
But who did guide you in this labyrinth of ?????????
Who ????????? your minion sir, ?????????,
The Captain elected of all roysting knavery,
He will be hanged, I warrant him shortly.
Ho, ho, ha, ha.
Yet go to, laugh on.
Are you not a cock, cuck-cold?
I may be indeed, my clothes be but thin,
And therefore I will even go get me in,
That Fortune my mother may cloth me anew.
Doe so, you had need so, I may say to you.
Now sure it is a world of worlds to see,
How all the world inclines to Vanity:
Men seek at first, that is but Vanity,
And lose at last that was but Vanity,
And yet continue still to follow Vanity,
As though it were a thing of certainty:
And I that bear the name of Vanity,
And see the worlds exceeding vanity,
In following so the tracks of vanity,
Doe triumph still amid my Empery,
And laugh at their simplicity,
That will be so misse-led by Vanity,
But who is this? oh I know him, ascholer of our train,
Tic Hob a clunch, that comes for money again.
God speed, Mast Fanitie.
Wocum, Mast Tenacity.
Sir, cham come once again for money.
So me thinks.
Shells be sped now at length trow ye?
I cannot tell ye, tic hard to say;
Peradventure yea, pera duenture nay.
How so man?
I fear me you will spend him too fast away.
Ho, ho, ho, ho, dost thou veare, that friend Fanitie?
Shalt not need man, chill keep him safe, che warrant thee.
Oh that chad him in my clouches, shoudst see I trow,
Whether chud keep him vast and safe or no.
I pray thee, good sweet Mast Fanitie,
Speak one good word for poor Tenacity.
And dost thou indeed so well love money?
Doe my wives Bees at home, think thou, love honey?
What would thou doe with it?
Chud chud, chud, chud.
Chud, chud, what chud?
Chud doe no harm at all.
No, nor much good (I think) to great nor small.
But well, put case I procure thee to speed,
You will remember your promise that I shall be feed.
Gods vast, man, yea chill doe it, chill doe it.
Stand there a while and wait.
Bright goddess, behold here again Tenacity,
That humbly makes his suit to have money.
For money? ho there: money finds himself well:
Money now hath no liking from Fortune to dwell.
In vanum laborauerunt, come.
Now good soot, honey, vaire, golden mustresse,
Let poor Tenacity taste of thy goodness:
Thee che honour, thee che serve, thee che reverence,
And in thy help, che put my whole confidence.
Money, you must go to him, there is no remedy.
Yea, and be used as before with Prodigality.
Let Prodigality go to the gallows tree:
Why man, he and I are clean contrary?
I chill coll thee, chill cusse thee.
So did he.
Chill save thee, chill spare thee, chill keep thee from wa???sting.
So did not he.
Go to then, seeing that my mothers will is such,
To put it in adventure I may not grutch.
Oh, my sweating, my darling, my chewel, my joy.
My pleasure, my treasure, mine own pretty boy.
How now? what mean you by this, Tenacity?
Oh, forbid me not to kiss my sweet Money.
Varewell, Vortune: and Vortune, che thank thee always.
Come on, surra, chill make you vast, bum vii.
What with ropes? what needs that?
For veare of robbing by the high way. La, ?????????, fa, sol, fa, sol, mi, fa, re, mi.
O monstrous vile filthy luck! see, in the twinkling of an eye,
Scarce knowing which way, I have quite lost my Money.
Out of all doubt, ?????????, he is not gone yonder way.
Then seek some other course, make here no stay:
He must be found out, there is no remedy.
Thou know in what pickle we stand without Money.
Why sure, Prodigality, it can be no other,
But he is returned to Fortune his mother.
Think thou so?
Thou, Fortune, hear thou? by fair means I advise thee,
Restore my Money to me again, deal plainly and wisely:
Or by this sharpe-edge sword, shalt see me play a proud part.
For I will have him again, in spite of thy hart.
Whom have we there, that keeps such a coil?
Even he that will not put up such a foil.
What's the matter?
Vanity, to that dame thy mistress commend ?????????
Tell her, tell her, it doth not a little offend me,
To have my money in such great despite,
Taken so from me, without any right.
What though it were once her own proper gift?
Yet given, it is mine own, there is no other shift.
Therefore charge her in the name of Prodigality,
That he be restored to me incontinently,
Lest she repent it.
These be sore and cruel threatenings, marry.
Is your haste so great, that by no means you may tarry?
I will not tarry, and therefore make haste.
Soft, sir, a little, there is no time past.
You may tarry, you must tarry, for ought as I know:
Nay, then you shall ?????????, whether you will or no.
Swounds, sir, he mocks you.
Gibe not with me, you hoorson rascal slave,
For money I come, and money will I have.
Sir, Vanity, Vanity. What, Vanity?
Speak and be hanged, Vanity. What will it not be?
What a prodigious knave, what a slave is this?
Fortune, fine Fortune, you, minion, if ye be ?????????,
Bethink ye betimes, take better ?????????
Restore unto me my money quietly,
Else look for wars: Vanity, Fortune, Vanity.
Sir, you see it boots not.
It is but my ill luck.
Now the devil and his damme give them both suck.
What may we doe? what counsel giu'st thou, Dicke?
Marry, sir, be ruled by me, Isle show you a trick,
How you may have him quickly.
As how?
Scale the walls, in at the window, by force fet him.
None better infaith, fetch a ladder, and I will set him.
Fortune, thou injurious dame, thou shalt not by this villainy,
Have cause to triumph over Prodigality.
Why speak thou not, why speak thou not, I say?
Thy silence doth but breed thine own hurt and decay.
Here is a ladder.
Set it to.
Swounds, help, Dick: help quickly, or I am choked.
God a mercy good halter, or else you had been yoked.
O thou vile, ill-fauoured, crow-troden, pye-pecked ?????????!
Thou abominable, blind, foul filth, is this thy wont,
First, maliciously to spoil men of their good,
And then by subtle sleights thus to seek their blood?
I abhor thee, I defy thee, wheresoever I go,
I doe proclaim my self thy mortal foe.
News, Prodigality, news.
Good, and God will.
What news, Tom?
I have met with money.
Where?
Marry sir, he is going into a strange country,
With an old chuff called Tenacity.
Tenacity? is that Tinkers boudget so full of audacity?
Tic true,
May we not overtake him?
Yes, easily with good horses,
Let's go then for Gods ?????????, we'll cateh him in a trap.
Go, we will go with you, what ever shall hap,
O rotten rope, that thou must be so brittle!
Had thou but happened to have held a little,
I had taught my princocks against another time,
So to presume dame Fortunes bower to clime.
To make such a scope, his hap was very good.
Well, he scoped fair, I swear by the rood:
But will you have me say my fantasy,
Quote differtur, non aufertur. For assuredly
The Gentleman will never hold himself quiet,
Till once more he come to taste of this diet.
Mark the end.
Vanity?
Madam.
Is this Roister gone!
Yea, Madam, he is gone.
Then get thee anon,
And cause my attendants to come away,
For here as now I will no longer stay,
But prosecute this foe of mine so fast,
By mischiefs all I may, that at the last,
He shall arrive unto a wretched end,
And with repentance learn how to offend
A goddess of my state and dignity.
Lady, to do your will, I hasten willingly.
Dame Fortunes power, her most exceeding might,
Is known by this as an undoubted thing:
Since here most plainly hath appeared in sight,
How all the world doth hang upon her wing,
How hie and low, of all states and degrees,
Doe rise and fall again as she decrees.
Then let not Virtue think it scorn to yield,
To Fortune chief of power, chief sovereignty:
Sith Fortune here by proof hath won the field,
Subdued her foes, and got the victory:
For as she list to favour, else to frown,
She hoists up, or headlong hurled down.
Madam, here are your vassals ready pressed,
To doe the thing that Fortune likes best.
Well then, come on, to witness this our victory,
Depart we hence with sound of fame triumphantly.
Reverence, due reverence.
Come on, my bulchin, come on, my fat fatox.
Come porkeling, come on, come pretty twattox.
Why will it not be? yet faster a curse.
This Gentleman of late is waxen so purse,
As at every lands end he seeks to rest him.
How think ye? hath not Tenacity trimly dressed him?
Prodigality, if thou love me, let vs here stay:
For sure I can doe no more then I may.
I am out of breath as weary as a dog,
A luskish lubber, as fat as a hog.
Come up, ????????? Money, wee may not here stay.
I must needs, Prodigality, there is no nay:
For if I should stir me one inch from the ground,
I think I shall die, sure, or fall in a sound.
Then must you be drawn.
Drawn, or hanged, all is one:
For I cannot stir me, my breath is clean gone.
How like ye this grossum corpus, so mightily grown?
I like him the better, that he is your own.
A more monstrous beast, a beast more vnweldie,
Since first I was borne, yet never beheld I.
Indeed the hooreson is waxen somewhat too fat:
But we will find medicines to remedy that.
Sir, let me but have him a little in cure,
To put my poor practise of Physic in ur,
And I dare warrant ye with a purgation or twain,
Isle quickly rid him out of all ?????????.
I think a glister were ?????????.
Nay, rather a suppository.
Nay then, what say you to letting of blood?
I think that some of these should doe him good.
Ask the Phisicion.
Prodigality.
Hoo.
I am sick.
Where, man?
Faith, here, in my belly.
It swells, I assure ye, out of all measure.
Take heed it grow not to a Timpani.
And if it doe, what is the danger then?
A consumption.
A consumption, marry, God forbid, man.
What think you now of ??????????
Was he your friend or your foe?
Ah, that wretch Tenacity hath brought me to all this woe,
It was he indeed that sought to destroy me,
In that he would never use to employ me:
But ?????????, sweet Prodigality,
Help to provide some present remedy:
Let me not be thus miserably spilt,
Ease me of this, and use me as thou wilt.
Yet had I rather live in state bare and thin,
Then in this monstrous plight that now I am in:
So fatty, so foggy, so out of all measure,
That in my self, I take no kind of pleasure.
Why, rise up then quickly, and let vs be gone.
Friends, you must help me. I cannot rise alone.
Come on, my sweet Money, we must have a mean,
To turn this foggy fat, to a finer lean,
The sooner the better.
Nay, Money, doubt not, but by sweat or by vomit,
I warrant thee boy, shortly thou shalt be rid from it.
Rid, quoth, if shaving, or boxing, ????????????,
Or noynting, or scraping, or purging, or blood ?????????,
Or rubbing, or paring, or ?????????, or fretting,
Or ought else will rid it, he shall want no ridding.
Come on, Money, let's be jogging.
Thieves, neighbours, thieves, come forth, beset the country.
Hark, list a while, what might this clamour be?
Zwounds, we are undone, Prodigality,
The Constables come after with hue and cry.
O Cerberus, what shall we doe?
Stand back, lie close, and let them pass by.
The eves, ?????????! O vile! O detestable deed!
The ?????????, neighbours: come forth, away, abroad with speed.
Where dwell these Constables?
Why? what's the matter, friend, I pray?
Why, thieves man, I tell ?????????, come away.
????????? I faith, wife, my scull, my Jack, my browne bill.
Come away quickly.
Dick, Tom, Will, ye hoorsons, make ye all ready, and haste apace after.
But let me hear, how stands the case?
Marry, sir, here-by, not far from this place,
A plain simple man riding on his Ass,
Meaning home to his Country in Gods peace to pass,
????????? certain Roisters most furious and mad,
Is spoiled and robbed of all that he had.
And yet not contented, when they had his money,
But the villains have also murderd him most cruelly.
Good God for his mercy!
It was my hap to come then present by him,
And found him dead, with twenty wounds upon him.
But what became of them?
They fled this way.
Then, neighbour, let vs here no longer stay,
But hence and lay the country round about.
They shall be quickly found, I have no doubt.
My Lords, you see how far this worldly state ????????? is,
From good declined, inclined still to follow things amiss.
You see but very few, that make of Virtue any price:
You see all sorts with hungry wills, run headlong into vice.
We see it oft, we sorrow much, and heartily lament,
That of himself, man should not have a better government.
The very beasts that be devoid of reason, dull &amp; dumb,
By nature learn to shun those things, whereof their hurt may come.
If man were then but as a beast, only by nature taught,
He would also by nature learn, to shun what things are nought.
But man with reason is endued, he reason hath for stay,
Which reason should restrain his will, from going much astray.
Madam, tic true:
Where reason rules, there is the golden mean.
But most men stoop to stubborn will,
Which conquers reason clean.
And Will again to fancy yields,
Which twain be special guides,
That train a man to tread ill paths,
Where ease and pleasure bides.
No ease, no pleasure, can be good, that is not got with pains.
That is the cause from Virtues ?????????,
Mans fancy still refrains.
And pains, I think, they feel likewise,
That unto vice doe bend.
They feel, no doubt: but yet such pains
Come not before the end.
I grieve for man, that man should be, of ill att??pts so fine.
Grieve not for that, evil tasted once, turns him to good again.
Then will I take a cheerful mind,
Unpleasant thoughts expel,
And cares for man commit to them,
That in the heavens doe dwell.
Do so, dear Madam, I beseech you most heartily,
And recreate your self before you go hence, with some sweet melody.
IF pleasure be the only thing,
That man doth seek so much:
Chief pleasures rest, where virtue rules:
No pleasure can be such.
Though Virtues ways be very straight,
Her rocks be hard to clime:
Yet such as doe aspire thereto,
Enjoy all joys in time.
Plain is the passage unto vice,
The gappes lye wide ????????? ill:
To them that wade through lewdness lake,
The Iseis broken still.
This therefore is the difference,
The passage first seems hard:
To virtues train: but then most sweet,
????????? length is their reward.
To those again that follow ?????????,
The way is fair and plain:
But fading pleasures in the end,
Are bought with fasting pain.
If pleasure be the only thing, &amp;c.
Now my Lords, I see no cause, but that depart we may.
Madam, to that shall like you best, we willingly obey.
Yes, Lady, stay awhile, and hear of strange adventures.
Of what adventures tell you? let vs know.
Master Sheriff, of that is happened, doe you make show.
Then may it please you, the effect is this:
There is a certain Roister, named Prodigality,
That long about this town hath ruffled in great jollity,
A man long suspected of very lewd behaviour,
Yet standing ever so high in Fortunes ?????????,
As never till now, he could be betrayed,
Of any offence, that to him might be laid:
Now wanting (belike) his wonted bravery,
He thought to supply it, by murder and robbery.
By murder and robbery?
Yea, sure.
How?
This gallant, I tell you, with other lewd franions,
Such as himself, unthrifty companions,
In most cruel sort, by the high way side,
Assaulted a country man, as he homewards did ride,
Robbed him, and spoiled him of all that they might,
And lastly, bereaved him of his life out-right.
O horrible fact!
The country hereupon ????????? hue &amp; cry straightway:
He is apprehended, his fellows fled away:
I supplying, though unworthy, for this year,
The place of an Officer, and Sheriff of the shire,
To my Princes use, have seized on his money,
And bring you the same, according to my duty:
Praying, the party may have the law with speed,
That others may be terrified from so foul a deed.
So horrible a fact can hardly plead for favour:
Therefore go you, Equity, examine more diligently,
The manner of this outrageous robbery:
And as the same, by examination shall appear,
Due justice may be done in presence here.
It shall be done, Madam.
Then, Madam, I pray you, appoint some Officer to take the money,
That I may return again with Equity.
Let it be delivered to my steward Liberality.
What, Money? how come you to be so fat and foggy?
Surely, sir, by the old chuff, that miser Tenacity.
How so?
He would never let me abroad to go,
But locked me up in coffers, or in bags bound me fast,
That like a Bore in a sty, he fed me at last.
Thus Tenacity did spoil me, for want of exercise:
But Prodigality, clean contrariwise,
Did toss me, and fleece me, so bare and so thin,
That he left nothing on me, but very bone and skin.
Well, Money, will you bide with him that can devise,
To rid you and keep you from these extremities?
Who is that?
Even my self, Liberality.
Sir, I like you well, and therefore willingly,
I am contented with you to remain,
So as you protect me from the other twain,
I warrant thee.
First, from thy bands Isle set thee free,
And after, thy sickness cured shall be,
Thanks and obedience I yield, &amp; vow to Liberality.
My Lord, according to your appointment and will,
I come to attend your pleasure.
Have you brought your bill?
Yea, my Lord.
Give it me.
Isle be your mean unto the Prince, that it may dispatched be:
The while take here, these hundred crowns to relieve ye.
God save the Queen, and God save Liberality.
Sir, I have long served the Prince at great expense,
And long have I bin promised a recompense:
I beseech you consider of me.
What, doe you serve without fee?
Yea truly, sir.
Hold, pray for the Queen.
It shall be my prayer day and night truly.
God save the Queen, and God save Liberality.
Now, good my Lord, vouchsafe of your charity,
To cast here aside your pitiful eye,
Upon a poor soldier, naked and needy,
That in the Queens wars was maimed, as you see.
Where have you served?
In France, in Flaunders: but in Ireland most.
Under whom?
Under Captain Wel-don.
He was my soldier, indeed sir, until he lost his leg.
Hold, pray for the Queen.
God save the Queen, and God save Liberality.
Room, my Masters, give place, stand by.
Sir, Equity hath sent me to let you understand,
That hither he will resort out of hand,
To sit upon the arraignment of ?????????.
In good time.
Behold, he comes.
Now, Equity, how falls the matter out?
That Prodigality is guilty of the fact, no doubt,
And therefore for furtherance of Justice effectually,
My Lord the Judge comes to sit upon him presently:
Wherein we crave your assistance.
Isle wait upon you.
Room, my masters, room for my Lord: stand by.
Call for the prisoner.
Make an oyes, crier.
Oyes, oyes, oyes!
Sheriff of Middlesex.
Repeat, Sheriff, &amp;c.
Bring forth the prisoner.
????????? &amp;c.
Prodigality.
Prodigality.
Pain of the peril shall fall thereon.
Pain of, &amp;c.
Here, sir.
Prodigality, hold up thy hand.
Thou art indicted here by the name of Prodigality, for that thou, the fourth day of February, in the three &amp; forty year of the pros???porous reign of Elizabeth our dread Sovereign, by the grace of God, of England, France, and Ireland Queen, defender of the faith, &amp;c. together with two other malefactors yet unknown, at High-gate in the County of Middle sex before said, did ????????? lie take from one Tenacity of the parish of Pancridge yeoman, ????????? the said County, one thousand pounds of gold and silver star???ling:
And also, how thy ?????????, the ????????????; with a sword, price twenty shillings, then and there cruelly did give the said Tenacity upon the head, one mortal ?????????, whereof hee is now dead, contrary to the Queens peace, her, Crown and dignity.
How say thou, Prodigality, to this ?????????, felony, and murder? art thou ?????????, or not guilty?
My Lord, I beseech you, grant me council to plead my cause.
That may not be, it stands not with our laws.
Then, good my Lord, let me some respite take.
Neither may that be: thus doth the indictment lie,
Thou art ????????? of murder, and of robbery,
To which thou must now answer presently,
Whether thou be thereof guilty or not guilty.
Well, since there is no other remedy,
And that my fact falls out so apparently,
I will confess, that in deed I am guilty,
Most humbly appealing to the ????????? mercy.
Then what can thou say for thy self, Prodigality,
That according to the law thou should not die?
Nothing, my Lord: but still appeal to the Princes mercy.
Then hearken to thy judgment.
Thou, Prodigality, by that name haste bin indicted and arraigned here, of a robbery, murder, and felony, against the laws commit???ted by thee: the indictment whereof being read unto thee here, thou confessed thy self to be guilty therein: whereupon I ludge thee, to be had from hence, to the place thou came fro, and from thence to the place of execution, there to be hanged till thou be dead. God have mercy on thee.
My Lord, I most humbly beseech you to hear me.
Say on.
I confess, I have run a wanton wicked race,
Which now hath brought me to this woeful wretched case:
????????? heartily sorry, and with tears doe lament
My former lewd, and vile misgovernment.
I find the brittle stay of ????????? Fortunes state.
My heart now ????????? after Virtue, all too late:
Yet good my Lord, of pity condescend,
To be a mean for him, that means to amend.
The Prince is merciful, of whose great mercy,
Full many have largely tasted already:
Which makes me appeal thereto more boldly.
Prodigality, I not mislike your wailefull disposition,
And therefore, for you to the Prince, there shall be made Petition,
That though your punishment be not fully remitted,
Yet in some part, it may be qualified.
God save your life.
MOst mighty Queen, yonder I sate in place,
Presenting show of chiefest dignity;
Here prostrate, lo, before your Princely grace,
I show my self, such as I ought to be,
Your humble vassal, subject to your will,
With fear and love, your Grace to reverence still.

COme bedfellow come, strew apace, strew, strew:
in good troth tic pity that these flowers must be
trodden under feet as they are like to bee anon.
Pity, alack pretty heart, thou art sorry to see any good
thing fall to the ground: pity? no more pity, then to see an
Innocent Mayden-head delivered up to the ruffling of her
new-wedded husband. Beauty is made for use, and hee that
will not use a sweet soul well, when she is under his fingers
I pray Venus he may never kiss a fair and a delicate, soft, red'
plump-lip.
Amen, and that's torment enough.
Pity? come fool fling them about lustily; flowers no∣for
dye a sweeter death, than when they are smoother'd to
death in a Lovers bosom, or else pave the high ways, over
which these pretty, simpering, jetting things, called brides, must
trip.
I pray thee tell me, why doe they use at weddings to
furnish all places thus, with sweet herbs and flowers?
One reason is, because tic—ô a most sweet thing
to lye with a man.
I think tic a O more more more more sweet to lye
with a woman.
I warrant all men are of thy mind: another reason
is, because they stick like the scutchions of madame chasti∣tie,
on the sable ground, weeping in their stalks, and wink∣ing
with their yellow-sunke eyes, as loath to behold the
lamentable fall of a Maidenhead: what senseless thing in all
the house, that is not now as melancholy, as a new set-vp
Schoolmaster?
Troth I am.
Troth I think thou mournst, because you have mist thy
turn, I doe by the quiver of Cupped: you see the torches melt
themselves away in tears: the instruments wear their heart
strings out for sorrow: and the Silver Ewers weep most
pitiful Rosewater: five or six pair of the white innocent
wedding gloves, did in my sight choose rather to be torn in
pieces than to be drawn on; and look this Rosemary, (a
fatal herb) this dead-mans nose-gay, has crept in amongst
these flowers to deck• th'nuisible coarse of the Brides May∣denhead,
when (oh how much do we poor wenches suffer) a∣bout
eleven or twelve, or one a clock at midnight at furthest,
it descends to purgatory, to give notice that Caelestine (hey
ho) will never come to lead Apes in hell.
I see by thy sighing thou wilt not.
If I had as many Mayden-heads, as I have hairs on my
head I'd venture them all rather then to come into so hot a
place; prethy strew thou, for my little arms are weary.
I am sure thy little tongue is not.
No faith that's like a woman bitten with fleas, it neuerlyes
still: •ye vpont, what a miserable thing tic to be a noble Bride,
there's such delays in rising, in fitting gowns, in tyring, in
pinning Rebatoes, in poaking, in dinner, in supper, in Revels,
&amp; last of all in cursing the poor nodding fiddlers, for keeping
Mistress Bride so long up from sweeter Revels; that, oh I could
never endure to put it up without much bickering.
Come you are an odd wench, hark, hark, music? nay
then the Bride's up.
Is she up? nay then I see she has been down: Lord ha
mercy on vs, we women fall and fall still, and when we have
husbands we play upon them like Virginal Jacks, they must
rise and fall to our humours, or else they'll never get any good
strains of music out of vs; but come now, have at it for a
mayden-head.
Come knaves, night begins to be like my self, an
old man; day plays the thief and steals upon vs; O well
done wenches, well done, well done, you have covered all
the stony way to church with flowers, tic well, tic well,
ther's an Emblem too, to be made out of these flowers and
stones, but you are honest wenches, in, in, in.
When we come to your years, we shall learn what
honesty is, come pew-fellow.
Is the music come yet? so much to do! First
come?
Come sir.
Have the merry knaves pulled their fiddle cases
over their instruments ears?
As soon as ere they entered our gates, the noise
went, before they came ne'er the great Hall, the faint hearted
villiacoes sounded at least thrice.
Thou should have revived them with a Cup of
burnt wine and sugar; sir, you, horse-keeper, go, bid them
curry their strings: Is my daughter up yet?
Up sir? she was seen up an hour a go.
Shoe's an early sturrer, ah sir.
She'll be a late sturrer soon at night sir.
Go too Peeter Flash, you have a good sudden
flash of brain, your wits husky, and no marvel, for tic like
one of our Comedians beards, stillith stubble: about your
business, and look you be nimble to fly from the wine, or
the nimble wine will catch you by the nose.
If your wine play with my nose Sir, Isle knocke's
coxcomb.
Doe Peeter, and wear it for thy labour; Is my
Son in Law Sir Walter Terell ready yet?
Ready sir.
One of you attend him: Stay Flash, whore's the
note of the guests you have invited?
Here Sir, Isle pull all your guests out of my bosom;
the men that will come, I have crossed, but all the Gentlewo∣men
have at the tail of the last letter a prick, because you
may read them the better.
My spectacles, light, light, knaves: Sir Adam Prickshaft, thou hast crossed him, heel come.
I had much a doe sir, to draw Sir Adam Prickeshaft home, because I told him it was early, but heel come.
Justice Crop, what will he come?
He took physic yesterday sir.
Oh then Crop cannot come.
O Lord yes, sir yes it was but to make more room
in his Crop for your good cheer, Crop will come.
Widow M•never.
Shoe's pricked you see sir, and will come.
Sir Vaughan ap Rees, oh hee•s crossed twice, so, so,
so, then all these Ladies, that fall downwards here, will
come I see, and all these Gentlemen that stand right before
them.
All will come.
Well said, here, write them out again, and put
the men from the women; and Peeter, when we are at Church
bring wine and cakes, be light &amp; nimble good Flash, for your
burden will be but light.
Prickeshaft God morrow, god morrow: go, in,
in, in, to the Bridegroom, taste a cup of burnt wine this more∣ning,
twill m•ke you fly the better all the day after.
You are an early stirrer Sir Quintilian Short∣hose.
I am so, it behooves me at my daughters wedding,
in, in, in; fellow put ou• thy torch, and put thy self into my
buttery, the torch burns ill in thy hand, the wine will burn
better in thy belly, in in.
Ware there, room for Sir Adam Prickeshaft: your
Worship—
Sir Vaughan a•d Widow, Mineuer, welcome,
welcome, a thousand times: my lips Mistress Widow shall bid
you God morrow, in, in, one to the Bridegroom, the other to
the Bride.
Why then Sir quiontilian Shorthose, I will step
into mistress Bride, and Widow Mineuer, shall go upon
M. Bridegroom.
No pardon, for by my truly Sir Vaughan, Isle
ha no dealings with any M. Bridegrooms.
In widow in, in honest knight in.
I will usher you mistress widow.
Light there for sir Vaughan; your good Worship—
Drink that shilling Ma. Peeter Flash, in your
guts and belly.
Isle not drink it down sir, but Isle turn it into that
which shall run down, oh merrily!
God morrow to these beauties, and Gentlemen,
that have Ushered this troop of Ladies to my daughters
wedding, welcome, welcome all; music? nay then the bride∣groome's
coming, where are these knaves here?
All here sir.
God morrow Ladies and fair troops of gallants,
that have deposed the drowsy King of sleep, to Crown our
train with your rich presences, I salute you all;
Each one share thanks from thanks in general.
God morrow M. Bridegroom, mistress Bride.
God morrow M. Bride groom.
Gallants I shall entreat you to prepare,
For Masks and Revels to defeat the night,
Our Sovereign will in person grace our marriage.
What will the king be heer?
Father he will.
Where be these knaves? More Rose-mary and
gloves, gloves, gloves: choose Gentlemen; Ladies put on
soft skins upon the skin of softer hands; so, so: come mistress
Bride take you your place, the old men first, and then the
Bachelors; Maids with the Bride, Widows and wives to∣gether,
the priset's at Church, tic time that we march the∣there
Dear Blunt at our return from Church, take pains
to step to Horace, for our nuptial songs; now Father when
you please.
Agreed, set on, come good Sir Vaughan, must we
lead the way?
Peeter you go too fast for Mistress pride: so, gin∣gerly,
gingerly; I muse why Sir Adam Prickeshaft sticks so
short behind?
He follows close, not too fast, hold up knaves,
Thus we lead youth to church, they vs to graves.
To thee whose fore-head swells with Roses,
Whose most haunted bower
Gives life &amp; sent to every flower,
Whose most adored name encloses,
Things abstruse, deep and divine,
Whose yellow tresses shine,
Bright as Eoan fire.
O me thy Priest inspire.
For I to thee and thine immortal name,
In-in-in golden tunes,
For I to thee and thine immortal name—
In-sacred raptures flowing, flowing, swimming, swimming:
In sacred raptures swimming,
Immortal name, game, dame, tame, lame, lame, lame,
Pux, hath, shame, proclaim, oh—
In Sacred raptures flowing, will proclaim, not—
O me thy Priest inspire!
For I to thee and thine immortal name,
In flowing numbers filled with spright and flame,
Good, good, in flowing numbers filled with spright &amp; flame.
Horace, Horace, my sweet ningle, is always in la∣bore
when I come, the nine Muses be his midwives I pray
Iupiter: Ningle.
In flowing numbers filled with sprite and flame,
To thee.
To me? I pledge thee sweet Ningle, by Bacchus
quizzing boule, I thought th'adst drunk to me.
It must have been in the divine liquor of Pernaessus,
then in which, I know you would scarce have pledged me,
but come sweet rogue, sit, sit, sit.
Over head and ears y•aith? I have a sacke-full of
news for thee, thou shalt plague some of them, if God send
vs life and health together.
Its no matter, empty thy sack anon, but come here
first honest rogue, come.
First good, First good▪ pure Helicon ha?
Dam me left be not the best that ever came from me,
if I have any judgment, look sir, tic an Epithalamium for Sir
Walter Terrels wedding, my brains have given assault to it
but this morning.
Then I hope to see them fly out like gun-powder
ere night.
Nay good rogue mark, for they are the best lines
that ever I drew.
Heir's the best leaf in England, but on, on, Isle but
tune this Pipe.
Mark, to thee whose fore-head swells with Roses.
O sweet, but will there be no exceptions taken, be∣cause
fore-head and swelling comes together?
Push, away, away, its proper, besides tic an elegance
to say the fore head swells.
Nay an't be proper, let it stand for Gods love.
Whose most haunted bower,
Gives life and sent to every flower,
Whose most adored name encloses,
Things abstruse, deep and divine.
Whose yellow tresses shine,
Bright as 〈◊〉 fire.
O pure, rich, ther's heate in this, on, on.
Bright as Eoan fire,
O me thy Priest inspire!
For I to thee and thine immortal name—mark this.
In flowing numbers filled with spryte and ••am.
I mary, ther's spryte and flame in this.
A pox, a this Tobacco.
Wot this case were my last, if I did not mark, nay
ell's one, I have always a consort of Pypes about me, mine
Ingle is all fire and water; I marked, by this Candle (which is
none of Gods Angels) I remember, you started back at sprite
and flame.
For I to thee and thine immortal name,
In flowing numbers filled with sprite and flame,
To thee Loves mightiest King,
Himen ô Himen does our chaste Muse sing.
Ther's music in this;
Mark now dear Asinius.
Let these virgins quickly see thee,
Leading out the Bride,
Though their blushing cheeks they hide,
Yet with kisses will they fee thee,
To untie their Virgin zone,
They grieve to lye alone.
So doe I by Venus.
Yet with kisses will they fee thee, my Muse has marched
(dear rogue•) no •arder yet: but how first? how first? nay pre∣thee
good Asini•s deal plainly, doe not flatter me, come,
how?—
If I have any judgment:
Nay look you Sir, and the• follow a troop of other
rich and laboured conceits, oh the end shall be admirable!
but how first sweet Bubo, how, how?
If I have any Judgment, tic the best stuff that e∣for
dropped from thee.
You ha seen my Acrostics?
Isle put up my pypes and then Isle see any thing.
You have a Copy of mine Odes to, hast not Bubo?
Your odes? O that which you spake by word a mouth
at th'ordinary, when Musco the gull cried Mew at it:
A pox on him poor braineles Rooke: and you re∣member,
I told him his wit lay at pawn with his new Sat∣tin
suit, and both would be lost, for not fetching home by a
day.
At which he would fai•e ha blushed but that his pain∣ted
cheeks would not let him.
Nay sir the Palinode, which I mean to stitch to
my Revels, shall be the best and ingenious piece that ever I
sweat for; stay rogue, Isle fat thy spleen and make it plump
with laughter.
Shall I? faith Ningle, shall I see thy secrets?
Puh my friends.
But what fardle's that? what fardle's that?
Farthel, away, tic my packet; here lies entombed
the loves of Knights and Earls, here tic, here tic, here tic,
Sir Walter Terils letter to me, and my answer to him: I no
sooner opened his letter, but there appeared to me three glo∣rios
Angels, whom I adorned, as subjects doe their Some∣reigns:
the honest knight Angles for my acquaintance,
with •uch golden baits—but why dost laugh my good
rogue? how is my answer, prithee, how, how?
Answer, as God judge me Ningle, for thy wit thou
may answer any Justice of peace in England I warrant; thou
writ'st in a most goodly big hand too, I like that, &amp; readst as
leageably as some that have bin saved by their neck-verse.
But how dost like the Kinghts indicting?
If I have any judgment; a pox o•t, heir's worship∣full
lines indeed, heir's stuff: but ••ra Ningle, of what fa∣shion
is this knights wit, of what block•?
Why you see; well, well, an ordinary Ingenuity, a good
wit for a knight, you know how, before God I am haunted
with some the most pitiful dry gallants.
Troth so I think; good pieces of lantskip, show best a far off.
I, I, I, excellent sumpter horses, carry good clothes;
but honest rogue, come, what news, what news abroad? I
have heard a the horses walking a••h top of Paules.
Hay? why thē Captain Tucca rails upon you most
preposterously behind your back, did you not hear him▪
A pox upon him: by the white &amp; soft hand of Minerua,
Isle make him the most ridiculous: dam me if I bring not's
humoured stage: &amp;—scu•uy limping tongued captain, poor
gre•ie buff larkin, hang him: tic out of his Element to tra∣duce
me: I am too well ranked Asinius to bee stabbed with his
dudgeon wit: sir, Isle compose an Epigram, upon him, shall
go thus—
Nay I ha more news, ther's Crispinus &amp; his Journey∣man
Poet Demetrius Faninus too, they swear they'll bring
your life &amp; death vpon'th stage like a Bricklayer in a play.
Bubo they must press more valiant wits than their
own to do it: me •th stage? ha, ha, Isle start thence poor cop∣per-lace
workmasters, that dare play me: I can bring (&amp; that
they quake at) a prepared troop of gallants, who for my sake
shall distaste every vnsalted line, in their ••y-blowne Comedies
Nay that•s certain, isle bring 100. gallants of my rank
That same Crispinus is the silliest Dor, and Faninus
the slightest cob-web-lawne pierce of a Poet, oh God!
Why should I care what every Dor doth buzz.
Incredulous ears, it is a crown to me.
That the best judgements can report me wronged.
I am one of them that can report it:
I think but what they are, and am not moved.
The one a light ••••ptuous Reueler,
The other, a strange arrogating puff,
Both impudent, and arrogant enough.
S'lid do not Cri••cus Revel in these lines, ha Nine∣glee
ha?
Yes, they're mine own.
Horace.
Flaccus.
Horace, not up yet;
Peace, tread so•tly, hyde my Paper; who's this so
early?
Some of my rooks, some of my gulls?
Horace, Flac•us.
Who's there? st•ay, tread softly: Wat Terill on my
life: who's there? my gown sweet rogue, so, come up,
come in.
God morrow Horace.
O, God save you gallants.
Asinius Bubo well met.
Nay I hope so Crispinus, yet I was sick a quar∣la
of a year a got of a vehement great tooth-atch: a pox
o•t, it bit me vi•ye, as God same la • knew it was you by your
knocking so soon as I saw you; Demetrius Fannius, will you
take a whiff this morning? I have tickling gear now, heir's
that will play with your nose, and a pipe of mine own scow∣ring
too.
I, and a Hodgshead too of your own, but that will
never be scoured clean I fear.
I burnt my pipe yesternight, and it was never used
since, if you will tic at your service gallants, and Tobacco too,
tic right pudding I can tell you; a Lady or two, took a pipe
full or two at my hands, and praised it for the Heavens, shall
I fill Flannius?
I thank you good 〈◊〉 for your love,
I fildome take that Physic, tic enough
Having so much fool to take him in snuff.
Good Bubo read some book▪ and give vs leave•—
Leave have you dear Ningle, marry for reading any
book Isle take my death vpout (as my Ningle says) tic out of
my Elemēt: no faith, eve• since I felt one hit me ith teeth that
the greatest Clarks are not the wisest men, could I abide to
go to School, I was at As in present• and left there: yet be∣cause
Isle not be counted a worle fool then I am, Isle turn
over a new leaf.
To see my fate, that when I dip my pen
In distilde Roses, and doe strive to dreine,
Out of mine Ink all gall; that when I way
Each syllable I write or speak, because
Mine enemies with sharpe and searching eye▪
Look through &amp; through me, carving my poor labours
Like an Anatomy: Oh heaven• to see,
That when my lines are measured out as straight
As even Paralels, tic strange that still,
Still some imagine they are drawn awe•y.
The error is not mine, but in their eye,
That cannot take proportions.
Horace, Horace,
To stand within the shot of galling tongues,
Proves not your gilt, for could we write on paper,
Made of these turning 〈◊〉 of heaven, the clouds,
Or speak with Angels tongues▪ yet wise men know,
That some would sha•e the head, tho Saints should sing,
Some snakes 〈…〉, because they reborn with stings.
Tic true.
Doe we not see fools laugh 〈◊〉 heaven and mock
The Mákers workmanship; be not you grieved
If that which you mould fair, upright and smooth,
Be skrwed a wry, made crooked, lame and vile,
By racking coments, a•d calumnious tongues,
So to be bit it raukcles not: for innocence
May with a feather brush off the foulest wrongs.
But when your d•stard wit will strike at men
In corners, and in riddles fold the vices
Of your best friends, you must not take to heart,
If they take off all gilding from their pills,
And only offer you the bitter Coare.
Crispinus.
Say that you have not sworn unto your Paper,
To blot her white cheeks with her dregs and bottom
Of your friends private vices: say you swear
Your love and your aleageance to bright virtue
Makes you descend so low, as to put on
The Office of an Executioner,
Only to strike off the head of sin,
Where ere you find it standing,
Say you swear;
And make damnation parcel of your oath,
That when your lashing jests make all men bleed;
Yet you whip none. Court, City, country, friends,
Foes, all must smart alike; yet Court, nor City,
Nor foe, nor friend, dare winch at you; great pity.
If you swear, dam me Faninus, or Crispinus,
Or to the law (Our kingdoms golden chain)
To Poets dam me, or to Players dam me,
If I brand you, or you, tax you, scourge you:
I wonder then, that of five hundred, four hundred five,
Should all point with their fingers in one instant
At one and the same man?
Dear Faninus.
Come, you cannot excuse it.
Hear me, I can—
You must da•be on thick colours then to hide it.
We come like your Physicians, to purge
Your sick and dangerous mind of her disease.
In troth we doe, o•t of our loves we come,
And not revenge, but if you strike vs still,
We must defend our reputations:
Our pens shall like our swords be always sheathed,
Unless too much prou••••, 〈◊〉 i• then
They draw blood of you, blame vs not, we are men:
Come, let thy Muse bear up a smoother sail,
Tic the easiest and the basest Art to rail,
Deliver me your hands, I love you both,
As dear as my own soul, prove me, and when
I shall traduce you, make me the scorn of men.
Enough, we are friends.
What reads Asinius?
By my troth heir's an excellent comfortable book,
it's most sweet reading in it.
Why, what does it smell of Bubo?
Mas it smells of Rose-leaues a little too.
Then it must needs be a sweet book, he would fine
perfume his ignorance.
I warrant he had wit in him that penned it.
Tic good yet a fool will confess truth.
The whoorson made me meet with a hard stile in
two or three places as I went over him.
I believe thee, for they had need to be very lowe &amp;
easy Stiles of wit that thy brains go over.
Wher's this gallant? Morrow Gentlemen: what's,
this devise 〈◊〉 yet Horace?
Gods so, what mean you to let this fellow dog you
into my Chamber?
Oh, our honest Captain, come, prithee let vs
see.
Why you bastards of nine whoores, the Muses, why
doe you walk here in this gorgeous ga•le•y of gallant inuen∣tions,
with that whooreson poor lyme &amp; hayre-rascall?
why—
O peace good Tucca, we are all sworn friends,
Sworn, that Iudas yonder that walks in Rug, will
dub you Knights ath post, if you serve under his band of
oaths, the copper fact rascal will for a good supper out swear
twelve dozen of grand Juries.
A pox ont, not done yet, and bin about it three
days?
By Iesu within this hour, save you Captain
Tucca.
Dam thee, thou thin bearded Hermaphrodite, dam
thee, Isle save my self for one I warrant thee, is this thy Tub
Diogines?
Yes Captain this is my poor lodging.
Morrow Captain Tucca, will you whiff this
morning?
Art thou there goats pizzel; no goda•ercy Caine
I am for no whiffs I, come hither sheep-skin-weauer•s •foot
thou look as though th'adst begged out of a Jail: draw,
I mean not thy face (for tic not worth drawing) but draw
near: this way, march, follow your commander you
scoundrel: So, thou must run of an errand for me Mepho∣stophiles.
To doe you pleasure Captain I will, but when∣there
To hell, thou know the way, to hell my fire and
brimstone, to hell; dost stare my Sar•en•-head at Newgate?
dost gl•ate? Isle march through thy 〈◊〉 go•s, for shoo∣ting
jests at me.
Dear Captain but one word.
Out bench-whistler out, isle not take thy word for a
dagger Pie: you browne-bread-mouth stinker, isle teach thee
to turn me into Banks his horse, and to tell gentlemen I am
a Juggler, and can show tricks.
Captain Tucca, but half a word in your ear.
No you starved rascal, thou't bite off mine ears then,
you must have three or four suites of names, when like a low∣sie
Pediculous vermin you have but one suite to thy back: you
must be called Aspire, and Criticus, and Horace, thy tytle's lone∣ger
a reading then the Stile a the big Turks: Aspire, Criticus,
Quintus, Horatius, Flacu•s.
Captain I know upon what even bases I stand, and
therefore—
Bases? wud the rogue were but ready for me.
Nay prithee dear Tucca, come you shall shake—
Not hands with great Hunkes there, not hands, but
Isle shake the gull-groper out of his tanned skin.
For our sake Captain, nay prithee
hold.
Thou wrongst here a good honest rascal Crisp∣nus,
and a poor varlet Demetrius Fanninus (brethren in
thine own trade of Poetry) thou say Crispinus Satin doublet
is Reauel'd out here, and that this penurious sneaker is out at
elboes, go two my good full mouthed ban-dog, Isle ha thee
friends with both.
With all my heart captain Tucca, and with you too,
Isle lay my hand• under your feet, to keep them from
eking.
Can you have any more?
Say thou me so, old Coal come? do it then; yet tic
no matter neither, Isle have thee in league first with these two
roly powlies: they shall be thy Demons and thou their Pithy∣ass;
Crispinus shall give thee an old cast Satin suite, and De∣metrius
shall write thee a Scene or two, in one of thy strong
garlic Comedies; and thou shalt take the guilt of consci∣ence
for ••and swear tic thine own old lad, tic thine own:
thou never yet fels't into the hands of satin, did?
Never Captain I thank God.
Go too, thou shalt now King Gorboduck, thou shalt,
because Isle ha thee damned, Isle ha thee all in Satin: Aspire,
Criticus, Quintus, Horatius, Flaccus, Crispinus shall do it, thou
shalt do it, heir apparent of Helicon, thou shalt do it.
Mine Ingle wear an old cast Satin suite?
I wa•er-fate your Ningle.
If he carry the mind of a Gentleman, he'll scorn it
it's heals.
Mary muff, my man a ginger-bread, wilt eat any
small coal?
No Captain, wot you should well know it, great
coal shall not fill my belly.
Scorn it, dost scorn to be arrested at one of his old
Suit•s?
No Captain, Isle wear any thing.
I know thou wilt, I know you are an honest low minded
Pigmy, for I ha seen thy shoulders lapped in a Players old cast
Cloak, like a Sly knave as thou art: and when thou rinsed mad
for the death of Horatio: thou borrowed a gown of Rosci∣us
the Stager, (that honest Nicodemus) and sentst it home low∣sie,
did not? Respond, did not?
So, so, no more of this, within this hour—
If I can sound retreat to my wits, with whom this
leader is in skirmish, Isle end within this hour.
What wut end? wut hang thy self now? has he not
writ Finis yet Jack? what will he bee fifteen weeks about
this Cockatrices egg too? has hee not cackeld yet? not
laid yet?
Not yet, hee swears hee will within this hour.
His wits are somewhat hard bound: the Puncke
his Muse has sore labour ere the whore bee delivered: the
poor saffron-cheeke Sun-burnt Gypsy wants Physic; give
the hungrie-face pudding-pye-eater ten Pills: ten shillings
my fair Angelica, they' make his Muse as yare as a tum∣bler.
He shall not want for money if heel write.
Go by Ieronimo, go by; and here, drop the ten
shillings into this Basin; doe, drop, when Jack• hee shall call
me his Moecen••: besides, Isle dam vp's Ouen-mouth for rayl∣ing
it's: So, i•t right Jack? first sterling? fall off now to the
vauward of yonder four Stinkers, and ask aloud if wee
shall go? the Knight shall defray Jack, the Knight
when it comes to Sum totalis, the Knight, the
Knight.—
Well Gentlemen, we'll leave you, shall we go Cap∣taine?
good Horace make some hast.
Isle put on wings.
I never saw mine Ingle so dashed in my life be∣fore.
Yes once Asinius.
Mas you say true, hee was dashed worse once going
(in a rainy day) with a speech to'th Tilt-yard, by Gods
lyd has called him names, a dog would not put up, that had a∣ny
discretion.
Hold, hold up thy hand, I ha seen the day thou
did not scorn to hold up thy golles: ther's a Soldiers
Spur-royall, twelve pence: Stay, because I know thou can
not write without quick•••for; up again, this goll again, I give
thee double presse-money: Stay, because I know thou hast a
noble head, isle divide my Crown, ô royal Porrex, ther's a
teston more; go, thou and thy Muse munch, d•e, munch;
come my dear Mandrake, if Skeldring fall not to decay, thou
shalt flourish: farewell my sweet Amadis de Gaul, farewell.
Dear Captain.
Come Jack.
Nay Captain stay, we are of your band.
March fair then:
Horace farewell, adieu Asinius
Ningle lets go to some •auerne, and dine together,
for my stomach rises at this scurvy leather Captain.
No, they have choked me with mine own disgrace,
Which (fools) isle spit again even in your face.
Knaves, Varlets, what Lunges, give me a dozen
of stools there.
Sesu plesse vs all in our five senses a piece, what
mean ye sir Kintilian Sorthose to stand so much on a dozen
stools, here be not preaches enough to hyde a dozen stools,
unless you wise some of vs preake his sins.
I say sir Vaughan no shin shall be broken heer▪
what lunges, a chair with a strong back, and a soft belli•,
great with child; with a cushion for this reverend Lady.
God never gave me the grace to be a Lady, yet
I ha been worshipped in my conscience to my face a thousand
times, I cannot deny sir Va•ghan, but that I have all imple∣mints,
belonging to the vocation of a Lady.
I trust mistress Mineuer you have all a honest
omen shut have?
Yes party, as my Coach, and my fan, and a man
or two that 〈…〉 turn, and other things which Id bee
loath every one should see, because they shall not be common,
I am in manner of a Lady in one point.
I pray mistress Mineuers, let vs all see that point for
our better understanding.
For I ha somethinges that were fetched (I am sure) as
far as some of the Low Countries, and I paid sweetly for
them too, and they told me they were good for Ladies.
And much good do it thy good heart fair widow
with them.
I am fair enough to bee a Widow, Sir Queen∣tilian.
In my soul and conscience, and well favoured
enough to be a Lady: here is sir ••ntilian Sorthose, and here
is sir Adam Prickshaft, a sentleman of a very good brain, and
well headed: you see he shoots his bolt seldom, but when
Adam lets go, he hits: and here is sir Vaughan ap Rees, and
I believe if God sud take vs all from his mercy, as I hope hee
will not yet; we all three love you, at the bottom of our bell∣lies,
and our hearts: and therefore mistress Mineuer, if you
please, you shall be knighted by one of vs, whom you fall de∣sire
to put into your device and mind.
One I must have sir Vaughan.
And one of vs thou shalt have widow.
One I must have, for now every one seeks to crow
over me.
By Sesu and if I find any crowing over you, &amp; he
were a cock (come out as far as in Turkeys country) tic pos∣sible
to cut his comb off.
I muse why sir Adam Prickshaft flies so far from
vs.
I am in a browne study, my dear, if love should
bee turned into a beast, what beast hee were fit to bee turned into.
I think Sir Adam an Ass, because of his bea∣ring.
I think (saving your reverence) Sir Adam a puppy,
for a dog is the most loving creature to a christian that is, unless
it be a child.
No, I think if love should bee turned away, and
go to serve any beast, it must bee an Ape, and my rea∣son—
Sir Adam, an Ape? ther's no more reason in an
Ape, than in a very plain Monkey; for an Ape has no tail,
but we all know, or tic our duty to know, love has two tails;
In my sudsment, if love be a beast, that beast is a buns of Red∣dis;
for a buns of Rods is wise meat without Mutton, and
so is love.
Ther's the yawning Captain (saving your reverence
that has such a sore mouth) would one day needs persuade
me, that love was a Rebato; and his reason was (saving your
reverence) that a Rebato was worn out with pinning too of∣ten;
and so he said love was.
And Master Captain Tucca said wisely too,
love is a Rebato indeed: a Rebato must be poaked; now
many women wear Rebatoes, and many that wear Re∣batoes—
Must be poakt.
Sir Adam Prickshaft has hit the clout
The Music speaks to vs, we'll have a dance be∣fore
dinner.
The King's at hand.
Father the King's at hand.
Music talk louder, that thy silver voice,
May reach my Sovereigns ears.
I pray doe so, Musicians bestir your singers, that
you may have vs 〈…〉
His Grace comes, a Hall 〈◊〉, where be my
men? blow, blow your cold 〈…〉 they sweat; tickle
them till they sound again.
Be•t go meet his Grace.
Agreed.
Pray all stand bare, as well men as women: Sir
Adam is best you hide your head for fear your wise brains
take key-colde: on before Sir Kintilian; Sentlemen fall in before
•he Ladies, in seemly order and fashion; so this is come∣•ye.
Nay if your pleasures shrink at sight of vs,
We shall repent this labour, Mistress Bride
You that for speaking but one word to day▪
Must loose your head at night; you that doe stand
Taking your last leave of virginity;
You that being well begun, must not be Maid:
Win you the Ladies, s•the men will woo,
Our self will lead my blushing Bride with you.
God bless your Majesty, and send you to be
along King William Rufus over vs, when he sees his times &amp;
pleasures.
Wee thank you good Sir Vaughan, wee will take
your meaning not your words.
Load Music there.
I am glad, our Majesty will take any thing at my
hands; my words • trust in Sesu, are spoken between my soul
and body together, and have neither Felonies nor treasons a∣bout
them, I hope.
Good words Sir Vau•han, I prithee give vs leave.
Good words sir Vaughan? thats by interpertation in
english, you•r best give good words sir Vaughan: god and his
Ansells bless me, what ails his majesty to be so tedious and
difficult in his right minds now, I hold my life that file ras∣call-rymer
Horace hath puzd and puzd aboue a hundred merry
tales and lice, into his great and princely ears: by god and he
use it, his being Phoebus priest cannot save him, if hee were his
Sapline too id press upon his coxcomb: good lord bless me
out of his majesties cellar: King Williams, I hope tic none of∣fences
to make a supplication to god a mighty for your long
life: for by shesu I have no meaning in it in all the world, unless
rascals be here that will have your grace take shalke for shees,
and unless Horace has sent lie•e to your majesty.
Horace, what's he sir Vaughan?
As hard-fauourd a fellow as your majesty has seen
in a summers day: he does pen, an't please your grace, toys
that will not please your grace; tic a Poet, we call them Bardes
in our Country, singes ballads and rymes, and I was mighty
sealous, that his Ink which is black and full of gall, had bro∣ught
my name to your majesty, and so lifted up your hye and
princely collar.
I neither know that Horace, nor mine anger,
If as thou say our high and princely choler
Be up, we'll tread it down with dances; Ladies
Loose not your men; fair measures must be tread,
When by so fair a dancer you are lead.
Mistress Miniuer:
Party sir Vaughan I cannot dance.
Party by this Miniuer cap, and acording to his
masesties leave too, you sall be put in among theise Ladies, &amp;
dance ere long I trest in god, the saking of the seats.
That turn fair Bride shows you must turn at night,
In that sweet dance which steals away delight.
Then pleasure is a theife, a fit, a fever:
True, he•s the thief, but women the receiver.
This change sweet Maid, says you must change your life,
As Virgins doe.
Virgins ne'er change their life,
She that is wived a maid, is Maid and wife.
But she that dyes a Maid;—
Thrice happy then.
Leads Apes in hell.
Better lead Apes then men.
Well met.
Tic overtaken.
Why fair sweet?
Women are overtaken when they meet;
Your blood speaks like a coward,
It were good,
If every Maiden blush, had such a blood.
A coward blood, why whom should maidens fear?
Men, were Maids cowards, they'd not come so ne'er,
My Lord the Measure's done, I pleale my duty.
Only my heart takes measure of thy beauty.
Now by my hose I swear, that's no deep oath,
This was a fine sweet earth-quake gently moved,
By the soft wind of whispring Silks: come Ladies,
Whose joints are made out of the dancing Orbs,
Come, follow me, walk a cold measure now;
In the Brides Chamber; your hot beauty's melt,
Take every one her fan, give them their places,
And wave the Northern wind upon your faces.
Sir Walter Terrill.
My confirmed Liege
Beauty out of her bounty, thee hath lent,
More then her own with liberal extent.
What means my Lord?
Thy Bride, thy choice, thy wife,
She that is now thy fathom, thy new world,
That brings thee people, and makes little subjects;
Kneel at thy feet, obey in every thing,
So every Father is a private King.
My Lord, her beauty is the poorest part,
Chiefly her virtues did endow my heart.
Doe not back-bite her beauties, they all shine,
Brighter on thee, because the beams are thine,
To thee more fair, to others her two lips
Show like a parted Moon in thine Eclipse;
That glance, which lovers amongst themselves devise,
Walks as invisible to other eyes:
Give me thine ear.
What means the King?
Tic a quaint strain.
My Lord.
Thou dare not Wat.
She is too course an object for the Court.
Thou dare not What: let to night be to morrow,
For shoe's not yet mine own.
Thou dare not Wat▪
My Lord I dare, but—
But I see thou dare not.
This night.
Yea, this night, tush thy mind repairs not,
The more thou talk of night, the more thou dare not;
Thus far I tend, I wot but turn this sphere,
Of Ladies eyes, and place it in the Court,
Where thy fair Bride should for the Zodiac shine,
And every Lady el•e sit for a sign.
But all thy thoughts are yellow, thy sweet blood
Rebels, you are jealous Wat; thus with proud revels
To emmulate the masking firmament,
Where Stars dance in the silver Hall of heaven,
Thy pleasure should be seasoned, and thy bed
Relish thy Bride, But, but thou dare not What.
My Loord I dare.
Speak that again.
I dare.
Again kind What, and then I know thou dare.
I dare and will by that joint holy oath,
Which she and I swore to the book of heaven.
This very day when the surveying Sun,
Rise like a witness to her faith and mine,
By all the loyalty that subjects owe
To Majesty, by that, by this, by both,
I swear to make a double guarded oath,
This night untainted by the touch of man,
She shall a Virgin come.
To Court?
To Court.
I know I took a woman to my wife,
And I know women to be earthly Moons,
That never shine till night, I know they change
Their Orbs (their husbands) and in sickish hearts,
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
Steal to their sweet Endimions, to be cured
With better Physic, sweeter diet drinks,
Then home can minister: all this I know
Yet know not all, but give me leave O King,
To boast of mine, and say that I know none;
I have a woman but not such a one.
Why, she's confirmed in thee; I now approve her,
If constant in thy thoughts who then can move her?
Wilt please your Highness take your place within,
The Ladies attend the Table.
I go good Knight; Wat thy oath.
My Lord,
My oath's my honour, my honour is my life,
My oath is constant, so I hope my wife.
If you fly out Ningle, heir's your Cloak; I think it
rain• too.
Hide my shoulders in it.
Troth so th'adst need, for now thou art in thy Pee
and Kue; thou hast such a villainous broad back, that I war∣rant
you are able to bear away any mans ie••es in England.
It's well Sir, I ha strength to bear yours me thinks;
fore God you are grown a piece of a Critist, since you fell in∣to
my hands: ah little rogue, your wit has picked up her crum•
pretty and well.
Yes faith, I find my wit a the mending hand Ningle;
troth I doe not think but to proceed Poetaster next Com∣mencement,
if I have my grace perfectly: every one that con∣fer
with me now, stop their nose in merriment and swear I
smell somewhat of Horace; one calls me Horaces Ape, ano∣there
Horaces Beagle, and such Poetical names it passes. I was
but at Barbers last day, and when he was rinsing my face, did
but cry out▪ fellow thou makst me 〈◊〉 too long, &amp; says
he says hyee, Master Asinius Bub•, you have even Horaces
words as right as if he had spit them into your mouth.
Well, away dear Asinius, deliver this letter to the
young Gallant Drus•, he that fell so strongly in love with me
yesternight.
It's a sweet Muske-cod, a pure spic•d-gull, by this
feather I pity his Ingenuities; but hast writ all this since Nine∣glee?
I know thou hast a good running head and thou listest.
Foh come, your great bellied wit mu•• long for every
thing too; why you R•ok, I have a set of letters ready starcht
to my hands, which to any fresh suited gallant that but newly
enters his name into my roll, I send the next morning, ere
his ten a clock dream has rise from him, only with clap∣ing
my hand to it, that my Novice shall start, ho and his hair
stand an end, when hee sees the sudden flash of my writing;
what you pretty Diminutive rogue, we must have false fierce
to amaze these spangle babies, these true heirs of Ma• Juice•ice
Shallow.
I wot always have thee saw•• a fool thus.
Away, and, stay: here be Epigrams upon Tucca, di∣vulge
these among the gallants; as for Crispinus, that Cris∣pin-asse
and Fannius his Play-dresser; who (to make the
Muses believe, their subjects ears were starved and that there
was a dearth of Poefie) cut an Innocent Moore in the middle, to
serve him in twice; &amp; when he had done, made Poules-worke
of it, as for these Twynnes these Poet〈◊〉:
Their Mimic tricks shall serve
With mirth to feast our Muse, whilst their own starve.
Well Ningle Isle trudge, but whore's the Ran∣deuow?
Well thought off, marie at Sir Vaughans lodging
the VVelsh knight, I have composed a loue-letter for the gal∣lants
worship, to his Rosamond: the second, Mistress Mini∣for,
because she does not think so soundly of his •am English as
he could wish; I ha gulled his Knight-ship here to his face, yet
have given charge to his winking understanding not to per∣ceiue
it: nay Gods so, away dear Bubo.
I am gone.
The Muses birds the Bees were hived and fled,
Vs in our cradle, there by prophesying;
That we to learned •ares should sweetly sing,
But to the vulgar and adulterate brain,
Should loath to prostitute our Virgin strain.
No, our sharpe pen shall keep the world in awe,
Horace thy Poesy, wormwood wreathes shall wear,
We hunt not for men's loves but for their fear.
O Sir Adam Prickshaft, you are a the bow hand
wide, a long, yard I assure you: and as for Suitors, truly they
all go down with me, they have all one flat answer.
All Widow? not all, let Sir Adam bee your
first man still.
Widow, art stolen from Table? I Sir Adam,
Are you my rival? well, fly fair you're best;
The King's exceeding merry at the banquet,
He makes the Bride blush with his merry words
That run into her ears; ah he's a wanton,
Yet I dare trust her, had he twenty tongues,
And every tongue a Stile of Majesty,
Now Widow, let me tell thee in thine ear,
I love thee Widow, by this ring; nay wear it.
Isle come in no rings pardie, Isle take no gold.
〈…〉
Master Peter Flash, I will grope about Sir Queen∣tilian,
for his terminations touching and considering you.
I thank your Worship, for I have as good a sto∣macke
to your Worship as a man could wish.
I hope in God a mighty, I shall fill your stomach
Master Peter: What two upon one Sentlemen; Mistress Miniuer,
much good do it you Sir Adam.
Sir Vaughan, have you dined well Sir Vaughan?
As good seer as would make any hungry man
(and a were in the vilest prison in the world) eat and hee had
any stomach: One word Sir Quintilian in hugger mugger;
here is a Sentleman of yours, Master Peter Flash, is tesirous
to have his blew coat pulled over his ears; and—
No Sir, my petition runs thus, that your worship
would thrust me out of doors, and that I may follow Sir
Vaughan.
I can tell you Master Flash, and you follow me I
go very fast, I think in my conscience, I am one of the light∣est
knights in England.
It's no matter Sir, the Flashes have ever bin known
to be quick and light enough.
Sir Vaughan, he shall follow you, he shall dog you good Sir Vaughan.
Why then Peter Flash I will set my four marks
a year, and a blew coat upon you.
God a mercy to your worship, I hope you shall never
repent for me.
You bear the face of an honest man, for you blush
passing well Peter, I will quench the flame out of your name,
and you shall be christened Peter Salamander.
The name's too good for me, I thank your
worship.
Are you come Master Horace, you sent me the
Copy of your letters countenance, and I did write and read
it; your wits truly have done very valiantly: tic a good
inditements, you ha put in enough for her ha you not?
According to my instructions.
Tic passing well, I pray Master Horace walk a
little beside your self, I will turn upon you incontinent.
What Gentleman is this in the Mandilian, a sol∣dyer?
No, tho he has a very bad face for a soldier, yet he
has as desperate a wit as ever any Scholar went to cuffs for;
tic a Sentleman Poet, he has made rimes called Thalamimums,
for M. Pridegroome, on vrd widow.
Is this he? welcome Sir, you name? pray you walk
not so stately, but be acquainted with me boldly; your name
Sir?
Quintus, Horacius, Flaccus.
Good Master Flappus welcome.
Mistress Miniuer, one vrde in your corner here;
I desire you to break my arms here, and read this Paper,
you shall feel my minds and affections in it, at full and at
large.
Iletreceiue no Love libels party, but by word a
mouth.
By Sesu tic no libel, for here is my hand
to it.
Isle ha no hand in it Sir Vaughan, Isle not deal
with you.
Why then widow, Isle tell you by word a mouth
my devices.
Your devices come not near my mouth Sir Vaugh∣an
party, I was upon a time in the way to marriage, but now I
am turned a tother side, I ha sworn to lead a single and simon∣ple life.
She has answered you Sir Vaughan.
Tic true, but at wrong weapons Sir Adam; will
you be an Ass Mistress Miniuers?
If I be you shall not ride me.
A simple life! by Sesu tic the life of a fool, a simon∣ple life!
How now Sir Vaughan?
My brains has a little fine quawme come un∣der
it, and therefore Sir Adam, and Sir Quintilian, and mistress
Miniuer caps God bo'y.
Good Sir Vaughan.
Master Horace, your inventions doe her no
good in the Vniuersalities; yet here is two shillings for your
wits; nay by Sesu you shall take it if it were more: yonder
bald Adams, is put my nose from his joint; but Adam I will be
even to you: this is my cogitations, I will indite the Ladies &amp;
Miniuer caps to a dinner of Plumbs, and I shall desire you
M. Horace, to speak or rail; you can rail I hope in God a
mighty.
You mean to speak bitterly:
Right, to spit bitterly upon baldnes, or the
thinnes of hair; you •all eat down Plumbs to sweeten your
mouth, and here is a good Ansell to defend you: Peter Sa∣lamander
follow me.
With hue and cry and you will Sir.
Come M, Horace, I will go pull out the Ladies.
And Isle set out my wits, Baldnes the Theme?
My words shall flow hye in a silver stream.
Wher's my most costly and sump•uous Shoe••hose•▪
Is the King risen from table Captain Tucca?
How? risen? no my noble Quintilian, kings are greater
men then we Knights and Civilly•s, and therefore must eat
more then lesser persons; Godamercy good Dives for these
crumbs: how now? has not Friar Tucke dined yet? he falls so
hard to that Oyster-pye yonder.
Oyster-pye Captain? ha ha, he loves her, and I
love her and fear both shall go without her.
Dost love her, my finest and first part of the Mirror
of Knighthood? hang her she looks like a bottle of ale, when
the cork flies out and the Ale fomes at mouth, she looks
my good button-breech like the sign of Capricorn, or like
Tiborne when it is covered with snow.
Ell's one for that, she has a vizard in a bag, will
make her look like an Angel; I wot I had her, upon conditi∣on,
I gave thee this chain manly Tucca.
I? say thou so Friskin? I have herath hip for some
causes, I can sound her, she•ll come at my beck.
Wot I could sound her too Noble commaun∣der.
Thou shalt do it; that Lady ath Lake is thine Sir Tri∣stram,
lend me thy chain, doe, lend it, Isle make her take it
as a token, Isle lincke her unto thee; and thou shalt wear
her glove in thy Worshipful hat•e like to a leather broo•h;
Nay and thou mistrusts thy collar, be tied in it ••ill.
Mi••rust Captain no here tic, give it her if she'll
take it, or wear it thy s•lfe, if she'll take me, Isle watch him
well enough too.
No more, Il• shoot away yonder Prickshaft, and
then belabour her, a•d fly you after yonder Cuckoo: dost here
me my noble Gold•n•h:—
No more.
How do• thou my smug Belimperia? how dost thou?
hands off my little bald Derrick, hands off: hark hither Su∣sanna,
beware a these two wicked Elders, shall I speak well or
•ll of thee?
Nay, even as you please Captain, it shall be at your
choice.
Why well said, my nimble Short-hose.
I hear her, I hear her.
Art angry father time? art angry because I took
mother-Winter aside? Isle hold my life thou art struck with
Cupids Birde-bolt, my little prick shaft, art? dost love that
mother Mumble-crust, dost thou? dost long for that whim-wham?
Wot I were as sure to lye with her, as to love
her.
Have I found thee my learned Dunce, have I found
thee? If I might ha my will, thou should not put thy spoon in∣to
that bumble-broth (for indeed Id taste her my self) no
thou should not; yet if her beauty blind thee, she's thine, I
can do it, thou heard her say even now, it should bee at my
choice.
She did so, work the match and Isle bestow—
Not a silk point upon me, little Adam she shall
bee thy Eeue, for less then an Apple; but send, bee wise,
seud her some token, shoe's greedy, she shall take it, doe,
send, thou shalt stick in her (Prickeshaft) but fend.
Heir's a purse of gold, think you that will be
accepted?
Go to, it shall bee accepted, and it were but silver,
when that Flea-bitten Short-hose steppes hence: vanish
too, and let me alone with my Grannam in Gutter-Lan•
there, and this purse of gold doe, let me alone.
The King, gods Lord, I doe forget the King;
Widow, think on my words, I must be gone
To waite his rising, Isle return anon.
Stay Sir Quintilian, Isle be a waiter too.
Widow we'll trust that Captain there with
you.
Now, now, mother Bunch how dost thou? what dost frown Queen Gwyniuer? dost wrinkle? what made these
pair of Shittle-cockes here? what doe they fumble for? Isle
ha none of these Kites fluttering about thy corks, for thou
shalt bee my West Indies, and none but trim Tucca shall
discover thee.
Discover me? discover what thou can of me.
What I can? thou know what I can discover, but I
will not lay thee open to the world,
Lay me open to the world?
No I will not my mould decayed Chari•g-crosse, I
will not.
Hang thee patch-pannell, I am none a thy Charing-crosse:
I scorn to be Cross to such a scab as thou makst thy
self.
No, tic thou makst me so, my Long Meg a Westmin∣ster,
thou breedst a fcab, thou—
I? dam thee filthy Captain, dam thy self.
My little devil a Dow-gate, Isle dam thee, (thou
know my meaning) Isle dam thee up; my wide mouth at
Bishops-gate.
Wot I might once come to that damming.
Why thou shalt, my sweet dame Anise a clear thou
shalt, for Isle drown my self in thee; I, for thy love, Isle sink,
I, for thee.
So thou wilt I warrant, in thy abominable sins;
Lord, Lord, howe many filthy words hast thou to answer
for.
Name one Madge-owlet, name one, Isle answer for
none; my words shall be forth coming at all times, &amp; shall
answer for them selves; my nimble Cat-a-mountaine: they
shall Sislie Bum-trincket, for Isle give thee none but Sugar∣candy
words, I will not Pusse: goody Tripe-wife, I will
not.
Why dost call me such horrible ungodly names
then?
Isle name thee no more Mother Red•cap upon pain
of death, if thou wilt Grimalkin, Maggo• a-pye I will not.
Wot thou should well know, I am no Maggot, but
a mere Gentlewoman borne.
I know thou art a Gentle, and Isle nibble at thee, thou
shalt be my Cap-a-maintenance, &amp; Isle carry my naked sword
before thee, my reverend Lady Lettice-cap.
Thou shalt carry no naked swords before me to fright
me, thou—
Go too, let not thy tongue play so hard at hot-cockles;
for, Gimmal Gurton, I mean to bee thy needle, I love thee, I
love thee, because thy teeth stand like the Arches under Lone∣don
Bridge, for thou't not turn Satire &amp; bite thy husband;
No, come my little Cub, doe not scorn me because I go in
Stag, in Buff, heir's velvet too; thou see I am worth thus
much in bareveluet.
I scorn thee not, not I.
I know thou dost not, thou shat see that I could march
with two or three hundred links before me, look here what?
I could show gold too, if that would tempt thee, but I will
not make my self a Gold-smithes stall I; I scorn to go
chained my Lady ath Hospital, I doe; yet I will and must bee
chained to thee.
To me? why Master Captain, you know that I
have my choice of three or four pair of Knights, and there∣fore
have small reason to fly out I know not how in a man
of war.
A man a war? come thou know not what a worcester∣shipfull
focation tic to be a Captains wife: three or four pair
of Knights? why dost hear Ioane-a-bedlam, Isle enter into
bond to be dubbed by what day thou wilt▪ when the next act∣on
is laid upon me, thou shalt be Ladified.
You know I am offered that by half a dozen.
Thou shalt little Miniuer, thou shalt, Isle ha this frock
turned into a foote-cloth; and thou shalt be carted, drawn
I mean, Coached, Coached, thou shalt ride Iigga-Iogge; a
Hood shall flap up and down here, and this shipskin-cap
shall be put off.
Nay party, Isle put off my cap for no mans plea∣sure.
Wut thou be proud little Lucifer? well, thou shalt
go how thou wilt Maide-marian; come, bus thy little An∣thony
now, now, my clean Cleopatria; so, so, go thy ways
Alexis secrets, you have a breath as sweet as the Rose, that grows
by the Bear-garden, as sweet as the proud'st head a
Garlic in England: come, wut march in, to the Gentle
folks?
Nay truly Captain you shall be my leader.
I say Mary Ambree▪ thou shalt march foremost,
Because Isle mark how broad you are in the heals.
Party, I will be set ath last for this time.
Why then come, we'll walk arm in arm,
As tho we were leading one another to Newgate.
Mine's of a fashion, cut out quite from yours.
Mine has the sharpest tooth, yonder he is.
Captain Tucca.
How now? I cannot stand to read supplications now
They're bitter Epigrams composed on you
By Horace.
And dispersed amongst the gallants
In several copies, by Asinius Bubo.
By that live Eel? read, Leg Legito, read thou •ask.
Tucca's grown monstrous, how? rich? that I fear,
He's to be seen for money every where.
Why true, shall not I get in my debts, nay and the
rogue write no better I care not, farewell black Jack fare∣well.
But Captain, heir's a nettle.
Sting me, doe.
Tucca's exceeding tall and yet not hye,
He fights with skill, but does most vilely lye.
Right, for here Ely now, open, open▪ to make my
adversary come on; and then Sir, here am I in's bosom: nay
and this be the worst, I shall hug the poor honest face-maker,
Isle love the little Atheist, when he writes after my commenda∣tion,
another whip? come yerk me.
Tucca will bite, how? grown Satirical,
No, he bites tables, for he feeds on all.
The whoreson clouen-foote devil in mans apparel lies,
There stood aboue forty dishes before me to day,
That I ne'er touched, because they were empty.
I am witness young Gentlemen to that.
Farewell stinckers, I smell thy meaning Screech-owle,
I doe tho I stop my nose: and Sir Poet, we'll have thee un∣trust
for this; come, mother Mum-pudding, come.
My song of parting doth this burden bear;
A ki••e the Ditty, and I s•t it here.
Your lips are well in tune, strung with delight,
By this fair Bride remember soon at night:
Sir Walter.
My Liege Lord, we all attend,
The time and place.
Till then my leave commend.
Ladies▪ I am to put a very easy suite upon you all,
and to desire you to fill your little polios at a dinner of plums
behind noon; there be Suckets, and Marmilads, and Mar∣chants,
and other long white plummes that fine would kiss
your delicate and sweet lips; I indite you all together, and
you especially my Lady Pride; what doe you say for your
sells? for I indite you all.
I thank yo• good Sir Vaughan, I will come.
Say Sentlewomen will you stand to me too?
We'll sit with you sweet Sir Vaughan.
God a mighty plesse your faces, and make your
peauties last, when wee are all dead and rotten:—you all
will come.
All will come.
Pray God that Horace bee in his right wits to
rail now.
Come Lady, you shall be my dancing guest.
To tread the maze of music with the rest.
Isle lead you in.
A maze is like a doubt:
Tic easy to go in, hard to get out.
We follow close behind.
That measure's best.
Now none marks vs, but we mark all the rest.
Father, and you my Bride; that name to day,
Wife, comes not till to morrow: but omitting
This interchanging of Languages; let vs think
Upon the King and night and call our spirits
To a true reckoning; first to Arm our wits
With complete steel of Judgment, and our tongs,
With sound attillery of Phrases: then
Our Bodies must bee motions; mooing first
What we speak: afterwards, our very knees
Must humbly seem to talk, and suit out speech;
For a true furnished Cortyer hath such force,
Though his tongue faints, his very legs discourse.
Son Terrill, thou hast drawn his picture right,
For hoe's no full-made Courtier, nor well strung,
That hath not every joint stuck with a tongue.
Daughter, if Ladies say, that is the Bride, that's she,
Gaze thou at none, for all will gaze at thee.
Then, ô my father must I go? O my husband
Shall I then go? O my self, will I go?
You must.
You shall.
I will, but give me leave,
To say I may not, nor I ought not, say not
Still, I must go, let me entreat I may not.
You must and shall, I made a deed of gift,
And gave my oath unto the King, I swore
By thy true constancy.
Then keep that word
To swear by, O let me be constant still.
What shall I cancel faith, and break my oath?
If breaking constancy thou breakst them both.
Thy constancy no evil can pursue.
I may be constant still, and yet not true.
As how?
As thus, by violence detained,
They may be constant still, that are constrained.
Constrained? that word weighs heavy, yet my oath
Weighs down that word; the kings thoughts are at odds,
They are not even balanced in his breast;
The King may play the man with me; nay more,
Kings may usurp; my wife's a woman; yet
Tic more then I know yet, that know not her,
If she should prove mankind, it were rare, fie, fie,
See how I loose my self, amongst my thoughts,
Thinking to find my self; my oath, my oath,
I swear another, let me see▪ by what,
By my long stocking, and my narrow skirts,
Not made to sit upon, she shall to Court.
I have a trick, a charm▪ that shall lay down
The spirit of lust, and keep thee vndeflowred;
Thy husbands honour saved, and the hot King,
Shall have eno•gh too▪ Come, a trick, a charm.
God keep thy honour safe, my blood from harm.
Come, my sicke-minded Bride, Isle teach thee how,
To relish health a little: Taste this thought,
That when mine eyes served loves commission,
Upon thy beauties I did seize on them.
To a Kings use; cure all thy g•iefe with this,
That his great seal was graven upon this ring,
And that • was but Steward to a King.
Ladies and Sentlemen, you are almost all well∣come,
to this swe•t nuncions of Plums.
Almost all •ir Vaughan: why to which of vs are
you so niggardly, that you cut her out but a peace of well∣come.
My interpretations is that almost all are well∣come,
because I indicted a brace or two more that is not come,
I am sorry my Lady Pride is not among you.
Slid, he makes hounds of vs Ningle, a brace quoth a?
Peter Salamanders draw out the pictures of all
the joint stools, &amp; Ladies sit down upon their wooden faces.
I warrant Sir, Isle give every one of them a good
stool.
Master Horace, Master Horace, when I pray to
God, and desire in hipocrit•es that bald Sir Adams were heer,
then, then, then begin to make you ra•les at the poverty and
beggarly want of hair.
Leave it to my judge•meant.
M. Bubo sit there, you and I will think upon our
ends at the Tables: M. Horace, put your learned body into the
midst of these Ladies; so tic no matter to speak graces at nun∣cions,
because we are all past grace since dinner.
Mas I thank my destiny I am not past grace, for
by this hand full of Caraways, I could never abide to say
grace.
Mistress Miniuer, is not that innocent Gentleman a
kind of fool?
Why doe you ask Madam?
Nay for no harm, I ask because I thought you
two had been of acquaintaine.
I think he's within an Inch of a fool.
Madam Philocalia, you sit next that spare Gen∣tleman,
wot you heard what Mistress Miniuer says of you.
Why what says she Madam Dicache.
Nay nothing, but wishes you were married to that
s•all timbered gallant.
Your wish and mine are twins, I wi•• so too for
Then I should be s•re to lead a merry life.
Yes faith Lady, Id make yo• laugh, my bolts now
and then should be soon shot; by these com•its, weed let all
slide.
He takes the sweetest oaths that ever I heard a gal∣lant
of his pitch swear; by these Comfits, &amp; these Caraways,
I warrant it does him good to swear.
Yes faith tic meat and drink to me.
I am glad Lady Petula (by this Apple) that they please you.
Peter Salamanders wine, I beseech you Master
Asinius Bubo, not to swear so deeply, for there comes no
fruit of your oaths; here Ladies, I put you all into one cor∣ners
together, you shall all drink of one cup.
Peter I prithee fill me out too.
Id fling you out too and I might ha my will, a pox
of all fools.
Mistress Miniuers, pray bee lusty, wot Sir Adams
Prickshaft stuck by you.
Who, the bald Knight Sir Vaughan?
The same M. Horace, he that has but a remnant or
parcel of hair, his crown is clipped and par'd away; me thinks
tic an excellent quality to bee bald; for and there stuck a
nose and two nyes in his pate, he might wear two faces un∣der
one hood.
As God save me la, if I might ha my will, Id rather
be a bald Gentleman then a hairy; for I am sure the best and
tallest Yeomen in England have bald heads: me thinks hair
is a scurvy lousy commodity.
Bubo, herein you blaze your ignorance.
Pray stop and fill your mouths, and give M. Ho∣race
all your ears.
For▪ if of all the bodies parts, the head
Be the most royal: if discourse, w•t, Judgment,
And all our understanding faculties,
Sit there in their high Court of Parliament,
Enacting laws to sway this humorous world:
This little Isle of Man: needs must that crown,
Which stands upon this supreme head, he fair,
And held inualuable, and that crowne's the Hair:
The head that wants this honour stands awry,
Is hare in na•e and in authority.
Hemeanes balde-pates mistress Mini•ers.
Hair, tic the robe which curious nature weaues,
To hang upon the head: and does adorn,
Our bodies in the first hour we are horn:
God does bestow that garment: when we dye,
That (like a soft and silken Canoe•••)
Is still spread over vs; •n spite of death
Our hair grows in our grave, and that alone
Looks fresh, when all our other beauty's gone.
The excellence of Hair, in this shines •l•ere,
That the four El•mints take pride to wear
The fashion of it: when Fire most bright does burn,
The flames to golden lockes doe strive to 〈◊〉▪
When her lascivious arms the Water hurls,
About the shores wast, her sleek head she curls:
And rorid clouds being sucked into the Ayre,
When down they melt, hangs like fine silver hair.
You see the Earth (whose head so oft it shoe•no)
Frighted to feel her lockes sorudely •orne,
Stands with her hair an end, and (thus afraid•)
Turns every hair to a greene naked blade.
Besides, when (struck with gr•efe) we long to dye,
We spoil that most, which most does beau••fie,
We r•nd this Head-tyre off. I thus conclude,
Colours set colours out; our eyes judge right,
Of vice or virtue by their opposite:
So, if fair hair to beauty ad such grace,
Baldnes must needs be ugly, vile and base.
True M. Horace, for a bald reason, is a reason that
has no hairs upon it, a scurvy scalded reason.
By my truly I never thought you could ha picked
such s•range things out of hair before.
Nay my Ningle can tickle it, when hee comes
too't.
Troth I shall never bee enameld of a bare-headed
man for this, what shift so ever I make.
Then Mistress Miniuer S. Adams Prickshaft must
not hit you; Peter take up all the clothes at the table and the
Plums.
Save thee my little worshipful Harper; how doe ye•
my little cracknels? how doe ye?
Welcome M. Tucca, sit and shoot into yo•r bell∣lie
some Sugar pellets.
No, Godamercy Cadwallader, how doe you Horace?
Thanks good Captain.
Wher's the Sering thou carry about thee? O have I
found thee my scowring-sticke; what's my name Bubo?
Wot I were hanged if I can call you any names
but Captain and Tucca.
No Fye'st, my name's Hamlet revenge: thou hast
been at Parris garden hast not?
Yes Captain, I ha plaide Zulziman there.
Then M. Horace you plaide the part of an honest man.
Death of Hercules, he could never play that part well
in's life, no Fulkes you could not: thou call Demetrius
Iorneyman Poet, but thou putst up a Supplication to be
a poor Iorneyman Player, and had been still so, but
that thou could not set a good face upon it: thou hast forgot
how thou amblest (in leather pilch) by a play-wagon, in the
high way, and took mad Ieronimoes part, to get service a∣mong
the Mimickes: and when the Stagerites banished thee
into the Isle of Dogs▪ thou turn'dst Ban-dog (villainous Guy) &amp;
ever since bitest, therefore I ask if you have been at Parris-gar∣den,
because thou hast such a good mouth; thou ba•tst well,
read, leg, save thy self and read.
Why Captain these are Epigrams composed on you.
Go not out Farding Candle, go not out, for trusty
Damboys now the deed is done, Isle pledge this Epigram in
wine, Isle▪ yellow i•, I, yes.
God bless vs, will be drunk with nittigrams
now.
So, now arise sprite ath Buttry; no Herring-bone Isle
not pull thee out, but arise dear Echo rise, rise devil or Isle
con•ur thee up.
Good Master Tucca lets ha no conjuring here.
Vddes blood you scald gouty Captain, why
come you to set encombrances here between the Ladies.
Be not so tart my precious Metheglin, be not (my old
whore a Babilon, sit fast.)
O Iesu it I know where abouts in London Babilon
stands.
Feed and be fat my fair Calipolis, stir not my beau∣teous
wriggle-tailes, Isle disease none of you, Isle take none of
you up, but only this table-man, I must enter him into some
filthy sink point, I must.
Captain, you doe me wrong thus to disgrace me.
Thou think thou moist be as saucy with me as my
Buff Jerkin to sit upon me, dost?
Dam me, if ever I traduced your name,
What imputation can you charge me with?
Sblud, I, what cōputations can you lay to his •••ge?
answer, or by Se•u Isle canvas your coxcomb Tucky.
If they draw sweet hearts, let vs shift for our •elves.
My noble swaggerer, I will not fall out with thee, I can∣not
my mad Cumrade▪ find in my heart to shed thy blood.
Cumrade by Sesu call me Cumrade again, and
isle Cumrade ye about the sins and shoulders; ownds, what
come you to smell out here? did you not dine and feed whore∣ribly
well to day at dinner, but you come to munch h•ere, and
give vs winter-plummes? I pray depart, go marse, marse,
marse out a doors.
Adieu Sir Eglamour, adieu Lute-stringe, Curtin-rod,
Goose-quill; here, give that full-nos'd Skinker, these rimes; &amp;
hark, Isle tag my Codpeece point with thy legs, spout-pot
Isle empty thee.
Dost threaten me? Gods lid Isle bind thee to the
good forbearing.
Will you amble Hobby-horse, will you trot and
amble?
Raw Artichocke I shall sauce thee.
I pray you Master Tucca, will you send me the five
pound you borrowed on me; O you cannot hear now, but
Isle make you hear me and feel me too in another place, to
your shame I warrant you, thou shalt not conny-catch me
for five pounds; he took it up Sir Vaughan in your name, hee
swore you sent for it to Mum withal, it was five pound in gold,
as white as my kercher.
Ownds, five pound in my name to Mum a∣bout
withal.
I, to Mum withal, but hee plays mum-budget
with me.
Peter Salamander, tie up your great and your
little sword, by Sesu Isle go sing him while tic hot, Isle beat
five pound out of his leather pilch: Master Horace, let your
wits inhabit in your right places; if I fall sansomely upon th•
Widow, I have some cousins Garman at Court, shall beget
you the reversion of the Master of the Kings Revels, or else
be his Lord of Misrule now at Christmas: Come Ladies,
whoreson Straggling Captain, Isle pound him.
How now? what ail'st tho•, that thou look•t so
pay?
Nay not•ing, but I am afraid the Welsh Knight
has given me nothing but purging Comfits: this Captain▪
sticks pockily in my stomach; read this scroll, he says they are
rimes, and bid me give them you.
Rimes•tic a challenge sent to you.
To me?
He says here you divulged my Epigrams.
And for that dares he challenge me?
You see he dares but dare you answer him?
I date answer his challenge, by word of mouth, or
by wr•ting, but I scorn to meet him, I hope he and I are no•
Para•else.
Dear Bubo, thou shalt answer him; our credits
Lye pawned upon thy resolution,
Thy valour must redeem them; charge thy spirits,
To waite more cl•se, and near thee: if he kill thee,
Isle not sir•iue; into one Lottery.
We'll cast our fates; together live and dye.
Content, I owe God a death, and if he will make
me pay't against my will, Isle say tic hard dealing.
Did Apolloes Freeze gown watch man (boy, dost
hear Tu•kie-co•kes tail have an eye behind, least the en∣mieassault
〈◊〉 R•re-ward) on proceed Father Adam; did
that same tiranicall-tongu'd rag-a-muffin Horace, turn bald∣pates
out so naked?
He did, and whipped them so with nettles, that
The Widow swore that a bare-headed man,
Should not man her: the Lady Petula
Was there, heard all, and •old me this.
Go too.
Thy gold was accepted, it was, and she shall bring thee into
her Paradise, she shall small Adam, she shall.
But how? but how Captain?
Thus, go, cover a table with sweet meates, let all the
Gentlewomen, and that same Pasquils-mad-cap (mother Bee
there) nibble, bid them bite: they will come to gobble down
Plummes; then take up that pair of Basket hilts, with my
commission, I mean C••spinus and Fannius; charge one of
them to take up the Bucklers, against that hayre-monger Ho∣race,
and have about or two, in defence of balde-pates: let
them crack every crown that has hair on it: go, l•t them
lift up baldenes to the sky, and thou shalt see, twill turn Mi∣niuers
heart quite against the hair.
Excellent, why then M. Tucca—
Nay, wh•r, nimble Prickshaft; whir, away, I go up∣on
life and death, away, fly Scanderbag fly.
Arm Captain, arm, arm, arm, the foe is come down.
Hold Captain Tucca hold, I am Bubo, &amp; come to an∣swer
any thing you can lay to my ch•rge.
What, dost summon a parley my little Drum-sticke?
tic too late; thou see my red flag is hung out, Isle fill thy guts
with thine own carrion carcass, and then eat them up instead
of Sausages.
Use me how you will; I am resolute, for I ha made
my Will.
Wilt fight Turke-a-ten-pence? wilt fight then?
Thou shalt find Isle fight in a Godly quarrel, if I be
once fired.
Thou shalt not want fire, Isle ha thee burnt when thou
wilt, my cold Cornelius: but come: Respicefunem; look,
thou •eest; open thy self my little Cutlers Shop, I chal∣lenge
thee thou slender Gentlemen•n, at four sundry wea∣pons.
Thy challenge was but at one, and Isle answer but
one.
Thou shalt answer two, for thou shalt answer me and
my Captain.
Well said Cockerel out-crowe him: art hardy noble
Huon▪ art Magnanimous? licke-trencher; look, search, least
some lye in ambush; for this man at Arms, has paper in's bell∣lie,
or some friend in a corner, or else hee durst not bee so
crank.
Captain, Captain, Horace stands sneaking here.
I smelt the foule-fisted Morter-treader, come my
most damnable fastidious rascal, I have a suite to both of
you.
O hold, most pitiful Captain hold.
Hold Captain, tic known that Horace is valiant, &amp;
a man of the sword.
A Gentleman or an honest Citizen, shall not Sit in
your pennie-bench Theaters, with his Squirrel by his side
cracking nuts; nor sneak into a Tavern with his Mermaid;
but he shall be Satyr'd, and Epigram'd upon, and his humour
must run vpo'th Stage▪ you'll ha Eu•rye Gentleman in's hue∣more,
and Every Gentleman out on's humour: wee that are
heads of Legions and Bands, and fear none but these
same shoulder-clappers, shall fear you, you Serpentine
rascal.
Honoured Captain.
Art •ot famous enough yet, my mad Horastratus, for
killing a Player, but thou must ea•e men alive? th• friends? Sir∣ra
wilde-man, thy Patrons? thou Anthropophagite, thy
Maecenas••s?
Captain, I'm sorry that you lay this wrong.
So close unto your heart: dear Captain think
I writ •ut of hot blood, which (now) being cold,
I could be pleased (to please you) to quaff down,
The po•son'd Ink, in which I dipped your name.
Say thou so, my Palinodicall rimester?
Hence forth Isle rather breath out S•l•ecismes
(To doe which Id as soon speak blasphemy)
Than with my tongue or pen to wound your worth,
Believe it noble Captain; it to me
Shall be a Crown, to crown your acts with praise,
Out of your hate, your love Isle strong lie raise.
I know now th•ast a number of these Quiddits 〈◊〉
bind men to'th peace: tic thy fashion to 〈◊〉 Ink in every
mans face; and then to craule into his bosom, and damn thy
self to w•p•t off again: yet to g•ue out abroad, that hee was
glad to come to composition with thee: I know Monsieur
Mac•iauell tic one a thy rules; My long-heel'd Troglodite, I
could make thine ears burn now, by dropping into them, all
those hot oaths, to which, thy self gau's• volun••rye ••re, (whē
thou wast the man in the Moon•) that thou would never
squib out any new Salt-p•t•r Ie•••• against honest Tucca, nor
those Maligo-tasters, his Poetasters; I could Cino••phil•s, but
I will not, yet thou know thou hast broke those oaths in
print, my excellent infernal.
Captain.
Nay I smell what breath is to come from thee, thy
answer is, that there's no faith to be held wi•h Heretics &amp;
Infidels, and therefore thou swear any thing: but come lend
m•e thy hand, thou and I hence forth will bee Alexander and
Lodwicke, the G•mini: sworn brothers▪ thou shalt be Peritho•s
and Tucca Theseus; b•t •le leave thee •th lurch, when thou
make thy voyage into hell: till then, •hen•assure•lie.
With all my soul dear Captain.
Thou'lt shoo•• thy quills at me, when my terrible
backe's turned for all this, wilt not Porcupine? and bring me &amp;
my Heliconistes into thy Dialogues to make vs talk madlie,
wut not Lucian?
Captain, if I doe—
Nay and thou dost, horns of Lucifer, the Parce•l-Po∣et•
shall Sue thy wrangling Muse, in the Court of Pernassus,
and never leave hunting her, till she plead in Form P•uperi:
but I hope th'a•t more grace: come: friends, clap•h•ndes tic a
bargain; am•able Bubo, thy fist •used walk •oo: so, I love
thee, now I see you are a little Hercules, and wilt fight; Isle S•icke
thee now in my company like a sprig of Rosemary.
Draw Sir Rees he's yonder shall I upon him?
Upon him? go too, go too Peter Sal•mander;
hold, in Gods name hold; I will kill him to his face, because
I mean he shall answer for i•; being an eye-witnes; one vrde
Captain Tucky.
Isle give thee ten thousand words and thou wilt, my
little Thomas Thomasius.
By Sesu, tic best you give good vrdes too, least I
b•ate out your tongue, and make your vrde ne'er to bee taken
more; doe you hear, five pounds, five pounds Tucky.
•thou shalt ha five, and five, and five and thou want
money my Iob.
L•aue your fetches and your figures, you tough
leather-Ierkins; leave your quandaries, and tricks, and draw
upon me you're best: you conny-catch Widow Miniuer-caps
for five pounds, and say tic for me to cry Mum, and make me
run up and down in dishonours, and discredits; is it not true,
you winke-a-pipes rascal? is not true?
Right, true, guilty, I remember't now; for when I
spake a good word to the Widow for thee my young Samp∣son—
For five pounds you cheating scab, for 5. pounds,
not for me.
For thee ô Caesar, for thee I took up five pounds in
gold, that lay in her lap, &amp; •aid Id give it thee as a token from
her: I did it but to smell out how she stood affected to thee, to
feel her; I, and I know what she said, I know how I carried a∣way
the gold.
By Sesu, I ha not the mercy to fall upon him now:
M. Tucky, did widow Miniuers part quietly from her gold,
because you lied▪ and said it was for me?
Quietly, in peace, without grumbling; made no noise,
I know how I tempted her, in thy behalf; my little Trang do.
Captain Tucky, I will pay back her 5. l. (unless you
be damned in lies) &amp; hold you, I pray you pocket up this; by
the cross a this sword &amp; dagger, Captain you shall take it.
Dost swear by daggers? nay then Isle put up more at
thy hands then this.
Is the fray done si•?
Done Peter, put up your s•eater.
Come hither, my soure-fac'd Poet; fling away that
beard-brush Bubo, cashier him and hark: Knight attend:
So, that raw-head and bloudy-bones Sir Adam, has feed ano∣there
brat (of those nine common wenches) to defend bald∣nes
and to rail against hair: he'll have a •ling at thee, my
noble Cock-Sparrow.
At me? will hee •ling the cudgels of his wit •t
me?
And at thy button-c•p too; but come, Isle be your lea∣der
you shall stand, hear all, &amp; not be seen; cast off that blew
coat away with that flown, and follow, come:
Bubo, we follow Captain.
Peter, leave coming behind me, I pray any lone∣ger
for you and I must part Peter.
Sounds Sir, I hope you will not serve me so, to turn
me away in this case.
Turn you into a fools coat; I mean I will go
solves, or in solitaries alone; ounds y-are best give better words,
or Isle turn you away indeed; where is Captain Tucky? come
Horace; get you home Peter.
Isle home to your cost, and I can get into the Wine-Seller.
Remember where to meet me.
Yes Isle meet; Tucca should ha found I dare
meet.
Dare defend baldnes, which our conquering Muse
Has beaten down so flat? Well, we will go,
And see what weapons their weak wits doe bring;
If sharpe, we'll spread a large and nobler wing;
Tucca, here lies thy Peace: war roars again;
My Sword shall never cut thee, but my pen.
Thanks good Sir Adam.
Welcome red-cheekt Ladies,
And welcome comely Widow; Gentlemen,
Now that our sorry banquet is put by,
From s••aling more sweet kisses from your lips
Walk in my garden: Ladies let your eyes
Shed life into these flowers by their bright beams,
Sit▪ Sit h•ere's a large bower, here all may hear,
Now good Crispinus let your praise begin.
There, where it left off Baldnes.
I shall win.
No praise, by praising that, which to deprave,
All tongues are ready▪ and which none would have.
To prove that best, by strong and armed reason,
Whose part reason fears to take, cannot but prove,
Your wit's fine temper, and from these win love.
I promise you has almost converted me, I pray bring
forward your bald reasons M. Poet.
Mistress you give my Reasons proper names,
For Arguments (like Children) should be like,
The subject that begets them; I must strive
To crown Bald heads, therefore must baldlie thrive;
But be it as it can: To what before,
Went armed at table, this force bring I more,
If a Bare head (being like a dead-mans scull)
Should bear •p no praise else but this, it sets
Our end before our eyes; should I despair,
From giving Baldnes higher place then hair?
Nay party, hair has the higher place.
The goodliest &amp; mo•t glorious strange-built wonder,
Which that great Architect hath made, is heaven;
For there he keeps his Court, It is his Kingdom,
That's his best Master-piece; yet tic the roof,
And Sell••ng of the world: that may be called
The head or crown of Earth, and yet that's bald,
All creatures in it bald; the lovely Sun,
Has a face sleek as gol•e; the full-cheekt Moon,
As brigh• and smooth as silver: nothing there
Wears dangling lockes, but sometime blazing Stars,
Whose fla•ing curls se• realms on fire with wars.
Descend more low; look through mans fiue-folde sense,
Of all, the Eye, bears greatest eminence;
And yet that's bald, the hairs that like a lace,
Are sticht unto the 〈◊〉, borrow those forms,
Like Pent-houses to save the eyes from storms.
Right▪ well •aid.
A head and face ore-g•own with Shaggy dross,
O, tic an Orient pearl hid all in Moss,
But when the head's •ll naked and vncrown'd,
It is the worlds Globe, even, smooth and round;
〈◊〉 i• 〈…〉 which 〈…〉,
Shoots her last Arrow: what man ever lead
His age 〈◊〉 with a staff; but had a head
Bare and uncovered? hee whose years doe rise,
To their full height, yet not bald, is not wi•e.
The Head is Wisdoms house, 〈◊〉 but the thatch,
Hair? It's the basest stubble; in scorn of it,
This Proverb sprung, he has more hair then wit:
Mark you not in derision how we call,
A head grown thick with hair, B•sh-naturall?
By your leave (Master Poet) but that Bush-naturall,
is one a the trimmest, and most intanglingst beauty in a wo∣man.
Right, but believe this (pardon me most fair)
You would have much more wit, had you less hair:
I could more weary you to tell the proo••s.
(As they pass by) which fight on Baldnes side,
Then were you taskt to number on a head,
The hairs: I know not how your thoughts are lead,
On this strong Tower shall my opinion rest,
Heads thick of hair are good, but bald the b•st,
You are within a hair of it, my sue••t Wit when•••r will•
tho•? my delicate Poetical Fury, th'a•t hit it to a hair.
By your favour Master Tucky, his bald rea∣sons
are wide aboue two hairs, I bases you pardon me
Ladies, that I thrust in so malepartly among you, for I did
but much hee•e, and see how this cruel Poet did handle bald
heads.
He gave them but their due Sir Vaughan; Wid∣dow
did he not?
By my faith he made more of a bald head, than
ever I shall be able: he gave them their due truly.
Nay vds blood, their due is to bee a the right
hair as I am, and that was not in his fingers to give, but
in God a Mighties: Well, I will hire that humorous and
fantastical Poet Master Horace, to break your bald pate
Sir Adam.
Break my bald pate?
Dost hear my worshipful block-head?
Patience Captain Tucky, let me absolve him;
I mean he shall prick, prick your head or sconce a little with
his goose-quils, for he shall make another Thalimum, or cross∣•tickes,
or some Polinoddyes, with a few Nappy-grams in
them that shall lift up hair, and set it an end, with his learned
and hearty commendations.
This is excellent, all will come out now.
That same Horace me thinks has the most vngod∣lie
face, by my Fan; it looks for all the world, like a rotten rus∣set
Apple, when tic bruised: Its better then a spoonful of Si∣namon
water next my heart, for me to hear him speak; hee
sounds it so in the nose, and talks and randes for all the
world, like the poor fellow under Ludgate: oh fie up∣on
him.
By my troth sweet Ladies, it's Cake and pudding to
me, to see his face make faces, when hee reads his Songs
and Sonnets.
Isle face some of you for this, when you shall not
budge.
Its the stinckingst dung-farmer—foh upon him.
Foh? oundes you make him vrse than old her∣ring:
foh? by Sesu I think he's as tidy, and as tall a Poet as e∣for
drew out a long verse.
The best verse that ever I knew him hack out, was
his white necke-verse: noble Ap Rees thou would scorn
to lay thy lips to his commendations, and thou smeldst
him out as I doe, hee calls thee the burning Knight of the Sa∣lamander.
Right, Peter is my Salamander; what of
him? but Peter is never burnt: howe now? so, go too
now.
And says because thou Clipst the Kings Eng∣lish.
Oundes me• that's treason: clip? horrible•
treasons, Se•u hold my hands; clip? he baits mouse-trappes
for my life.
Right little Twinckler, right: hee says because
thou speak no better, thou can not keep a good tongue
in thy head.
By God tic the best tongue, I can buy for love
or money.
He shoots at thee too Adam Bell, and his arrows
sticks here; he calls thee bald-pate.
Oundes make him prove these intollera∣bilities.
And asks who shall carry the vineger-bottle▪ &amp; then
he rimes too't, and says Prickshaft: nay Miniuer hee crom∣plesthy
Cap too; and—
Come Tucca, come, no more; the man's well known,
thou need not paint him, whom does he not wrong?
Mary himself, the ugly Po•e Boniface, pardons him∣self,
and t•erefore my indgement is, that presently he bee had
from hence, to his place of execution, and there bee Stabbed,
Stabbed, Stabbed.
Oh gentlemen, I am slain, oh s••ue art hyt'd to mur∣der
me, to murder me, to murder me?
Oh God!
Ounds Captain you have put all Poetry to the
dint of sword, blow wind about him: Ladies for our Lords
sake you that have smocks, tear off pieces▪ to shoot through
his oundes: Is he dead and buried is he? pull his nose, pinch,
rub, rub, rub, rub.
If he be not dead, look here; I ha the Stab and pip∣pin
for him: if I had killed him, I could ha pleased the great fool
with an Apple.
How now? be well good Horace, heir's no wound;
You're slain by your own fears; how dost thou man?
Come, put thy▪ he a•t into h•• place again;
Thy out-side's neither peir'st, nor In-side •lain.
I am glad M. Horace, to see you walking.
Gentlemen, I am black and blew the breadth of a
groat.
Breadth of a groat? there's a teston, hide thy infer∣mities,
my scurvy Lazaru•, doe, hide it, least it prove a scab in
time: hang thee desperation, hang thee, thou know▪ I cannot
be sharpe set against thee: look, feel (my light-vptailes all)
feel my weapon.
O most pitiful a• 〈◊〉 as my great thumb.
By Sesu, as blunt as a Welsh bag-pudding.
As blunt as the top of Poules; tic not like thy Aloe,
Cicatrine tongue▪ bitter: no▪ tic no s•abhor▪ but like thy good∣l•
and glorious nose, blunt, blunt, blunt: dost roar bulchin?
dost roar? you have a good ron•iuall voice to cry Lantern &amp;
Candle-light.
Two vrds Horace about your ears: how ch•nce it
passes, that you bid God b•yg• to an •one•t trade of building
Symneys, and laying down Brickes, for a worse handicraft∣nes▪
to make nothing but rai•es; your Mu•e leanes upon no∣thing
but filthy rotten •ails, such as stand on Poules head,
how chance?
Sir Vaughan.
You lye s•r varlet sir ••llaine, I am sir Salamanders,
ounds, is my man Master Peter Salamanders face as vrse as
mine? Sentlemen, all and Ladies, and you say once or twice
Amen, I will lap this little Silde, this Booby in his blankets
again.
A blanket, these cracked Venice glasses shall fill him
out, they shall toss him, hold fa•t wag• tai•es: so, come, in,
take this bandy with the racket of patience, why when? dost
flampe mad Tambe•lain, do•t •tampe? thou think you have
Mortar under thy 〈◊〉, do••▪
Come▪ a •andy ho.
O hold mo•t sacred beauties.
Hold, ••lence, the puppet-teach•• speaks.
Sir Vaughan, noble Captain, Gentlemen,
Crispinus, dear De••et••us ô r•deem me,
Out of this infamou•—by God by l•su—
Nay, swear not so good Horace, now these Ladies,
Are made your ex••utioners: prepare,
To suffer like a galla••, not a coward;
Isle try t'vnloose, their hands, impossible.
Nay, women's 〈◊〉 are• implacable.
Why, would you make me thus the ball of scorn?
Isle tell thee why, because th•a•t en••ed A••lons of as∣salt
and battery, against a company of honourable and worcester∣shipfull
Fathers of the law: you wrangling ra•call, law is one
of the pillars ath land, and if thou be bound too't (as I hope
thou shalt bee) thou't proo•e a skip-lacke, thou't be whipped.
Isle tell thee why, because thy sputtering chappes yelp, that
Arrogance, and •mpudence, and Ignorance, are the essen∣teal
parts of a Courtier.
You remember Horace they will puncke, and
pink, and pump you, and they catch you by the coxcomb:
on I pray, one lash, a little more.
Isle tell thee why because thou •ryest ptrooh at worcester∣shipfull
Citizens, and cal'•• them Flat-caps, Cuckolds, and
banckrupts, and modest and virtuous wives punckes &amp; cock∣atrices.
Isle tell thee why, because you have arraigned two Poets
against all law and conscience; and not content with
that, hast turned them amongst a company of horrible black
Fry•s.
The same ha•d still, it is your own another day,
M. Horace, admonitions is good meat.
Thou art the true arraigned Poet, and should have
been hanged, but for one of these part-takers, these charitable
Copper-lac'd Christians▪ that fetched thee out of Purgatory,
(Players I mean) Theaterians pouch-mouth▪ Stage-walkers;
for this Poet, for this, thou must lye with these four wenches,
in that blancket, for this—
What could I doe, out of a just revenge,
But bring them to the Stage? they envy me
because I hold more worthy company.
Good Horace, no; my cheeks doe blush for thine,
As often as thou speak so, where one true
And nobly-vertuous spirit; for thy best part
Loves thee, I wish one ten, even from my heart.
I make account I put up as deep share
In any good mans love which thy worth earns,
As thou thy self; we envy not to see,
Thy friends with Baize to crown thy Poesy.
No, here the gall lies, we that know what stuff•
Thy very heart is m•de of; know the sty•ke
On which thy learning grows, and can give li•e
To thy (once dying) baseness; yet must we
Dance Antiques on your Paper.
•a•nius.
This makes vs angry, but not envious,
No, were thy warped soul, put in a new mould,
Id wear thee as a Jewel set in gold.
And Jewels Master Horace, must be hanged you
know.
Good Pagans, well said, they have sowed up that
broken seame-rent lye of thine, that Demetrius is out at El∣bows,
and Cri•pinus is fallen out with Satin here, they have;
but b•oate-herring dost hear?
Yes honoured Captain, I have ears at will.
First not better be out at Elbows, then to bee a bond∣slave,
and to go all in Parchment as thou dost?
Parchment Captain? tic Pe•petuana I assure
you.
My Perpetual pantaloone t•ue, but tic waxed over;
you are made out of Wax; thou must answer for this one day;
thy Muse is a ••glare, and wears clothes upon best-be-trust:
you are great in some bodies books for this▪ thou know where;
thou would bee out at Elbows, and out at heals too,
but that thou lay•st about thee with a Bill for this, a
Bill—
I confess Captain, I followed this suite hard.
I know thou d•d••, and therefore whilst we have Hi∣ren
here, speak my little dish-washers, a verdict Peace∣kitchens.
Blancket.
Hold I pray, hold, by Se•u I have put up∣on
my head, a fi•e device, to make you laugh, tic not
your fools Cap Master Horace, which you covered your Po∣etasters
in, but a fine trick, ha, ha▪ is iumbling in my brain.
Isle beat out thy brains, my whoreson handsome
dwarf, but isle have it out of thee.
What is it good Sir Vaughan?
To conclude, tic after this manners, because Ma.
Horace is ambition, and does conspire to bee more hye and
tall▪ as God a migh••e made him, we'll ca•rye his terrible, per∣son
to Court, and there before his Masestie Dub, or
what you call it, dip his Muse in some liquor, and christen
him, or dye him, into colours of a Poet.
Exceilent.
Super Super-excellent Revellers go, proceed you
Masters of Art in kissing these wenches, and in dances, bring
you the quivering Bride to Court, in a Mask, come G•um∣boll,
thou shalt Mum with vs; come, dog me skneakes∣bill.
O thou my Muse!
Call upon God a mighty, and no Muses, your
Muse I warrant is otherwise occupied, there is no de•ling
with your Muse now, therefore I pray marse, marse, marse,
oundes your Moose?
We shall have sport to see them; come bright beauties,
The Sun stoops low, and whispers in our ears,
To hasten on our Mask, let's crown this night,
With choice composed wreathes of sweet delight.
O Night, that Dyes the Firmament in black,
And like a cloth of clouds dost stretch thy limbs;
Upon the windy Tenters of the Ayre:
O thou that hang upon the back of Day,
Like a long mourning gown: thou that art made
Without an eye, because thou should not see
A Lovers Revels: nor participate
The Bridegrooms heaven; ô heaven, to me a hell:
I have a hell in heaven, a blessed curse;
All other Bridegrooms long for Night, and tax
The Day of lazy sloth; call Time a Cripple,
And say the hours limp after him: but I
Wish Night for ever banished from the sky,
Or that the Day would never sleep: or Time,
Were in a swooned; and all his little Hours,
Could never lift him up with their poor powers.
But backward runs the course of my delight;
The day hath turned his back, and it is night:
This nigh• will make vs odd; day made vs even,
All else are dimbed in hell, but I in heaven.
Let loose thy oath▪ so shall we still be even.
Then am I dimbed in hell, and not in heaven.
Must I then go•tic easy to say no,
Must is the King hims•lfe, and I must go;
Shall I then go? that word is thine; I shall,
Is thy command: I go because I shall;
Will I then go? I ask my self; ô ill,
King, says I must; you, I shall; I, I will.
Had I not sworn.
Why did thou swear?
The King
Sat heavy on my resoluion,
Till (out of breath) it panted out an oath.
An oath? why, what's an oath? tic but the smoke,
Of flame &amp; blood; the blister of the spirit,
Which rises from the Steam of rage, the bubble
That shoots up to the tongue, and scaldes the voice,
(•or oaths are burning words) thou •wor'st but one,
Tic frozen long ago: if one be numbered,
What Countrymen are they? where doe they dwell▪
That speak nought else but oaths?
•hey're men of hell.
An oath? why tic the traffic of the s•ule,
Tic law within a man; the seal of faith,
The bond of every conscience; unto whom,
We set our thoughts like hands: yea, such a one
I swore, and to the King: A King contains
A thousand thousand; when I swore to him,
I swore to them; the very hairs that guard
His head, will rise up like sharpe witnesses
Again•t my faith and loyalty: his eye
Would ••raight condemn me: argue oaths no more,
My oath is high, for to the King I swore.
Must I betray my Chastit•? So long
Clean from the treason of rebelling lust;
O husband! O my •ather! if poor •,
Must not live chaste, then let me cha•lie dye.
I, heir's a charm shall keep thee chaste, come, come,
Old Time hath left v• but an hour to play
Our part•; b•gin the •ceane, who shall s•eake first?
Oh, I, I play the King, and Kings speak fir•;
Daughter stand thou here, thou Son Terrill there,
O thou standst well thou I•an'st again•• a post,
(For thou't be po•ed off • warrant thee:)
The King •ill hang a horn about •hy n•cke,
And make a post of thee; you stand w•ll both,
We need no Prologue, the King entering first,
He's a most gracious Prologue: mary then
For the Cata••rophe, or Epilogue,
Ther's one in cloth of Silver, which no doubt,
Will please the hearers well▪ when he steps out;
His mouth is filed with words: see where he stands;
He'll make them clap their eyes besides their hands.
But to my part; suppose who enters now▪
A King, whose eyes are set in Silver; one
That blushes gold, speaks Music dancing walks,
Now gathers nearer▪ takes thee by the hand,
When straight thou think, the very Orb of heaven,
Moos round about thy fingers, then he speaks,
Thus—thus—I know not how.
Nor I to answer him.
No girl? know thou not how to ensue• him?
Why then the field is lost, and he rides home,
Like a great conqueror; not answer him?
Out of thy part already? y foiled the Scene?
Disranckt the lines? disarmed the action?
Yes yes, true chastity is tongued so weak,
Tic ouer-come ere it know how to speak.
Come, come, thou happy close of every wrong,
Tic thou that can dissolve the hardest doubt;
Tic time for thee to speak, we are all out.
Daughter, and you the man whom I call Son,
I must confess I made a deed of gift;
To heaven and you, and gave my child to both:
When on my blessing I did charm her soul,
In the white circle of true Chastity,
Still to run true, till death: now Sir if not,
She forfeits my rich blessing, and is Fined
With an eternal curse; then I tell you,
She shall dye now, now whilst her soul is true.
Dye?
I, I am deaths echo.
O my Son,
I am her Father; every tear I shed,
Is three score ten year old; I weep and smile
Two kind of tears: I weep that she must dye,
I smile that she must dye a Virgin: thus
We joyful men mock tears, and tears mock vs.
What speaks that cup?
White wine and poison.
Oh:
That very name of poison, poisons me;
Thou Winter of a man▪ thou walking grave,
Whose life is like a dying Taper: how
Can thou define a Lovers labouring thoughts?
When• Sent hast thou but death? what taste but earth?
The breath that purls from thee, is like the Steam
Of a new-open'd vault: I know thy drift,
Because thou art travelling to the land of Graves,
Thou couetst company, and hither bring,
A health of poison to pledge death: a poison
For this sweet spring; this •lement is mine,
This is the Ayre I breath; corrupt it not;
This heaven is mine, I bought it with my soul,
Of him that sells a heaven, to buy a soul.
Well, let her go; she's th••e thou call her thine,
Thy Element, the Ayre thou breath; thou know
The Ayre thou breath is common, make her so:
Perhaps thou't say; none but the King shall wear
Thy night-gowne, she that laps thee warm with love;
And that Kings are not common: Then to show,
By consequence he cannot make her so,
Indeed she may promoote her shame and thine,
And with your shames, speak a good word for mine▪
The King shining so clear, and we so dim,
Our dark disgraces will be seen through him.
Imagine her the cup of thy moist life,
What man would pledge a King in his own wife?
• She dye•▪ that sentence poisons her: O life!
What slave would pledge a King in his own wife?
Welcome, ô poison physic against lust,
Thou wholesome medicine to a constant blood;
Thou rare Apothe cary that can keep,
My chastity preserved, within this box;
Of tempting dust, this painted earthen pot,
That stands upon the ••all of the white soul,
To set the shop out like a flatterer,
To draw the customers of Sin: come, come,
Thou art no poison, but a dyet-drinke,
To moderate my blood: White-innocent Wine,
Art thou made guilty of my death? oh no,
For thou thy self art poisoned, take me hence,
For Innocence, shall murder Innocence.
Hold, hold, thou shalt not dye, my Bride, my wife,
O stop that speedy messenger of death;
O let him not run down that narrow path,
Which leads unto thy heart; nor carry news
To thy remoouing soul, that thou must dye.
Tic done already, the Spiritual Court,
Is breaking up; all Offices discharged,
My soul remooues from this weak standing house,
Of frail mortality: Dear Father, bless
Me now and ever: Dearer Man farewell,
I jointly take my leave of thee and life,
Go, tell the King thou hast a constant wife.
I had a constant wife, Isle tell the King;
Until the King—what dost thou smile? art thou
A Father?
Yea smiles on my cheeks arise,
To see how sweetly a true virgin die•s.
Sir Walter Terrill, gallants are all ready,
All ready.
Well said, come, come, wher's the Bride?
She's going to forbid the Banes again.
She'll dye a maid: and see, she keeps her oath.
Fair Caelestine!
The Bride!
She that was fair,
Whom I called fair and Caeles•in.
Dead!
Dead, sh's deaths Bride, he hath her maidenhead.
Sir Walter Terrill.
Tell vs how.
All cease,
The subject that we treat of now is Peace,
If you demand how: I can tell: if why,
Ask the King that; he was the cause, not I.
Let it suffice, she's dead, she kept her vow,
Ask the King why, and then Isle tell you how:
Nay give your Revels life, tho she be gone,
To Court with all your preparation;
Lead on, and lead her on; if any ask
The mystery, say death presents a mask,
Ring peals of Music, you are Lovers belles,
The loss of one heaven, brings a thousand hells.
Why so, even thus the Mercury of 〈◊〉▪
Ushers th'ambrosiate banquet of the Gods,
When a long train of Angels in a rank,
Serve the first course, and bow their Crystal knees,
Before the Silver table; where Ioues page
Sweet Ganimed filles Nectar: when the Gods.
Drink healths to Kings, they pledge them; none but Kings
Dare pledge the Gods; none but Gods drink to Kings.
Men of our house are we prepared?
My Liege,
All waite the presence of the Bride.
The Bride?
Yea, every senseless thing, which she beholds,
Will• look on her again, her eyes reflection,
Will make the walls all eyes, with her perfection:
Observe me now, because of Masks and Revels,
And many nuptial ceremonies: Mark,
This I create the Presence, here the State,
Our Kingdoms seat, shall sit in honours Pride,
Like pleasures Queen, there will I place the Bride:
Be gone, be speedy, let me see it done.
A King in Love, is Steward to himself,
And never scorns the office, my self buy,
All glances from the Market of her eye.
Sound Music, thou sweet suitor to the ayre,
Now woo the ayre again▪ this is the hour,
Writ in the Calender of time, this hour,
Music shall spend, the next and next the Bride;
Her tongue will read the Musicke-Lecture: Wat
I love thee Wat, because thou art not wise;
Not deep-read in the volume of a man,
Thou never saw a thought, poor soul thou think,
The heart and tongue is cut out of one piece,
But you are deceived, the world hath a false light,
Fools think tic day, when wise men know tic night.
My Liege they're come▪ a mask of gallants,
Now—the spirit of Love ushers my blood.
They come.
The Watch-word in a Mask is the bold Drum.
All pleasures guard my King, I here present,
My oath upon the knee of duty: knees
Are made for Kings, they are the subjects Fees.
Wat Terrill▪ you are ill suited, ill made up,
In Sable colours, like a night piece dyed,
Come thou the Prologue of a Mask in black;
Thy body is ill shaped; a Bridegroom too?
Look how the day is dressed in Silver cloth,
Laid round about with golden Sunne-beames: so
(As white as heaven) should a fresh Bridegroom go.
What? Caelestine the Bride, in the same task?
Nay then I see ther's mystery in this mask.
Prithee resolve me Wat?
My gracious Lord,
That part is hers, she acts it; only I
Present the Prologue, she the mystery.
Come Bride, the Scene of blushing entered first,
Your cheeks are settled now, and past the worst; Un•asks her
A mystery? oh none plays here but death,
This is deaths motion, motionless; speak you,
Flatter no longer; thou her Bridegroom; thou
Her Father speak.
Dead.
Dead.
How?
Poisoned.
And poisoned?
What villain durst blaspheme her beauties, or
Profane the clear religion of her eyes.
Now King I enter, now the Scene is mine,
My tongue is tipped with poison; know who speaks,
And look into my thoughts; I blush not King,
To call thee Tyrant: death hath set my face,
And made my blood bold; hear me spirits of men,
And place your ears upon your hearts; the day
(The fellow to this night) saw her and me,
Shake hands together: for the book of heaven,
Made vs eternal friends: thus, Man and Wife,
This man of men (the King) what are not kings?
Was my chief guest, my royal guest, his Grace
Graced all the Table, and did well become
The upper end, where sate my Bride: in brief,
He tainted her chaste ears; she yet unknown,
His breath was treason, tho his words were none.
Treason to her and me, he dared me then,
(Under the covert of a flattering smile,)
To bring her where she is, not as she is,
Alive for lust, not dead for (Chastity:
The resolution of my soul, out-dar'd,)
I swore and taxed my faith with a sad oath;
Which I maintain; here take her▪ she was mine,
When she was living, but now dead, she's thine.
Doe not confound me quite; for mine own guilt,
Speaks more within me then thy tongue contains;
Thy sorrow is my shame: yet herein springs,
•oy out of sorrow, boldness ont of sham•;
For I by this have found, once in my life,
A faithful subject, thou a con•tant wife.
A constant wife.
Am I confounded twice?
Blasted with wonder.
O delude we not.
Thou art too true to live again, too fair
To be my Caelestine, too constant far
To be a woman.
Not to be thy wife,
But first I plead my duty, and salute
The world again.
My King, my Son, know all,
I am an Actor in this mystery,
And bear the chiefest part. The Father I,
It was I that ministered to her chaste blood,
A true somniferous potion, which did steal
Her thoughts to sleep, and flattered her with death:
I called it a quick poisoned drug, to try
The Bridegrooms love, and the Brides constancy.
He in the passion of his love did fight,
A combat with affection; so did both,
She for the poison strove, he for his oath:
Thus like a happy Father, I have won,
A constant Daughter, and a loving Son.
Mirror of Maidens, wonder of thy name,
I give thee that art given, pure, chaste, the same
Here Wat: I would not part (for the worlds pride)
So true a Bridegroom, and so chaste a Bride.
My Liege, to wed a Comical event,
To presupposed tragic Argument:
Vouchsafe to exercise your eyes, and see
A humorous dreadful Poet take degree.
Dreadful in his proportion or his pen?
In both, he calls himself the whip of men.
If a clear merit stand upon his praise,
Reach him a Poets Crown (the honoured Baize)
But if he claim it, wanting right thereto,
(As many bastard Sons of Poesy doe)
Race down his usurpation to the ground.
•rue Poets are with Art and Nature Crowned.
But in what mould so ere this man bee east;
We make him thine Crispinus, wit and judgment,
Shine in thy numbers, and thy soul I know,
Will not go armed in passion against thy foe:
Therefore be thou our self; whilst our self 〈◊〉,
But as spectator of this Scene of wit.
Thanks royal Lord, for these high honours done,
To me unworthy, my minds brightest fires
Shall all consume themselves, in purest flame,
On the Alter of your dear eternal name.
Not under vs, but next vs take thy Seat,
"Arts nourished by Kings make Kings more great,
Use thy Authority.
Demetrius.
Call in that self•creating Horace, bring
Him and his shadow forth.
Both shall appear,
" No black-tyed star must stickein virtues Sphere.
Ounds did you see him, I pray let all his Masesties
most excellent dogs, be set at liberties, and have their freedoms
to smell him out.
Smell whom?
Whom? the Composer, the Prince of Poets, Ho∣race,
Horace, he's departed: in Gods name and the Kings I
sarge you to ring it out from all our ears, for Horaces body is
departed: Master hue and cry shall—God bless King
Williams, I cry you mercy and ask forgiveness, for mine
eyes did not find in their hearts to look upon your Ma∣jest.
What news with thee Sir Vaughan?
News? God tic as vrse news as I can desire to
bring about me: our vnhansome-fac'd Poet does play at
bo-peepes with your Grace, and cries all-hidde as boys
doe.
Stand by, room there, back, room for the
Poet.
He's reprehended and taken, by Sesu I rejoice ve∣rye
near as much as if I had discovered a New-found Land, or
the North and East Indies.
So, tug, tug, pull the mad Bull in by the horns: So,
bait one at that stake my place-mouth yelpers, and one at
that stake Gurnets-head.
What busy fellow's this?
Save thee, my most gracious King a Harts save thee,
all hats and caps are thine, and therefore I veil: for but to thee
great Sultane Soliman, I scorn to be thus put off or to deliver up
this sconce I wud.
Sir Vaughan, what's this jolly Captains name?
Has a very sufficient name, and is a man has do•
God and his Country as good and as hot Service (in conque∣ring
this vile Monster-Poet) as ever did S. George his horse∣back
about the Dragon.
I sweat for it, but Tawsoone, hold thy tongue Mon
du, if thou't praise me, do it behind my back: I am my
weighty Sovereign one of thy grains, thy valiant vassal;
ask not what I am, but read, turn over, vnclaspe thy Chro∣nicles:
there thou shalt find Buffe-Ierkin; there read my
points of war; I am one a thy Mandilian-Leaders; one that
enters into thy royal bands for thee; Pantilius Tucca; one
of thy Kingdoms chiefest quarrellers; one a thy most faith∣full—fie—fie—fie—
Drunkards I hold my life.
No whirligig, one of his faithful fighters; thy drawer
ô royal Tamor Cham.
Go too, I pray Captain Tucca, give vs all leave
to doe our business before the King.
With all my heart, shi, shi, shi shake that Beare-whelp
when thou wut.
Horace and Bubo, pray send an answer into his
Masesties ears, why you go thus in Ouids Morter-Morphesis
and strange fashions of apparel.
Cur why?
My Lords, I was drawn into this beastly suite by
head and shoulders only for love I bare to my Ningle.
Speak Ningle, thy mouth's next, belch out, belch,
why—
I did it to retire me from the world;
And turn my Muse into a Timonist,
Loathing the general Leprosy of Sin,
Which like a plague runs through the souls of men:
I did it but to—
But to bite every Motley-head vice by the nose, you
did it Ningle to play the Bug-beare Satire, &amp; make a Camp
royal of fashion-mongers quake at your paper Bullets; you
Nasty Tortoise, you and your Itchy Poetry break out like
Christmas, but once a year, and then you keep a Revelling,
&amp; Arraigning, &amp; a Scratching of men's faces, as tho you were
Tyber the long-tail'd Prince of Rats, doe you?
Horace.
Silence, pray let all v•des be strangled, or held
fast between your teeth.
Under control of my dread Sovereign,
We are thy Judges; thou that did Arraign,
Art now prepared for condemnation;
Should I but bid thy Muse stand to the Bar,
Thy self against her would give evidence:
For flat rebellion against the Sacred laws,
Of divine Poesy: herein most she mist,
Thy pride and scorn made her turn Sat•rist,
And not her love to ver•ue (as thou Preach)
Or should we minister strong pills to thee:
What lumps of hard and indigested stuff,
Of bitter Sa•irism, of Arrogance,
Of Selfe-loue, of Detraction, of a black
And stinging Insolence should we fetch up?
But none of these, we give thee what's more fit,
With stinging nettles Crown his stinging wit.
Well said my Poetical huckster, now he's in thy hand∣ling
rate him, doe rate him well.
O I beseech your Majesty, rather then thus to be net∣ed,
Isle ha my Satyrs coat pulled over mine ears, and bee
turned out a the nine Muses Service.
And I too, let me be put to my shifts with mine
Ningle.
By Sesu so you shall M. Bubo; flea off this hairy
skin M. Horace, so, so, so, untruss, untruss.
His Poetical wreath my dapper puncke-fetcher.
Ooh—
Nay your oohs, nor your Callin-•es cannot serve your
turn; your tongue you know is full of blisters with railing,
your face full of pockey-holes and pimples, with your fie∣rye
inventions: and therefore to preserve your head from
eking, this Biggin is yours,—nay by Sesu you shall
bee a Poet, though not Lawrefyed, yet Nettlefyed,
so:
Sir stincker, you're but vntruss'd now, I owe
thee a whipping still, and Isle pay it: I have laid rods
in Peace and Vinegar for thee: It shall not bee the
Whipping 〈◊〉 Satire, nor the Whipping of the blinde-Beare,
but of a counterfeit lugler, that steals the name of
Horace.
How? counterfeit? does hee usurp that name?
Yes indeed ant please your Grace, he does sup
up that abominable name.
Hee does O King Cambises, hee does: thou hast
no part of Horace in thee butt's name, and his damnable
vices: thou hast such a terrible mouth, that thy beard's
afraid to peep out; but, look here you staring Levy∣than,
heere's the sweet visage of Horace; look per∣boylde-face,
look; Horace had a trim long-beard, and a
reasonable good face for a Poet, (as faces go nowadays)
Horace did not screw and wriggle himself into great
Men's familiarity, (impudently) as thou do•st: nor wear
the Badge of Gentlemen's company, as thou dost thy
Taffeta sleeves tacked too only with some points of pro∣fit:
No, Horace had not his face punched full of Oylet-holes,
like the cover of a warming-pan: Horace loved Poets well,
and gave Coxcombs to none but fools; but thou love
none, neither Wisemen nor fools, but thy self: Horace was
a goodly Corpulent Gentleman, and not so lean a hole∣low-cheekt
Scrag as thou art: No, heere's thee Copy of
thy countenance, by this will I learn to make a number of
villainous faces more, and to look scurvily vpon'th world, as
thou dost.
Sir Vaughan will you minister their oath?
Master Afinius Bubo, you shall swear as little
as you can, one oath shall damme up your Innocent
mouth.
Any oath Sir, Isle swear any thing.
You shall swear by Phoebus (who is your Po∣ets
good Lord and Master,) that hereafter you will not hire
Horace, to give you poesies for rings, or hand-kerchers, or
knives which you understand not, nor to write your Love∣letters;
which you (in turning of a hand) set your marks up∣on,
as your own: nor you shall not carry Latin Poets about
you, till you can write and read English at most; and lastly
that you shall not call Horace your Ningle.
By Phoebus I swear all this, and as many oaths as
you will, so I may trudge.
Trudge then, pay your legs for Fees, and bee dis∣sarg'd.
Tprooth—run Red-cap, ware horns there.
Now Master Horace, you must be a more horrible
swearer, for your oath must be (like your wits) of many col∣lours;
and like a Brokers book of many parcels.
Read, read; th'inuentory of his oath.
Isle swear till my hair stands upon end, to bee rid of
this sting, oh this sting.
Tic not your sting of conscience, is it?
Upon him: Inpri•is.
Inprimis, you shall swear by Phoebus and the
half • s••re M•ses lacking one▪ not to swear to hang your
self, if you thought any Man, Ooman or Silde, could write
Plays and 〈◊〉, as well-fauo••'d ones as your self.
Well, said, hast brought him toth gallows al∣ready?
You shall swear not to bombast out a new
Play, with the old linings of Jests, stolen from the Tem∣ples
Revels.
To him old Tango.
Moreover▪ you shall not sit in a Gallery, when
your Comedies and Interludes have entered their Actions,
and there make vile and bad faces at every lyne, to make
Sentlemen have an eye to you, and to make Players afraid to
take your part.
Thou shalt be my Ningle for this.
Besides you must for swear to venture on the stage,
when your Play is ended, and to exchange courtesies, and
complements with Gallants in the Lords rooms, to make
all the house rise up in Arms, and to cry that's Horace, that's
he, that's he, that's he, that pens and purges Humours and
diseases.
There boy, again.
Secondly, when you bid all your friends to the
marriage of a poor couple, that is to say: your Wits and
necessities, alias dictus, to the rifling of your Muse: alias, your
Muses vp-sitting: alias a Poets Whitson-Ale; you shall swear
that within three days after, you shall not abroad, in
Booke-binders shops, brag that your Vize-royes or Tri∣butorie-Kings,
have done homage to you, or paid quar∣terage.
Isle bussethy head Holofernes.
Mo•eouer and Inpri•is, when a Knight or
Sentlemen of vrship, does give you his passe-p••t, to tra∣uaile
in and out to his Company, and gives you money for
Gods sake; I trust in Sesu, you will swear (tooth and
nail) not to make sealed and wry-mouth Jests upon his
Knight-hood, will you not?
I never did it by Parnassus.
Wut swear by Parnassus and lyetoo, Doctor Dod∣dipole?
Thirdly, and last of all saving one, when your
Plays are misse-likt at Court, you shall not cry Mew
like a Pusse-cat, and say you are glad you write out of the
Courtiers Element.
Let the Element alone, tic out a thy reach.
In brieflynes, when you Sup in Tauer•es, a∣amongst
your betters, you shall swear not to dip your
Manners in too much sauce, nor at Table to fling Epi∣grams,
Emblems, or Play-speeches about you (like
Hayle-stones) to keep you out of the terrible danger of
the Shot, upon payne to fit at the upper end of the
Table, a'th left hand of Carlo Buffon: swear all this, by A∣polo
and the eight or nine Muses.
By Apollo, Helicon, the Muses (who march three
and three in a rank) and by all that belongs to Pernassus,
I swear all this.
Bear witness.
That fearful wreath, this honour is your du•,
All Poets shall be Poet-Apes but you;
Thanks (Learnings true Mecoenas, Poesies king)
Thanks for that gracious •are, which you have lent,
To this most tedious, most rude argument.
Our spirits have well been feasted; he whose pen
Draws both corrupt, and clear blood from all men:
(Careless what vein he pricks) let him not rave,
When his own fides are struck, blows, blows, doe crave.
Kings-truce, my noble Hearbe-a-grace; my Prince∣lie
sweet-William, a boon—Stay first, First a match or no
match, Lady Furniuall First?
A match?
I, a match, since he hath hit the Mistress so often in the
fore-game, we'll even play out a rubbers.
Take her for me.
Take her for thy self, not for me.
Play out your rubbers in Gods name, by Sesu Isle
〈◊〉 boule more in your Alley, Iddow.
My Chain.
My Purse.
Isle Chain thee presently, and give thee ten pound
and a purse: a boon my Liege:—dance ô my delicate
Rufus, at my wedding with this reverend Antiquary; first done?
•ut thou?
He glue thee Kingly honour: Night and Sleep,
With silken Ribands would tie up our eyes,
But Mistress Bride, one measure shall be led,
In scorn of Mid-nights hast▪ and then to bed.
GEntlemen, Gallants, and you my little
Swaggerers that fight lowe: my tough
hearts of Oak that stand too't so valiantly, and are
still within a yard of your Captain: Now the Trum∣pets
(that set men together by the ears) have left
their Tantara-rag-boy, let's part friends. I recant,
bear witness all you Gentle-folkes (that walk in the
Galleries) I recant the opinions which I held of
Courtiers, Ladies, &amp; Citizens, when once (in an as∣sembly
of Friars) Irailde upon them: that Heretical
Liber••no Horace, ta•light me so to mouth it. Besides,
it was when stiff Tucca was a boy: it was not Tucca
that reeled and roared then, but the Devil &amp; his An∣gels:
But now, Kings-truce, the Captain Summons a
parley, and delivers himself and his prasing comp∣ny
into your hands, upon what composition you will.
Are you pleased? and Isle dance Friskin for joy, but if
you be not, by 'th Lord Isle see you all—here for
your two pence a peace again, before Isle loose your
company. I know now some be come hither with
cheeks swollen as big with hisses, as if they had the
tooth-ach: vds-foote, if I stood by them, Id bee so
bold as—entreat them to hiss in another place.
Are you advised what you doe when you hiss? you
blow away Horaces revenge: but if you set your
hands and Seals to this, Horace will write against it,
and you may have more sport: he shall not loose his
labour, he shall not turn his blank verses into wast
paper: No, my Poëtasters will not laugh at him, but
will untruss him again, and again, and again. Isle tell
you what you shall doe, cast your little Tucca into
a Bell: doe, make a Bell of me, and be al you my clap∣pers,
upon condition, wee may have a lusty peal,
this cold weather: I have but two legs left me,
and they are both yours: Good night
my two penny Tenants
God night.

Duke Rodorick, and my noble cozen Flaunders:
Are your Battalions ready for the charge?
Ten thousand men of Orleans I com∣maund,
And those are bravely marshald on the plain,
Ready to be commanded by your Highness.
As many of the warlike brood of Mars
Doe call me General: those, my gracious Lord,
Together with my self I recommend,
To be commanded by your Majesty.
Thanks, Earl of Flaunders, Duke of Orleans, thanks,
What lets vs that we charge not on the Foe?
My Lord of Pembrooke, are your Englishmen
Squadrond with ours, and ready for the charge?
The French and English make one warlike body,
Whereof your Highness is the moving head:
Or peace or war, as pleases you direct.
Then war, and give the signal through the Host.
Nauar, Nauar, submission were more meet,
Then to add blood to wrong.
What wrong, King Lewes?
The Kingdom of Nauar we will acknowledge
To hold of none but of the King of Kings.
Three hundred years prescriptions on our sides,
So long thy Ancestors by fealty
Have held thy Kingdom of the Crown of France.
Talk not of years, years limit not a Crown,
There's no prescriptions to enthral a King:
He finds it written in the Rolls of time,
Nauar's a Kingdom solely absolute,
And by collusion of the Kings of France,
Because it lies so fitly upon France,
The people speaking all one mother tongue,
It hath bin wrested for a Royalty,
Untruly due unto the Crown of France.
That Pembrook speaks the truth, behold my sword,
Which shall approve my words substantial.
Pembrooke, you are too plain in your discourse.
I tell thee, Rodoricke, Pembrooke soldier-like
Hath truly opened, what ten thousand lives
Will hardly doe, if war be made the Judge.
If war be Judge? why, shallow-witted Burbon,
Who shall decide this difference, but war?
Hath not the Judge put on his Scarlet Robe?
Is not the field prepared? our men in armour?
The Trumpets ready for the sound of death?
And nothing hinders vs but our own words?
Leave idle parley, my dread sovereign Lord,
And soon resolve the Duke in fire and smoke,
That he maintains a title false and forged,
And that Nauar is a usurping Lord.
On that isle hazard all these valiant lives.
Sound Drums and Trumpets, make King Lewes know,
He makes his best friend prove his greatest Foe.
Why pause our drums? our trūpets, speak as loud,
Till the bright ayre be made a purple cloud.
Pause, gracious father.
Noble father, pause.
Let Ferdinand thy son so far prevail,
That peace, not war may end this difference.
For Bellamiraes sake abstain from war.
Philip thy son humbly desires a peace.
Let not my father sheathe his warlike sword
Within the bowels of his Countrymen.
Thy daughter Katherine prays the like.
From whence proceeds this sudden sound of peace?
Comes it from me? what, from my Ferdinand?
From Bellamira my sweet second self?
Or rather comes it (Lewes) from thy soul?
Thy Philip, the true Image of thy self?
Thy Katherine, thy hearts chiefest joy?
Princes, you ask, you know not what your selves.
Rodorick, they ask a sweet and pleasing boon.
Why, they ask peace, and we are set for war.
Tic a bad peace exceeds not a just war.
We will not rise from this submissive ground,
Till we obtain, if not a peace, a truce.
Nor shall our feet bee guilty of new steps,
Till I obtain a truce from murdering war.
Show me some reason (son) for this demand.
Show me some reason (children) for this prayer.
I love the daughter of thine enemy.
Fair Katherine hath inthrald my heart.
I love the daughter of thine enemy,
Fair Bellamira hath inthrald my heart.
Is love the cause? then wherefore wage we war?
What matter first who wears both Diadems,
When the Succession lives in eiders heir?
If Ferdinand be crowned King of Nauar,
Fair Katherine shall be crowned his Queen:
If Philip wear the Diadem of France,
Fair Bellamira made his lovely Queen,
Sways half the Sceptre. See what heaven can doe,
Provide for peace, even in the jaws of war!
How sweetly doth the Earl of Pembrooke speak!
Now trust me I am ravished with his voice.
What says Nauar? what, first war or peace?
A truce for three months, so it please your Highness,
During which time our children shall have leave,
With Drum and Trumpet to surueigh the Camp,
To Court our daughters, and to feast themselves,
As fits the sons of honourable foes:
And if it prove a match between them both,
There end all difference, Isle bequeath my Crown,
As a rich offering to their nuptial Rites.
Here, strike the truce upon my kingly hand,
Which is as surely ratified in this,
As by the testimonial of a world.
So now, for three months space all wars surcease,
Our thoughts are wholly fixed on love and peace.
Zounds, here's a truce made up by miracle.
Isle cross it by a wily stratagem.
What stratagem?
By love to Bellamira.
Oh could I dive into the Princes heart,
By any insinuation ne'er so base,
How easily might I effect my plot,
To make the Kingdom of Navarre mine own.
It were but a dram or so unto the son,
And a small thing would send the old man hence.
What, noble Rodorick, to gain a Crown,
A Duke would doe much.
More then poison two:
But you, my Lord, forget your self too far,
Know you to whom you have disclosed your heart?
Why, to the Duke of Orleans.
The dear friend of Lewes the French King.
King me no Kings,
Although we seem to be of several sides,
Rodorick, we love together like true friends.
This Truce gives aim to our intention:
Assist me (worthy Orleans) to effect,
First, my desired love, and next the Crown.
Peter de Lions is your Lordships servant,
A boon companion, and a lusty Knave:
He is in love with Bellamiraes maid,
And by that love he may bestead your Highness,
More then your best friends in your best designs.
Call him forth.
What Peter.
Here, my Lord.
Why dost thou look so wildly?
Not with drink, nor yet with rage.
His looks are wild with love.
With love surreuerence? can there be a face
In all the world patched up with eyes and lips,
A forehead, and a pair of Crimson cheeks,
To make me do at on, to make me look wild?
Come, come, tic known that you love Thomasin.
Zounds, they that know that, know my heart &amp; all,
I have not the power to deny it, tic most true.
And tic most true that I love Bellamira:
Now if thou art in favour of thy wench,
Many a meeting thou may help me to,
And learn besides what suitors seek her love,
And whom she most affects. These things once known,
It were worth a Dukedom, Peter.
Sbloud, give me a Dukedom, and isle warrant you
The knowledge of these things ten times o'er.
Theres Angels for thee, Peter, think on them,
And doe thy best to help thy masters love.
Well, howsoever I smooth it to the Duke,
My thoughts are bent on his destruction.
You have my heart in your purse, isle doe any thing for you.
And thou shalt want no gold, &amp; so farewell.
I cannot choose but farewell, and have the good An∣gels
to comfort me; yet I am melancholy. Hears gold to
make me merry: O but (hey ho) here is love to make me sad.
To avoid prolixity, I am crossed with a Suitor, that wants a
piece of his tongue, and that makes him come lisping home:
they call him Cavalier Bowyer, he will have no nay, but the
wench. By these hilts, such another swash-Buckler lives not
in the nyne quarters of the world: why, he came over with
the Earl of Pembrooke; and he limps, and he limps, &amp; he
devours more French ground at two paces, thē will serve
Thomasin at nineteen. If ever he speak French, to avoid
prolixity, he will murder the tongue. Isle provide for him,
theres but small choice, either he shall renounce the wēch,
or forsake his lame legs, his lisping tongue, and his life to: for
by S. Denis, I had rather dye in a ditch, then be bobbed of
my fair Thomasin.
Whither goes royal Philip thus prepared?
On what adventure goes Prince Ferdinand?
To conquer all the world, fair Katherine,
Whose beauty in mine eye surmounts it far.
Virtue and love conducts me to your sister.
On the like voyage are my fortunes bound,
I go to win thy sister.
Some fair Star,
On our great hopes shine fair and debonair.
Amen, saith Pembrocke.
Amen, saith Rodoricke.
This way my Love dwells.
In this ayre breathes mine.
Farewell.
Prince Ferdinand, if these cross loves
Enjoy a wished success, peace here shall dwell.
And we be friendly Brothers.
True.
Farewell.
Pity such true love, which like blessed seed,
Sown in such fertile soil, his princely breast,
By the rough stormy brow and winters hate
Of adverse parents should be timeless nipped,
And dye ever it attain maturity:
For I have heard, the Princess whom he serves,
Is hotly courted by the Duke of Burbon,
Who to effect his choice, hath in these wars
Furnished your father with a gallant power:
His love may happily then disable Philips.
O no, my father doth affect the Prince:
Besides, my sisters heart is so combined
To his in perfect love, that Burbons hate,
Nor all the world that knot can separate.
Then sorrow not for him, but turn the stream
Of gentle pity on thy wretched friend,
Within whose bosom love hath kindled fire,
So ardent, that the flames will bury me.
Philip is throned in my sisters eyes:
But in my love disdain and hatred lies.
Doth she not pay true kindness with the like?
As stepdames, orphans, night, the cleer-fac't day,
So doth she hate me, and return my woes,
Like a steeld Anvil backward on my self.
She is all hate, yet such a lovely foe,
That I must kiss the sword that wounds me so.
Inter these thoughts, this is her fathers tent.
Drum, give a friendly summons to the King.
Forbear a while (dear Pembrooke:) by our vows,
Which in the book of heaven are registered,
By all the rights of friendship, by that love
Thou bear thy native Country, I conjure thee,
This day to be the Trumpet of my worth,
To speak the passions of thy grieved friend,
To Katharines ears, till those pure Ivory gates,
Appears with the volley of thy battring words,
Give way to my laments to touch her heart:
For this have I extracted thee from many,
Made thee my fellow Pilgrim to her shrine,
Knowing thy thoughts from loves Religion free▪
When my prayers fail, thy tongue may plead for me.
Must I be spokesman? Pembrooke plead for love?
Whose tongue tunde to the Instruments of war,
Never knew strain of fancy on my breath:
Affection never dwelt, but war and death.
But if thou lou'dst to have thy soldiers fight,
Or hearten the spent courages of men,
Pembrooke could use a stile invincible.
Lou'dst thou a town, I de teach thee how to woo her▪
With words of thunder-bullets wrapped in fire,
Till with thy Cannon battery she relent,
And humble her proud heart to stoop to thee.
Or if not this, then mount thee on a Steed,
Whose courage never awde an iron Bit,
And thou shalt hear me hollow to the beast,
And with commanding accents master him:
This Courtship Pembrooke knows; but idle love,
The slicke-fac't object of an amorous brain,
Did never clothe mine eye-balls, never taught
This tongue inurde to broils and stratagems,
The passionate language of a troubled heart:
I am too blunt and rude for such nice service.
Yet since my friend inioynes me to this task,
Take courage, isle both speak, plead, woo for thee,
And when I want fit words to move her mind,
Isle draw my sword, and swear she must be kind.
Drummer report our presence to the King.
Prince Ferdinand, and honoured English Pembrooke,
Now by S. Denis, welcome. One run straight,
And give our daughter notice of these ghosts.
What man, we know you come prepared to woo:
To woo, to win; now by our sacred life,
We wish in soul our daughter were your wife.
Our son is with your sister, fair hap wait:
For peace or war lives in your love or hate.
Welcome once more, first, weal go see your love,
After, to banquet, and from thence to woo.
Be merry, then weal share a friendly part,
But you shall triumph in our daughters heart.
See that the Tent be ready furnished.
By this, my father and those Lords are met,
Amongst whom, the noble Pembrooke, like the Sun,
Out-shines the borrowed glory of the rest:
And well I may compare him to the Sun,
That but once looked upon with his fair shape,
Hath dazzled my poor senses, and left me blind.
But sir, whore's the man I bade you bring?
If you can judge of colours (Madam) this is he.
Painter, stand forth.
An earnest cause (my friend) importunes me,
Wherein I am to crave thy cunningest Art.
Such as it is, you may command, fair Princess.
But are thy colours fresh? thy pencil smooth?
Thy hand vnwauering? and thy head dislodged
Of all unquiet harsh encumbrances?
For thou must draw proportion of those parts,
Whose worth to tell, my tongue wants utterance.
Fear you not (Madam) I am well prepared.
Then hither strait with youthful Ferdinand,
Nauars stout son, there comes an English Knight,
Pembrooke they call him, honourably borne:
Him (whilst we are in conference) thou shalt mark,
And to the life set down his counterfeit.
Nor is it needful I should show him thee,
The goodliest person in the train, that's he.
Let me alone to give the Painter destruction, I
know him as well as the Beggar knows his dish: he wears
a white Scarf in his hat, and an Orange tawny feather up∣on
his arm.
Fool, indirectly thou describ'st another:
Thats Prince Nauar, Pembrooke his plume is Azure,
A little intermixed with spotless white,
Prefiguring the temper of the Sky,
With whose hye motion his great mind doth move.
Orange tawny and Azure, ell's one, all is but fea∣there,
there is no difference I am sure but in colour.
Why, thats as much as may be, is it not?
Not so, isle prove the contrary: You are fair, and
I am foul, is that all the difference between you and I?
there's another thing in it, if you mark it well.
I prithee peace, and with thy ignorance
Draw not the Painter likewise into error.
Here take thy stand, thou know him by these marks
I lately spake of: seem to excel thine Art,
And I will study to requite thy pains.
Thus did the Greeks, when they begirt the walls
Of strong built Troy, sometimes with friendly check
Entertain peace, and spend their frolic hours,
In courtly feasting of each other foe.
Welcome (young Ferdinand) I promise you,
It cheers my spirit we doe embrace you here,
And welcome too (brave Lord) we cannot say,
As if we were in Paris; we might say,
Your viands shall be costly: but presume,
Such as the Camp affords, weal have the best.
Daughter, I prithee bid them welcome.
My Lord, I doe
That with the Congy of a bended knee:
But this with my true hearts loyalty.
Lords, you are welcome, by my fathers leave.
Why, now thou dost content thy father, Kate,
When wholly unto merriment inclined,
Thou answerst with like sympathy of mind.
But yet her looks are haggard and obscure,
Which makes me doubtful sheele not stoop to lure.
Princes, let's enter: come, Isle lead the way:
The feast is mine, you are my ghosts this day.
Now Pembrooke, show thy friendships true effect,
Obfayne her love, my life thou shalt protect.
He stays behind the rest, O happy hour!
Work on (sweet Painter) to enrich mine eye
With that, which else procures my tragedy.
Fair Madam, in this confluence of sweet joy,
When every one resorts unto the feast,
Me thinks you should not thus retire alone,
As seeming, your best fare were heavy moan.
I am not (Sir) alone, nor do I starve
My appetite with any wilful fast,
I have a banquet of sweet pleasing thoughts;
That is more precious then the costliest feast.
But at your fathers board there sits a guest,
To whom the cup of Ganimede will seem
But juice of Hemlock, and the daintiest dish,
As much unsavoury as the Pomice stone,
Unless your presence season his delight.
I am sorry I want skill to serve his diet.
I have not bin instructed to such end.
But I will teach you (Madam) if you please.
Rather the party grieved first should show
Wherein we err, else how can we discern
What is our fault, or how we may amend?
That office he commits unto my tongue.
Is he not able then to speak himself?
Yes, Madam, I have heard when Ferdinand,
With whom in Padua I was conversant,
So spake in the assembly of the learned,
With such a grace and well composed phrase,
As many thought grave Tullies eloquence
Flowed like a honey River from his lips.
He wants then belike sufficient courage.
Never lived Knight less preiudic'd in that,
Then valiant Ferdinand, whom I have seen,
Couch his staff Lance with such dexterity,
As if the god of battle had himself
Entered the Lists, and pressing to the midst
Of steele-composed troops, like lightning fly,
Till he had made a passage with his sword.
So puissant in his fortitude with men,
And daunted with a silly women's looks?
How can that be?
Yes, when you weigh the force
Of your resistless and controlling beauty,
It is your beauty: were his power and spirit
Ten times more haughty venturous then it is,
Compels it stoop in homage to your foot,
As trembling Lambs, when they to Lions couch.
It was well he chose so good an Orator,
To plead the imperfection of his cause.
I should have that opinion of my self,
If for my sake your Grace would favour him.
Yes, for your sake we have endured his name;
And for your sake we tolerate his suite:
But when you cease to speak, then all that praise
You have attributed to his desert,
Seems borrowed from your self, you are the man
Whose eloquence compares with Cceroes.
You are the man, whose knightly fortitude
Lives in the world vnpreiudic'd of any.
You vanquish beauty, and enthral the mind
Of female weakness, with no lesser awe,
Then Indian vassayles stoop unto their Lords.
The name of Ferdinand you have mista'ne:
Say tic your self, and then your whole discourse
Observes the perfect method that it should.
Should I be false and treacherous to my friend?
I am entreated but to speak for him.
But for your self would be more acceptable.
Oh pardon me, nor let immodest strain
Cleave to my brow, my love is chastely bred,
Other then Pembrooke, Katherine never vows,
Shall be inthroniz'd in her maiden thoughts.
Mistake me not, I say tic Ferdinand
Dyes in affection to your Deity.
But in affection I survive to none,
But only Pembrooke.
Will you be esteemed
A cruel murdresse of a loyal friend?
Will Pembrooke triumph in a women's fall?
You anger me, respect young Ferdinand.
You please me not, to speak of Ferdinand.
Nay, then tic time to go, or wrong my friend.
Since, Madam, what I would I cannot doe,
Mine honour here bids me leave off to woo.
Stay, Pembrooke, Katherine will sue to thee,
So shalt thou keep thy faith and loyalty.
Tarry, sir, tarry, we want the length of your nose: nay,
if you will not hear, isle be so bold as follow your nose.
Sir, tarry, tarry.
He will not hear, nor (too unkind) look back.
But, Madam, spite his heart you shall see this.
Give me his picture: Image far more kind,
Then is the substance, whence thou art derived!
Which way soever I divert my self,
Thou seem to follow with a loving eye.
Thee will I therefore hold within mine arms,
As some small comfort to increasing harms.
What means my second self by this long stay?
I cannot rest till I be certified,
What good or bad success my suite returns:
But he is gone, and in fair Katharines hand
I see his picture. What may this pretend?
Thou hast done well indeed, in every part
Thou show complete &amp; cunning workmanship:
His eye, his lip, his cheek are rightly framed;
But one thing thou hast grossly ouer-slipt.
Where is his stubborn unrelenting heart,
That lurks in secret as his master doth,
Disdaining to regard or pity me?
Madam, his heart must be imagined
By the description of the outward parts.
O no; for then it would be tractable,
Mild and applausiue as the others be.
No Prince, but Pembrooke dwells in Katharines eye,
Whose that disturbs our pleasing solitude.
Know you not me? my name is Ferdinand,
Whose faithful love Lord Pembrooke late commenced?
Speak then for Pembrooke as he did for you,
Or else your bootless suite will soon be cold.
Why, he was Orator in my behalf:
If I should speak for him, as he for me,
Then should I breathe forth his passions, not mine own.
I, I, tic so, the villain, in my name,
Hath purchased her affection for himself,
And therefore was he absent from the feast:
And therefore shuns my sight, and leaves behind
This counterfeit, to keep him still in mind.
Tic so, tic so, base Traitor, for this wrong
My sword shall cut out thy perfidious tongue.
I have run till I sweat, sweat till my shirt cleaves
to my back, cried till I am hoarse, and am hoarse till I
cannot cry, and yet he will not come back.
No matter, fellow, I have here a pledge,
Which I will zealously devote me to.
There's thy reward, withdraw, my father comes.
Where are these Lords? the one hath sate with me,
And suddenly is risen from the board:
The other came not at all. Daughter, saw you
The Prince or Pembrooke, which way they are gone?
Back to their Tents, my Lord, as I suppose.
Back to their Tents, and take no leave of vs?
Nay, then I fear their meaning was too smooth,
And some black Treason covered in their smiles,
Which we will seek immediately to prevent.
Stand, give the word along, stand.
Stand there.
Lieutenant.
Captain.
Is the watch set in the Kings quarter yet?
An hour ago.
Zounds, what foolish Canaanits were they, to run
in debt to their eyes for an hours sleep, sooner then they
needed? Sergeant.
Anon sir.
Anon sir! s'hart, the Rogue answers like a Drawer:
but tic the trick of most of these Sergeants, all clincum,
clancum. Gods dynes, I am an Onion, if I had not rather
serve foremost in the forlorn hoop of a battle, or run
point blank against the mouth of a double charged Can∣non,
then come under the arrests of some of their pewter
passels: zounds, tic hotter a great deal then hell mouth, &amp;
Dives burning in Sulphur: but thou art none of the genea∣logy
of them. Where must we watch to night?
In the furthest Trenches that confront the enemies
Camp.
Thats the next way to have all our throats cut.
That cannot be, you know, Captain, there's a peace
toward.
A pox a peace, it keeps our Ancient whole; but s'hart
our gabardines go to wrack: but futra: tic well known, since
Dick Bowyer came to France, he hath showed himself a
gentleman &amp; a Cavalier, and sets fear it's heals: and I
could scope (a pox on it) the other thing, I might haps return
safe &amp; sound to England; but what remedy? al flesh is grass,
and some of vs must needs be scorched in this hot Coun∣trey.
Lieutenant Core, prithee lead my Band to their quar∣la,
and the Rogues do not as they should, cram thy self,
good Core, down their throats, and choke them. Who
stand Sentronell to night, sir?
That must I, Captain.
You, Raf Nod? zounds, soldiers, follow my disc∣pline,
say your prayers, you are all dead men, all dust and a∣shes,
all worms meat.
How so, Captain?
Doe you make him Sentronell? s'hart, heel nod
presently: and he do not sleep sitting upon the point of a
Spanish needle, Dicke Bowyer's a very shuttlecock. Nod!
zounds, he is one of the nine sleepers, a very Dormouse: &amp;
I had a Pageant to present, of the seven deadly sins, hee
should play Sloth: and he did not sleep when he should
speak his part, I am a Badger.
That's true, you have half the nature of a Badger,
for one leg is shorter then another.
Zounds, you Rogue, doe not you know that? Isle tell
you: s'hart, and I lye, call me Iebuzite. Once as I was figh∣ting
in S. Georges fields, and blind Cupped seeing me, and
taking me for some valiant A chilles, he took his shaft, and
shot me right into the left heel, and ever since, Dick Bow∣yer
hath been lame: but my heart is as sound as a bell,
heart of Oak, spirit, spirit. Lieutenant, discharge Nod,
and let Cricket stand Sentronell, till I come.
He shall, Captain.
On before, strike Drum, march soldiers, keep your
place, Nod: lusty my harts, for the honour of England, &amp; our
brave General, the Earl of Pembrooke. So, I have dis∣charged
my self of these.
Hot shot! now to my love: some may say, the tale of Ve∣nus
loving Mars, is a fable: but he that is a true soldier, and
a Gent. as Dick Bowyer is, &amp; he do not love some varlet or
other, zounds, he is worse then a gaping Oyster without li∣quor.
There's a pretty sweet faced mother that waits on the
princess, that I have some mind to; but a whorsō Achitophel,
a parasite, a rogue, one whose face looks worse thē a Tailors
cushen, of old shreds &amp; colours; zounds, like a weavers leg,
in an old ditch feeding horseleaches, &amp; this trotter is my rye∣ual,
&amp; loves Thomasin: his name is Peter de Lions; but s'hart
(I will not swear neither) if I do not turn Rich. Cor de Lion
with him, if I do not tear out his heart and eat it with mus∣tard,
let him say Dick Bowyer's a Mackarell. Yonder hee
comes with my Property ha`d in hand. Zoūds, I say nothing:
but isle hear what they say, and determine afterword.
Thomasin, you know me, I hate prolixity: in a word,
my humour is thus, I love you.
And I do not spoil that humour, so—
Your answer compendiously, &amp; avoid prolixity.
Mary muff! by Iesu, I scorn to humble the least
part about me, to give answer to such a trotting question: as
I live, it ioults mine ears worse in hearing, then the princes
coach on a broken cawsey.
Thomasin, leave this pace, &amp; take me with you: my
Lord loves your Lady, yet I hear say, she is this night betro∣thed
to the Prince of France: so I love you, and shall I lose
you? No, I hate prolixity: in a word, the end is, isle mary you.
Pretty, as God save me! what will Captain Bowyer
say to that, if he should know it?
A good Rogue, by Iesu.
Bowyer a Captain? a Capon, a button mould, a lame
gaberdine, a red beard Sprat, a Yellow hammer, a bow case,
a very Jackdaw with his tongue slit.
Zounds, what a Philistine is this? what a dictionary
of proper names hath the Rogue got together? heart, his
tongue crawls as fast as the Cheese doth in Germany. Isle
pearce you for this, you Lobster.
Bowyer, mordu futra for him; and that sour crab do
but leer at thee, I shall squeeze him to verges.
And you squeeze me, I may haps grow saucy with you,
you whoreson burned Pudding pie, you dry Parsnip: kiss
me, Thomasin: so, dare you stand to your word now, and
squeeze me?
Stumps, I challenge thee for this indignity. Bowyer,
I will gyrd my self with thy guts, I am a Soldier and a
Captain.
Captain? s'hart, and thou hast under thy charge,
any other then Pigmies, I am Gogmagog. Dost thou hear
(sowgelder?) and I do not with six Cranes (well marshald)
overrun thee and thy hundred and fifty, say Dick Bow∣year's
a coward.
For that word, draw.
Hold, Gentlemen.
Peace (good Thomasin) silence, sweet socket. Peter,
dost see this sword? this sword kilt Sarlaboys, that was one
Rogue: now it shall kill thee, that's two Rogues. Whoreson
puttock, no garbage serve you but this? have at you.
Who's this at enmity within our Camps?
What, Bowyer, and the servant to great Burbon?
Both sheathe your weapons: by our martial law,
This act is death.
Isle be hanged then. Doest thou hear, noble Gene∣rall?
Dick Bowyer knows what belongs to service: we did
not draw of any malice, by this element of iron &amp; steel,
but to measure which of our swords were longest. Isle save
you for once, you Saracen, because I see you'll hang scurvy∣lie:
but the next time—
Good Captain Bowyer, let our English troops
Keep a strong watch to night: my throbbing heart,
Like to a Scritchowle in the midnight hour,
Bodes some black scene of mischief imminent.
Never fear (General) if Iulius Caesar rise up against
vs, ever he do my Lord any wrong, zounds, isle be cut smaller
then pot-hearbs. Isle to the trenches, come Thomasin. Leer
not, Lobster, lest I thum that russetting face of yours with my
sword hilt, till that it look as pyde coloured as the Rainbow.
By Iesu isle do it, and therefore follow me not.
Why should this load of grief lye on my heart
With such a ponderous weight? I know no cause,
Unless it be by thinking on the wrong
My friend receives in the unmatched love,
Which Katherine bears me: yet my faith is sound,
And like a solid Rock shall check her tears.
Katherine loves me; yet for my friends delight,
Pembrooke will hate her love, and fly her sight.
Nauar, you sprinckle me with foul reproach,
And dim the lustre of our royal name,
With colours of dishonour.
Hear me, Burbon.
What words can satisfy so great a wrong?
Have you not with consent of all your Lords,
Promised your daughter to this generous prince?
Their true love forced vs to it.
True love? tic fayn'd.
Ha, Burbon.
Gentle Philip.
With my sword,
Isle prove my love unfeigned, thee a false Lord.
This like a Sanctuary frees thy tongue,
And gives thee childish liberty of speech,
Which else would fawn and crouch at Burbons frown.
Now by S. Denis—
Isle not chat with boys.
Nauar, to thee I speak: thy daughters looks,
Like the North Star to the Sea-tost Mariners,
Hath brought me through all dangers, made me turn
Our royal Palace, to this stage of death,
Our state and pleasures, to a bloody Camp,
And with the strength and puissance of our force,
To lift thy falling and decayed state,
Even to her pristine glory, in thy quarrel
Burbon hath set himself against his King,
And soiled his greatness with a Traitors name.
Now when our worth expected rich reward,
Fair Bellamira, wonder of her time,
Must Philip have her?
Burbon, she is mine.
isle be revenged, by heaven I will,
Or I will pave these plains with the dead bodies
Of our dear subjects: we have sworn thy fall,
That oaths thy death, our rage thy funeral.
Hear our excuse.
We will not credit ayre.
Peter, watch Rodorick, when the prince is gone,
Tell him, Id speak with him.
Enough, tic done.
Nauar, this setting Sun, which sees our wrong,
Shall ever his morrows beams guide the proud East,
View Himens rites turned to a tragic feast
His anger bears him hence, young prince of France,
Since to reduce our enmity to love,
And thereby like a fair and lovely Bride,
To mary peace to France, we are content,
To bring the sea-tost bark of your affects,
Half shipwrecked with the tempest of these wars,
To their desired port, as we agreed:
Go to your father, and inform him thus:
If personally heel view our friendly Tents,
And seal these Articles of peace proposde,
This night you shall be troth-plight to our child.
Were it to search the furthest Northern clime,
Where frosty Hymns with an icy Mace,
Strikes dead all living things, Id find it out,
And borrowing fire from those fair sunny eyne,
Thaw Winters frost, and warm that dead cold clime:
But this impose is nothing, honoured King,
Isle to my father, and conduct him hither:
For whilst my soul is parted from her sight,
This earth is hell, this day a tedious night.
Come Rodorick, you shall bear me company.
He shall not, for isle stay him instantly.
It were pity to keep two such loves asunder.
Daughter, you &amp; your Ladies to your tent,
And deck you richly to receive the prince.
My Lord of Pembrooke, happily returned:
How doth our soon? See where he comes himself.
Speak, boy, how spedst thou with fair Katherine?
I know not how: Is trothlesse Pembrooke there?
Be not dismayed, at length sheele pity thee.
Son, bid our Officers adorn our Court
In her chief glory: for this happy night
Shall 〈◊〉 a period to this smarting war.
Your sister shall be troth-plight to Prince Philip,
And France and we made friends about it then.
Pembrooke, have you the charge to see our Captains
Prepare a martial welcome to the King.
Isle not be idle: since Nauar was crowned,
Our heart with so much joy did ne'er abound.
Nor mine with so much hate. Pembrooke, a word.
What wills your Grace?
That Pembrooke is a villain.
Look not so strange, I speak it not your friend,
But hee that in his soul hath sworn thine end.
A villain? and my death? I am amazed.
Art thou awake? or is all this a dream?
A dream of death: meet me to morrow morning,
As thou art Pembrooke and a Gentleman,
By yon fair River side, which parts our Camps.
You know the place, come armed, and so farewell.
Dear friend.
Push, meet me.
Ferdinand, I will.
Revenge, smile on, thou shalt drink blood thy fill.
This is my waiting night, tic for no good,
That I stand Sentronell. Well, good or ill,
I care not greatly, so I get the gold:
Therefore to avoid prolixity, here walk I.
Here comes the men that must reward my pain.
Have you the poison?
And a strong one too.
Heere's a preservative to save your hand.
When Rodoricke fails your Lordship, heaven shall fail,
To illuminate the world with cheerful light.
Then here about should Peter wait for me:
For this is the Pavilion of the Princess.
My Lord.
Peter.
Here is the key that opens to the Tent,
I stole it from my sweet heart Thomasin.
Enter without prolixity, woo and win the Lady:
But give me gold (my Lord) and Isle to Dice.
Hold, take thy fill.
And it shall go as fast.
Now gentle Peter, get thee unto rest:
My business craves the absence of the world▪
None but my felt and Rodoricke shall behold
The secret complot that I doe intend.
I go, my Lord.
Now blessed key, open unto my love,
Doe more then loving lines or words can doe:
My letters have bin answered with disdain:
Her father I have moved to gain my love,
But he is frosty in my fervent suite,
And now perforce I will obtain my love,
Or ease her puling hatred by revenge.
You stay too long, isle help to turn the key.
What do I see? the majesty of heaven,
Sit in a maiden slumber on the earth?
What, is my Bellamira turned a goddess,
Within the table of her glorious face!
Me thinks, the pure extraction of all beauty
Flows in abundance to my loue-sicke eye.
O, Rodoricke, she is admirably fair:
And sleeping, if her beauty be so rare,
How will her eyes enchant me if she wake!
Here, take the poison, isle not stain that face,
For all the treasure of the Western Island.
I see no such admired perfection.
Waken her, Burbon, and this loving charm,
Which now hath led your senses prisoner,
Will vanish, and her speech full of reproof,
Beget a new phantasm all of hate:
Thou wilt detest her when she shall deny thee.
Wakē her, Rodorick, for I want the power.
I hope I am disguised sufficiently,
That Bellamira cannot know my face.
Madam, fair Bellamira.
Here I am, who calls on Bellamira?
I, fair love,
The Duke of Burbon that doth honour thee.
The Duke of Burbon in my Tent so late?
Where is my Guard? what Peter, Thomasin.
Step to her, and restrain her, lest she call:
Isle be a looker on, and be unknown.
What needs your Highness call for any guard,
Since you are guarded with a faithful friend?
Behold me, Madam, humbly on my knee,
Come to renew my suite, vouchsafe me love,
Or with this weapon take away my life:
Much better it were a thousand times to dye,
Then live in torment of your scorching eye.
You have inflamed my heart, oh quench that flame,
Or into cinders turn my haplesse trunk:
Haplesse, in being vnbelou'd of you.
My Lord of Burbon, you presume too much
On th'extremity of passion.
Have I not answered many an idle letter,
With full assurance that I cannot love?
Have I not often, viva voce checked
Your courtly kindness? frowned upon your smiles?
Used you unkindly, all to wean your love?
And doe you still persevere in your suite?
I tell thee, Burbon, this bold part of thine,
To break into my Tent at dead of night,
Deserves severe correction, and the more,
Because it brings mine honour into question.
I charge thee, as thou art a Gentleman,
Betake thee to thine own Pavilion,
And let this answer satisfy for all:
Burbon, I cannot, nor I will not love thee.
Cannot, nor will not? zoūds, Madam, but you must.
Must I?
And shall.
You will not force me to it?
Or force that sparkling beauty from your face.
Look not so fiercely, nor cry out for help:
For if you doe, this makes you cry your last.
Seeing neither words, kind letters, hearty sighs,
Humble entreaty, nor a world of payne,
Can move you to take pity of my love:
But Tyrant-like, your beauty seeks my life,
I will blot out that beauty with this juice.
Thus, thus I wipe away my passions:
Thus doe I heal the torments of my love▪
Thus doe I ransom my enthralled eye,
And by depriving of the cause of life,
Kill the effect, which was a world of sorrow.
Farewell, foul Bellamira, I am pleased
In this revenge, that no way could be eased.
Zounds, he has don't: now, Rodorick, joy thy fill.
Burbon is thine, the Dukedom is thine own:
For only he in the Inheritance
Stood as an obstacle, to let my claim.
This deed of his will take away his life:
And then let me alone to enjoy his land.
Isle steal away unseen, cause unsuspected:
I would not for the world be once detected.
Poison my face! oh most inhumane wretch!
Revenge more vile, then to abridge my life.
What, Thomasin, what, brother Ferdinand:
My kingly father: is there none that hears?
Then Treason, treason, let that waken you:
For capital is this offence to me.
O Iesu, mistress, what ails your face!
Her face!
Tic spotted like a Panthers skin.
O, were those spots as kindly beautiful,
Then were fair Bellamira vndeform'd.
O, what divine power hath sent this Leprosy?
Say, beauteous sister.
Speak, fair Bellamira.
Speak, my good mistress.
My sweet daughter, speak.
Her silence argues a tormented spirit.
Thy countenance argues a deceitful soul.
Where is Nauar?
Where is fair Bellamira?
My Philip, oh give leave to fly his sight.
Stay, gentle daughter, heel not injure thee.
Here are the Articles concluded on,
I could not rest, till I had signed them,
And brought them to your Highness. A month hence
The marriage shall be fully solemnised,
So please your Majesty and your fair daughter:
Are you content?
To live in discontent.
Me thinks, this royal presence hath dim looks:
Is it because they are in the arms of night,
Which sets a leaden lustre on the eye?
Or hath some accident occoasted them,
That troubles their aspect with melancholy?
Is Nauar well? is Ferdinando well?
Is Pembrooke well? Is Bellamira well?
O, where is Bellamira? tell me, Princes,
For now my tongue hath struck upon her name.
I feel a kind of killing ecstasy.
Where is she? in her Tent?
Deny me, father,
I would not see Prince Philip with this face.
Why speak you not? what, have I touched the string,
Whereon the burden of your sorrow lies?
Father, look round about, see you my love?
Rodoricke, look round about, see you my love?
I see her not.
Nor I.
I say not so.
The garments that she wears, mine eye should know.
What Lady's this that hides her heavenly face?
Here are no Basilisks with killing eyes:
You need not hide your beauty: sweet, look up,
Me thinks I have an interest in these looks.
What's here, a Leper amongst Noble men?
What creatures this? why stays she in this place?
Oh, tic no marvel though she hide her face:
For tic infectuous: let her leave the presence,
Or Leprosy will cleave unto vs all.
O let me leave the presence, gentle father,
When Philip bids his Bellamira go.
My Bellamira!
How? my sons beloved!
Is this my love? was this your beauteous child?
My child.
My sister.
Beauteous Bellamira.
Spotted.
Disfigured.
Made a loathsome Leper.
How came this sudden alteration?
For she was comely, lovely, beautiful,
When the day left his Chariot to the night.
That heaven doth know, and only Bellamira.
Daughter, I charge thee, tell me how it came.
Burbon, oh Burbon.
Did he doe the deed?
He came into my Tent at dead of night,
And rubbed my face with an infectuous herb,
Because I would not grant unto his love.
I cried for help, but none did succour me.
I know he did, and laugh to think on it.
And he shall rue his treason.
Threaten not,
Leave the revenge to me whom it concerns,
Tic I am robbed of a delicious look,
A heavenly sparkling brow, a starry eye,
A countenance fairer then Auroraes looks,
When all the East is gilded with her blush.
Tic I will be revenged: but not before
I have espousde my lovely Bellamira.
Espoused her!
How! marry a face deformed!
A leprous creature!
An infectuous maid!
One, whose sores are perchance incurable!
Be they incurable, it is my Love,
And for my sake she hath endured this wrong▪
And, should I now forsake her thus distressed,
I could not merit a true Lovers name.
To show I love her, I will marry her,
Before the month expire: nay in the morn:
Delays, perchance, may make her think I scorn.
Marry with me? fetch me a looking glass,
That I may see how sweet a Bride I am.
Oh, I detest my self: Dear, hate me too:
I am not to be married but to death.
Though I were Empress of the spacious world,
I de lay my self and Kingdom at thy feet.
Live, noble Philip, joy some happier match:
Tic my unworthiness makes me deny thee.
Think thou, because thy face is spotted so,
Thou art not worthy of thy Philips love?
Thy face to me was but a Marshall,
To lodge thy sacred person in my mind,
Which long ago is surely chambred there:
And now what needs an outward Harbinger?
I doe affect, not superficially:
My love extended further then the skin.
The inward Bellamira tic I seek,
And unto her will Philip be epousde.
Oh admirable love!
Oh, my dear son,
Thou make me famous by thy loyalty.
I never heard the like.
Pen never writ.
A worthier Story to posterity.
Pen never writ of a more treacherous friend,
Then, Pembrooke, thou hast proved to Ferdinand.
Sweet Love, prepare thee to be Philips Bride:
For here I swear, as I am royal borne,
Isle marry thee, before the mornings Sun
Hath run the third part of his glorious course.
Father, good night: dear friends, dear Love, good night:
Marriage, I hope, will make my spirits more light.
Good night, sweet son. King Lewes, stay with me,
Be thou my comforter, isle comfort thee.
Pembrook, remember that thou fail me not.
O God, what may these moody looks intend?
Me thinks, I should have better from my friend.
Now, Bellamira, thou hast time to think
Upon these troublous matters: should I suffer
So brave a Gentleman as Philip is,
To wed himself to my unworthy self,
It would be counted virtue in the Prince;
But I were worthy of a world of blame.
No, Philip, no, thou shalt not wrong thine honour,
Nor be impeached by Bellamiraes spots.
In some disguise isle steal away to night,
And ne'er appear more in my Philips sight.
There is no toil to this walking of the Round:
S'hart, I have been stumbling up and down all this
night, like a Brewers horse, that has ne'er a good eye in
his head: Tic as dark as Pitch. I can resemble our
Camp to nothing better then hell, save that in hell they
are always waking, and here the villains are as drow∣sie
as swine. Lieutenant Nod! why, you might have shot
a double Cannon in his ear, and never have waked him:
I jogged, and I jogged; I shouted, and I shouted; and yet the
mongrel snorted, you might hear him to Dover: at last,
I dragd him by the heals into a ditch of water, and there
left the Lobster crawling. A the tother side, Core be∣ing
appointed to stand Sentinel upon the Wallounes
quarter, s'hart, the Loach gets me into a Sutlers bath, and
there sits me drinking for Joins best cap: but by this
hand, and as Dicke Bowyer is a Soldier, and a Cavalier,
he shall sit in the bolts for it to morrow. My comfort is
in these extremities, that I brought Thomasin to her La∣dies
Tent, leaving her new-come Lover to pick straws:
but soft, queen vou la?
My name is Ferdinand.
Stand.
Why, Captain, thou dost know me wellinough.
Know, or not know, without the word you pass
not.
Soliman.
So, allie, allie, Monseur.
First, tell me, saw thou Pembrooke come this way?
I saw him not.
Farewell.
As much to you. Zounds, these Frenchmen think
to out-face vs with a card of ten: but, and his beard were
made of brass, Dicke Bowyer will make him know the
discipline of war. Here comes another.
Who's there? Dick Bowyer?
Some call me so, what then?
Pembrooke salutes thee.
Oh, good morrow, my Lord, good morrow.
I prithee, Captain, saw thou Ferdinand,
Son to Nauar, as thou did walk the round?
Even now, my Lord, he past along this way.
Himself alone? or had he company?
Nay questionless, he was alone, my Lord.
Could thou discern his face? how did he look?
Faith, scurvily, my Lord, like a greene cheese, or the
inside of a rotten Pumpian.
There is Crowns for thee to drink.
I thank your Lordship. To see the difference be∣tweene
these French Cures, and our English Cavaliers:
there's as much bounty in them, as there's Marchpane in a
dish of Almond butter. I might have stood here till my
teeth chatter in my head, ever the tother Launceprisado
would have said, Here, Captain Bowyer, there's a Car∣dicue,
to wash down melancholy. But had I known as
much, I would have basted him, till his bones had rattled
in his skin.
Come, sir, you shall answer your walking before
our Captain.
Well, sirs, take heed what you doe, I am a Princes
man, if you stay me upon the Kings hye way, I can lay fell∣lowship
to your charge.
But sir, wee can lay Treason to thine, for being
without the word.
Without the word! O pernicious Frenchman!
without the word! why, I have called thee Villain, him
Rascal; this, Slave; that, Rogue; and am I still without
the word?
I, sir, the word that must serve your turn, the
Watch-word.
Faith, you're like to watch this twelvemonth, ere
you have any other words at my hands.
How now masters, what calfe are you dragging to
the slaughter-house there? ha?
A straggler, and a spy: Captain, I pray exa∣mine
him.
So, Lieutenant Core, you are crept from your cups
at last, Isle talk with you anon: but, sir, to you: From
whence come you?
I came, sir, from the King of France camp.
So, what's your name?
My name, sir, is Bow wow.
S'hart, what a name's that! the Hedge-hog mocks
vs: Bow wow, quoth? whatkin art thou to the generation
of Dogs?
No dog, sir, would you should know it, though I
be encompassed with cures.
Zounds, he calls vs cures, hang the hotchpotch
up in a fathom or two of match.
Not you, sir, I call not you so: I know you to be a
very insufficient ill-spoken Gentleman.
Well, sir, whom do you serve?
My master, sir, is the Lady Katherine, the French
Kings daughter: I have bin abroad about some business of
hers, and am now going back again.
An honourable Lady, sir: let him go: tic against the
law of arms to stay him.
Stand of: but soft, I doe not know your name, sir,
that my Lady may give you thanks.
My name's Dick Bowyer.
Then, master Dicke Bowyer, after my hearty
commendations, •due: but as for the rest, I shall, I say no
more, I shall—
How now, Core? how can you answer your being
a tippling, when you should stand Sentinel?
Believe me, Captain, I had but a whiff or two:
for I was passing dry.
Thou art always dry: the whoreson Mault-worm
has a throat like the burning Climb, or a Glasse-makers
Furnace: But your remove from thence has saved you
from the bolts. How now, what Water-Spanyell have
we here?
Tic Lieutenant Nod.
Captain, deride me not: I protest, I came by this
mischance by good service, by following a spy, that came
to discover our army.
O notable Rogue! did not I find thee asleep, and
threw thee into a ditch?
Was it you? by this light, I took you for a spy.
Yet saw me not, no more then a Molewarp: this is
an egregious Rogue.
Yes, I saw you well enough, and I did but try how
you would use me.
By this flesh and blood, many one that lies in his
grave, was not half so senseless: but the Watch breaks
up, every one to his quarter, away.
Tic true, they are gone together, and I am sent to
watch Prince Ferdinand, and the Earl of Pembrooke:
this way they went; but they are got out of sight. I were
very bad to be a Hound, that have no better a sent: if they
were hares, as they are men, I should think them squatted:
but hushed, here comes one of them.
The morn look red: red morns doe threat a storm,
That storm shall light on Pembrooke or my self.
This is our meeting place: here runs the stream
That parts our camps: the time consorts the place;
And (Pembrooke) it thy reputation hold,
It is thy q. to enter.
Here comes the tother, this is luck upon luck:
now will I run and fetch my mistress, the Lady Katherine,
to part their fray.
Good end succeed my early heaviness:
Three times my feet, as loath to guide me hither,
Have stumbled in a plain and even way,
My sword forsook his scabbard once or twice,
Blood from my nostrils thrice hath spouted forth,
And such a dimness ouerrunnes my sight,
That I have tan a tree to bee a man,
And questioned with it about serious things.
This is the place where I must meet my friend.
Yonder he stands. Good morrow, Ferdinand.
Good morrow to thy death: draw, Pēbrook, draw,
The ground thou treadst upon, must be thy grave.
Draw upon Ferdinand?
I, upon me.
Dally not, Pembrooke, I am bent to fight,
And that with thee for the best blood thou bear.
You have some reason for this resolution.
My will.
A sorry argument to kill your friend.
I must have better reason then your will,
Or isle not draw upon my Ferdinand:
Our love is older then of one days growth,
A years continuance hath united vs.
Have we not made an interchange of oaths,
Sworn love to one another twenty times,
Confirmed that friendship by society,
Encreasde it with the sympathy of mind,
Making one pleasure, pleasure unto both?
And shall this bond be broken upon will?
Then you'll not draw?
Yes, nearer to thy person,
In friendly sort to embrace thee, Ferdinand.
Thou art a coward, and thou dare not fight.
Thou know the contrary: for we have fought
At every weapon, to approve our skill.
Go to, you are a villain and a coward,
And by the royal blood that gave me life,
Isle kill thee, Pembrooke, though thou do not draw.
Kill me? thou wilt not wrong thine honour so?
Zounds, but I will: &amp; traitor, take thou that.
Wound me so desperately? nay then isle draw,
Not to offend, but to defend my self.
Now I perceive it is my blood thou seekst:
Witness you heavens, and all you gracious powers,
That stand auspicious to this enterprise,
That Pembrooke draws forth an unwilling sword.
Why so, now manfully defend thy self.
Another woūd? then Pembrook, rouse thy spirit,
And bear no longer with this haire-braynd man.
Yet (Ferdinand) resolve me of the cause,
That moves thee to this unkind enterprise:
And if I satisfy thee not in words,
This double wound shall please thee with my blood.
Nay, with my sword Isle make a score of wounds,
Rather then want of blood divorce thy love.
I hate thee deadly, and I seek thy life:
What other reason, Pembrook, would thou have?
Prepare, prepare, in this conflict to show,
Thou art a Knight, and can overcome thy foe.
And if I spare thee not, impute the cause
To thine own rashness, and mine eking wounds.
I hope I have slain thee.
Oh, I fear thy life: how fares my Ferdinand?
What, liu'st thou yet? then my fare is ill.
I am marked for death,
I feel a general faintness through my limbs:
Expense of blood will soon expend my life.
The like debility my joints doe feel.
Then we must both dye in the latest of death.
Tell me, oh tell me, whence proceeds this hate?
I fear not (Pembrooke) to discover now.
Thou were my Spokes-man unto Katherine,
And treacherously thou stol'st away her heart.
Oh, I can say no more, my spirits doe faint.
Pembrooke, farewell, I have revenged my wrong.
Oh▪ yet a little longer, gracious time,
Detain his princely spirit in his breast,
That I may tell him he is misse-inform'd,
And purge my self unto my dying friend:
But death hath laid his num-cold hand upon me:
I am arrested to depart this life.
Dear Ferdinand, although thou be my death,
How full of pleasure is this Forest life!
My Park I liken to a Common wealth,
In which, my Bucks and Does are Citizens:
The Hunters Lodge, the Court, from whence is sent
Sentence of life or death, as please the King:
Only our gouernment's a tyranny,
In that wee kill our subjects upon sport.
But stay, what Gentlemen doe here lye slain?
If any spark of life doe yet remain,
Isle help to fan it with a nimble hands
The Organ of his arm doth play apace,
He is not so far spent, but that with help,
He may recover to his former state.
How is the other? I doe feel soft-breath
Break from between his lips. Oh, for some aid,
To bear them to the Forest, to my Lodge:
But as I am, isle try my utmost strength,
To save their lives: ferret seen, shall be the first:
Patience, and isle return and fetch the other.
My angle-rod is broke, my sport is done;
But I will fetch my net, to catch some fish:
To lose both fish and pleasure, is too much.
Oh what contentment lives there in the brooke!
What pretty trames are made by cunning hands,
To entrap the wily watery Citizens!
But what art thou that lie upon the ground?
Sleepst thou? or art thou slain? hath breath his last?
No spark of life appears: yet from his eye,
Me thinks I see a glimmering light breakeforth,
Which wanting strength, is like a twilight glimpse.
If there be any hope to save his life,
Isle try my utmost cunning, To my house,
Poor Gentleman, Isle bear thee as a guest,
And either cure thy wounds, or make thy grave.
Just in this circle I left the two Princes ready to
draw; for I read the whole discourse of the Combat in
their red eyes.
Here lye their weapons, and here flows their
blood.
Have they not slain one another, and buried
themselves?
Peace, fool▪ tic too sure, that they are slain.
O Lord, then let me turn my self into a Ballad,
and morn for them.
Thou angrest me, with jesting at my sorrow:
Hence from my sight, my heart is full of grief,
And it will break, the burden is so great.
Go from your sight? then let me go out of your
company: for I had as leeue leave your sight as your
company. Is this my reward for watching and watch∣ing?
Oh Mistress, doe not kill me with unkindness: I
shall, I shall—
What shall you?
Weep out mine eyes, and fill the holes with salt water.
I prithee leave me, I am not displeased,
But fain would vent my sorrow from my heart.
Hold, take my purse, spend that, and leave my presence:
Go every where, enquire my Pembrooke out:
And if thou bring motto his breathless trunk.
I will reward thee with a treble gift.
Well, I were best bee going, now I am so fairly
offred. Mistress, your reward hath stopped my tears, and en∣tic'de
my legs to be walking. Farewell, I will go, God
knows whither, to seek and to find both, and neither.
Farewell, sweet Mistress.
O Pembrooke, let me kneel unto thy blood:
And yet I know not whether't be thy blood,
Save that my soul by a divine instinct,
Tells me it is the treasure of thy veins.
If thou be dead, thou mirror of all men,
I vow to dye with thee: this field, this grove
Shall be my receptacle till my last:
Content with that that feeds the airy souls,
My pillow shall be made a bank of moss,
And what I drink, the silver brooke shall yield.
No other camp nor Court will Katherine have,
Till fates do limit her a common grave.
Our daughter fled! whē? whither? which way? how?
I know not.
Bellamira, my lives joy,
Upon those pinions that support her flight,
Hovers my heart, you bear away my soul.
Turn, turn again, and give this earthly frame
Essential power, which for thine absence dyes:
Thou art the sweet of sweets, the joy of joys:
For thee was Philip borne. O turn again,
And Philip is the blessedest of men.
We are glad she's gone, though we dissemble it.
Son, bridle this affection, cease these laments,
She did not value them.
Lewes, she did,
Till savage hate that shape disfigured.
O, she was worthy to be Queen of heaven.
Her beauty, ever it suffered violence,
Was like the Sun in his Meridian Throne,
Too splendent for weak eyes to gaze upon.
She was too bright before, till being hid
Under that envious cloud, it took the place
Of a dark ground, to show a lovelier face.
That Leprosy in her seemed perfect beauty:
And she did 〈…〉.
With virtue, which no 〈◊〉 calumnious breath
Could ever soil, true virtues dye is such,
That malice cannot stain, nor envy tush.
Then say not but her worth surmoūts these woes.
She grieved to tie you to a hated bed,
And therefore followed Burbon for revenge.
Burbon? who names him? that same verbal sound
Is like a thunder clap to Philips ears,
Frighting my very soul. Sure, you said, Burbon,
And to that prodigy you joined revenge:
Revenge, that like a shadow follows him.
It was he that made me bankrupt of all bliss,
Sud the divorce of that pure white and red,
Which decked my Bellamiraes lovely cheeks:
And shall he scope unpunished?
Join your hands,
And all with vs swear vengeance on the Duke.
Not for the world: who prosecutes his hare
On Burbon, iniures me: I am his foe,
And none but I will work his overthrow.
What means our son?
To hunt him for revenge.
The darkest angle of this vniuerse,
Shall not contain him through the bounded world:
Isle prosecute his flight with ceaslesse steps:
And when long travel makes them dull or faint,
Baiting them fresh with Bellamiraes wrongs,
Like Eagles they shall cut the flaxen ayre,
And in an instant bring me where he is.
Where goes our son?
To hell, so that in that kingdom,
Fate would ascertain me to meet with Burbon.
Where ever I confront him, this shall kill him.
Thou shalt have aid to compass thy revenge▪
No aid, but this strong arm. Farewell, farewell.
Since Bellamira hath for sooke her friend,
I seek destruction (Burbon) and 〈◊◊〉
Stay him: this fury will betray thy life.
Poor king made wretched by thy daughters loss.
Poor king made wretched by thy desperate son.
Spēd not your woes too fast, but save some tears
To dew the obsequies of your dead son.
What, Ferdinand?
Hoe's slain by Pembrokes hands,
And Pembroke left breathless by Ferdinand.
Their quarrel is uncertain, and their bodies
By some uncivil hands contrayed away,
And no inquiry can discover them.
Our son slain▪ Bellamira poisoned▪
Navarre, tear off these hairs, and raging die.
More Tragedies at hand, what news bring• Rodo∣rick?
Such as will make the hearers, senseless trunks.
Why do thy our highness in your foe-mens tents
Revel away the time, and yield your person,
To the known malice of your enemies,
Whilst in your own tents, rapine and foul lust,
Grasps your fair daughter to dishonour her?
Our daughter?
She is silly stolen from thence,
Yet none knows whither, save one Sentinel,
Who doth report he heard a wretched Lady
Exclaim, false Ferdinand would ravish her.
That was my child dishonoured by thy son.
You wrong him, France.
Thou hast betrayed vs, king,
And trained vs to a loathed festival,
The marriage of thy stained and leprous child,
Whilst in our absence, Ferdinand unjust,
Hath stained our daughters beauty with wild lust.
If you remember, he &amp; English Pembroke
Last day forsook your Camp, as discontent.
That proved their loves were faynd, and of set ma∣lice,
He came to view our Camp, how he might act
That deed of obloquy, and scope with life.
Tic France hath done the wrong: you have cō∣menst
This deed of death on Pembrook &amp; our son;
And now to cover it, suggest and fain
Our guiltless son a guilty ravisher:
But render me their bodies.
Whore's our Child?
Seek her.
Seek Ferdinand.
France.
Petty king,
For this our wrong, look to be vnderling.
What Drum is this?
Are we entrapped, Nauar?
Fear not, on yonder hill, whose lofty head
Orelookes the vnder-valleyes, Royal Burbon,
Attended by ten thousand Soldiers,
Craves peace and fair accord with mighty France.
Burbon, that was the ruin of my Child?
Summon our forces straight and charge the slave,
In Burbons rescue draw our forces up.
What means the king of France?
To join with him.
What? with a Traitor and a murderer
He did a deed of merit and of fame,
Poisoned the Sister of a ravisher,
A Tarquin, an incestuous Tereus,
And our poor Child the wronged Philomell:
Arayne our Battles straight, and join with Burbon.
Hear what we'll urge.
Speak then in war and death:
In other terms, out rage will spend no breath.
And we will speak so loud, that heaven it self
Shall echo with the clangor: both our children
Weal race from our remembrance, and advance
No other thought, but how to plague proud France.
Conjoin with Burbon, ever three Suns shall set,
In the vast Kingdom of Oreanus:
In a pitched field weal meet the King of France,
And that false Traitor Duke.
Nauar, thou dare not.
Now by Saint Denis, and our Grandsires tomb,
Weal meet thee.
Welcome. O, bring valiant men.
Weel think on nought but graves &amp; tōbs till then.
Ha, ha: I laugh to see these Kings at jar.
Now civil discord like a raging flood,
Swelling aboue her banks, shall drown this land,
Whilst Rodorick on her ruins builds his hopes.
The King of France through my suggestion,
Thinks Katherine his daughter ravished,
Who only winged with love, is fled the Camp:
Pembrooke and Ferdinand, in mutual strife,
Slain by eche other, doth confirm my words▪
And for reuēge whets keen the two Kings swords.
I thāk thee, Forester, whose rough grown walks,
Wild in aspect, afford more courtesy,
Then places 〈◊〉 or for civility.
My life redeemd by thy industrious hand,
Remains in love and duty bound to thee.
Fair Knight, prevention of sad death, by health,
More joys my soul, then thanks or rich reward.
But is your armour easy? sits it well?
I never in my life was better sitted.
This should be that unlucky fatal place,
Where causeless hate drew blood from Ferdinand.
Behold the grass, a purple register,
Still blushes in remembrance of our fight.
Why wither not these trees? those her be and plants?
And every neighbour branch droup out their grief?
Poor souls, they do, and have wept out their sap,
Yet I have paid no duty to my friend.
Where is the Tomb I wild you to erect?
See, valiant knight, proportiond and set up,
As well as my poor skill would suffer me:
And here his picture hangs.
You have done well:
Your hand I see's a perfect Architect
In sorrows building: once more let suffice
I quite your painful travel but with thanks:
Now leave me to my self, for here I vow
To spend the remnant of my hapless days:
No knight nor Prince shall ever pass this way,
Before his tongue acknowledge Ferdinand
The faithfullest lover and the louingst friend
The world contains: Isle have his Sepulchre
As yet but naked and vngarnished,
Ever many days hang richer with the spoils
And vanquished Trophies of proud passengers,
Then was the Romans wealthy Capitol:
So, gentle Forester, bequeath thy prayers
In my assistance; that is all I crave.
The God of power give power unto your arm,
That you may prove victorious fortunate.
Farewell, kind Host: &amp; now let me embrace
This empty Monument of my lost friend.
Oh! were it so happy to enshrine his bones,
How blessed should Pembrooke be? but they are torn
By the fierce savage Wolf, whose filthy maw
Is made an unfit grave to bury him.
But if (without offence) I may desire it,
I wish his soul from Paradise may see,
How well his name is kept in memory:
These eyes that saw him bleed, have wept for him:
This heart devised his harm, hath sighed for him:
And now, this hand, that with ungentle force
Deprived his life, shall with repentant service,
Make treble satisfaction to his soul▪
Fortune, thou dost me wrong, to suffer me
So long vncombatted: I prithee send
Some stubborn Knight, some passenger,
Whose stout controlling stomach will refuse
To yield to my prescription, but by force▪
I hate this idle rest of precious time.
How now! derid'st thou my devotion, goddess?
Thou sendst a woman to encounter me.
Henceforth isle hold thee for a feigned name,
And no disposer of my Christian hopes:
But soft, I know that face: oh! I, tic she
Was unjust cause of all this misery.
Long have I wandered with unquiet mind,
To find my Pembrook: that they fought, I hear:
That they were wounded both to death, I hear:
But whether cured or dead, I cannot hear▪
Nor lives there any (if deceased) can tell,
Within what place their bodies are interred.
Since therefore all my travel is in vain,
Here will I take a truce with former care.
This cursed nook was that unlucky plot,
Where cursed Ferdinand did kill my Love.
What Knight is this? isle question him, perhaps
He can resolve me where my Pembroke is:
Joy and good fortune, sir, attend your state.
Your wishes come too late.
What seek you, Madam?
Tel me, sir knight, for so you seem to be:
Know you this dismal place you do frequent?
Or have you heard of that unhappy fight,
Was here performed by Pembrook and his foe?
Yes, Madam, I have heard of it long since,
And, to my grief, knew both the Gentlemen.
But can you tell me if they live or no?
Or dead, what hand hath given them burial▪
Rest you assured, Madam, they are dead:
The one of them to whom I was allied,
And nearly kent in friendship from my youth,
By me lies buried here: a braver Knight,
And truer Lover never breathed in France.
O tell me, is it Pembrooke? if for him
You have erected this fair monument,
Perpetual honour I will doe your state:
Not only, Madam, have I built this tomb
In his memorial: but my self have sworn
Continual residence within this Wood:
And for the love I bare him, wear these arms,
That whatsoever Knight, aduenturer or other,
Making his journey this way, and refusing
To do Knights homage to my breathless friend,
By this assailing steel may be compelled.
Oh, let me know your name, so kindly moved,
To dignify my Pembrookes high deserts.
You did not hear me say it was Pēbrook, Madam▪
What is become of him, I doe not know,
Nor greatly care, since he did wrong my friend,
And first kindled this dissensious brawl.
This buried here, is noble Ferdinand,
His fathers comfort, and his Countries hope.
Oh Madam! had you seen him as I did,
Begirt with wounds, that like so many months,
Seemed to complain his timeless overthrow:
And had before bin inward with his virtues,
To think that nature should endure such wrack,
And at one time so many precious gifts
Perish by death, would have dissolved your heart.
He was the very pride of fortitude,
The house of virtue, and true frendships mirror:
Look on his picture, in the arms of death,
When he was ready to give up the ghost,
I caused it to be drawn: if at that time,
In that extremity of bitter pangs,
He looked so lovely, had so fresh a colour,
So quick a moving eye, so red a lip,
What was his beauty when he was in health?
See with what courage he endured the combat,
Smiling at death for all his tyranny.
Had death bin ought but what he was, sterne death,
He would have bin enamoured with his look.
A certain soft remorse
Creeps to my heart, persuades me he was true,
Loving, and virtuous: but my self unkind,
Coyly to scorn the proffer of his mind.
O that in Justice of her former hate,
She now would hopeless do ate on Ferdinand▪
Isle do the best I can to bring her on:
Despair and madness, fetch her off again,
Madam, how say you? wast not a grievous thing,
So rich a Gem, should lye raked up in dust?
So sweet a flower, be withered in his prime?
Death was a villain for attempting it,
And so was Pembrooke for effecting it.
No bloody Scythian, or inhumane Turk,
But would ha trembled to ha touched his skin,
Or spilt one drop of his Heroic blood.
Had not that Lady then an iron heart?
A rude ungrateful mind? a savage spirit?
That knew this virtuous honourable Knight,
This gracious shape, and unmatched excellence,
To be entangled with her ferment love,
To serve her in all loyalty of heart,
To reverence and adore her very name,
To be content to kiss the lowly earth,
Where she did set her foot: and when he sued
For grace, to scorn him, to deride his sighs▪
And hold his tears and torment in contempt▪
Of all that ever lived, deserved she not,
The worlds reproach, and times perpetual blot?
Heard you him ever speak of such a one?
Oft times: but chiefly then, when he perceived,
His hurt was mortal, and no way but death.
At every groan, he called upon her name,
As if that sound were present remedy?
And when insulting death drew short his breath,
And now was ready to close up his eyes:
Farewell, quoth he, where ever I find a shrine,
My soul fly thou to beauteous Katherine.
That ruthless mind, that iron savage heart,
So greatly loved, and so little loving,
Breathes in this breast, it was I returned disdain,
For deep affection; scorn for loyalty:
And now compassionlesse shall pine my self.
Oh Ferdinand, forgive me, Ferdinand:
Enjoin me any penance for that wrong;
Say I shall tread a tedious pilgrimage
To furthest Palestine, and I will do it.
But peace, fond womā, these exclaims are vain?
Thy Ferdinand is dead and cannot hear,
As thou wast sometimes deaf, and would not hear.
A just reward. Come, Madam, have you done?
Give me the picture I may hang it up.
Oh take it not away: since I have lost
The substance, suffer me to keep the shadow:
Me thinks, so long as this is in my hand,
I clasp my Ferdinand between mine arms:
So long as I behold this lively form,
So long as I refreshed by his smiles:
So long, me thinks, I hear him speak to me.
Knew I the Painter drew this counterfeit,
I would reward him with a mynt of gold.
If such a pleasure you receive by this,
I tell you, Madam, I shall shortly have
His whole proportion cut in Alabaster,
Armed as he was when he encountered here,
Which kneeling, shall be set upon his tomb.
On that condition I will gather flowers,
And once a day come straw them at his feet:
And once a day pay tribute of choice thanks▪
To you the furtherer of my happiness:
Till then, I place the picture where it was.
Come on, Madam, me thinks now a mask would
do well: but I perceive your drift, I smell your policy, you
think a bald face hath no need of a black mask. Shall I tel
you what you look like? A broyld herring, or a tortured
Image made of plaster work.
So, sir, you may scoff my misery.
Still haunted with these women? are men vanished?
Or what occasion leaves the Realm of France,
So void and empty of adventurous Knights?
Out of peradventure, Madam, the ghost of Saint
George is come out of England, to see what hospitality S.
Denis keeps in France.
Poor Bellamira, I lament thy state;
But I must still suppress my discontent.
What are you so deformd with loathsome spots?
And what that Antique keeps you company?
Antique! thou lie, and thou were a Knight of
ginger-bread: I am no Antique, the whole parish where I
was borne will swear, that since the reign of Charlemain
there was not a better face bred or brought up amongst
them.
Have patience, Knight, how ever thus deformed,
This Lady is the daughter of Nauar.
Madam, it joys me I have met you here,
Though much laments me of your heavy plight.
There needs no repetition of your wrong:
I know, the villain Burbon did the dead,
Whom my incensed brother will revenge.
For Philips sake I have bin martyrd thus,
And for his sake left King and Courtly life,
To entertain a Pilgrims painful habit.
But on what strange adventure stays this Knight,
Within this desolate forsaken wood?
For love of Ferdinand your princely brother,
Whose Hearse he guards in honourable Arms.
Is this my brothers Hearse? is this the place,
Where I was shipwrecked of a brothers name?
Oh, let me spend a loving sigh for him,
And sacrifice a sisters holy rites:
For ever rest, sweet Ferdinand, in peace,
Until thy body glorified from heaven,
Become immortal by thy souls return.
Poor Bellamira, how I pity thee▪
Yet must forbear to comfort thy distress.
Is my young Lord buried here? I say no more, but
I pray God send him a joyful insurrection.
Enough, sweet Bellamire,
These leprous spots, tic time they were removed.
Come, go with me. Since I left Aquitayne,
And came acquainted with these private walks,
It was my happy chance to meet an Hermit,
Whose skill in Phisike warrants present cure,
And pure refining of your poisoned blood:
Isle bring you thither: afterword select
Delicious sweets, to deck your brothers tomb.
Come, sir, follow vs.
Doe not think, Madam, that isle forsake you. And
so, sir, you that walk in pewter vassal, like one of the worcester∣thyes,
will you be ruled by me?
Wherein?
To set a gin for Woodcocks, &amp; catch your self first.
Hence, beetle-head. And Pembrook, now bethink
How great a tide of miseries breaks in.
First, thou art taxed with the loss of him,
Whom equal with thy self thou hold dear:
Next, Bellamira is become a Leper,
Whose absence Philip carefully laments:
Then treacherous Burbon joins himself with France,
And both the Kings are angrily incensed:
But last, which is some comfort to the rest,
Disdainful Katherine wastes with fruitless love.
Would all so minded like mishap might prove.
But by this signal there are Knights at hand,
I must provide their valours to withstand.
Stay your intended march.
What Peer of France,
Or in the world so haughty resolute,
Dare breathe the word of stay to mighty France?
Or what art thou presum'st to stay my course?
A Knight I am, and to adventures bound:
This monument erected for my friend,
By me is guarded: If you mean to pass,
You must doe homage, or else fight with me.
Homage of me! Know I am King of France,
And in subjection to no earthly power.
Thou know not what thou say, to challenge vs,
Of any such inferior privilege.
What homage is it thou requir'st of vs?
First, to acknowledge him lies buried here,
The faythfulst Lover, and most valiant Knight,
That in this time drew sword, or managed horse.
And what was he? A scapart, oryour Country∣man
Gargantua, that stuffed every button of his coat with
a load of hay? 'Shart, wee have me a fellow; here's all
mouth, hee speaks nothing but Monarch. Doest thou
hear, King? give me leave to encounter this puckfist: and
if I doe not make him cry Peccaui, say Dicke Bowyer's a
powdered Mackrel.
My blood begins to boyle, I could be pleased,
To have this fellow by the ears, but that
Theres many of my betters here in place.
King of Navarre, let Flanders cope with him.
Imperial France, give Burbon leave to try
The hazard of a combat with this Boaster.
Dispatch, Navarre, one of you come forth,
To interchange a warlike blow or two.
First let vs know what penalty thou set
Upon thy self, if thou be vanquished.
A recantation of my former words,
A servitude to him that conquers me:
But who so ever is by me subdued,
Must leave his Shield to beautify this shrine.
Let not Nauar, my Lord, rob vs of honour:
Say, Burbon first shall break a Lance with him.
A scribe that privilege, my Lord, to me:
And Rodorick will have death, or victory.
No, noble Rodorick, Burbon shall begin,
And as he speeds, we will employ your power.
Provide thee, Burbon, Isle not favour thee.
Be sure He show thee like hostility.
Hold, the advantage is on thy side,
The Duke of Burbon shall hang up his shield.
Id rather have his life, then al your shelds:
Who is next?
Zounds, I think he has a patten to take up all the Shields
ith Country, hang me if thou want work, hears for
Nauar, the earl of Pembroke &amp; Cavalier Bowier:
A thousand pound to a Taylors bodkin, this fellow has a
familiar: but howsoever, thou may thank my lame leg:
theres my shield.
Now Rodorick, betake you to your task.
My fortune's answerable to the rest.
Since all miscarry, France will put his chance
Upon the hazard of the Dice for once.
You are an Honourable foe, my Lord:
By law of Arms, you must hang up your shield.
I yield to law and thy approved valour.
King of Nauar, will only you sit out?
No, King of France, my blot's as hot as thine,
And this my weapon shall confirm my words.
Nauar down too! 'Shart, this fellow hath the trick of it:
If he be not a witch or some Devil, let me be
stickt into a Carbonado.
Thou son of Chivalry, let me now entreat,
To know his name, for whom thou reapst this honour:
Or what he was, whose bodie's here entered?
A valiant Knight, his name, young Ferdinand,
Slain by misfortune of a friendly hand.
Is it my son thou make thy valours prise,
And striu'st so to enternize with thy sword?
Let me embrace thee. Not alone my shield,
But I will leave my heart upon his shrine.
My dearest Ferdinand, I would my sighs,
Or sad lamenting tears might have the power,
Like Balm to quicken thy benumbed joints,
Then would I drown this marble ever I went,
And heat it hot with vapour of my breath.
Nauar, this now may testify thy wrong,
In false accusing me for his remove.
Thou moist be guilty still for ought I know:
For though I find him dead, I find not yet
The Tragic manner of his hapless end.
Thou may as well have murdered Ferdinand,
As favour him hath poisoned Bellamira.
Injurious king, it was base Ferdinand,
On whom just heavens have shown just vengeance here,
Ravished my Katherine and conveyed her hence,
Where I shall never more behold her face.
Tic false, and we'll maintain it with our swords▪
Tic true, and we'll maintain it with our swords.
By heaven, the tongue profaneness the sacred name
of Ferdinand with any villainy,
Isle cut it out, or stop his throat with blood,
And so dam in his blasphemous upbraids.
Content thee, knight, Isle case thee of that labour.
To morrow is expired the time of truce.
France, on with thy Battalions to the plain
Thou wast prepared before to pitch upon,
Isle meet thee there.
And I will meet with thee.
Sound Drums and Trumpets: honoured knight, farewell:
Who shall survive next morn, strāge news shall tel.
Thus heady rage, blind in her rash resolve
Drew Ferdinand and me into the field,
As now it doth these hot incensed kings.
Were it not my vows prohibit my desire,
To stay the inconvenience of this fight,
I would discover where their Daughters are,
To show the error they are shrouded in:
But Time hath run a desperate course with me,
And desperate let them run to misery:
Here comes a Straggler of their Army▪ Stand.
What voice is that presumes to bid me stand?
His that can force thee, if thou wilt not stand.
By this bright ayre reflected on my sword,
If the whole Army of Nauar had said
As much to Philip, yet he would not stand.
And thou but one, how dare thou profer it,
Knowing how sharp a Spur doth prick me on,
The death of Burbon for my Bellamire?
Hang up thy shield, as other knights have done,
Upon the Hearse of noble Ferdinand,
And thou may freely pass without control.
The Hearse of Ferdinand! I honour him,
He was the brother of my dearest Love,
What's this I see? my fathers bettered shield!
The shield of France! of Flaunders! Burbons too!
It can not then impeach or prejudice
The name of Philip, to consort with such,
Especially being done for Ferdinand.
There is my shield: and Knight, but for my haste,
I would expostulate of other things:
But after traytrous Burbon I have slain,
Knight, look for me, isle visit thee again.
Now Rodorick, keep thy word, and I am blessed:
But if thou fail, isle forward with the rest.
Successful action sit upon thy sword:
This net of sorrows, I perceive, entangles
Not only Pembrooke, but the Court of France.
Nauar and his associates are all touched.
Time look upon vs, and at last determine,
This heart-disseuering tumults with a peace.
Since, Ferdinand, by gracious providence,
Thou art recovered of thy mortal wounds;
With the new life thy body is reuiude,
Revive the ancient passions of thy mind,
Think on thy friend, on Pembrook take remorse,
Whose honoured life, thy hasty hand cut off:
This is the place, as I remember me.
Whats here? a Tomb? who hath prevented me
In my religious duty to my friend?
You, Knight, I doubt not, can resolve me.
What art thou? stand.
A Knight, and fain would know,
What sacred monument and Tomb this is?
His, whilst he lived, that of the worlds increase,
Was the most loyal friend, and valiant Knight:
Which thou must likewise ratify with me,
And hang thy shield up to adorn his Hearse,
Or venture Combat for denying it.
His name, I pray thee.
Ferdinand.
What's he acquainted with my name? belike some one
Loved Pembroke, and supposing (wrongfully)
Me slain by him, to satisfy for that,
Observes this honour in my memory:
Be not thou Ferdinand ungrateful then,
But stand for Pembroke, as this knight for thee.
What answer gives thou? shall I homage have?
Not for his sake thou nam'st, not for Ferdinand:
There lived a knight exceld his petty fame,
As far as costly Pearl the coursest Pebble:
An English knight called Pembroke, were his bones
Interred here, I would confess of him
Much more then thou requir'st, and be content
To hang both shield and sword upon his Hearse.
How comes this stranger by my name? Belike
He was affected unto Ferdinand:
And for his sake (hearing he did me wrong)
Covets to make amends, or means to prove
If I embrace him with unfeigned love.
He shall not doubt of that, once more I say,
It was Ferdinand was the renowned Knight
Of all the world.
But I deny that saying,
Giving to Pembroke that preeminence.
For Ferdinand my valour will I try.
In Pembrooks valour I will fight and die.
Either I dream, or this is Ferdinand.
My sight deludes me, or stout Pembroke lives.
Thrice happy honoured, I do embrace my friend.
Welcome, oh welcome Pembroke, to mine arms,
Whom I imagined, death had tan from me.
The like did I by Princely Ferdinand:
But that he lives, my soul confounds with joy.
Tell me, dear friend, since our unlucky fight,
Have you heard ought of my disdainful Love?
Of her and all the rest: Her father lives:
This is his shield, and this is great Nauars:
This Rodoricks, the Duke of Orleans,
And this malicious Burbons: all the which
I forced from them, to beautify thy shrine.
But tic of Katherine thou desire to hear:
She likewise hath bin here; her flinty heart,
So much before inclined to cruelty,
Now waxes tender: she no sooner saw
Thy picture here; but by heavens providence,
Or how I know not, she so dotes on it,
As I supposed she would a dyed for love.
Has then my shadow and supposed death
Brought that to pass my living substance could not?
It hath, and never Lady more enamoured,
Then now is Katherine of her Ferdinand.
I told her, and no more then truth I told,
A cunning Carver had cut out thy shape
And whole proportion in white Alabaster,
Which I intended here should be set up.
She earnestly entreated she might have
A sight of it, and daily be permitted
To deck thy tomb and statue with sweet flowers.
Shoe's but even now departed to that end,
And will (I know) be quickly here again.
Now for assurance I dissemble not,
Instead of thy resemblance cut in stone,
Kneel here thy self, and hear her piteous moan.
Content, I hold your counsel for the best:
Weal once conclude our sorrows with a jest.
Soft, there's a cushē: nay, you must be bare,
And hold your hands up, as the manner is.
What if I held a book, as if I prayed?
It were best of all; and now I think upon it,
Here is a book: so, keep your countenance,
You must imagine now you are transformed.
Yonder she comes, in any case stir not.
I fear I have detracted time too long,
In my determinde service to my Love:
But Isle redeem my fault with double care.
See where his statue is set up: kind Knight,
For ever Katherine will record thy truth.
How say you, Madam, first not very like him?
As like, as if it were himself indeed.
And would to God my prayers might be heard,
That as the Image of Pigmalion once,
Life might descend into this senseless stone:
But that was faynd, as my desire is fond,
Relentless death withholds my Ferdinand;
And no entreaty may recover him.
In token then I doe repent my scorn,
That I was cruel to so kind a friend,
Thou the presenter of his absent person,
Receive these sweets, thy temples be adorned
With this fresh garland; thy white Ivory hand
Boast of this Ring, which if thou were alive,
Should bind our faiths up in a nuptial knot:
But for thou can not be revived again,
Isle dwell with thee in death: and as my spirit
Mounts to the happy mansion of thy spirit:
So to accompany thy shadow here,
Isle turn my body to a shadow too;
And kneeling thus, confront thy silent looks,
With my sad looks: this is the Instrument.
Now Ferdinand, behold thy Katherine comes.
And she is welcome unto Ferdinand.
Isle play the clark for both, and say Amen.
Nay, muse not, Madam, tic no senseless Image,
But the true essence of your wished Love.
I am ashamed to look him in the face.
Hide not those splendāt lights, hereafter be
A constant wife, it shall suffice for me.
Heaven cast her off, if Katherine prove not so.
Of that no more: now let vs haste from hence,
To quiet the dissension lately sprung
Between your parents, Philip likewise gone,
To be revenged on Burbons treachery,
Perhaps may stand in need of friendly aid:
To him and them our vows must next be paid.
What Pembrook counsels, we cōsent unto.
Now whilst our Armies wearied with the heat
That the bright sun casts from his midday throne,
Abstain from bloody intercourse of war,
Isle lead thee Philip unto Burbons Tent.
Rodoricke, thou highly fauourest me in this,
And doubt not, if my complot take effect,
Isle make thee Duke of Burbon.
Stay your speech, here comes king Lewis.
They can not know me, I am so disguised.
Follow my counsel, and immediately begin the Battle.
Why, the heat's great,
It burns in our Armour as we march.
It burns the enemy as well as wee.
It warmes our Soldiers spirits &amp; makes them fire:
I had rather dye, then when my blood is hot,
Be awde by counsel, till it freeze like Ice:
He is no Soldier, that for fear of heat,
Will suffer victory to fly the field.
My Lord of Burbon, ye are more hot then wise.
Rodorick, me thinks you are very peremptory.
It is in zeal of the general good:
Go to your Tent, refresh your vnscorcht limbs:
There draw your battles model: and as soon
As the cool winds have fand the burning Sun,
And made it tractable for travailers:
Arm you, and mount upon your barbed Steed,
Lead forth your Soldiers, and in good array,
Charge bravely on the Army of our foe.
The Duke of Orleans hath counseld well,
Isle in and recreate me in my Tent.
Farewell, my Lord, when you resolve to fight,
Proclaim your meaning by a Canons mouth,
And with a volley I will answer you.
If you will needs retire, farewell my Lord.
Ha Rodoricke, are not we fine Politicians,
That have so quaintly wrought the King of France
Unto our faction, that he threatens war,
Against the almost reconcilde Nauar?
But this is nothing to the acts weal do:
Come, come, my Lord, you trifle time with words:
Sit down, sit down, and make your warlike plot:
But wherefore stand these murdrous Glaues so ny?
Touch them not, Rodorick, prithee let them stand.
Some paper, pen, and ink.
My Lord.
Post to the Master Gunner,
And bid him plant his demi culuerings
Against the kings pavilion.
Presently.
But first, bring pen and ink and paper straight.
Rodoricke, thou shalt assist me in this plot.
Do it your self, my Lord, I have a charge
Of Soldiers, that are very mutinous,
And long I dare not stay, for fear my absence
Be cause of their revolt unto Nauar.
Then to your Soldiers: I will to my plot.
Away my Lord, leave me unto the Duke.
Kill you the Duke, and after Isle kill thee.
This pen is stabbed, and it will not write,
The Ink that's in the Standage doth look black,
This in my pen is turned as red as blood.
The reason that the platform you would make,
Must by this hand be written with thy blood.
Zounds, what art thou that threatens Burbon so?
One that's as desperat-carelesse of his life,
As thou art timorous, and fear to dye.
Come thou to kill me?
If I should say no,
This weapon would condemn me, which I seized
Of purpose, Burbon, to bereave thy life.
Why, fond man, mad man, know thou what thou doest?
I know it, Burbon, and I know besides,
What thou would say, to daunt my resolution.
What would I say?
Why, that this place is death,
As being thy Tent, environed with thy slaves;
Where if I kill thee, tic impossible
To scope with life: this, Burbon, thou would say:
But Philip is not to be moved with words.
Philip!
I Philip, Bellamiraes Love,
Whose beauty, villain, thou hast poisoned:
For which I have vowed thy death, and thou shalt dye.
Therefore betake you to what fence you will,
Amongst this bundle choose one weapon forth,
And like a worthy Duke prepare thy self,
In knightly manner to defend thy life:
For I will fight with thee, and kill thee too,
Or thou shalt give an end unto my life.
But if thou call unto thy slaves for help,
Burbon, my sword shall nail thee to the wall▪
And think Prince Philip is a Prince indeed,
To give thee this advantage for thy life.
Boy, I will scourge your insolence with death.
Come on.
Oh, I am slain.
Murder, murder, Burbon the Duke is slain.
Peace, Rodorick, I am Philip thy dear friend.
Thou art a counterfeit, I know thee not.
Did not thou guide me unto Burbons Tent?
I guide thee to the Tent? I know thee not.
What, murder, ho: will no man hear my voice?
Yes, here are those can hear well enough.
Where is the murdered, and the murderer?
Peter, behold thy masters breathless trunk,
And there's Prince Philip that hath murdered him.
To avoid prolixity, Isle kill him:
Yet first give me leave to weep for my master.
First, seize the murderer, and after weep.
He that first ventures to attach my life,
Let him be sure he hath a life to spare:
For I will send one breathless to the grave.
You that have nyne lives, assault the gentleman.
What peasants, dare you not attach the slave?
Isle raise the whole Camp, but isle apprehend him.
Alarm drums: Soldiers, encircle him,
And either apprehend or slay the wretch.
Tic princely Philip, help to rescue him.
What slaves are these that dare oppose thēselues,
In rescue of a murderer against an Host?
Such as will make thee, Rodorick, fly for life.
Zounds, men are mortal; to avoid prolixity, my
Lord of Orleans, your best course is flying, and therein I
will be your follower.
Fly before three, and be thus strong?
It were madness.
We trifle time, let's drive them from the Tent.
Live, worthy Philip, Pembrooke bids thee live,
That did suspect this complot at the tomb,
When in the honour of Prince Ferdinand,
You did resign your shield.
Th'Earle of Pembrooke!
And Ferdinand that loves thee as his soul.
Two lives I owe my stars, beside mine own,
In sending me two friends of such import.
Durst you adventure thorough the enemies Camp,
And put your lives in danger to save mine?
The rumour of the Duke of Burbons death,
Hath so possessed the Camp with admiration,
That they regardless suffer all to pass:
Only this, Rodorick wakens them a little;
But cannot wean them from their wondering minds.
That Rodorick is a perfect villain turned:
For though he guided me unto his Tent,
And gave his liking that the Duke should dye;
Yet how the villain cried to murder me.
But come, in this confusion let's be gone,
Tic dangerous to abide in Burbons Tent.
Rodoricke, thou art the next must taste of death:
That task once done, we shall with little payne,
Our angry fathers reconcile again.
The Alarm sounded in the enemies Camp.
Now for Nauar and Fame, stand to it, sirs.
Hart, stand to it? heere's some of vs knows how
to run away, and they be put to it: Though wee have
lost our brave General, the Earl of Pembrooke, ye
here's Cavalier Bowyer, Core and Nod, by Iesu, sound
Cards; and Mahound and Termagant come against vs,
weal fight with them. Couragio, my hearts, S. George
for the honour of England.
The adverse part comes on, fight gallantly.
Is false Nauar so thirsty to drink blood,
That he must join the Squadron of his troops,
Before the signal of the battel's given.
Belike you thought to take vs vnpreparde.
No, king, our wrong hangs like a watch before vs,
And makes vs number every short-lynd minute,
Till your lives answer for our Daughters death;
Charge, brave spirits: Saint Denis now for France.
Saint Denis for Nauar: Alarm Drums.
Nauar and his weak forces make retire:
Pursue them, Sirs, the victory is ours.
Be like starved Lions amongst a heard of Beasts,
Ruthelesse and bloody slaughters all you meet,
Till proud Nauar be slain, or kiss your feet:
Saint Denis, and cry murder through the host.
He that steps forward with a murdering thought,
Marries him self to death. France, cease the fight:
They are Frenchmen you pursue, French men you should save.
Dig not for Traitors love your subjects grave.
What frantic knights are those that dare oppose
Their single force against our multitudes?
Those that wish you and France bright fems en∣crease.
So you would chase hence war, and welcome peace.
That was the Traitor, that slew royal Burbon.
Down with the villains.
Soldiers, seize on him,
And then pursue Nauar with sudden death.
Ever the least hair fall from his kingly head,
Rodorick, thy base trunk shall be butchered.
Will you accept of peace?
Follow Nauar.
Down with that murderer.
Zounds, then in spite,
Weal save Nauar, and chase you hence in fight.
All. Ha, ha.
Nay, smile not, though our number's few,
Our great hearts tell vs, we shall conquer you.
Alarm. and S. George.
France and his daunted forces gives vs ground:
Charge, charge again, and we are Conquerors.
Stand, or ne'er stir again.
What mean these Knights?
To stop your passage this way, great Nauar.
I charge thee, by the duty of a King,
Thy love to Justice, and thy subjects lives,
You sound retreat, and make a peace with France.
A peace, and have the vantage of the day?
That's a trick, by Iesu, to mock an Ape: we'll
none of that.
We'll have no peace, but what our swords can make.
Follow the chase.
Are you grown insolent?
For one light puff of fortune proves it so▪
Nay, then our swords turn to your overthrow.
That was my father that you fought against.
You did as much to mine.
Princes, agree: force cānot end this war, but policy.
Therefore disperse your selves, and let our Squires,
With Trumpets in their mouths sound loud retreat,
Where you perceive the fight most violent.
The strangeness of which act will straight amaze,
When they shall hear both peace and war denounced,
And one self instant, they will soon retire.
To know the issue, Princes, fall to work:
Tic work of charity, it would doe me good,
If we could end this battle without blood.
I hope we shall: farewell, isle to my charge.
The like will Pembrooke.
Philip is not last.
Yet though I seek the safety of my friends,
Rodorick shall lose his blood, ever this fight ends.
Struggle not, strive not, your sweet heart Bow∣yer
cannot save you. Without prolixity, you must go
with me.
Help, help.
And the God of war come in thy defence, my
humour is to kill him. Come away.
By Iesu, &amp; you go this way, you must pay custom.
Zounds, you pickt-hatch Cavalier petticote-monger, can
you find time now to be catching Thomasin? come, deliver,
or by Zenacrib, &amp; the life of king Charlemain, isle thrash
your coxcomb, as they doe hens at Shrouetyde: no,
will you not doe, you Tan-fat? zounds, then have at you.
Are the Kings severed? will they bow to peace?
Peace is a welcome guest unto their hearts:
But Rodoricke, like a greedy envious churl,
Fearing to spend his wealth, still keeps them back,
Tic he exasperates the Princes hate:
And when our Trumpets call them to retire,
He with wars clangor sets them on again.
Unless he be removed, our labour's lost.
It shall not; for isle seek him through the Host,
And with this sword pare off the Traitors head.
Doe, and isle scour these ranks: if Pembroks eye
Encounters his, he meets his Tragedy.
Stay, warlike friends, and aid me in revenge.
That is Rodoricke.
Heere's the Traitor, strike him down.
Who lifts his arm at him, strikes at my breast.
Why have you thus ringed me about with swords
To show thee thou must dye.
What have I done,
That thus you labour my destruction?
Thou were it a party in all Burbons wrongs.
Falsely termed Ferdinand a Ravisher.
Set discord twixt these Kings,
Practised my death.
Villain, for this, our swords shall stop thy breath.
Stand not to argue, let's all run at him.
Now as you love my love, or prize mine honour.
Touch not the Traitor, he is Philips foe;
And none but I must work his overthrow.
Thrice in the battle he was rescued from me:
But now hoe's fallen into the Lyons paw,
From whence the whole world cannot ransom him.
Preservers of my life, heroic friends,
Be you my safety, keep the Soldiers off,
Whilst in the midst by fair and equal fight,
I send this Traitor to eternal night.
By heaven agreed.
Here Pembrooke takes his stand:
Come France and all the world, I will not start,
Till Philips knightly sword pearce Rodoricks hart.
Accursed, I am betrayed, encompassed round:
Now life and hope and state must kiss the ground.
Rodorick, thou see, all ways are stopped to fly,
Be desperate then, fight-brauely, and so die.
Now are his treacheries repaid with death:
Philip and Pembrooke, sound your retreats
With better hope; in him all hatred ends:
The kings will now love peace, &amp; soon be friends.
Zounds, never run for the matter, a scratched face
can not serve your turn, we must have bloody noses: stād
on your guard: &amp; I do not make haggasse puddings of your
guts, Isle never domineer in the long Alleyes again.
Cymnell, Isle crack you for this, Isle teach you to
deal with Peter de Lions, and that without prolixity.
Do: have at you in earnest: S. George, you rogue.
So, there's for your prolixities: there's for Tho∣masin:
the Thornbackly slave, and he were made of any
thing but gristles, I am a pumpian: 'Shart, he had no met∣tle
in him: yet how the villain crak't and domineered
when he was living: ah, sir, never g•in for the matter,
tic Captain Bowyer that speaks it. When thou meetst
the great Devil, commend me to him, and say, I sent him
thee for a new years gift: and there's one Sarlaboys to, as
arrant a bloud-sucker, and as notable a coward, as ever
drew weapon in a bawdy house: hee carries my mark a∣bout
him: if Dicke Bowyer be not writ a bountiful be∣nefactor
in hell for my good deeds, in sending thither such
Cannibals, I am a Rabbit-sucker: yet I scorn to vaunt of
my deeds too. They sound a retreat: farewell, Peter, and
learn hereafter what it is to be rival to an English gentle∣man,
Cavalier Bowyer, one of the nyne worthyes.
Nauar, why have you sounded a retreat?
Will your proud heart decline and call vs Lord?
We thought by the faint lāguage of your drums,
France would have known his error, and begged peace.
France beg a peace!
Nauar call you his Lord!
Why did you cease the fight, and sound retreat?
Not we, by this beard: not we, by the life of Pharo.
Your Trumpets guided by your fainting breath,
Dehorted vs from war, and sounded peace.
Nauar derides vs.
France, tic you that do it.
Sound war, and bravely let vs once more too't.
Kings of Nauar and France, why doe you thus
With civil butchery wound this blessed land,
Which like a mother, from her melting eyes,
Sheds crimson tears, to see you enemies?
Lewes of France, wherein hath great Nauar
Dangerd your state, that you should prosecute
War with her largest ruin? how hath France
Sowed such inveterate hate within your breast,
That to confound him, you will undergo
The orphants curse, the widows tears &amp; cries,
Whose husbands in these wars have lost their lives?
Ever you contend, discourse your grievances.
False Ferdinand his son, ravished our child.
Now by my Knighthood, honour, and this gage,
France, isle approve you wrong that Ferdinand.
Who can accuse him?
That did Rodorick.
That Traitor, for a deed so false, so foul,
Hath answered it by this, even with his soul.
Our son, and valours bloom, th'English Pem∣brooke,
By Lewes treachery were butchered.
Were the whole world joined in so false a thing,
Alone Id combat all, and clear the King.
France never had design in their two deaths.
He leagued with Burbon, that destroyed my child.
He poisoned her deservedly.
That deed of shame
Cut off his life, and raced out Burbons name.
His death shall be thy death; for thy hand slue him.
This other in the battle twice to day,
Made vs retire, France, shall we join in league,
Till we have veng'd our malice on these knights?
Nauar, agreed. Soldiers, this kyld your Lords.
And this our fame: let's mangle them with swords.
Take truce a while with rage: hear what we'll urge▪
This knight flew Burbon, this enforced you fly;
Therefore you hate them, and for hate they die.
Since then true virtue is disfigured,
Desert trod down, and their heroic worth,
In justice doomed on Traitors merits, Death:
Behold these two, which thousands could not daunt,
But your ingratitude, on bended knee,
Yield up their swoords to bide your tyranny.
It was he kilt Burbon: if you love him dead,
Show it by paring off this valiant head:
Do you the like: to this revenge apace.
They fear not threats, and scorn to beg for grace.
And they shall find none.
Knights, triumph in death,
We are your headsmen, Kings shall stop your breath.
Philip, my son!
Young Ferdinand my joy!
Call them not sons, whom you would fain de∣stroy.
Hold not our age too long in deep suspect.
Art thou Ferdinand?
And thou Philip?
We are the friendly sons of adverse parents,
Your long lost children, though supposed slain,
We live, and come to joy your age again.
Welcome all earthly bliss.
Welcome, dear child,
Thy presence half our sorrow hath exiled.
How soon this Scene is chāg'd! those that euē now
Were sworn wars servants, now to peace do bow:
Then Pembrooke, strive to make their joys more full,
See, kingly father, to that princely son.
Pembrooke, the hated murderer of his friend:
Pembroke, that did divide thee from his sight,
And cut so many passages of death,
In his endeared bosom, humbly thus
Forgets his honour, and from your hye hand,
Invokes revenge for wounding Ferdinand.
Still he surmounts me in an honoured love,
Rise, friend; or if thou striu'st to have the world,
In me, as in a glass, see a false friend.
Behold, I kneel, and here proclaim to all,
My friendship's broke, but thine substantial.
Model of virtue, honoured Pembroks Earl,
Rise in as dear regard as Ferdinand.
Oh, had I Bellamira once in hold,
Age would turn youth, &amp; I should ne'er be old.
Had I my Katherine once again,
Our joy were then stretched to the highest strain:
But she was ravished, and then murdered.
Bear not that hard opinion: Rodoricks tongue
Slandered that Prince, and did his virtue wrong.
Lewis of France, hear what an English Earl
Speaks in the front and view of all thy Host:
If ever Ferdinand stained Katharines honour,
I was a party: yet in all your Camp,
Who dares step forth and call me ravisher?
No, France, know Pembroke is an Englishman,
Highly derived, yet higher in my thoughts;
And for to register mine acts in brass,
Which all-deuouring time shall ne'er race out,
Have I through all the Courts of Christendom,
In knightly trial proved my virtue sound,
Raised Englands fame aloft; and shall I now,
In her next continent, her neighbour Realm.
France, on whose bosom I may stand and see
That blessed soil, that bred and fostered me,
Soil all my late got honour, to consent
Unto a royal Princes ravishment?
Id sooner from a mountain cast my self,
Or from a hungry Lyon tear his pray,
Then dare to act a deed so infamous:
But words are ayre: Lewis, behold this face;
This proves our honour clear from all disgrace.
My Katherine!
My dear sister!
My fair Love!
See, Princes, loves effect: she flies your hand,
To live embraced with her dear Ferdinand.
And heaven forbid that we should sunder them.
Nauar, reach me thy hand: grym war is fled,
And peace shall end the same in a nuptial bed.
Son Philip, ratify your sisters choice.
Even with my soul: for ever live you blessed.
Oh Bellamira, had not cursed Burbon,
For beauty robbed thy cheeks with Leprosy:
Had thou but stayed with me, as is their state,
So had bin mine, happy and fortunate.
By your leave, sweet bloods: may a Gentleman
or so, deceive two or three ounces of words in this
assembly?
You may.
Is there not a young Kings son amongst you,
who treading the steps of his father, is called Philip?
I am the man thou seekst.
Then the old saying is verified, He that seeks, shall
find. Here is a poor kinswoman of mine would desire
some private conference with you, or so.
With me? whom see I? Bellamira!
Daughter!
Do not deride my woes, speak, speak, I pray.
Look not so strange, it is thy lovely Love,
Thus managed, to approve thy constancy.
Embrace her then: and now Nauar and France,
Here end your strife, and let all hatred fall,
And turn this war to Hymens festival.
This Pembrooks counsel we subscribe unto.
The like doth France: Lovers embrace your Loves;
And Captains, join your Bands, mix power with power,
And let those swords, which late were drawn for death,
Sleep in their sheathes. You, worthy Pembrooke,
And all your followers, shall receive our favours,
In plenteous largess: so, set on to Court;
Sound Drums and Trumpets, deaf the ayre with cries,
And fill eche subjects heart with joys increase,
T'applaud our childrens love, and this days peace.

