THis is the Countess Eugenias house I think, I can never hit of their same English City houses, tho I were borne here: if I were in 〈◊〉 City in France, I could find any house there at midnight.
Their two strange hungry knights (Will) make the leanest trenchers that ever I waited on.
A plague on them Jack, they leave vs no fees at all, for our attendance, I think they use to set their b•…nes in silver they pick them so clean, see, see, see Jack whats that?
A my word (〈◊〉) tic the great Baboon, that was to be seen in Southwark.
Is this he? gods my life what beasts were we, tha•… we wood not •…ee him all this while, never trust me if hee look not somewhat like a man, see how prettily hee holds the torch in one of his forefeete, wheres his keeper 〈◊〉 owe, is he broke loose?
Hast ever an Apple about thee (Will) weal take him up sure, we shall get a monstrous deal of mo∣ny with him.
That we sh•…ll yfath boy, and look thou here, here is a red cheeked apple to take him up with.
Excellent •…it a my credit, lets lay down our pro∣uant, and to him.
Isle let them alone a while.
Give me the apple to take up Jack, because my name is Jack.
Hold thee Jack, take it.
Come Jack•…, come Jack, come Jack.
I will come to your Sir, Isle Jack ye a my word, Isle Jack ye.
Gods me he speaks Jack, O pray pardon vs Sir▪
Out ye m•…pede monckies can ye not know a man from a Marmoset, in their Frenchified days of ours? na•… isle Iackefie you a little better yet.
Nay good Sir, good Sir, pardon vs▪
Pardon vs, out ye home-bred peasants, plain eng∣lish, pardon vs, if you had parled, &amp; not spoken, but said pardon moi▪ I wood have pardoned you, but since you speak, and not parley, I will cudgel ye better yet.
O pardon moi monsieur.
Bièn iè vous remercie, theirs pardon pour vous Sir now.
Why I thank ye for it Sir, you seem to bee a Squire of our order Sir.
Whose page might you be Sir.
I am now the great French Trailers page▪
Or rather the frēch Traualer•… great page. Sir, on, on
Hight Captain Fouleweather, alias Comenda∣tions; whose valours within here at super with the Coū∣•…es Eugenia, whose proper eaters I take you two to be.
You mistake vs not Sir.
This captain Fouleweather, alias Cōmendations (Will) is the gallāt that will needs be a suitor to our Coūtes
Faith and if Fouleweather be a welcome suitor to a •…air Lady, has good luck.
O Sir, beware of one that can shower into the▪ lips of Ladies, Captain Fowleweather? why hes a
Captinado, or C•…ptaine of Captains, and will lie in the•…r io•…ntes that give him cause to work v•…pone them so heavily, that hee will make their hearts ache I warrant him▪ Captain Fowleweather? why hee will make the cold stones sweat for fear of him, a day or two befo•…e he come at them. Captain Fowleweather? why he does so dominere, and reign over women.
A plague of Cap•…aine Fowleweather I remēber him now Jack, and know him to be a dull moist brained Ass.
A Southern man I think.
As fearful as a Hare, &amp; a will lye like a Lap∣wing, &amp; I know how he came to be a Captain, &amp; to have his Surname of Commendations.
How I prithee Will?
Why Sir he served the great Lady Kingcob, and was yeoman of her wardroppe, &amp; because a cood brush up her silks lustily, she thought hee would curry the e∣nemies coats as soundly, and so by her commentate∣once, he was made Captain in the lowe Countries.
Then being made Captain only by his Ladies comme•…dations, without any worth also of his own, he was ever after surnamde Captain Commendations?
Right.
I Sir right, but if he had not said right, my Cap∣taine should have taken no wrong at his hands, nor yours neither I can tell ye.
What are those two Knights names, that are thy captains Comrades, and within at supper with our Lady?
One of their names Sir, is, Sir Giles Goosecappe, the others Sir Cut. Rudseby.
Sir Giles Goosecappe whats he a gentleman?
I that he is at least if he be not a noble man, and his chief house is in Essex.
In Essex? did not his Ancestors come out of Londō
Yes that they did Sir, the best Gosecappes
in England, comes out of London I assure you.
I but Sir these must come into it before they come out ont I hope, but what countryman is •…ir Cut. Rudeby?
A Northern man, or a VVesternmā I take him, but my Captain is the Emphaticall man; and by that pretty word Emphaticall •…ou shall partly know him; for tic a very forcible word in troth, &amp; yet he forces it too much by his favour; mary no more then he does all the rest of his words; with whose multiplicity often times he travails himsele out of all good company.
Like enough; he trauaild for nothing else.
But what qualities haunt Sir Giles Goosecap now Sir?
Sir Giles Goosecap has always a deaths head (as it were) in his mouth, •…or his only one reason for •…very thing is, because wee are all mortal; and therefore hee is generally called the mortal knight; then hath he ano∣there pretty phrase too, and that is▪ he will tickle the va∣night ant still in every thing and this is your Sum tota∣lis of both their virtues.
Tic enough, tic enough, as long as they have land enough, but now muster your third person before vs I beseech you,
The third person and second knight blunt Sir Cut. Rudesby, is indeed blunt at a sharpe wit, and sharpe at a blun•… wit a good bustling gal•…ant talks well at Rovers; he is two parts soldier; as slovenly as a Swit∣zer, and somewhat like one in face too; for he wears a bush beard will dead a Cannon shot better then a wool∣pack: hee will come in•…o the presence like your French∣man •…n foul boots▪ and dares eat garlic as a prep•…a∣tiue to his Cour•…ship; you shall know mo•…e of hi•… h•…re∣after; but good wags let me win you now, for the Geographical parts of your Ladies in requital.
That you shall Sir, and the Hydrographicall too and you will; first my Lady the widow, and Counts
•…ugenia, is in earnest, a most worthy Lady, and indeed can doe more then a thousand other Ladies can doe I can tell ye.
Whats that I pray thee?
Mary Sir, he means she can do more then sleep, and eat and drink; and play at noddy, and help to make his self ready.
Can she so?
She is the best scholar of any woman but one in England, she is wi•…e and virtuous,
Nay she has one stra•…ge quality for a woman besides, tho these be strange enough that hee has reko∣ned.
For Gods sake whats that?
She can love reason•…able constantly, for she loved her husband only, almost a whole year together.
Thats strange indeed, but what is your fair Lady Sir?
My Lady Sir, the Lady Hippolita.
That is as chaste as ever was Hippolitus.
(True my pretty Parenthesis) is half a maid, half a wife, and hal•…e a widow.
Strange tale to tell; howe can thou make this good my good Assumpsit.
Thus Sir, •…he was betrothed to a gallant young gentleman that loud his with such passion and admi∣ration that he never thought he could bee so blessed as to en•…oy her in sull marriage, till the minister was mar∣rying them, and even then when he was saying I Charles take thee Hippolita; with extreme joy he began to look pale, then going forwards saying to my wedded wife, he looked paler, and, then pronouncing, for richer for poorer as long as we both shall live, he looked extreme pale; Now sir when she comes to speak her part, and said, I Hippolota take thee Charles, hee began to faint for joy, then saying to my wedded husband, hee began to sink, but then going forth too for better sor wo•…e, he
could stand no longer but with very conceit it seemed, that she whom hee tendered as the best of all things, should pronounce the worst, and for his sake too, hee sunk down right, and died suddenly: And thus being half married, &amp; her half husband wholly dead, I hope I may with discretion affirm her, half a maid, half a wife, and half a widow; do ye conceive•… me Sir?
O Lord Sir, I devour you quick; and now Sir I beseech you open unto me your tother Lady, what is she?
Isle answer for her, because I know her Ladyship to be a perfect maid indeed.
How can thou know that?
Passing perfectly I warrant ye.
By measuring her neck twice, and trying if it will come about his forehead, and slyp over her nose?
No Sir no, by a rule that will not slip so I warrant you, which for his honours sake I will let slip unto you, gods so Jack▪ I think they have supped.
Bear Lady we have waited well the while.
Well though they have lost their attendance, let not vs lose our Suppers Jack.
I doe not mean it, come Sir you shall go in and drink with vs y faith.
Pardon moi monsieur.
•…o pardoning in truth Sir,
Ie vous remorse de-bon Ceur.
A plague on you sweet Ladies, tic not so late, what needed you to have made so short a supper.
In truth Sir Cut. we might have tickled the va∣night ant, an hour longer if my watch be trustible.
I but how should their beauties know that Sir Giles? your watch is mortal, and may err.
T•…ats •…ooth Captain, but do you hear hone•… 〈◊〉 pray take a light, and see if the mo•…no shine, I have a Sun dial will resolve presently.
Howsoever believe it Ladies, tic unwholesome, un∣courtly, unpleasant to eat hastily, &amp; rise suddenly, a mā can show no discourse, no wit, no stirring, no variety, no pretty conceits, to make the meat go down emphaticaly?
Wi•…fred.
M•…dam.
I prithee go to my uncle the Lord Momford, and entreat him to come quicken our ears with some of his pleas•…ned Spirit; This •…am Fowleweather •…as made me so melancholy, prithee make haste.
I will madam.
We will bid our guests good night madam, this sa•…e Fowleweather makes me so fleepie.
Fie upon it, for Gods sake shut the Casements, here is such a fulsome air comes into this chamber; in good faith madame you must keep your house in bet∣la reparations, this same Fowlweather beats in so filthy.
Isle take order with the Porter for it Lady, good night gentlemen.
Why good night &amp; be hāgd, &amp; you'll needs be gon.
God give you good night madams, thank you for my good cheer, weal tickle the vani•…e ant, no longer with you at this time, but isle end•…te your La: to supper at my lodging one of these mornings; and that ere long too, because we are all mortal you know.
Light the Lady Penelope, and the Lady Hippolita to their chambers, good night fair Ladies.
Good night madam, I wish you may sleep well after your light supper.
I warrant you Lady I shall never be troubled with dreaming of my Frēch Suitor.
Why how now my Frēchified captain Fowlweather? by gods ludd thy Surname is never thought vpō here, I perceive hears no body gives thee any cōmendations.
Why this is the vntrauaild rudeness of our gross Eng∣lish
Ladies •…ow; would any French Lady v•…e a man thus thy•…ke ye? be they any way so uncivil, and fulsome? they say they wear foul smocks, and course smocks, I say they lie, and I will die int.
I, doe so, pray thee, thou shalt die in a very ho∣norable cause, thy countries general quarrel right.
Their smocks quoth you? a my word you shall take them up so white, and so pure, so sweet, so Empha∣ticall, so mooing.
I marry Sir, I think they be continually moving.
But if their smocks were Course or foul.
Nay I warrant thee thou ca rest not, •…o thou were: at them.
S'death they put not all their virtues in their smocks, or in their mocks, or in their stew de cocks as our Ladies doe.
But in their stewed pox, theres all their gentile∣tie.
Nay good Sir Cut. doe not aggravate him no more.
Then are they so kind, so wise, so familiar so noble, so sweet in entertainment, that when you shall, have cause to discourse or sometimes to come nearer! them; if your breath bee ill, your teeth ill, or any thing about you ill why they will presently break with ye, in kind sort, good terms, pre•…tie experiments, and tell you plain this; thus it is with your breath Sir, thus it is with your teeth Sir, this is your disease, and this is your medicine.
As I am true mortal Knight, it is most superla∣tiuely good, this.
Why this is Courtly now, this is sweet, this plain, this is familiar, but by the Court of France, our peevish dames are so proud, so precise, so coy, so disdain∣•…full, and so subtle, as the Pomonean Serpent, mort dieu the Punk of Babilon was never so subtle.
Nay doe not chafe so Captain.
Your Frenchman wood ever chase Sir Cut, be∣ing thus moude.
What? and play with his beard so.
I and bry•…le, it doth express that passion of an∣ger very full and emphaticall.
Nay good knight if your French wood bry•…le, let •…im alone, in truth our Ladies are a little too coy and subtle Captain indeed.
Subtle Sir Giles Goosecappe? I assure your Soul, they are as subtle with their suitors, or loves, as the La∣tine Dialect where the nominatiue Case, and the verb, the Sub•…antiue, and the Adiectiue, the verb, and the verb, stand as far a sunder, as if they were perfect stran∣gers one to another; and you shall hardly find them out, but then learn to Construe, and perse them, and you shall find them prepared, and acquainted, &amp; agree toge∣there, in Case, gender, and number.
I detest Sir Cut, I did not think hee had bin half the quintessence of a•…choler he is.
Slit theres not one of them truly emphatical.
Yes Isle ensure you Captain, there are many of them truly Emphaticall but all your French Ladies are not fat? are they Sir?
Fat Sir, why doe ye think Emphaticall is fat Sir Giles?
Gods my life brother knight, did thou think so? hart I know not what it is my self, but yet I never thought it was fat, Isle be sworn to thee.
Why if any true Courtly dame had had but this new fashioned suit, to entertain any thing in different∣lie stuffed, why you should have had her more respective by far.
Nay theres some reason for that Captain, me thinks a true woman should perpetually dote upon a new fa•…ion.
Why you're i'thright Sir Cut. Innoua fert Any•… mus m•…tatas dicere-formas. tic the mind of man, and wo∣man
to affect new fashions; but to our Mynsatiues for sooth, if he come like to your Besognio, or your bore, so he bee rich, or emphaticall, they care not; would I might never excel a dutch Skipper in Courtship if I did not put distaste into my carriage of purpose; I knew I should not please them. Lackey? alum le torch.
Slit, here is nei•…her Torch, nor Lackey me thinks.
O mon dew.
O doe not swear Captain.
Your Frenchman •…for swears Sir Cut, upon the lack of his Lackey I assure you.
See here he comes, and my Ladies two pages, they have bin tickling the vanity ont yfa•…th.
Captain •…owleweather, my Lady the Counts Eugenia commends his most kindly to you, and is deter∣mined to morrow morning early if it be a frost to take her Coach to Barnet to bee nipped where if it please you, to meet her, and accompany her homeward, joining your wit with the frost, and help to nip her, She does not doubt but tho you had a sad supper, you will have a joyful breakfast.
I shall indeed my deeare youth.
Why Captain I abused thee, I see: I said the La∣dies respected thee not, and n•…w Iperceiue the widow is in love with thee.
Sblood knight I knew I had struck her to the quick, I wondered she departed in that extravagant fashion: I am sure I past one Passado of Courtship upon her, that has hertofore made a lane amongst the French Ladies like a Culuering •…hot, Isle be sworn; and I think Sir Giles you saw how she fell under it.
O as clear as can dlelight, by this day-light.
O good knight a the post, heel swear any thing.
The other two Ladies commend them no less kindly to you two knights too; &amp; desire your worships wood meet them at Barnet ith morning with the Cap∣taine.
O. good Sir.
Our worships shall attend their Ladyships thither.
No Sir Giles by no means, they will go privately thither, but if you will meet them there.
Meet them, weal die fort, but weal meet them.
Lets go thither to night knights, and you bee true gailants.
Content.
How greedily they take it in Sir.
No it is too far to go to night, weal bee up betimes ith morning, and not go to bed at all.
Why its but ten miles, &amp; a fine clear nightS. Giles
But ten miles? what doe ye talk Captain?
Why dost think its any more?
I, •…allay ten pounds its more then ten mile, or twelve either.
What to Barnet?
I, to Barnet?
Slit, Isle lay a hūdred poūd with thee, if thou wilt.
Isle lay five hundred, to a hundred, Slight I will not be out borne with a wager, in that I know, I am sure it was four years agon ten miles thither, and I hope tic more now, Slit doe not miles grow think you, as well as other Animals.
O wise Knight!
I never End in the Town but once, and then they lodged me in a Chamber so full of theise Ridicu∣lus Fleas, that I was fine to lie standing all night, and yet I made my man rise, and put out the candle too, be∣cause they should not see to bire me.
A pretty project.
Intrude Captain if I might advise you, you should tarry, and take the morning before you.
How? O •…on Dew, how the villain poulltrou•…e, dishonours his travail? you Buffonly Mouchroun, are you so mere rude, and English to advise your Captain?
Nay I prithee Fouleweather be not tēpesteous with thy poor Lackey.
Tēpesteous Sir Cut, will your Frenchman think you, suffer his Lackey to adieu•…e him?
O God you must take heed Lacquy how you advise your captain, your Frēch lackey would not have donit.
He would have bin poxed •…erst: Alum le torch, sweet pages commend vs to your Ladies, say wee kiss their white hands, and will not fail to meet them▪ knights which of you leads?
Not we Sir, you are a Captain, and a leader.
Besides, thou art commended for the better man, for thou art very Commendations it self, and Captain Commendations.
Why, what tho I be Captain Commentate∣once?
Why and Captain comme ndations, is hearty? commendations, for Captains are hearty I am sure, or else hang them,
Why, what if I bee hearty Commendations, come, come, sweet knights lead the way.
O Lord Sir, always after my hearty Come∣dations.
Nay then you conquer me with president, by the Autenticall form of all Justice letters. Allon.
Here is a most sweet Gudgeon swallowed, is there not?
I but how will they digest it think thou? when they shall find our Ladies not there?
I have a vaunt-Curriing devise shall make them digest it most healthfully.
Work on sweet love, I am not yet resolved
T'exhaust this troubled spring of vanities
And nurse of perturbations, my poor life,
And therefore since in every man that holds
This being dear, there must be some desire
Whose power to enjoy his object may so mask
The Judging part that in her radiant eyes
His estimation of the world may seem
Upright, and worthy, I have chosen love
To blind my Reason with his misty hands
And make my estimatiue power believe
I have a project worthy to employ
What worth so ever my whole man affords:
Then sit at rest my Soul, thou now hast found
The end of thy infusion, in the eyes
Of thy divine Eugenia look for heaven.
Thanks gentle friends is your good Lord and mine, gon up to bed yet?
I do assure ye not Sir, not yet, nor yet, my deep, and studious friend, not yet musical Clarence.
My Lord?
Nor yet, thou sole deuider of my Lordship.
That were a most unfit division
And far aboue the pitch of my lowe plumes
I am your bold and constant guest my Lord.
Far, far from bold, for thou hast known me long
Almost their twenty years, and half those years
Hast bin my bedfellow; long time before
This unseen thing, this thing of nought indeed
Or Atom called, my Lordship shined in me,
And yet thou makst thy sell•…e as little bold
To take such kindness, as becomes the Age
And truth of our indissolauble love
As our acquaintance sprung but yesterday
Such is thy gentle and too tender Spirit.
M•… Lord, my want of Courtship makes me fear
I should be rude, and this my mean estate
Me•…es with such envy, and detraction
Such misconstructions, and resolved misdoomes
Of my poor worth, that should I be aduaunc'd
Beyond my unseen lowen•…s, but one hai•…e
I should be torn in pieces with the Spirits
That fly in ill-lungd tempests through the world,
Tearing the head of virtue from her shoulders
If she but look out of the ground of glory.
Twixt, whom, and me and every worldly fortune
There fiights such sour, and Cursed Antipathy
So waspi•…he, and so petulant a Star,
That a•…l things tending to my grace or good
Are ravished from their object, as I were
A thing created for a wilderness
And must not think of any place with men.
O hark you Sir, this wayward mood of yours must sifted be, or rather rooted out, you'll no more music Sir?
Not now my Lord,
Begone my masters then to bed, to bed.
I thank you honest fri•…nds
Hence with this book &amp; now Mou•…sieur Clarence, methinks plain &amp; prose friendship would do excellent well betwixt vs comethus Sir, or rather thus, come Sir tic time I trow that we both lived like one body, thus, a•…d that both our sides were sli•…, and Concorporat with Organs fit to effect an individual passage even for out very thoughts; suppose wee were one body now, and I charge you believe it; where of I am the hart, and you the liver.
Your Lordship might well make that division if you knew the plain song.
O Sir, and why so I pray?
First because the heart, is the more worthy en∣trail, being the first that is borne, and moves, and the last that moves, and dies; and then being the fountain of heate too, for wheresoever our heate does not flow directly from the hart to the other Organs, there, their action must of necessity cease, and so without you I no∣there would nor could live.
Well Sir for these reasons I may be the heart▪ why may you be the liver now?.
I am more then ashamed, to tell you that my Lord.
Nay nay be not too suspicious of my iudgemēt, in you I beseech you: ashamed friend? if your love over∣come not that shame, a shame take that love I say. Come sir why may you be the li•…er?
The plain and short truth is (my Lord) because I am all liver, and tournd lover.
Lover?
Lover y faith my Lord.
Now I prithee let me leap out of my skin for joy why thou will•… not now revive the sociable mirth of thy sweet disposition? wilt thou shine in the world a new? and make those that have fleighted thy love, with the Austerity of thy knowledge, dote on the again with thy commanding •…haft of their humours?
A las my Lord they are all far out of my aims and only to fit my self a little better to your friend∣ship, have I given these wilful reigns to my office∣tions.
And y faith is my sower friend to all worldly desires overtaken with the hart of the world? Love I shall be monstrous proud now, to hear shees every way a most rare woman that I know thy spirit, &amp; judge∣meant hath chosen, is she wise? is she noble? is she capa∣ble of thy virtues? will she kiss this forehead with iudi∣ciall lips? where so much judgment &amp; virtue deserves it? Come brother Twinn, be short I charge you, &amp; name me the woman.
Since your Lordship will shorten the length of my follies relation, the woman that I so passionateli•… love, is no worse Lady then your own Niece, the too worthi•… Countess Euge•…in.
Why so, so, so, you are a worthy friend are you not to cons•…le this loue-mine in your head, and
would not open it to your hart, now beshrow my hart, if my hart dance not for joy tho my hee•…es do not, &amp; they doe not, because I will not set that at my heals that my friends set at his heart, what? friend and Nephew? both nephews a far inferior title to friend I confess, but I will prefer the backwards (as many friends doe) &amp; leave their friends worse then they found them,
But my noble Lo. it is almost a prodigy, that I being only a poor Gentleman and far short of that state and wealth that a Lady of her greatnesses in both will expect in her husband.
Hold thy doubt friend, never fear any woman, unless thy self be made of straw, or some such dry matter, and she of lightning, Audacity pros∣pers aboue probability in all worldhe matters, dost not thou know that Fortune governs them without order, and therefore reason the mother of order is none of her counsel, why should a man desiring to aspire an unreasonable creature which is a woman? seek her fruition by reasonable means, because thy self binds upon reason, wilt thou look for congruity in a wo∣man? why? there is not one woman amongst one thou∣sand, but will speak false Latin, and break Priscians head, attempt nothing that you may with great reason doubt of, and out of doubt you shall obtain nothing, I tell thee friend the enmine•…t confidence of strong spirits is the only wich-craft of this world, Spirits wrestling with spirits, as bodies? with bodies? this were enough to make the hope well, if she were one of these painted communities, that are ravished with Coaches, and upper hands, and brave men of dirt: but thou know friend shees a good scholar, and like enough to, bite at the rightest reason, and reason evermore Ad optima hortetur: to like that which is best, not that which is bravest, or rightest, or greatest, and so consequently worst, But prove what she can, we will turn her, and wind her, and
make her so pliant that we will draw her through a wedding ring y faith.
Would to god we might my Lord.
Isle warrant thee friend.
Where is mistress Winnyfred; for my Lady Euge∣nia desires to speak with your Lordship.
Marry enter mistress Winnifred even here I pray thee, from the Lady E•…genia, doe you hear friend?
Very easily on that side my Lord.
Let me feel? does not thy heart pant apace, by my hart well laboured Cupped, the field is yours sir God, and upon a very honourable composition, I am sent for now I am sure, and must even truss and to her:
witty mistress Winnifred, nay come near woman I am sure this Gentleman thinks his chamber the sweeter for your dear presence.
My absence shall thank him my Lord.
What rude Mistress Winnifred? nay faith you shall come to him, and kiss him, for his kindness.
Nay good my Lord, Isle never go to the mar∣ket for that ware I can have it brought hōe to my door
O Winnifred, a man may know by the m•…r∣ket folks how the market goes.
So you may my Lord, but I know few Lords that think scorn to go to that market thēselues.
To go to it Winnifred, nay to ride to it y faith.
Thats more then I know my Lord.
You'll not believe it till you are then a horse∣back, will ye?
Come, come, I am sent of a message to you will you hear it?
Stop, stop fair Winnifred, would you have audience so soon, there were no state in that y faith; this fair gentlewoman sir.
Nuw we shall have a fiction I believe.
Had three Suitors at once.
You'll leave out none my Lord.
No more did you Winnifred you enterferde with them all in 〈◊〉.
O Monstrous Lord by this light!
Now Sir 〈◊〉 make my tale short I will doe that which she did not; vz. leave out the two first, the third coming the third night for his turn.
My Lord, my Lord, my Lady does that, that no body else does, desires your company and so fare you well.
O stay a little sweet Winnifred, help me but to 〈◊〉 my points again, and have with you.
Not I by my truth my Lord, I had rather see your hose about your heals, then I would help you to truss a point.
O witty Winnifred? for that left, take thy pas∣port, and tell thy Ladies thou left me with my hose about my heals.
Well, well my Lord you shall sit till the moss grow a bout you•… he les, ere I come at you again.
She cannot abide to hear of her three Sui∣•…; but is not this very fit my sweet Clarence? Thou 〈◊〉 my rare Niece cannot sleep without me; but forthy company sake, she shall to night; and in the morning I will visit her early; when doe thou but stand in that place, and thou may•…t chance hear, (but art sure to see) in what subtle, and farre-fetcht manner Isle solicit her about thee.
Thanks worthy Lord.
I That have studied with world〈◊〉 thoughts the way of heaven, and how •…few heaven is reached
To know how mighty, and how many are
The strange affections of enchanted number
How to distinguish all the motions
Of the Celestial bodies, and what power
doth separate in such form this massy Round:
What is his Essence, Efficacies, Beams?
Footsteps, and Shadows? what Eternes•…es is
The world, and Time, and Generation?
What Soul, the worlds Soul is? what the black Springes
And unravelled Original of Things,
What their perse•…erance▪ what is life and death,
And what our Certain Restoration?
Am with the staid▪heads of this Time employed
To watch withal my Nerues a Female shade.
Witty Mistress Wynnefred, where is your 〈◊〉 I pray?
Faith your Lordship is bold enough to •…eeke her out, i•… she were at her urinal?
Then Sh'as done it seems, for here she comes to save me that labour, away wenches, get you hence wenches.
What, can you not abide my maids uncle?
I never •…ood abide a maid in my life Niece, but either I draw away the maid, or the maidenhead with a wet finger.
You love to make your self worse then you are still.
I know few mend in this world Madam, For the worse the better thought on, the better the worse spoken on ever amongst women.
I wonder where you have bin all this while with your sentences.
Faith where I must be again presently. I can∣not stay long with you my dear Niece.
By my faith but you shall my Lord, Gods pity what will become of you shortly, that you drive maids a∣fore you, &amp; offer to leave widows behind you, as man∣kindly, as if you had taken a surfeit of our Sex lately, and our very sight turned your stomach.
Gods my life, She abuses her best uncle; no∣for trust me if it were not a good revenge to help her to the loss of her widowhood.
That were a revenge and a half, indeed.
Nay it were but a whole revenge Niece, but such a revenge as would more then observe the true rule of a revenge.
I know your rule before you utter it, Vlciscere Ini∣mico sed sine tuo incommodo.
O rare Niece, you may see, what tic to bee a a scholar now, Learning in a woman is like weight in gold, or Luster in Diamants, which in no other Stone is so rich or refulgent
But say dear Uncle how could you find in your heart to stay so long from me.
Why alas Niece, you're so smeard with this willfull-widdowes three-yeeres black weed, that I never come to you, but I dream of Courses, and Sepul∣chres, and Epitaths, all the night after, and therefore a∣dew dear Niece.
Beshrew my heart my Lord, if you go their three hours.
Three hours? nay Niece, if I dance atten∣dance three hours (alone in her chamber) with an La∣die so near alide to me, I am very idle isaith, marie with such an other; I would dance, one, two, three, four, and five, tho it cost me ten shillings; and now I am in, have at it, my head must devise something while my feet are piddling thus, that may bring her to some fit consi∣deration of my friend, who indeed is only a great school∣ler▪ and all his honours, and riches lie in his mind.▪
Come, Come, pray tell me uncle, how does my
cousin Momford?
Why, well, very well Niece, &amp; so is my friend Clarence well too, &amp; then is there a worthy gentleman well as any is in England I can tell ye.
But when did you see my Cousin?
And tic pity but he should do well, and he shall be well too, if all my wealth will make him well.
What means hee by this trow ye, your Lo: is very dancitiue me thinks.
I, and I could tel you a thing would make your Ladyship very dancitiue, or else it were very dunsatiue in faith. O how the skipping of this Christmas block of ours moves the blockhead heart of a woman, &amp; indeed any thing that pleases the foolish eye which presently runs with a lying tale of Excellence to the mind.
But I pray tell me my Lord could you tell me of a thing would make me dance say you?
Well, farewell sweet Niece I must needs take my leave in earnest.
Lord bless vs, here is such a stir with your farewells.
I will see you again within these two or three days a my word Niece.
Gods precious, two or three days? why this Lord is in a marvelous strange humour. Sit down sweet Uncle, in faith I have to talk with you about great matters.
Say then dear Niece, bee short utter your mind quickly now.
But I pray tell me first, whats that would make me dance in faith?
Dance, what dance? hitherto your dan∣cers legs bow for-sooth, and Caper, and Jerk, and Firk, and dandle the body aboue them, as it were their great child, though the special Ierker bee aboue this place I hope, here lies that shut fetch a perfect woman over the Coals in faith.
Nay good Uncle say whats the thing you
could tel me of.
No matter, no matter▪ But let me see a pas∣s•…g prosperous forchead of an exceeding happy di∣stāce betwixt the eye brows; a cle•… lightning eye; a temperate and •…eshe blood in both the cheeks; excel∣lent m•…arkes, most excellent marks of good fortune.
Why, how now Uncle did you never see me before!
Yes N•…ce▪ but the state of these things at this instant must bee specially observed, and these out∣ward signs being now in this clear elevation, show your •…oubled mind is in an excellent power, to pre∣far them to act forth then a little dear N•…ce.
This is excellent.
The Creses here are excellent good; The propor•…ion of the chin good; the little aptness of it to stick out; good. And the wart aboue it most excee∣ding good. Never trust me, if all things bee not ensue∣rabble to the predictiō of a most divine fortune towards her; vow if she have the grace to apprehend it in the nick; theirs all.
Well my Lord, since you will not tell me your secret, isle keep another from you; with whose disco∣rye, you may much pleasure me, and whose conceal∣meant may hurt my es•…ate. And if you bee no •…inder then to see me so endangered; isle bee very patient of it I assure you.
Nay then it must instantly forth. This kind con iuration even fires it out of me; and (to be short) gather all your Judgment together, for here it comes. Niece; Clarence Clarence, rather my Soul then my •…riēd Clarence of too substantial a worth, to have any figures cast a∣bout him, (notwithstanding, no other woman with Empires could stir his affections) is with your virtue•… most extremely in love; and without your requital dead. And with it •…am sh•…ll •…and this golden distich through the world of you both.
No•… illo melior quisquam nec amantior aequi
Fire few•…t, aut isle reuerentior vlla Dearum.
Ay me poor Dame, O you amass me Uncle,
Is this the wondrous fortune you presage?
What man may miserable women trust?
O peace good Lady, I come not to ravish you to any thy•…g. But now I see how you accept my mo∣tion: I perceive (how upon true trial) you esteem me. Have I rid al this C•…cuite to levy the powers of your Judgment, that I might not prove their strength too suddenly with so violent a charge: And doe they fight it out in white blood. And show me their hearts in the soft Crystal of tears
O uncle you have wounded your self in charge∣ing me that I should shun Judgment as a monster, if it would not weep; I place the poor felicity of this world in a worthy friend, and to see him so vnwor∣thely revolted, I shed not the tears of my Brain, but the tears of my soul. And if ever nature made tears theffects of any worthy cause, I am su•…e I now shed them worthily.
Her sensual powers are up in faith, I have thrust her soul quite from her Tribunal. This is her Sedes va∣cans when her sub•…acts are privileged to libel against her, and her friends. But weeps my kind Niece for the wounds of my friendship? and I touched in friendship for wishing my friend doubled in her singular happi∣ness?
How am I doubled? when my honour, and good name, two essential parts of me; would bee less, and lost?
In whose Judgment?
In the judgment of the world.
Which is a fools bolt. Nihil a vertute nec a viritate remotius quam Vulgarise open•…: But my dear Niece,
it is most true that your honour and good name ten∣dred 〈◊〉 they are the species of truth are worthily two essential parts of you; But as they consist only in airy titles and corruptible blood (whose bitterness sanitise et non nobilitas efficit) and care not how many base and exe crable acts they commit, they touch you no more then they touch •…night. And yet shall no nobility you have in either, be impaired neither.
Not to marry a poor gentleman?
Respect him not so; for as he is a gentleman he is noble; as he is welthilie furnished with true know∣ledge, he is rich and therein adorned with the exa∣test complements belonging to everlasting nobleness.
Which yet will not maintain him a week: Such kind of nobleness gives no cotes of honour nor can scarce get a cote for necessity
Then is it not substantial knoweledge (as it is in him) but verbal and fantastical for Om•…a in isle ▪ille. complexutenet.
Why seeks he me then?
To make you joint partners with him in all things, and there is but a little partial difference be∣twixt you, that hinders that universal jointure: The bigness of this ci•…cle held too near our eye keeps it frō the whole Sphere of •…he Sun but; could we sustain it indifferently betwixt 〈◊〉 and it, it would then without check of one beam appear in his fulness.
Good Uncle be content for now shall I no∣for dream of contentment.
I have more then done Lady, and had rather have suffered an alteration of my being then of your Judgment; but (dear niece) for your own honour sake repair it instantly.
See here comes the Ladies; make an A∣prill day one dear•… love and be suddenly cheer∣full
God save you more then fair Ladies, I am glad your come, for my business will have me gone pre∣sently.
Why my Lord Mo•…ford I say? will you go be∣fore dinner?
No remedy sweet Beauties, for which rude∣no•…e I lay my hands thus lowe for your pardons:
O Courteous Lord Momford!
Niece? Men's estquae sola queen•…s. Sola facet claros meant emque honoribus ornate
Virus honos •…at at mendax infamy tarried.
Mine own dear nephew?
What success my Lord?
Excellent; excellent; come Isle tell thee all.
Doe you hear madam, how our youths h•…re have gulled our three suitors?
not I Lady, I hope our suitors are no fit meat for our Pages.
No madam, but they are fit sauce for any mans meat Isle warrant them.
VVhat's the matter Hippolita?
They have sent the knights to Barnet madam this frosty morning to meet vs their.
I'st true youths, are knights fit subiec•… for your knaveries▪
Pray pardon vs madam, we would be glad to please any body.
I indeed madam and we were sure we pleas•…d thē highly to tell thē you were deaf•…rous of their company.
O it was good Eugenia, their livers were too hot, you know, and for temper sake they must needs have a cooling card plaid upon them.
And besides madam we wood have them know that your two little Pages, which are less by hal•…
•…hen two leaves, have more learning in them then is in all their three volumes.
I faith Will, and putt their great pagicall index to them too.
But how will ye excuse your abuses wags?
We doubt not madam, but if it please your La∣diship to put up their abuses,
Trusting they are not so dear to you, but you may.
Wee shall make them gladly furnish their pose∣kits with them.
Well, children, and fowls, agree as you will, and let the world know now, women have nothing to doe with you.
Come madam I think your dinner bee almost ready,
And see, here are two honourable guests for you, the Lord Tales, and Sir Cutberd Kingcob.
Lack you any guests madam?
I my Lord such guests as you.
Theres as common an answer, as yours was a question my Lord.
Why? al things shoot be cōmon betwixt Lords, and Ladies you know.
Indeed Sir Kuttberd Bingcob, I have heard, you are either of the family of Love, or of no religion at all.
Hee may well be said to be of the family of Love, he does so flow in the loves of poor overthrown La∣dies.
You speak of that I wood doe madam, but in earnest, I am now suing for a new mistress; look in my hand sweet Lady, and tell me what fortune I shall have with her.
Doe you think me a witch, Sir Cutberd?
Pardon me Madam, but I know you to bee learned in all •…hinges.
Come on lets see.
He does you a special favour Lady, to give you his open hand, for tic commonly shut they say.
What find you in it madam?
Shut it now and isle tell ye.
What now Lady•…?
You've the worst hand that ever I saw knight have▪ when tic open, one can find nothing in it, and when tic shut one can get nothing out ont.
The age of letting go is past madam, wee must not now let go, but strike up men's heals, and take am as they fall.
A good Cornish principle believe it Sir Cuttberd.
But I pray tell me Lady Penelope, how entertain you the love of my Cousin Sir Giles Goosecappe.
Are the Goosecaps a kin to you my Lord.
Even in the first degree madam. And Sir Giles I can tell ye, tho he seem something simple, is composed of as many good parts as any knight in England.
He shoot be put up for concealment then, for he shows none of them.
Are you able to reckon his good parts my Lord?
Isle doe the best I can Lady, •…erst, hee dances as comely and lightly as any man, for upon my honour, I have seen him dance upon•… Eggs, and a has not bro∣ken them.
Nor cracked them neither.
That I know not, indeed I wood bee loath, to lie though he be my kinsman, to speak more then I know by him.
Well forth my Lord.
He has an excelēt skill in al manner of perfumes, &amp; if you bring him glones fro forty pence, to forty Shillings a pair he will tell you the price of them to two pence.
A pretty sweet quality believe me.
Nay Lady hee will perfume you gloves him self; most delicately, and give them the right Spanish Titillation.
Titillation whats that my Lord?
Why Lady tic a pretty kind of term new come up in perfuming, which they call a Titillation.
Very well expounded my Lord; forth with your kinsmans parts I pray.
Hee is the best Sempster of any woman in Eng∣land, and will work you needle work edgings, and French purls from an Angel to four Angels a yard.
Thats precious ware indeed.
He will work you any flower to the life, as like it as if it grew in the very place, and being a delicate perfumer, hee will give it you his perfect and natural savor.
This is wonderful; forth sweet Lord Tales.
He will make you flies and worms, of all sorts most lively, and is now working a whole bed embro∣dred, with nothing but glow worms; whose lights a has so perfectly done, that you may go to bed in the chamber, doe any thing in the Chamber, without a Candle.
Never trust me if it be not incredible; forth my good Lord.
Hee is a most excellent Turner, and will turn you wassel-bowles, and posit Cups carved with Lib∣berdes faces, and Lyons heads with spouts in their mouths, to let out the posit Ale, most artificially.
Forth good Lord Tales.
Nay good my Lord no more, you have spoken for him thoroughly I warrant you.
I lay my life Cupped has shot my sister in love with him out of your lips my Lord.
Well, come in my Lords, and take a bad dinner with me now, and wee will all go with you at night to a better supper with the Lord, and Lady Furnifall.
We attend you honourable Ladies.
Bullaker.
I Sir.
Ride and catch the Captains horse.
So I doe Sir.
I wonder Sir Giles you wood let him go 〈◊〉, and not ride after him.
Wood I might never be mortal Sir C•…tt: if I rid not aftter him, till my horse sweat, so that he had ne'er a dry thread on him, &amp; hollod &amp; hollod to him to stay him, till I had thought my fingers ends wood have gon off with hollowings; Isle be sworn to ye &amp; yet he ran his way like a Diogenes, and would never stay for vs.
How shall wee doe to get the 〈◊〉 Captain to London, now his horseis gone?
Why hee is but a lame Jade neither Sir Moil, we shall soon our'take him I warrant ye.
And yet thou say thou gallopst after him as fast as thou coodst, and coodst not Catch him; I lay my life some Crabfishe has bitten thee by the tongue, thou speak so backward still.
But here is all the doubt Sir Cut: if nobo∣die shoold catch him now, when hee comes at London, some boy or other wood get up o•… him and ride him •…otte into the water to wash him; Isle bee sworn I followed one that rid my horse into the Thames, till I was up tooth knees hitherto; and if it had not been for fear of going over shoes, because I am troubled with the rheum, I wood have taught him to wash my horse when hee was
hot yfath; how now sweet Captain dost feel any 〈◊〉 in thy payne yet▪
Ease in his pain quoth you, has good luck if he feel ease in pain I think, but wood any ass in the world ride down such a hill as Highgate is, in such a frost as this, and never light
Gods precious Sir Cut. your Frenchman never lights I tell ye.
Light Sir Cut, Slight and I had my horse again, theres ne'er a paltry English frost an them all shoot make me light.
Go too you French Zanies you, you will follow the french steps so long, till you be notable to set one Sound Steppe oath ground all the days of your life.
Why Sir Cut I care not if I be not sound so I be well but we were justly plaugde, by this hill for foal∣lowing women thus.
I and English women too sir Giles.
Thou arr still prating against English women I have seen none of the French dames I confess, but your greatest gallants for men in France, were here late∣lie I am sure, and methinkes there should be no more difference bet•…ixt our Ladies and theirs, then there is betwixt our Lords and theirs, and our Lore•…s are as far beyond them in faith, for person, and Courtship, as they are beyond ours for phantasticallitie.
O Lord sir Cut, I am sure our Ladies hold our Lords tack for Courtship, and yet the french Lodrs put them down, you noted it sir Giles.
O God sir, I stud and heard it, as I satith pre∣sense.
How did they put them down I pray thee?
Why for wit, and for Courtship Sir Moil.
As how good lefthandded Francois.
Why Sir when Meuusieur Lambois came to your mistress the Lady Hippolita as she sate in the presence, sit down here good Sir Giles Goosecappe, hee kneeled me by her thus Sir, and with a most quaint French Art in his speech of ah bellissime, I desire to die now sa•…es hee for
in his speech of ah bellissime I desire to die now says he for your love that I might be buried here.
A good pick-thacht complement by my faith; but I prithee what answered she.
She, •… scorn to note that I hope then did he vie it again with an other ho.
That was ho, ho, I wood have put the third ho to it, if I had been as my mistress, and ho, ho, haht him out of the presence in faith,
Ho says he, their fair eyes, I wood not for a million they were in France, they wood renew all our ciuill-wars again.
That was not so good me thinks captain.
Welliudgd in faith, there was a little wit in that I must cōfesse, but she put him down far, &amp; aūswered him with aquestiō &amp; that was whether he wood s•…em a lover or a ie stter, if a lover a must tel her far more likelier then those, or else she was far frō believing thē, if a Easter, she cood have much more ridiculous jests then his of twenty fools that followed the court, and told him she had as lieve be courted with a brush faggot as with a frēchman, that spēt it self al in sparks, &amp; would sooner∣fire ones chimney then warm the house, and that such fparkes were good enough yet to set thatched dispositiōs a fire, but hers was tild with slight, and respected thē as slightly.
Why so Captain, and yet you talk of your great frenchmen, to God little England had never known them I may say.
VVhat's the matter sir Giles, are you out of love with frenchmen now of a sudden.
Slit captain Wood not make one, Isle be sworn, Isle be sworn, they took away a mastie dog of mine by commission now, I think on it makes my tears stand in my eyes with grief, I had rather lost the dearest friend that ever I lay withal, in my life be this light, never stir if
if hee fought not with great Sekerson four hours to one, foremost take up hindmost, and took so many loaves from him, that hee starved him presently: So at last the dog cood doe no more then a Bear cood doe, and the bear being heavy with hunger you know, fell upon the dog, broke his back, and the dog never stirred more.
Why thou say the frenchmen took him away.
Frenchmen, I, so they did too, but yet and hee had not bin kilt, twood ne'er a greeud me.
O excellent unity of speech.
Save ye knights.
Save you Captain.
Pages, welcome my fine pages.
Welcome boys.
Welcome sweet Will, good Jack.
But how chance you are so far from London now pages, is it not almost dinner time.
Yes indeed Sir, but we left our fellows to wait for once, and cood not choose in pure love to your worships, but we must needs come and meet you, before you met our Ladies, to tell you a secret.
A secret, what secret I pray thee?
If ever your worships say any thing▪ we are undone for ever.
Not for a world believe it.
Why then this it is; wee ove•…heard our Ladies as they were talking in private say they refused to meet you at Barnet this morning of purpose, because they wood try which of you were most patient.
And some said you, Sir Giles, another you Sir and the third you Captain,
This was excellent.
Then did they swear one another not to excuse themselves to you by any means, that they might try you the better, now if they shall see you say nothing in the
world to them, what may come of it, when Ladies be∣gin to try their suitors once, I hope your wisdoms can i•…dge a little.
O ho my little knave let vs alone now in faith, wood I might be Cashiered, if I say any thing.
Faith and I can forbear my Tongue as well as another I hope.
Wood I might be degraded if I speak a word, Isle tell them I care not for loosing my labour.
Come knights shall we not reward the pages?
Yes I prithee doe, Sir Giles give the boys something.
Never stir Sir Cut, if I have ever a great about me but one three pence.
Well knights isle lay out force all, here my fine pages.
No in deed ant please your worship.
O pages refuse a gentleman's bounty.
Cry you mercy Sir, thank you sweet Cap∣taine
And what other news is stirring my fine vilely∣cos.
Marry Sir they are envy•…ed to a great supper to night to your Lords house Captain▪ the Lord Furnifall, and there will bee your great cousin Sir Giles Goosecappe, the Lord Tales, and your uncle Sir Cut. Rudesby, Sir Cutbert Kingcob.
The Lord Tales, what countryman is hee?
A kentish Lord Sir, his ancestors came forth off Canterbury.
Out of Canterbury.
I indeed Sir the best Ta•…s in England are your Canterbury tales, I assure ye.
the boy tells thee true Captain.
Hee writes his name Sir, Tales, and hee being the tenth son his father had; his father Christ∣•…d him December Tales, and so his whole name is the
Lord December Tal•…s.
A my mortality the boy knows more then I doe of our house.
But is the Lady Furnif•… (Captain) still of the same drinking humour she was wont to be.
Still of the same knight, and is never in any so∣ciable vain till she be tipsy, for in her sobriety she is mad, and fears my good little old Lord out of all pro∣portion.
And therefore as I hear he will earnestly inuit guests to his house, of purpose to make his wife drunk, and then dotes on her humour most profanely.
Tic very true knight; wee will sup with them to night; and you shall see her; and now I think ont, isle tell you a thing knights, wherein perhaps you may exceedinly pleasure me.
VVhats that good Captain.
I am desirous to help my Lord to a good mer∣rye Fool, &amp; if I cood help him to a good merry one, he might d•…e me very much credit I assure ye.
Sblood thou speak to vs as if wee cood serve thy turn.
O France Sir Cut: your Frenchman wood not have taken me so, for a world, but because Fools come into your companies many times to make you merry
As thou dost.
Nay good Sir Cut: you know fools doe come into your companies.
I and thou know it too, no man better.
Bear with Choler Sir Giles.
But wood you help your Lord to a good fool so fine Sir.
I my good page exceeding fine.
You mean a wench, do you not Sir, a foolish wēch?
Nay I wood have a man fool, for his Lord: page▪
Does hi•… Lord: love a fool, so well •… pray.
Assure thy self page, my Lord loves afoole as
he loves himself.
Of what degr•…e wood you have your Fool Sir, for you may have of all manner o•… d•…s.
Faith I wood have him a good Emphaticall fool, one that wood make my Lord laugh well, and I card not,
Laugh well (um) then wee must know this Sir, is your Lord Costive of laughter, or laxative of laugh∣la?
Nay he is good merry little Lord, and indeed something Laxative of Laughter.
Why then Sir the less wit will serve his Lord∣ships turn, marry if he had bin Costive of laughter, hee must have had two or three drams of wit the more in his fool, for we must •…inister according to the quā∣tity of his L•…rd: humour you know, and if he s•…ood have as much Wit in his fool being Laxative of laughter, as if hee were Costive of Laughter, why he might laugh himsele into an Epilepsy, and fall down dead suddenly, as many have done with the e•…tremitie of that passion; and I know your Lord cares for nothing, but the health of a fool.
Thart ith right my notable good page.
Why, and for that health Sir we will w•…rrant his Lordship, that if he should have all Bacon de sanitate tu•…∣da read to him, it shoot not please his Lordship so well as our fool shall.
Remorse my more then English pages.
A my word I have not seen pages have so much wit, •…hat have never bin in France Captain.
Tic true indeed Sir Giles, well then my almost french Elixirs▪ will you help my Lord to a fool, so fit for him as you say.
As fit, Isle warrāt you Captain, as if he were made for him, and hee shall come this night to supper, and fool where his Lord: sits at table.
Excellent •…rt, fail not now my sweet pages.
Not for a world sir, we will go both, and seek him presently.
Doe so my good wags
Save you knights.
Save you Captain.
Farewell my pretty knaves, come knights, shall we resolve to go to this Supper?
What else.
And let's provide torches for our men to sit at door with all captain.
That we will I warrant you sir Giles.
Torches? why the Moon will shine man.
The moon Sir Cut: I scorn the moon in faith, Slit sometimes a man shall not get her to shine &amp; if he wood give her a couple of Capons, and one of them must be white too, God forgive me I cud never abide her since yesterday, she served me such a trick tother night.
What trick sir Giles?
Why sir Cut: cause the days be mortal and short now you know, and I love day light well; I thought it went a way faster then it needed, and run after it into Finsburie-fieldes ith calm evening to see the wind mils go? &amp; even as I was going over a ditch the moon by this light of purpose runs me be∣hind a cloud, and lets me fall into the ditch by hey∣uen.
That was ill done in her in deed sir Giles.
Ill done sir Cut: Slydda man may bear, and bear, but and she have no more good manners, but to make every black slovenly cloud a pearl in her eye I shall ne'er love English moon again, while I live Isle besworn to ye.
come knights to London horse, horse, horse.
In what a case he is with the poor English moon, because the french moons (their torches) will∣be
the less in fashion, and I warrant you the Captain will remember it too, tho hee say no thing, hee se•…onds his resolute chaseso and follows him, Isle lay my life you shall see them the next cold night, shut the moon•…shine out of their chambers, and make it lie without doors all night. I discredit my wit with their companies now I think on it, plague a god on them; Isle fall a beating on them presently.
Sing good Horatio, while I sigh and write.
According to my master Platos mind
The Soul is music, and doth therefore joy
In accents musical, which he that hates
With points of discord is together tied
And barks at Reason, Consonant in sense.
Divine Eugenia, bears the •…ular form
Of music and of Reason, and presents
The Soul exempt from flesh in flesh inflamed,
Who must not love his then, that loves his soul?
To her I write, my friend, the star•…e of friends
Will needs have my strange lines greet her strange eyes
And for his fake isle power my poor Soul forth
In floods of Ink; but did not his kind hand
Bar me with violent grace, I wood consume.
In the white flames of her impassionate Love
E•…e my harsh lips shoot vent the odorous blaze.
For I am despair•…e of all worldly Joys
And there was never man so harsh to men,
When I am fullest of digested life
I seem a lifeless Embrion to all
Each day racked up in nightlike Funeral.
Sing good Horatio, whilst I sigh and write.
Suffer him to love that suffers not loving, my love is without passion and therefore free from alteration.
Prose is too harsh, and verse is poetry
Why shoot I write then? merit clad in Ink
Is but a mourner, and as good as naked
I will not write my friend shall speak for me
Sing one staue more my good Horatio.
I must remember I know whom I love,
Adame of learning, and of life exemt
From all the Idle fancies of her sex,
And this that to an other dame wood seem
Perplex•… and folded in a rudelesse veil
Will be more clear then ballads to her eye
Isle write, if but to satisfy my friend.
Your third stauce sweet Horatio and no more.
How vainly doe I offer my strange love?
I marry, and bid states, and entertain
Ladies with tales and jests, and Lords with news
And keep a house to feast Actions hounds
That eat their moister, and let idol guests
Draw me from serious search of things divine
To bid them sit, and welcome, and take care
To sooth their pal ats with choice kitchen stuff
As all must doe that marry and keep house
And then look on the left sid of my yoke
Or on the right perhaps and see my wife
Draw in a quite repugnant course from me
Busied to starch her french purls, and her puffs
When I am in my Enema refiexa quid sit faelicitas quae origo rerum?
And make the•…e beings that are known to be
The only serious objects of true men
Seem shadows, with substanti al•… stir she keeps
About her shadows, which if husbands love
They must believe, and thus my other self
Brings me another body to dispose
That have already much too much of one,
And must not look for any Soul of her
To help two rule to bodies.
Fie for shame.
I never heard of such an antedame.
Doe women bring no help of soul to men?
Why friend they either are men's souls themselves
Or the most witty Imitatrix•…s of them
Or prettiest sweet apes of human Souls,
That ever Nature framed; as I will prove.
For first they be Substantiae lucidae
And p•…rer then men's bodies like their souls,
Which men's harsh hairs both of their breast &amp; chin
Occasiond by their gross and •…udder heate
Plainly demonstrates: Then like souls they doe,
Mouere corpora, for no power on earth
Moves a mans body, as a woman does!
Then doe they Dare forms corpori
Or add fair forms to men, as their souls doe:
For but for women, who wood care for forms?
I vow I never wood wash face, nor hands
Nor care how ragged, or flouenlie I went
VVer't not for women, who of all men's pomps
Are the true final causes: Then they make
Men in their Seeds imortall like their Souls
That else wood perish in a span of time.
Oh they be Soulelike-Creatures, and my Niece
The Soul of twenty rare Souls stilt in one.
That, that it is my Lord, that makes me love.
Oh are ye come Sir, welcome to my Niece
As I may say at midnight gentle friend
What have you wrote I pray?
Strange stuff my Lord.
Indeed the way to believe is to love
And the right way to love is to believe,
This I will carry now with pen and In•…ke
For her to use in answer, see, sweet friend
She shall not stay to call, but while the steel
Of her affection is made soft and hot,
Isle strike and take occasion by the brow.
Blessed is the wooing thats not long a doing.
Had ever man so true, and noble friend?
Or wood men think this sharpe worlds freezing Air
To all true honour and judicial love
Wood suffer such a flourishing pine in both
To overlook the boxe-trees of this time?
When the learned mind hath by impulsion wrought
Her eyes cl•…re fire into a knowing flame.
No elemental smoke can darken it
Nor Northern cold•…es nip her Daphnean flower,
O sacred friendship thanks to thy kind power
That being retired from all the faithless world
Appearst to me in my vnworldly friend,
And for thine own sake let his noble mind
By moving presedent to all his kind
(Like just Deucalion) of earths stony bones
Repair the world with humane blood and flesh
And dying virtue with new life refresh.
Tic time to leave your Chests Ladies tic too studious an exercise after dinner.
Why is it called Chests?
Because they lean upon their Chests that play at it.
I wood have it called the strife of wits, for tic •… game so witti•…, that with strife for mastery, wee hunt it eagerly.
Specially where the wit of the G•…caps are in cha•… my Lord.
I am a Goosecappe by the mothers side madam, at least my mother was a Goosecappe.
And you were her white son, I warrant my Lord.
I was the youngest Lady, and therefore must be her white son ye know, the youngest of ten I was.
And the wisest of Fifteen.
And sweet Lady will ye cast a kind eye now upon my Cousin, Sir Giles Goosecappe.
Pardon my Lord I have never a spare eye to cast away I assure ye.
I wonder you shoot Content cast away Lady upon him, doe you remember those few of his good parts I rehearsed to you.
Very perfectly my Lord, amongst which one of them was, that he is the best Sempster of any woman in England, pray lets see some of his work?
Sweet Lord lets see him sow a little.
You shall a mine honour Lady.
Hes a goodly great knight indeed; and a little needle in his hand will become him prettily.
From the Spanish pike to the Spanish needle, he shall play with any knight •…n England Lady.
But not •… c•…erso, from the Spanish needle to the Spanish pike.
I think he be too wise for that indeed madam, for he has 20. miles length in land lies together, and hee wood bee loath to bring it all to the length of •… pike.
But no man commends my blount Servant Sir Cut: Rudeshy methinks.
Hee is a kind gentleman Lady though hee bee blunt, and is of this humour, the more you pre∣sum upon him without Ceremony, the more•…
he lo•… you, if he know you think him kind once and will say nothing but still use him, you may melt him into any kindness you will; he is right like a wo∣man, and had rather, you shoot bluntly take the greatest •…our you can of him, then shamefastly entreat it.
He says well to you Hippolita.
I madam, but they 〈◊〉, he will beat one in Jest, and byte in kindness, and tear ones ruffs in Cour•…ippe.
Some that he makes sport withal perhaps, but none that he respects •…assureye.
And wha'ts his 〈◊〉 C•…beard?
Some two thousand a year Lady.
I pray doe not tell him that I asked, for I stand •…ot upon living.
O Good Lady who can live without living?
Still here Lordings? good companions in faith, I see you come not for vittles.
Vittles, my Lord, I hope we have vittles at home.
I but sweet Lord, there is a principle in the Poli•…itians physic, •…at not your meat upon other men's trenchers, &amp; beware of surfeits of your own cost many good companions cannot abide to eat meat at home ye know. And how 〈◊〉 my noble Niece now, and her fair Lady Feeres?
What wind blows you hither trow?
Hark you madam, the sweet gale of one Clarences breath, with this his paper •…aisle blows me hither.
Aye me still, in that humour? beshrowe my hart it I take any Papers from him.
Kind bosom doe thou take it then.
Nay then never trust me.
Let it •…all then, or cast it awa•…e you were best, that every body may discover your love suits, doe; theres sombodie near if you note it, and how have you spent the time since dinner nobles?
At chests my Lords,
Read it niece.
Here bear it back I pray.
I bear you on my back to hear you; and how play the Ladies sir Cuthbert, what men doe they play best withal, with knights or rooks?
With knights my Lord.
It is pity their board is no broader, and that some men caled gulls are not added to their game
Why my Lo it needs not, they make the knights gulls.
Thats pretty sir Cuthbert; you have begone I know Niece, forth I command you.
O yare a sweet uncle.
I have brought her a little Gre•…ke, to help me out withal, and shees so coy of her learning for sooth she makes it strange: Lords, and Ladies, I inuit you al to supper to night, and you shall not deny me.
We will attend your Lordship.
Come Ladies let's into the gallery a little.
And now what says mine own dear niece in faith?
What shoot she say to the backfide of a pa∣per.
Come, come, I know you have bin a'the bell∣lie side.
Now was there ever Lord so prodigal, of his own honoured blood, and d•…nity?
A•…ay with these same horse fair allegations, will you answer the l•…r?
Gods my life you go•… like a cunning spokes man,
man, answer uncle? what doe ye think me desperate of a husband
Not so niece, but careless of your poor un∣kle.
I will not write that's certain.
What will you have my friend and I pe•…each, doe you thirst our bloods?
O yare in a mighty danger no doubt on it.
If you have our bloods beware our ghosts I can tell ye, come will ye write?
I will not write in faith.
in faith dame, then I must be your secretary I see, here is the letter, come, doe you dictate and Isle write.
If you write no otherwise then I dictate, it will scarce prou•… a kind answer I be∣leeue.
But you will be advised I trust. Secretaries are of counsel with their countesses, thus it begins. Suffer him to love, that suffers not loving, what answer you to that?
He loves extremely that suffers not in love.
He answers you for that presently, his love is without passion, and therefore free from alteration, for Pa•… you know is in Alterationem lab•… he loves you in his soul he tells you, wherein there is no passion, say dame what answer you.
Nay if I answer any thing.
Why? very•… well, isle answer for you.
You answer? shall I set my hand to your an∣swear?
I by my faith shall ye.
By my faith, but you shall answer as I wood have you then.
Always put in with advice of your secretary, niece, come, what answer you?
Since you needs will have my Answer, Isle Answer 〈◊〉 to the first, and last part of his letter.
Doe so Niece, and leave the midst for him∣self a gods name, what is your answer?
I cannot but suffer you to love, if you do love.
Why v•…rye good, there it is, and will requite your love; say you so?
Beshrowe my lips then my Lord.
Beshrowe my fingers but you shall; what, you may promise to requite his love, and yet not promise him marriage I hope; well, and will requite your love.
Nay good my Lord hold your hand, for isle bee sworn, isle not set my hand •…oo't.
Well hold of your hand good madam till it shoot come on, Isle be ready for it anon, I warrant ye•… now forth; my Love is without passion, and therefore free from alteration, what answer you to that madam?
Even this my Lord, your Love being mental, needs no bodily Requital.
I am Content with that, and here it is; but in hart.
What but in hart?
Hold of your hand yet I say, I doe embrace and repay it,
You may write uncle, but if you get my hand to it,
Alas Niece this is nothing, first any thing to a bodily marriage, to say you love a mā in Soul if your harts agree and your bodies meet not? simple marriarge rites, now let vs forth: hee is in the way to felicity, and desires your hand.
My ha•…d shall always sign the way to felicity.
Very good, may not any woman say this now. Conclude now sweet Niece.
And so God prosper your Journey.
Charitably concluded, though far short of that •…ove I wood have shown to any friend of yours
Niece I swear to you, your hand now, andlet this lit∣tle stay his appetite.
Read what you have writ my Lord.
What needs that madam, you remember it I am sure.
Well if it want sense in the Composition, let my secretary be blamed for it, theirs my hand.
Thanks gentle Niece, now isle read it.
Why now, more then before I pray?
That you shall see strait, I cannot but suffer you to love if you doe love and will requite your love.
Remember that requital was of your own put∣ning it, but it shall be after my fashion I warrant ye.
Interrupt me no more, your love being men∣toll needs no bodily requital•…, but in hart I embrace &amp; repay it; my hand shall always sign the way to felicity, and my self knit with you in the bands of marriage e∣for walk with you, in it, and so God prosper our jour∣ney:
Gods me life, tic not thus I hope.
By my life but it is Niece.
By my life but tic none of my deed then.
Doe you use to set your hand to that which is not your deed, your hand is at it Niece, and if there be any law in England, you shall perform it too:
When, ythis is plain dishonoured deceit.
Does all your truest kindness end in law?
Have patience Niece, for what so ere I say
Only the laws of faith, and thy free love
Shall join my friend and thee, or nought at al,
By my friends love, and by this kiss it shall.
Why, thus did false Accontius snare Cydippe.
Indeed dear love his wile was something like
And then tic no vnheard-of•…recherie
That was enacted in a gods Eye,
Acconti•…s wort•…ie love feared not Diana
Before whom he contrived this sweet deceit
Well there you have my hand, but isle besworn I never did thing so against my will.
T'will prove the better madam, doubt it not▪
And to allay the billows of your blood,
Raised with my motion bold and opposite
Dear niece sup with me, and refresh your spirits:
I have invited your companions
With the two guests that dined with you to day,
And will send for the old Lord Furnifall
The Captain, and his mates and (tho at night)
We will be merry as the morning Lark.
No, no my Lord, you will have Clarence there.
A las poor gentleman I must tell you now
Hes extreme sick, and was so when he wrote
Tho he did charge me not to tell you so;
And for the world he cannot come abroad.
Is this the man that without passion loves
I doe not tell you he is sick with love;
Or if he be tic wilful passion.
Which he doth choose to suffer for your sake
And cood restrain his sufferance with a thought,
Upon my life he will not trouble you;
And therefore worthy niece fail not to come.
I will on that condition.
Tic performed: for were my friend well and cood comfort me; I wood not now entreat your com∣panie, but one of you I must have, or I die, oh such a friend is worth a monarchy.
Nay my gallants I will tell you more.
Forth good my Lord.
The evening came and then our waxen stars
Spa•…kled about the heavenly court of France.
When I then young and readiant as the sun
G•…ue luster to those lamps, and curling thus
My golden foretoppe▪ stepped into the presence,
Where set with other princely dames I found
The Countess of Lancalier and her niece
Who as I told you cast so fixed an eye
On my behaviours talking w•…th the king:
True my good Lord.
They rose when I came in, and all the lights
Burned dim for shame, when I stood up and shined.
O most passionate description Sir Cut:
True of a candles end.
The passingst description of a candle, that ever lived Sir Cut:
Yet aymd I not at them, nor seemed to note
What grace they did me, but found courtly cause
To talk with an accomplished gentleman
New come from Italy, in quest of news▪
I spake Italian with him.
What so young?
O rarissime volt cad•…no nel parlour nostro familiar.
Slit a cood speak it knight, at three year old.
Nay gentle Captain doe not set me forth
I love it not, in truth I love it not.
Slight my Lo•…d but truth is truth you know.
I dare •…nsure your Lordship, Truth is truth, &amp; I have heard in France, they speak French as well, as their mother tongue my Lord.
Why tic their mother tongue my noble knight▪
But (as I tell you) I seemed not to note
The Ladies notes of me, but held my talk,
with that Italianate Frenchman, and took time
(Still as our conference served) to show my Courtship
In the three quarter leg, and settled look,
The quick kiss of the top of the forefinger
And other such exploits of good Accost;
All which the Ladies took into their eyes
With such attention that their favours swarmed
About my bosom, in my hat, mine ears,
In skarffes about my thighs, upon mine arms
Thick on my wrists, and thicker on my hands,
And still the less I sought, the more I found.
All this I tell to this notorious end,
That you may use your Courtship with less care
To your coy mistress•…s; As when we strike
A goodly Sammon, with a little line
We doe not tug to hale her up by force
For then our line wood break, and our hook lost;
But let her careless play along the stre•…me
As you had left her, and sheele drown her •…elf.
A my life a most ri•…h comparison.
Never stir, if it bee not a richer Caparison, then my Lord my Cosine wore at tilt, for that was bro∣dred with nothing but mooneshine ith the water, and this has Sāmons in it; by heaven a most edible Caparisō.
Odious thou woodst say, for Cōparisōs are odious.
So they are indeed sir Cu•…▪ al•… but my▪ Lords.
Bee Caparisons odious Sir Cut: what like flow∣ers?
O ass they be odorous.
A botts athat stinking word odorous, I can never hit on it,
And how like you my Court-counsaile gallāts ha▪
Out of all proportion excellent my Lord: &amp; be∣lee•…e it for Emphaticall Courtship, your Lordship puts down all the Lords of the Court.
No good Captain no.
By France you doemy Lord for Emphaticall Courtship.
For Emphaticall Courtship indeed I can doe somewhat.
Then does your merry entertainment become you so festifally, that you have all the bravery of a Saint Georges day about ye when you use it.
Nay thats too much in sadness Captain.
O good my Lord, let him praise you, what so ere
it costs your Lordship.
I assure your Lordship your merry behaui∣our does so festifally show upon you, that every high holiday when Ladies wood bee most beautiful; eve•…y one wishes to God she were turned into such a little Lord as you, when you're merry.
By this fire they doe my Lord, I have heard am.
Marry God forbid knight they shoot be turned into me; I had rather be turned into them amin honour.
Then for your Lordships quips, &amp; quick jests, why Gest Romanorum were nothing to them a my virtue
Well, well, well, I will hear thee no more, I will hear thee no more, good Captain, Tha'st an excellent wit, and thou shalt have Crowns amin honour, and now knights and Captain, the fool you told me off, do you al know him?
I know him best my Lord.
Doe you Sir Giles, to him then good knight, &amp; be here with him, and here, and here, and here again; I mean paint him unto vs Sir Giles, paint him lively, live∣lie now, mygood knightly boy.
Why my go•…d L•…rd? hee will ne'er be long from vs, because we are all mortal you know.
Very true,
And as soon as ever wee go to dinner, and supper together,
Dinner and supper together, whens that trow?
A will come you in amongst vs, with his Cloak buttond, loose under his chin.
Buttond loose my Lord?
I me Lord buttond loose still, and both the flaps cast o•…r before, both his shoulders before him.
Both shouldiers before him?
From before him hee means; forth good Sir Gyl•…s.
Like a potentate My Lord?
Much like a •…otentate indeed.
For all the w•…rld like a Potentate S. Cut: ye know.
So Si•….
All his beard nothing but hai•…e.
Or something else.
Or something else as you say.
Excellent good.
His Melons, or his Apricots, Oranges al∣ways in an unclean hand kerchiffe very cleanly I warrant you my Lord.
A good no•…e fool Sir Giles of mine honour.
Then hi•… fine words that hee sets them in, con∣catic•…ll, a fine Aniseed wench fool upon ticket and so forth.
Passing strange words believe me,
Knoth every man at the table, though he never saw him before, by sight and then will he fool you so finely my Lord, that hee will make your hart ache, till your eyes run over.
The best that ever I heard, gray mercy good knight for thy merry description, Captain, I give thee twenty companies of commendations, never to bee cashiered.
Save your Lordship,
My pretty cast of Marlins, what prophecies with your little maistershippes?
Things that cannot come to pass my Lord, the worse our fortunes.
Why whats the matter pages?
•…ow now my Ladies foisting hounds.
M. Jack▪ M. Jack; how do ye M. William, frolic?
Not s•… frolic, as you left vs Sir Giles.
Why wags, what news bring you a Gods name.
Heavy news indeed my Lord, pray pardon vs.
Heavy news? not possible your little bodies cood bring am then, unload those your heavy news I beseech ye?
Why my Lord the fool we took for your Lord: is thought too wise for you, and we dare not presēt him,
Slit pages, you'll not cheats of our fool will ye?
Why sir Giles, hes too dogged and bitter for you in truth, we shall bring you a fool to make you laugh, and he shall make all the world laugh at vs.
I indeed sir Giles, and he knows you so well too
Know me▪ slight he knows me no more then the beg•… knows his dish.
Faith he begs you to be content sir Giles, for he will not come.
Beg me? slight I wood I had known that, to∣there day, I thought I had met him in Paules, &amp; he had bin any body else but a pillar, I wood have run him through by heaven, beg me?
H•… begs you to be content sir Giles, that is, he prays you▪
O does he praise me, then I commend him.
Let this unsuitable fool go sir G•…les, we will make shift without him.
That we will a my word my Lord, and have him too for all this.
Doe not you say so sir Giles, for to tel•… you true that fool is dead.
Dead? Slight that cannot be man, I know he wood ha writ to me ont had bin so.
Quick or dead let him go sir Giles.
I my Lord, for we have better news for you to harken after.
what are they my good Now•…tions?
My Lord Momford entreats your Lordship and these knights and captain to accompany the countess Eugenia and the o•…her two Ladies at his house at supper to night.
All desiring your Lo: to pardon them, for not eating your meat to night.
Withal my hart wags, and theirs amends; my harts, now set your courtship a'the last, a'the tain∣ters, and prick up your sell•…es for the Ladies.
O brave s•…r 〈◊〉 come 〈◊〉 prick up the Ladies:
A•…d will not the knights two noble kinsemē be there?
Both will be their my Lord.
Why theres the whole knot of vs then, and there shall wee know•…ke up the whole triplicitie of your nuptials.
•…e make my Lord my Cousin speak for me.
And your Lordship will be for me I hope.
With tooth and nail Captain, A my Lord.
Hang am Tytts isle pommel my self into am.
Your L•…: your Cousin S•…r Giles has promised the Ladies they shall see you sow.
Gods me, wood I might never be mortal if I doe not carty my work with me.
Doe so Sir Gyl•…s, and withal use means
To taint their high bloods with the shaft of Love,
Sometimes a fingers motion wounds their minds;
A jest, a Gesture, or a pretty laugh.
A voice, a present, ah, things done ith nick
Wound deep, and sure, and let fly your gold
And we shall nuptials have hold belly hold.
O rare Sir Cut: we shall eat nut-shells. hold belly hold
O pitiful knight, that koowes not nuptials from nutshells.
And now Comme port•… vous monsieur?
Port bien vous remorse.
We may see it indeed Sir, &amp; you shall go before with vs.
No good monsieurs.
Another Crash in my Ladies Cellar in faith mon∣sieur.
Remorse de bon ceur m•…nsieurs.
How now my friend does not the knowing beams
That through thy cōmon sense glaūce through thy eyes
To read that letter, through thine eyes retire
And warm thy heart with a triumphant fire?
My Lord I feel a treble happiness
Mix in o•…e soul, which proves how eminent
Things endless are aboue things temporal,
That are in bodies needefully confined;
I cannot suffer their dementions pierced
Where my immortal part admits expansure
Even to the comprehension of two more
Comixed substantially with her mere self.
As how my strange, and riddle▪ speaking friend?
As thus my Lord, I feel my own minds joy
As it is separate from all other powers,
And then the mixture of an other soul
Joined in direction to one end, like it,
And thirdly the contentment I enjoy,
As we are joined that I shall work that good
In such a noble spirit as your niece,
Which in my self I feel for absolute;
Each good mind doubles his own free content
When in an others use they give it vent.
Said like my friend, and that I may not wrong
Thy full perfections with an emptier grace,
Then that which show presents to thy conceits,
In working thee a wi•…e worse then she seems;
•…e tell thee plain a secret which I know.
My niece doth use to paint herself with white
Whose cheeks are naturally mixed with red
Either because she thinks pale-lookes moves most:
Or of an answereable nice affect
To other of her modest qualities;
Because she wood not with the outward blaze
Of tempting beauty tangle wanton eyes;
And so be troubled with their tromperies:
Which 〈◊〉 as thou wilt. I make it known•…
That thy free comment may examine it,
As willinger to tell truth of my no•…e,
Then in the least degree to wrong my friend.
A jealous part of friendship you unfold;
For was it ever seen that any dame
Wood chainge of choice a well mixed white and red
For bloodless paleness, if she strived to move?
Her painting then is to shun motion,
But if she mended some defect with it
Breeds it more hate then other ornaments;
(Which to supply bare nature) Ladies wear?
What an absurd thing is it to suppose;
(If Nature made vs either lame or sick,)
We wood not seek for sound limbs, or for health
By Art the Rector of confused Nature?
So in a face if Nature be made lamer
Then Art can make it, is it more offence
To help her want there then in other limbs?
Who can give instance where dames faces lost
The privilege their other parts may boast.
But our most Court received Poets says
That painting is pure chastities abettor.
That was to make up a poor rime to Nature.
And far from any Judgment it conferred
For lightness comes from harts, and not from looks
And if inchastitie possess the hart;
Not painting doth not race it, nor being clear
Doth painting spot it,
Om•…e bonum naturaliter pulchrum.
For outward fairness bears the divine form,
And moves beholders to the Act of love;
And that which moves to love is to be wished
And eche thing simply to be wished is good.
So I conclude mere painting of the face
A lawful and a commendable grace▪
What paradox dost thou defend in this
And yet through thy clear arguments I see
Thy speech is far exempt from flattery,
And how illiterate custom grossly erres?
Almost in all traditions she prefers.
Since then the doubt I put thee of my niece,
Checks not thy doubtless love, forth my dear friend,
And to all force to those impressions,
That now have carved her fantasy with love,
I have invited her to supper here.
And told her thou art most extremely•… sick.
Which thou shalt counterfeit with all thy skill,
Which is exceeding small to counterfeit,
Practise a little, love will teach it thee,
And then shall doctor Versey the physician,
Come to thee while her self is in my house.
With whom as thou confer'st of thy disease,
Isle bring my niece with all the Lords and Ladies.
Within your hearing under feigned pretext,
To show the pictures that hang •…eere thy chamber,
Where when thou hearst my voice, know she is there.
And therefore speak that which may stir her thoughts,
And make her fly into thy opened arms.
Ladies whom true worth cannot move to ruth
True lovers must deceive to show their truth
Where is Sir Giles Goosecappe here?
Here my Lord.
Come forward knight it is you that the La∣dies admire at working a mine honour.
A little at once my Lord for Idleness sake.
Sir Cut, I say, to her captain.
Come good ser•…ant let's see what you work.
Why look you mistress▪ I am making a fine dry sea, full of fish, playing in the bottom, &amp; here isle let in the water so lively, that you shall hear it roar.
Not hear it Sir Giles.
Yes in sooth madam with your eyes.
I Lady; for when a thing is done so exceed∣ingly to the life, as my knight•…e cousin does it, the eye oftentimes takes so strong a heed of it, that it cannot contain it alone, and therefore the ear seems to take part with it.
That's a very good reason my Lord.
What a Jest it is, to hear how seriously he strives to make his foolish kinsmans answers wise ones.
What shall this be servant?
This shall be a great whale mistress, at all his bigness spouting huge hills of salt-water before him, like a little▪ water squirt, but you shall not need to fear him mistress, for he shall be si•…ke and gould▪ he shall doe you no harm, and he be ne'er so lively.
Thank you good servant.
Doe not think Lady, but he had need tell you this a forehand for a mine honour, he wrought me the monster Caucasus so lively, that at the first sight I started at it.
The monster Caucasus my Lord? Cauca•…s is a mountain; Cacus you mean.
Cacus indeed my Lord, cry you mer∣cie.
Here isle take out your eye, and you will mistress.
No by my faith Servant it is better in
Why Lady, Isle but take it out in jest, in carnest.
No, something else there, good servant.
Why then here shall be a Camel, and he shall have horns, and he shall look (for al the world) like a maid without a husband.
O bitter sir Giles.
Nay he has a dry wit Lady I can tell ye.
He bobbed me there indeed my Lord.
Marry him sweet Lady, to answer his bitter bob.
So she may answer him with horns indeed.
See what a pretty work he wears in his boot▪hose.
Did you work them your self sir Giles, or buy them?
I bought am for nothing madam in th'ex∣ange
Bought am for nothing.
Indeed madam in th'exchange they so honour him for his work that they will take nothing for any thing he buys on am; but wheres the rich night-cappe you wrohgt cousin▪ if it had not bin too little for you, it was the best piece of work, that ever I saw.
Why my Lord, t'was big enough, when I wrought it, for I wore pantables then you know.
Indeed the warmer a man keeps his feet the less he necdes wear upon his head.
You speak for your kinsman the best, that ever I heard my Lord.
But I believe madam, my Lord my cousin has not told you all my good parts.
I told him so I warrant you cousin.
What doe you think he left out Sir Giles?
Marry madam I can take tobacco now, and I have bought glow-wormes to kindle it withal, better
then all the burning glasses ith world.
Glowe-wormes sir Giles will they make it burn?
O od madam I feed am with nothing but fire, a purpose, Isle besworn they eat me sieve faggots a∣week in charcoal.
Nay he ha•… the strangest devices Ladies that ever you heard I warrant ye.
That's a strange device in deed my Lord.
But your sowing sir Giles is a more gentlewo∣man-like quality I assure you.
O far away, for now servant, you no de never marry, you are both husband, and wife your self.
Nay indeed mistress I wood fine marry for all that, and isle tell you my reason, if you will.
Let's hear it good servant.
Why madam we have a great match at foot-ball towards, married men against bachelors, &amp; the married men be al my friends, so I wood fine mar∣rye to take the married men's parts in truth.
The best reason for marriage that ever I heard sir Giles.
I pray will you keep my work a little mistress; I must needs strain a little curtsy in truth.
Gods my life I thought he was a little to blame.
Come, come, you hear not me dame.
Well said sir Cut, to her now we shall hear fresh courting.
A las sir Cut, you are not worth the 〈◊〉, every body says you cannot love, how soever you talk on it.
Not love dame? slit what argument woodst have of my love trow? let me look as red as scar∣let a fore I see thee, and when thou come in sight if the sun of thy beauty, doe not white me like a sheppards hollandl am a Iewe to my Creator.
O excellent.
Let me burst like a Tod, if a frown of thy brow has not turned the very heart in my belly, and made me ready to bee hanged by the heals for a fort∣night to bri•…g it to the right again.
You shoot have hanged longer Sir Cut: tic not right yet,
Zonnes, bid me cut off the best limb of my by∣die for thy love, and isle lai't in thy hand to prove it, dost think I am no Christian, have I not a Soul to save?
Yes tic to save yet I warrant it, and will be while tic a soul if yo•… use this.
Excellent Courtship of all hands, only my Cap∣taines Courtship, is not heard yet, good madam give him favour to court you with his voice.
What shoot he Court me with all else my Lord?
Why, I hope madam there be other things to Court Ladies withal besides voices.
I mean with an audible sweet song madam.
With all my heart my Lord, if I shall bee so much in debted to him.
Nay I will be indebted to your ears Lady for hearing me sound music.
Well done Captain, prove as it will now.
My Lord Doctor Versey the Physician is come to see master Clarence.
Light and attend him to him presently.
To master Clarence? what is your friend sick?
Exceeding sick.
I am exceeding sorry.
Never was sorrow worthier bestowed
Then for the ill state of so good a man.
Alas poor gentleman; good my Lord lets see him.
Thanks gentle Lady, but my friend is loath
To trouble Ladies since he cannot quit them.
With any thing he hath that they respect.
Respect my Lord; I wood hold such a man
In more respect then any Emperor
For he cood make me Empress of my self
And in mine own rule comprehend the world.
How now young dame? what so dainly inspird
This speech hath silver hairs, and reverence asks
And sooner shall have duty done of me
Then any pomp in temporal Empery.
Good madam get my Lord to let vs greet him.
Alas we shall but wrong and trouble him.
His Contemplations greet him with most welcome.
I never knew a man of so sweet a temper
So soft and humble, of so high a Spirit.
Alas my noble Lord he is not rich,
Nor titles hath, nor in his tender cheeks
The standing lake of Impudence corrupts,
Hath nought in all the world, nor nought wood have,
To grace him in the prostituted light.
But if a man wood consort with a Soul
Where all mans Sea of gall and bitterness
Is quite evaporate with 〈◊〉 holy flames,
And in whose powers a Doue-like Innocence
Fosters her own deserts, and life and death,
Runs hand in hand before them: All the Skies
Clear and transparent to her piercing eyes,
Then wood my friend be something, but till then
A Cipher, nothing, or the worst of men.
Sweet Lord lets go visit him.
Pray good my Lord, whats that you talk on?
Are you come from your necessary business Sir Giles? we talk of the visiting of my sick friend Clarence.
O good my Lord lets visit him, cause I know his brother.
Know his brother, nay then Co•…ned doe
not deni•… him.
Pray my Lord whether was eldest, he or his elder brother?
O! the younger brother eldest, while you live Sir Giles.
I say so still my Lord, but I am so borne down with truth as never any knightith world was I think.
A man wood think he speaks simply now; but indeed it is in the will of the parents, to make which child they will youngest, or eldest: For often we see the younger 〈◊〉, wherein he is eldest.
Your Logical wit my Lord is able to make a∣ny thing good.
Well come sweet Lords, &amp; Ladies, let vs spend
The time till supper-time with some such sights
As my poo•…e house is furnished withal
Pictures and Jewels; of which implements
It may be I have •…ome will please you much.
Sweet Lord lets see them.
I think your disease Sir, be rather of the mind then the body.
Be there diseases of the mind Doctor?
No question Sir, even as there be of the body.
And cures for them too?
And cures for them too, but not by Physic.
You will have their deseases, griefs? will ye not?
Yes, oftentimes.
And doe not griefs ever rise out of passions?
Evermore.
And doe not passions proceed from corporal distempers?
Not the passions of the mind, for the mind ma∣ny times is sick, when the body is healthful.
But is not the mindes-sicknes of power to make the body sick?
In time, certain.
And the bodies ill affections able to infect the mind?
No question.
Then if there bee such a natural commerce of Powers betwixt them, that the ill estate of the one of∣fends the other, why shoot not the medicines for one cure the other?
Yet it will not you see. Heimihi quote nullus a•…or est medicabilis herbs.
Nay then Doctor, since you cannot make any reasonable Connexion of these two contrarieties the mind and the body, making both subject to passion, wherein you confound the substances of both, I must tell you there is no disease of the mind but one, and •…hat is Ignorance.
Why what is love? is not that a disease of the mind?
Nothing so for it springs naturally out of the blood, nor are wee subject to any disease, or sorrow, whose causes or effects simply and natiuely concern the body, that the mind by any means partakes, nor are there any passions in the Soul, for where there are no affections, there are no passions: And Affectus your master Gallon refers part•…irascents, For illic est enema senti∣ens vbi sunt affectus: Therefore the Rational Soul can∣not be there also.
But you know we use to say, my mind gives me this or that, even in those addictions that concern the body.
We use to say so indeed, and from that use comes the abuse of all knowledge, and her practise, for when the object in question only concerns the state of the body? why shoot the soul bee sorry or glad for it? if she willingly mix her self, then she is a fool, if of necessity and against her will, A slave, And so, far from that wisdom, and freedom that the Empress of Reason, and an eternal Substance shoot comprehend.
Divinely spoken Sir, but very Paradoxically.
Who's there?
I, my Lord.
Bring hither the key of the gallery, me thought I heard the Doctor and my friend.
I did so sure.
Peace then a while my Lord
We will be bold to evesdroppe; For I know
My friend is as respective in his chamber
And by himself, of any thing he does
As in a Critic Synods curious eyes
Following therein Pyth•…gores golden rule.
Maximè omnium •…psum reuerere.
Know you the Countess Eugonia Sir?
Exceeding well Sir, she's a good learned scholar.
Then I perceive you know her well indeed.
Me thinks you two shoot use much conference.
Alas sir, we doe very seldom meet,
For her esta•…e, and mine are so unequal,
And then her knowledge passes mine so far
That I hold much to sacred a respect,
Of his high virtues to let mine attend them.
Pardon me Sir, this humbleness cannot flow
Out of your udgment but from passion.
Indeed I doe accoun•… that passion,
The very high perfection of my mind,
That is excited by her excellence,
And therefore willingly, and gladly feel it.
For what was spoken of the most chaste Queen
Of rich Pasiaca may be said of her.
Ante•…t sortem moribus virtutibus Annos,
Sex•… animo, morum No•…litate Genus.
A most excellent Distich.
Come Lords away, lets not presume too much
Of a good nature, not for all I have
Wood I have him take knowledge of the wrong
I rue•…ely off•…r him: come then isle show
A few •…are Jewels to your honoured eyes,
And then pre•…t you with a common supper.
•…wells my Lord, why is not this candlestick•… one of yo•…r jew•… pray?
Yes mar is it Sir Giles if you will.
•…is a most si•…e candlestick in truth, it wants nothing but the languages.
The languages servant, why the languages?
Why mistress; there was a la•…tin cand•…estick h•…re before, and that had the languages I am sure.
I thought he had a reason for it Lady.
I and a reason of the Sun too my Lord, for his father wood have bin ashamed on it.
Well master Clarence I perc•…iue your mind
Hath so incorporate it self wi•…h flesh
And therein ratified that flesh to spirit,
That you have need of no Physicians help.
But good Sir even for holy virtues health
And grace of perfect knowledge, doe not make
Those ground-workes of eternity, you lay
Means to your ruin, and short being here:
For the too strict and rational Course you hold
Will eat your body up; and then the world,
Or that small point of it, where virtue lives
Will suffer Diminution: It is now
Brought almost to a simple unity,
Which is, (as you well know) Simplicior puncto.
And if that point fail once, why, then alas
The unity must only be supposed,
Let it not fail then, most men else have sold it;
Tho you neglect your self, uphold it,
So with my reverend love I leave you Sir.
Thanks worthy Doctor, I do amply quite you
I prop poor virtue, that am propped my self,
And only by one friend in all the world,
For virtues only sake I use this wile,
Which otherwise I wood despise and scorn,
The world should s•…ke and all the pomp she hugs
Close in her hart, in her ambitious gripe
Ere I sustain it, if this slendrest joint
Moved with the worth that worldlings love so well
Had power to save it from the throat of hell
Come on fair Ladies I must make you both
Familiar witnesses of the most strange part
And full of impudence that ere I plaide.
VVhats that good madam?
I that have been so more then maiden-nice
To my dear Lord and uncle not to yield
By his importunate suite to his friends love
In look, or almost thought; will of my self
Far past his expectation or his hope
In action, and in person greet his friend,
And comfort the poor gentleman's sick state.
Is this a part of so much Impudence?
No but I fear me it will stretch to more
Mary madam the more the merrier.
Marry Madam? what shoot I marry him?
You take the word me thinks as tho you would,
And if there be a thought of such kind heate
In your cold bosom, wood to God my breath
Might blow it to the flame of your kind hart.
Gods precious Lady, know ye what you say,
Respect you what I am, and what he is,
What the whole world wood say, &amp; what great Lords
I have refused and might as yet embrace,
And speak you like a friend, to wish me him?
Madam I cast all this, and know your choice
Can cast it quite out of the crystal doors
Of your Judicial eyes: I am but young
And be it said without all pride I take,
To be a maid, I am one, and indeed
Yet in my mothers womb to all the wiles
Weend in the looms of greatness, and of state:
And yet even by that little I have learned
Out of continual conference with you,
I have cried harvest home of thus much judgment
In my greene sowing time, that I cood place
The constant sweetness of good Clarence mind,
Filled with his inward wealth and nobleness;
(Look madam here,) when others outward trash
Shoot be contented to come under here.
And so say I upon my maiden head.
Tic well said Ladies, thus we differ then,
I to the truth-wise, you to worldly men:
And now sweet dames observe an excellent jest
(At least in my poor jesting.) The Etl my uncle
Will miss me strait, and I know his close drift
Is to make me, and his friend Clarence meet
By some device or other he hath plotted.
Now when he seeks vs round about his house
And cannot find vs, for we may be sure
He will not seek me in his sick •…iends chamber,
(I have at al times made his love so strange,)
He straight will think, I went away displeased,
Or heartily careless of his hartiest suit.
And then I know there is no grief on earth
Will touch his hart so much, which I will suffer
To quite his late good pleasure wrought on me,
For isle be sworn in motion and progress
Of his friends suite, I never in my life
VVrastled so much with passion or was moved
To take his firm love in such •…elouse part.
This is most excellent madam, and will prove
A neecelike, and a noble friends Revenge.
Bold in a good cau•…e, then lets greet his friend,
Where is this sickly gentleman at his book?
Now in good troth I wood their books were burned
That rapp men from their •…app before their time,
How does my uncles friend, no other name
I need give him, to whom I give my self,
O madam let me rise that I may kneel,
And pay some duty to your sovereign grace.
Good Clarence doe not wo•…ke your self disease
My Lady comes to ease and comfort you.
And we are handmaids to her to that end.
Ladies my hart will break, if it be held
Within the verge of this presumptuous chair.
Why, Clarence is your judgment bent to show
A common lovers passion? let the world,
That live•… without a hart, and is but show,
stand on her emtie, and empoisoned form,
I know thy kindness, and have seen thy hart,
Closed in my uncles free, and friendly lips
And I am only now to speak and act,
The rit'es due to thy love: oh I cood weep▪
A bitter show of tears for thy sick state,
I cood give passion all her blackest rites.
And make a thousand vows to thy deserts,
But these are common, knowledge is the bond,
The seal and crown of our united minds▪
And that is ra•…e, and constant, and for that,
To my late written hand I give thee this,
See heaven, the soul thou gau'st is in this hand.
This is the knot of our eternity,
Which fortune, death, nor hell, shall ever loose.
What an unmannerly trick is this of thy coun∣tesse, to give the noble count her uncle the slip thus?
Unmannerly, you villain? O that I were worthy to wear a •…agger to an•…e purpose for thy sake?
Why young gentlemen, utter your anger with your fists.
That cannot be man, for all fists are shut you know, and utter nothing, and besides I doe not think my quarrel just for my Ladies 〈◊〉 in this cause, for I protest she does most 〈◊〉 miscarry her self.
Protest you saucy Jack you, I shoot doe my country and courtship good service to beat thy co•…lts teeth out of thy head, for suffering such a reave∣rend word to pass their guard; why, the oldest courtier in the world man, can doe no more then protest,
Indeed page if you were in France, you wood bee broken upon a wheel for it, there is not the b•…st Dukes son in France dares say I protest, till h•…e bee one and thirty year old at least, for the inheritance of that word is not to bee possessed before.
Well, I am sorry for my presumtion then, but more sorry for my Ladies, marie most sorry •…or thee good Lord Momforde, that will make 〈◊〉 most of a•…l •…ore for our selves, if wee doe not find her out.
Why alas what shoot wee doe? all the stars of out heaven see, wee seek her as fast as w•…e can, if she bee crept into a rush wee will seek her out or burn her.
Villains where are your Ladies, seek them
Out; hence, home ye monsters, had still keep you there
Where le•…itie keeps, in her in constant Sphere,
A wa•…e you pr•…ious villains, what a plague,
Of varied tortures is a women's hart?
How like a peacocks tail with different lights,
They differ from them selves; the very ayre
Alters the aspen humours of their bloods.
Now excellent good, now superexcellent bad.
Some excellent good, some? but one of all:
Wood any ignorant baby serve her friend,
Such an uncivil part? Sblood what is learning?
An artificial cobweb to catch flies,
And nourish Spiders, cood she cut my throat,
W with her departure I had bin her calfe,
And made a dish at supper for my guests
Of her kind charge, I am beholding to her,
Puff, is there not a feather in this •…ire
A man may challenge for her? what? a feather?
So easy to be seen; so apt to trace;
In the weak flight of her inconstant wings?
A mote man at the most, that with the sun,
Is only seen, yet with his radiant eye,
we cannot single so from other motes,
To say this mote is she, passion of death,
She wrongs me past a death, come▪ come my friend,
Is mine, she not her own, and theres an end.
Come uncle shall we go to supper now?
Zounes to supper? what a do•…r is this?
A las what ails my uncle, Ladies see.
Is not your Lordship well?
Good speak my Lord.
A sweet plague on you all, ye witty rogues have you no pity in your villainous jests, but run a man quite from his fifteen wits?
Will not your Lordship see your friend, and niece?
Wood I might sink if I shame not to see her
Tush t'was a passion of pure Jealousy,
Isle now make her now a mends with Adoration.
Gods of learning and of constancy,
Of friendship and every other virtue.
Come, come, you have abused me now I know
And now you plaster me with flatteries.
My Lord the con•…ract is knit fast betwixt them
Now all heavens quire of Angels sing Amen,
And bless the•…s true borne 〈◊〉 with their bliss,
And Niece tho you have 〈◊〉 me in this,
Isle uncle you yet in an other thing,
And quite deceive your expectation.
For where you think you have contracted harts
With a poor gentleman, he is sole heir
To all my •…arledome, which to you and yours
I freely, and for ever here bequeath;
Call forth the Lords, sweet Ladies let them see
This sudden and most welcome Novelty;
But •…rye you mercy Niece, perhaps your modesty
Will not have them partake this sudden match.
O uncle think you so, I hope I made
My choice with too much Judgment to take shame
Of any form I shall perform it with.
Said like my Niece, and worthy of my friend.
My Lords, take witness of an absolute wonder,
A marriage made for virtue, only virtue,
My friend, and my dear niece are man and wife.
A wonder of mine honour, and withal
A worthy presedent for al the world;
Heaven bless you for it Lady, and your choice.
Thanks my good Lord.
An Accident that will make policy blush,
And all the Complements of wealth and state,
In the successful and vnnumbred Race
That shall flow from it, filled with fame and grace.
So may it speed dear Counts, worthy Clarence.
Thanks good Sir Cu•…berd.
Captain be not dismayed, Isle marry thee,
For while we live, thou shalt •…y consort be.
By France my Lord, I am not grieved a whit,
Since Clarence hath her; he hath bin in France,
And therefore merits her if she were better.
Thē knights isle knit your happy nuptial knots,
I know the Ladies minds better then you;
Tho my rare Niece hath chose for virtue only,
Yet some more wise then some, they choose for both
Virtue, and wealth.
Nay 〈◊〉 then I plead
This goes with my choice, Some more wise then some,
For only virtues choice is truest wisdom.
Take wealth, &amp; virtue both amongst you then,
They love ye knights extremely, and Sir 〈◊〉:
I give the ch a st Hippolita to you▪
Sir Giles this Lady;
Nay stay there my Lord,
I have not yet proved all his knightly parts
I hear he is an excellent Poet too.
That I forgot sweet Lady; good Sir Giles▪
Have you no sonnet of your pen about ye?
Yes, that I have I hope my Lord my Cousin.
Why, this is passing fit.
Id be •…oath to go without paper about me against my mistress, hold my work again, a man knows not what need he shall have perhaps.
Well remembered a mine honour Sir Giles:
Pray read my Lord, I made this sonnet of my mistress.
Nay read thy self man.
No intrude Sir Cut: I cannot read mine own hand.
Well I will read it.
Three things there be which thou should only crave,
Thou Pomroy, or thou apple of mine eye;
Three things there be, which thou should lunge to have,
And for which three, each modest dame wood 〈◊〉,
Three things there be, that shoot thine anger swag,
An English mastiff, and a fine french page.
Sblood 〈◊〉, theres but two things, thou 〈◊〉 thy self.
Why Sir Cut: thats 〈◊〉, the verse wood have bin too long, and I had put in the third, S'light you are no Poet I perceive.
Tic excellent servant.
Keep it Lady then,
And take the only knight of mortal men.
Thank you good my Lord as much as tho you had given me twenty shillings in truth, now I may take the married men's parts at footeball.
All comforts crown you all; &amp; you Captain
For merry form sake let the willow crown;
A wreath of willow bring vs hither strait.
Not for a world shoot that have bin forgot
Captain it is the fashion, take this crown.
With all my hart my Lord, and thank ye too
I will thank any man that gives me crowns.
Now will we con•…ecrate our ready supper
To honoured Hymen as his nuptial rite,
In form whereof first dance fair Lords and Ladies
And after sing, so we will sing and dance,
And to the skies our virtuous joys advance.
Now to the song, and doe this garland grace.
Willow, willow, willow.▪
our captain goes down:
Willow, willow, willow,
his valour doth crown.
The rest with Rosemary we grac•…,
O Him•… let thy lights
With richest rays guild 〈◊〉 face,
and feast harts with delights.
Willow, willow, willow,
we chant tothe skies:
And with black and yellows,
give co•…rtship the prize.


GO you that have enclosed the dreadful beast,
And give the sign that's usual to our hunting,
Go swell your eyes and harts with horns and shouts,
If there be any swain of Cinthia's troupe
In all Arcadia, delighted in her sports,
Whose generous affects are stung with care,
Or glory of these woods: let him come forth
And follow me, where in a circle small
(Though to our valor large) enclosed is
The ugly Bore, monster of nature &amp; these woods.
That vast and fierce (by many harms well known)
Inhabitant of Erimanthus, plague to the fields,
Terror to country clowns. Go then prevent
Not only, but provoke with horns shrill sound,
Blushing Aurora out. Linco we'll go
And worship first the Gods: for there it is best
We any work begin.
Siluio I praise
Thy worshipping the Gods, but yet to trouble them
That are their ministers I do not praise.
The keepers of the temple are a sleep,
They cannot see the day break for the mountains top.
To thee perhaps, that art not yet awake,
All things do seem a sleep.
O Siluio,
Did nature on these youthful years of thine
Bestow such beauty to be cast away?
Had I but such a ruddy cheek? so fresh?
Farewell to woods, I'd follow other sports:
I'd wear my days in mirth: all summer tide
In dainty shades, winter by the fire side.
Thy counsel (Linco) is like unto thy self.
At other pleasures would I aim, were I Siluio.
So would I, were I Linco, but I Siluio am,
Therefore I Siluioes deeds do like, not Lincoes.
O fool, that seekst so far for hurtful beasts▪
And hast one lodged so near thy dwelling house.
Art thou in earnest? or dost thou but jest?
Thou jests, not I.
And is he then so near?
As near as it is to thee.
Where? in what wood?
Siluio thou art the wood: the ugly beast
That's harboured there, is this thy beastliness.
Was it not well gest of me thou did but jest?
A Nymph so fair, so delicate! but tush
Why do I call her Nymph, a Goddess rather.
More fresh, more dainty, then the morning rose.
More soft, more purely white then swanny down.
(For whom there's not a shepherd amongst vs all so brave,
But sighs, and sighs in vain) for thee alone
Reserues her self, ordained by heaven and men:
And yet thou neither think of sighs or plaints.
O happy boy (though most unworthily)
Thou that mighst her enjoy, still sliest her Siluio,
Still her despisest. Is not then thy heart
Made of a beast, or or of hard Iron rather?
If to relinquish love be cruelty,
Then is it virtue, and I not repent
That I have banished love my hart: but joy
That thereby I have overcome this love,
A beast more dangerous then the other far.
How hast thou overcome that which thou never proved•.
Not proving it, I have it overcome.
O if thou had but proved it Siluio once,
If thou but knew what a high favour it were,
To be beloved, and loving to possess
A loving hart, It'am sure thou then would say,
Sweet lovely life why hast thou staid so long?
These woods and beasts leave foolish child, and love.
Linco, I swear a thousand Nymphs I'll give
For one poor beast that my Melampo kills:
Let them that have a better taste then I
In these delights possess them, I will none.
Dost thou taste ought, since love thou dost not taste,
The only cause that the world tastes all?
Believe me boy, the time will one day come
Thou wilt it taste. For love once in our life
Will show what force he hath. Believe me child,
No greater pain can any living prove,
Then in old limbs the lively sting of love.
Yet if in youth love wound, that love may heal:
But come it once in that same frozen age,
Wherefore oftentimes the disability,
More then the wound we plain. O mortal then,
And most intolerable are those pains.
If thou seek pity, ill if thou findst it not,
But if thou findst it ten time worse, do not
Protract it till thy better time be past,
For if love do assail thy hoary hears,
Thy silly flesh a double torment tears.
Of this which when thou would thou can not,
These woods and beasts leave foolish boy &amp; love.
As though there were no life but that which nursed
These amorous sollies and fond ecstasies.
Tell me if in this pleasant time now flowers renew,
And the world waxes young again; thou should
In stead of flowery valleys, fragrant fields,
And well clad woods: see but the oak, the ash, the pine,
Without their levy hears: graslesse the ground▪
The meadows want their flowers. Would thou not say
The world doth languish? nature did decay?
Now that same horror, that same miracle,
That monstrous novelty thou hast thy self.
As love in old men is ridiculous:
So youth without love is unnatural.
Look but about (Siluio) what the world hath
Worthy to be admired. Love only made
The heavens, the earth, the seas themselves do love.
And that same star that the days. break foretells,
Tastes the flames of her thrice puissant son.
And at that hour, because perhaps she leaves
The stolen delights and bosom of her love:
She darts down abroad her sparkling smiles.
Beasts in the woods do love; and in the seas
The speedy Dolphins and the mighty Whales.
The bird that sweetly sings, and wantonly
Doth she, now from the oak unto the ash,
Then from the ash unto the mirtill tree:
Says in her language I in love do burn.
(Would I might hear my Siluio answer her the same!)
The Bull amid the heard doth loudly lowe,
Yet are those lowes but bidding to loves feasts.
The Lyon in the wood doth bray, and yet
Those brays are not the voice of rage, but love.
Well to conclude, all things do love but thou,
Thou only Siluio art in heaven, in earth,
In seas, a soul vncaple of love.
Leave, leave these woods, these beasts, and learn to love.
Was then my youth committed to thy charge?
That in these soft esseminate desires
Of wanton love, thou should it nurse and train?
Remember not what thou, and what I am?
I am a man, and humane me esteem,
With thee a man, or rather should be so,
I speak of humane things. Which if thou skornst
Take heed least in dishumaning thy self,
A beast thou prove not sooner then a God.
Neither so famous nor so valiant
Had been that monster-tamer, of whose blood
I do derive my self, had he not tamed love.
See blind child how thou erst: where had thou been
Had not that famous Hercules first loved?
The greatest cause he monsters tamed was love.
Know thou not that fair Omphale to please,
He did not only change his Lions skin
Into a women's gown; but also turned
His knotty club into a spindell and a rock.
So was he wont from trouble and from toil
To take his ease, and all alone retire
To her fair lap, the haven of happy love.
As rugged Iron with purer mettle mixed
Is made more fit (refined) for noble use:
So fierce &amp; untamed strength that in his properrage
Doth often break: yet with the sweets of love
Well tempered proves truly generous.
Then if thou dost desire to imitate
Great Hercules, and to be worthy of his race,
Though that thou wilt not leave these savage woods
Doo: follow them: but do not leave to love,
A Love so lawful as your Amarillis.
That you Dorinda she I you excuse,
For it were unfit your mind on honour set,
Should be made hot in these amorous thefts:
A mighty wrong unto your worthy spouse.
What say thou Linco? shoe's not yet my spouse.
Hast thou not solemnly received her faith?
Take heed proud boy, do not provoke the gods.
The gift of heaven is humane liberty,
May we not force repell, that force receive?
Nay if thou would but understand! the heavens
Hereto do tie thee that have promised,
So many favours at thy nuptial feast.
I'm sure that gods have other things to do
Then trouble and molest them with these toys.
Linco, nor this, nor that love pleases me,
I was a huntsman not a lover borne,
Thou that dost follow love thy pleasure take.
Thou cruel boy descended of the gods,
I scarce believe thou were begot by man,
Which if thou were, thou sooner were begot
With venom of Meger and Ptisifo,
Then Ʋenus pleasure which men so commend.
Cruel Amarillis, that with thy bitter name
Most bitterly dost teach me to complain.
Whiter then whitest Lilies and more fair,
But deafer and more fierce then th'adder is.
Since with my words I do so much offend,
In silence will I die: but yet these plains
These mountains and these woods, shall cry for me,
Whom I so oft have learned to resound
That loved name. For me my plaints shall tell
The plaining fountains and the murmuring winds:
Pity and grief shall speak out of my face,
And in the end though all things else prove dombe,
My very death shall tell my martyrdom.
Love (dear Mirtillo)'s like a fire enclosed,
Which straightly kept, more fiercely flames at last,
Thou should not have so long concealed from me
The fire, since it thou could not hide.
How often have I said Mirtillo burns,
But in a silent flame and so consumes.
My self I harmed her not to offend
(Courteous Ergasto) and should yet be dombe,
But strict necessity hath made me bold.
I hear a voice which through my scared ears
Wounds alas my wretched heart with noise
Of Amarillis nighing nuptial feast,
Who speaks ought else to me he holds his peace.
Nor dare I further search, as well for fear
To give suspicion of my love, as for to find
That which I would not. Well! I know (Ergasto)
It fits not with my poor and base estate
To hope at all a Nymph so rarely qualifide,
Of blood and spright truly celestial,
Should prove my wife. O no, I know too well,
The lowliness of my poor humble star,
My destiny's to burn! not to delight
Was I brought forth, but since my cruel fates
Have made me love my death more then my life,
I am content to die, so that my death
Might please her that's the cause thereof;
And that she would but grace my latest gasp
With her fair eyes, and once before she made
Another by her marriage fortunate,
She would but hear me speak. Courteous Ergasto,
If thou love me, help me with this favour,
Aide me herein, if thou take pity of my case.
A poor desire of love; and light reward
Of him that dies: but dangerous enterprise.
Wretched were she, should but her father know
She had bowed down her ears to her lovers words,
Or should she be accused to the priest
Her father in law, for this perhaps she shuns
To speak with you, that else doth love you well,
Although she it conceals; for women though
They be more frail in their desires,
Yet are they craftier in hiding them;
If this be true, how can she show more love
Then thus in shunning you? she hears in vain,
And shuns with pity that can give no help.
It is sound counsel, soon to cease desiring,
When we cannot attain to our aspiring.
Oh were this true, could I but this believe,
Thrice happy pain. Thrice fortunate distress.
But tell me sweet Ergusto, tell me true,
Which is the shepherd whom the stars so friend?
Know thou not Siluio Montane's only son?
Dianaes priest: that rich and famous shepherd,
That gallant youth? He is the very same.
Most happy youth, that hast in tender years
Found fate so ripe. I do not envy thee,
But plain my self.
Nor need you envy him
That pity more then envy doth deserve.
Pity! and why?
Because he loves her not.
And lives he? hath a hart? and is not blind?
Or hath she on my wretched hart spent all her flames?
And her fair eyes blown all their loves on me?
Why should they give a lemme so precious
To one that neither knows it, nor regards it?
For that the heavens the health of Arcady
Do promise at these nuptials. Know you not
How we do still appease our goddess wrath,
Each year with guiltless blood of some poor Nymph?
A mortal and a miserable tribute.
It is news to me, that am a new inhabitant,
Is it pleases love and my poor destiny:
That did before inhabit savage woods,
But what I pray you was that grievous fault
That kindled rage in a celestial breast?
I will report the doleful tragedy
From the beginning of our misery,
That able are pity and plaints to draw
From these hard rocks, much more from humane breasts.
In that same golden age when holy priesthood, and
The temples charge was not prohibited
To youth. A noble swain Amintas called,
Priest at that time, loved Lucrina bright:
A beauteous Nymph, exceeding fair: but therewithal
Exceeding false, and light. Long time she loved him,
Orate the least, she seemed so, with fained face
Nursing his pure affections with false hopes.
Whilst she no other suitors had. But see
The inconstant wretch! no sooner was she wooed
By a rude shepherd, but at first assault,
At his first sigh, she yielded up her love:
Before Amintas dream't of Jealousy.
At last Amintas was forlorn, despite,
So that the wicked woman would nor see, nor hear
Him speak, now if the wretch did sigh,
Be thou the judge that know his pain by proof.
Aye me, this grief all other griefs exceeds.
After he had his heart recovered
From his complaints, he to his goddess turns,
And praying saves: Great Cynthia if I have
At any time kindled with guiltless hands
The holy flames, revenge thou then for me
This broken faith of my inconstant Nymph.
Diana hears the prayers of her priest,
And straight out-breathing rage, she takes her bow
And shoots shafts of mennitable death
Into the bowels of Arcadia.
People of every sex, of every age,
Soon perished, no succour could be found,
T'was bootless art to search for remedies,
For often on the patient the physician died.
One only remedy did rest, which was
Strait to the nearest Oracle they went,
From whom they had an answer very clear,
But aboue measure deadly horrible.
Which was, our Cynthia was displeased, and to
Appease herire, either Lucrina or some else for her,
Must by Amintas hands be sacrificed.
Who when she had long time in vain complained,
And looked for help from her new friend in vain,
Was to the sacred Altars led with solemn pomp,
A woeful sacrifice. Where at those seete
Which had pursued her long time in vain
At her betrayed Lovers feet she bends
Her rtembling knees, attending cruel death.
Amintas stretches out the holy sword,
Seeming to breath from his inflamed lips,
Rage and revenge; turning to her his face,
Speaks with a sigh, the messenger of death:
Lucrina for thy further pains, behold
What Lover thou hast left, and what pursued
Judge by this blow. And with that very word
Strikes the blade into his woeful breast,
Falling a sacrifice upon the sacrifice.
At such a strange and cruel spectacle,
The Nymph amazed stand twixt life and death,
Scarce yet assured whether she wounded were
With grief, or with the sword. At last, as soon
As she recovered had, her spright, and speech,
She plaining says. O faithful valiant love!
O too late known! that by thy death hast given
Me life and death at once. If to were a fault
To leave thee so? behold I'll mend it now,
Eternally uniting both our souls,
And therewithal she takes the sword, all warm,
With the blood of her too late loved friend,
And strikes it through her hart, falling upon
Amintas, that was scarcely dead as yet,
And felt perchance that fall. Such was their end,
To such a wretched end did too much love,
And too much treachery conduct them both.
O wretched Shepherd, and yet fortunate,
That had so large and famous scope, to show
Thy troth, and waken lively pity of thy death
Within another breast. But what did follow?
Was Cynthia pleased, found they a remedy?
Somewhat it slak't, but yet not quite put out:
For after that a year was finished,
Her rage began a fresh, so that of force
They driven were, unto the Oracle:
To ask new counsel, but brought back again
An answer much more woeful then the first.
Which was, to sacrifice them: and each after year,
A maid, or woman, to our angry power,
Even till the third and past the fourth degree:
So should ones blood for many satisfy.
Besides, she did upon the unhappy sex,
Impose a wretched and a cruel law.
And (if you mark their nature) in obseruable.
A law recorded with vermilion blood:
What ever maid or woman broken had
Their faith in love, and were contaminate,
If they should find none that would die for them▪
They were condemned without remission.
To these our grievous great calamities,
The fathers hoped to find a happy end,
By this desired marriage day. For afterword
Having demanded of the Oracle
What end the heavens prescribed had our ill,
Answer was given in such like words as these:
No end there is to that which you offends,
Till two of heavens issue love unite;
And for the ancient fault of that false wight,
A faithful Shepherds pity make amends.
Now is there not in all Arcadia
Other bows left, of that celestial root:
Save Amarillis, and this Siluio,
The one of Pans seed, the other of Hercules.
Nor to our mischief yet hath never hoped,
That male and female met at any time
Till now. Therefore good reason Montane hath
To hope, though all things sort not to the Oracle,
Yet here's a good foundation laid: the rest
High fates have in their bosoms bred,
And will bring forth at this great marriage day.
O poor Mirtillo! wretched man!
So many cruel enemies? such wars?
To work my death cannot great Love suffice?
But that the Fates, their arms will exercise.
This cruel love (Mirtillo) feeds himself
With tears, and grief, butt's never satisfied.
Of beauty weak that pleases only one,
Because she is not gracious in the eyes of more.
A beauteous Nymph, sought too by multitudes
Of worthy lovers, if she be content
With only one, and all the rest despise,
Either she is no woman, or if so she be,
She is a fool. What's beauty worth unseen?
Or seen, unsought? or sought too but of one?
The more our lovers be, the greater men,
The surer pledge have we in this wild world.
That we are creatures glorious and rare,
The goodly splendour of a beauteous Nymph,
Is to have many friends. So in good Towns
Wise men ever doo. It is a fault,
A foolish trick, all to refuse for one.
What one cannot, many can well perform:
Some serve, some give, some fit for other use.
So in the City lovely Ladies do,
Where I by wit, and by example too,
Of a great Lady learned the Art of love.
Corisca would she say. Let thy
Lovers and thy garments be alike.
Have many, use, wear but one, and change often.
Too much conversing breeds noisomeness,
And noisomeness despite, which turns to hate:
We cannot worser do, then fill our friends,
Let them go hungry rather from thee still.
So did I always, always loving store,
One for my hand, an other for mine eye:
The best I ever for my bosom kept,
None for my heart, as near as ere I could.
And now I know not how Mirtillo comes
Me to torment, now must I figh, and worse
Sigh for my self, deceiving no man else.
Now must I rob my limbs of their repose,
Mine eyes of sleep, and watch the break of day:
Now do I wander through these shadowed woods,
Seeking the footsteps of my hated love.
What must Corisca do? shall I entreat him?
No: my hate not gives me leave. Isle give him o'er,
Nor will my love consent. What shall I do?
Prayers and subtilties I will attempt:
I will bewray my love, but not as mine,
If this prevail not, then Isle make disdain
Find out a memorable huge revenge.
Mirtillo if thou can not like my love,
Then shalt thou try my hate. And Amarillis,
Thou shalt repent thou ever my rival were it.
Well, to your costs you both shall quickly prove,
What rage in her can do that thus doth love.
SO help me Gods, I know I now do speak
To one that understands more then I do.
These Oracles are still more doubtful then
We take them, for their words are like to knives,
Which taken by the hafts, are fit for use,
But by the edges held, they may do harm.
That Amarillis as you argue, is
By the high heavenly Destinies elected for
Arcadiaes universal health: who ought
More to desire, or to esteem the same
Then I that am her father• but when I regard
That which the Oracle foretold, ill do the signs
Agree with our great hopes: since love should then
Unite, how falls it out he slies from her?
How can hate and despite bring forth loves fruit?
Ill could he contradict had heavens ordained it.
But since he doth contrary it, it is clear,
Heavens do not will: for if so they would
That Amarillis should be Siluioes wise,
A Lover, not a Huntsman, him they would have made.
Do you not see he is a child as yet?
He hath attained scarcely to eighteen years,
All in good time he may yet taste of love.
Taste of a beast, heel neueuer woman like.
Many things alter in a young mans heart.
But always love is natural to youth.
It is unnatural where years do want.
Love always slowres in our green time of age.
It doth but flower, it is quite without all fruit.
With timely flowers love ever brings forth fruit.
Hither I came not for to jest (Montane)
Nor to contend with you. But I the father am
Of a dear only child, and (if it be lawful so to say)
A worthy child, and by your leave of many sought.
Titirus, if the Destinies have not ordained
This marriage, yet the faith they gave on earth,
Binds them vntoo't, which if they violate,
They violate their vow to Cynthia,
Who is enraged against vs, how much thou know.
But for as much as I discover can,
The secret counsels of the eternal powers:
This knot was knit by the and of Destiny.
All to good end will sort, be of good cheer.
I'll tell you now a dream I had last night.
I saw a thing which makes my ancient hope
Revive within my heart, more then before.
Dreams in the end prove dreams, but what saw you?
Do you remember that same woeful night,
When swelling Ladon ove•flowd his banks,
So that the fishes swam where birds did breed,
And in moment did the ravenous flood,
Take men and beasts by heaps and herds away.
(Oh sad remembrance) in that very night
I lost my child, more dear then was my heart:
Mine only child, in cradle warmly laid.
Living, and dead, dearly beloved of me.
The Torrent took him hence ere we could prove
To give him succour, being buried quite,
In terror, sleep, and darkness of the night:
Nor could we ever find the cradle where he lay,
By which I guess some whirlpit swallowd both.
Who can guess otherwise? and I remember now,
You told me of this your mishap before:
A memorable misadventure sure,
And you may say, you have two sons begot,
One to the woods, the other to the waives.
Perhaps the piteous heavens will restore
My first sons loss, in him that lives yet;
Still must we hope, now listen to my tale.
The time when light and darkness strove together,
This one for night, that other for the day,
Having watched all the night before, with thought
To bring this marriage to a happy end,
At last, with length of weariness, mine eyes
A pleasing slumber closed, when I this vision saw,
Me thought I sat on famous Alfeus bank,
Under a levy plane tree with a baited hook,
Tempting the fishes in the stream, in midst
Whereof, there rose me thought an aged man:
His head and beard dropping down silver tears,
Who gently roughed to me with both his hands
A naked child, saying, behold thy soon,
Take heed thou killst him not. And with that word
He dived down again. When straight the skies
Waxed black with clouds, threatening a dismal shower,
And I afraid, the child took in mine arms,
Crying, ah heavens, and will you in an instant then,
Both give and take away my child again?
When on the sudden all the sky waxed clear:
And in the River sell a thousand bows,
And thousand arrows, broken all to shivers.
The body of the plane tree trembled there,
And out of it there came a subtle voice
Which said, Arcadia shall be fair again.
So is the Image of this gentle dream
Fixed in my heart, that still me thinks I see it:
But aboue all, the courteous aged man.
For this when you me met, I coming was
Unto the temple for to sacrifice,
To give my dreams presage prosperous success.
Our dreams are rather representments vain
Of Idle hopes, then any things to come:
Only days thoughts made fables for the night.
The mind doth not sleep ever with the flesh,
But is more watchful then, because the eyes
Do not lead it a wandering where they go.
Well, of cur children what the heavens disposed have,
Is quite unknown to vs, but sure it is,
Yours against the law of nature feels not love.
And mine hath but the bond of his faith given
For her reward. I cannot say she loves,
But well I wot she hath made many love:
And it is unlike, she tastes not that she makes
So many taste. Me thinks shoe's altered much
From that she was: for full of sport and mirth,
Shoe's wont to be. But it is a grievous thing,
To keep a woman married and unmarried thus.
For like a Rose that in some garden grows,
How dainty it is against the Sun doth rise,
Persuming with sweet odours round about,
Bidding the humming bees to honey feast:
But if you then neglect to gather it,
And suffer Titan in his middayes course
To scorch her sides, and burn her dainty seat,
Then ere Sun-set, discoloured she falls,
And nothing worth upon the shadowed hedge.
Even so a maid whom mothers care doth keep,
Shu••ing her heart from amorous desires.
But if the piercing looks of hungry lovers eyes
Come but to view her, if she hear him sigh,
Her heart soon ope's, her breast soon takes in love:
Which if for shame she hide, or fear contain,
The silent wretch in deep desire consumes.
So fades beauty if that fire endure,
And leasing time, good fortune's lost be sure.
Be of good cheer, let not these humane fears,
Confound thy spright, let's put our trust •the Gods,
And pray to them (it is meet) for good success.
Our children are their off-spring, and be sure
They will not see them lost that others keep.
Go'w, let vs to the Temple jointly go,
And sacrifice you a hee Goat to Pan,
I a young Bull, to mighty Hercules.
He that the heard makes thrive, can therewithal
Make him thrive, that with the profits of his heard
Hallowes the Altars. Faithful Demotes,
Go thou and fetch a young and lovely Bu'l,
As anie's in the heard, and bring it by the mountains way,
I at the Temple will attend for thee.
A he Goat bring Demotes from my heard.
Both one and other I will well perform.
I pray the Gods (Montane) thy dream do sort
Unto as good an end as thou dost hope.
I know remembrance of thy son thou lost,
Inspires thee with a happy prophecy.
LIke frost to grass, like drought to gentle flowers,
Like lightning unto corn, like worms to seeds,
Like nets to dear, like lime to silly birds,
So to mankind is love a cruel foe.
He that love lik'ned unto fire, knew well
His pe•fidous and wicked kind. For look
But on this fire, how fine a thing it is.
But touch it, and it is then a cruel thing.
The world hath not a monster more to dread.
It ravens worse then beasts, and strikes more deep
Then edged steel, and like the wind it slies:
And where it plants his imperious feet,
Each force doth yield, all power gives place.
Even so this love, if we it but behold,
In two fair eyes, and in a golden Tress,
Oh how it pleases! oh how then it seems
To breathe out joy, and promise largely peace!
But if you it approach, and tempt it once,
So that it creep and gather force in you,
Hircane no Tigress, Liby no Lyons hath,
Nor poisonous worms, with teeth or stings so fierce,
That can surpass, or equal loves disease,
More dreadful then is hell, then death it self,
Sweet pities foe, the minister of rage:
And to conclude, love void of any love.
Why speak I thus of love? why blame him thus?
Is he the cause that the whole world in love,
Or rather loue-dissembling, sins so?
Oh women's treachery! that is the cause
That hath begotten love this infamy.
How ever love be in his nature good,
With them his goodness suddenly he leases.
They never suffer him to touch their hearts,
But in their faces only build his bower.
Their care, their pomp, and all their whole delight.
Is in the bark of a bepainted face.
It is not in them now faith with faith to grace,
And to contend in love with him that loves,
Into two breasts dividing but one will:
Now all their labour is, with burnished gold
To die their hair, and tie it up in curls,
Therein to snare unwary lovers in.
O what a stinking thing it is, to see them take
A Pencil up, and paint their bloodless cheeks:
Hiding the faults of nature and of time,
Making the pale to blush, the wrinkled plain,
The black seem white, faults mending with far worse.
Then with a pair of pincers do they pull
Their eye-browes till they smart again.
But this is nothing, though it be too much,
For all their customs are alike to these.
What is it that they use, which is not counterfeit?
Op they their mouths? they lie: move they their eyes?
They counterfeit their looks: If so they sigh,
Their sighs dissembled are. In sum, each act,
Each look, each gesture, is a very lie.
Nor is this yet the worst. It is their delight,
Them to deceive even most, that trust them most;
And love them least, that are most worthy love.
True faith to hate, worser then death it self:
These be the tricks that make love so perverse.
Then is the fault faithless Corisca thine?
Or rather mine, that have believed thee so?
How many troubles have I for thy sake sustained?
I now repent, nay more I am ashamed.
Lovers believe me, women once adored,
Are worser then the grisly powers of hell.
Strait by their valor vaunt they that they are
The same you by your folly fashion them.
Let go these base• sighs, prayers and plaints,
Fit weapons for women and children only.
Once did I think that prayers, plaints, and sighs,
Might in a women's heart have stirred up
The flames of love, but rush I was deceived.
Then if thou would thy mistress conquer, leave
These silly toys, and close thou up all love.
Do that which love and nature teaches thee,
For modesty is but the outward virtue of
A women's face. Wherefore to handle her with mo∣destie,
Is a mere fault, she though she use it, loves it not.
A tender-harted Lover shalt thou not
Corisca ever find me more, but like a man
I will assail and pierce thee through and through.
Twice have I taken thee, and twice again
Thou hast escaped (I know not how) my hands:
But if thou come the third time in my reach,
I'll fetter thee for running then away.
T'hart wont to pass these woods, I like a hound
Will hunt thee out. Oh what a sweet revenge
I mean to take: I mean to make thee prove
What it is unjustly to betray thy Love.
Oh high and puissant law writ, rather borne
Within loves mighty breast,
Whose ever sweat and lovely loving force,
Towards that good which we unseen suborn,
Our harts doth pull and wills doth wrest,
And even natures self to it doth force;
Not only our frail corpce
Whose sense scarce sees is borne and dies again,
As daily hours wax and wane.
But even inward causes, hidden seeds
That moves and governs our eternal deeds.
If great with child the world do wondrous frame
So many beauties still:
And if within as far as Sun doth see
To'th mighty Moon and stars Titanian fame
A living spright doth fill,
With his male •allow this same vast degree▪
If thence mans of spring bee.
The plants have life, and beasts both good and bad,
Whether the earth be clad,
With flowers, or nipped have her ill-feathered wing,
It still comes from thine euersting spring.
Nor this alone but that which hopes of fire
Sheds into mortal wights:
From whence stars gentle now strait fierce are found
Clad in good fortunes or mishaps attire,
From whence lifts frailest lights
The hour of birth have, or of death the bound.
That which makes rise or else pull• down
In their disturbed affects all humane will,
And giving seems, or taking still.
Fortune, to whom the world would this were given,
All from thy sovereign bounty is deriuen,
Oh word inevitably true and sure
If it thy meaning is
Arcadia shall after so many woes
Find out new rest and peace, new life procure.
If the fore-told on bliss
Which the great Oracle did erst expose
Of the fair fatal marriage rose
Proceed from thee and in thy heavenly mind
Her fixed place doth find.
If that same voice do not dissemble still,
Who hinders then the working of thy will?
See loves and pities foe, awayward swain,
A proud and cruel youth,
That comes from heaven, and yet with heaven contends.
See then another Lover, (faithful in vain)
Battring a harts chaste truth,
Who with his flames perhaps thy will offends,
The less that he attends,
Pity to's pl•ints: reward to his desert
More strangely flames in faith his hart.
Fatal this beauty is to him that it high prizes,
Being destined to him that it despizeth.
Thus in it self alas divided stands
This heavenly power,
And thus one fate another iustles still,
Yet neither conquered is, neither commands.
False humane hopes that tower
And plant a siege to th'Elementall hill,
Rebellious unto heavens will:
Arming poor thoughts like giant fools again,
Lovers and no Lovers vine.
Who would have thought love and disdain blind things,
Should mount aboue the sovereign starry wings.
But thou that standst aboue both stars &amp; fate,
And with thy wit divine
Great mover of the skies dost them restrain,
Behold: we thee beseech our doubtful state
With destiny combine.
And fathers loving zeal, love and disdain,
Mix flame and frozen vain.
Let them that shunt to love, now learn to love,
Let not that other moan.
Ah let not others blindest folly thus
Thy gently promised pity take from vs.
But who doth know? perhaps this same that seems
An unavoidable mischievous estate,
May prove right fortunate.
How fond a thing it is for mortal sight
To search into the Eternal suns high light.
HOw I have searched along the rivers side,
About the meadows, fountains, and the hills,
To find thee out: which now I have, the gods be praised.
Ah that thy news Ergasto may deserve
This haste. But bring thou life or death?
This though I had I would not give it thee.
That do I hope to give thee, though I have it not
As yet. But fie, thou must not suffer grief
To overthrow thy senses thus. Live man and hope.
But to the purpose of my coming now,
Ormino hath a sister, know her not?
A tall big wench, a merry-countnaun'st Nymph
With yellow hair, somewhat high-coloured.
What is her name?
Corisca.
I know her well,
And heretofore have spoke with her.
Then know that she (and see withal your luck)
Is now become (I know not by what privilege)
Companion to your beauteous Amarillis.
I have discovered all your love to her,
And this which you desire, and readily
She me hath given her faith to bring about.
O happy Mirtillo if this same prove true:
But said she nothing of the means whereby?
Nothing as yet, nor would she that conclude
Until she knew the manner of your love.
How it began, and what hath hoped therein,
That she might easilier spy into the hart
Of your beloved Nymph, and better know
How to dispose by prayers or by fraud
Of her request. For this I came to you,
And make me now acquainted from the head,
With all the history of your dear Love.
So will I do, but yet Ergasto know
This memory (a bitter hopeless thing)
Is like a fire-brand tossed in the wind,
By which how much the fire increases still,
So much the brand with blazing flame consumes
O piercing shaft made by some power divine!
The which the more we seek to draw it out,
The faster hold it takes, the deeper root.
Well can I tell you, that these Lovers hopes
Are full of vanities and falsehoods still,
Loves fruit is bitter, though the root be sweet.
In that sweet time when days advantage get
Aboue the nights, then when the year begins:
This dainty pilgrim, beauties bright new sun,
Came with her countenance like another spring,
T'illumin•te my then thrice happy soil
Of Pisa, and Eglidis fair. Brought by her mother
To see the sacrifices and the sports
That celebrated in those solemn days
Were unto love. Where while she meant to make
Her eye-sight blessed with that same spectacle,
She blessed the spectacle with her fair eyes,
Being loves greatest miracle beneath the skies.
No sooner had I scene that face, but straight
I burnt, defending not the foremost look,
Which though mine eyes into my breast directed
Such an imperious beauty, as me thought did say,
Mirtillo yield thy hart for it is mine.
Oh in our breasts what mighty power hath love?
Ther's none can tell, save they the same which prove
See how industrious love can work even in
The simplest breasts. A sister which I had
I made acquainted with my thoughts, who was
By chance companion to my cruel Nymph.
The time she staid in Pisa and Elide,
She faithful counsel, and good aide me gave,
She dressed me finely in one of her gowns,
Circling my temples with a periwig,
Which gracefully she trimmed up with flowers.
A quiver and a bow hung at my side,
She taught me furthermore to fine my voice
And looks, for in my face as then there grew no hair.
This done, she me conducted where the Nymph
Was wont to sport her self, and where we found
A noble troupe of maidens of Megara,
By blood or love allied to my goddess.
Amongst them she stood like to a princely Rose,
Among a heap of humble Violets.
We had not long been there before vprose
One of the maidens of Megara, and thus bespoke.
Why stand we idly still in such a time,
When plames and famous trophies are so rise?
Have not we arms counterfeit fights to make
As well as men? Sisters be ruled by me:
Let's prove among our selves our arms in jest,
That when we come to earnest them with men,
We may them better use. Let's kiss, and strive
Who can kiss sweetliest among our selves:
And let this garland be the victors gain.
All at the proposition laughed: and all
Unto it strait agreed. Straightway began
A fight confused, no signal we attended.
Which by her seen that first ordained the sport,
She says again. Let's make her worthy judge
That hath the fairest mouth. All soon agreed,
And Amarillis chose. Who sweetly bowing down,
Her beauteous eyes in modest blushing stand,
Did show they were as fair within as th'were without.
Or that her face her, rich-clad mouth envied,
And would be clothed in pompous purple too,
As who should say, I am as fair as it.
In good time did you change into a Nymph,
A happy token of good luck to come.
Now did the beauteous judge sit in her plate,
According as the Megarence prescribed.
Each went by lot to make due proof of her
Rare mouth, that heavenly paragon of sweetness.
That blessed mouth that may be likened to
A perfumed Indian shell of oriental pearl,
Opening the dainty treasure, mixed with honey sweet
And purple blush. I cannot (my Ergasto) tell
Th'inexplicable sweetness which I felt
Out of that kiss. But look what Cypress caves
Or hives of Hybla have, are nothing all
Compared with that which then I tasted there.
Oh happy theft sweet kiss.
Yea sweet,
But yet not gracious, for it wanted still
The better part: love gave it, but love not
Returned it back.
But then how did you
When it was your lot to kiss?
Unto those lips
My soul did wholly fly, and all my life
So shut therein, as in a little space
It waxed nothing but a kiss. And all
My other limbs stood strenghlesse trembling still,
When I approached to her lightning looks,
Knowing my deed was theft and deceit,
I feared the majesty of her fair face,
But she assures me with a pleasing smile:
And puts me forward more, love sitting like
A Bee upon two fresh and dainty Roses close.
Kissing, I tasted there the honey sweet,
But having kissed, I felt the lovely Bee
Strike through my hart with his sharp piercing sting.
And being wounded thus, half desperate,
I thought t'haue bitten those manslaught'ring lips,
But that her odoriferous breath like air divine,
Wak'ned my modesty and still my rage.
This modesty molested Lovers still.
Now were the lots fulfild, and every one
With heedful minds the sentence did attend:
When Amarillis judging mine the best,
With her own hands she crowns my tresses, with
The gentle garland kept for victory.
But never was shadelesse meadow drier parcht,
Under the baleful fury of the heavenly dog,
Then was my hart in sunshine of that sweet,
Never so vanquished as in victory.
Yet had I power to take the garland off,
And reach it her, saying to you belongs
Alone the same. It is due to you, that made
Mine good, by virtue of your mouth.
She gently took't and crowned her self therewith.
And with an other that she ware crowned mine.
T's this I wear thus dried as you see,
It will I carry to my grave with me.
In dear remembrance of that happy day.
But more for sign of my dead hopes decay.
Thou pity more then envy dost deserve,
That were another Tantalus in loves delights,
That of a sport a torment true did make.
Thou pai'st too dear for thy stolen delicates.
But did she ere perceive thy policies?
That know I not (Ergasto) yet thus much I know,
That in the time she made Elidis blessed
With her sweet countenance, she liberal was
Of pleasing looks to me. But thereof did
My cruel fates rob me so suddenly,
That I perceived it not till they were gone.
Whē I drawn by the power of her beauteous look
Leaving my home came hither, where thou know
My father had this poor habitacle.
But now the day that with so fair a spring began,
Come to his western bound, thunders &amp; lightēs out,
Ah then I saw these were true signs of death.
Now had (alas) my tender father felt,
My not-foreseene departure, and overcome
With grief, fell sick nigh hand to death,
Whereby I was constrained to return.
Ah that return proved the fathers health,
But deadly sickness to the son: for in short time
I languished and pined quite away.
Which held me from the time the sun had left
The bull, until his entry into Capricorn.
And so had still, had not my piteous father sought
For counsel to the Oracle, which said,
Only Arcadia could restore my health.
So I returned to see her that can heal
My bodies grief (O Oracles false lye)
But makes my soul sick everlastingly.
Strange tale thou telst (Mirtillo) though't be true.
The only health to one that's desperate,
Is to despair of health. And now it is time
I go communicate with our Corisca.
Go to the fountain you, there stay for me,
Isle make what haste I can.
Go happily,
The heavens (Ergasto) quith thy courtesy.
O Fortunate delight, and care of my
Fair spiteful Siluio. Ah that I were
As dear unto thy cruel moister as thou art.
(Happy Metampo) he with that white hand,
That nippes my heart, thee softly stroking feeds.
With thee all day and all the night he is,
Whilst I that love him so, sigh still in vain.
And that which grieves me worst, he gives thee still
Kisses so sweet, that had I one of them,
I should go blessed away, I cannot choose
But kiss Melampo. Now if th'appie stars
Of love, sent thee to me bcause thou should
Find out his steps. Go'w whither me great love.
Thee nature teaches. But I hear a horn
Sound in these woods.
Vo ho ho, Melampo ho,
If my desire deceive me not, that is the voice
O my beloved Siluio, that call, his dog,
He hath our labour saved.
Vohoho, Melampo ho.
Doubtless t's he: happy Dorinda. heavens
Have sent him whom thou soughtst, it is best I put
The dog aside, so may I win his love.
Lupino. (Lu.) Whats your will?
Go hide thy self
In that same thick, and take the dog with thee.
I go.
And stir not till I call.
No more I will.
Go soon.
And call you soon, least hunger make
The dog believe I am a shoulder of mutton, and so fall too.
Go get you hence hen-hearted wretch.
O wretched me, whither shall I go
To follow thee my dear, my faithful dog?
The dales, the mountains, I have sought with care,
All weary now I am. Cursed be the beast
Thou did pursue. But see a Nymph, perhaps
She can tell news of him. Out upon her,
It is she that's still so troublesome to me.
I must dissemble. Fair and gracious Nymph,
Did you my good Melampo see to day?
I fair good Siluio? can you call me fair?
That am not fair a whit unto your eyes.
Or fair or soul, did you not see my dog?
Answer to this, or I am quickly gone.
Still thou art froward unto her that thee adores,
Who would believe that in that smooth aspect
Were harboured such rugged thoughts. Thou through
These savage woods and rocky hills pursu'st
A beast that flies thee, and consum'st thy self
In tracing out thy greyhounds steps: and me
Thou shunst and dost disdain that loves thee so.
Ah leave these does that run so fast away,
Take hold of me thy preordained pray.
Nymph, I Melampo came to seek, not to loose time,
Farewell.
Do not so shun me cruel Siluio,
I'll tell thee news of thy Melampo man.
Thouiests Dorinda. (Do.) Siluio, I protest
By that dear love that me thy handmaid makes,
I know where thy Melampo is that coursed the doe.
How did he leese her?
Both dog and doe are in my power.
Both in your power?
Why doth it grieve you then
That I them hold that do adore you so?
Dear Dorinda, quickly give me him.
See wau'ring child, am I not fortunate?
When a beast and a dog can make me dear to thee.
Good reason too, but yet her Isle deceive.
What will you give me?
Two gilded apples
Which my mother gave me yesterday.
I want no apples, and perhaps I could
Thee better-tasted give; did thou not thus
Disdain my gifts.
What would thou have, a kid,
A lamb? Ah but my father gives me no such leave.
Nor kids, nor lambs do I desire, it is thy love
My Siluio which I seek.
Wilt thou nought but my love?
Nought else.
I give it thee. Now my dear Nymph
Give me my dog and doe.
Ah that thou knew
That treasures worth whereof thou seem so liberal,
Or that thy heart did answer to thy tongue.
Hear me fair Nymph, thou ever telst me of
A certain love, I know not what it is.
Thou dost desire I should thee love, and so I do.
As far forth as I can, or understand,
Thou call me cruel, and I know not cruelty.
Wretched Dorinda, how hast thou placed thy hopes
In beauty, feeling ne'er a spark of love?
Thou lovely boy art such a fire to me,
And yet burns not thy self. Thee under humane shape
O• dainty mother, did the Cyprian dame
Bring forth, thou hast his arrows and his fire.
Well know my breast both burnt and wounded too,
Get but hi• wings unto thy shoulders, and
New Cupia shall• thou be, were it not thy hear•
Is made of rocky frozen Isy shelf,
Have carried all thy •ew and proved thy pray,
When beasts had wanted in the woods thou might
Have shot at me for one, and in this breast
Have used still thy tough-well-sinew'd bow.
So as thou would, I like thy servant might
Thy weapons carried have, or proved thy pray,
Making my breast both quiver and the mark
For those thy shafts. But unto whom speak I?
To him that hears me not, butt's fled from me,
Fly where thou wilt, thee will I still pursue,
Even into hell, if any hell can be
More painful then my grief, then thy great cruelty.
O How Fortune favours my designs
More then I looked for. She good reason hath,
For I ne'er asked her favour shamefastly.
Great power she hath, and with good cause the world
Calls her a puissant goddess: yet must we not sit still,
For seldom idle folks prove fortunate.
Had not my industry made me companion unto her,
What would this fit occasion have availed me,
To bring my purpose unto pass? Some fool
Would have her rival shunt, and showed signs of
Her jealousy, bearing an evil eye
About, but that had been ill done, for easilier
May one keep her from an open then a hidden foe.
The covered rocks are those which do deceive
The wisest mariners Who cannot friendship fine,
Cannot truly hate. Now see what I can do,
I am not such an •ass to think she doth not love,
It might she make some other fool believe.
But tush, I am the mistress of this art. A tender wench,
Scarce from the cradle crept, in whom love hath
Stilled but the first drops of his sweet, so long
Pursued and woo•d by a worthy friend,
And worse, 〈◊〉, and •ekist, and yet not love•▪
She is an ass that it believes. Isle not believe.
But see how Fortune favours me: Behold
Where Amarillis is her self. Isle make
As though I saw her not, and stand aside.
Dear blessed woods, and you the silent groves
Of rest and peace, the harbour-houses true:
How willingly I turn to visit you.
And if my stars had so been pleased t'haue let
Me live unto my self, I with th'elizian fields
The happy gardens of the demi gods,
Would not have changed your gentle shadow spots.
If I judge right, these worldly goods are nought
But muschiefes, still the richest have least goods,
And he possesses most that is most poor.
Riches are ever snares of liberty.
What's fame of beauty worth in tender years?
Or heavenly nobleness in mortal blood?
So many favours, both of heaven and earth,
Fields large, and happy, goodly meadow plains,
Fat pastures, that do fatter flocks present,
If in the same the hart be not content.
Happy that shepherdess, whose scarcely knees,
A poor, but yet a cleanly gown doth reach:
Rich in her self, only in natures gifts.
Who in sweet poverty, no poorness knows:
Nor feels no tortures which this •iches brings.
Desire to have much, ne'er doth her torment,
If she be poor, yet is she well content.
She natures gifts doth nurse with natures gifts,
Making milk spring with milk, saucing her native sweet
With honey of the Bee, one fountain serves her
To drink, to wash, and for her looking glass.
If she be well, then all the world is well.
Let the clouds rise, and thunder threat amain,
Her poverty doth all the fear prevent,
If she be poor, yet is she well content.
Finely the flock committed to her charge
Feeds on the grass, the whilst her shepherd friend
Feeds on her eyes, not whom the stars, or men,
Her destinies, but whom affection chooses.
Then in the shadow of a M••tell tree,
Cherished, she cherishes again; nor doth
She feel that heat which she discovers not:
Nor ever heat discover which she doth not feel.
Always declaring troth of her intent,
If she be poor, yet is she well content.
True life that knows not death before they die.
Ah that I might my fortune change with theirs.
But see Corisca. Gods save you good Corisca.
Who calls me? Dear Amarillis dearer then
Mine eyes, my life, whither go you alone?
No further then you see, glad I have found you out.
You have her found that will not part from you.
And even now, thus was I thinking with my self,
Were I her soul how could she stay away so long?
And therewithal you came my dear, and yet
You do not love your poor Corisca.
Why so?
Ask you why so? and you a bride to day.
A bride?
A bride, and yet from me you keep it.
How should I utter that I do not know?
Yet will you fine?
You jest.
It is you that jest.
And can it then be true?
Most certain true.
Do not you know thereof?
I know I promised was,
But know not that the marriage is so near.
I heard it of my brother Ormin: and to say the troth,
There is no other talk. But you look pale.
This news perhaps doth trouble you.
It is
Long since the promise past, and still my mother said
This day it should revive.
Unto a better life
You shall revive, for this you should be merry,
Why do you sigh? let that poor wretch go sigh.
What wretch?
Mirtillo, whom even now I found
Ready to die: and surely he had died
Had I not promised him this marriage to disturb,
Which though I only for his comfort said,
Yet were I fit to do it.
And did he give cōsent?
I: and the means.
I pray you how?
Easily:
So you thereto disposed be to yield.
That could I hope, and would you give your faith
Not to disclose it, I discover would
A thought which in my heart I long have hid.
I it disclose! Ground open first thy jaws
And swallow me up by a miracle.
Know then (Corisca) when I think I must
Be subject to a child, that hates, that flies from me,
And hath no other sport but woods and beasts,
And loves a dog better then thousand Nymphs,
I malcontented ••ue half desperate.
But dare not say so for respect I bear
Unto mine honesty, unto my faith
Which to my father, and what worser is,
Which to our puissant goddess I have given:
If by thy help my faith my life both saved,
I might divide me from this heavy knot,
Then should thou be my health, my very life.
If so for this thou sigh good reason thou
Dear Amarillis hast. How oft he said?
A thing so fare to one that can despise it?
So rich a lemme to one that knows it not:
But you too crafty are to tell the troth.
What let's you now to speak?
The shame I have.
Sister you have a mischievous disease,
I'had rather have the pox. the f•for, or the fistula,
But trust to me, youl'e quickly leave the same:
Once do but master it, and then it is gone.
This shamefastness that nature stamps in vs
Cannot be mastered for if you seek
To hunt it from your hart, it shes into your face.
O Amarillis, who (too wise) conceals
Her ill, at last great folly she reveals.
Had thou but at the first discovered
This thought to me, thou had been lose ere this.
Now try Coriscaes art, you could not have
Entrusted you into more subtle faithful hands.
But when you shall be freed by my help
From this same captive husband, will you not
Provide you of another Lover then?
At better leisure we will think of that.
Trust me you cannot faithful Mirtillo.
You know there is not at this day a swain
For value, honest troth and beauty, worthier
Of your affection. And you will let him die,
Without so much as saying so. Yet hear him once.
How better it were to give him peace &amp; stab:
The root of such desire as hath no hope.
Give him this comfort yet before he die.
It rather double will his misery.
Leave that to him.
But what becomes of me,
If ever it be known?
Small hurt thou hast.
And small t'shalbe before my name it do endanger.
If you may fail in this then in the rest.
I you may fail. Adieu.
Nay stay Coris•a,
Hear me but speak.
No not a word, unless
You promise me.
I promise you, so you
Do tie me to nought else.
To nothing else.
And you shall make him think I knew not of it.
Isle make him think it was by chance.
And that I may
Depart as soon as I think good.
As soon
As you have heard him speak.
And that he shall
Quickly dispatch.
So shall he do.
And that
He come not near me by my darts length never.
O what a toil it is to reform your simpleness:
All parts saving his tongue we'll surely tie.
Will you ought else?
No nothing else.
Whē will you do it?
When you think good, give me but so much time
I may go home and hear more of this marriage.
Go. But take heed you do it warily.
But hear what I am thinking on. To day
About noon time among these shadow trees
Come you without your Nymphs, here shall you find
Me to that end, with me shall be Nerine,
Aglaure, Elisa, Phillis, and Licorice, all mine own.
As wise as faithful good companions.
Here may you now (as often you have done)
Play at blind buff. Mirtill will easily think,
That for your sport and not for him you came.
This pleases me, but yet I would not have
Your Nymphs to hear the words Mirtillo speaks.
I understand, and well advised, let me alone,
I'll make them vanish when I see my time:
Go, and forget not now to love your poor Corisca.
How can I choose but love her in whose hands
I have reposed my life.
So she is gone.
Small force will serve to batter down this rock,
Though she have made defence to my assault,
Yet will she never his abide. I know too well
How hearty prayers of a gracious Love
Can tempt a tender wenches hart. Yet with this sport
I'll tie her so, she'll scarcely think it sport.
I'll by her words, will she or nill she, spy
And pierce into the bowels of her hart,
I'll make me mistress of her secrets all.
Then I'll conduct her so that she shall think
Her most unbridled love and not my art
Hath brought her in to play this wretched part.
O I am dead,
And I alive?
Ah turn
My Amarillis, turn again, I taken am.
Tush Amarillis hears thee not, be quiet now.
Oh me my hear.
I have hunted thee so long
That at the last you are fallen into my snare.
This is the robe sister, this is the hear.
Speak you to me Satire?
I even to thee.
Are you not that same famous Corisca, that
Excellent mistress of lies, that at so dear a ra•e
False hopes, feigned looks, and lying words dost sell,
That hast betrayed me so many ways perfidous Corisca.
I am Corisca gentle Satire, but not now
So pleasing to thine eyes as I have been.
I gentle wicked wretch, I was not so
When me thou 〈◊〉 to follow Coridon.
I le•t thee for another.
See, see a wonder,
This is news indeed. But when I stole
Fair Lilies bow, Clor• scarf, Daphnes rich •oabe,
And Silutaes buskins, then thou promi'st me
Thy love thou gau'st another should be my reward.
The dainty garland which I gave to thee,
Thou gau'st to Nisus. And when me thou made
To watch so many frosty night▪ both •n
The cave, the woods, and by the river side,
And ever mockedst me, was I not gentle then?
Believe me now thou shalt me pay for all.
Thou stranglest me as if I were a dog.
Now see if thou can run away again.
Thy policies shall not avail thee now.
If but thy head hold on it is vain to strive.
Good Satire give me leave to speak to thee.
Sp•ak tlhen
How can I speak? let me go:
Upon my faith I will not run away.
What faith oh faithless woman hast? Dare thou
Yet speak of faith to me? Isle carry thee
Into the darkest cave this mountain hath:
Where never Sun nor humane steppe approached,
Il'e hide the rest there thou with my delight
And with thy scorn shalt feel what I will do with thee.
And can thou be so cruel to that hair
For which thou oft hast sworn it were sweet to die,
And that thou coulst not suffer too much ill for me?
Oh heavens, oh fa•es, whom shall a woman trust?
Ah wicked, think thou to deceive me yet?
Can thou yet tempt me with thy subtilties?
Oh gentle Satire do not make a scorn
Of her that thee adores. If so thy hart
Be not of marble made, behold me at
Thy feet, if ever I offended thee (ô Idol of
My soul) I pardon crave. By these same strong
And more then manlike knees which I embrace,
By that same love thou sometime bar to me,
By that same sweetness which thou wont'st to draw
Thou said out of mine eyes calling them stars,
Now wretched fountains of these bitter tears,
I pray thee pity me, let me but go.
The wretch hath almost moved me, should I but trust
Affection only I were overcome.
But to be short, I will not trust thee, strive no more.
For all this humbleness thou art Corisca still.
Oh me my head, stay yet do not deny
Me one poor favour yet.
What fauour's that?
Hear me but once.
Thou think with fained words
And forged tears to mollify my heart.
Ah courteous Satire, what wilt thou make of me?
We'll try.
No pity then?
No pity I.
Art thou resolved of this?
I am resolved.
Hast thou now made an end of all thy charms?
Oh villain indiscreet, unseasonable.
Half a man, half a goat, and all a beast:
Dried Carogne, defect of wicked nature.
Dost thou believe Corisca loves not thee?
It is most true. What should I love in thee:
This goodly bunch of that beslauered beard,
These goatlike ears, that stinking toothless cave?
Oh witch are these to me?
These are to thee.
Ribald to me?
Half goat to thee.
And do
Not I with these my hands thrust out thy bitches tongue?
I if thou durst.
A silly woman in my hands,
Dares brave me? dares despise me thus? Well I'll.
Villain what wilt thou do?
Isle eat thee quick.
Where be thy teeth?
Oh heavens who can endure
I'll pay you home, come on.
I will not come.
That will I see.
Spite of thy hart I will not.
Come on, we'll see who hath the stronger, thou
Do enter-speake, and in a little sown
Great things bewray, and sweetest secret blisses
To others hidden, to themselves well known.
Such joy, nay such sweet life doth loving prove,
Soul knit to soul by th'earthly knot of love.
Kisses that kisses meet, do paint vnmou'd,
Th'incounters of two harts, loving beloved.
O Spring, the gentle childhood of the year,
Mother of flowers, fresh herbs, &amp; fresh desires,
Thou turn again, but with thee do not turn
The happy days of my delightful joys:
Thou turnst, thou turnst, but with thee turnst nought else
Save of the loss of my dear trusures lorn,
The miserable wretched memory.
Thou art the same thou were, so fresh, so fair,
But I am not as I was wont to be,
So dear to other eyes. Oh bitter sweets of love,
Much worser it is to leese you once possessed,
Then never to have you enjoyed at all,
Much like the grief to change a happy state.
The memory of any good that wastes,
Consumes it self as the other is consumed.
But if my hopes be not as is their use,
Of brittle glass, or that my deep desire
Make not my hope much greater then the truth,
Here shall I see the sun-beames of mine eyes.
Here if I be not mocked I shall her see
Stay her quick feet at sound of my lament.
Here shall my greedy eyes after long fast
Receive sweet food from her divinest look.
Here will she turn her son'raigne lights on me,
If not gentle, yet cruel will they bee.
If not the means to breed mine inward joy,
So •ierce, yet as I die to mine annoy.
O happy day sighed for long time in vain,
If after times so clouded with complaints
Love thou dost grant me sight of her fair eyes,
I mean made bright as is the morning Sun,
Hither Ergasto sent me, where he said
Corisca and my beauteous Amarillo
Would be together playing at blind man buff:
Yet here see I none blind, save my blind will,
That wandering seeks her sight by other means
But finds it not. O poison to my food,
This long delay blinds my heart with fear.
My cruel destiny will never change.
Each hour, each moment that a Lover stays
Expecting his contentment, seems a world.
But who doth know? perhaps I staid too long.
And here Corisca hath attended me.
Ay me! If this be true, then welcome death.
BEhold the buff!
Behold indeed! ah sight.
Why stay ye now▪
Ah voice that hast at once
Both wounded me and healed me again?
Where be ye? what do ye? Lisetta you
That so desired this sport, where are you now?
Where is Corisca? and where be the rest?
Now may it be truly said that love is blind,
And hath a scarce that binds up his eyes.
Come list to me! guide me clear of these trees,
There set me in the pain, you round about
A circle make and so begin the play.
What shall I do? I see not how this sport
Can do me good, not I Corisca see that is
The load-starre of my hopes. Heavens aide me.
Why are ye come? think ye nought else to do
But blind mine eyes? Where are ye let's begin?
Blind love I do not trust to thee,
That makes desires full of obscurity.
Thou hast s•• all sight lesser troth,
Unhappy they that trust thine oath.
Blind or not blind thou tempest in vain,
For I can shift me in this plain.
Blind thou dost see through Irons eyes,
Blind thou best sighted safely ties.
Now that I am at liberty,
I were a fool to trust to thee.
In test nor earnest I'll not stay,
Because thou kill when thou dost play.
But ye play too far off, ye should touch me.
O mighty Gods! what do I see? am I
In heaven or earth? you've no such h•rmonie.
But you that blind and faithless prove,
That calls me to play this hour,
Behold I play and with my hand
Hit your back and by you stand.
I play and round about you run,
And for I trust not you I shun.
Here am I no• and there again,
Whilst you take me strive in vain.
The reason is my hart is free,
Therefore you cannot handle me.
I thought I had Licorice caught, and I
Have got a tree. I hear you laugh full well.
Oh would I were that tree. Me thinks I see Corisca
Hidden in yonder shrubs, she nods to me,
Tic even she, she beckons still to me.
Free harts have ever feet to fly,
And so (enticing power) have I▪
Yet will you tempt me in to train?
In saith (sweet) no: t's all in vain.
The reason is my harts is free,
Therefore you cannot handle me.
I would this tree were burned, now had I thought
I had E•sa taken.
Yet doth Corisca point,
She threatens me, sh'would have me put my self
Among these Nymphs.
Belike thus I all day
Must play with trees.
I must spite of my hart
Go out and speak. Why staist thou fearful wretch?
Until she come into thy arms? let her take thee,
Give me thy 〈◊〉 (fool) go and meet with her.
How ill agree my hart with my desire?
Th'one dares so little, the other seeks so much.
It is time I turn again unto the sport,
I almost weary am. Fie, •ie: you make
Me run too much, in faith you're too blame.
Now look about triumphant power,
That the worlds tribute dost devour.
Now bear thou mocks and many a bat,
And like an Owl you are wondered at.
About whom birds fl•cke thick and round,
Vt hilst them she strives in vain to wound.
So art thou love this instant tide
Laughed at and mocked on every side.
Some hit thy back and some •hy face,
Sparing thee neither time nor place.
It will not boot thee spread thy wings,
Nor that thy pi•tons whistling stings.
Catch how thou wilt thou geist not me,
The reason is my hart is free.
Him thou hast caught it is no wonder,
For love holds all his senses under.
IN faith Auglaura I have caught you now.
Will you be gone? nay 〈◊〉 Isle hold you fast.
Trust me had I not unawares to him
Thrust him on her, this labour had been lost.
What not a word? are you she or not she?
Here do I take this dart, and in this grove
I turn me to observe what follows.
So now I know Corisca are you not?
It is so you are so great and have no hair,
I could have wished no better match then this.
And since you ti'de me, do untie me too,
Quickly my hart, and I will pay thee with
The sweetest kiss thou ever had. Why stai'st?
Me thinks your hands do shake. Put to your teeth,
If with your nails you cannot do the deed.
How tedious you're? Let me alone,
My self will rid me of this trouble soon:
But see how many knots have made me sure.
Ah that I may but make you play this part.
So now I see. Ay me what do I see?
Let me alone (traitor) ay wretched me.
Stand still my soul.
Let me alone I say,
Date you thus offer force to Nymphs Aglaure,
Elisa treachours where are you become?
Let me alone.
Behold I let you go.
This is Coriscaes craft, well keep you that
Which you have not deserved.
Why fly you hence▪
(Cruel) behold my death, behold this dart
Shall pierce my woeful breast.
What will you do?
That which perhaps grieves you (most cruel Nymph.
That any else beside your self should do.
Oh me, me thinks I am half dead.
But if this work belong alone to you,
Behold my breast, here take this fatal dart.
Death you have merited. But tell me who
Hath made you boldly thus presume?
My love
Love is no cause of any villain-act.
Love trust me t'was in me. I made me respec∣tiue:
And since you first laid hold on me less cause
You have to call my action villainy.
Yea even when I by so commodious means
Might be made bold to use the laws of love,
Yet did I quake a Lover to be found.
Cast not my blind deeds in my teeth I pray.
My much more love makes me more blind then you.
Prayers and fine conceits, not snares and thefts,
Discreetest Lovers use.
Assauadge beast
With hunger hunted, from the woods breaks forth
And doth assail the stranger on his way,
So I that only by your beauteous eyes
Do live: since that sweet food me have forbad,
Either your cruelty or else my fate
A starved Lover issuing from those woods
Where I have suffered long and wretched fast,
Have for my health assaid this stratage me
Which loves necessity upon me thrust.
Now blame not me (Nymph cruel) blame your self,
For prayers and conceits true loves discretion
As you them call, you not attend from me,
You have bereaved with shunning me the means
To love discreetly.
Discreetly might you to do
To leave to follow that which flies you so,
In vain you know you do pursue me still.
What is it you seek of me?
Only one time
Deign but to hear me, ere I wretched die.
T's well for you, the favour that you ask
You have already had: now get you hence.
Ah Nymph that which I have already said,
Is but a drop of that huge ample sea
Of my complaints, if not for pity sake,
Yet for your pleasure now hear (cruel) but
The latest accents of a dying voice.
To ease your mind and me this cumber rid,
I grant to hear you, but with this condition,
Speak small, part soon, and never turn again.
In too too small a bundle (cruel Nymph)
You do ccommaund me bind my huge desires,
Which measure, but by thought nought could con∣taine:
That I you love, and love more then life,
If you deny to know, ask but these woods
And they will tell, and tell you with them will
Their beasts, their trees &amp; stones of these great rocks
Which I so oft have tender made to melt
At found of my complaints. But what make I
Such proof of love where such rare beauty is?
See but how many beauteous things the skies contain,
How many dress the earth in brave attire:
Thence shall you see the force of my desire.
〈◊〉 as the waters fall, 〈…〉,
The ay•• doth 〈◊〉 the earth 〈…〉,
And all these same the skies do compass ••not.
〈◊〉 so to you as to their chiefest good,
My soul •oath she, and my poor thou 〈…〉
With all affection to your lovely 〈◊〉:
He that from then 〈◊〉 object would them turn,
Might fast turn from their viuall course the sky,
The earth, the ayre, the water, and the fire.
And quite remove the earth from oft his seat.
But why command you me to speak but small?
Small shall I tell, it I but tell you shall
That I must die, and less shall dying doo,
If I but see what is my turn too.
Ay me, what shall I do? which may out-last
My miserable love? When I am dead,
Yet cruel soul have pity on my pains.
Ah fair! ah dear I sometime so sweet a cause
Why I did live whilst my good fates were pleased.
Turn hitherward those starry lights of love,
Let me them see once meek and full of pity
Before I die. So may my death be sweet.
As they have been good guide, unto my life,
So let them be unto my death, and that
Sweet lo•ke which first begat my love, beget
My death 〈◊〉 my loves Hesperus become
The 〈◊〉 star•e of my decaying day.
But you obdurate, never 〈…〉,
While•• I more humble you more haughty are.
And can you hear me and not speak a word?
Whom do I speak too wretch a marble stone?
If you will say nought else, yet bid me die,
And you shall see what force your words 〈◊〉 have.
A• wicked love, this is a mise••e axed•••m,
A Nymph so cruel so desirous of my death,
Because I ask it as a favour, scorns 〈…〉,
Arming her cruel voice in silence so,
Least it might favour mine exceeding wo.
I• I as well to answer as to hear,
You pronus'd had, just cause you might have found
To have condemned my silence for unjust.
You call me cruel, imagining perhaps
By that reproof more easily to draw
Me to the contrary. No know 〈◊〉
I am no more delighted with the sound
Of that desertlesse and disliked praise
You to my beauty give, then discontent
To hear you call me cruel and unjust.
I grant this cruelty to any else a fault,
But to a lover virtue t's and honesty,
Which in a woman you call cruelty.
But be it as you you'd blame-worthy fault,
To be unkind to one that loves. Tell me,
When was Amarillis cruel unto you?
Perhaps when reason would not give me leave
To use this piti•: yet ho•y I it used
Your self can judge, when you from death I saved:
I mean when you among a noble sort of maids,
A lustful Lover in a women's clothes
Banded your self, and durst contaminate
Their purest sports, mingling mong kisses innocent,
Kisses lascivious and impure: which to remember
I am ashamed. But heavens my witness are,
I knew you not, and after I you knew,
I scorned your deed, and kept my soul untouched
From your lasciviousness, not suffering at all
The venom there to run to my chaste heart.
You violated nothing save th• our 〈◊〉
Of these my lips. A mouth kissed but by force
Spits out the kiss, and kill the shame wi••all.
But tell me you, what ••uite had you received
Of your •ash theft, had I discovered you
Unto those Nymphs? The 〈…〉 had not been
So lamentably torn on libers banks
Of Bacchus dames as you had been of them,
Had not you helped, her pity whom you cruel call.
That pity which was fit for me to give, I ever gave:
For other it is in vain you either ask or hope:
If you me love, then love mine honesty,
My safety love, and love my life withal.
Thou art too far from that which thou desire,
The heavens forbid, the earth contraries it,
Death is the punishment thereof. And aboue all
Mine honesty daisies forbidden acts:
Then with a safer keeper of her honours flower,
A soul well-borne will ever scorn to have.
Then rest in peace (Mirtillo) give ore this suite,
Get thee far hence to live if thou art be wise.
T'abandon life for peevish grief or smart,
Is not the action of a valiant hart.
From that which pleases virtue, it is t'abstaine,
Is that which pleases breeds offence again.
To save ones life is not within his power,
That hath his soul forsaken and given ore.
One armed in virtue conquers all desire.
Virtue small conquest gets where love triumphs.
Who cannot what he would will he what he can.
Oh loves necessity no laws endures.
Distance of place may heal your wound again.
In vain one flies from that his hart doth harbour.
A new desire an old will quite displace.
Had I another hart, another soul.
Time will at last clearly this love consume.
I after love hath quite consumed my life.
Why then your wounds will not be cured at all?
Never till death.
Till death▪ well hear me now,
And look my words be laws unto your deeds.
Howbee't I know to die is the more usual voice
Of an enamoured tongue, then a desire
Or firm conceit his soul hath entertained,
Yet if by chance such a strange folly hath
Possessed thy mind, know then thy death will be
Death to mine honour as unto thy life.
Now if thou love me, live and let it be
A token of thy wit henceforth thou shun
To see me, or to seek my company.
O cruel sentence! can I without life
Live think you then? Or can I without death
Find end unto my torment and my grief?
Well now it is time you go (Mirtillo) hence!
You'll stay too long. Go comfort your self,
That infinite the troupe of wretched Lovers is.
All wounds do bring with them their several pain,
Nor can you only of this love complain.
Among these wretches I am not alone: but yet
A miserable spectacle am only I,
Of dead and living, nor can live nor die.
Well go your ways.
Ah sad departure,
End of my life, go I from you, and do not die?
And yet I feel the very pangs of death,
That do give life unto mine ecstasy,
To make my hart immortally to die.
OH Mirtillo! oh my dearest soul
Coldest thou but see into her hart whom thou
Call cruel Amarillis, then would thou say
Thou had that pity which thy hart desires.
Oh minds too much unfortunate in love!
What boots it thee my hart to be beloved?
What boots it me to have so dear a Love?
Why should the cruel sates so disvnite
Whō love conioines? and why should traitorous love
Conjoin them whom the destinies do part?
Oh happy savage beasts whom nature gives
No laws in love, save very love it self.
Inhumane humane law, that punish'st
This love with death, if it be so sweet to sin,
And not to sin so necessary bee,
Imperfect nature that repugneth law,
Or law too hard that nature doth offend.
But rush, she loves too little that fears death,
Would gods death were the worst that's due to sin.
Dear chastity, th'inviolable power
Of souls well-borne that hast my amorous will
Retained in chains of holy rigour still:
To thee I consecrate my harmless sacrifice.
And thou my soul (Mirtillo pardon me,
That cruel 〈◊〉 where I should piteous bee.
Pardon her that in looks and only words
Doth seem thy foe, but in my heart thy friend.
If thou would be revenged, what greater pain
Would thou 〈◊〉, thou this my cruel grief?
Thou art my heart, and sha•t be spite of heaven
And earth, when thou dost plain &amp; sigh, and weep,
Thy tears become my blood, thy sighs my breath:
And all thy pains they are not only thine,
For I them feel, and they are turned mine.
HIde you no more my Amarillis now.
Wretch I discovered am.
I all have heard,
Be not afraid, did I not say I loved you,
And yet you are afraid? and hides your self
From her that loves you so▪ Why do you blush?
This blushing is a common fault.
Corisca I am conquered I confess.
That which you cannot hide you will confess.
And now I see too weak a thing doth prove
A women's heart t'encounter mighty love.
Cruel unto Mirtillo, but more cruel to your self.
It is no cruelty that springs of pity.
Cicute and Aconite do grow from hoisome roots.
I see no difference twixt this cruelty
That doth offend, and pity helping not.
Ah me Coriscal
These sighs good sister
Are but 〈…〉 of your heart They are 〈◊〉
For 〈…〉 worth.
I could not be
Thus cruel 〈◊〉 I should love cherish hopelessly.
Therefore 〈…〉 shows I have compassion
Of 〈…〉 Why ho•elesly?
〈◊〉 you not know I am espoused to Sell••o,
And that 〈…〉 to death
That violates her faith?
Oh simple fool,
Is this the let▪ Which is more ancient among vs,
Dianaes law• of loves? this in our breasts
Is bred and grows with vs, Nature her self
With her own hands imprints in our hearts breasts:
And where this law commands, both heaven &amp; earth
But if the other law do take my life, •obey.
How can loves law restore it me again?
You are too nice, were every woman so,
Had all such straight respects Good times farewell,
Small practisers are subject to this pain.
The law doth never stretch unto the wise.
Believe me should blame-worthy all be slain,
The 〈◊〉 then would soon prove womanlesse.
It needful was, theft should forbidden bee
To th•m that closely could not cover theft.
This honesty is but an art to seem so,
Let others as they 〈◊〉 believe, 〈◊〉 think so still.
These are but vanities (Coris•a• to•ere best
Quickly to leave that which we cannot hold.
And who forbids thee fool? This 〈◊〉 too 〈◊〉
To pass it over with one only love:
Men are too sparing of then favours now,
(Whether't be for want, or else for frowardness
The fresher that we are, the dear• still:
Beauty and youth once gone w'are like B•e hives
That hath no honey, no nor yet no wax.
Let men prate on they do not feel our woes,
For their condition d•ffers much from ours,
The elder 〈…〉 the perfect•
If they 〈…〉 they wisdom gain:
His private to a public good compare?
Then closing up mine eyes, I let my self
Be led by thee my dear, my faithful guide.
But do not stay now, enter me betime.
I'll to the T•mple first, and to the Gods
My prayers make, without whose aide no happy end
Can ever sort to mortal enterprise.
All places (Amarillis) temples are,
To hearts devout, you'll slack your time too much.
Time's never lost in praying unto them
That do command the time.
Go then dispatch.
Now if I err not, am I at good pass,
Only this staying troubles me, yet may it help,
I must go make new snares to train in Coridon.
Isle make him think that I will meet him there,
And after Amarillis send him soon,
Then by a secret way Isle bring Dianaes Priests:
Her shall they find, and guilty doom to death.
My rival gone (Mirtillo) sure is mine,
See where he comes. Whilst Amarillis stays
Isle somewhat try him. Love now once inspire
My tongue with words, my face with heavenly fire.
HEre weeping sprights of hell new torments hear,
New sorts of pain, a cruel mind behold
Included in a look most merciful,
My love more fierce then the infernal pit,
Because my death cannot suffice to glut
Her greedy will, and that my life is but
A multitude of deaths command me live,
That to them all my life might living give.
Isle make as though I heard him not, I hear
A lamentable voice plain hereabouts,
I wonder who it is, oh my Mirtillo.
So would I were a naked shade or dust.
How feel you now your self after your long
Discourse with your so dearly loved Nymph?
Like a weak sick man that hath long desired
Forbidden drink, at last gets it unto his mouth
And drinks his death, ending at once both life &amp; thirst.
So I long sick, burned and consumed in
This amorous drought, frō two fair fountains that
Ice do distill from out a rocky brain
Of an indurate heart,
Have drunk the poison that my life will kill,
Sooner then half of my desire fulfil.
So much more mighty waxes love as from
Our hearts the force is he receives (dear Mirtillo)
For as the Bear is wont with licking to give shape
To her misshapen brood, that else were helpless borne.
Even so a Lover to his bare desire,
That in the birth was shapeless, weak and frail.
Giving but form and strength begets love:
Which whilst it is young and tender, then it is sweet,
But waxing to more years, more cruel grows,
That in the end (Mirtillo) an mueterate affect
Is ever full of anguish and defect.
For whilst the mind on one thought only beats;
It waxes thick by being too much fixed.
So love that should be pleasure and delight,
Is turned to melancholy, and what worser is,
It proves at last, or death, or madness at the least:
Wherefore wise is that heart that often changes love.
Ere I change will or thought, changed must my life
Be into death, for though the beauteous Amarillis
Be most cruel, yet is she all my life:
Nor can this bodies bulk at once contain
More then one heart, more then one soul retain.
O wretched shepherd, ill thou know to use
Love in his kind, love one that hates thee, one
That flies from thee, fie man, I had rather die.
As gold in fire, so saith in griefe's refined,
Nor can (Corisca) am•rous constancy
Show his great power, but thorough cruelty.
This only rests amongst my many griefs.
My sole content doth my heart burn or die,
Or languish ne'er so much, light are the pains,
Plaints, torments, sighs, exile, and death it self,
For such a cause, for such a sweet respect.
That life before my faith shall broken bee,
So worse then death I hold inconstancy.
O brave exploit, Lover magnanimous,
Like an enraged beast or senseless rock,
There cannot be a greater damned plague,
More mortal poison to a soul in love.
Then is this faith. Unhappy is that heart
That let it self be gulled with vain fantas•nes
Of this erroneous and unseasonable
Disturber of these amorous delights.
Tell me poor man with this thy foolish virtue of constancy,
What love thou in her that doth thee despise?
Love thou the beauty that is none of thine?
The joy thou hast not? the pity thou want?
The reward thou dost not hope for? if thou deem right,
Thou love thine ill, thy grief, thy very death,
You are mad to hunt thus that thou can not have.
Lift up thy self (Mirtillo) happily thou want
•ome choice of friends, thou finds none to thy mind.
More dear to me is pain for Amarillis▪
Then any joy a thousand else can give:
If me my fates forbid her to enjoy,
For me then die all other kinds of joy.
I fortunate in any other kind of love?
No though I would I could not:
Nor though I could I would not.
And if I thought in any time henceforth
My will would wish or power obtain the same,
I would desire of heaven and love at once
Both will and power might quite be taken away.
Wilt thou then die for her that thee disdains?
Who pity not expects doth fear no pains.
Do not deceive thy self, perhaps thou think
She doth dissemble in this deep despite,
And that she loves thee well for all this show.
Oh that thou knew what unto me she ever says.
All these are trophies of my truest faith,
With which I will triumph over her cruel will,
Over my pains, and my distressed chance,
Over worlds fortune, and over death it self.
(What would he do, did he but know her love?)
How I bewail thee wretched frenzy man:
Tell me did thou ever any love besides?
She was my first, and she my last shall be.
For ought that I can see you never tried
Love but in cruel moods, but in disdain.
Oh if you had but proved him one time kind,
Prove him but so, &amp; you shall see how sweet a thing
It is t'enioy a grateful Nymph; sheel'e you adore,
She'll make your Amarillis bitter to your taste.
How dear a thing it is wholly to have
What you desire, and be nought bard thereof.
Here your Nymph sigh to cool your scalding sighs,
And after say (my dear) all that you see is yours.
If I be fair, I am only fair for you:
Only for you I cherish these my cheeks,
My lockes, my breast, your dear hearts only lodge.
But this (alas•e) is but a brooke to that
Great Sea of sweets which we in love might taste,
Which none can utter save by proof.
Thousand times blessed that under such a star is borne.
Here me (Mirtillo) how like I was t'haue said
My heart) a Nymph as gentle as the wind
Doth blow upon with hair of glistening gold,
As worthy of your love as you of hers,
Praise of these woods, love of a thousand hearts,
By worthy youths in vain solicited,
You only loves more then her heart, her life,
If you be wise do not despise her then.
She like a shadow to thy self will be,
A faithful follower of thy footsteps ever,
One at thy word, obedient at thy beck,
All hours of day and night at thy command.
Do not forsake this rare adventure then,
No pleasure in this earth so sweet as this,
It will not cost a tear, no not a sigh.
A joy accommodated to thy will,
A sweetness temp'red sweetly to thy taste,
Is it not a treasure worth the having (man)?
Leave then the feet of flying hopeless trace,
And her that follows thee, scorn not to embrace.
I feed you not with hopes of vanity.
If you desire to see her, you shall see her straight.
My hart's no subject for these loves delights.
Prove it but once, and then return again
Unto thy solitary grief, so may thou see
What are those joys that in loves pleasures bee.
A taste corrupted, pleasant things abhors.
Be not you cruel yet to rob her life,
That on your eye, depends, you know what it is
To beg with poverty, if you desire
Pity your self, do it not her deny.
What pity can he give that none can get?
In sum I am resolved whilst here I live,
To keep my faith to her how ere she prove,
Cruel or pitiful, or how she will.
(Oh truly blind, unhappy senseless man)
To whom preseru'st thou faith? trust me I am loath
T'augment thy grief, but for the love I bear thee
I cannot choose. Think Amarillis is unkind
For zeal she to religion bears?
Or unto chastity? Thou art a fool,
The room is occupied and thou must weep
Whilst others laugh. What? now you are dumb.
Now stands my life in midst twixt life and death,
Whilst I in doubt do stand, if to believe,
Or not believe, this makes me so amazed.
You'll not believe me then?
Oh if I do,
Straight shall you see my miserable end.
Live wretched man, live and revenged bee.
Oh no it is not true, it cannot bee.
Well theres no remedy, I must rehearse
That which will vex thy heart. See thou that cave?
That is the true custodian of her faith
And her religion. There thee to scorn she laughs,
There with thy torments doth she sauce the joys
Of thy thrice happy rival. There to be plain
Thy faithful Amarillis oft is wont
To dally in the arms of a base shepherd slave.
Go sigh, preserve thy faith, there's thy reward.
Dost thou tell true Corisca? may I believe thee?
The more thou seek, the worse thou find still.
But hast thou seen this thing Corisca?
I have not seen't, yet may thou if thou wilt,
For even this day is order taken this hour,
That they may meet. Hide thee but somewhere here,
And thou shalt see her first go in, then he.
Then comes my death.
See where she comes,
Softly descending by the Temples way. See thou her?
Do not her stealing feet bewray her stealing heart?
Attend thou here and thou shalt see th'effect.
Since I am here, the truth I now will see,
Till then, my life and death suspended bee.
LEt never mortal enterprise be taken in hand
Without this heavenly counsel, half confused
And doubtful was my heart when I went hence
Unto the Temple, whence thanks be to heaven,
I do well comforted, and well disposed return.
Me thought to my pure prayers and devout,
I felt a spright celestial move within me
Hartning my thoughts, that as it were did say,
What fear thou Amarillis? be assured.
So will I go assured, heavens be my guide,
Favour fair Mother of love her pure designs,
That on thy succour only doth depend.
Queen of the triple sky if ever thou prou'dst
Thy suns hot fire, take pity then of mine.
Guide hither courteous goddess that same swain
With swift and subtle feet that hath my faith.
And thou dear Cave into thy bosom take
Me, loves handmaid, and give me leave there to
Accomplish my desires. Why do I stay?
Here's none doth see or hear. Enter secure.
Oh Mirtillo, could thou but dream to find me here.
WHat am I blind, or do I too much see?
Ah had I but been borne without these eyes,
Or rather not at all had I been borne.
Did spiteful fates reserve me thus alive
To let me see so bad, so sad a sight?
Mirtill thy torments pass the pains of hell.
No: doubt no more: suspend not thy belief,
Thine eyes, thine ears, have seen, have heard it true.
Thy love an other owns not by the law
Of earth, that binds her unto any one,
But by loves law that ties her sole to thee.
O cruel Amarillis, wa'st not enough
To kill me wretch, but thou must scorn me too?
That faithless mouth that sometime gre•'t my joys,
Did vomit out my hateful name, because
She would not have it in her heart to be
A poor partaker of her pleasures sweet.
Why stay thou now? she that did give me life
Hath ta'n't away, and giu'n't an other man:
Yet wretch thou liu'st, thou dost not die. O die
Mirtillo, die to thy tormenting grief,
As to thy joy thou art already dead.
Die dead Mirtillo, finished is thy life.
Finish thy torment too: fleet wretched soul
Through this four constrained and wayward death:
Tic for thy greater ill that thus thou liust.
But what? And must I die without revenge?
First will I make him die that gives me death:
Desire to live so long I will retain
Till justly I have that Usurper slain.
Yield Grief unto Revenge: Pity to Rag•,
Death unto life, till with my life I have
Revenged the death, another guiltless gave.
This Steel shall not drink mine vnuenged blood,
My hand shall rage ere it shall piteous bee.
What ere thou art that ioyst my comforts all,
I'll make thee feel thy ruin in my fall.
I'll place me here even in this very Grove,
And as I see him but approach the Cave,
This Dart shall sudden wound him in his side.
It shall be cowardlike to strike him thus,
I'll challenge him to single combat, I:
Not so; for to this place so known and used,
Shepherds may come to hinder vs, and worse:
May search the cause that moved me to this fight,
Which to deny were wickedness to feign,
Will make me faithless held: and to discover,
Will blot her name with endless infamiet
In whom albeit I like not what I see,
Yet what I loved I do, and ever shall.
But what hope I to see, th'adult'rer die
That robbed her of her honour, me my life?
But if I kill him, shall not then his blood
Be to the world a token of this deed?
Why fear I death? since I desire to die.
But then this murder once made plain, makes plain
The cause whereby she shall incur that infamy:
I'll enter then this Cave, and so assail him,
I so, that pleases me: I'll steal in softly,
So that she shall not hear me. I believe
That in the secretest and the closest part
I gather by her words I shall her find,
Therefore I will not enter in too far.
A hollow hole there is made in a Rock,
The left side covered all with Y•ie leaves:
Beneath the other asscent there will I stand,
And tune attend t'effect what I desire:
I'll bear my dead foe to my living foe;
Thus of them both I shall be well revenged:
Then with this self same Dart Isle pierce this breast,
So shall there be three pier'st without relief,
First two with Steel, the third with deadly grief,
(Fierce) she shall see the miserable end
Of her beloved, and her betrayed friend,
This Cave that should be harbour of her joys,
Of both her loves, and that which more I crave,
Of her great shame, may prove the happy grave.
And you the steppes that I in vain have followed,
Could you me speed of such a faithful way?
Could you direct me to so dear a Bower?
Behold I follow you. O Corisea, Corisea,
Now hast thou told too true, now I believe thee.
DOth this man then believe Corisea, following her steps
Into the Cave of Eri••a•. Well, hoe's mad,
He knows her not; believe me he had need
Have better hold of her engaged faith,
Then I had of her hear: But knots more stringed,
Then gaudy gifts on her he cannot tie.
This damned Whore hath sold her self to him,
And here she'll pay the shameful markets price.
She is within, her steps bewray the same,
This falls out for her punishment, and thy revenge:
With this great ouerstu•ding stone close thou the Cave,
Go then about, and fetch the Priest with thee:
By the hill way which few or none do know,
Let her be executed as the law commands,
For breach of marriage troth, which she to Coridon
Hath plighted, though she ever it concealed
For fear of me, so shall I be revenged
Of both at once, I'll leese no farther time:
From off this Elm I'll cut a bough, with which
I may more speedily remove this stone! Oh how great it is!
How fast it sticks. I'll dig it round about.
This is a work in deed: Where are my wonted forces:
Oh perverse Stars! in spite of you I'll moou't.
Oh Pan Licciu, help me now, thou were a lover once,
Revenge thy love disdained, upon Corisea.
So, in the name of thy great power it moos.
So, in the Power of thy great name it falls.
Now is the wicked Fox taken in the trappe.
Oh that all wicked Women were with thee within,
That with one fire they might be all destroyed.
HOw Puissant art thou Love,
Natures mires•, and the Worlds wonder?
What savage nation, or what rustic hart
Is it that of thy power feels no part?
But what Wi•'s so pr•found can pull asunder
That powers strength?
Who feels those flames thy fire lights 〈◊〉 length,
Immoderate and vain,
Will say amortall spright thou sole dost reign
And live, in the corporal and fleshly breast.
But who feels after how a lover is
Wak'ned to Ʋertue, and how all those flames
Do tremble out at sight of honest shames,
(Ʋnbrid'led blust'ring lusts brought down to rest)
Will call thee Spright of high immortal bliss,
Having thy holy receptacle in the soul.
Rare miracle of human: and divine aspects,
(That blind) dost see, and Wisdom (mad) corrects,
Of sense and understanding intellects,
Of reason and desire confused affects.
Such Empery hast thou on earth,
And s• the heau•ns aboue dost thou control:
Yet (by your leave) a wonder much more rare,
And more stupendous hath the world then you,
〈◊〉 how you make all wonders yield and how
Is •asery known. Your powers do berthe,
And being taken from virtue of a woman fair.
O Woman gift of the high heavenly sky,
Or rather his who did their spangled gown
So gorgeous make unto our mortal eye:
What hath it which a Women's beauty push not down,
In his vast brow a monstrous Cicloplik•,
It only one eye hath,
Which to beholding gazers gives no light,
But rather doth with terror blindness, strike:
If it do sigh or speak•, it is like the wrath
Of an enraged Lion that would fight:
And not the skies alone but even poor fi••des.
Are blasted with the flames his lightning we•ldes.
Whilst thou with Lamps most sweet,
And with an amorous angelic light
Of two Suns visible that never meet,
Dost always the tempestuous troubled spright
Of thy beholder quiet and delight:
Sound, motion, light, that beauty doth assume,
State, daintiness, and value, do aright
Mix such a harmony in that far sight,
That skies themselves with vanity presume,
If less then Paradise those skies do shine
To Paragon with thee (thing most divine)
Good reason hath that sovereign creature (named
A Man) to whom all mortal things do how,
If thee beholding, higher cause allow
An• ye•d to bee.
What thou•h he rule and triumph truly famed,
It is not for high powers more worth do see
In him then is in thee,
Eu•her• of sceptre or of victory:
But for to make thee far more glorious satnd,
Because the Conq•crier thou dost command:
And 〈◊〉 must bee, for mans humanity
Is subject still to Beauties deutie.
Who will not trust this, but contrary saith,
Let him behold Mirtilloes won •reus saith:
Yet Woman to thy worth this is a stain,
Love is made l•a• so hopelessly and vain.
SO fixed was my hart and whole intent
In bringing of this Dear unto the bow,
That I forgotten had my dearest heir
That brutish villain robbed me of: Oh how I grieud,
With such a price to purchase mine escape:
But t'was of force to get out of the hands
Of that same senseless beast, who though he have
Less hart then any Conny hath, yet might he do
Me many injuries and many skornes.
I always him despised: whilst he had blood
In any of his veins (like a Horse-leach)
I sucked him still. Now doth it grieve him that
I have given o'er to love him still; just cause he had.
If one could love a most unlovely Beast,
Like herbs that erst were got for wholesome use,
The juice drawn out, they rest unprofitable,
And like a stinking thing we them despise:
So him, (when I had what so ere was good sucked out
From him) how should I use, but throw the sapless trunk
Unto the dunghill heap? Now will I see
If Coridon be gotten close into the Cave.
What news is this I see? Sleep I or do I wake•
I am assured this Caves mouth erst was op,
How close tic shut? How is this ancient Stone?
Rolled down? was it an Earthquake since.
Yet would I know if Coridon were there
With Amarillis, then cared I little for the rest,
Certain hoe's there, for tic a good while since
Lisetta gave him word. Who knows the contrary?
T'may be Mirtillo moved with disdain,
Hath done this deed, hee had hee but my mind,
Could only have performed this rare exploit.
Well by the Mountains way will I go see,
And learn the troth of all how it hath past.
LInco, I am assured thou know me not.
Who would have thought that in these rusty rags
Gentle Dorinda had been ever hid.
Were I some Dog, as I but Linco am,
Unto thy cost I should thee know too well.
What do I see? Dor. Linco, thou see great love,
Working effects both strange and miserable.
One like thy self, so soft so tender yet,
That were it but now (as one would say) a babe,
And still me thinks it was but yesterday
Since in mine arms I had thee little wretch,
Ruling thy tender cries, and taught thee too
To call thy Father Dad, thy Mother Momma:
When in your house I was a Servant hired,
Thou that so like a fearful Doe wa'st wont
To fear earch thing before thou feltst this love,
Why, on a sudden thee would scarre each blast,
Each Bird that stirred a bush, each Mouse that from
Her hole did run, each Leaf would make thee start,
Now wander all alone by hills, by woods,
Fearing no Beast that haunts the Forests wilde?
Wounded with Love, who fears another hurt.
Love had great power, that could not only thee
Into a Man, but to a Wolf transeforme.
O Linco, coldest thou but see here within,
There should thou see a living Wolf devour
My wretched soul like to a harmless Lamb.
And who's that Wolf? Siluio. Do. Ah thou hast said.
Thou, for he is a Wolf, hast changed thy self
Into a Wolf because no humane looks
Could move his love, perhaps this beasts yet mought.
But tell me, where had thou these clothes so ragd?
I'll tell thee true, to day I went betime
There where I heard that Siluio did intend
A noble hunting to the savage Boor,
At Erimantus foot, where Eliceit
Puts up his head, not far off from the lawnd,
That from the hill is severed by descent,
I found Mel•mpo my fair Siluioes Dog,
Whose thirst I think had drawn him to that place:
I that each thing of Siluio held full dear,
Shade of his shape, and footsteps of his feet,
Much more the Dog which he so dearly loved,
Him straightway took, and hee without ado,
Like to some gentle Cade, came quietly with me:
Now whilst I cast this Dog to reconuey
Home to his Lord and mine, hoping to make
A conquest of his love by gift so dear,
Behold he comes seeking his footsteps out,
And here he stays. Dear Linco I will not
Leese further time in telling every thing
That twixt vs past, but briefly to dispatch:
After a heap of feigned vows and words,
The cruel Boy fled from me straight away
In ire'full mood with his thrice-happy Dog,
And with my dear and sweetest sweet reward.
Oh desperate Siluio! Oh cruel Boy!
What did thou then? Disdaind'st thou not his deed?
As if the heate of his disdain had been
Of love unto my hart the greatest fire,
So by his rage increased my desire:
Yet still pursuing him unto the chase,
Keeping my broken way, I Lupus met,
Here thought I good with him to change my clothes,
And in his servile habit me to hide,
That amongst the Swains I for a Swain might pass,
And at my pleasure see my Silo•o.
Went thou to hunt in likeness of a Woolfe,
Seen by the Dogs, and yet return••'st safe?
Domida, thou hast done 〈◊〉.
〈◊〉
No wonder it is, the Dog• could do no harm
Unto their Masters 〈…〉.
There stood I 〈…〉 sort
Of neighbour 〈…〉,
Rather to see the 〈…〉.
At every 〈…〉 Beast
My hart did quake: 〈…〉
My soul step: 〈…〉
But my chief hope the 〈…〉 disterb'd,
Of that immeasurable Boor 〈…〉,
Like as the rau'nous strength of 〈◊〉 storm
In little time brings trees and rocks to ground:
So by his tusks bedewed with blood and foam,
We see Dogs slain, Staves broke, and wounded men.
How many times did my poor blood desire
For Siluioes blood to combat with the Boor,
How often times would I have stepped to make
My breast a buckler for my Siluioes breast,
How often said I in my sefe, excuse,
Excuse the dainty lapp of my dear Love:
So to my self spake I with praying sighs,
Whilst he his Dog all armed with hardened skin,
Lets loose against the Beast, who waxed proud
Of having made a wretched quarries sight
Of wounded Shepherds and Dogs slain outright:
Linca, I cannot tell this Dogs great worth,
And Siluio loves him not without good cause.
Look how an angry Lyon entertains
The pointed horns of some undaunted Bull,
Sometime with force, sometime with policy,
And fastens at the last his mighty paws
So on his back as no power can remou't:
So strong Me••••p' avoiding craftily
The Boors swift 〈◊〉 and mortal wounding blows:
At last taints on his ear, which first he shakes,
And afterword so firmly him he holds,
As his vast sides might wounded be at ease:
The dismal token of a deadly stroke,
The Siluio innocating Phoebes name,
Du•ct this blow (said he) and here I vow
To sacrifice to thee his ghastly head.
This l•yd, from out his q•for of pure gold,
He takes a speedy Sha•t, and to his ear
He draws his mighty Bow, and straight the Boor
Between his neck• and shoulder wounded, dyes:
I freed a sigh, seeing my Silui• safe.
Oh happy beast might thy life so leave,
By him that hearts from humane beasts doth reeve.
But what became of that same fearful beast?
I do not know, because I came away
For fear of being seen: But I believe
That solemnly they mean to carry it
Unto the Temple, as my Siluio vowed.
And mean you not to change these rusty clothes?
Yes wis full fine, but Leap••e hath my Gown,
And promised t'attende me at this Spring,
But 〈◊〉 miss: dear Linco if thou love me
Go seek him in these Woods, he is not far,
I'll rest me in the mean time by this Den,
For weariness makes me to sleep desire,
Nor would I home return in this attire.
I go, and stir not you till I return.
Shepherds, have you not heard our Demi-God
Montanus, worthy son of Hercules descent,
Hath slain the dreadful Boor, that did infest
All Arcady, and now he doth prepare
To satisfy his Vows, if we will thankful bee
For such a benefit, lets go and meet him,
And give him all the reverence that we can.
Oh doleful fortune! Oh most bitter chance!
Immedicable wound, Oh mornefull day!
What voice of horror and of plaint hear wee?
Stars foomen to our good, thus mock you vs?
Did you so high our hopes lift up, that with
Their fall you might vs plague the more?
This seems Ergasto, and it is surely hee.
Why do I Stars accuse, accuse thy self,
That brought'st the Iron to Loves Anvil so,
Thou did it strike, thou made the sparks fly out
From whence this fire grows so unquenchable:
But heavens do know my pity brought me to it.
Oh hapless Lovers, wretched Amarillis,
Unfortunate Titirus, childless father,
Sad Montanus, desolate Arcadia:
Oh miserable we; and to conclude,
All that I see, speak, hear, or think, most miserable.
What wretched accident is this that doth contain
So many miseries? Gow' Shepherds Gow'!
Lets meet with him: Eternal heavenly powers,
Will not your rage yet cease? Speak good Ergasto,
What lamentable chance is this thou plainst?
Dear friends, I plain vs all the ruin of Arcadia.
What's this?
The prop of all our hopes is down.
Ah speak more plain.
Daughter of Titirus,
The only branch of her decaying stock,
Hope of our health, which to Montanus son,
Was by the heavens promised and deste•ied,
Whose marriage should have freed Arcadia,
Wise Amarillis, Nymph celestial,
Pattern of honour, flower of chastity:
My hart will not give me leave to speak.
Why, is she dead?
Nay doomed to death.
Ay me, what's this.
Nay worse, With infamy.
infamous.
Found with the adult'rour, &amp; if hence ye go not soon,
Ye may her see led captive to the Temple.
Oh rare! but wicked, valor of this female sex,
Oh chastity, how singular thou art,
Scarce can a man say any woman's chaste,
Save she that ne'er was tried; unhappy age:
But courteous Shepherd, tell vs how it was?
This day betime you know Montanus came,
With th'haples father of the wretched Nymph,
Both by one self devotion led, which was
By prayers, to haste the marriage to good end:
For this the Sacrifizes offered were,
Which solemnly performed with good aspects:
For never were there seen entrails more fair,
Nor flames more bright, by which the blind Divine
Moved, did to Montanus say: This day
With Amarillis shall your son be wed:
Go quickly and prepare the marriage feast.
Oh blindly done, blind Prophets to believe,
The fathers and the standers by were glad,
And wept, their hearts made tender with this joy.
Titirus was no sooner gone, but straight we heard
And saw unhappy fearful signs, the messengers
Of sacredire: at which so sudden and so fierce,
Each stood amazed, the Priests enclosed were
Within the greater Cloysture, we without,
VVeeping were saying holy prayers, when lo
The wicked Satire audience earnest craves
Of the chief Priest: and for this was my charge,
I let him in, to whom he thus begins,
Fathers, if to your Vows the Incense and
The Sacrifizes be not answerable,
If on your Aulters purely burn no flames,
Wonder not, for in Ericinaes Cave,
A treacherous Nymph profaneness your holy Laws:
And in adultry her faith doth break.
Come Ministers with me, we'll take in the fact.
A while the unhappy father breathes, thinking he had
Found out the cause of this so dismal signs,
Straight he commands chief Minister Nacander go
With that same Satire, and captiud to bring
Them to the Temple both: him straight accompanied
With all our troupe of under Ministers,
The Satire by a dark and crooked way,
Conducts into the Cave: the young-man scared
Without torch-light, so suddenly assailed:
Assays to fly unto that outward issue,
But it the Satire closed hath too fast.
What did you then?
I can not tell you how
Amazed we were, to see her that we taken had,
To be Titirus daughter, whom no sooner we
Had laid hold on, but out Mirtillo steps,
And throws his Dart, thinking to wound Nicander:
And had the steel hit as he did direct,
Nicander had been slain: but shrinking back,
Whether by chance or wit, he shunt the harm:
But the strong Dart pierced his hayrie clothes,
And there stuck fast, Mirtillo not being able
It to recover, captive taken was.
What's come of him?
He by an other way is led.
What shall he do?
To get more out of him,
Besides, perhaps he shall not skotfree scope:
For having so offended our high Priest,
Yet would I could have comforted the wretch.
Why could you not?
Because the Law forbids
Vs under Ministers to speak with gultie folks:
For this I came about, and left the rest,
Provoking heavens with tears and prayers devout,
To turn away this dreadful storm from vs:
And so pray ye, and therewithal farewell.
So shall we do, had we but once performed
Our duty unto Siluio, eternal Gods
In pity, not in fury, show your selves supreme.
NOw crown my temples with triumphant Baize,
Victorious ten ples, this day happily
I combated have in the field of Love,
And vanquished: this day both heaven and earth,
Nature and Art, Fortune and Destiny,
Both friends and enemies have fought for me.
The wicked Satire whom I hated so,
Hath helped me much: for it was better that
Mirtillo should, then Coridon, be taken,
To make her fault more likely and more ill:
What though Mirtillo taken be, he will soon be free,
To her alone the punishment is due.
O solemn victory, On famous triumph,
Dress me a Trophy amorous deceits,
You in this tongue, in this same precious breast
Are aboue Nature most omnipotent.
Why stay I now? it is time for me to go,
Until the Law have judged my rival dead,
Perhaps the Priest may draw the troth from me:
Fly then Corisea, danger it is to lie,
For them that have no feet wherewith to fly▪
I'll hide me in these woods until I may
Return t'enioy my joys: happy Corisea,
Who ever saw a braver enterprise?
HEe had a hart most hard, or rather had
No hart at all, nor any humane sense,
That did not pity thee poor wretched Nymph,
And felt no sorrow for thy misery:
Only to see a Damsel captivate,
Of heavenly countenance and so sweet a face,
Worthy the world should to thee consecrate
Temples and Sacrifices, led to the Temple
For a Sacrifice, surely it were a thing
That with dry eyes I think none could behold:
But who knows how and wherefore thou were borne?
Titirus daughter, Montan'es daughter in law,
That should have been, and that these two are they
Which do uphold Arcadia, and that thy self
A dainty Nymph, so fair of form,
The natural confines of this thy life,
Approachest now so near the bounds of death:
Hee that knows this, and doth not plain the same,
He is no man, but beast, in humane shape.
If that my fault did cause my wretchedness,
Or that my thoughts were wicked, as thou think
My deed, less grievous would my death be then:
For it were just my blood should wash the spots
Of my defiled soul, heavens rage appease,
And humane justice justly satisfy,
Then could I quiet my afflicted sprights,
And with a just remorse of well-deserued death,
My senses mortify, and come to death:
And with a quiet blow pass forth perhaps
Unto a life of more tranquillity:
But too too much Nicander too much grieved
I am, in so young years Fortune so hie,
An Innocent, I should be doomed to die.
Ah pleased it heavens we had against thee offended,
Not thou offended against the heavenly powers:
For we alas with greater case might have
Restored thee to thy violated name,
Then thou appeasd their violated powers:
But I see not who thee offended hath,
Saving thy self. Tell me? were thou not found
In a close place with the Adulterer, alone
With him alone? Were it thou not promised
Unto Montanus son? Hast thou not broke thy faith?
How art thou innocent?
I have not broke
The Law, and I am innocent.
Thou hast not broke
The law of Nature happily (Love if thou likest)
But humane law and heavens thou hast transgressed,
(Love lawfully.)
Both heavens &amp; men have er'd to me:
If it be true that thence our haps do come,
For is it reason in my destiny,
I bear the pain that's due to other's faults?
Peace Nymph, came up thy tongue in wilful rage,
Let loose, do not condemn the Stars, for wee
Our selves procure vs all our misery.
I none accuse in heaven, but my ill fates.
And worse then them is she, that me deceived.
Then blame thy self, that hast deceived thy self,
I was deceived, but by an others fraud.
It is no deceit, to whom deceit is dear.
Then you I see condemn me for unchaste?
I say not so, ask but your deeds, they'•e tell.
Deeds often are false tokens of the hart.
The deeds we see, we cannot see the hart.
See what you will, I'am sure my hart is clear.
What led you then into the Cave alone?
Simplicity, and my too much belief.
Trust you your Chastity unto your Love?
I trusted my false friend, and not my Love.
What friend was that, your amorous desire?
Orminoes sister, who hath me betrayed.
Sweet treachery, to fall into your love.
I knew not of Mirtilloes coming I.
Why did you enter then? and to what end?
Let it suffice not for Mirtilloes sake.
You are condemned except you've better proof.
Let her be asked of my innocence.
What she, that was the occasion of your fault?
She that betrayed me, will you not her believe?
What faith hath she that was so faithless then?
I by our Goddess Cinthiaes name will swear.
Thy deeds have mart the credit of thine oath:
Nymph, to be plain, these are but dreams, and waives
Of muddy water, cannot wash clean, nor guilty hearts
Speak troth; thou should have kept thy chastity
As dearly as the apple of thine eye.
And must I then thus (good Nicander) die?
Shall none me hear, nor none my cause defend?
Thus left of all, deprived of every hope,
Only accompanied with an extreme
Unhappy Funeral 〈◊〉 that not helps me.
Nymph be content, and since thou were so fond
In 〈◊〉, be more 〈…〉 punishment:
〈…〉 eyes to heaven, thence 〈◊〉 thou come,
And thence doth come all 〈…〉 that hap•,
As from a Fountain doth a 〈…〉:
And though to vs it ill do seem, as every good
〈…〉 with some ill, yet there it is 〈◊〉.
Great 〈◊〉 doth know to whom all thoughts are known:
So doth our Goddess whom we worship here,
How much I grieve for thee: and if I have
〈◊〉 with my words thy soul, like a Phisicion I
Have done, who searches first the wound
Where it suspected is: be quiet then
Good Nymph, and do not contradict that which
Is writ in heaven aboue of thee.
O cruel sentence, whether writ in heaven
Or earth? In heaven it is not writ,
For there mine innocence is known: but what
Avails it since I needs must die? Ah too too hard,
And too too bitter cup. Ah good Nicander,
For pity sake make not such haste with me
Unto the Temple! stay, Oh stay a little while!
O Nymph, to whom death is so grievous now,
Each moment seems a death, it is thine ill to stay:
Death hath not so much harm, as fear thereof;
Thou sooner dead, thy pain is sooner past.
Some help may come, dear father: father now
Dost thou leave me, now leave thine only child.
Wilt thou not help me yet before I die?
Do not deny me yet thy latest kiss:
One blade shall wound both breasts, and out of mine
Thy blood must stream. Oh father! Oh sweet name!
Sometime so dear which I ne'er called in vain,
Make you your only daughters marriage thus,
A mornings Bri•e, an evening Src••fize?
Nymph. Do not thus torment thy self and me,
It is time I lead you to the Temple now,
My duty it is, I may not slack it so.
Dear Woods farewell, my dearest Woods farewell,
Receive my latest sighs until my soul
By cruel wound from this my body free,
Return to seek your loved shadows out:
For Innocents can not be doomed to hell,
Nor amongst the blessed can despayrers dwell.
O Mirtillo, wretched was that day
That first I saw thee, and thy sight did please,
Since I my 〈◊〉 must leave, more near to thee
Then thine, which proves the occasion 〈◊〉 my death.
Wilt thou believe that she is doomed to death
For thee, that cruel ever was to thee,
To keep me innocent? For me too bold,
For thee too little dating 〈◊〉 my will: •ow ever t'was,
I faultless die, fruitless, and without thee
My dear I die, my dear Mirt. No. Surely she
Is dead, and in Mirtilloes loved 〈◊〉 her life
Hath finished: her love and grief the blade
Prevented hath: come help to hold her up,
She lives yet, I feel her hart doth throb:
Carry her to the Fountain here hard by,
Fresh water may restore her stonied sprights,
But were it not a deed of pity now,
To let her die of grief, and shun the blade:
No let vs rather succour now her life,
Wee do not know what heavens will do with her.
O Glorious child of great Alci•es race,
That Monsters kilst, and Wild-bestes dost deface.
O glorious child, who 〈◊〉 Boor
Hast overthrown, unconquerable thought:
Behold his head, that seems to breath out death,
This is the 〈◊〉 of our Demi-God,
Help Shepherds help to celebrate his name,
And with solemnity his deeds to grace.
O glorious child of great Alcides race,
That Monsters kilst, and Wild-bestes dost deface.
O glorious child, by whom the fertile plains,
Deprived of till age, have their good regain•:
Now may the Plough-man go securely, and
Sow both his Seed, and reap his Harvest in:
These ugly teeth can now no more them chase.
O glorious child of great Alcides race,
That monsters 〈◊〉, and wild Beasts dost deface.
O glorious child, how thou dost couple still
Pity with fortitude. 〈◊〉 behold
Thy humble Silui•• vow; behold this head,
That here and here in thy despite is armed
With white and crooked tusks, envying thy horns.
Thou puissant Goddess, since thou did direct
His shaft: the price of his great victory
Is due to thee: hee famous by thy grace.
O glorious child of great Alcides race,
That monster, kilst, and wild Beasts dost deface.
Until this time I nener durst believe,
That which the Satire of Corisea said,
Imagining his tale had been but fordg'd,
Maliciously to work me injury:
Far from the t•oath it seemed to me that place,
Where she appointed I with her should meet,
(If that be true which was on her behalf,
Delivered me by young Lisetta late)
Should be the place to take th'Adult• ou• in:
But see a sign that may confirm the same,
Even as he told me, so it is in deed.
Oh what a Stone is this, which shuts up thus
The huge mouth of this Cave? Oh Corisea,
All in good time I have found out your guiles,
Which after so long use, at last return
With damage to your self. So many lies,
So many treacheries, must needs presage
Some mortal disaduenture at the least,
To him that was not mad, or blind with love:
T'was good for me• stayde away so long,
Great fortune that my father me detained
So with a tedious stay, as then me thought,
Had I kept time but as Lisetta bad,
Surely some strange adventure had I had.
What shall I doe? shall I attired with spleen,
S•eke with outrageous fury for revenge?
F••no, I honour her too much: so bee
The case with reason weight; it rather would
Have pity and compassion, then revenge.
And shall I pity her, that me betrays?
She rather doth betray her self, that thus
Abandons me, whose faith to her was pure,
And give her self in pray
To a poor Shepherd stranger vagabond,
That shall to morrow be more perfidous then she.
Should I according to the Satyrs counsel, her accuse,
Of the faith broken, which to me she swore:
Then must she die: My hart's not half so base,
Let her then live for me: or to say better,
Let her die unto me, and live unto others:
Live to her shame, live to her infamy;
Since she is such, she never can in me
Kindle one spark of fearful jealousy.
O Goddess, that no Goddess art, but of
An idle people, blind and vain: who with
Impurest minds and fond Religion,
Hallowes the Aulters and great Temples too.
What, said I Temples? wicked Theaters
O• beastly deeds, to colour their dishonest acts
With titles of thy famous Deity,
Because thy shames in others shames made less,
Let lose the rains of their lasciviousness.
Thou foe to Reason, plotter of mildeedes,
Corrupter to our souls, calamity
To the whole world; thou daughter of the Sea,
And of that treacherous monster rightly borne,
That with the breath of hope dost first entice
These humane breasts, but afterword dost move
A thousand storms of sighs, of tears, of plaints:
Thou may be better called Mother of tempests and
O• rage, then Mother of Love.
To what a misery hast thou thrown down
Those wretched Lovers? now may thou vaunt thy self
To be omnipotent, if thou can save
That poor Nymphs life, whom with thy snares thou hast
Conducted to this miserable death.
O happy day I hallowd my chaste mind
To thee my only Goddess Cynthia,
Such power on earth to souls of better sort,
As thou art light in heaven aboue the Stars.
Much better are those studious practises
Then those which Venus unchaste servants use:
Thy servants kill both Bears and ugly Boors,
Her servants are of Bears and Boors still slain.
Oh Bow and matchless Shaftes, my power and my delight,
Vain fantastiue Love, come prove thine arms,
•sseminate with mine: but fie, too much
I honour thee poor weak and wreckling child,
And for thou shalt me hear, I'll speak aloud.
A rod to chastise thee will be enough.—enough.
What art thou L••ho that so sounds again?
Or rather Love, that answer loudly so?—y so.
I could have wished no better match; but tell
Me then, Art thou (by heaven) hee—eauen hee
The son of her that for Aaenis did
So miserably burn, in whom nought good it.—Goddess.
A Goddess? no, the Concubine of Mars,
In whom 〈◊〉 doth wholly lye—•holly a lye.
O fine, thy tongue doth 〈…〉,
Wilt thou come forth? thou do•• but darkly dare,—y dare,
I held thee for a coward 〈◊〉, art thou a 〈…〉
Dost thou that title bravely scorn—y scorn.
O God, then art thou Ʋul•a•es son, by that
Lame Smith begot.—God,
A God? of what? of Winds, mad with base ••earth—earth.
God of the earth? makes thou thy foes to rue:—to•ue.
With what dost thou still punish those that strive,
And obstinately do contend with Love?—with Love.
Nay soft, when shall crooked Love (tell me good fool)
Enter my breast? I warrant it is too straight.—straight,
What, shall I fall in love so suddenly?—suddenly,
What is her name that I must then adore?—Door.
Dorind• fool, thou can not speak out yet,
But dost not thou mean her•—ee'n her.
Dorinda whom I hate; but who shall force my will•—I will.
What weapons wilt thou use? perhaps thy Bow,—thy Bow
My Bow? not till it be by thy lewd folly broken,—broken
My broken arms encounter me, and who
Shall break them? thou?—thou.
Fie fie thou art drunk, go sleep go sleep: but stay,
These marvels must be done: but where?—hear.
O fool, and I am gone, how thou art laden with
Wit-robbing Grapes that grew upon the Vine.—Divine
But soft, I see, or else me thinks I see
Something that's like a Woolfe in yonder Grove.
It is sure a Woolfe: How monstrous great it is.
This day for me is destined to praise:
Good Goddess, with great favours dost thou show
To triumph in one day over two Beasts:
In thy great name, I loose this shaft, the swiftest and
The sharpest which my Q•iue• holds.
Great Archeresse, direct thou my right hand,
And here I vow to sacrifice the spoils
Unto thy name. O dainty blow, blow fallen
Even where my hand and eye it destined.
Ah that I had my Dart, it to dispatch,
Before it get into the Woods away.
But here be Stones, what need I any else?
Heere's scarcely one, I need none now: here is
Another Shaft will pierce it to the quick.
What's this I see? unhappy Siluio?
I'haue shot a Shepherd in a Wolfish shape.
O bitter chance! O ever miserable!
〈…〉 thinks I know the wretch, ti's Linco that
Doth hold him up. Oh deadly shaft! Oh most
Unhappy Vow! I guilty of another blood?
I thus the causer of another death?
I that have been so liberal of my life,
So large a spender of my blood for others health?
So, cast away thy weapons, and go live
All glorilesse. But see where he doth come,
A great deal less unhappy then thy self.
Lean thou thy self (my Daughter) on this arm.
Unfortunate Dorinda. Sell. O me! Dorinda? I am dead.
O Linco L•nco, Oh my second father!
It is Dorinda sure: Ah voice; ah sight.
Dorinda to sustain, Linco hath been
A fatal office unto thee: thou hardst
The first cries that I ever gave on earth,
And thou shalt hear the latest of my death:
And these thine Arms, that were my Cradle once,
Shall be my Coffin now.
O child more dear
Then if thou were it mine own. I cannot speak,
Grief hath my words dissolved into tears.
On earth hold op thy jaws and swallow me.
Oh stay both pace and plaint (good Linco) for
The one my grief, my wound the other doth increase.
Oh what a hard reward most wretched Nymph,
Had thou received for thy wondrous love?
Be of good cheer, thy wound not mortal is,
I but Dorinda mortal, will be quickly dead:
But dost thou know who it is hath wounded me?
Let vs care for the sore, not for the essence,
For never did Revenge yet heal a wound.
Why stay I still? Shall I stay whilst they see me?
Have I so bold a face? Fly Siluio fly
The punishment of that revengeful sight,
Fly the just edge of her sharpe cutting voice:
I cannot fly, fatal necessity doth hold
Me here, an I makes me seek whom most
I ought to shun.
Why Linco, must I die
Not knowing who hath given me my death?
It Siluio is.
P•••so.
I know his shaft.
On happy issue of my lives last end,
If I be shun by such a lovely friend.
See where he is, with countenance him accusing.
Now heavens be praised, you're at good pass,
With this your bow and shaftes omnipotent,
Hast thou not like a cunning Wood-man shot?
Tell me, thou that of Sell••• liust; was it not I
That shot this dainty shoot? Oh Boy too wise,
Had thou believed this foolish aged man,
Had it not better been Answer me wretch.
What can thy life be worth, if thee do die?
I know thou'st say thou thoughtst t'haue shot a Woolfe,
As though it were no fault to shoot
Not knowing (careless wandering chi'd) if it were
A man or beast thou shotst at: what Herdsman, or
What Plougsman dost thou see attired in other clothes?
Ah Siluio, Siluio, who ever sows wi•t so greene,
Doth ever reap ripe fruit of ignorance.
Think you (vain Boy) this chance by chance did come?
Never without the powers divine did such like happen:
Heaven is enraged at your supportlesse spite,
To love and deep despising so humane affects.
Gods will not have companions on the earth,
They are not pleased with this austerity:
Now thou art dumb, thou were not wont t'indure.
Siluio, let Linco speak, he doth not know
What sovereign•tie thou o'er Dorinda hast,
In life and death by the great power of Love.
If thou hast shot me, thou hast shot thine own:
Thou hitst the mark that's proper to thy shaft,
These hands that wounded me, have followed right
The aim of thy fair eyes. Siluio, behold her whom
Thou hottest so, behold her as thou would:
Thou would me wounded have, wounded I am:
Thou wished me dead, I ready am for death,
What would thou more? What can I give thee more?
Ah cruel Boy, thou never would believe
The wound by thee Love made, can thou deny
That which thy hand hath done? thou never saw
The blood mine eyes did shed; see thou this then,
That gushes from my side: but if with pity now
All gentleness and valour be not spent,
Do not deny me cruel soul, I pray,
At my last gasp, one poor and only sigh:
Death should be blessed, if thou but thus would say,
Go rest in peace poor soul, I humbly pray.
Ah my Dorinda, shall I call thee mine,
That art not mine, but when I thee must loose:
And when thou •ast thy death received by me,
Not when I might have given thee thy life:
Yet will I call thee mine, that mine shalt bee
Spite of my fortune: and since with thy life
I cannot have thee, I'll have thee in death:
All that thou see in me, is ready for revenge:
I kilde thee with these weapons, with the same
I'll kill my self: I cruel was to thee,
I now desire nothing but cruelty.
I proudly thee despi'd, upon my knees
I humbly thee adore, and pardon crave;
But not my life. Behold my Bow, my Shaftes.
Wound not mine eyes or hands, they are innocent:
But wound my breast, monster to pity, foe
To love: wound me this hart, that cruel was
To thee: behold, my breast is bare.
Siluio, I wound that breast? thou had not need
Let it be naked to mine eyes, if thou desirdst
I should it wound. O dainty beauteous rock,
So often beaten by the waives and winds
Of my poor tears and sighs in vain: and is it true,
Thou pity feelst? or am I wretch but mocked:
I would not this same Alabaster skin
Should me deceive, as this poor Beasts hath thee.
I wound thy breast? it is well, Love durst do so.
I ask no wore revenge, then thou should love.
Blessed be the day wherein I first did burn,
Blessed be my tears and all my martirdomes:
I wish thy praise, and no revenge of thee.
But courteous Siluio, that dost kneel to her,
Whose Lord thou art; since me thou needs wilt serve,
Let thy first service be, to rise when I thee bid:
The second, that thou liu'st: for me, let heavens
Work their will; in thee my hart will live:
As long as thou dost live, I cannot die.
But if it seem unjust my wound should be
Unpunished, then break this cruel Bow,
Let that be all the malice thou dost show.
Oh curtuous doom: and so't shall be,
Thou deadly Wood shalt pay the price of others life,
Behold, I break thee, and I render thee
Ʋnto the Woods, a trunk unprofitable:
And you my Shaftes that pierced have the side
O• my fair Love, because you brothers bee
I put you both together, and deliver you,
Rods armed in vain, and vainly feathered.
T'was true Love told me late in Echoes voice.
O powerful tamer both of Gods and men:
Late enemy, now Lord of all my thoughts,
I• thou esteem it glory to have mollified
A proud obdurate hart, Defend me from
The fatal stroke of death? one only blow
Killing Dorinda, will me with her kill:
So cruel death, if cruel death she prove,
Will triumph over thee triumphant love.
So wounded both, yet wounds most fortunate,
Were but Dorindaes sound. Let's soon go seek
Some remedy.
Do not good Linco lead
Me to my fathers house in this attire.
Shall my Dorinda go to other house
Then unto mine? no sure: alive or dead
This day I'll marry thee.
And in good time,
Since Amarillis hath lost life and marriage too.
O blessed couple! O eternal Gods!
Give two their lives, giving but one her health.
Siluio I weary am, I cannot hold me on
My wounded side.
Be of good cheer,
Thou shalt a burden be to vs most dear.
Linco give me thy hand.
Hold there it is.
Hold fast, and with our arms we'll make a seat
For her. Sit there Dorinda, and with thy right hand
Hold Lincoes neck, and with thy left close mine:
Softly my hart, for rushing of thy wound.
O now me thinks I am well. Sell. Linco hold fast.
Do not you stagger, but go forward right,
This is a better triumph then a head.
Tell me Dorinda, doth thy wound still prick?
It doth; but in thine arms my lovely treasure,
I hold even pricking dear, and death a pleasure.
O Sweet and golden age, when Milk
Unto the tender World was meat:
Whose Cradle was the harmless Wood,
Their dearer parts whose grass like silk,
The Flocks untouched, did joy to eat:
Nor feared the World the spoil of blood,
The troublous thoughts that do no good
Did not then make a cloudy veil
To dim our suns eternal light:
Now Reason being shut up quite,
Clouds do our Wits skies ouer-haile:
From whence it is strange lands we seek for ease,
Ploughing with huge Oak trees the Ocean seas,
This bootless superstutious voice,
This subject profit less then vain,
Of toys, of titles, and of slight,
Whom the mad World through worthless choice,
Honour to name doth not disdain,
Did not with tyranny delight,
To rule our minds, but to sustain
Trouble for troth, and for the right
To maintain saith a firm decree
Amongst vs men of each degree,
Desire to do well was of right:
Care of true Honour, happy to be named,
Who what was lawful pleasure to vs framed.
Then in the pastures grony shade,
Sweet Carols and sharpe Madrigal•.
Were flames unto dear lawful Love:
There gentle Nymphs and Shepherds made
Thoughts of their words, and in the dales
Did Himen joys and kisses move,
Far sweeter and of more behove,
True lovers only did enjoy
Loves lively Roses and sweet Flowers,
Whilst Wily-craft sound always showers,
Showers of sharpe will, and wills annoy:
Were it in Woods or Caves for quiet rest,
The name of Husband still was like•d best.
False wicked World, that courrest still
With thy base mercenary name
The souls chief good, and dost entice
To nourish thought of newfound Will,
With likelihoods 〈◊〉 again:
Ʋnbridling eu•• secret vice,
Like to a Net laid by device
Among 〈◊〉 Flowers and sweet• spread 〈◊〉,
Thou cloathst wild thoughts in 〈…〉,
Esteeming seeming goodness, deeds,
By which the life with Art deceive:
Nor dost thou care (this Honour is thy act)
What theft it be, so Love may hide the fact.
But thou great Honour, great by right,
Frame famous spirits in our hearts,
Thou true Lord of each Noble breast:
O thou that rulest Kings of might,
Once turn thee into th•se our parts,
Which wanting thee, cannot be blessed:
Make the•r from out their mortal rest,
With mighty and with powerful stings,
Who by a base unworthy will
Have left to work thy pleasure still,
And left the worth of antiqur things:
Let's hope our ills a truce will one day take.
And let our hopes not waver no nor shake:
Let's hope the setting sun will rise again,
And that the skies when they most aarke appear,
Do draw (though covered) after vvished clear.
THe place is ever good, where any thrives:
And every place is native, to the wise.
True (good Ʋranio) I by proof can tell,
That young, did leave my fathers house, and sought
Strange places out, and now turn home gre• heard,
That erst departed hence with golden lockes;
Yet is our native soil sweet unto him
That hath his sense: Nature doth make it dear,
Like to the Adamant, whom though the Matrinet
Carry far hence, sometime where as the Sun
Is borne, and sometime where it dyes; yet still
The hidden virtue where with it beholds,
The Northern Pole it never doth forgo:
So he that goes far from his native soil,
And often times in stranger land doth dwell,
Yet he retains the love he to it bore.
O my Arcadia, now I greet thy ground,
And welcome good Ʋranio, for it is meet
You do partake my joys, as you have done my toil.
I may partake your toil, but not content,
When I remember how far hence I left
My house and little household off: well may I rest
My limbs, but well I wot my hart will moan,
Nor save thy self, could any thing have drawn
Me from Elidis now: yet I know not
What cause hath made you travail to this place.
Thou know my dear Mirtillo, whom the heavens
Have given me: for my Son came hither sick,
Here to get health, according to the Oracle,
Which said only Arcadia could restore it him:
Two months he hath been here, and I not able to
Abide that stay, went to the Oracle
To know of his return: which answered thus.
Return thou to thy Country, where thou shalt
Live merrily with thy Mirtillo dear:
Heavens have determined great things of him;
Nor shalt thou laugh but in Arcadia.
Thou then my dear companion, merry bee,
Thou hast a share in all my good, nor will
Carino smile, if my Ʋranio grieve.
All labours that I for Ca•ino take,
Have their reward: but for to short the way,
I pray you tell what made you travail first.
A youthful love I unto Music bore,
And greediness of foreign fame, disdaining that
Arcadia only should me praise, made me
Seek out Eli•• and Pisa famoue so,
Where I saw glorious Aegean crowned with Baize,
With Purple next to Virtue evermore;
So that he Ph•bus seemed: when I devout
Unto his power did consecrate my Lute:
Then left I Pisa, and to M•cen• went,
And afterwards to Argos, where I was
At first, adored like a God: but twilbe too
Too troublesome to tell the story of my life.
I many fortunes tried, sometime disdained,
Sometime respected like a power divine:
Now rich, then poor; now down, then up aloft:
But in the change of place, my fortunes never changed,
I learned to know and sigh my former liberty;
And leaving Argos, I returned to
My homely Bower I in Elidis had:
Where Gods be praised) I did Mirtillo buy,
Who since, hath comforted all mine annoys.
Thrice happy they who can contain their thoughts
And not through vain and most immoderate hope,
〈◊〉 the sweet tasted fruit of moderate good.
Who would have thought t'haue waxed poor in gold
I thought t'haue found in royal Paliaces
People of more humanity, then here,
Which is the noble ornament of worthy sprightes;
But I (Ʋr••io) found the contrary:
People in name and words right curtuous,
But in good deeds most ••arse, and Pities foes:
People in face, gentle and pleasant still;
But fiercer then th'outr•gious swelling Sea:
People with countenance all of charity,
But thoroughly Covetous, and fraught with Envy:
The greater shows they make, the less troth they mean▪
That which is virtue otherwhere, is there but vice:
Vprightest deeds, true love, pity sincere,
〈…〉 faith, of hand and hart,
A hie most innocent; these they esteem
But cowards still, and men of silly wits:
Follies and vanities, that are ridiculous,
Coosonage, lying, theft, and rapine clad:
In holiness, by others downefalles and their loss,
Rich still to grow, to build their reputation
On others infamy, to lay five snares
To trap the innocent; these are the virtues of that place.
No merit, worth, reverence of age,
Of law, or of degree, no rains of shame,
Respect of love or blood, nor memory
Of any good received: and to conclude,
nothing so reverend, pure, or just can be,
That seems forbidden to these gulfs of pride,
Of honour so ambitious: so covetous
Of getting still. Now I that always lived
Unwary of their snares, and in my forehead had
All my thoughts written, my hart discovered;
You well may judge, I was an open mark
To the suspicious shaftes of envious folks.
What can be happy in that caytiue land,
Where Envy ever Virtue doth command?
If since I travailed, my Muse had had
As good a cause to laugh as it had to weep,
Perhaps my stile would have been fit t'haue sung
The arms, and honours, of my noble Lord,
So that he needed not to have envied
The brave Meonian trumpet of Achilles fame.
I might have made my Countries brow, been girt
With happy Laurel too: But too inhumane is this age,
And too unhappy gui•t of Poetry.
The Swans desire a quiet nest, a gentle ayre,
Pernassu• never knew this biting care.
Who quarrels with his fate and fortune still,
His voice must needs be hoarse, his song but ill:
But now it is time to seek Mirtillo out.
Oh how this Countrey's changed! I scarcely know it:
But Strangers never want a guide that have a tongue,
We will enquire to the next harbour house,
Where thou thy weary limbs may well repose.
WHich plain I first (my child) of thee? thy life
Or honesty? Isle plain thine honesty,
Because thy fire (though mortal) honest was:
And in thy steed my life I'll plain and spend,
Of thy life and thine honesty to see an end.
O Montane, only thou with thy devices
And ill-•not Oracles, and with thy love,
And proud despiser of my daughter, to this end,
Hast brought my child. Oh doubtful Oracles,
How vain you bee? and honesty against love
In youthful hearts a weak defence doth prove,
A woman whom no match hath ever sought,
Is evil guarded from this common thought.
If dead he be not, or that through the ayre
No winds have carried him, him might I find:
But see him now, when least I thought I should:
O late for me, for thee too quickly found,
Except the news were better that I bring.
Brings thou the weapon that hath slain my child?
Not this, but less: But how heard you this news?
Why lives she then?
She lives, and may do still,
For in her choice it is to live or die.
Oh blessed be thou that lifts me up from death:
But how is she unsafe, since at her choice it is
To live or die?
Because she will not live.
She will not live? What madness makes her thust
Another death: and if thou dost not move her,
She is so bent, as others send in vain
Their praying words.
Why stay we? let vs go!
What, soft and fair, the Temples gates are shut,
And know you not how it unlawful is
For any one save sacerdotal foot,
To touch the sacred ground, until such time
The Sacrifice unto the Aulters come,
Adorned with the Sanctuary rites?
How if shee'ffect her purpose in the while?
She cannot, for shoe's kept.
in mean time,
Then tell truly how all this is come to pass?
Thy mournful child now come before the Priest
With looks of fear and grief, that tears brought forth,
Not only from vs by, but by my troth,
Even from the pillors of the Temples self
And hardest stones, that seemed to feel the same,
Was in a trice accused, conuic't, condemned.
O wretched child, and why was she condemned?
Because the grounds of her defence were small:
Besides, a certain Nymph, whom she did call
In testimony of her innocence,
Was absent now, and none could find her out:
And fearful signs, and monstrous accidents
Of horror in the Temple proved the doubt,
As dolorous to vs, as strange and rare,
Not seen since we did feel heavenly ire
That did revenge Amintas love betrayed,
The first beginning of our misery.
Diana sweat out blood, the Earth did shake,
The sacred Cave did bellow out unwonted howling▪
And dire deadly cries:
Withal, it breathed out such a stinking mist,
As Plutoes empire kingdom hath no worse.
And now with sacred order goes the Priest
To bring thy daughter to her bloody end,
The whilst Mirtillo (wondrous thing to tell)
Offered by his own death, to give her life,
Crying, unbind those hands (unworthy striges)
And in her steed that should be sacrificed
Unto Diana, drove me to the Aulters
A Sacrifice to my fair Amarillis.
O admirable deed of faithful love.
And noble hart.
Now hear a miracle:
She that before so fearful was to die,
Changed on the sudden by Mirtilloes words,
Thus answers with a bold undaunted hart:
〈…〉 then by thy death to gain
〈◊〉 to her death, that by thy life doth live.
O 〈◊〉 unjust: on Ministers, on on, why do you stay?
〈◊〉 me forthwith unto mine end: Isle no such pity I,
Mirtill replies, Live cruel piteous love,
My hart his spiteful pity doth reprove:
To me it lunges to die. Nay then to me
(She answers) that by Law condemned am:
And here anew begins a wondrous strife,
As though that life were death, and death were life.
(O souls well borne) O couple worthy of
Eternal honour, never dying praise:
O living, and o dying glorious lovers.
Had I so many tongues, so many voices,
As Heaven hath eyes, or Ocean sea hath sands;
All would be dumb and hoarse in setting out
Their wondrous and incomprehended praise.
Eternal Child of heaven, O glorious Dame,
That mortal deeds enchroniclest to time,
Write thou this History, and it enfold
In solid Diamond with words of gold.
But what end had this mortal quarrel then?
Mirtillo vanquishes? O rare debate,
Where dead on living gets the victory.
The Priest speaks to your Child, be quiet Nymph,
We cannot change this doom, for he must die
That offers death, our Law commands it so:
And after bids, your Daughter should be kept,
Least griefs extreme should bring her desperate death▪
Thus stood the state When Montane sent me for thee.
In sooth tic true, sweet scented Flowers shall cease
To dwell on Rivers banks, and Woods in Spring
Shall be without their Leaves, before a Maid
Adorned with youth, shall set sweet Love at nought:
But if we stay still here, how shall we know
When it is time unto the Church to go?
Here best of all, for in this place alas,
Shall the good Shepherd sacrificed be.
And why not in the Church?
Because there where
The fault is done, the punishment must be.
And why not in the Cave? there was the fault.
Because to open skies it mus be hallowed.
And how know thou all these misteriall rites?
From the High-priest, who from Tireno had them,
For true Amintas and untrue Lucrine,
Were sacrificed so: But now tic time to go;
See where the sacred Pempe softly descends:
It were well done of vs by this other way,
To go unto the Temple to thy daughter.
OH daughter of great Jove, sister of Phebus bright,
Thou second Titan, to the blinder world that gives light
Thou that with thy well tempered vital ray,
Thy brothers wondrous heate doth well allay,
Which make sweet Nature happily bring forth
Rich fertile births of Herbs, of Beasts, of Men:
As thou his heate dost quench, so calm thine ire
That sets Arcadiaes wretched hearts on fire.
O daughter of great Jove. &amp;c.
Yea sacred Priests, the Aulters ready make,
Shepherds devout, reiterate your sounds,
And call upon the name of our great Goddess.
O daughter of great Jove. &amp;c.
Now Shepherds stand aside, nor you my servants
Come not near, except I call for you.
Valiant young man, that to give life else where,
Abandonest thine own, die comforted thus far:
It is but a speedy sigh, which you must pass;
For so seems death to noble minded sprightes,
That once performed, this envious age,
With thousands of her years shall not deface
The memory of such a gentle deed:
But thou shalt live the example of true faith,
But for the Law commands thee sacrificed,
To dye without a word: Before thou kneelst,
If thou hast ought to say, say it, and hold thy peace
For ever after that.
Father, let it be lawful that I call thee so,
For though thou gau'st not, yet thou take my life:
My body to the ground I do bequeath, my soul
To her that is my life: But if she die,
As she hath threatened to do; aye me,
What part of me shall then remain alive,
Oh death were sweet, if but my mortal parts
Might die, and that my soul did not desire the same:
But if his pity ought deserves that dyes,
For sovereign pity then courteous father,
Provide she do not die; and with that hope
More comforted, Isle pay my destinies,
Though with my death you me from her disioyne,
Yet make her live, that she may me retain.
Scarce I contain from tears: ô frail mankind!
Be of good cheer my son, I promise thy desire,
I swear it by this head, this hand take thou for pledge.
Then comforted, I die all comforted:
To thee my Amarillis do I come,
Soul of the faithful Shepherd, as thine own
Do thou receive, for in thy loved name
My words and life I will determine straight:
So now to death I kneel, and hold my peace.
On sacred Ministers, kindle the flame
With Frankincense and Myrrh, and Incense throw thereon
That the thick vapour may on high ascend.
O daughter of great Jove. &amp;c.
WHat Countrymen are here, so bravely furnished
Almost all in a Livery? Oh what a show
Is here? how rich, how full of pom it is?
Trust me, I think it is some Sacrifice.
Reach me (Nicander) the golden Basin,
That contains the juice of Bacchus fruit.
Behold it is ready here.
So may this faultless blood
Thy breast (Oh sacred Goddess) mollify,
As do these falling drops of Wine extinguish
This blazing flame. So, take the Basin, there;
Give me the silver Ewer now:
Behold the Ewer.
So may thine anger cease with that same faithless Nymph
Provoked as doth this fire, this falling stream extinguish.
This is some Sacrifice, but whore's the holocaust?
Now all is fit, there wants nought but the end.
Give me the Axe.
If I be not deceived,
I see a thing that by his back seems a man:
He kneels: he is perhaps the holocaust.
O wretch tic so, the Priest holds him by th'ead:
And hast thou not unhappy country yet,
After so many years heavens rage appeasd?
O daughter of great Jove, sister of Phebus bright,
Thou second Titan, to the blinder world that gives light.
Revengeful Goddess that for private fault,
Dost public punishment on vs inflict,
(Whether it be thy only will, or else
Eternal providence immutable command)
Since the infected blood of (Lucrina false)
Might not thy burning justice then appease,
Drink now this innocent and voluntary Sacrifice,
No lesser faithful then Amintas was,
That at thy sacred Alter in thy dire revenge I kill.
O daughter of great Jove, sister of Phebus bright,
Thou second Titan, to the blinder world that gives light.
Oh how I feel my hart wax tender now,
Binding my senses with unusual maze:
So both my hart not dares, my hands unable are
To lift this Axe.
Isle see this wretches face,
And then depart: for pity will not let me stay.
Perhaps against the Sun my strength doth fail,
And tic a fault to sacrifice against the Sun,
Turn thou thy dying face toward this hill.
So now, tic well.
O wretch! what do I see?
My son Mirtillo, Is not this my son?
So now I can.
It is even so.
Who lets my blow?
What dost thou sacred Priest?
O man profane,
Why hast thou held this holy Axe? how dare
Thou thy rash hands inpose upon the same?
O my Mirtillo, how came thou to this?
Go dotard old and foolish insolent.
I never thought t'haue thee embraced thus.
Patch stand aside, thou may not handle things
Sacred unto the Gods, with hands impure.
Dear to thee Gods am also I, that by
Their good direction hither came even now.
N•…er cease, hear him, and turn him hence.
Then courteous Priest, before thy sword doth light
Upon his neck, Why dyes this wretched Boy?
I, why the Goddess thou ador'st, beseech thee tell?
By such a heavenly power thou coniur'st me,
That I were wicked, if thee denied:
But what will it profit thee?
More then thou think.
Because he for an other willing is to die.
Dye for an other? then I for him will dye:
For pity then, thy falling blow direct,
In stead of his, upon this wretched neck.
Thou dotest friend.
And will you me deny
That which you grant another man?
Thou art
A Stranger man.
How if I were not so?
Nor coldest thou, for he dyes but by exchange.
But tell me, what art thou? thy habit shows
Thou art a Stranger, no Arcadian borne.
I an Arcadian am.
I not remember
That I ever saw thee erst.
Here was I borne,
〈…〉, and father of this wretch.
Art thou Mirtill•es father then? thou come
〈◊〉 both for thy self and me:
Stand now aside, least with thy fathers tears,
Thou make fruitless, vain our Sacrifice.
If thou a father were?
I am a father man,
A tender father of an only son:
Yet were this same, my Siluioes head, my hand
Should be as ready for it as it is for this:
For he this sacred habit shall unworthy wear,
That to a public good, his private doth prefer.
O let me kiss him yet before he dye.
Thou may not man.
Art thou so cruel son?
Thou wilt not answer thy sad father once.
Good father hold your peace.
O wretched wee
The holocaust contaminate ô Gods.
The life you gave, I cannot better give,
Then for her sake, who sole deserves to live.
Oh thus I thought his fathers tears would make
Him break his silence.
Wretch with error have
I done the law of silence, quite I had forgot.
On Ministers, why do we stay so long?
Carry him to the Temple back to th'noly Cell,
There take again his voluntary vow.
Then bring him back, and bring new Water too,
New Wine, new Fire: dispatch, the sun grows low.
But thank thou heavens thou aged impudent,
Thou art his father? if thou were not: well,
(I swear by this same sacred habit on my head I wear)
Thou should soon taste how ill I brooke thy boldness.
Why, know thou who I am▪ know thou that with
This Rod I rule affairs both human and divine?
I cry you mercy holy sacred Priest.
I suffered thee so long, till thou grow insolent.
Know thou not Rage that Justice 〈◊〉 up,
The longer it is delayed, the greater tic?
Tempestius •urie never waigned rage,
In breasts magnanimus, but that one blast
Of Generous effect could cool the same:
But it I can not grace obtain, let me
Find justice yet, you can not that deny,
Law makers be not freed from the Laws:
I ask you justice, justice grant me then,
You are unjust, if you Mirtillo kill.
Let me then know how I can be unjust?
Did you not tell me it unlawful was
To sacrifice a Strangers blood▪
I told you so,
And told you that which heavens did command.
He is a Stranger you would sacrifice.
A Stranger, how? is he not then thy son?
Let it suffice, and seek no further now.
Perhaps because you not begot him here.
Oft he least knows, that most would understand.
Here we the kindred mean, and not the place.
I call him Stranger, for I got him not.
Is he thy son, and thou bigots him not?
He is my son, though I begot him not.
Did thou not say that he was borne of thee?
I said he was my son, not borne of me.
Extremity of grief hath made thee mad.
If I were mad, I should not feel my grief.
Thou art ore-madd, or else a lying man.
A lying man will never tell the truth.
How can it be son, and not son at once?
The son of love, and not of nature hoe's.
Is he thy son? he is no Stranger then:
If not, thou hast no part at all in him:
Father or not, thus thou convinced art.
With words and not with truth, I am conuin'st.
His faith is doubted that his words contraries.
Yet do I say thou dost a deed unjust.
On this my head, and on my Siluioes head,
Let my injustice fall.
You will repent it.
You shall repent, if you my duty hinder.
I call to witness men and Gods.
Gods you
To witness call, that you despised have.
Since you'll not hear me, hear me heaven and earth.
Mirtill a stranger is, and not my son,
You do profane your holy sacrifice.
Heavens aide me from this Bedlam man.
Who is his father since hoe's not your son?
I cannot tell you, I am sure not I.
See how he wauers, is he not of your blood?
Oh no.
Why do you call him son?
Because I from his cradle have him nourished still,
And ever loved him like my son.
Bought you him? stole you him? where had you him:
A courteous stranger in 〈◊〉 gave me him.
And that same stranger, where had he the child?
I gave him.
Thou mou'st at once disdain and laughter.
First thou him gau'st, and then had him in gift.
I gave him that which I with him had found.
And where had you him?
In a lowe hole,
Of dainty Mutle trees upon Alpheus bank:
And for this cause Mirtillo I him called.
Here's a fine tale, what have your woods no beasts?
Of many sorts.
How escaped he being devoured:
A speedy Torrent brought him to this hole,
And left him in the bosom of a little Isle,
On every side defended with the stream.
And were your streams so pitiful they drowned him not?
Your Rivers gentle are that children nuise.
Laid in a cradle like a little ship,
With other stuff the waters wound together,
He was safe brought by chance unto this hole.
Laid in a cradle?
In a cradle laid.
And but a child?
I but a tender child.
How long was this ago••
Cast up your cou•t
Is it not nineteen years since the great flood?
So long it is since.
Oh how I feel a horror shake
My bones.
He knows not what to say:
Oh wicked act, overcome yet will not yield:
Thinking t'ourstrip me in his wit, as much
As in his force, I hear him murmur,
Yet he nill bewray that he convinced is.
What interest had the man you speak of in
That child? was he his son?
I cannot tell.
Had he no better knowledge then of it then thus?
Nor that know I.
Know you him if you see him?
He seemed a shepherd by his clothes and face,
Of middle stature, of black hair his beard
And eye-browes were exceeding thick.
Shepherds
Come hither soon.
Behold we are ready here.
Which of these did he resemble then?
Him whom you talk withal he did not only seem,
But tic the same, who though't be twenty years ago,
Hath not a whit altered his ancient look.
Stand then aside, Demotes stay with me,
Tell me know thou this man?
Me seems so,
But yet I know not where.
Him can I put in mind.
Let me alone, stand you aside a while.
I your commandment willingly obey.
Now answer me Demotes, and take heed
You do not lye, tic almost twenty years
Since you returned from seeking out my child,
Which the outrageous River bare away:
Did you not tell me you had searched in vain
All that same country, with Alpheus waters?
Why ask you this?
Did not you tell me him
You could not find?
I grant I told you so.
What child then was it (tell me) which you gave
Unto this stranger which did know you here?
Will you I should remember what I did
So long ago? old men forgetful are.
Is not he old? yet he remembers it.
Tush he doth rather dote.
That shall we see,
Come hither stranger, come.
I come.
Oh that
Thou were as far beneath the ground.
Tell me
Is this the shepherd that gave thee the gift?
This same is he.
What gift is it thou speak of?
Dost not remember in the temple of Olimpich Jove,
Having had answer of the Oracle,
And being ready to depart, I met with thee,
And asked thee of the Oracle, which thou declaredst,
After I took thee home unto my house,
Where did thou not give me an Infant child,
Which in a cradle thou had lately found?
And what of that?
This is that very child,
Which ever since I like mine own have kept,
And at these Aultars must be sacrificed.
Oh force of Destiny.
Yet wilt thou fine?
Is it not true which he hath told thee here?
Oh were I dead as sure as it is true.
And wherefore did thou give another goods?
Oh moister seek no more, let this suffice.
Yet wilt thou hold me off and say no more?
Villain thou die if I but ask again.
Because the Oracle foretold me that the child
Should be in danger on his fathers hands
His death to have if he returned home.
All this is true, for this he told me then.
Ay me, it is too manifest, the case is clear.
What rests then, would you more proof then this?
The proofe's too great, too much have you declared,
Too much I understand, •o Carino, Carino,
How I change grief and fortunes now with thine,
How they affections now are waxen mine,
This is my son, oh most unhappy son,
Of a more wretched father. More savage was
The water in him saving, then in running quite away,
Since at these sacred Aultars by thy fathers hands
Thou must be slain, a woeful sacrifice,
And thy poor blood must wash thy native soil.
Art thou Mirtilloes father then? how lost you him?
The deluge ravished him, whom when I lost,
I left more safe, now found, I leese him most.
Eternal providence which with thy counsel hast
Brought all these occurrents to this only point,
You are great with child of some huge monstrous birth,
Either great good or ill thou wilt bring forth.
This t'was my sleep foretold, deceitful sleep.
In ill too time, in good too lying still.
This was the unwonted pity, and the sudden horror that
I felt to stay the axe and shake my bones:
For nature sure abhors a stroke should come
From fathers hands, so wild abominable.
Will you then execute the wicked sacrifice?
By other hands he may not at these Altars die.
Why will the father murder then the son?
So bids our law, and were it piety to spare
Him since the true Amyntas would not spare himself?
O wicked Fates, me whither have ye brought?
To see two fathers sovereign pity made a homicide▪
Yours to Mirtillo, mine unto the Gods,
His father you denying for to bee,
Him thought to save, and him you lost thereby,
Thinking and seeking, I to kill your son,
Mine own have found, and must mine own go kill.
Behold the monster horrible this Fate brings forth.
O cruel chance (Mirtillo) ô my life.
Is this that which the Oracle told of thee?
Thus in my native soil hast thou me happy made:
O son of me poor old and wretched man,
Lately my hope, my life, now my despair and death.
To me Carino leave these woeful tears,
I plain my blood: my blood, why say I so,
Since I it shed? poor son why got I thee?
Why were thou borne? did the mild waters save thy life,
The cruel father might the same bereave?
Sacred immortal powers, without whose deep insight
No wave doth stir in seas, no blast in skies,
No leaf upon the earth: what great offence
Have I committed, that I worthy am
With my poor off-spring for to war with heaven?
If I offended have, oh yet my son
What hath he done you cannot pardon him?
O Iupiter the great disdainful blast
Would quickly suffocate my aged sense,
But if thy thunder bolts will not, my weapons shall.
The dolorous example Isle renew,
Of good Amyntas our beloved Priest,
My son amazed shall see his father slain,
Ere I a father will go kill my son:
Die thou Montane, tic only sit for thee,
O powers, I cannot say whether of heaven or hell,
That agitooke with grief, despairful minds,
Behold your fury thus it pleases you.
I nought desire save only speedy death,
A poor desire my wretched life to end,
Some comfort seems to my sad spright to send.
Wretched old man, as greater flames do dim
The lesser lights, even so the sorrow I
Do of thy grief conceive, hath put out mine,
Thy case alone deserves pity now.
SOftly my son, and set thy feet secure,
Thou must uphold me in this rugged way,
Thou art my bodies eye, I am thy minds,
And when thou come before the Priest, there stay,
Is it not the reverend Tirenio which I see?
Who blind on earth, yet sees all in heaven?
Some great thing moves him thus, these many years
I saw him not out of his holy Cell.
God grant he bring vs happy news.
Father Tirenio, what's the news with you▪
You from the temple? how comes this to pass?
To you I come for news, yet bring you news
How oft blind eyes do aide the inward sight,
The whilst the mind vntraueld with wilde sights,
Withdraws into it self, and Linceus eyes
Doth set a work in sightless senses blind.
We may not Montane pass so lightly ore
The unexpected things, that heavenly mixture temps with hue∣mane,
Because the Gods do not converse on earth,
Nor partly hold with mortal men at all.
But all these works so great, so wonderful,
Which the blind world to blinder chance ascribes,
Is nothing but ce'estiall counsel talk,
So speak th'eternall powers amongst themselves,
Whose voices though they touch not deafened ears,
Yet do they •and to hearts that understand.
O four, ô six times happy he that understands it well.
The good Nicander as thou did command,
Stays to conduct the holy sacrifice,
But I retained him by an accident
That's newly fallen: the which (I know not) all
Unwonted and confused, twixt hope and fear.
Dulled my sense. I cannot understand, and yet the less
I comprehend, the more I do conceive.
That which you know not wretch, I know too well,
But tell me can the Fates hide ought from thee?
That piercest to the deep'st of Destinies.
If (son) the use divine of light prophetical
Were natures gift, and not the gift of heaven,
Then might thou see as well as I, that Fates
Secrets sometime deny our working minds,
This only tic that makes me come to thee,
That I might better be informed who tic
That is discovered father to the youth
That's doomed to die (if I Nicander understand.)
That father you desire to know am I.
You father of our Goddess sacrifice?
I am the wretched father of that wretched son.
Of that same faithful shepherd, that to give
Life to an other, gives himself to death?
His that by death gives an other life,
Yet by that death kills him that gave him life.
And is this true?
Behold my witness here.
That which he saith is true.
And who art thou?
I am Carino his father thought till now.
Is this the child the flood so bare away?
The very same.
And for this then dost thou
Montanus call thy self a wretched father?
O monstrous blindness of these earthly minds,
In what a dark profound and misty night
Of errors be they drowned? when thou O heavenly son
Dost not enlighten them: Montanus thou
Art blinder in thy mind then I of eyes,
That dost not see thy self the happiest father
And dearest to the gods that ever yet did child beget.
This was the secret which the Fates did hide.
This is that happy day, with so much blood
So many tears we did expect.
This is the bl•ssed end of our distress.
O thou Montanus turn into thy self,
How is the famous Oracle forgot,
Printed in the hearts of all Arcad•a?
No end there is for that which you offends,
Till two of heavens issue love unite,
The tears of joy• so satisfy my heart
I cannot utter it. No end there i•,
No end there is to that which you offends,
Till two of heavens issue love unite,
And for the ancient fault of that false wight,
A faithful shepherds pity make amends.
Tell me Montanus, is not this thy son
Heavens issue? is not Amarillis so?
Who hath united them but only love?
Siluio by parents force espoused was
To Amarillis, whom he hated still,
If thou the rest examine, you shall plainly see
The fatal voice only Mirtillo meant.
For since Amyntas chance where have we seen
Such faith in love that might coequal this?
Who since Amyntas willing was to die
For any Nymph, only Mirtill except.
This is that faithful Shepherds pity, which deserves
To cancel that same ancient error of Lucrine.
With this deed is the heavens ire appeased,
Rather then with the shedding humane blood,
Rendering unto th'eternall justice, that
Which female treachery did take away.
Hence t'was no sooner he unto the temple came,
There to renew his vow, but straight did cease
All those prodigious signs, now did
The holy Image sweat out blood no more,
Nor shook the ground, nor any noise nor stench
Came from the Cave, save gracious harmony,
And odours. O sweet mighty providence,
O heavenly Cods, had I all words, all hearts,
All to thy honour would I consecrate:
But to my power Isle render you your due.
Behold upon my knees ô heavenly powers,
I praise your name, how much am I obliged
That you have let me live until this day?
An hundred years I have already worn,
And never yet was life so sweet as now:
I but begun to to live, now am I borne again.
Why leese I time with words that unto deeds is due?
Help me up son, without thee can I not
Vpraise these weak and feeble members son.
Tirenio hath waked such joy in me
United yet with such a miracle
As I scarce feel I joy, nor can my soul
Confounded show me high retained mirth,
O gracious pity of the highest Gods,
O fortunate Arcadia, ô earth,
More happy then all earths beneath the sun,
So deare's thy good, I have forgot mine own,
And my beloved sons, whom twice I lost,
And twice again have found, these seem a drop
To the huge waives of thy great good: ô dream,
O blessed dream, celestial vision rather.
Arcadia now thou waxest bright again.
Why stay we Montane now? heavens not expect
A sacrifice of rage, but thanks and love,
In stead of death our Goddess now commands
Of marriage knot a sweet solemnity:
But say how farre's to night?
Not past one hour.
Then to the Temple turn, where let thy son
Espoused be to Amarillis straight, whom he may lead
Unto his fathers house before the sun be set,
So heavens command. Come, you Montanus, you.
Take heed Tiremo we do not violate
Our holy law, can she her faith now give
Unto Mirtillo, which she Silu•o gave?
And unto Siluio may she give her faith,
So said thy servant, was Mirtillo called,
Though I more liked Mirtillo him to name.
That's very true, I did revive his name
In this my younger son.
That doubt's well cleared, now let vs go.
Carino go with vs, this day Mirtillo hath
Two fathers found, Montane a son, and thou a brother.
In love Mirtilloes father, and your brother,
In reverence a servant to you both:
And since you are so kind to me, I pray you then
Bid my companion welcome for my sake.
Most welcome both.
Eternal heavenly powers,
How diverse are your high untrodden ways
By which your favours do on vs descend?
From those same crooked deceitful paths whereby
Our thoughts would fame mount up into the sky?
LInco belike the spiteful Sell•io
When least he meant, a Lover is become,
But what became of her?
We carried her
To Siluioes house, whose mother her embraced
With tears of joy or grief I know not whether,
Glad that her son is waxed a loving spouse,
But sorry for the Nymphs mishap, and that
She is a stepdame evil furnished
Of two daughters in law: complaining one dead,
An other wounded.
Is Amarillis dead?
She must die straight, for so doth fame report,
For this, I go to comfort old Montanus,
Who l•esing one sons wife, hath found an other.
Then doth Dorinda live?
Live. I it were well
Thou were so well.
Her wound not mortal was.
Had she been dead, yet Siluioes cunning would
Have her 〈◊〉.
What Art her healed so soon?
From top to toe isle tell the wondrous cure.
About the wounded Nymph stood men and women,
Each with a ready hand, but trembling heart.
But fair Dorinda would not any should
Save Siluio touch her, saying that the hand
Which was her hurt, should be her remedy.
Siluio, his mother, and I, stayed there alone,
Working with counsel too one with his hand,
Siluio when gently he had wiped away
The bloody streams that stained her Ivory flesh,
Assays to draw the shaft out of the wound,
But the wild steal yielding unto his hand,
Left hidden in the wound the harmful head.
Hence came the grief, for t'was impossible
With cunning hand, or dainty instrument,
Or other means, to draw it out from thence.
Opening the wound perhaps with wider wound
He might have found the steel with other steel.
So mought he do, or so he must have done,
But too too piteous, and too loving now
Was Siluioes hand, for such like cruel pity
By such hard means, love never heals wounds.
Although it seemed to her that pain it self
Was pleasant now between her Siluioes hands.
He not amazed says thus: this head shall out,
And with less pain then any will believe.
I put it there, and though I be not able straight
To take it out, yet with the use of hunting
I will restore the loss I have by hunting.
I do remember now an herb that is well known
Unto the savage Goat, when he is wounded
With some Huntsmans shaft: this they to vs,
Nature to them bewrayed, and it is hard by.
All suddenly he parts unto a neighbour hill,
And there a bundle gathers, straight to vs
He comes, and out he draws the juice thereof,
And mingles it with veruine seed, and root
Of Centaurs blood, making a plaster soft,
Which on the wound he lays: virtue miraculous,
The pain straight ceased, the blood was quickly staid,
The steel straightway without or toil or pain,
The workmans hand obeying, issues out.
And now her strength returns to her again,
As though she had not suffered wound at all:
Nor was it mortal, for it had untouched
Both left the bones and bellies outward run,
And only pie•st into the musclouse slanke.
Great virtue of an herb, but much more great
For fortune of a woman hast thou told.
That which between them past when this was done,
Is better to be gesl'd at then be told.
Dorinda sure is well, and with her side
Can serve her self to any use she likes.
Thou think she hath endured more wounds by this,
But as the piercing weapons divers are,
So are the wounds: of some the grief is sharpe,
Of some it is sweet, one healing waxes sound,
The less an other heales, the sounder it is.
In hunting he to shoot such pleasure found,
That now he loves he cannot choose but wound.
Still thou wilt be that amorous Linco.
In mind but not in force my dear Corisca,
Greene blooms d•sire within this aged tronke.
Now Amarillis hath resigned her life,
I will go see what dear Mirtillo doth.
O day of wonders, day all love, all grace,
All joy, ô happy land, ô heavens benign.
See where Ergasto is, he comes in time.
Now all things joyful are, the earth, the ayre,
The skies, the fire, the world, and all things laugh.
Our joys have pierced the lowest hell, nor is
There any place that not partakes our bliss.
How •ocond is this man?
O happy woods
That often sighed and wept out woeful case,
Enjoy our joys, and use as many tongues
As leaves that leap at sound of these sweet winds,
Which •••led with our rejoicings calmly smile,
Sing they the sweet adventures of these friends.
He speaks of Siluio and Dorinda sure,
Well, we must live, tears are no sooner ebbed,
But straight the flood of joy comes huffing in
Or Amarillis, not a word he speaks
Only takes care to joy with them that joy.
Why tic well done, for else this humane life
Would still be full of sighs: whither away
Ergasto go so pleasantly, unto some marriage?
Even so, but hast thou heard the happy chance
Of the two fortunate Lovers? is it not rare Corisca?
To my contentment even now I heard it all
Of Linco, and t'doth somewhat mitigate
The grief I for my Amarillis feel.
Why Amarillis? Of whom think thou I speak?
Of Siluio and Dorinda man.
What Siluio? what Dorinda? thou know nought,
My joy grows from a higher nobler root.
I Amarillis and Mirtillo sing,
The best contented subjects of loves ring.
Why is not Amarillis dead?
How dead?
I tell thee shoe's a bright and merry B•id.
Was she not then condemned unto death?
She was condemned, but soon releast again.
Telst thou me dreams? or dreaming do I hear?
Thine eyes shall tell thee if thou'lt stay a while,
Soon shalt thou see her with her faithful friend
Come from the Temple, where they plighted have
Their marriage troth, and so go to Montanus h•use
To reap sweet fruit of their long amorous toils.
O had thou seen (Corisca) the huge joy,
The mighty noise of joy full voices, and
Th'innumerable troupes of men and women,
Thou should have seen, old, young, sacred and profane,
But little less then mad or drunk with 〈◊〉.
With wonder who ran not to see the Lovers?
Each reverence to each them embraced there.
Some praised their pity, some their constancy.
Some praised the gifts that Jove, and some that nature gave.
The hills, the dales, the meadows did resound,
The glorious name of faithful Shepherd,
From a poor Shepherd to become so soon
A Demigod, and in a moment pass
From life to death, the neighbour obsequies
To change for unexpected and despaired nuptials.
This is some what (Corisca) but not half
Her to enjoy, for whom he sought to die,
Her that disdained to live if he had dyed,
This is fortune, this is such a sweet
As thought prevents, and yet thou art not glad.
Is not thy Amarillis then as dear to thee,
As my Mirtillo is to me?
Yes, yes, Argasto, see how glad I am.
O had thou seen but Amarillis when
She gave Mirtill her hand for pledge, and took
His hand again, thou easily had perceived
A sweet but unseen kiss: I could not say
Whether she took it, or she gave it him.
Her cheeks would have the purest colour stained,
Purple or Roses Art, or nature brings,
How modesty was armed in dainty shield
Of sanguine beauty, with force of that stroke
Unto the strikor turned, whilst she all nice
Seemed as though she fled, but to recover force
She might more sweetly encounter that same blow,
Leaving it doubtful if this kiss were given or taken,
With such a wondrous Art it granted was.
This taken sweet, was like an action mixed
With rapine and with yielding both at once,
A•o so courteous, that it seemed to crave
The very thing that it denying gave:
Such a retreat, and such a speedlesse flight,
As mend the pace of the pursuer, might,
O sweetest kiss, I cannot stay Corisca,
I go directly I to find a wife:
For amongst the joys there is no pleasure sure,
If gentle• love do not the same procure.
If he say true, then thou Corisca hast lost all.
Come holy Himeneus, come this even
According to our vows and to our songs
〈◊〉 thou these Lovers 〈…〉.
〈…〉 one 〈…〉 of heaven,
Knit thou the 〈…〉.
Ah me it is too true, this is the fruit
Thou from thy store of vanities must reap.
O thoughts, o my desires, no less unjust
Then false and vain. Thus of an innocent
I sought the death to have my beastly will•,
So bloody cruel was I then, so blind.
Who opens now mine eye•? Ah wretch, I see
My fault most •whole that seemed felicity.
Come holy Himeneus▪ &amp;c.
See faithful Shepherd, after all thy tears,
All thy distresses, whither thou art come,
Is not this she from thee was taken away
By law of heaven and earth? by cruel fate?
By her chaste will? and by thy poor estate?
By her faith given another man, and by her death,
Behold Mirtillo now shoe's only thine.
This face, these eyes, this breast, these dainty hands,
All that thou see, hear, and feel, so often sought
In vain by thee, are now rewards become
Of thine undaunted faith, yet thou art dombe.
How can I speak, I scarce know if I breathe,
Nor what I see, I scarce believe I see:
Let Amarillis you that pleasure give,
In her alone my souls affections live.
Come holy Himeneus, &amp;c.
What do ye now with me treacherous toys,
Wild frenzies of the body, spots of the soul?
You long enough have me betrayed here,
Go get you to the earth, for earth you are,
You wear th'armes erst of lascivious love,
Trophes of chastity now may you prove.
Come holy Hymeneus, &amp;c.
Why tris•est thou Corisca•? now's fit time
〈…〉 impetrate, •ear'st thou thy pain?
Beheld, thy pain cannot be greater then thy fault.
〈…〉 and blessed couple, of the skies
And earth b•loved, since to your glorious fate
This day hath me•kely bowed all earthly force,
〈◊〉 reason she do bow that against the same
〈◊〉 set a work a•l of her earthly force.
Now 〈◊〉, I will not deny
〈…〉 the same which you desired,
But you enjoy it, for you worthy were.
You do enjoy the loyalst man alive.
And you Mirtillo do enjoy the chastest Nymph
〈…〉 the world hath bred. Believe you me,
For 〈◊〉 whetstone was unto your 〈◊〉,
And to her chastity. But courteous Nymph, before
Your anger do descend on me, behold
Your 〈◊〉 face, there shall you find the force
Both of my fault, and of your pardon too:
For in the virtue of such worthiness,
You cannot choo•• but cause of pardon find.
Beside• you 〈…〉 the self•am fire
That did inflame unfortunate desire.
I do not only pardon thee 〈…〉
I count thee 〈◊〉 the effect beholding not the cause.
For fire and sword, although they wounds do bring,
Yet those once he•lt to vs to whole 〈◊〉 dear,
Howsoever now thou prou'st or f•iend, or foe,
I am well 〈◊〉 the Destinies did make
Thee the good instrument of my content.
Happy 〈…〉,
And if you please 〈◊〉 with vs to be,
Come then and take part of our joys with vs.
I have 〈…〉 pardon me,
And that 〈…〉.
And I (Corisca) pardon all thy harms,
Save this delaying of my sweet content.
You and your mirth I to the Gods commend.
Come holy Himeneus▪ &amp;c.
I am so tied to pain, that in the 〈◊〉
Of all my joys 〈…〉 must languish still.
Is it not enough this 〈…〉 pomp
Doth hold vs thus, but that Corisca must
Come in to hinder vs?
You are too quick my dear.
O my sweet treasure I am not 〈◊〉,
Yet do I quake for fear of le•sing thee.
This seems a dream, and still I am afraid
My sleep should break, and thou my soul should fly away.
In better proof my •ences would I sleep,
That this sweet sight is not a dreaming sleep.
Come holy Himeneus, come this even
According to our vows, and to our songs
Dress thou these Lovers as them best belongs.
Both t'one and t'other of the seed of heaven,
Knit thou the fatal knot this blessed eauen.
O Happy 〈◊〉,
That plants have 〈◊〉, and reaped 〈◊〉.
In many bitter grievous foils
Have you 〈◊〉 your desires,
Henceforth prepare your amorous fires,
And 〈…〉 your tender sprights,
Unto your true sincere delights.
You cannot have a 〈◊〉 joy,
There is n• •ll can you annoy.
This is true joy, true pleasure, and true mirth,
〈…〉 virtue got an patience gives birth.

THe humble Sock that true Comedians were,
Our Muse hath don'd, and to your fav'ring eyes,
In lowest Plaine-song doth her self appear,
Borrowing no colours from a quaint disguise:
If your fair favours cause her spirit to rise,
She to the highest pitch her wings shall rear,
And proud quothurnicke action shall devise,
To win your sweet applause she deems so dear.
Mean while shore up our tender pimping twig,
That yet on humble ground doth lowly lie:
Your favours sunneshine guilding once this sprig,
It may yield Nectar for the gods on hie:
Though our Invention lame, imperfect be,
Yet give the Cripple alms for charity.
EVen now the welcome twilight doth salute
Th'approaching night clad in black sable weeds.
Black as my thoughts, that harbour nought but death,
Thefts, murders, rapes and such like damned acts,
The infant babes to whom my soul is nurse:
Come Bobbinton, this starre-bespangled sky
Bodeth some good, the wether's fair and dry.
My scarlet-hearted Scarlet, gallant blood,
Whose bloody deeds are worthy memory
Of after ages, let me embrace thee: so,
So, now me thinks I fold a richer gem,
Than wealthy India can afford to Spain:
There lies my treasure, and within thy arms
Security that never breeds harms.
Brave resolution, I am proud to see
So sweet a graft upon a worm-wood tree,
Whose juice is gall, but yet the fruit most rare:
Who wreakes the tree, if that the fruit be fair?
Therefore resolve, if we a booty get,
It boots not whence, from whom, when, where, or what.
Well (God forgive vs) here lets take our stands,
We must have gold although we have no lands.
Stay Vrsula, have you those futes of Ruffs,
Those stomachers, and that fine piece of Lawn,
Marck'd with the Letters C C. and S.
I have.
If your forgetfulness cause any defect,
You're like to pay for it, therefore look unto it.
I would our journey had as safe an end,
As I am sure my Ladies ruffs are here,
And other wares which she bespoke of you.
Tic good; but stay, give me thy hand my girl,
Tic somewhat dark, come, let vs help each other:
She past her word one of her gentlemen
Should meet vs at the bridge, and thats not far,
I muse they are not come, I doe assure thee,
Were I not much beholding to her Ladyship
For many kindenesses: Mile-end, should stand
This gloomy night unvisited for vs.
But come, me thinks I may discern the bridge.
And see a man or two, in very deed
Her word, her love and all is honourable.
A prize young Scarlet, Oh, a gallant prize,
And we are Pirots that will seize the same
To our own uses.
But hold man, not too fast:
As far as I can gather by their words,
They take vs for my Ladies Gentlemen,
Who as it seems should meet them on their way,
Then if thou say the word weal seem those men,
And by those means withdraw thē from their way.
Where we may rifle them of what they carry,
I mean, both goods, and their virginity.
Tic well advised, but Scarlet, give me leave
To play the Gentleman and welcome them.
Enjoy thy wish.
Welcome you sacred stars,
That add bright glory to the sable night.
Excellent, by heaven.
I am sorry your beauty's so discomfited,
Treading so many tedious weary steps,
And we not present to associate you.
Oh, blessed Bobbington.
Sir, I do thank you for this taken pains,
That as your worthy Lady promised me,
We now enjoy your wished company.
Shoe's thine own boy, I warrant thee.
And I am proud, too proud of this imploymēt,
Come M. Scarlet take you that pretty sweet,
You see my Ladies care; she promised one
But hath sent two.
Tic honourably done.
This is your way.
That way, alas sir no.
Come, it is: nay then it shall be so.
What mean you Gentlemen?
O he will rob me.
Look to the box Vrsula.
Help, help, murder, murder.
Now you supporters of decrepit youth,
That mount this substance twixt fair heaven and earth,
Be strong to bear that huge deformity,
And be my hands as nimble to direct them,
As your desires to waft me hence to London.
Help, help, heel ravish me.
My thinks I hear the sound of ravishment.
Help, help.
Marry and will, knew I but where, and how.
What do I see?
Thieves full of lust beset virginity!
Now stir thee cripple, and of thy four legs
Make use of one, to doe a virgin good:
Hence ravening cures: what, are you at a prey?
Will nothing satisfy your greedy chappes
But virgins flesh? Isle teach you prey on carrion,
Pack damned ravishers, hence villains.
Thanks, honest friend, who from the gates of death
Hath set our virgin souls at liberty.
Give God the glory that gave me the power.
I do, kind Sir, and think my self much bound
To him aboue, to thee that treads this ground,
And for this aid, Isle ever honour thee;
My honour you have saved redeemed it home:
Which were it not done, by this time had been gone.
Hereafter more of this; but tell me now
The cause of these events, the effect, and how.
Isle tell you sir; but let vs leave this place,
And onward on our way.
It shall be so, see where they walk along,
Isle cross the other way and meet them full,
Keep thou this way, and when thou hearst vs chat,
Come thou behind him snatch away his crutches,
And then thou know he needs must fall to ground,
And what shall follow leave the rest to me.
About it then.
Y faith she is an honourable Lady,
And I much wonder that her Ladyship
Gives entertain to such bad men as these.
Stand thou that hast more legs than nature gave thee.
Mongrel, isle choose.
Then go to sir, you shall.
Murder murder.
Stay there my horse:
Whence comes this echo of extremity?
Help, help.
What doe I hear, a virgin call for help?
Hands off dam'nd villains, or by heaven I swear,
Isle send you all to hell.
Hold, forbear.
I came in rescue of Virginity.
He did, he did, and freed vs once from thrall.
But now the second time they wrought his fall.
Now you distressed objects, do you tell
Upon what mount of woe your sorrows dwell.
First get we hence away, and as we go,
Kind gentleman, our fortunes you shall know.
Thanks worthy sir, may but the Cripple be,
Of power to gratify this curtsy,
I then shall think the heavens favour me.
No more now for Gods sake, let vs hence.
If I doe live, your love Isle recompense.
NOw for my true-loues hand-kercher; these flowers
Are pretty toys, are very pretty toys:
O but me thinks the Peascod would doe better,
The Peascod and the Blossom, wonderful!
Now as I live, isle surely have it so.
Some maids will choose the Gilliflower, some the Rose,
Because their sweet cents do delight the nose,
But very fools they are in my opinion,
The very worst being drawn by cunning art,
Seems in the eye as pleasant to the heart.
But heir's the question, whether my love or no
Will seem content? I, there the game doth go:
And yet isle pawn my head he will applaud
The Pescod and the flower, my pretty choice.
For what is he loving a thing in heart,
Loves not the counterfeit, though made by art?
I cannot tell how others fancy stand,
But I rejoice sometime to take in hand,
The simile of that I love; and I protest,
That pretty pescod likes my humour best.
But isle unto the Drawers, heel counsel me,
Here is his shop: alas, what shall I doe?
Hoe's not within, now all my labor's lost,
See, see, how forward love is ever crossed,
But stay, what Gallant's this?
A plague on this Drawer, hoe's never at home:
Good morrow sweet-heart, tell me, how thou dost?
Upon what acquaintance?
That's all one, once I love thee, give me thy hand and say, Amen.
Hands off, sir Knave, and wear it for a favour.
What? dost thou mean thy love pretty fool?
No fool, the knave, O gross;
A gentleman and of so shallow wit!
I know thou came to the drawer.
How then?
Am not I the propperer man?
Yes, to make an ass on.
Will you get up and ride?
No, isle lackey by his side, and whip the ass.
Come, come, leave your jesting, I shall put you down.
With that face! away you want-wit.
By this hand, I shall.
By the ass-head you shall not.
Go to, you are a woman.
Come, come, ye are a man.
I have seen as fair.
I have heard as wise.
As fair as Mall Berry.
As wise as young Bowdler.
As M. Bowdler.
Hoida; come up.
Go thou down then.
No good ass, bate an As of that.
What M. Bowdler, will it ne'er be otherwise?
Still, still a hunting, every day winching?
Faith sir, the modest behaviour of this Gentlewoman,
Hath insinuated my company.
Lord, how eloquence flows in this Gentleman!
Faith, I shall put you down in talk, you were best to yield.
No sir, I will hold out as long as I may,
Though in the end you bear the fool away.
Mean you by me? you gull me not?
No by this night, not I.
For if you did, I would intoxicate my head.
Yea, I dare swear you'll go a fool to bed.
Mean you by me? you gull me not?
No, I dare swear the Gentlewoman means well.
And so I doe indeed, himself can tell:
But this it is, speak Maidens what they will,
Men are so captions the 'ile ever construe ill.
To her sir, to her, I dare swear she loves you.
Well then fair Mall, you love me as you say.
I never made you promise, did I, I pray?
All in good time you will do, else you lie,
Will you not?
No for-sooth not I.
Barnard, she gulles me still.
It is but your mis-conceit, try her again:
You know by course all women must be coy;
To her again, then she may happily yield.
Not I, in faith.
Then mine shall be the field:
Wisdom, adieu, once more faint heart farewell;
Yet if thou see the Drawer, I prithee tell him,
Mall Berry hath more work for him to doe;
And for your self, learn this when you doe woe,
Arm you with courage, and with good take heed,
For he that spares to speak must spare to speed,
And so farewell.
Call her again, Barnard.
Shoe's too swift for me:
Why this is the right course of gullerie,
What did you mean having so fair an aim
So fondly to let slip so fair a game?
Bowdler become a man for maids will stand,
And then strike home, art thou not young and lusty,
The minion of delight, fair from thy birth,
Atones play-pheere, and the pride of earth?
I know it, but a kind of honest blood
Tilts in my loins, with wanton appetites,
She bade me doe a message to the Drawer,
And I will doe it; there will come a day,
When Humfry Bowdler, will keep holiday,
Then Mall look to your self, see that you be sped,
Or by this light Isle have your maidenhead.
Spoke like a gallant, spoke like a gentleman, spoke like your self:
Now doe I see some sparks of manhood in you,
Keep in that key, keep in the self same song,
Isle gage my head you'll have her love ere long.
Wilt thou not tell me (brother Ferdinand)
Now by this light Isle haunt thee like a sprite,
Until I know whence springs this melancholy.
O brother!
Thou art too young to reach the depth of grief,
That is immured within my hearts deep closet,
A thousand sighs keep daily sentinel,
That beat like whirle-winds all my comfort back,
As many sobs guard my distressed heart,
That no relief comes near to aid my soul,
Millions of woes like bands of armed men,
Stop up the passage of my sweet relief:
And art thou then persuaded that thy words,
Can any comfort to my soul afford?
No, no, good Frank, dear brother then forbear,
Unless with grief in me you'll take a share.
Grief me no griefs, but tell me what it is
Makes my (sweet Ferdinand) thus passionate:
Isle conjure grief, if grief be such an evil,
In spite of Fortune, Fates, or any Devil.
Wilt thou not leave me to my self alone?
Brother, you know my mind,
If you will leave your dumpish melancholy,
And like my self banish that puling humour,
Or satisfy my expectation,
By telling whence your sorrow doth proceed
I will not only cease to trouble you,
But like a true skilful physician,
Seek all good means for your recovery.
Well brother, you have much importuned me,
And for the confidence I have in you,
That you'll prove secret, I will now unfold,
The load of care that presses down my soul:
Know then good Frank, love is the cause hereof.
How, love! why whats that love?
A child, a little little boy thats blind.
And be ore-come by him! plagued by him!
Driven into dumps by him! put down by a boy!
Mastered by love! O, I am mad for anger:
By a Boy! is there no rosemary and baize in England
To whip the Ape? by a boy!
I, such a boy as thou can never see,
And yet ere long may feel his tirranie:
Hoe's not visible, yet aims at the heart,
Wo be to those that feel his wounding dart;
And one of them I am: wounded so deep,
That in my passions I no mean can keep:
Unhappy time, woe to that dismal hour,
When love did wound me with fair Phillis flower:
O Phillis, Phillis; of flowers sweetest flower,
That ever garnished any princely bower:
Farewell, farewell, my woes will ne'er remove,
Till I enjoy fair Phillis for my love.
Whats here, Phillis and love, and love and Phillis:
I have seen Phillis, and have heard of love;
I will see Phillis, and will hear of love:
But neither Phillis, nor the power of love,
Shall make me bond-slaue to a women's beck.
Who's here, my second brother male-content?
Isle stand aside and note his passions.
O love, that I had never known thy power.
More lovers yet! what the devil is this love?
That these my wandering eyes had kept their stay;
That I my self had still been like my self;
That my poor heart had never felt the wound,
Whose anguish keeps me in a deadly sound:
Oh how deluding dreams this night ore-past,
Drenched my sad soul in pleasures floating sea!
Me thought I clasped my love within my arms,
And circling her, saved her from threatening harms;
Me thought there came an hundred in an hour
That sought to rob me of my sweetest flower:
But like a champion I did keep her still
Within this circle, free from every ill:
But when I waked and mist my Phillis there,
All my sweet joys converted into fear.
What brother Anthony, at prayers so hard?
Tell me what saint it is thou inuocates?
Is it a male, or female? howsoever,
God bless thee brother, you are in a good mind,
But now I remember me, thy saint is blind.
How, blind?
I brother, blind, I heard thee talk of love,
And love is blind they say.
I would it were as blind as Ebon night,
That love had never hit my heart so right;
But what is love in your opinion?
A voluntary motion of delight,
Touching the superficies of the soul;
A substance less divine then is the soul,
Yet more then any other power in man
Is that which loves, yet neither is enforced,
Nor doth enforce the heart of man to love:
Which motion as it vnbeseemes a man,
So by the soul and reason which adorn,
The life of man it is extinguished,
Even at his pleasure that it doth possess.
Thus may the free-man jest at mannacles,
The furre-clad citizen laugh at a storm,
The swarthy Moore diving to gather pearl,
Challenge the scalding ardor of the sun;
And aged Nestor sitting in his tent,
May term wounds sport, &amp; war but merriment.
Tic true, fore God it is, and now me thinks,
My heart begins to pity hearts in love:
Say once more, Anthony, tell me thy griefs,
Let me have feeling of my passion,
Possess me deeply of thy melting state,
And thou shalt see.
That thou wilt pity me,
No by my troth, if every tale of love,
Or love it self, or foole-bewitching beauty,
Make me crosse-arme my self; study ay-mees;
Defy my hat-band; tread beneath my feet
Shoo-strings and garters; practise in my glass
Distressed looks, and dry my liver up,
With sighs enough to win an argosy.
If ever I turn thus fantastical,
Love plague me, never pity me at all.
Yonder she comes that holds me prisoner.
What? Phillis, the fair maid of the Exchange?
Is she god Cupids judge over men's hearts?
Brother, isle have one venue with her tongue,
To breathe my wit, and jest at passion:
By your leave Mistress Flower.
Your rude behaviour scarce offers you welcome.
I prithee tell me Phillis, I hear say,
Thou keepst love captive in thy maiden thoughts.
That is a thought beyond your reach to know.
But shall I know it?
On what acquaintance? then might you deem me fond,
If (as you say) love be at my command.
May not your friend command as great a matter?
Isle know him well first, for that friend may flatter.
Why, I hope you know me.
That's a question.
Well, if you doe not, you shall before I stir.
Know you yonder lump of melancholy,
Yonder bundle of sighs yonder wad of groans,
The same and I were chickens of one brood,
And if you know him, as I am sure you doe,
Being his brother, you needs must know me too.
I partly have a guess of yonder Gentleman,
His name is Moister Golding as I take it.
Golding I am, and thine sweet fair I am,
And yet not thine, but a most wretched man,
Thou know my cause of grief, my wound of woe:
And knowing it, why wilt thou see it so?
Put salves of comfort to my griefs unrest,
So moist thou heal my sore of heaviness.
Hark you fair maid, are you a Surgeon?
I prithee give my brother Anthony
Somewhat to heal the love sore of his mind,
And yet tic pity that he should have help:
A man as free as air, or the Suns rays,
As boundless in his function as the heavens,
The male and better part of flesh and blood,
In whom was poured the quintessence of reason,
To wrong the adoration of his Maker,
By worshipping a wanton female skirt,
And making Love his Idol: fie dotard, fie,
I am ashamed of this apostasy,
Isle talk with her to hinder his complaints.
Phillis, a word in private ere you go,
I love ye sweet.
Sour, it may be so.
Sour, and sweet; faith that doth scarce agree.
Two contraries, and so be we.
A plague on this courting, come, weal make an end.
I am sorry for it since you seem my friend.
I, but thou can not weep.
Then had I a hard heart.
How say you? come brother, now to your part.
At your direction: no, this merry glee,
(Good brother) sorts not with my melancholy,
Love covets private conference, so my sorrow,
Craves your absence which I fine would borrow.
No marvel then we say that love is blind,
If it still revel in obscurity,
I will depart I will not hinder love,
Isle wash my hands fare well sweet turtle dove.
In faith your brother is a proper man.
Whats your will with me.
Even what you please.
Did you not call me back?
Not, to my knowledge.
No, sbloud somewhat did, farewell, farewell.
He is a very very proper man.
I am in haste pray urge me not to stay.
The man doth dote pray God he hits his way.
Fore God ther's not a maid in all this town,
Should sooner win me, but my business calls me,
Give me thy hand, next time I meet with thee,
Lesser entreaty shall woo my company.
In faith in faith.
In faith, this was the hand, what means my blood,
Doe I not blush, nor look extremely pale?
Is not my head a fire, my eyes nor heart?
Ha, art thou here? I feel thee love I faith,
By this light, well via farewell, farewell.
Now he is gone, and we in private talk,
Say, wilt thou grant me love, wilt thou be mine?
For all the interest in my love is thine.
Your brother Ferdinand hath vowed as much,
Na more, he swears what man so ere he be,
Presumes to be corival in his love,
He will revenge it as an injury,
And clothe the thief in basest obloquy.
I, is my brother my competitor?
Isle court my love and will solicit thee,
Were Ferdinand himself in company.
What say thou to my suit?
Time may doe much, what I intend to doe
I mean to pause upon.
Let it be so;
If that my brothers hinderance be all,
Isle have thy love though by my brothers fall.
Two brothers drowned in love, I and the third
For all his outward habit of neglect,
If I judge rightly if I did not dream,
Hath dipped his foot too in Loves scalding stream.
Well, let them plead and perish if they will;
Cripple, my heart is thine, and shall be still.
I am not well, and yet I am not ill,
I am, what am I? not in love I hope?
In love! let me examine my self, who should I love? who did I last converse with, with Phillis: why should I love Phillis? is she fair? faith so so: her forehead is pretty, somewhat re∣sembling the forehead of the sign of the maiden head in, &amp;c. Whats her hair? faith to Bandora wiars, theres not the like simile: is it likely yet that I am in love? Whats next? her cheeks, they have a reasonable scarlet, never a Diars daughter in the town goes beyond her. Well, yet I am not in love. Nay, she hath a mole in her cheek too: Venus mole was not more natural; but what of that, I am Atones, and will not love. Good Venus pardon me. Let vs descend: her chin, O Helen, Helen, wheres your dimple Helen? it was your dimple that bewitched Paris, and without your dimple I will not love you Helen, No, yet I am safe. Her hand, lets handle that, I saw her hand, and it was lily white, I touched her palm, and it was soft and smooth: and then what then? her hand did then bewitch me, I shall be in love now out of hand. In love! shall I that ever yet have prophand love, now fall to worship him? Shall I that have jested at lovers sighs now raise whirl winds? shall I that have flouted ay-mees once a quarter, now practise ay-mees every minute? shall I de∣fie hat-bands, and tread garters and shoostrings under my feet? shall I fall to falling bands and be a ruffin no longer? I must; I am now liege man to Cupped, and have read all these informations in his book of statutes, the first chapter, page millesimo nono, therefore, hat-band avaunt, ruff regard your
self, garters adieu, shoo-strings so and so; I am a poor en∣amorate, and enforcde with the Poet to say, Love orecomes all, and I that love obey.
Now before God a very good conceit,
But too much sleep hath over taken me,
The night hath plaid the swift-foote runne-away:
A good conceit, a very good conceit,
What Fiddle, arise Fiddle, Fiddle I say.
Heir's a fiddling indeed, I think your tongue be made of nothing but fiddlestrings, I hope the fiddle must have some rest as well as the fiddle-sticke: well Crowd, what say you to Fiddle now?
Fiddle, it is a very good conceit.
It is indeed, Master.
What dost thou mean?
To go to bed again Sir.
No, Fiddle, that were no good conceit Fiddle,
What a fiddling doe you keep, are you not ashamed to make such music; I hope sir, you will christen me anew shortly, for you have so worn this name, that ne'er a wench in all the town but will scorn to dance after my fiddle.
Well Fiddle, thou art an honest fellow.
Thats more than you know, Master.
Isle swear for thee Fiddle.
You'll be damned then, Master.
I love thee Fiddle.
I had rather your daughter loved me,
Tic a rare conceit in faith.
I hold with you Master, if my young mistress would like so well of my music, that she would dance after no by∣dies instrument but mine.
No Fiddle, that were no good conceit.
A shame on you, I thought you would not hear on that side
Fiddle, thou toldst me, M. Golding was in love with my daughter.
True, master; therein you say well.
And he entreats me to meet him at the star in cheap, to talk concerning the match.
True still moister.
And I have sent for my neighbour M. Berry to bear me company,
True, all this is most natural truth.
And now Fiddle, I am going on my way.
Nay thats a lie, that hath mart all, was your con∣ceipt so tired you could tel troth no longer?
Why Fiddle, are we not going?
No indeed sir, we are not, we stand still, your con∣ceit failed in that.
Fore God tic true, I am not ready yet: whats hee?
By your leave sir, I would crave a word in secret sir.
At your pleasure, hears none but my man Fiddle,
I sir, moister Fiddle is my name, sir Laurence Syro was my father.
Sir, this is my business, my name is Racket, I have a ship of my own upon the river.
By your leave sir, captain Racket is your name.
Some call me so indeed sir.
It is a good conceit, I pray proceed.
Sir, I am now bound to sea, and wanting some money for the better furnishing of my wants.
O, you would borrow money of me.
Thats my suit indeed.
Thats no good conceit.
Na, hear me sir, if you will supply me with ten pound till my return from Barberry, I will leave in your hands a dia∣monte of greater value than the money.
A Diamond, is it a Diamond, or but a counterfeit?
Fiddle, my spectacles.
Tic right, I assure you sir.
Then tic a good conceit: my spectacles.
Here sir.
Where sir?
You cannot see moister, but I can.
O tic good, it is a good conceit: well sir, ten pound,
You are content if at three months end,
You bring me not ten pound in English coin,
This diamond shall be my proper own.
I am sir, shall I receive the money now?
I, here it is, and tic a good conceit.
Will you go near sir? Fiddle, make him drink.
Will you approach cavalier, if I speak not in sea∣son, tic because I was never in the salt country, where you sea captains use to march.
You are very eloquent sir, isle follow you.
Let me alone then for leading my men.
A diamond worth forty for ten pound,
If he return not safe from Barbary,
Tic good, a very good conceit.
By your leave moister Flower.
Welcome good moister Berry, I was bold to entreat your company to speak with a friend of mine,
It is some trouble, but the conceit is good.
No trouble at all sir, shall we be going?
With all my heart sir, and as we go,
Isle tell you my conceit, come moister Berry.
Well met my dear bundle of few, well met.
As much to thee my humorous blossom.
A plague on thee for a dog, have I found thee? I hate thee not, and yet by this hand I could find in my heart: but sir, Crutch, I was encountered.
Who became your bail?
Ye filthy dog, I was encountered by a wench I say.
In a wenches counter! I thought no less: what sir did thou lie in the Knights ward, or on the masters side?
Neither, neither in faith.
Where then, in the Hole?
By this hand Cripple isle bombast thee!
My crutch you mean for wearing out my clothes.
Thy nose dog, thy nose, a plague on thee, I care not for thee, and yet I cannot choose but love thee.
Sir, Mall Berry was here about work thou hast of hers, had thou been here to have heard how I spurrd the wench with incantations, thou would have given me the praise for a jester.
True moister Bowdler, I yield it you, I hold you for the absolutst jester; O mis-take me not, I mean to jest upon, a juggling gull, a profound seeing man of shallow wit, that Europe, na the world I think affords.
Well, thou art a Jew sir, Isle cut out that venomous tongue of thine one of these days.
Doe it in time, or Isle crush the heart of thy wit till I have strained forth thy infectious humour to a drop in faith.
Here comes my amorous vessel, isle board her y∣faith: Well encountered Mall, how dost thou wench, how dost thou?
Whats that to you sir?
Why I ask thee in kindness.
Why then in kindness you are a fool for asking.
Is the fool your livery?
Not so, for then you wearing that livery, would term your self my fool.
Meaning me? you gull me not, if you doe:
What then?
O vile! I would take you down.
Alas it wants wit, his wit is too narrow.
Isle stretch my wit but I will take you down.
How, upon the tenters? indeed if the whole piece were so stretched, and very well beaten with a yard of refor∣motion, no doubt it would grow to a goodly breadth.
By this hand.
Away you ass, hinder not my business.
Finely put off wench in faith.
By your leave moister Drawer.
Welcome mistress Berry, I have been mindful of your work.
Is it done?
Yes, and here it is.
Here is your money.
Cripple, ere long isle visit thee again,
I have some ruffs and stomachers to draw.
At your pleasure.
By thy leave Mall, a word.
Away you bundle of nothing, away.
She hath a wit as sharpe as her needle.
Alas, my self have been her whetstone with my conference in th'Exchange any time these many years.
In th'Exchange! I have walked with thee there, before the visitation of my legs, and my expense in timber, at the least a hundred times, and never heard thee speak to a wench.
Thats a lie, thou were by when I bought these gloves of a wench.
Thats true, they cost thee an English shilling at a word, mary it follows in the text, that your shilling proved but a harper, and thou were shamefully arraignd for it.
Good, but I excusde my self.
True, that thou thoughtst it had bin a shilling, ma∣rye thou had never an other, nor so much as a shilling more to change it. Thou talk in th'Exchange!
Indeed my best gift is in the morning when the Maids visit my chamber, with such necessaries as I usually buy of them.
O thou art one of those, that if an honest Maid be sent to thy chamber with her Mistress goods, and return as honest and chaste as the moon: Sir, you are one of those that will slander the poor wenches, by speaking liberally of their proneness to love; and withal, brag how cheap you have bought their ware metaphorically, when indeed they depart as honest as they came thither, and leave you all the day after to sigh at the sight of an ill bargain.
When wilt thou spit out this serpents tong of thine?
When wilt thou cast off this antique garment of o∣stentation? do it, do it, or by the Lord I will impress thy va∣nights, and so anotomize the very bowels of thy absurdities, that all the world shall take notice of thee for a fool, and shun thee as the pox or the pestilence.
News, news, news.
Sweet rogue, whats the matter?
By Iesu the rarest dancing in christendom.
Sweet rascal, where, O doe not kill my soul
With such delays, tell me kind rogue, O tell me where it is.
At a wedding in Gracious street.
Come, come, away, I long to see the man
In dancing Art that does more than I can.
Than you sir! he lives not.
Why I did understand thee so.
You only excepted, the world besides
Cannot afford more exquisite dancers
Than are now capering in that bridal house.
I will behold them, come crutch, thou shalt with vs.
Not I.
Down dog, isle have thy company.
I have business.
By this hand thou shalt go with vs.
By this leg I will not.
A lame other, never stand to that.
By this crutch but I will.
Come, you loose time, supper is done long since,
And they are now a dancing.
Stay Fiddle with thy torch, Gentlemen, good even.
Moister Berry!
Moister Berry, I wish you well sir: moister Fiddle I am yours for a congee.
After the French salutation I am yours for the like courtesy.
Moister Barnard, to morrow is your day
Of payment sir, I mean the hundred pound,
For which I have your bond, I know tic sure,
You will not break an hour; then if you please
To come to dinner sir, you shall be welcome.
Sir, I did mean to visit you at home,
Not to pay down the money, but entreat
Too months forbearance.
How! forbear my money?
Your reason, why I should forbear my own?
You know at first the debt was none of mine,
I was a surety, not the principal:
Besides, the money that was borrowed
Miscarried in the venture; my friend died,
And once already have you prisoned me,
To my great charge, almost my ouer-throw,
And some-what raised the debt by that advantage:
These things considered, you may well forbear
For two months space, so small a sum as this.
How! I may forbear; Sir, I have need of money:
I may indeed sit monilesse at home,
And let you walk abroad spending my coin.
This I may doe, but sir you know my mind,
If you do break your day, assure your self,
That I will take the forfeit of your bond.
The forfeit of his bond!
I sir, the forfeit; tic no charity
To favour you that live like Libertines:
Heir's a Crew!
A crew; what Crew?
A crew of unthrifts, careless dissolutes,
Licentious prodigals, wild tauern-tracers.
Night watching money-wasters, what should I call ye?
O I want words for to define you rightly;
But this I know, London ne'er fostered such
As Barnard, Bowdler, and this paltry crutch.
And you want words sir, isle teach thee words;
Thou should have come to every one of vs
As thus: thou wretch, thou miser thou wild slave
And drudge to money, bond-man to thy wealth,
Apprentice to a penny, thou that hoards up
The fry of silver pence and half-penies,
With show of charity to give the poor,
But putst them to increase, where in short time
They grow a child's part, or a daughters portion.
Thou that inuents new clauses for a bond
To cousin simple plainness: O not a Dragon,
No, nor the devils fangs are half so cruel
As are thy claws; thus, thus thou should have reeled:
The forfeit of his bond, O I could spit
My heart into his face; thou blood-hound that dost hunt
The dear, dear life of noble Gentry.
Cripple, tic known I am an honest man;
But for thy words, Barnard shall fare the worse:
As for thy self.
Who he sir, never regard him, I know the vildest thing by him, O tic abominable!
Dost thou so Fiddle, speak, hold, take thou that speak of his shame, speak freely, isle protect thee.
I tell you sir, twill make your hair to stand on end as stiff as a Rubbing-brush, to hear his villainies.
What's this you have given me?
A shilling Fiddle.
Have you any skill in Arithmetic?
Why dost thou ask?
Sir, I would have you to multiply; could you not make this one shilling two or three? I would not be known to beg, but if out of your cunning you can doe this trick of multi∣plication, I shall speak the better.
O ther's another shilling for thee, now let me hear what villainies thou can charge the Cripple with.
So sir, this is multiplication, now sir, if you know the Rule of addition you are an excellent Scholar: can you not add?
What dost thou mean?
An other shilling sir.
There is another shilling; now Fiddle speak.
Why then attend you Hills and Dales, and stones so quick of hearing, this Cripple is.
What is he villain?
An honest man, as any is in all the town.
An honest man!
I by this silver, and as good a fellow as ever went up∣on
four legs, if you would multiply till mid-night, I would never speak otherwise.
Fiddle, thou art a knave, and so is hee:
Come let vs home; Barnard, look to thy bond,
If thou doe break thy day, I do protest,
By yon chaste Moon.
The chaste Moon, why the Moon is not chaste.
How prou'st thou that?
Why sir, ther's a man in the middle of her, how can she be chaste then?
Then by my life I swear, isle clap him up
Where he shall see neither the sun nor moon,
Till I be satisfied the utmost penny,
And so fare-well.
Gallants good-night; if time and place were in pros∣parity, I were yours for an hours society, I must after yon mulberry with my torch: adieu dear hearts, adieu.
Come Barnard, lets to the dancing, lets tickle it to night, For to morrow thy heals may be too heavy.
Alls one; my heart shall be as light as fire.
Come, shall we go?
Cripple, will you along?
My business stays me here.
Fare-well then dog of Israel, farewell.
Else one, my heart shall be as light as fire:
Sblood, were I indebted a hundred pound,
My fortune failed, and fled as Barnards are,
Not worth a hundred pence as Barnards is:
I shoud be now devising sentences
And Caveats, for posterity to carve
Upon the inside of the counter wall:
Therefore Isle now turn provident; Isle to my shop
And fall to work.
Yonder's his shop, O now you gods aboue
Pity poor Phillis heart, that melts in love;
Instruct the Cripple to find out my love,
Which I will shadow under the conceit
Of my invention for this piece of work;
O teach him how to yield me love again,
A little little love, a dram of kind affection,
His many virtues are my true direction:
By your leave M. Drawer.
Welcome Mistress Flower, whats your pleasure?
My cause of coming is not unknown to you,
Here is be spoken work which must be wrought
With expedition, I pray have care of it;
The residue I refer to your direction:
Only this hankercher, a young Gentlewoman,
Wished me acquaint you with her mind herein:
In one corner of the same, place wanton love,
Drawing his bow shooting an amorous dart,
Opposite against him an arrow in a heart,
In a third corner picture forth disdain,
A cruel fate unto a loving vain:
In the fourth draw a springing Laurel tree,
Circled about with a ring of poesy: and thus it is:
Love wounds the heart and conquers fell disdain,
Love pities love, seeing true love in pain:
Love seeing Love how faithful Love did breath,
At length impalà love with a Laurel wreath.
Thus you have heard the Gentlewoman's mind,
I pray be careful that it be well done:
And so I leave you, more I fine would say,
But shame forbids and calls me hence away.
Sweet fair, I pity, yet no relief
Harbors within the closet of my soul:
This Phillis bears me true affection,
But I detest the humour of fond love:
Yet am I hourly solicited
As now you see, and fine she would make known
The true perplexion of her wounded heart:
But modesty checking her forwardness
Bids her be still; yet she in similes
And loue-comparisons, like a good Scholar
By figures makes a demonstration
Of the true love enclosed in her heart.
I know it well, yet will not tell her so,
Fancy shall never marry me to woe;
Take this of me, a young man's never mared,
Till he by marriage from all joy be bared.
Yo gods of Love that sits aboue, and pity Lovers pain,
Look from your thrones upon the mons, that I do now sustain.
Was euerman thus tormented with love?
Ye little birds that sit and sing
Amidst the shady valleys,
And see how Phillis sweetly walks
Within her Garden alleyes;
Go pretty birds about her bower,
Sing pretty birds she may not lower,
Ah me, me thinks I see her frown
Ye pretty wantons warble.
Go tell her through your chirping bills,
As you by me are bidden,
To her is only known my love,
Which from the world is hidden:
Go pretty birds and tell her so,
See that your notes strain not too low,
For still me think I see her frown,
Ye pretty wantons warble.
Go tune your voices harmony,
And sing I am her Lover;
Strain load and sweet, that every note,
With sweet content may move her:
And she that hath the sweetest voice,
Tell her I will not change my choice,
Yet still me thinks I see her frown,
Ye pretty wantons warble.
O fly, make haste, see, see she falls
Into a pretty slumber,
Sing round about her rosie bed
That waking she may wonder,
Say to her, tic her lover true,
That sends love to you to you:
And when you hear her kind reply,
Return with pleasant warblings.
Avaunt delusion, thoughts cannot win my love;
Love, though divine, cannot divine my thoughts:
Why to the ayre then do I idle here
Such heedles words far off, and ne'er the near;
Hie thee young Frank, to her that keeps thy heart,
There let sweet words they sweeter thoughts impart.
But stay; here comes my melancholy brothers both,
Isle step aside, and hear their conference.
What? is my brother Ferdinand so near?
He is my elder, I must needs give place;
Anthony, stand by, and list what he doth say,
Haste calls me hence, yet I will brooke delay.
Shall I exclaim against fortune and mishap.
Or rail on Nature who first framed me?
Is it hard chance that keeps me from my love?
Or is this heap of loathd deformity,
The cause that breeds a blemmish in her eye?
I know not what to think, or what to say,
Only one comfort yet I have in store,
Which I will practise though I ne'er try more.
Oh, for to hear that comfort I doe long,
Isle turn it to a strain to right my wrong.
I have a brother rival in my love;
I have a brother hates me for my love;
I have a brother vows to win my love;
That brother too, he hath incensed my love,
To gain the beauty of my dearest love;
What hope remains then to enjoy my love?
I am that brother rival in his love,
I am that brother hates him for his love:
Not his but mine, and I will have that love,
Or never live to see him kiss my love;
What thou erst said, I am that man alone,
That will depose you brother from loves throne;
I am that man, though you my elder be,
That will aspire beyond you one degree.
I have no means of private conference,
So narrowly pursues my hinderer,
No sooner am I entered the sweet court
Of lovely rest, my loves rich mansion,
But rival love to my affection
Follows me, as a soon enforced straw,
The drawing virtue of a sable jet:
This therefore's my determination,
Within the close womb of a sealed paper,
Will I right down in bloody Characters,
The burning zeal of my affection:
And by some trusty messenger or other,
Convey the same into my loves own hand;
So shall I know her resolution,
And how she fancies my affection.
Yet subtle Fox, I may perchance to cross you:
Brother, well met; whither away so fast?
About affairs that doe require some haste.
Tic well done brother, you seek still for gain.
But you would reap the harvest of my pain:
Farewell good brother, I must needs be gone,
I have serious business now to think upon:
Yet for I fear my brother Anthony,
Isle step aside and stand a while unseen,
I may perchance descry which way he goes;
Thus policy must work twixt friends and foes.
So, hee is gone, I scarcely trust him neither;
For tic his custom, like a sneaking fool,
To fetch a compass of a mile about,
And creep where he would be; well, let him pass,
I heard him say, that since by word of mouth
He could not purchase his sweet mistress favour,
He would endeavour what his wit might doe
By writing, and by tokens; O tic good
Writing with ink; O no, but with his blood.
Well, so much for that, now I know his mind
I doe intend not to be far behind:
Heel send a letter, I will write another,
Doe what you can, isle be before you brother;
Isle intercept his letter by the way,
And as time serves, the same I will bewray:
Mine being made, a Porter Isle procure,
That shall convey that heart-inticing lure;
About it then, my letter shall be writ,
Though not with blood, yet with a reaching wit.
And shall it so, good brother Anthony?
Were you so near when we in secret talked?
Wilt ne'er be otherwise? will you dog me still?
Welcome sweet Frank; such news I have to tell,
As cannot choose but like thee passing well:
Thou know my love to Phillis?
Brother, say on.
Thou likewise art acquainted with my rival,
And I doe build upon your secrecy.
Sblood, and I thought you did not, Id retire:
Brother you know, I love you as my life.
I dare profess as much, and there-vpon
Make bold to crave thy furtherance, in a thing
Concerns me much.
Out with it brother;
If I shrink back, repose trust in some other.
Then thus it is; my brother all in haste
Is gone, to write a letter to my love,
And thinks thereby to cross me in my suit,
Sending it by a Porter to her hand;
If ever therefore thou wilt aid thy brother,
Help me in this, who seeks help from no other.
By the red lip of that dainty saint, Isle aid thee all I may.
It is enough; then brother Isle provide
A Porters habit, alike in every point,
Will you but so much humble your estate,
To put your self in that so base attire,
And like so mean a person waite his coming,
About his door which will not be ore long,
Thou shalt for ever bind me to thy love.
Brother, tic a base task, by this light,
But to procure a further force of love,
Isle doot, in faith I will sweet Ferdinand,
About it then, provide thee some disguise,
But see you stay not long in any wise,
Here shall you find me, go, dispatch.
For this isle love thee everlastingly.
Mean time isle cross your love and if I can.
Hears no villainy twixt vs three brothers:
My brother Ferdinand he would have the wench,
And Anthony he hopes to have her too:
Then what may I? faith hope well, as they doe.
Neither of them know that I love the Maid;
Yet by this hand I am half mad for love.
I know not well what love is, but tic sure,
Isle die if I have her not, therefore
Good brothers mine beguile you one an other,
Till you be both gulled by your younger brother.
Here is a Porters habit, on with it brother.
Your hand then brother for to put it on,
So now tic well, come brother, whats my task?
This first, that thou make haste to Anthonies,
Ask for a burden and thou shall be sure
To have his letter to my dear love Phillis,
Deliver it not, but keep it to thy self,
Till thou hast given this paper to her hands,
Whose lines do intimate thy chaste desires.
This is the sum of all, good Frank, make haste,
Love burns in me, and I in love doe waste.
Waste still, but let me in my love increase,
Now would not all the world take me for a Porter?
How strangely am I metamorphosed?
And yet I need not be ashamed neither,
Jove when his loue-scapes when he attempted ever
Transformed himself, yet ever sped in love,
Why may not I then in this strange disguise?
This habit may prove mighty in loves power,
As beast, or bird, bull, or swan, or golden shower.
Within the centre of this paper square,
Have I wrote down in bloody characters,
A pretty poesy of a wounded heart,
Such is loves force once burst into a flame,
Doe what we can we cannot quench the same,
Unless the tears of pity move compassion,
And so quench out the fire of affection,
Whose burning force heats me in every vain,
That I to Love for safety must complain:
This is my Orator whose dulcet tongue
Must plead my love to beauteous Phillis.
Now for a trusty messenger to be
Employed herein betwixt my love and me,
And in good time I see a Porter no,
Come hither fellow, dwellst thou here about?
Sir, my abiding is not far from hence,
And Trusty Iohn men call me by my name.
Can thou be trusty then, and secret too,
Being employed in weighty business?
Sir, I was never yet disproou'd in either.
Then mark me well, in Cornhill by th'Exchange,
Dwells an old Merchant, Flower they call his name,
He hath one only daughter, to whose hands,
If thou conveniently can give this letter,
Isle pay thee well, make thee the happiest Porter
That ever undertook such business.
Sir, give me your letter, if I doe it not,
Then let your promised favour be forgot.
Anthony Golding is my name, my friend,
About it then, thy message being done,
Make haste to me again, till when, I leave thee.
And so fare thee well loving brother,
It had bin better you had sent some other,
Let me consider what is best be done,
Shall I deliver his letter? No:
Shall I convey it to my rival brother? Nor so:
Shall I tear the same? No not for a million:
What shall I then do? mary like a kind brother,
Open the book, see what is written there,
If nought but love, in love have thou a share.
Brother, by your leave I hope you'll not deny,
But that I love you: God bless my eie-sight,
A Sonnet tic in verse, now on my life
He hath perusde all the impressions
Of Sonnets since the fall of Lucifer,
And made some scurvy quaint collection
Of fustian phrases, and vplandish words.
Fair glory of virtue, thy enamorate
Pleads loyally in pure affection,
Whose passion Love do thou exonorate,
And he shall live by thy protection:
Nor from thy love shall he once derogate,
For any soul under this horizon,
Yield thou to love, and I will fail in neither,
So love and truth shall always live together.
Yours devoted,
Anthony Golding.
Before God, excellent good Poetry,
Sbloud what means he by this line?
For any soul under this horizon?
No matter for his meaning, mean what he will,
I mean his meaning shall not be delivered,
But for my other trust my other letter,
That shall come short too of fair Phillis hands,
There is a Cripple dwelling here at hand,
Thats very well acquainted with the Maid,
And for I once did rescue them from thieves,
Swore, if he lived, he would requite that kindness,
To him I will for council, he shall be
My tutor by his wit and policy.
Why how now sir, can you find nought to doe,
But waste the parchment in this idle sort?
I do but what my mistress gave in charge.
Your mistress! in good time: then sir it seems
Your duty cannot stoop but to her lewre:
Sir, I will make you know, that in his absence
You shall account to my demand, your mistress
And your mistress will is thus, and thus you'll doe:
But answer to the motion I have made,
Or you shall feel you have another mistress now:
Speak, why when I say?
Indeed I know your glory.
Your pride's at full in this authority:
But, were it not for modest bashfulness,
And that I dread a base contentious name,
I would not be a by-word to th'Exchange,
For every one to say (my self going by)
Yon goes a vassal to authority.
You would not sir: had I the yard in hand,
Id measure your pate for this delusion,
And by my maiden chastity I swear,
Unless
What unless! I know your wilfulness,
These words are but to show the world your humour.
I often use to square these parchment pieces
Without occasion: I am sure you are not witting
The Lawns you lately bought of moister Brookes
Are new come home, brought by the Merchants servant:
I know you are short membred, but not so short
Of your remembrance, that this is news to you.
You're best to brave me in a taunting humour.
Wilt please you op the door? wheres Vrsula?
Oh hears good stuff, my backe's no sooner turned
But she must needs be gadding, and where I pray?
Shoe's gone to M. Pawmers on the other side.
On great occasions, sir, I doubt it not.
Kind Dicke, thou wilt not be unmindful of my duty
To that same worthy Arts-master, Lionel Barnes.
Thy love, sweet Will, hath chainde it to my memory.
Then with this kind embrace I take my leave,
Wishing thou were as safe arrived at Cambridge,
As thou art at this present near the Exchange.
And well remembered, kind Will Bennet,
Others affairs made me oblivious
Of mine own; I pray thee go to the Exchange,
I have certain bands, and other linen to buy,
Prithee accompany me.
With all my heart.
Sure, this is a beauteous gallant walk.
Were my continual residence in London,
I should make much use of such a pleasure:
Me thinks the glorious virgins of this square
Gives life to dead struck youth; Oh heavens!
Why how now Dicke?
By my sweet hopes of an hereafter bliss,
I never saw a fairer face then this:
O for acquaintance with so rich a beauty.
Take thy occasion, never had thou better.
Have at her then.
What lack you Gentlemen?
Faith nothing, had I thee.
For in thine eye all my desires I see.
My shop you mean sir, there you may have choice
Of Lawns, or Cambrics, Ruffs well wrought, Shirts,
Fine falling bands of the Italian cut-worke,
Ruffs for your hands, wast-cotes wrought with silk,
Night-caps of gold, or such like wearing linen,
Fit for the Chap-man of what ere degree.
Faith virgin in my days, I have worn &amp; out-worne much,
Yea, many of these golden necessaries;
But such a gallant beauty, or such a form
I never saw, nor never wore the like:
Faith be not then unkind, but let me wear
This shape of thine, although I buy it dear.
What hath the Tailor plaide his part so well,
That with my gown you are so far in love?
Mistake not sweet your garment is the cover,
That veils the shape and pleasures of a lover.
That argues then, you doe not see my shape,
How comes it then you are in love with it?
A garment made by cunning Arts-mens skill,
Hides all defects that Natures swaruing hand
Hath done amiss, and makes the shape seem pure;
If then it grace such lame deformity,
It adds a greater grnce to purity.
Oh short lived praise! even now I was as fair
As any thing; now fouler nothing.
Dissembling men, what maid will credit them?
How misconstruction leads your thoughts awry.
I prithee Dicke atone; think on thy journey.
You counsel well sir, I think the Gentleman
Comes but to whet his wit, and tic but need;
Tic blunt enough, he may ride far upon it.
Mary gip Minx.
A fine word in a Gentleman's mouth;
It were good your back were towards me,
There can I read better content, then in the face of lust.
Now you display your virtues, as they are.
What am I, you, Cipher, parrenthesis of words,
Stall-troubler, praetor, what sit I here for nought?
Bestow your lustful court-ships on your minions,
This place holds none; you and your companion
Get you down the stairs, or I protest
Isle make this squared walk too boat for you.
Had you been as you seemed in out-ward show,
Honest Gentlemen, such terms of wild abuse
Had not been proffred to virginity;
But Swains will quickly show their base descent.
This is no place for brawls, but if it were,
Your impositions are more then I would bear.
Come, shoe's a woman, I prithee leave her.
Nay sure a maid, unless her thoughts deceive her.
God speed you well: sir boy.
Anon.
Got to the Starchers for the suit of ruffs,
For M. Bowdlers bands, and M. Goldings shirts,
Lets have a care to please our proved friends:
As for our strangers, if they use vs well,
For love and money, love and ware weal sell.
Now fortune be my guide, this is the shop;
And in good time the Cripple is at work:
God speed you sir.
Welcome honest friend; whats thy will with me?
I would entreat you read a letter for me.
With all my heart:
I know the maid to whom it is directed.
I know you doe Cripple, better then you think.
I pray you, what Gentleman writ the same?
Sir, a Gentleman of good learning, and my friend;
To say the truth, t'was written for my self,
Being some-what overtaken with fond love,
As many men be sir.
Why art thou persuaded, or haste thou any hope,
So beautiful a virgin as she is,
Of such fair parentage; so virtuous,
So gentle, kind, and wise as Phillis is,
That she will take remorse of such base stuff,
I think not so: but let me see, whats thy name?
Trusty Iohn men call me sir.
How comes it then your blinded Secretary,
Hath writ another name unto the letter?
Yours devoted Anthony Golding.
But sure this letter is no right of thine,
Either thou foundst the same by happy chance,
Or being employed as a Messenger,
Plaid'st ledger dumaine with him that sent the same:
Wherefore the maid (well known unto my self)
I will reserve the letter to her use,
That she, if by the name herein set down,
She know the Gentleman that doth wish her well,
She may be grateful for his curtsy.
Nay then I see I must disclose my self:
Sir, might I build upon your secrecy,
I would disclose a secret of import.
Assure thy self I will not injure thee.
Then Cripple know, I am not what I seem,
But took this habit to deceive my friend:
My friend indeed, but yet my cruel foe;
Foe to my good, my friend in outward show:
I am no Porter, as I seem to bee,
But younger brother to that Anthony;
And to be brief, I am in love with Phillis,
Which my two elder brothers do affect:
The one of them seeks to defeat the other:
Now if that I, being their younger brother
Could gull them both, by getting of the wench,
I would requite it with loves recompense.
Cripple, thou once did promise me thy love,
When I did rescue thee on Mile-end Greene,
Now is the time, now let me have thy aid,
To gull my brothers of that beauteous maid.
Sir, what I promised I will now perform;
My love is yours, my life to doe you good,
Which to approve, follow me but in all,
Weal gull your brothers in the wench, and all.
Say thou me so friend, for that very word
My life is thine, command my hand and sword.
Then let me see this letter; it should see me
You vnder-tooke to carry from your brother
To the maid.
I did, and from my brother Ferdinand,
This other letter to the same effect.
Well, list to me, and follow my advise,
You shall deliver neither of them both;
But frame two letters of your own invention,
Letters of flat denial to their suits,
Give them to both your brothers as from Phillis,
And let each line in either Letter tend
To the dispraise of both their features;
And the conclusion I would have set down,
A flat resolve bound with some zealous oath,
Never to yield to either of their suits:
And if this sort not well to your content,
Condemn the Cripple.
But this will ask much time,
And they by this time look for my return.
Why then my self will fit you presently,
I have the Copies in my custody,
Of sundry Letters to the same effect.
Of thy own writing?
My own I assure you, sir.
Faith thou hast robbed some Sonnet book or other,
And now would make me think they are thine own.
Why, think thou that I cannot write a letter,
Ditty, or Sonnet with judicial phrase,
As pretty, pleasing, and pathetic,
As the best Ouid-immitating dance
In all the town.
I think thou can not.
Yea, isle swear I cannot,
Yet sir, I could conny-catch the world,
Make my self famous for a sudden wit,
And be admired for my dexterity,
Were I disposed.
I pre thee how.
Why thus there lived a Poet in this town,
(If we may term our modern Writers Poets)
Sharpe-witted, bitter-tongd, his pen of steel,
His ink was tempered with the biting juice,
And extracts of the bitterst weeds that grew,
He never wrote but when the elements
Of Fire and Water tilted in his brain:
This fellow ready to give up his ghost
To Luciaes bosom, did bequeath to me
His Library, which was just nothing,
But rolls, and scrolls, and bundles of cast wit,
Such as durst never visit Paules churchyard:
Amongst them all, I happened on a quire
Or two of paper filled with Songs and Ditties,
And here and there a hungry Epigram,
These I reserve to my own proper use,
And Pater-noster-like have kon'd them all.
I could now when I am in company,
At ale house, tavern, or an ordinary,
Upon a theme make an extemporal ditty,
(Or one at least should seem extemporal)
Out of th'aboundance of this Legacy,
That all would judge it, and report it too,
To be the infant of a sudden wit,
And then were I an admirahle fellow.
This were a piece of cunning.
I could doe more, for I could make enquiry
Where the best wetted Gallants use to dine,
Follow them to the tavern, and there sit
In the next room with a calves head and brimstone,
And over hear their talk, observe their humours,
Collect their jeasts, put them into a play,
And tire them too with payment to behold
What I have filched from them. This I could doe:
But O for shame that men should so arraign
Their own fee simple wits, for verbal theft!
Yet men there be that have done this and that,
And more by much more than the most of them.
But to our purpose Cripple to these letters.
I have them ready for you, here they be,
Give these to your two brothers, say that Phillis
Delivered them with frowns, and though her name
Be not subscribde (which may not well be done)
It may perhaps give them occasion
To think she scorned them so much grace and favour.
This done, return to me, and let me know
Th'occurrants of this prastise as they grow,
And so farewell, I can no longer stand
To talk with you, I have some work in hand.
Farewell mad Cripple, now Frank Golaing sly,
To put in practise this new policy:
But soft, here comes the Maid, I will assay
To plead my own love by a stranger way,
By your leave sir.
Porter, I am not for you, you see I am perambulating before a female.
I would crave but a word with you.
Speak in time then Porter, for otherwise I doe not love to answer you, and bee as brief as you can, good Pore∣la.
I pray you sir, what Gentlewoman is this?
Certes Porter, I serve a Gentleman, that Gentle∣man is father to this Gentlewoman, this Gentlewoman is a maid, this maid is fair, and this fair maid belonged to the Exchange, and the Exchange hath not the like fair maid now Porter, put al this together, and tel me what it spells.
I promise you sir, you have post me.
Then you are an ass Porter, tic the fair Maid of the Exchange.
His name I pray you sir.
Her name Porter requires much poeticalitie in the subscription, and no less judgment in the understanding; her name is Phillis, not Phillis that same dainty lass that was beloved of Amintas, nor Phillis she that doted on that comely youth Demophoon, but this is Phillis, that most strange Phillis, the flower of the Exchange.
What, would that Porter any thing with me?
Yes Mistress, since by chance I meet you here,
Isle tell you, though it not concerns my self,
What I this morning saw; there is a Gentleman
One master Golding the youngest of three brothers,
They call him Frank; O this man lies very sick,
I being at his house perchance enquired
What his disease was of a servant there,
Who said, the doctors cannot tell themselves,
But in his fits he ever calls on Love,
And prays to Love for pity, and then names you,
And then names Love again, and then calls Phillis,
And sometime starts, and would forsake his bed,
And being asked whither, he says he would go to Phillis,
My business called me hence, but I heard say
His friends doe mean to entreat you to take the pains
To visit him, because they do suppose,
The sick man loves you, and thence his sickness grows.
Porter, is this true?
Or art thou hired to this, I prithee tell me.
Mistress, not hired, my name is Trusty Iohn.
If I delude you, never trust me more.
I thank thee Porter, and thank Love withal,
That thus hath wrought the tyrant Goldings fall,
He once scorned Love, jested at wounded hearts,
Challenged almighty beauty, raild at passion,
And is he now caught by the eyes and heart?
Now by Dianaes milk white veil I swear,
The goddess of my maiden chaste desires.
I am as glad of it as glad may be,
And I will see him, if but to laugh at him,
And torture him with jeasts; Fiddle, along,
When we return, if they doe send for me,
Isle arm my self with flouts and cruelty.
Porter, wee commit you, if you be a crafty knave, and lay in the wind for a vantage, you have your answer: mark her last words, isle arm my self with flouts and cruelty.
Isle arm my self with flouts and cruelty.
Will you so Phillis, what a state am I in?
Why I of all am furthest from her love:
Sblood, if I now should take conceit at this,
Fall sick with love indeed, were not my state
Most lamentable? I by this hand were it:
Well heart, if thou wilt yield, look to thy self,
Thou wilt be tortured, well what remedy.
Here comes my brother Anthony, I am for him.
Porter, what news? spake you with Phillis?
I too late, to my grief,
Spoke with her, sir, In faith I think I have;
Heir's a letter for you, and by that
You shall be judge if I did speak with her;
Now Cripple, shall we prove your learned wit?
Zounds am I mad, or is she mad that writ this?
Isle read it over again:
SIr, I did never like you, I doe not now think well of you, And I will never love you: I choose my husband with my eyes, and I have seen some especial fault in you; as the co∣lore of your hair, the elevating of your head, to an affected proportion, as if you fainted for want of air, and stood in that manner to suck it into your nose, your neck is too long: and to be short, I like no part in or about you: and the short and the long boy, is, that I will never love you, and I will no∣for marry but one I love.
Not yours, but her own.
Blank, I am struck blank, and blind, and mad withal,
Here is a flat denial to my suit,
A resolution never to be won:
What shall I doe? assist me God of love,
Instruct me in thy schoole-tricks; be my guide
Out of this labyrinth of love and fear,
Unto the palace of fair Phillis favour:
I have it; I will intimate her mother
In my behalf, with letters and with gifts,
To her isle write to be my advocate:
Porter farewell, ther's for thy pains,
Thy profit by this toil passes my gains.
You have your answer, and a kind one too;
Cripple isle make thee chrutches of pure silver
For this devise, thou hast a golden wit;
Now if my brother Ferdinand were here
To read his absolution, here he comes.
Brother.
Frank.
What hast thou given the letter to her hand,
And staid my brother Anthonies withal?
I have done both, and more then that, behold
Here is an answer to your letter brother.
Frank, I will love thee, whiles I live for this.
Scarce, when you read what there contained is.
GAllant, that write for love, if you had come your self yon might perchance have sped; I do not counsel you nei∣there, to come your self, unless you leave your head at home, or wear a vizard, or come backe-wardes, for I never look you in the face but I am sick: and so praying God to conti∣nu my health, by keeping you from me, I leave you.
O unkind answer to a Lovers letter;
Let me survey the end once more:
For I never look you in the face but I am sick: and so prai∣ing God to continue me in health, by keeping you from me.
Is she so far from yielding? is this fort
Of her chaste love yet so impregnable?
What shall I doe? this is the furthest way,
A labour of impossibilities:
This way to win her? I will once again,
Challenge the promise that her father made me;
To him isle write, and he I know will plead
My love to Phillis, and so win the maid.
Farewell poor tortured heart; was ever known
Two loving brothers in such misery?
Let me consider of my own estate:
What profit do I reap by this delusion?
Why none; I am as far from Phillis heart
As when she first did wound me with her eyes:
Cripple, to thee I come, tic thou must be
My counsellor in this extremity.
Sir Bowdler, what makes thee in this merry vain?
O Lord sir, it is your most elevated humour to be mer∣rye, to be concise, set up the collar, and look thus with a dou∣ble chin, like Diogenes peering over his Tub, is too cymi∣call, the sign of Melancholy, and indeed, the mere effect of a salt rheum.
Who would think this Gentleman yesterdays dis∣temperature should breed such motions? I think it be resto∣ratiue to activity, I never saw a gentleman caper so excellent, as he did last night.
Mean you me sir?
Your own self, by this hand.
You gull me not.
How, gull you!
Me thinks a man so well reputed of,
So well commended for your qualities
In Schools of nimble actiuenesse,
And places where divinest Choristers
Warble enchanting harmony, to such
As think there is no heaven on earth but theirs:
And knowing your self to be the Genius
Of the spectators, and the audience hearts,
You wrong your worthy self intolerably,
To think our words savor of flattery.
Sir dog, how did thou like my last caper, and turn a the toe?
Before God passing well.
I know his worship made it, tic so excellent,
It was my yesterdays exercise.
After the working of your purgation, was it not?
What purgation, you filthy cur?
After the purging of your brain Sir.
Be still dog, bark not, though by mis-fortune
I was last night somewhat distempered:
I will not be upbraided; t'was no more
But to refine my wit; but tell me truly,
How dost thou like my caper?
Far better than I can commend it.
Now as I am a Gentleman
My Tutor was not witting of the same;
And in my opinion t'will doe excellent:
O this air! heir's a most eloquious air for the memory,
I could spend the third part of my Arms in silver,
To be encountered by some good wit or other.
What say you to your sweet heart, Mall Berry?
Peace Cripple, silence, name her not, I could not endure the carer of her wit, for a million, she is the only she Mercury under the heavens; her wit is all spirit; that spirit fire, that fire flies from her tongue, able to burn the radix of the best invention; in this Element she is the abstract and brief of all the eloquence since the incarnation of Tullies I tell thee Cripple, I had rather encounter Hercules with blows, than Mall Berry with words: And yet by this light I am horribly in love with her.
See where she comes, O excellent!
Now have I no more blood than a bull-rush.
How now; what ail you sir?
Whats the matter man?
See, see, that glorious angel doth approach,
What shall I doe?
She is a saint indeed; Zounds to her, court her, win her, wear her, wed her, and bed her too.
I would it were come to that, I win her! by heaven, I am not furnished of a courting phrase, to throw at a dog.
Why no, but at a woman you have; O sir, seem not so doltish now, can you make nofustian, ask her if sheele
take a pipe of Tobacco.
It will offend her judgment, pardon me.
But hear you sir? reading so much as you have done,
Doe you not remember one pretty phrase,
To scale the walls of a fair wenches love?
I never read any thing but Venus and Atones.
Why thats the very quintessence of love,
If you remember but a verse or two,
Isle pawn my head, goods, lands and all twill doe.
Why then have at her.
Fondling I say, since I have hemd thee here,
Within the circle of this ivory pale,
Isle be a park.
Hands off fond sir.
And thou shalt be my dear;
Feed thou on me, and I will feed on thee,
And Love shall feed vs both.
Feed you on woodcockes, I can fast awhile.
Vouchsafe thou wonder to alight thy steed.
Take heed, shees not on horseback.
Why then she is alighted,
Come sit thee down where never serpent hisses,
And being set, isle smother thee with kisses.
Why is your breath so hot? now God forbid
I should buy kisses to be smothered.
Mean you me? you gull me not?
No, no, poor Bowdler, thou dost gull thy self:
Thus must I do to shadow the hid fire,
That in my heart doth burn with hot desire:
O I doe love him well what ere I say,
Yer will I not my self self love bewray,
If he be wise he will sue with good take heed:
Bowdler, doe so, and thou art sure to speed:
I will fly hence to make his love the stronger,
Though my affection must lie hid the longer.
What moister Bowdler, not a word to say?
No by my troth, if you stay here all day.
Why then isle bear the bucklers hence away.
What moister Bowdler, have you let her pass vncon∣quart?
Why what could I doe more? I looked upon her with judgment, the strings of my tongue were well in tune, my embraces were in good measure, my palm of a good consti∣tution, only the phrase was not mooing; as for example, Venus her self with all her skill could not win Atones, with the same words: O heavens! was I so fond then to think that I could conquer Mall Berry? O the natural fluency of my own wit had been far better!
Gotten good fellow.
God give you the time of the day, pardon me Gal∣lants, I was so near the middle that I knew not which hand to take.
A very good conceit.
And yet because I will be sure to give you a true salu∣tation, Cripple, quomodo vales? Good morrow Cripple, good∣den good moister Barnard, moister Bowdler, Bonos noshes, as they say, good night; and thus you have heard my manner of salutation.
You are very eloquent, sir; but Fiddle, whats the best news abroad?
The best news I know not sir, but the newest news is most excellent in faith.
Prithee lets hear it.
Why this it is, the Sergeants are watching to arrest you at moister Berries suit.
Wounds, where?
Nay, I know not where; alas sir, there is no such mat∣la, I did but say so much, to make you warm the handle of your rapier: But M. Bawdler, I have good news for you.
Let me hear it, my sweet russetting.
How, russetting?
I my little apple Iohn.
You are a
A what?
You are a, O that I could speak for indignation!
Nay, what am I?
Yon are a pippinmonger to call me Russetting or ap∣ple Iohn.
Sir Russetting, isle pare your head off.
You pippinmonger, Isle cut off your legs, and make you travel so near the mother earth, that every boy shall be high enough to steal apples out of thy basket, call me Rus∣setting?
Nay, be friends, be friends.
As I am a gentleman cripple, I meant him no harm, but the name of Russetting to moister Fiddle, that many times travels under the arm in velvet, but for the most part in lea∣there trust with calue-skinne points, tic most tolerable, and not to be endured, flesh and blood cannot bear it.
Come, come, all shall be well.
Fiddle, give me thy hand, a plague on thee, thou know∣west I love thee.
Say you so? why then anger avoid the rome, melan∣choly march away, choler to the next chamber, and here is my hand I am yours to command from this time forth, your ve∣rye mortal friend, and loving enemy, moister Fiddle.
Now tell vs, what is the news you had for me?
O, the sweet news, faith sir, this it is, that I was sent to the Cripple from my young Mistress. Moister Cripple you know I have spent some time in idle words, therefore be you compendions, and tell me if my mistress handkercher be done or no.
Fiddle tic done, &amp; peace it is, cōmend me to thy mistress.
After the most humble manner I will; and so gentle∣men I commit you all: you Cripple to your shop; you sir, to a turn-vp and dish of capers; and lastly, you M. Barnard, to the tuition of the Counter-keeper: theres an Item for you, and so fare-well.
M. Bowdler, how do you like his humour?
By this light, I had not thought the clod had had so nimble a spirit: but Cripple farewell, Isle to Mall Berry, come Barnard along with me.
Farewell sweet Signiors both, farewell, farewell.
The conceit is good, Ferdinand entreats a mar∣riage with my daughter; good, very good: for he is a Gentle∣man of good carriage, a wise man, a rich man, a careful man, and therefore worthy of my daughters love: it shall be so.
Mary and shall, kind Gentleman, my furthe∣rance say thou? Yes Anthony, assure thy self, for by the mo∣therly care that I bear to my daughter, it hath been a desire that long hath lodged within my careful breast, to match his with thy well-deseruing self; and to this end have I sent for my daughter, and charged my servants, that presently up∣on her repair hither from her Mistresses, that she enter this private walk, where, and with whom, I will so work, that doubt it not, dear son, but she shall be thine.
And I will make her ioyncture of a hundred pounds by year: it is a very good conceit, and why? because the worthy portion betters my conceit, which being good in conceiving well of the Gentleman's good parts, the proffe∣red ioyncture adds to my conceit, and betters it, very good.
A thousand crowns for you to make the match, pretty heart, how love can work! by Gods blessed mother, I vow she shall be thine, if I have any interest in my daughter;
but stay, whom have I espied? my husband likewise reading of a Letter, and in so good an humour, isle lay my life, good Gentleman hee hath also wrought with him for his good will; and for I long to know the truth thereof, my sudden purpose shall experience it. Whats here husband?
a Letter from moister Ferdinand, to entreat a marriage with your daughter.
And here the like to you from Anthony to that effect, this is no good conceit, if she be mine, she shall be Ferdinand.
If she respect her mothers favour,
Tic Anthony shall be her love.
How wife?
Even so husband.
You will not cross my purpose, will you?
In this you shall not bridle me I swear.
Is she not my daughter?
You teach me husband, what your wife should say,
I think her life is dearest unto me,
Though you forget the long extremity
And pain which I endured, when forth this womb
With much ado she did enjoy the life she now doth breathe,
And shall I now suffer her destruction?
Yea but conceit me wife.
A fig for your conceits, in this I know there can be none that:
Say he be his fathers eldest son, and a merchant of good wealth, yet my dear Anthonies as rich as he:
What though his portion was but small at first,
His industry hath now increased his talent;
And he that knows the getting of a penny,
Will fear to spend, she shall have him, if any.
By the Mary God wife, you vex me.
Tic your own impatience, you may choose.
I will not wed my daughter to that Anthony.
By this.
Hold wife, hold, I advise thee swear not,
For by him that made me, first I vow,
She shall not touch the bed of Anthony.
And may I never live (so God me help)
If ever she be wed to Ferdinand.
The diuel's in this woman, how she thwarts me still!
Fret on, good husband, I will have my will.
But conceit me wife, suppose we should con∣sent our daughter should wed either of them both, and she dislike the match, were that a good conceit?
Ell's one for that, I know my daughters mind if I but say the word.
I would be loath to wed her against his will,
Content thee wife, weal hear her resolution,
And as I find her, to her own content
To either of them she shall have my consent.
Why now old Flower speaks like himself.
Agreed, and faith wife tic a good conceit,
And see where my daughter comes: welcome girl,
How doth your Mistress Phillis? God bless thee Phillis, rise.
God have the glory, in perfect health she is.
Tic good, I am glad she doth so well;
But list my daughter, I have golden news
To impart unto thee:
A golden, Golding, wench, must be thy husband,
Is it not a good conceit?
Father, I understand you not.
Then, my girl, thy conceit is very shallow,
Moister Ferdinand Golding is in love with thee.
No daughter, tic thine Anthony.
Ferdinand is rich, for he hath store of gold.
Anthony is rich, yet is not so old.
Ferdinand is virtuous, full of modesty.
Anthony's more gracious, if more may be.
Ferdinand is wise (being wise) who would not love him.
Anthony more wise, then Girl desire to prove him.
In Ferdinand is all the beauty that may be.
He is deceived, tic in thine Anthony.
Dear Parents, you confound me with your words,
I pray what mean these hot persuasions?
Thy good my daughter.
If but ruled by me.
But for thy ill-fare.
If she tend to thee.
The truth is this, that each of vs hath tan
A solemn vow, that thou my loving daughter
Shalt wed with one of those two gentlemen:
But yet refer the choice unto thy self,
One thou shalt love, love Ferdinand, if me.
If love thy mother, love thine Anthony.
In these extremes what shall become of me?
I pray you give me respite to consider
How to digest these impositions,
You have imposde a business of such weight,
Pray God your daughter may discharge her self.
Think on it, my girl, we will withdraw a∣while.
A little respite fits my resolution,
Those Gentles sue too late, there is another,
Of better worth, though not of half their wealth,
What though deformed, his virtue mends that miss;
What though not rich, his wit doth better gold,
And my estate shall add unto his wants,
I am resolved (good father, and dear mother,)
Phillis doth choose a Cripple, and none other;
But yet I must dissemble.
How now my souls best hope! tell me, my girl,
Shall Ferdinand be he?
I pray a word in private.
Mary with all my heart.
In all the duty that a child can show,
The love that to a father it doth owe;
I yield my self to be at your command,
And vow to wed no man but Ferdinand.
But if you please, at your departure hence,
You may enforce dislike to cloud your brow,
To avoid my mothers anger and suspicion.
Before God a very good conceit,
Hence baggage, out of my sight,
Come not within my doors, thou had been better,
Run millions of miles bare footed, then
Thus by your coy disdain to have deluded me.
Oh mine own flesh and blood, the mirror of wit!
Now will I hence, and with all the speed I may
Send for my son, isle have it done this day.
What, is he gone? and in so hot a chafe?
Well let him go, I need not question why,
For well I wot his suit is cold, t'must die.
Daughter, I gather by thy pleasant smiles,
Thy mother hath more interest in thy love,
Than discontented Flower thy aged father.
Mother, you have, for when I well consider
A mothers care unto her dear bought child,
How tenderly you nurcde and brought me up,
I could not be so much unnatural
As to refuse the love you proffer me,
Especially being for my chiefest good;
Therefore when married I intend to be,
My loyal husband shall be Anthony.
Live ever then my dear dear daughter Phillis,
Let me embrace thee in a mothers arms;
Thus, thus and thus isle ever hug my daughter,
Him hence thou sendst with frowns, me hence with laughter,
Come Phillis, let vs in.
Forsooth isle follow you.
Am not I a good child think you,
To play with both hands thus against my parents?
Well, tic but a trick of youth: say what they will,
Isle love the Cripple, and will hate them still.
Mirror of kindness, extremities best friend,
While I breathe, sweet blood, I am thine,
Entreat me, nay command thy Frances heart,
That wilt not suffer my ensuing smart.
Sweet signior, my advise in the reservation of those Letters,
Which I will have you hide from eye of day,
Never to feel the warmth of Phoebus beams,
Till my selfes care, most careful of your weal,
Summon those lines unto the bar of Joy.
I will not err, dear friend, in this command.
So much for that, now listen further Frank,
Not yet two hours expiration,
Have taken final end, since Beauties pride,
And Natures better part of workmanship,
Beauteous Phillis was with me consorted;
Where she amongst other pleasing conference,
Burst into terms of sweet affection,
And said, ere long she would converse with me
In private at my shop, whose wounded soul
Struck with loves golden arrow lives in dread,
Till she doe hear the sentence of my love,
Or be condemned by judgment of fell hate.
Now since that gracious opportunity
Thus smiles on me, I will resign the same
To you my friend, knowing my unworthy self
Too foul for such a beauty, and too base
To match in brightness with that sacred comet.
That shines like Phoebus in Londons Element;
From whence inferior stars derive their light:
Wherefore I will immediately you take
My crooked habit, and in that disguise
Court her, yea win her, for she will be won,
This will I doe, to pleasure you my friend.
For which my love to thee shall never end.
About it then, assume this shape of mine,
Take what I have. for all I have is thine?
Supply my place, to gain thy hearts desire,
So may you quench too hearts that burn like fire:
Shoe's kind to me, be she as kind to you,
What admiration will there then ensue?
Frank, I will leave thee, now be thou fortunate,
That we with joy your loves may consummate,
Farewell, farewell, when I return again,
I hope to find three in a pleasing vain.
Farewell dear friend; was ever known a finer policy?
Now brothers, have amongst you for a third part,
Nay, for the whole, or by my soul, isle loose all,
What though my father did bequeath his lands
To you my elder brethren, the movables I sue for
Were none of his: and you shall run through fire,
Before you touch one part of my desire:
Am I not like my self in this disguise,
Crooked in shape, and crooked in my thoughts
Then am I a Cripple right, come wench, away,
Thy absence breeds a terror to my stay.
Yonder she comes, now frame thy hands to draw,
A worser workman never any saw.
Yea yonder sits the wonder of mine eye;
I have not been the first whom destiny
Hath thwarted thus; imperious Love,
Either withdraw the shaft that wounds my heart,
Or grant me patience to endure my smart:
Remorseless love, had any but thy self
Been privy to my direful passion,
How I consume and waste my self in love,
They would have been, yea much more pitiful:
But all avails not; demanding for my work
Shall be a means to have some conference.
Good morrow to you, is my handkercher done?
Yea Mistress Flower, it is finished.
How sweetly tunes the accent of his voice!
Oh, do not blame me, dearest love alive,
Though thus I dote in my affection;
I toil, I labour, and I fine would thrive,
And thrive I may if thou would give direction:
Thou art the star whereby my course is led,
Be gracious then, bright sun, or I am dead.
Fair Mistress Phillis, such wanton toys as these,
Are for young Novices that will soon bee pleased,
The careful thoughts that hammer in my brain,
Bid me abandon wanton love; tic vain.
For me it is.
Is my vngarnishd, dark, and obscure Cell,
A mansion fit for all-commanding love?
No, if thou wilt sport with love,
And dally with that wanton amorous boy;
Hie thee unto the odoriferous groves.
There is no groves more pleasant unto me,
Then to be still in thy society.
There of the choicest fragrant flowers that grow
Thou moist devise sweet roseate Coronets,
And with the Nymphs that haunt the silver streams,
Learn to entice the affable young wag;
There shalt thou find him wand ring up and down,
Till some fair saint impale him with a crown:
Be gone I say, and doe not trouble me,
For to be short, I cannot fancy thee.
For to be short, you cannot fancy me:
Oh cruel word, more hateful then pale death,
Oh, would to God it would conclude my breath.
Forbear, forbear, admit that I should yield:
Think you, your father would applaud your choice.
Doubt not thereof, or if he do not, alls one,
So you but grant to my affection.
I am too base.
My wealth shall raise thee up.
I am deformed.
Tut, I will bear with that.
Your friends dislike brings all this out of frame.
By humble suit I will redress the same.
Now to employ the virtue of my shape:
Fair mistress,
If heretofore I have remorseless been,
And not esteemed your undeserved love,
Whereby in the glass of your affection
I see my great unkindness; forgine what's past,
And here I proffer all the humble service
Your hie prized love doth merit at my hands,
Which I confess is more then I unable
Can gratify: therefore command my toil,
My travel, yea, my life to pleasure you.
I take thee at thy word, proud of thy service,
But yet no servant shalt thou be of mine,
I will serve thee, command, and isle obey:
This doth my soul more good, yea, ten times more
Then did thy harsh denial harm before,
Let vs embrace like two united friends,
Here love begins, and former hatred ends.
Brother Anthony, what news from Venice?
Are your ships returned? I had rather
Hear news from Phillis: Oh, brother Frank,
Thy absence makes me burn in passion.
Sir, I had letters from my factors there
Some three days since; but the return of one,
Of one poor letter, yet not answered,
Makes me stark mad: a plague upon that Porter,
Damned may he be for thus deluding me.
How now brother, why retire you so?
Yonders a friend of mine acquaintance,
With whom I would gladly have some conference,
I pray thee stay I will return immediately.
Of your acquaintance; is she so good brother?
Only with you acquainted, and no other?
Faith isle try that, take heed sir what you doe.
If you begin to court, I needs must woe,
Brother have you done?
But two words more at most:
You have not then received any such letter?
A vengeance take the lazy messenger;
Brother if I live, isle quittance thee for this,
Good words, dear brother, threatened men live long.
You have done.
Yes.
Then by your leave brother,
You had one word, I must have another.
I know our business tends to one effect:
O that villain Frank, it mads my soul
I am so wronged, by such a foolish Boy.
That foolish boy may chance prove to be witty:
What, and the elder brothers fools? Oh ti's pity!
That villaiue Porter hath deluded me,
Confusion guerdon his base villain.
What are you cursing too? then we catch no fish:
Comes there any more, hears two Snights to a dish.
Well, since I have such opportunity,
Isle trust no longer to uncertainty.
At it so hard brother; well, woe apace,
A while I am content to give you place.
Well, to her both, both doe the best you can;
I fear young Frank will prove the happier man.
You have your answer, trouble me no more.
Yet this is worse then my suspense before,
For then I lived in hope, now hope is fled.
What, male content? is Ferdinand struck dead,
Fortune be blithe, and aide the second brother.
Think you to have more favour then an other?
To her a Gods name, live not in suspense,
While you two strive, I needs must get the wench.
I am resolved, and, sir you know my mind.
What, you repulsed too? Phillis is too unkind.
Here sits my Love, within whose lovely breast
Lives my content, and all my pleasures rest,
And for a further confirmation,
Which to approve, even in sight of both you here present,
I give my hand, and with my hand, my heart,
My self, and all to him; and with this ring
Isle wed my self.
I take thy offering,
And for the gift you gave to me, take this,
And let vs seal affection with a kiss.
Oh sight intolerable.
A spectacle worse then death.
Now gentlemen, please you draw near and listen to the Cripple.
Know you that letter? sir, what say you to this?
How came they to your hands?
Sirs, a porter even of late left them with me,
To be delivered to this Gentlewoman.
A plague upon that Porter; if ere I meet him,
My rapiers point with a deaths wound shall greet him.
Frank thou art a villain, thou shalt know it ere long.
For proffering me such undeserved wrong.
So, vomit forth the rheum of all your spite,
These threats of yours procure me more delight.
Now gentle love, all that I have to say,
Is to entreat you seek without delay,
My fathers kind consent, for thou hast mine,
And though he storm yet will I still be thine;
Make trial then, tic but thy labour lost,
Though he deny thee, it requires no cost.
I will assail with expedition.
God, and good fortune go with thee, farewell.
Well, I will go, but not in this disguise;
Arm thee with policy Frank, Frank must be wise:
Now would the substance of this borrowed shape
Were here in presence, and see where he comes,
Poor in the well framed limbs of nature, but
Rich in kindness beyond comparison.
Welcome dear friend, the kindest soul alive,
Here I resign thy habit back again,
Whereby I prove the happiest man that breaths.
Hast thou then, sweet blood, been fortunate?
Hark, I will tell thee all:
Faith sir, me thinks of late you are very light.
As a feather, sweet Rogue, as a feather:
Have I not good cause, sweet Mall, sweet Mall,
Hath she not caused the same: well, if I live, sweet wench,
Either by night or day I will requite your kindness.
Now I will take my leave, to put the same in practise.
Good fortune waite on thee.
Mall, thou art mine, by thine own consent;
How say thou Mall?
Yes forsooth.
I am witness sir.
But that is not sufficient Mall, if thou art content Mall, heir's a Rogue hard by, a friend of mine, whom I will acquaint with our loves, and hee shall bee partaker of the match.
Nay sir, if you mean to have partners in the match, I hope Ralfe can help to serve your wives turn as well as an∣other, what ere he be. How say you mistress?
Alls one to me, whom he please.
Come then sweet Mall, weal to the Drawer,
There to dispatch what I further intend.
And well remembered husband.
A forward maiden by this light; husband before the Clarke hath said Amen.
He hath work of mine, I pray forget it not.
I will not Mall. Now you lame Rogue, where is this maidens work? my wives work you rascal, quick, give it her?
Sweet Seignior, the sweet Nymphs work is almost finished, but sweet blood, you drive me into admiration with your latter words, your sweet wives work, I admire it!
I ye halting Rascal, my wives work; shoe's my wife before God and Ralfe, how say thou Mall, art thou not?
Yes for sooth, and to confirm the same,
Here in this presence, I plight my faith again;
And speak again, what erst before was said,
That none but you shall have my maiden-head.
A good wench Mall, in faith, now will I to thy fa∣there for his good will, Cripple, see you remember what is past, for I will call thee in question for a witness if need require, farewell cur, farewell dog.
A due fond humorist, Parenthesis of jests,
Whose humour like a needless Cipher sils a room:
But now Mall Berry, a word or two with you:
Hast thou forgotten Barnet? thy thoughts were bent on him.
On him Cripple! for what? was it for marriage?
It was for love, why not for marriage? O monstrous!
Were I a maid and should be so bewitched,
I'd pull my eyes out that did lend me light,
Exclaim against my fortune, ban my stars,
And tear my heart, so yielding her consent
To Bowdlers love, that froth of complement.
Cripple, you lose your time, with your fair tears
To circumvent my heart: Bowdler I love thee,
Barnard I hate, and thou shalt never move me.
I will; thou dost love Barnard, and I can prove it.
That I love Barnard! by heavens I abhor him.
Thou love him, once again I say, thou love him,
For all thou hast borne Bowdler still in hand.
What wilt thou make me mad? I say, I hate him.
I say thou love him: have not I been at home,
And heard thee in thy chamber praise his person,
And say he is a proper little man,
And pray that he would be a suitor to thee?
Have I not seen thee in the Bay-window
To sit crosse-aride, take counsel of thy glass,
And prune thy self to please young Barnards eye?
Some times curling thy hair, then practising smiles,
Sometimes rubbing thy filthy butter-teeth,
Then pull the hairs from off thy beetle-browes.
Painting the veins upon thy breasts with blew,
An hundred other tricks I saw thee use,
And all for Barnard.
For Barnard! it was for Bowdler.
I say, for Barnard.
Nay more, thou know I lay one night at home,
And in thy sleep I heard thee call on Barnard
Twenty times over.
Will you be sworn I did.
I, I will swear it:
And art thou not ashamed thus to be changed,
To leave the love of a kind Gentleman
To dote on Bowdler? Fie, fie, reclaim thy self:
Embrace thy Barnard, take him for thy husband,
And save his credit, who is else undone,
By thy hard fathers hateful cruelty.
Cripple, If thou can prove that ever I
Did fancy Barnard, I will love him still.
Why isle be sworn thou did.
And that I doted on him in my sleep.
Isle be sworn I could not sleep all night
In the next room, thou did so rave on him.
I cannot tell, I may well be deceived,
I think I might affect him in my sleep,
And yet not know it; let me look on him,
In faith he is a pretty handsome fellow,
Tic pity he should waste himself in prison;
Hey ho.
Whats the matter wench?
Cripple, I will love him.
Wilt thou in faith?
In faith I will.
Give me thy hand, a bargain, tic enough.
But how shall he know I love him?
Why thus: I will entreat the Sergeants
To go with him along unto thy father,
And by the way isle send young Bowdler from vs,
And then acquaint my Barnard with thy love,
He shall accept it and avouch the same
Unto thy father, wench do thou the like,
And then I hope his bonds are cancelled.
Cripple, shall we have your company?
My friends, hold here, theres money for your pains
Walk with your prisoner but to moister Berry,
And ye shall either find sufficient bail,
Or else discharge the debt, or I assure you
Weal be your aid to guard him safe to prison.
Well, we are willing sir, we are content
To show the Gentleman any kind of favour.
Along then; hark moister Bowdler.
Welcome good moister Berry, is your stomach up sir? It is a good conceit in faith.
It is indeed sir.
What, Fiddle!
If his stomach be up to go to dinner.
Fiddle, bid moister Berry welcome.
What else moister? with the best belly in my heart, the sweetest strain in my music, and the worst entertainment that may be, Fiddle bids your worship adesdum.
Thanks Fiddle, and moister Flower, I am much be∣holding to your courtesy.
Fiddle, I wonder that he stays so long,
Thou toldst me Anthony would follow thee.
I, and heel be here I warrant you.
Isle tell you sir, it is a rare conceit,
My wife would have her marry Anthony,
The younger brother, but against her mind,
I will contract her unto Ferdinand,
And I have sent for you and other friends,
To witness it; and tic a good conceit.
Fiddle, are all things ordered well within?
Alls well, alls well, but there wants some saffron,
To colour the custards withal.
Here, take my keys, bid Susan take enough.
Fiddle, are all our guests come yet?
I sir, and here comes one more than you looked for.
God save you Master Flower, as much to you Ma∣ster Berry.
Welcome M. Golding, yare very welcome sir.
My brother Ferdinand commends him to you,
And hears a letter to you from himself.
A letter sir, it is a good conceit,
Isle read it strait,
Moister Flower, I am beholding to you for your kindness, and your furtherance in my loue-suite, but my mind is champion∣general, and I will not marry your daughter, and so farewell.
This is no good conceit: what Ferdinand,
Delude old Flower, make me deceive my friends,
Make my wife laugh, and triumph in her will,
What think you Fiddle?
Why sir I think it is no good conceit.
Thou say true Fiddle, tic a bad conceit,
But hear you sir.
I understand by Fiddle your forwardness in my suit to your daughter: but nevertheless I am determined to draw back, and commit your daughter to her best fortunes, and your self to God; Farewell.
Why this is like my husbands bad conceit,
Have you ore-reachd me Flower, you crafty fox?
This is your doing, but for all your slight
Isle cross you if my purpose hit aright.
Tut, tell not me sir, for my credit and reputation is as it is, and theres an end: if I shall have her, why so.
Sir, the conceit is doubtful, give me leave but to consider of it by my self.
With all my heart.
Moister Golding, a word I pray sir,
You know my daughter Phillis, doe you not?
Mistress, I doe.
She is a star I tell you.
She is no less indeed.
I tell you sir upon the sudden now,
There came an odd conceit into my head,
Are you a bachelor?
I am indeed.
And are you not promised?
Not yet believe me.
Moister Golding.
Well, do you hear sir? if you will be pleased
To wed my daughter Phillis, you shall have her.
To wed your daughter, why she loves me not.
Alls one for that, she will be ruled by me:
Disdain her not because I proffer her,
I tell you sir, Merchants of great account
Have sought her love, and Gentlemen of worth,
Have humbly sud to me in that behalf:
To say the truth, I promised her to one,
But I am crossed and thwarted by my husband,
Who means to marry his unto another:
Now sir, to cry but quittance for his guile,
I offer her to you; if you accept her,
Isle make her dowry richer by a pair
Of hundred pounds than else it should have been.
Why this is excellent, past all compare,
Sud to to have her, gentle mistress Flower,
Let me consider of it.
Nay, nay, defer no time if you will have her,
Isle search my coffers for another hundred.
Say I should yield, your husband will withstand it.
Isle have it closely done without his knowledge;
Is it a match?
Well, well, I am content.
Why then old Flower, isle cross your close intent.
It shall be so; and tic a good conceit,
It shall be so if but to cross my wife,
Hark moister Golding, the conceit doth like me.
You love my daughter, so me thought you said;
You said moreover, that she loves you well,
This love on both sides is a good conceit.
But are you sure sir, that my daughter loves you?
For proof thereof show her this ring.
A ring of hers! tic well.
I but conceit me,
If I had wood her in my proper shape,
I do believe she never would have liked me,
Therefore since I shall have her, give me leave
To come and court his in my borrowed shape.
With all my heart, and tic a good conceit,
And hears my hand, son Golding, thou shalt have her.
Then father Flower, I rest upon your promise,
Isle leave you for a while, till I put on
My counterfeited shape, and then return.
Welcome good son, tic well, by this conceit
My wife will be prevented of her will:
I would not for the half of all my wealth,
My crosse-word wife had compassd her intent:
Now wife.
Now Husband.
You still maintain the suit for Anthony,
You'll have your will, and I must break my word.
Jest on old Flower, be cross, and do thy worst,
Work the best means thou can, yet whiles I live
I swear she never shall wed Ferdinand.
What shall she not?
No that she shall not.
I say, she shall.
In faith she shall not.
No!
No.
Well wife, I am vexed, and by Gods precious.
O sir, be patient gentle mistress Flower,
Cross not your husband, let him have his will.
His will!
Hearst thou wife, be quiet, thou know my humour.
Thus to be crossed, it is no good conceit.
A fig for your conceit; yet for because,
I know I shall prevent him of the match,
That he intends, henceforth I will dissemble.
Well moister Flower, because it shall be said,
And for kind moister Berry may report
The humble loyalty I bear to you,
Such as a wife should doe unto her husband.
I am content to yield to your desires,
Protesting, whiles I live, I never more
Will speak that Anthony may marry her.
Wife, speak thou with thy heart?
Husband, I doe.
Dost thou indeed?
Indeed forsooth I doe.
Then tic a good conceit: ha, ha;
I see tic sometimes good to look aloft,
Come hither wife, because thou art so humble,
Isle tell thee all, I have received a letter
From Ferdinand, wherein he sends me word,
He will not marry with my daughter Phillis,
And therefore I was full determined
To cross thy purpose, that his brother Frank
Should marry her, and so I still intend:
What say thou wife, dost thou assent thereto?
That Frank should marry her, I have sworn he shall,
And since this falls so right, isle not disclose,
That I did mean so much; but now Isle yield,
That it may seem my true humility:
Husband, because hereafter you may say,
And think me loving, loyal, and submiss,
I am content, Frank shall have my consent.
Why now thou show thy self obedient,
And thou dost please me with thy good conceit.
By your leave moister Flower,
Berry I am arrested at your suit.
And I am glad of it with all my heart;
Hold friends, theres somewhat more for you to drink,
Away with him to prison.
Stay moister Berry, I have brought you bail.
What bail? where is your bail? here is none I know
Will bee thy bail, away with him to prison.
Yes, I forsooth father, isle be his bail,
Body for body; think you isle stay at home,
And see my husband carried to the Jail?
How, thy husband!
My husband I assure you:
Father, these Sergeants both can witness it.
We saw them both contracted man and wife,
And therefore thought it fit to give you knowledge,
Before we carried him unto the prison.
But isle undo this contract on my blessing,
Daughter, come from him, hoe's a reprobate.
He is my husband.
But thou shalt not have him.
Faith but I will, Barnard, speak for thy self.
Why M. Berry, tic well known to you,
I am a gentleman, though by misfortune,
My ventures in the world have somewhat failed me:
Say that my wealth disables my desert,
The difference of our bload supplies that want?
What though my lands be morgagde, if you please,
The dowry you intend to give your daughter,
May well redeem them. You perhaps imagine
I will be wilde, but I intend it not.
What shall I say, if you will give consent?
As you redeem my lands, so I my time ill spent
Mean to redeem; with frugal industry,
Isle be your counsels pupil, and submit
My follies to your will, mine to your wit.
What think you moister Flower?
Faith moister Berry,
Barnara speaks well, and with a good conceit.
Dost thou love him Mall?
Yes sir, and here protest,
Of all in London I love Barnard best.
Then moister Berry, follow my conceit,
Cancel his bond, and let him have your daughter.
Well Barnard, since I see my daughter loves thee,
And for I hope thou wilt be kind and loving,
Regard thy state, and turn an honest man,
Here, take my daughter, isle give thee in thy bond,
Redeem thy lands, and if thou please me well,
Thou shalt not want all that I have is thine.
I am loue-bound to her, to you in duty,
You conquer me with kindness, she with beauty.
Then Moister Berry I think we may depart.
I, when you please, you see the matter ended,
The debt discharged, and I can ask no more.
Why then we take our leaves.
Now wife, if young Frank Golding were come back,
To sum our wish, it were a good conceit:
Why how now Phillis, sad, come tell me wench,
Art thou resolved yet for to have thy husband?
A golden Golding, tic a good conceit.
That golden Golding is but loath some dross,
Nor is it gold that I so much esteem;
Dust is the richest treasure that we have,
Nor is the beauty of the fairest one,
Of higher price or value unto me,
Than is a lump of poor deformity.
Father, you know my mind, and what I said,
Which if you grant not, I will rest a maid.
To die a maid, that is no good conceit.
Master, wheres my moister? hears one would couple a brace of words with you.
With me sir.
No sir, with my young mistress.
What is he knave?
A crooked knave sir, tic the Cripple.
What would he have? he hath no good conceit,
Tic he that hath bewitched my daughters heart,
He is a knave, go send him packing hence.
As you respect the welfare of your child,
Dear father, let me speak with him.
Speak with him! no, it is no good conceit,
I know hee comes to run away with thee.
Run away with her? well may she carry him, but if he run away with her, isle never trust crutch more.
Thou say true Fiddle, tic a good conceit:
Go call him in, Frank Golding, it is he.
In the lame knaves disguise, a good conceit;
Now sir, whats the news with you, you come to speak with my daughter?
Yea sir, about a little work I have of hers.
What work, you knave? no, thou hast some conceit, to rob me of my daughter; but away:
I like not that conceit out of my doors.
Unhappy Phillis, and unfortunate.
Sir, I am content, isle not move your patience.
Life of my living body, if thou go,
Though not alive take me hence dead with woe.
In troth sir, you are too blame.
What? is she dead? it is no good conceit.
Speak to me Phillis, O unhappy time,
Sweet Girl, dear daughter, O my only joy,
Speak to thy father wench, in some conceit,
What, not a word?
Now may you see, what fell impatience
Begets upon such tender plants as these.
Now may we see the folly of old age,
Governed by spleen, and overweening rage.
Speak to me, daughter.
And thou shalt have, what not? couetst thou gold?
Thou shalt not want for crowns, thou shalt have all.
O was my fury author of thy trance?
Did I deny thy loves access to thee?
Speak but one word and thou shalt be his wife,
By heaven thou shalt.
I take you at your word; it is no pain
To die for love, and then revive again.
Now M. Flower how like you this conceit,
Hath she not over reached you?
My word is past, and yet for all my rage,
I rather choose to fail in my conceit,
And wed thee Phillis to thy own content.
Here, take my daughter, Cripple, love her well,
Be kind to her, and isle be kind to thee,
Thou art but poor, well I will make thee rich,
And so God bless you, with a good conceit.
I thank you, when I leave to love my wife,
Heaven hasten death and take away my life.
Tic well done Frank, I applaud thy wit,
And now I know I fail not in conceit.
Gentlemen sweet bloods, or brethren of familiarity,
I would speak with Phillis, shall I have audience?
Help me derre father, O help me Gentlemen,
This is some spirit, drive him from my sight.
Were he the devil, thou shalt not budge a foot.
Zounds two Cripples, two dogs two cures, tic won∣derfull!
Fear not dear heart.
Hence foul deformity.
Nor thou nor he, shall my companion be,
If Cripples dead, the living seem to haunt,
Isle neither of either, therefore I say avaunt;
Help, me father.
Dear heart, revoke these words,
Here are no spirits nor deformities,
I am a counterfeit Cripple now no more,
But young Frank Golaing. as I was before:
Amaze not love, nor seem not discontent,
Nor thee nor him shall ever this repent.
M. Flower, I come to claim your promise.
I come for yours, your daughter I doe mean.
My promise; why sir, you refused my promise,
And sent me word so in your letter.
And so did you to me, and now tic past,
Your brother Frank hath both our free consents.
Sir, sir, I wrote no letter.
By heaven, nor I.
But I did for you both; I was your Scribe,
The whilst you went to see your house a fire:
And you (as I remember) I did send,
To see your sister drowned at London-Bridge.
Y faith good brother have you ore reach,d vs so?
So cunningly, that none of vs could know.
For all this cunning, I will break the match.
And so will I.
Why brothers, shoe's mine by her fathers gift.
Brother you lie, you got her with a shift.
I was the first that loved her.
That's not so, t'was I.
Catch that catch can, then brothers both you lie.
Yea, but conceit me Gentlemen, what doe you
mean to spoil my daughter? you claim her, and I have go∣uen her your younger brother; this is no good conceit: why how now Phillis, still drooping, cheer thee my girl, see a company of Gentlemen are at strife for thy love; look up, and in this fair assembly make thine own choice; choose where thou wilt, and use thine own conceit.
But will my father then applaud my choice?
I will.
And will these worthy Gentlemen be pleased,
How ever my dislike or liking prove?
We will.
I must confess you all have taken pains,
And I can give but all for that pains taken,
And all my all, is but a little love,
And of a little who can make division,
I would I knew what would content you all.
Thy love.
Thy life and love.
Thy life, thy love, thy self, and all for me,
For if I want but one, I then want thee.
If then I give what either if you crave,
Though not what you desire will it suffice.
I wish but love.
And as a friend you have it.
I life and love.
And as your friend, I vow, to love you whilst I live, as doe now.
I ask but all for I deserve no more.
And thou shalt have thy wish, take all my store,
My love my self.
By heaven, I ask no more:
Brothers, have done, and Dad to end all strife,
Come take her hand and give her for my wife.
Withal my heart, and tic a good conceit.
Gentlemen, patience is your fairest play.
Impatience pulls me hence, for this disdain,
I am resolved never to love again.
Stay brother Ferdinand, isle follow thee,
Farewell all love, tic full of treachery.
By heavens Frank I do commend thy wit,
Come Mall, shall thou and I ask blessing too for company?
You and I sir, alas, we are not play-fellowes, though we be turtles: I am provided.
Provided! why am not I thy Menelaus?
I sir, but this is my Paris, I am resolved,
And what I doe is by authority.
Is it even so, is Helen stolen by Paris?
Then thus in arms will Menelaus morn,
Till Troy be sacked, and Helena return.
This is the man, officers attach him upon felony.
M. Flower, I arrest you upon felony, and charge you to obey.
Arrest me upon felony! at whose suit?
Sir, at mine; where had you that Diamond on your finger? it was stole from me, and many other Jewels to the va∣lue of a hundred pound.
This is no good conceit; hath Captain Racket,
Banded old Flower to such an exigent?
I hope my credit somewhat will assist me;
Well, whither must I go?
Straight to the bench, where now the Judges are
To give you speedy trial.
Words here are little worth, wife and friends all
Go with me to my trial, you shall see
A good conceit now brought to infamy.

To give content to this most curious Age,
The gods themselves with have brought down
to the Stage,
And figured them in Planets, made even Hell
Deliver up the Furies, by no spell,
(Saving the Muses rapture) further, we
Have trafficked by their help; no History
We have left unrifled, our Pens have, been dipped
As well in opening each hid Manuscript,
As Tracts more vulgar, whether read, or sung
In our domestic, or more foreign tongue:
Of Faiery Elves, Nymphs of the Sea, and Land;
The Lawns and Groves, no number can be scened
Which we have not given feet to, nay it is known,
That when our Chronicles have barren grown
Of Story, we have all Invention stretched,
Dived low as to the Center, and then reached
Unto the Primum mobile above:
(Nor escaped things intermediate) for your love,
These have been Acted often, all have past
Censure; of which some live, and some are cast:
For this in agitation, stay the end,
Though nothing please, yet nothing can offend.
THus from the holy Wars are we returned,
To, slumber in the Summer of soft peace,
Since those proud enemies that late blaspheamd
And spit their furies in the face of Heaven,
Are now laid low in dust.
Dread Sovereign.
The Heavens have showed their bounty unto us,
In guarding your most dear and isacred life
From opposite hatred, and that imminent peril
To which you were engaged.
When in one batt•isle you were twice unhorsed,
Guirt with the opposite ranks of Infidels,
That had not timely res••e come from Heaven,
Mortal assistance had been used in vain.
Ey, now you load me with a surplu•••dge•,
Of comprlesse debe•• this thrice 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
My noble Martial, twice that pe•llous day•
Did he bestride me, and beneath his Targe.
Me thought that instant did I lie as safe
As in my best and strongest Citadel;
The whilst his bright Sword like the Bolt of Jove,
Pierced the steele-crests of barbarous Insidels,
And flatted them with earth; although my Subject,
Yet in this one thing thou hast proved my Lord:
For when my life was forfeit to the Wars,
Thou by thy valour did redeem it freely,
And give it me, whilst thou ingag'st thy life:
For which if ever by like chance of War,
Laws forfeiture, or our prerogative,
Thy life come in like danger, here we swear
By our earths honours, and our hopes divine,
As thou for us, we'll ours engage for thine.
You give my Lord, to Duty Attributes
Too high for her submiss humility:
I am your vassal, and ten thousand lives
Of equal rank with mine, subjects and servants,
Be over-rated if compared with yours.
When I forget thee, may my operant parts
Each one forget their office: We create •hee
Next to our self of power, we but except
The name of King, all other dignities
We will communicate to thee our friend.
May I no longer use these Roy alties,
Or have the power to enjoy them, the• I wholly
Devote them to your service.
Noble Martial,
If I survive Englands Inheritance,
Or ever live to sit on Iacobs Stone,
Thy love shall with my Crown be hereditary.
And gracious Prince, since Heaven hath bin as lib∣rall
To grace me with your favour, as my birth
Was to endow me richly; all your graces
Shall with my great and ample revenues
Be ever to your virtues serviceable.
We know it. and have been observers long
Of thy choice virtues neither could we yet
Fasten that love on thee, which came not home
With double use and ample recompense.
These graces are beyond dimension,
They have nor height, nor depth, uncircumscrib'd,
And without bounds. He like abroad armed tree
O're-shadows us, and throw his spacious bows,
We that grow under cannot see the Sun,
Nor taste the cheerful warmth of his bright beams.
These branches we must lop by fire or Thunder,
Or by his shadowy a•mes be still kept under.
I was borne Eagle-fighted, and to gaze
In the Suns fore-head; I will brooke no cloud
To stand betwixt me and his glorious fire,
I'll have f•ll light, or none; either foare high,
Or else sink low; my ominous Fate is ca•t,
Or to be first, or of all abjects last.
You shall renowned Martial feast for us
The Ambassadors that come from foreign Lands,
To gratulate our famous victories.
I shall my Lord, and give them entertainment
To Englands honour, and to suite the place
Of which I bear the name.
We doubt it not:
We understand Lords, in these tedious wars
Some forward spirits have been at great expense
To furnish them like noble Gentlemen;
And many spent most part of their revenues
In honour of their Country, some undone
In pursuit of th•se wars: now if such come
For their relief by suite petitionary,
Let them have gracious hearing, and supply
Or by our service, or our Treasury
I have one Kinsman hath spent all his land,
And is returned a beggar, and so tattered,
As that I can but blush to acknowledge him:
But in the Wars he spent it, and for me,
Wars shall relieve him. He was a noble Heir,
But what these lost, let other Wars repair.
Lords all, once more we greet your safe return,
With general welcome, we invite you all
To feast with us, and joy what we have wo••e,
Happiest in these, our Martial, and our son.
It soemes thou hast not been in the Wars my
Friend, but art new come up to London.
Heaven plesse thee from all his mercies, and his
graces: It was told us in Wales, that you have great pig Or∣began
in Pals, and pigger by a great deal than our Organ
at Rixam, which made me make my travels and my journeys
on the pare hoof up to London, to have resolutions and cer∣tifications
in that pisinesse, that when I venturne into my
Countries and habitations, I may give notice to mine Uncle,
Rice ap Davy, ap Morgan, ap Evan, ap Iones, ap Geffrey.
I pray where apout stands Pals Church, can you tell her?
Ovary easily; stand with thy face that way, and
follow thy nose, and thou wilt be there presently. But doest
thou hear Briton, take my word, our Organ of Powles is
much bigger and better than yours of Rixam, by as
much as Powles Church is bigger and better than Saint
Pancridge.
Awe man, you prittle and prattle nothing but lea∣sings
and untruths: now will you but •as your posteriors a
little, and I will quickly show you your Organ of Pals.
Very good, I like your demonstration well; but
doest thou think your Organ of Rixam can compare with
ours for all that?
Lend me but your ears and your apprehensions, and
I will make you easily to acknowledge your errors.
But first show me your case in which you carry
your two pair of Organs, sure those flops will not hold them:
but in the mean time walk with me to the next red Lattice,
and I will give thee two Cannes, and wet thine Organ-pipes
well I warrant thee.
I will take your courtesies, and if ever I shall meet
you in Glamorgan, or Rednock-shire, I will make bold to re∣quite
some part of your kindnesses.
The very noise of that Horn hath frighted my
curtsy, but ell's one, fare-well for this time, and at our
next meeting ten to one I will be as good as my word.
Say you so man, why then Cad keep you from
all his mercies, and good fortunes, and make us all his ser∣vents.
Come, we will to the c•ace, be near us Martial,
I'll try to day which of our two good steeds
Can speed it best; let the most swift take both.
So please your Grace, but I shall surely loose;
Yours is the best for proof, though mine for show.
That will we try, the wager grows not deep
Equals the lay, and what we win, we'll keep,
Mount, mount.
Greater and greater still, no plot, no trick
To have him quite removed from the Kings Grace,
To slander him?
The King will lend no ear
To any just complaint that's made of him;
What can our • andals doe then?
Challenge him
Of Treason then, and that may happily call
His Loyalty into suspect and question,
Which on the King at 〈◊〉 will breed a coldness,
If not a deadness of affection.
Of Treason? say he crave the combat then,
For that's the least he can; which of us two
Shall combat him? I know his blows too well,
Not I.
I should be loath.
How doe you relish this?
His virtue and his bounty won him grace,
On that we'll build to ruin all his favours,
And work him to disgrace.
Pray teach me how?
First, praise him to the King, give all his virtues
Double their due, add unto every thing,
Ey, and Hyperb lize in all his deeds:
Let his known virtues be the common Theme
Of our discourse to stale him, rate his worth,
To equalise, if not to exceed the King:
This cannot but beget distaste at least.
But further.
Thus; then fall off from his praise,
And question his best deeds, as it may be
His noble bounty is but popular grace,
And his humility but inward pride:
His vulgar ••••age and applause abroad,
A way to climb and seat himself aloft,
You understand me?
Fully; come to horse,
And as we ride, our further plots digest,
To find what may disturb, what aid us best.
Spur to the King, his steed's unshod before,
The ways be stony, and he will spoil his beast:
Here take these shoes and hammer, brought of purpose
For mine own use.
My Lord, have you pluck'e the shoes off from your
own horse, to set them on another• a thousand to one but
you will spoil your own Guelding quite.
No matter, doe as I command thee sirrah;
Hollow him straight, I know he loves that horse,
And would not ride him bare for any gold.
Your horse is as good as his I am sure, and I think
you love him as well.
No matter, if he ask thee where thou had them,
Tell him, thou broughtst them with thee for my use.
Away, I'll gallop after, and over-take thee.
Put your shoes on another horses feet, and let
your own go bare-foot? a jest indeed.
The King affects both his good horse and Game,
I'll help to further both.
You have fetched me up at length, that's to your for∣tune,
Or my misfortune, for I lost a shoe.
Martial you ride well furnished to the field,
My Lord, so Horsemen should and I am glad
My man was so well furnished, and the rather
Since we are far from help; my man is cunning,
Your Highne••e to his skill may trust your horse.
Thou could not have presented me a gift
I could have tasted better, for that beast
I much esteem: you were out-stript at length.
Till I was forced to alight, my horse with yours
Kept equal speed.
Our Lords? now Gentlemen,
How doe you like the Chase?
It was excellent.
Had not my horse been by mischance unshod,
My Martial here and I had led you •till.
You were the better horsed.
And you the worst,
Witness the hugeness of your way behind:
Is not my horse yet shod?
He is my Lord.
Then let us mount again.
Your horse my Lord, is not in state to ride,
He wants two shoes before.
Whose doth, the Martials?
Oft such mischance; happen.
Were you furnished
For us, and for your self kept no supply?
So I may have my Lord to furnish you,
I care not how my self want.
Apprehension help me, for every circumstance apply
Thou hast done me an unwonted curtsy;
You spied my loss first.
I did my Lord.
And then alighted.
True.
Upon my life it is so,
To unshooe thine own good steed, and furnish mine,
Was it not? upon thy life resolve me true.
What I have done my Lord, I did to you.
You will exceed me still, and yet my curtsy
Shall rank with thine; for this great duty shown,
I pay thee thus, both steeds are now thine own.
They wager love.
The best thing I can doe
In me is duty; the worst, Grace in you.
The art ours; come mount, we wi• return to Court,
To order the great Tournament prepared
To doe our son grace; in which we entreat
Martial, your aid, because your skill is great.
We have visited all our familiars, is it not now
time that we revisit our Captain?
With all my heart good Corporal, but it had not
bin amiss, if we had gone to Burchen-lane first to have sui∣ted
us: and yet it is a credit for a man of the •word to go
thread-bare, because by his apparel he may be taken to be
an old Soldier.
Cock, thy father was a fresh water soldier, thou are not;
Thou hast been powdered, witness thy f•axe &amp; touch-box.
But who comes yonder, my Match? I am glad I
have met thee.
I knew Cock, at one time or other thou would
meet with thy Match. What, shall we go to my Captains
lodging?
Spare that pains, yonder he appears in his colours.
Fortun' de la guere; I that have flourished, no colours
like me, nay, no Trumpet thou in his highest key, have no∣thing
now but rags to flourish; I that have faced the enemy,
have not so much as any facing left me: were my suite but as
well pointed as I have seen some, and stood I but in the
midst of my followers, I might say I had nothing about me
but tag and rag. I am descended nobly; for I am descen∣ded
so low, that all the clothes of my back are scarce worth
a Noble: I was borne to thousands, and yet a thousand to
one, they will now scarce acknowledge me where I was
borne.
Health to our worthy Captain,
Thanks my most worthy soldiers; and yet if I should
examine your words, what at the most could all you make?
I would not have your Worship to examine our outsides.
And for your insides I'll pass my word.
Cānot all your worships credit afford you a new suit?
Credit me, no; my revenues were a thousand a year,
part of which I lavish'• amongst gallants, rioted in Ta∣vernes,
havockt in Ordinaries; and when my estate began •o
ebb, as my last refuge, I laid all my hopes upon the last wars,
but failing there, (as the world imagines) I am returned as
you see. The King hath promised supply and relief to all
that have spent their estates in his expeditions, but many like
my self have been borne to be poor, that scorn to be beg∣gorse;
as many have been borne to be rich, that can never
leave it; the truth is, I am my self as my proceedings will
express me further.
Will you cashier us Captain, or shall wee follow
your future fortunes?
You shall not leave me; my purpose is to try the
humours of all my friends, my Allies, my ancient associates,
and see how they will respect me in my supposed poverty:
though I loose their acquaintance, I will loose none of my
retinew. How say you Gentlemen, will you compared with
me in this my dejectedness?
As I am Corporal, so will I prove true Squire to
thy body.
And as I am true Cock, so will I crow at thy ser∣vice,
waite on thee with a comb for thy head, with fire to
thy Piece, with water to thy hands, and be cock sure in a∣ny
employment whatsoever.
And as I am true Match, I shall scorn that any of
them shall o're-match me in duty.
Attend me then; if I rise, you shall ascend; if fall,
I will lie flat with you. First then I will make some trial of
my Friends at the Court, and in good time: here's the King.
You have persuaded much, and I begin
To censure strangel, of his emulous love.
Further my Lord, what can his smoothness mean,
His curtsy, and his humility,
But as fly baits to catch the peoples hearts,
And wean them from your love.
Doth he not strive
In all things to exceed your curtsy,
Of purpose to out-shine your Royal deeds,
And daze I your brightness, that himself may shine?
Is he not only popular my Liege?
Is not the peoples suffrage sole to him,
Whilst they neglect your fame, his train doth equal,
If not exceed yours, still his Chamber thronged
With store of suitors: where the Martial lies,
There is the Court, all eyes are bent on him,
And on his glories; there's no Theme abroad,
But how he saved you from the Pagans sword,
How his sole hand sways, guides, and guards the Realm.
Think but my Lord on his last game at Chess,
'I was his past odds, but when he saw you moved,
With what a sly neglect he lost the mate,
Only to make you bound to'him.
For all the favours, graces, honours, loves
Bestowed upon him from your bounteous hand,
His cunning was to think to quit you all,
And pay you with a horse-shooe.
In the Tournament
Made by the Prince your son, when he was Peerless,
And without equal, this ambitious Martial
Strives to exceed, and did; but when he saw
Your Highness moved to see the Prince disgrac't,
He lost the Prize; but how? that all the people
Might see it given, not forfeit, which did add
Rather than derogate: briefly my Lord,
His curtsy is all ambition.
And well it may be; is he not our vassal?
Why should the Martial then contend with us.
To exceed in any virtue? we observe him.
His popularity, how affable
He's to the people; his Hospitality,
Which adds unto his love; his forwardness,
To entertain Ambassadors, and feast them,
Which though he doo '• upon his proper charge,
And for our honour, yet it may be thought
A smoothness, and a cunning, to grow great;
It must be so. A project we intend
To prove him faithless, or a perfect friend.
It takes, these jealous thoughts we must pursue,
And to his late doubts still add something new.
Your speech being ended, now comes in my cue.
My honourable Lord.
What beggar's this?
Beggar my Lord? I never begged of you:
But were I a beggar, I might be a Courtiers fellow:
Could I beg suites my Lord as well as you,
I need not go thus clad; or were you free
From begging as I am, you might rank me.
Comparisons? Away.
Folly and pride
In Silks and Lace their imperfections show,
But let p•re virtue come in garments torn
To beg relief she gets a courtly scorn:
My Lord you know me?
I have seen that face.
Why it is the same it was, it is no changeling,
It bears the selfsame front; it is not like yours,
Paled with the least disgrace, or past with brags,
That smiles upon gay clothes, and frowns on rags.
Mine's steadfast as the Sun, and free as 〈◊〉;
Whose equal eyes look upon want and state.
And doth not mine so too? Pray w•it's your business?
Only that you would know me: the K•ngs favour
hath made you a Baron, and the Kings wars have made
me a bare one: there's less difference in the Accent of the
word, than in the cost of our weeds: This is the same face
you were once acquainted with though not the same habit:
I could know your face, though your diseased body were
wrapped in sheepe-skins.
This fellow offends me.
Go churl, pas•e free,
Thou know my forfeit lands, though forget me:
Nay, you would be going too, you are as aff•aid of a torn
suite, as a younger brother of a Sergeant, a rich corne-master
of a plentiful year, or a troublesome Attorney to hear
of suits put to compromise.
Sir. I must challenge you, you are my kinsman;
My Grandsire was the first that raised the name
Of Bonvile to this height, but Lord to see
That you are grown a Lord, and know not me.
Cousin, I know you, you have bin an unthri•t,
And lavished what you had; had I so done,
I might have •bb'd like you, where I now flow.
Yet I can purchase that, which all the wealth you
have will never win you.
And what's that I pray?
Wit: is the word strange to you, wit?
Whither wilt thou?
True,
Wit will to many e•eit come to you.
Feed you upon your purchase, I'll keep mine.
Have you the wit to do it?
I have wit to buy,
And you to sell, which is the greater gain?
Cousin I'll keep my wealth, keep you your brain.
The wealth of Midst choke thee ere you are old,
And even the bread thou feed on change to gold.
My Lord, you hear how I pray for my Kindred,
I have a little more charity for my friend: with you
I have some b•sinesse.
I am in haste now.
I pray you stay.
Not now indeed.
Pardon, for here's no way
Before you hear me.
Prithee be brief.
Your daughter lives I hope.
What's that to thee?
Somewhat twill prove, e• and concerning me;
Before I laid my fortunes on these wars.
And was in hope to thrive, by your con•ent,
Nay, by your motion our united hearts
Were made more firm by contract; well you know
We were betrothed.
Sir, I remember't not.
I doe, and thus proceed:
I was in hope to have raised my fortunes high,
And with them to have pulled her by degrees
Unto that eminence at which I aim:
I ventured for it, but instead of wealth
I purchased nought but wounds. Honour I had,
And the repute of valour; but my Lord,
These simply of themselves are naked Titles,
Respectless, without price, and bombast wealth,
And to the purblind world show seeming bad,
Behold in me their shapes, they thus go clad.
You said you would be brief.
All that I had,
I spent upon my Soldiers, we took no spoil.
The wars have grated on me even to this
That you now see: Now my last refuge is,
To raise my self by her.
And spend her means
As thou hast done thine own vile unthrift? no,
I know no Contract.
I have one to show.
No matter; think thou that I'll vent my bags
To suite in Satin him that Jets in rags?
The world's all of one heart, this blaze I can,
All love the money, none esteems the man.
These be our friends at Court, and fine ones too,
Are they not pray? where be our followers?
Here noble Captain.
You see how our friends grace us, what hopes we have
to prefer you?
I see sufficient: Captain, I will discharge my self,
I mean to seek else-where for preferment.
All leave me if you please; but him that stays,
If ever I mount, I'll with my fortunes raise.
Captain, I desire your pas•e, I mean to march a∣long
with my Corporal.
Wilt thou go too?
I leave you? who I? for a little diversity, for a wet
storm? no Sir, though your out-sides fallaway, I'll cleave
as close to you as your linings.
Gramercy yet, away without reply?
Futre for thy base service.
Away, sfoot how am I fallen out of my humour? and
yet this strangeness of my nearest friends and alliance de∣serves
a little cotemplating; is it possible, that even Lords, that
have the best educating, whose ears are frequent to the most
fluent discourse, that live in the very brain of the Land, the
Court, that these should be gulled with shadows, and not
be able to distinguish a man when they see him; thou know∣est
me, yet these doe not.
Why may not a poor man have as good eyes as a∣another?
their ears indeed may be larger than mine, but I
can see as far without spectacles as the best Lord in the land.
These superficial Lords that think every thing to
be as it appears, they never question a mans wit, his descry∣tion,
his language, his inward virtues, but as hee seems,
he passes.
I warrant if I should look like an Ass,
They would take me for one too.
The next I try is my betrothed, if she acknowledge
this hand that hath received hers, this heart, this face, and
knows the person from the garment, I shall say, Woman,
there is more virtue in thee than Man.
There's no question of that; for they say, they will
hold out better: But Sir, if we be no better habitat, I make a
question how we shall get in at the Court-gate; for I'll assure
you your fashion is not in request at the Court.
My virtue is not to be imitated; I'll hold my pur∣pose
though I be kept back, and venture lashing in the Pore∣ters
Lodge. Come, follow me, I will go see my Mistress,
Though guirt with all the Ladies of the court:
Though ragged Virtue oft may be kept out,
No grate so strongly kept above the Center,
But Asses with gold laden, free may en•er.
Lord Martial, we are much in debt to you,
For by your favour we obtained the prize
In the last Tourney: we acknowledge it.
I could not love my Sovereign Gracious Prince,
Without extent of duty to the son.
It was nobly plied on both sides, both had ho∣nor;
Yet brother to be modest in your praise,
You had the best.
You please to grace me Sister.
Martial, I hear you are a widower late:
How long is it since your bea•teous Countess died?
My Lord, you make me now unsoldier-like
For get the name of Martial, to become
A passionate husband; her remembrance draws
Tears from mine eyes: she died some three Months since,
Good Lady shoe's now gone.
A kind Husband
I'll warrant him: if ever I chance to bride,
Heaven grant I find no worse.
Have you no children by her?
Two sweet Girls,
Now all my hopes and solace of this earth,
Whom next the zeal I owe unto my King,
I pri•e above the world.
Why noble Sir,
Are they not brought up to be trained at Court,
To attend our Sister?
They are young and tender,
And ever I teach them fas•ion, I would gladly
Train them in virtue, and to arm their youth
Against the smooth and amo•os baits of Court.
As kind a Father as a Husband now:
If ever I chance to wed, such Heaven grant me.
Why Heaven may hear your prayer: here's one
I warrant that dreams not on a Husband.
Ye• ever long
She may both dream, and speak as much as I.
No question but she thinks as much already;
And were here voice and her election free,
She would not stick to say this man for me.
You make the Lady blush.
Why to change face,
They say in mod•st Maids are signs of grace:
Yet many that like her hold down the head,
Will ne'er change colour when they're once in bed.
You'll put the Lady out of countenance quite.
Not out of heart; for all of her complexion,
Show in their face the fire of their affection:
And even the modest wives, this know we too,
Oft blush to speak what is no shame to doe.
Lady, the Princess doth but try your spirit,
And prove your cheek, yet doe not take it •ll,
He will one day come will act the Husbands part.
Here enters one, I hope it be not he.
Attend me sirrah into the presence, and if any of the
Guard repulse thee, regard him not.
I'll march where my Captain leads, were it into
the Presence of the great Termagant.
My duty to the Prince, Madam your favour,
Lord Martial, yours.
What will the fellow doe?
Lady, your lip.
My Lord, how like you this?
She would blush to speak, that doth not blush to kiss.
Well said Mistress.
A good bold fellow.
You are not ashamed to acknowledge me in this good
company: I have brought thee all that the wars have left
of me; were I better worth, it were all thine; thou can
have no more of the Cat but his skin, I have brought thee
home the same eyes that first saw thee, the same tongue
that first courted thee, the same hand that first contracted
thee, and the same heart that firs• affected thee: More I have
not, less I cannot: nay quickly sweet W•nch, and let me
know what to trust to.
Were you more worth, I could not love you more,
Or less, affect you less; you have brought me home
All that I love, your sell•e, and you are welcome.
I gave no faith to Money, but a Man,
And that I cannot loose possessing you:
It is not the robe or garment•l affect,
For who would marry with a suite of clothes?
Diamonds, though ••tin Lead, retain their worth,
And leaden Knives may have a golden sheath.
My love is to the Jewel, not the Case,
And you my jewel are.
Why god emery Wench: come sirrah.
Here's a short horse soon curried.
Is this your sweet-heart? I had need wish you
much joy, for I see but a little towards: Where did you take
him up by the hye-way, or did you not fall in love with him
hanging on a Gibbet?
What is he for Heavens sake? can no man give him
his true character?
I can my Lord, he's of a noble House,
A Bonvile, and great H••re; but being profuse,
And lavish in his nonage, spent the most
Of his known means, and hoping now at last
To raise his fortunes by the wars now ceased,
His hopes have fail•d him, yet we know him valiant
And fortunate in service. One whose mind
No fortune can deject, no favour raise
Above his virtues pitch.
If he be such,
We'll move the King in his behalf, and help
To cherish his good parts.
My Lord the Prince,
The King calls for you; for he dines to day
In the great Hall with great solemnity,
And his best state: Lord Martial, you this day
Must use your place, and waite, so all the Lords.
Come, we'll go see the King.
I shall attend your Grace.
And in faith Lady can you be in love with this
rag of honour?
Madam, you know I am my Fathers heir,
My possibilities may raise his hopes
To their first height: should I despise my hand
In a torn glove, or taste a poisonous draught
Because presented in a Cup of Gold?
Virtue will last when wealth flies, and is gone:
Let me drink Nectar though in earth or stone.
But say your Father now, as many Fathers are,
prove a true worldling, and rather than bestow thee on one
dejected, dis-inherite thee? how then?
My Father is my Father, but my Husband,
He is my self: my resolution is
To profess constancy, and keep mine honour;
And rather than to Queen it where I hate,
Beg where I love: I wish no better fate.
By my faith good counsel; if I live long enough,
It may be I may have the grace to follow it.
This Anniversary doe we yearly keep
In memory of our late victories.
In joy of which we make a public feast,
And banquet all our P•eres thus openly.
Sit Lords, those only we appoint to waite,
Attend us for this day: and now to crown
Our Festival, we will begin this health.
Who's that so near ou•elbow? Martial? you?
Stand off we wish you, further.
Me my Lord?
Ey you my Lord.
Your Highness will's a law,
I shall obey.
You are too near us yet: what are we King,
Or have we countermanders?
Note you that?
Now it begins.
I fear some Sycophants
Have dealt ignobly with us to the King:
No matter I am armed with innocence,
And that dares front all danger.
Lords this Health:
See it go round, it was to our victory.
With pardon, can your Highness that remember,
And so forget me?
Thou doest prompt me well,
You are our Martial.
I have used that place.
Your Staff? support it, and resolve me thus:
Which of yon Lords there seated at the board,
Hast thou been most in opposition with?
Or whom dost thou least favour?
I love all:
But should you ask me who hath wronged me most,
Then should I point out Chester.
Chester then,
Bear him that Staff, gived up into his hand,
Say, I commend me to him by the name
Of our High Martial; take your place below,
And let him waite on us: what doe you pause?
Or shall we twice command?
I'll do it my Lord:
Chester, the King commends his love to you,
And by my mouth he styles you by the name
Of his High Martial, which this Staff of Office
Makes good to you; my place I thus resign,
And gived up freely as it first was mine.
You must attend the King, it is a place
Of honour Chester, and of great command,
Use it with no less modesty than he
That late enjoyed it, and resigns it thee.
I need not your instruction; the Kings bounty
Bestows it freely, and I take my place.
And I mine here, th'allegeance that I owe him
Bids me accept it, were it yet more low.
Attend us Chester, wait upon our Cup,
It is an honour due to you this day.
I shall my Lord.
Oh my Lord you are welcome, wee have not had
your company amongst us long.
You ever had my heart, though the Kings service
Commanded still my person: I am eased
Of a great burden so the King rest pleased.
I have not seen a man hath borne his disgrace with
more patience; especially to be forced with his own hand to
deliver up his honours to his enemy.
It would have troubled me, I should not brooke it.
Command you fellow give his golden Key
To the Lord Clinton; henceforth we debar him
Access unto our Chamber, see it done.
The King commands you to give up your Key
Unto that Lord that nears you: henceforth Sir,
You to his person are denied access,
But when the King commands.
Say to my Liege,
The proudest foe he hath, were he an Emperor,
Should not have forced the least of these from me:
But I acknowledge these, and all I have,
To be sole his; my life too, which as willingly
To please him I will send: I thank his Highness
That sees so into my debility,
That he hath care to ease me of these loads
That have oppressed me long; so Sir it is done:
Come Lords, now let's be merry, and drink round,
After great tempests we a calm have found.
This Lord is of an unwonted constancy,
He entertains his disgraces as merrily as a man dyes that is
tickled to death.
Cannot all this stir his impatience up?
I'll search his breast but I will find his gaul:
Command him give his Staff of Council up,
We will bestow it elsewhere where we please.
The King would have you to forbear the Council,
And to give up your Staff.
I shall turn man,
Kings cannot force to bear more than we can.
Sir, are you moved?
Those that are wronged may speak:
My Lord, I let you know my innocence,
And that my true and unstained Loyalty
Deserves not this disgrace: none ever bore
Like eminence with me that hath discharged it
With better zeal and conscience: for my service
Let my wounds witness•e, I have some to show;
That had I not my body interposed,
Had been your skarres: all my deserved honours
You have bestowed upon my enemies,
Ey such as have whole skins,—
And never bled but for their ease and health.
You might with as much lustice take my life•
As seize my honours: howsoe're my Lord
Give me free leave to speak but as I find,
I ever have been true, you now unkind.
Will you contest?
What have you Sir that is not held from us?
Or what can your own virtue purchase you
Without our grace? Are not your fortunes, favours,
And your revenues ours? where should they end
But where they first began? have we not power
To give our own? or must we ask your counsel,
To grace where you appoint? need we a Guardian,
Or a•me you at the place?
Oh my dread King,
It sorrows me that you misprize my love,
And with more freedom I could part with life
Than with your Grace: my offices alas,
They were my troubles, but to want your favours,
That only thus afflicts my loyal thoughts,
And makes me bold to term your Grace unkind.
Sir, we command you to abandon Court,
And take it as a favour that we now
Not question of your life; without reply
Leave us.
I'll leave the Court as I would leave my burden,
But from your Highness in this kind to part,
Is as my body should fortake my heart.
Shall we not be ourselfe, or shall we brooke
Competitors in reign? act what we doe
By other men's appointment? he being gone,
We are unrivaled; we'll be sole, or none.
The Martiall's gone in discontent my Liege.
Pleased, or not pleased, if we be Englands King,
And mightiest in the Sphere in which we move,
We'll shine alone, this Phaeton cast down,
We'll state us now midst of our best affected:
Our new created Martial first lead on,
Whose Loyalty we now must build upon.
Sir, now attend me, I'll to the Ordinary,
And see if any of my ancient friends will take note of me.
Whore's the good man? within?
There's none dwells here; you may speak with the
Master of the house if you will.
Captain, Captain, I have descried an Host.
An Host? where? which way march they?
Mine Host of the house, see where he marches.
Here take my cloak, what is it not Dinner-time?
Are there no gallants come yet?
Why Sir, doe you mean to dine here to day?
Here doe I mean to cranch, to munch, to eat,
To feed, and be fat my fine Cullapolis.
You must pardon me Sir, my house entertains none
but Gentlemen; if you will stand at gate, when Dinner's
done, I'll help you to some fragments.
Sirrah, if your house be free for Gentlemen, it is fit
for me; thou see I keep my man, I've Crowns to spend
with him that's bravest here: I'll keep my room in spite
of Silks and Satins.
I would I were well rid of this ragamuffin.
How goes the day?
It cannot yet be old, because I see no more gallants come.
Mine Host, what's here?
A Tatterdemalean, that stays to sit at the Ordinary
to day.
Doest know him?
I did when he was flush, and had the Crowns; but
since he grew poor, he is worn quite out of my remem∣bronco.
He is a decayed Captain, and his name is Bonvile.
I would he would leave this place, and rank him∣self
with his companions.
Morrow Gentlemen.
The morning's past, •tic mid-day at the least.
What is the room so empty?
And please your Worships.
Here's more by one than it can well receive.
What Tatter's that that walks there?
If he will not leave the room, kick him down
stairs.
There's ne'er a silken outside in this company
That dares present a foot to doe that office:
I'll toss that heel a yard above his head
That offers but a spurn.
Can we not be private?
I am a man like you perhaps well bred,
Nor want I coin, for hark, my pockets chink:
I keep my man to attend me more perhaps,
Than some can doe that go in costlier Silk
Are you so fearful of a ragged suite?
They were first paid for ever they were put on;
A man may question whether yours were so.
Who kicks first, ha, come; have you mind to game?
I'll cast, or set at thus much; will you card
A rest for this? no? then let's to dinner:
Come serve in meat.
Mine Host, prithee put this fellow out of the room,
And let him not drop his shooe-clouts here.
Sfoot dost thou mean we shall go lousy out of
the house?
If he will not go out by fair means,
Send for a Constable.
And send him to Bridewell Ordinary; whipping
cheer is best for him.
Nay pray sir leave my house, you see the Gentlemen
will not endure your company.
Mine Host, thou knew me in my flourishing prime:
I was the first brought custom to thine house,
Most of my means I spent here to enrich thee;
And to set thee up, I've cast down my self.
I remember sir some such matter, but you see the
times change. Nay, will you leave the Gentlemen?
The Lease of this house had thou not from me?
Did I not give thee both the Fine and Rent?
I must needs say you were bountiful when you had
it, but in troth sir, if you will not be gone, J shall be forced to
turn you out by the head and shoulders.
And is not all this worth the trusting for an Ordinary?
Nay if you prate, I shall use you somewhat extraor∣denariate.
Down with the Rogue.
Since you hate calms, and will move stormy weather,
Now Host and guest shall all down stairs together.
Ah well done Master, tickle them noble Captain.
Come Cock I have took some of their stomachs
away from them before Dinner.
We are at peace now, and in threatened death
We doe enjoy new life: my only comforts,
The image of my late deceased wife,
Now have I time to surfeit on your sight,
Which Court-imployments have debarred me long.
Oh Fortune, thou did threaten misery,
And thou hast paid me comfort; need we ought
That we should seek the suffrage of the Court?
Are we not rich? are we not w•ll revenew'd?
Are not the Countrey-pleasures far more sweet
Than the Court-cares? Instead of balling suitors
Our ears receive the music of the Hound;
For mounting pride and lofty ambition,
We in the Ayre behold the Falcons Tower,
And in that Moral mock those that aspire.
Oh• my good King, instead of threat and wrong,
Thou hast brought me rest which I have wished so long.
Sir we have long been Orphans in the Country,
Whilst you still followed your affairs at Court;
We heard we had a Father by our Guardian,
But scarce till now could we enjoy your sight.
Nor let it seem offencive to your love,
That we in your retirement should take pride,
The King in this pursues our greater happiness,
And quickens most where he would most destroy.
You are mine own sweet girls '&amp; in your virtues
I place my sole bliss; you are all my honours,
My favours, state, and offices at Court:
What are you not? Let the King take my lands,
And my possession, and but leave me you,
He leaves me rich; more would I not desire,
And less he cannot grant.
One from the King
Attends your honour, and his urgency
Craves quick dispatch.
Ladies withdraw a little,
I long to know what mischiefe's now afoot;
We'll front it be it death, ey and march towards it.
A Chair, admit the Herald, let him in;
We are arm'd' against what can come, our breast is true,
And that's one Maxim, what is forced is wrong,
We can both keep our heart and guide our tongue.
Sir, the King greets you, and commands you effect
His will in this you know the Character.
My good Lord Martial you are welcome hither,
These Lines I kiss because they came from him.
You'll like the letter better than the style:
Ha, change your face? is your blood moved to the tide,
Or ebbes it to your heart?
Thou hast two Daughters,
Fair by report her whom thou love b•st
Send to the Court• it is thy Kings behest,
Doe this on thy allegiance,
Sir your Answer?
I pray Sir deal with men in •isery
Like one that may himself be miserable:
Insult not too much upon men distressed,
Play not too much upon my wretchedness;
The noble minds still will not when they can.
I cannot st• for answer pray be brief.
You are more welcome than your message Sir,
And yet that's welcome coming from my King;
Pray Sir forbear me, it is the Kings command,
And you shall know mine answer instantly•
Receive him nobly.
I shall waite your pleasure.
Malice, revenge, displeasure envy, ha•e,
I had thought that you had only dwelt at Court,
And that the Country had been clear and free:
But from Kings wraths no place I find is safe
My fairest daughter? had the King commanded
One of my hands, I had sent it willingly;
But her! yet Kings must not be dal••d with,
Somewhat I must •esolve to breed of force
Treason or to my blood, or to my King,
False Father or false or Subject I must prove,
Be true to h•m I serve o•her I love,
Somewhat I must: my Daugh••rs, call them in:
Leave them and us.
Ladies I must be blunt, the King's displeased
And hearing of two children whom I love,
My patience and my loyalty to try,
Commands that she whom I love best must dye.
Dye? alas chat's nothing; must nor all men so?
And doth not Heaven crown martyred innocence?
I was afraid my Lord the King had scene
To have strumpeted the 〈◊〉 for oft of your blood:
An innocent death my Lord is crown of rest,
Then let me dye as her whom you love best.
If but to dye, prove that you love me then;
Death were mo•t welcome to confirm your love.
Alas my Sister she: hath not the heart•
To look upon a rough To〈◊〉 face:
I am bold and con•tant, and my courage great;
As token of your love then point out me.
Alas my girl• for greater ills prepare,
Death would end yours and somewhat 〈◊〉 my sorrows:
What I must spe ke, contains ••avens greatest curse,
Search all the world, you can find nought so ill.
Speak't at once.
Her whom I best affect.
The King intends to strumpet.
Bless me Heaven!
Should he,
By all my joys I'll sooner dye
Then suffer it.
And so by Heaven will I.
Now you are mine indeed, who would forgo
One of these jemmes so fine, and valued so?
But passion give me leave, the King commands,
I must obey. The fairest he sent for;
None of my daughters have been seen at Court,
Nor hath the ambitious Chester viewed them yet:
My eldest then shall go, come hither girl;
I send thee, (Heaven knows) whether to thy death
Or to thine honour; though he envy me,
Yet in himself the King is honourable,
And will not stretch his malice to my child.
The worst I fear, and yet the best I hope.
I charge thee then even by a fathers name,
If the King deign to take thee to his bed
By name of Queen, if thou perceiv'st thy self
To be with child, conceal it even from him;
Next, when thou find him affable and free,
Find out some talk about thy Sister here,
As thus; thy Father sent thee but in jest,
Thy Sister's fairest, and I love her best.
It may incense the King.
What I intend
Is to my self, inquire no further of it.
I shall perform your will, and thus resolved
To be a Martyr ever a Concubine.
But if the King afford me further favour,
In my close bosom your last words I'll place.
Sister and Sister part, be you not seen,
Bid her farewell, a Martyr or a Queen.
They cannot speak for tears, alas for woe,
That force should part Sister and Sister thus,
And that the Child and Father of one heart,
Commands and powerful threats should thus divide.
But Chester stays, within there?
My Lord?
Have you received Earl Chester honourably?
The noblest welcome that the house could yield
He hath had my Lord, nothing was held too dear:
He much extols your bounty.
Usher h•min, we are now ready for him.
I shall my Lord.
Sir, I have sty•'d your leisure, now your Answer?
That I obey, the fairest of my girls
I send the King.
I easily can believe
That this the fairest is, her like in Court
Lives not; she is a Present for a King.
Say to the King I give her but conditionally,
That if he like not this fairest of the two,
Unstained he wi•l his gift send back again.
I shall, come Lady.
My Lord, I doe not load you with commends
And duties which I could doe to the King:
I know your love your memory may fail you,
And you them all may scatter by the way.
Doe thou a Fathers duty thus in tears,
And send me how thou speed'st to free these fears.
Came you from him?
Yes if it please your Maidenship; my Master sends
you word he is the old man, and his suite is the old suite still,
and his clothes the old clothes: He scorns to be a change
ling, or a shifter; he fears nothing but this, that hee shall
fall into the Lord your fathers hands for want of repara∣tions.
We know thy meaning, here bear him this gold,
And bid him suite him like the man he was,
Bid him to face the proudest hee in Court;
He shall not want whilst we have.
That was out of my Commission Lady, Gold
tempts, I have commandment not to touch it; it is another
thing he aims at: it is a thing, but I know not what man∣ner
of thing; but something it is, and he vows not to shift
a shirt till he be further resolved: hee only sends you Com∣mendations,
and withal to know if you would stand to
your word.
He wrongs me to cast doubts:
Tell him I am the •am I ever was,
And ever will continue as I am.
But that he should disdain this curtsy
Being in want, and coming too from me,
Doth somewhat trouble me.
We want Madam? you are deceived, wee have
store, of rags; plenty, of tatters; oboe•ndance, of jags;
huge rents, witness our breeches; ground enough to com∣mand,
for we can walk where we will, none will bid us
to Dinner; houses rent-free, and goodly ones to choose
where we will; the Martialsie, the Counter, Newgate,
Bridewell; and would a man desire to dwell in stronger buil∣dings?
and can you say that we are in want? No Lady, my
Captain wants nothing but your love, and that he entreats
you to send by me the bearer.
I doe, with all the best affection
A Virgin can bestow upon her friend.
I dare swear he is an honest man, but I dare not
say he is a true man.
How, not a true man?
No; for hee hath sworn to steal you away,
and thus I prove it: if he steal you away, I am sure you will
not go naked; he cannot steal you, but hee must steal the
clothes you have on; and he that steals apparel, what is he
but a Thief? and hee that is a Thief cannot be a true man
Ergo.
That is not theft when men but steal their own,
And I am his, witness this Diamond,
Which bear him, and thus say, that no disaster
Shall ever part me from his company.
I shall bear this with as good will as you would
bear him, Vtcung volumus.
What are we but our words? when they are past,
Faith should succeed, and that should ever last.
My Father?
Wots thou who's returned,
The unthrift Bonvile, ragged as a scarre-crow,
The Wars have gnawed his garments to the skin:
I met him, and he told me of a Contract.
Sir, such a thing there was.
Upon condition if he came rich.
I heard no such exception.
Thou doest not mean to marry with a beggar?
Unless he be a Gentleman, and Bonvile
Is by his birth no less.
Such only gentile are, that can maintain
Gentily.
Why, should your state fail you,
Can it from you your honours take away?
Whilst your Allegiance holds, what need you more,
You ever shall be noble although poor.
They are noble that have nobles; gentle they
That appear such.
Indeed so worldlings say:
But virtuous men prove they are only dear
That all their riches can about them bear.
Is not Earl Chester
Returned yet with an answer from the Martial?
Not yet my Lord.
For such contention we now scorn revenge,
Wee' le try the utmost of his patience now:
He would exceed our love, if it appear,
He will hold nothing for his King too dear.
Earl Chester is returned.
Hast brought her Chester?
Her whom her father the most fair esteems,
He hath sent by me, only with this request,
That if his free gift doe not like your Highness,
You'll send her back untouched to his embrace.
I fear we shall not, she app•ares too fair,
So straightly to part with: what is he would
Attempt such virgin-modesty to stain
By hopes of honour, flatteries, or constraint?
How doe you like her? your opinions Lords?
A beauteous Lady, one that hath no peer
In the whole Court.
Therefore I hold her precious.
A fairer face in Court who ever saw?
Her beaut, would become the name of Queen.
One of more state or shape where shall we find?
Her modesty doth doe her beauty grace,
Both in her cheek have chose a sovereign• ••ate.
You have past censure Lady, now you're mine,
And by your Fathers free gift you are so,
To make, or mar; to keep or bestow.
It glads me I am present to a King,
Whom I have always heard my father term
Royal in all things; virtuous, modest, chaste;
And to have one free attribute besides,
Which even the greatest Emperor need not scum,
Honest; to you if you be such my Liege,
A Virgins love I prostrate, and a heart
That wishes you all goodness with the duty
Of a true subject, and a noble father;
Then mighty Prince report your subject noble,
Since all those virtues you receive in me.
Thou hast overcome us all; that thou hast termed us,
We'll strive to be, and to make good those attributes
Thou hast bestowed upon us, rise our Queen,
Thy virtue hath took off the threatening edge
Of our intended hate: though thou art ours
Both by free gift and duty, which we challenge
As from a subject; though our power could stretch
To thy dishonour, we proclaim thee freed,
And in this grace thy father we exceed.
The King in this shows honour. Princes still
Should be the Lords of their own appetites,
And cherish virtue.
Have • your applause?
Your Highness shows both Royalty and Judgment
In four fair choice.
Are your opinions so?
Far be it mighty King we should distaste
Where you so well affect.
For grace and feature
England affords not a more complete Virgin.
Were she not the Martials daughter,
I'd term her worthy for my Sovereigns Bride.
Ey that's the grief.
This kiss then be the Seal,
Thou art our Queen, and now art only mine.
May I become your vassal and your Hand-maid,
Titles but equal to my humble birth:
But since your Grace a higher title deigns,
Envy must needs obey where power compels.
Give expeditious order for the Rites
Of these our present Nuptials which shall be
Done with all State and due solemnity;
And Martial in this business thou shall find
Thy self defective, and not us unkind.
Health to your Highness.
From my sad Master,
Your Martial once, now your dejected vassal,
And thus he bid me say: If the King deign
To grace my daughter with the stile of Queen,
To give you then this Casket which contains
A double dower; half of this mighty sum
He out of his revenues had afforded,
Had she bin match but to a Barons bed;
But since your Highness deigns her for your Bride,
And his Alliance scorns not to disdain,
He saith a double dower is due to you.
He strives to exceed us still; this emulation
Begets our hate, and questions him of life.
This Dower we take, his Daughter entertain,
But him we never shall receive to grace.
Bear not from us so much as love or thanks:
We only strive in all our actions
To be held peerless for our curtsy
And Royal bounty, which appears the worse,
Since he a Subject would precede his Prince:
And did we not his Daughter dearly love,
Weed send her back with scorn, and b•se neglect
But her we love, though him in heart despise,
Pay him that thanks for all his courtesies.
In this employment I will strive to do•
The office of a subject, and of servant too.
Since to that emulous Lord we have sent our hate,
Come to our Nuptials let•s pass on in state.
The humours of Court, City, Camp, and Country
I have trac't, and in them can find no man, but money; all
subscribe to this Motto, Malo pecuniam viro. Oh poverty,
thou are esteemed a sin worse than whoredom, gluttony,
extortion, or usury:
And earthy gold, thou art preferred before Heaven.
Let but a poor man in a thred-bare suite,
Or ragged as I am, appear at Court,
The fine-nos'd Courtiers will not sent him; no,
They shun the way as if they met the Pest:
Or if he have a suite, it strikes them deaf,
They cannot hear of that side.
Come to the City, the Haberdasher will sooner
call us block heads, than block us; come to the Sempsters,
unless we will give them money, we cannot enter into their
bands: though we have the Law of our sides, yet wee may
walk through Burchin-lane and be non-suited: come bare∣foot
to a Shoemaker, though he be a Constable, he will not
put us into his Stocks; though the Girdler be my brother, yet
he will not let his leather embrace me; come to the Glover,
his gloves are either so little that I cannot pluck them on, or
so great that I cannot compass. And for the Camp, there's
honour cut out of the whole piece, but not a rag of mo∣ney.
The Country hath alliance with the rest: my pur∣pose
is now I have so thoroughly made proof of the humours
of men, I will next assay the dispositions of women, not of
the choicest, but of those whom wee call good wen∣ches.
Pray Master if you go to a house of good fell∣lowship,
give me something to spend upon my Cockatrice;
if I have nothing about me, I shall never get in.
Ther's for you sirrah; doth not the world wonder I
should be so flush of money, and so bare in clothes? the rea∣son
of this I shall give account for hereafter: But to our pur∣pose,
here they say dwells my Lady Bawdy-face, here will
we knock.
Who's there? what would you have? ha?
Sweet Lady we would enter; nay by your leave.
Enter? where? here be no breaches for you to en∣la
truly.
And yet we are soldiers, and have ventured upon as
hot service as this place affords any.
Away you base companions, we have no breaches
for such tattered breeches, we have no patches to suite with
your rags.
Nay, pray give way.
Away you rogues, doe you come to shake your
rags here? doe you think we can vent our ware without
money you rascals? get you from my door you beggarly
companions, or I'll wash you hence with hot scalding wa∣la.
Nay I warrant her, wenches can afford her that at
all times.
Doe I keep house to entertain Tatterdemaleans
with a Pox, you will be gone?
We must forbear, the gallants are out of patience,
stand aside.
I would fine go in, but I have spent all my money.
No matter, they shall not know so much till we
get in, and then let me alone, I'll not out till I be fired out.
Then let's set a good face of the matter,
By your leave Lady.
You're welcome Gentlemen.
What fellows be yon?
Two poor soldiers that came for an alms and
please you, that stay for some reversions; there's none such
come into my house I warrant you.
Save you sweet Lady.
Where be those kitchinstuffes here, shall we have
no attendants? show these Gentlemen into a close room,
with a standing bed in it, and a truckle too; you are welcome
Gentlemen.
It is general thorough the world, each state esteems
A man not what he is, but what he seems:
The purest flesh raged can no entrance have,
But It'ch and all disease if it come brave,
Wide open stand the gates of lust and sin,
And those at which the wide world enters in.
Madam, to be short, I must have a wench, though I am rag∣general
outward, I am rich inward: here's a brace of Angels for
you, let me have a pretty wench, I'll be as bountiful to her.
Your Worsh p's very heartily welcome: wher's
Sis? Whore's Joyce? the best room in the house for
the Gentleman: call Mistress Priscilla, and bid her keep the
Gentleman company.
I•le make bold to enter.
Your Worship's most lovingly welcome: let the
Gentleman have attendance, and clean linen it he need any;
whither would you, you rogue?
Marry I would after my Master.
Thy Master? why is yon ragamuffin able to keep
a man?
Ey that he is able to keep a man, and himself too.
Then that man must be able to pay for himself
too, or else he may cool his heals without if his appetite
be hot.
Then shall I not go in?
No by my Mayden-head shall you not, nor any such
beggarly companion shall enter here, but he shall come tho∣row
me too.
No? what remedy? ha, ha; hee that rings at a
door with such a Bell, and cannot enter? Well, if there be
no remedy, I'll even stay without.
Oh me! is it you Sir? and are so strong to stand at
the door? Pray will you come near? your Master is new
gone in before: Lord, Lord, that you would not enter with∣out
trusting! you were even as far out of my remembrance
as one that I had never seen before.
I cannot blame you to forget me, for I think
this be the first time of •ur meeting.
What would you have Sir?
Nothing as they say, but a congratulation for our
first acquaintance. I have it here old bully bottom, I have it
here.
I have it here too: nay, pray sir come in, I am loath
to kiss at door, for fear my neighbours should see.
Speak, shall you and • condogge together?
I'll pay you to a hair.
Nay, I beseech you sir, come in: a Gentleman, and
stand at door? I'll lead the way, and you shall come behind.
No, no; I will not salute you after the Italian fa∣shion:
I'll enter before.
Most lovingly, pray draw the latch sir.
Nay faith sweet rogue thou shalt trust me for once.
Trust you? come up, can'•t thou pay the hackny
for the hire of a horse, and think thou to breath me upon trust?
Thou bid me come up, and shall I not ride?
Yes the gallows as soon.
A Gentleman, and have no money? marry you
make a most knightly offer.
How? to offer thee no money?
How can they offer that have none?
I'll either give thee ware or money, that's as good.
Ey but sir, I'll deal with no such chapman.
What's the matter here? ha? can you not agree a∣bout
the bargain?
Here's Gallants would have us breathed, and for∣sooth
they have no money.
They think belike, diet, lodging, ruffs, clothes,
and holland-smocks can ••l be had without money, and a
disease, if wee should catch it, Heaven bless us, can be cured
without money.
That's fine in faith: if my beds be shaken out of
their •o•nts, or my cords broken, must not the Joiner and
the Rope-maker both have money? if my rags be rubbed out
with your toes, can they be repaired without money? if my
linnenbe fouled, can I pay my laundress without money? be∣sides,
we must have so •thing to maintain our broken win∣dows
I hope; the Glazier will not mend thē without money.
Come, come let's run a score for once.
You shall not score of my tally, out of my doors.
Why shall we not be bosomed? have we paid, and
must we not have wenches?
You shall have the choicest of my house gentlemen.
Who, those Rascals?
They be Rascals that have no money; those be
Gentlemen that have Crowns; these are they that pay the
Joiner, the rope-maker, the Upholster, the Laundrer, the
Glazier; will you get you out of my doors, or shall wee
scold you hence?
That you shall never by thrusting them out of
doors.
Who but a mad man would be so base as to be hired,
much more to hire one of those bruitists, that make no dif∣ference
betwixt a Gentleman and a beggar, nay, I have seen
enough to be soon entreated.
You shall not need to fear me, I am gone:
Hoe's past before, nor will I stay behind;
I have seen enough to loath all your sisterhood.
Marry farewell frost. Now Sir, will you make
your choice, and your man after?
I'll have both, these are mine.
Go you then with your pair of Whores, I'll go
with this old skuller that first plied me.
I see thou love to go by water; come, shall we
dally together? sit upon my knee my sweet boy, what mo∣ney
hast thou in thy purse? wilt thou bestow this upon me
my sweet chic?
I'll see what I shall have first for my money by
your favour.
And shall I have this?
And I this?
Both these are mine, we are agreed then?
But I am ashamed, being such a tattered rogue, to lye with
two such fine gentlewomen; besides, to tell you truly, I am
lousy.
No matter, thou shalt have a clean shirt, and
but pay for the washing, and thy clothes shall in the mean
time be cast into an Oven.
But I have a worse fault, my skinne's not perfect;
What should I say I am?
Itchy? Oh thou shalt have Brimstone and
Butter.
Worse than all these, my body is diseased,
I shall infect yours.
If we come by any mischance, thou hast money
to pay for the cure: come, shall's withdraw into the next
chamber?
You are not women, you are devils both,
And that your Damme; my body save in wars,
Is yet unskarr'd, nor shall it be with you.
Say the last lecher that embraced you here,
And folded in his arms your rottenness,
Had been all these, would you not all that filth
Vomit on me? or who would buy diseases,
And make his body for a Spittle fit,
That may walk sound? I came to school you Whore,
Not to corrupt you; for what need I that
When you are all corruption; be he lame,
Have he no Nose, be all his body stung
With the French Fly, with the Sarpego dried:
Be he a Laser, or a Leper, bring
Coin in his fist, he shall embrace your lust
Before the purest flesh that sues of trust.
What Diogenes have we here? I warrant the Cin∣nick
himself said not so much when he was seen to come
out of a Bawdy house.
He shamed not to come out, but held it sin
Not to be pardoned to be seen go in.
But I'll be modest: nay, nay, keep your Gold
To cure those hot diseases you have got,
And being once clear, betake you to one man,
And study to be honest, that's my counsel:
You have brought many like you Gentlemen
That jet in Silks, to go thus ragged like us,
Which did they own our thoughts, these rags would change
To shine as we shall, though you think it strange.
Come, come, this house is infected, shall we go?
Why Sir, shall I have no sport for my money, but
even a snatch and away?
Leave me, and leave me ever, and observe
This rule from me, where there is lodged a Whore,
Think the Plagues cross is set upon that door.
Then Lord have mercy upon us: where have we
been?
Hist, hist; heere's a railing companion in∣deed.
I know not what you call a railing companion:
but such another discourse would make me go near to turn
honest.
Nay, if you be in that mind, I'll send for your
love: the plague in my house? the Pox is as soon: I am sure
there was never man yet that had Lord have mercy upon
us in his mind, that would ever enter here: Nay will you
go?
Before you all I here acknowledge Lords,
I never held me happy but in this
My virtuous choice, in having your applause,
Me-thinks I had the sweet consent of Heaven.
This noble Lady, now my royal Mother,
Hath by her love to you, regard to us,
And courteous affability to all,
Attained the general suffrage of the Realm,
Her modest carriage shall be rules to me,
Her words instructions, her behaviour precepts,
Which I shall ever study to observe.
I feel my body growing by the King,
And I am quick although he know it not;
Now comes my fathers last injunction
To my remembrance, which I must fulfil,
Although a Queen, I am his daughter still.
Lords, and the rest forbear us till we call,
A chair first, and another for our Queen,
Some private conference we intend with her:
Now leave us.
My fairest Isabella, the choi•e jewel
That I wear next my heart; I cannot hide
My love to thee, it is like the Sun enveloped
In watery clouds, whose glory will break thorough,
And spite opposure, seornes to be concealed;
Saving one thing, ask what my kingdom yields.
And it is freely thine.
What's that my Lord?
I cannot speak it without some distaste
To thee my Queen, yet if thy heart be ours
Name it not to me.
I am only yours.
Beg not thy fathers free repeal to Court,
And to those offices we have bestowed,
Save this, my Kingdom, and what it contains,
Is thy wills subject.
You are my King, and Husband;
The first includes allegiance, the next duty,
Both these have power above a Fathers name,
Though as a daughter I could wish it done,
Yet since it stands against your Royal pleasure,
I have no suite that way.
Thou now hast-thrust thy hand into my bosom,
And we are one: Thy beauty, oh thy beauty!
Never was King blessed with so fair a wife.
I doe not blame thy Father to prefer
Through fore thy sister both in love and face,
Since Europe yields not one of equal grace:
Why smiles my love?
As knowing one so fair,
With whom my pale cheek never durst compare:
Had you but seen my Sister, you would say,
To her the blushing Corrall should give way:
For her cheek staines it; Lilies to her brow
Must yield their Ivory whiteness, and allow
Themselves overcome. If ever you saw the sky
When it was clear'st, it never could come nigh
Her Azure veins in colour; shoe's much clearer,
Ey, and her love much to my Father dearer.
We by our noble Martial made request
For the most fair, and her whom he best loved:
Durst he delude us?
What I speak is true,
So will your self say when she comes in place.
Our love to thee shall not or'ecome that hate
We owe thy Father, though thou be our Queen.
He keeps her as his Treasure, locks her safe
Within his arms: he only minded me
As one he loved not, but thought merely lost.
Thou art lost indeed, for thou hast lost my heart,
Nor shalt thou keep it longet: all my love
Is swallowed in the spleen I bear thy Father,
And in this deep disgrace put on his King,
Which we'll revenge.
It shall be thus:
Chester bear hence this Lady to her Father
As one unworthy us, with her that dower
The double dower he by his servant sent:
Thy tears nor knee shall once prevail with us.
As thou art loyal, without further language
Depart our presence, we'll not hear thee speak.
What shall I further say?
Command him on his life to send to Court
His tother Daughter, and at our first summons,
Lest we proclaim him Traitor: this see done
On thy Allegiance.
Now the goal is ours.
None dare to censure or examine this,
That we shall hold our friend, or of our blood:
Subjects that dare against their Kings contend,
Hurl themselves down whilst others hie ascend.
I see the King is truly honourable:
All my disgraces and disparagements
He hath made good to me in this to queen my child,
And which more glads me, with such ardency
He seems to affect her, and to hold her dear,
That nothing's valued, if compared with her.
Now Heaven whilst thou this second happiness
And bliss wilt lend me, I shall still grow great
In my content, opinion, and my fate,
In spite of whisperers, and Court-flatterers.
Had you best loved my Sister, and less me,
I had been Queen before her; but she ventured
For her preferment, therefore it is her due;
Out of our fears and loves her honours grew.
Whilst I may keep thy beauty in mine eye,
And with her new raised fortunes fill mine ear,
I second none in bliss; she's my Court comfort,
Thou my home happiness: in these two blessed,
Heaven hath enriched me with a crown of rest.
Nor doe I cover greater Royalties
Than to enjoy your presence, and your love,
The best of these I prize above all fortunes,
Nor would I change them for my Sisters state.
Herbeauty and her virtues mixed, have won
The King my Sovereign to be termed my son.
Earl Chester, with the Queen your princely daughter
Are without train alighted at the gate,
And by this entered.
Thou hast troubled me,
And with a thousand thoughts at once perplexed
My affrighted heart: adm•t them; soft, not yet;
What might this mean? my daughter in the charge
Of him that is my greatest opposite,
And without train, such as becomes a Queen?
More tempest towards Kate? from which sweet child,
If I may kept thee, may it on my head
Power all his wrath, even till it strike me dead.
Rather, my Lord, your Royal life to free,
All his sterne fury let him shower on me.
My Lord shall I admit them?
Prithee stay,
Fate threatens us, I would devise a means
To shun it if we might: thou shalt withdraw,
And not be seen; something we must devise
To guard our selves, and stand our opposites:
Go keep your chamber, now let Chester in.
I shall my Lord.
My Loyalty for me, that keep me still;
A Tower of safety, and a shield' against Fate.
The King thy daughter hath in scorn sent back.
Pause there, and as y are noble answer me
Ever you proceed but to one question.
Propound it.
Whence might this dis•aste arise?
From any loose demeanour wanton carriage,
Spouse-breach, or disobedience in my daughter?
If so, I'll not receive her, shoe's not mine.
That let mine enemy speak, for in this kind
I would be taxed by such.
Upon my soul
There is no guilt in her.
Be it but his humour,
You are welcome, both my daughter and my Queen;
In this my Palace thou shalt reign alone,
I'll keep thy state, and make these arms thy Throne:
Whilst thou art chaste, thy stile with thee shall stay,
And reign, though none but I and mine obey.
What can you further speak?
Her double Dower
The King returns thee.
We accept it, see,
It shall maintain her port even with her name,
Being my Kings wife, so will I love his Grace,
She shall not want, will double this maintain her.
Being thus discharged of her, I from the King
Command thee send thy fairer Girl to Court,
She that's at home, with her to act his pleasure.
Sir, you were sent to challenge, not to kill;
These are not threats, but blows, they wound, they wound.
If Treasons imputation thou wilt shun,
And not incur the forfeit of thy life,
Let the Kings will take place.
You have my offices,
Would you had now my grief; but that alone
I must endure: would thou had both, or none.
Sentence of death when it is mildly spoke,
Hal•e promises life; but when your doom you mix
With such rough threats, what is it but twice to kill?
You tyrannise Earl Chester.
Will you send her?
That you shall know anon. Tell me my Queen,
How grew this quarrel 'tweene the King and thee?
By you was never Lady more beloved,
Or wife more constant than I was to him:
Have you forgot your charge, when I perceived
My self so grown, I could no longer hide
My greatness, I began to speak the beauties
Of my fair Sister, and how much she excelled,
And that you sent me thither as a jest,
That she was fairest, and you loved her best?
Enough; you are sure with child, and near thy time
Nothing more sure.
Then that from hence shall grow
A salve for all our late indignities:
Pray doe my humble duty to the King.
And thus excuse me, that my daughter's sick,
Craze•d, and weak, and that her native beauty
Is much decayed; and should she travel now,
Before recovered, 'tw• uld engage her life
To too much danger: when she hath ability
And strength to journey, I will send her safe
Unto my King; this as I am a subject,
And loyal to his Highness.
Your excuse
Hath ground from love and reason:
This your answer I shall return to the King.
With all my thanks:
That since my daughter doth distaste his bed,
He hath sent her back, and home to me her father,
His pleasure I withstand not, but return
My zeal, and these doe not forget I pray.
I shall your words have perfect, and repeat them
Unto the King.
I should disgrace her beauty
To send it maimed and waning; but when she
Attains her perfectness, then shall appear
The brightest star fixed in your Courtly Sphere.
The King shall know as much.
It is my purpose,
All my attempts to this one head to draw,
Once more in courtesies to overcome the King.
Come beauteous Queen, and thy fair Sister cheer,
Whom this sad news will both amaze and fear.
Sirrah, are all my lands out of mortgage, and my
deeds redeemed?
I cannot tell that Sir; but wee have had whole
chest-fulls of writings brought home to our house.
Why then it is done, I am possessed again
Of all my Fathers ancient revenues.
But how came you by all this money to buy
these new suits? methinks we are not the men we were.
Questionless that;. for now those that before de∣spiced
us, and our company, at meeting give us the bonjour.
Oh Heaven, thou ever art Virtues sole Patron,
And wilt not let it sink: all my known fortunes
I had engaged at home, or spent abroad:
But in the wars, when I was held quite bankrupt
Of all good hap, it was my chance to quarter
In such a house when we had sack't a Town,
That yielded me inestimable store
Of gold and jewels, those I kept till now
Unknown to any, pleading poverty,
Only to try the humour of my friends;
Which I have proved, and now know how to find
Fixed upon wealth, to want unnatural.
See Sir, yonder are my old fellows, Match and
Touch box; I doe not think but they come to offer their
service to you.
Save thee noble Captain, hearing of thy good
fortunes, and advancement, I am come to offer my self to be
partaker of the same, and to follow thee in the same colours
that thou h•st suited the rest of thy servants.
God-a-mercy horse, you shall not stand to my li∣very.
You see our old clothes stick by us still, good
Captain see us new moulded.
You are flies, away; they that my Winter fled,
Shall not my Summer taste: they only merit
A happy harbour, that through stormy Seas
Hazard their Barks, not they that sail with ease.
You taste none of my fortunes.
Corporal, you see this Livery? if you had stay, d
by it, we had been both cut out of a piece: Match, if you
had not left us, you had been one of this guard: Go, away,
betake you to the end of the Town; let me find you be∣tweene
Woods close-stile and Iflington, with will it please
your Worship to bestow the price of two Cannes upon a
poor soldier, that hath served in the face of the Sultan,
and so forth, Apogee, away, I scorn to be fellow to any
that will leave their Masters in adversity: if he entertain you,
he shall turn away me, that's certain.
Then good your Worship bestow something up∣on
a poor soldier, I protest—
Lo, I have taught him his lesson already; I knew
where I should have you?
There's first to make you beggars; for to that all
such must come that leave their Masters poor. Begone, and
never let me see you more.
God be with you good Captain: come Match,
let us betake us to our rendezvous at some out end of the
City.
Hee makes a beggar first that first relieves him;
Not Usurers make more beggars where they live,
Than charit•blemen that use to give.
Here comes a Lord.
I am glad to see you Sir.
You know me now? your Worship's wondrous wise,
You could not know me in my last disguise.
Lord God you were so changed.
So am I now
From what I was of late: you can allow
This habit well, but put my tother on,
No congie then, your Lordship must be gon.
You are my Summer-friend.
Cousin, well met.
You should have said well found•
For I was lost but late, dead, under ground
Our Kindred was: when I redeemed my Land,
They both revived, and both before you stand,
Well, well, I know you now.
And why not then?
I am the same without all difference; when
You saw me last, I was as rich, as good,
Have no additions since of name, or blood;
Only because I wore a thread-bare suite,
I was not worthy of a poor salute.
A few good clothes put on with small ado,
Purchase your knowledge, and your kindred too.
You are my silken Uncle: oh my Lord,
You are not in haste now?
I have time to stay,
To ask you how you doe, being glad to hear
Of your good fortune, your repurchast lands,
And state much amplified.
All this is true;
Ey but my Lord, let me examine you:
Remember you a Contract that once past
Betwixt me and your daughter? here she stands.
Sir, since you did vnmorgage all your means,
It came into my thoughts; trust me, before
I could not call it to mind.
Oh men's weak strength,
That aim at worlds, when they but their mere length
Must at their end enjoy: Thou then art mine,
Of all that I have proved in poverty,
The only test of virtue: what are these?
Though they be Lords, but worldlings, men all earth.
Thou art above them; virtuous, that's divine;
Only thy heart is noble, therefore mine.
And to be yours is to be what I wish;
You were to me as welcome in your rags,
As in these Silks. I never did examine
The out side of a man, but I begin
To censure first of that which grows within.
Only for that I love thee: These are Lords
That have bought Titles. Men may merchandise
Wares, ey, and traffic all commodities
From Sea to Sea, ey and from shore to shore,
But in my thoughts, of all things that are sold,
It is pity Honour should be bought for gold.
It cuts off all desert.
Master, who's here? mine Host of the Ordinary?
Your business sir? what by petition?
Fallen to a little decay by trusting, and knowing
your Worship ever a bountiful young Gentleman, I make
bold to make my wants first known to you.
Pray what's your suite?
Only for a cast suite, or some small remuneration.
And thou shalt have the suite I last put off:
Fetch it me Cock.
I shall Sir.
Fallen to decay? I'll fit you in your kind.
I have a suite to you Sir, and this it is.
In this suit came I to thine Ordinary,
In this thou would have thrust me out of doors,
Therefore with this that then proclaimed me poor,
I'll salve thy wants, nor will I give thee more.
Base worldlings, that despise all such as need;
Who to the needy beggar are still dumb,
Not knowing unto what themselves may come.
I have a cold suite on it if I be forced to wear it in
winter. I bid your worship farewell.
So should all that keep Ordinaries, bid their guests
farewell, though their entertainment be never so ill. Well
sir, I take you but for an ordinary fellow, and so I leave you.
Master, who will not say that you are a brave fellow, and a
most noble Captain, that with a word or two can discom∣fit
an Host.
I know you, therefore know to rate your words
Both to their height and depth, their true dimensions
I understand; for I have tried them all:
〈◊〉 thou art of anode•r element,
A mirror of thy •ex•, that can distinguish
Virtue from wealth, thee as my own I elect,
And these according to themselves despise.
A Courtier henceforth I my self profess,
And thee my wife, thou hast deserved no less.
No news yet from our Martial? we three months
Have stayed his leisure, but receive not yet
That daughter we sent for.
She peradventure
Hath not her strength recovered, or her beauty
Lost by her sickness, to the full regained.
Upon my life my Lord, when she is perfect,
And hath received her full ability,
She shall attend your pleasure.
But your Queen,
That virtuous Lady, when I think on her,
I can but grieve at her dejectedness.
Heaven knows I love her above all the world,
And but her Father, this contends with us
When we in all our actions strive to exceed:
We could not brooke her absence half so long.
But we will try his patience to the full.
My prostrate duty to the King my Master
I here present.
This is the Gentleman
Commended for his valour in your wars,
Whose ruined fortunes I made suite to raise:
I would entreat your Highness to respect him.
All his proceedings we partake at large,
Know both his fall and height; we shall regard him
Even with his worth: be near us, of our chamber.
Sir, we shall use your wisdom, and prefer it
According to your worth. Be this your hope
We know you.
Only in that I am happy.
Health to your Majesty.
Whence?
From my Master,
The pOOrest subject that your land contains,
Rich only in his truth and loyalty.
Speak, hath he sent his daughter?
Yes my Liege,
He hath sent his daughters, please you rest satisfied,
And patiently peruse what he hath sent.
We are full of expectations, pray admit
Those Presents that he means to greet us with.
You shall my Lord.
Your Queen and wise crowned with a wreath of gold
Of his own charge, with that this double dower
Doubled again, and guarded with this train
Of Gentlewomen according to her state,
My Lord presents you: this his younger daughter,
He hath bestowed a hand-maide to your Queen,
A place that may become her, were she child
Unto your greatest Peer; had he had more,
More had he sent; these worthless as they be,
He humbly craves you would receive by me.
His bounty hath no limit, but my Queen!
Her bright aspect so much persuades with me,
It charms me more than his humility.
Arise in grace, and sweet, forget your wrong.
My joys unspeakable can find no tongue
To express my true hearts meaning.
Beauteous Maid,
You are our Sister, and that royal Title
From all disgrace your freedom shall proclaim.
I find your Grace the same my noble Father
Hath still reported you; royal in all,
By whom the virtuous rise, th •ignoble fall.
I have not seen a Lady more complete;
Her modesty and beauty, both are matchless.
Am I a King, and must be exceeded still?
Or shall a subject say that we can owe?
His bounty we will equal, and exceed;
We have power to better what in hem's but well.
Your free opinions Lords, is not this Lady
The fairer of the twain? how durst our subject
Then dally with us in that high design?
With pardon of the Queen, shoe's paralleled
By her fair Sister.
Were my censure free,
I durst say bettered.
Were it put to me,
I should avow she, not the Queen alone
Excels in grace: but all that I have seen—
Dost love her?
As my honour, or my life.
Her whom thou so much praise, take to wise.
You bless my youth.
And strive to eternize me.
Nor in this joy have I the meanest part,
Now doth your Grace your inward love express
To me, and mine.
I never meant thee less:
Thy Sister and thy daughter freely embrace,
That next thee hath our Kingdoms second place,
How say you Lords, have we requited well
Our subjects bounty? are we in his debt?
Your Highness is in curtsy invincible.
And bountiful beyond comparison.
This must not hold, prevention out of hand,
For if the Martial rise, we stand not long.
Our wits must then to work.
They must of force.
This is not that to which our fortunes trust.
Let then our subject know his King hath power
To vanquish him in all degrees of honour,
And he must now confess him self excelled:
With what can Heaven or Earth his want supply
To equal this our latest curtsy?
We have the day, we rise, and he must fall
As one subdued.
His Highness knows not all,
One special gift he hath reserved in store,
May happily make your Grace contend no more.
No sir? think you your Master will yet yield?
And leave to us the honour of the day?
I wish him here but this last sight to see,
To make him us acknowledge.
On my knee
One boon I have to beg.
Speak, let me know
Thy utmost suite.
My noble Master stays
Not far from Court, and durst he be so ambitious
As but to appear before you, and present you
With a rich gift exceeding all have past,
The only perfect token of his zeal,
He would himself perpetually hold vanquished
In all degrees of love and curtsy.
For our Queens love, and our fair daughters sake,
We doe not much care if we grant him that.
Admit him, and his presence urge with speed;
Well may he imitate, but not exceed.
I fear our fall: if once the Martial rise,
Down, down must we.
Therefore devise some plot
His favour to prevent.
Leave it to me.
Lords, we are proud of this our unity,
Double Alliance, of our sons fair choice,
Since it is applauded by your general voice;
The rather since so matchless is our Grace,
That force perforce our subject must give place.
Not to contend, but to express a duty
Of zeal and homage I present your grace
With a rich jewel, which can only value
These royal honours to my Daughters done.
Value our bounty? should thou sell thy self
Even to thy skin, thou could not rate it truly.
My Liege, I cannot, but in lieu and part,
Though not in satisfaction, I make bold
To tender you this Present.
What's the project?
Here's cost and art, and amply both expressed,
I have not viewed the like.
It is wondrous rare,
I have not seen a Model richlier framed.
Or for the quantity better contrived:
This Lord in all his actions is still noble,
Exceeding all requital.
It is a brave out-side.
This that you see my Lord is nothing yet;
More than its worth it hath commended bin:
This is the case, the jewel lies within,
Pleases your Grace t'unvaile it.
Yes, I will:
But ever I open it my Lord, I doubt
The wealth within not equals that without.
What have we here?
A jewel I should rate,
Were it mine own, above your Crown and Sceptre,
A child?
A Prince, one of your royal blood:
Behold him King, my grand-child, and thy son,
Truly descended from thy Queen and thee,
The Image of thy self.
How can this be?
My royal Liege and Husband, view him well,
If your own favour you can call to mind,
Behold it in this Infant, limned to'th life;
Hoe's yours and mine, no kindred can be nearer.
To this rich jewel I hold nothing equal,
I know thee virtuous, and thy father loyal;
But should I doubt both, yet this royal Infant
Hath such affection in my heart impressed,
That it assures him mine: my noble subject,
Thou hast at length overcome me, and I now
Shall ever, ever hold me vanquished.
Had thou sought Earth or Sea, and from them both
Extracted that which was most precious held,
Thou nothing coldest have found to equal this,
This, the mixed Image of my Queen and me;
Here then shall all my emulation end,
O recome by thee our subject, and our friend.
Your vassal, and your servant, that have strove
Only to love you, and your royal favours:
Not to requite, for that I never can;
But to acknowledge, and in what I may
To express my gratitude.
Thine is the conquest:
But shall I gee't o'er thus? it is in my head
How I this lost days honour shall regain,
A gift as great as rich I have in store,
With which to gratify our subjects love,
And of a value unrequitable:
Thou hast given me a Grand-child, and a son,
A royal in•ant, and to me most dear,
Yet to surpass thee in this emulous strife,
I give thee here a daughter and a wife.
Now must thou needs confess the conquest won
By me thy King, thy Father, and thy son.
Your father, son, and subject quite surpassed,
Yields himself vanquished and overcome at length.
You have not my consent yet.
Madam, no;
The king doth this, his bounty to express.
Your love is to your self, and therefore free,
Bestow it where you please.
Why then on thee:
He that the Father doth so much respect,
Should not me-thinks the daughters love despise.
It is good for Maids take Husbands when they may.
Heaven knows how long we may be forced to stay.
Now Lords, these Nuptials we will solemnise
In all high state, in which we will include
Yours noble Bonvile, and with masks and revels
Sport out the tedious nights, each hand his Bride
Doubly by us from either part allied.
Why this is as it should be; now doe I smell Cour∣tier
already, I feel the Soldier steal out of me by degrees,
for Soldier and Courtier can hardly dwell both together in
one bosom. I have a kind of fawning humour creeping up∣on
me as soon as I but looked into the Court-gate; and now
could I take a bribe, if any would be so foolish to gee't me.
Now farewell Gun-powder, I must change thee into Da∣mask-powder;
for if I offer but to smell like a soldier, the
Courtiers will stop their noses when they pass by me. My
•ask I must change to a Cap and a Feather, my Bandilee∣to
to a Scarf to hang my Sword in, and indeed, fashion
my self wholly to the humours of the time. My Piece I
must alter to a Poynado, and my Pike to a Pickadevant:
only this is my comfort, that our provant will be better
here in the Court than in the Camp: there we did use to lye
hard, and seldom: here I must practise to lye extremely,
and often: But whilst I am trifling here, I shall loose the
fight of the Solemnity: The Prince is married, and the Mar∣teal's
married, and my Master's married, there will be simple
doings at night. Well, I must hence, for I believe, the King,
the Queen, and the rest of the Lords will use this place for
their revels. Dixie.
And why so sad my Lord?
I am all dullness,
There's no life in me, I have lost my spirit,
And fluency of my brain: observe you not
In what a height you fellow now resides
That was so late dejected; trebly grafted
Into the Royal blood? what can succeed,
But that we all our honours must resign,
And he of them be repossessed again?
The Marriages indeed are celebrated.
And they have all our pointed stratagems
Turned back upon our selves.
What, no prevention?
His Basses are so fixed he cannot shrink,
Being so many ways ingrast and planted
In the Kings blood: but our supporters stand
As shook with Earthquakes, or else built on sand.
My Lords attend the King, and clear this chamber,
For this nights revels it is the place prepared.
Your duties Lords, the King's upon his entrance.
Ey, so 'tmust be, each man hand his own:
For I am where I love; we are even coupled,
Some Music then.
Here's one falls off from me.
How now my Lord, dejected in your looks?
Or doth our sports distaste you?
Pardon me,
I cannot dance my Liege.
You can look on:
My Lord, you take his place, we'll have a measure,
And I will lead it; bid the Music struck.
So, well done Ladies: but we miss the Husband
To our fair Daughter, what's become of him?
Gone discontented hence.
What might this mean?
Doth he distaste his Bride, or envy us
That are degree'd above him? whore's our Queen?
My Liege?
You shall unto him instantly,
Attended with a beauteous train of Ladies,
And to his Chamber bear his princely Bride.
Bonvile, take you her royal Dower along,
You shall receive it of our Treasurer.
I shall my Lord.
Usher the Queen and Ladies, be their guide,
That done, each one to bed with his fair Bride.
I am so high, that when I look but down,
To see how far the earth is under me,
It quakes my body, and quite chills my blood:
And in my fear although I stand secure,
I am like him that falls. I but a subject,
And married to the Daughter of the King,
Though some may think me happy in this match,
To me it is fearful: who would have a wife
Above him in command, to embrace with awe,
Whom to displease, is to distaste the King?
It is to have a Mi•tris, not a wife,
A Queen, and not a subjects bed-fellow.
State I could wish abroad to crown my head,
But never yet loved Empire in my bed.
The Queen your daughter with your princely Bride,
And other Ladies, make way towards your chamber.
It is open to receive them, pray them in.
My Lord the King commends his love to you
In your fair Bride, whom royally conducted
He hath sent to be the partner of your bed.
Whom we receive in the arms of gratitude,
Duty to him, and nuptial love to her.
It is well they brought me, trust me my dear Lord,
I should have scarce had face to have come my self;
But yet their boldness mixed with mine together,
Makes me to venture I yet scarce know whither.
It is to our Nuptial bed.
Ey so they say,
But unto me it is a posh unknown;
Yet that which cheers me, I shall doe no more
Than those, and such as I, have done before.
Sure it is a thing that must, though without skill,
Even when you please, I am ready for your will.
With her the King hath sent this princely dower,
In which his love and bounty hee commends.
You are noble Sir, and honour waits on you
To crown your future fortunes: for that Casket,
Her beauty and her birth are dower sufficient
For me a subject.
I cannot think so much good to my King
As I am owing for her single self:
Then with all d•tie pray return that sum.
Her dower is in her self, and that l'le keep
Which in these lo• all arms this night shall sleep:
That is the Kings, with that this jewel too,
I think her cheap bought at that easy rate;
My second duty in that gif••ommend,
Were I worth more, more I have will to send.
An Emperor cannot show more Royalty
Than this brave Peer, hoe's all magnificent:
I shall with the best eloquence I have,
Make known your thoughts.
To all at once good night:
Save this my beauteous Bride, no wealth I prize,
That hath my heart took captive in her eyes.
Lights for the Queen and Ladies, night grows old,
I count my Virtue treasure, not my Gold.
What not at rest my Lord?
Why who can sleep
That hath a labouring brain, and sees from far
So many storms and tempests threaten him?
It is not in my element to do it.
Find you no project yet how to remove him?
None, none, and therefore can I find no rest.
It grows towards day.
That day is night to me,
Whilst you Sun shines: I had this even some conference
In private with the King, in which I urged
The Martialls discontent, withal inferred,
That by his look the Princess he despised:
The King changed face: and could we second this
By any new conjecture, there were hope.
To draw him in displeasure.
Watch advantage,
And as you find the humour of the King,
Work it unto the Martialls deep disgrace:
But soft the Prince.
So early up, how did you like your rest?
I found my most rest in my most unrest;
A little sleep serves a new married man:
The first night of his bridals I have made you
A Woman of a Maid.
You were up
Both late and early.
Why you were abroad
Before the Sun was up, and the most wise
Doe say it is healthful still betimes to rise.
Good day.
In one, ten thousand.
Lords, you have not seen
The King to day? it was his custom ever
Still to be stirring early with the Sun;
But here's his Majesty.
N•t all your smooth and cunning Oratory
Can colour so his pride, but we esteem him
A flattering Traitor, one that scorns our love,
And in disdain sent back our Daughters Dower:
Your Judgment Lords?
Hath he refused the Princess?
No; but her Dower sent back, and insolently;
Her whom we gave, he with a gift would buy,
A jewel; shall we merchandise our Daughter,
As one not able to bestow her nobly,
But that our poverty must force us sell her?
Your Highness much mispriseth his intent,
For he had no such thought.
We know his pride,
Which his ambition can no longer shadow.
Your Highness might doe well to call in question
His insolence and to arraign him fort.
Be you his Judges Bonvile, Audley, you:
Command him straight on his Allegiance,
To make appearance, and to answer us
Before our Lords of his contempt and scorn.
Shall we command him hither?
From his bed,
And if convicted, he shall surely pay for it.
We shall my Lord.
Arraign him on the sudden, ever it provied;
Le him not dream upon evasive shft•s,
But take him unprepared.
Shall we command
A Bar, and call a Jury of his Peers,
Whilst Chester, that enjoys the place of Martial,
Objects such Allegations against his life,
As he hath drawn out of his rude demeanour?
It shall be so; a Bar, and instantly
We will our self in person hear him speak,
And see what •used excuse he can produce
For his contempt.
My gracious Lord and Father,
What he hath done to you, proceeds of honour,
Not of disdain, or scorn; hoe's truly noble:
And if a Regal bounty be a sin
In any subject, hoe's only guilty
Of that true virtue.
Saw your Majesty
With what an humble zeal, and prostrate love
He did retender your fair Daugthers Dower,
You would not his intent thus misreceive.
It is humble pride, and mere hypocrisy
To blind the King, it is but ambitious zeal,
And a dissembling cunning to aspire.
My Father called in question for his life?
Oh let not me a sad spectator be
Of such a dismal object.
Nor will I,
But leave them to their hated cruelty.
This is no place for Ladies, we allow
Her absence; of the rest let none depart,
Till we have searched the cunning of his heart.
A Bar, a Judgment seat, and Jury set?
Yet cannot all this daunt our innocence.
You have disloyally sought to exceed
The King your Sovereign, and his royal deeds
To blemish, which your fellow Peers thus construe,
That strengthened by th'alliance of the King,
And better armed by the peoples love,
You may prove dangerous.
In policy of state to quench the sparks
Before they grow to flame, and top your height,
Before your spacious branches spread too far,
What to this general motion can you say,
Before we tax you with particulars?
With reverence to the State before which I stand,
That you my Lord of Chester appear shallow,
To think my actions can disgrace the Kings,
As if the luster of a petty Star
Should with the Moon compare: Alas, my deeds
Conferred with his, are like a Candles light
To out-shine the mid-dayes glory. Can the King
The glorious mirror of all gratitude,
Condemn that virtue in another bosom,
Which in his own shines so transparently?
Oh pardon me, mere virtue is my end,
Whose pitch the King doth many times transcend.
To tax you more succinctly, you have first
Abused the King in sending to the Court
Your daughter less fair, and the least beloved.
And that includes contempt most barbarous,
Which you in that unsubject-like expressed:
Your former emulations we omit.
As things that may find tolerable excuse,
And are indeed not matters capital:
But to the best and greatest, when the King,
Out of his bounty and magnificence
Vouc•saft to stile thee with the name of son,
Being but a subject, with contorted brows
And looks of scorn you took his curtsy,
And in contempt sent back the Princess dower.
Most true; a grounded proposition
To question you of life.
My life my lords?
It pleases me, that the King in person deigns
To grace my cause with his Majestic ear:
You plead for me in this, and speak my excuse.
I have but two in all,
He sent for one, and he received them both,
With them a sweet and lovely Prince to boot;
Who ever lost, I am sure the King hath won
At once, a wife, a daughter, and a son.
It is true my Lord, we all can witness it.
He that my discontent objects to me,
With the fair Princess speaks uncertainly.
The man judicious such for fools allows,
As have their inward hearts drawn in their brows:
Is there in all that bench a man so honest
That can in this be discontent with me?
I charge you all; those favours I receive
From his high Majesty, I swallow not
With greedy appetite, perhaps like you:
When I am graced, it comes with awe and fear,
Lest I offend that Prince that holds me dear.
That for my brow.
But for your scornful sending
Of the fair Princess dower back to the King,
How can you answer that?
Why Chester thus:
I am a man, though subject; if the meanest
Lord over his wife; why should that privilege
Be only bard me? should I wive an Empress,
And take her dowerlesse, should we love, or hate,
In that my bounty equals her estate.
Witness that Judge above you, I esteem
The Princess dearly, and yet married her
But as my wife, for which I am infinitely
Bound to the King: why should I grow engaged
Above my power, since this my Lords you know,
The less we run in debt, the less we owe.
Give me my thoughts, and score you on I pray,
I wish no more than I have means to pay.
Shall we my Lord his actions censure freely?
And sentence them.
A Persian History
I read of late, how the great Sophie once
Flying a noble Falcon at the Herne,
In comes by chance an Eagle sousing by,
Which when the Hawk espies, leaves her first game,
And boldly v•nters on the King of Birds;
Long tugged they in the Ayre, till at the length
The Falcon better breathed, seized on the Eagle,
And struck it dead: The Barons praised the Bird,
And for her courage she was peerless held.
The Emperor, after some deliberate thoughts,
Made him no less: he cause a Crown of gold
To be new framed, and fitted to her head
In honour of her courage: Then the Bird
With great applause was to the market-place
In tri •mph borne, where, wh•n her utmost worth
Had been proclaimed, the common Executioner
First b• the •ings command took off her Crown,
And after with a sword struck off her head,
As one no better than a noble Traitor
Unto the King of Birds.
•his use we make
From this your ancient Persian History,
That you a noble and a courteous Peer,
Praised for your hospital virtues and high bounty,
Shall be first crowned with Laurel to your worth:
But since you durst against your Sovereign
Oppose your self, you by your pride misled,
Shall as a noble Traitor loose your head.
That Sentence we confirm, and it shall stand
Irrevocable by our straight command.
I am glad my Liege I have a life yet left,
In which to show my bounty, even in that
I will be liberal, and spend it for you;
Take it, it is the last jewel that I have,
In lieu of which oh grant me but a grave.
A Laurel wreath, a scaffold, and a block,
Our self will see the Execution done:
Only thy life is ours, thy goods are free.
My Lord, you are the life of curtsy,
And you are kind unto me above measure,
To give away what might enrich your self.
Since they are mine, I will bestow them thus:
The best of those that were so late but yours,
My jewels, I, by will, restore you back,
You shall receive them separate from the rest:
To you the Kings son, and by marriage mine,
On you I will bestow my Armoury,
Stables of Horse, and weapons for the wars,
I know you love a Soldier: to the Princess,
And my two Daughters I give equal portions
From my revenue; but if my fair wife
Prove, and produce a Male-child, him I make
My universal Heir, but if a Female,
Her Dower is with the rest proportionable.
The next I give, it is my Soul to Heaven,
Where my Creator reigns: my words thus end,
Body to Earth, my Soul to Heaven ascend.
Stay.
Hold
Executioner forbear.
Hear me a Daughter for a Father plead.
Oh Father, hear me for my Husbands life,
Doubly allied, I am his Niece and Wife.
Oh Father hear me, for a Father crave.
Than sentence him oh let me perish rather;
I plead for him that's both my son and Father.
Oh make your mercy to this prisoner free.
Father to us.
And Husband unto me.
Hence with the•e womanish clamours.
Unto these
Let me my Liege presume to add another,
Behold him kneel that is your son and brother.
Your Sister and your Daughter great King hear.
Your Mother and your Daughter.
Or like dear,
Your Queen and Sister.
Speak, what hath he done?
Who ever saw a father on a son
Give sentence? or my Royal Lord, which rather
Adds to your guilt, a son condemn the father?
My Liege, command them hence, they but disturb
The Traitor in his death.
A Traitor's he
That dares so term him, Chester, we mean thee:
Our best of subjects, with our height of grace
We wed thee to us, in this strict embrace
Thy virtues, bounties, envied courtesies;
Thy courage, and thy constancy in death,
Thy love and Loyalty to the end continued,
More than their clamorous importunities
Prevail with us: then as our best and greatest,
Not to exceed, but equal thee in love,
To end between us this Heroic strife,
Accept what we most pecioushold, thy Life.
Which as your gift •'le keep, till Heaven &amp; Nature
Confine it hence, and always it expose
Unto your love and service; I never loved it,
But since'twas yours, and by your gift now mine.
I observe in thee
The substance of all perfect Loyalty;
In you save flattery, envy, hate, and pride
Nothing, or ought to goodness that's allied;
Resign those places that belong to him,
Better than so borne noble, be unborn.
Till you your hearts can fashion to your faces,
We here suspend you from your stiles and places.
A royal doom.
Once more from us receive
Thy beauteous Bride, as we will hand our Queen:
The Prince already is possessed of his.
Nay Bonvile, as your Bridals were together,
So follow in your rank, and by the stile
Of a Lord Baron, you are now no less
If you dare take our word: Our Funerals thus
We'll turn to feasting, and our blood to wines
Of most choice taste pressed, from the purest Grape.
Our noble Martial, kinsman, and our friend,
In our two virtues after times shall sing,
A Loyal Subject, and a Royal King.
THat this Ploy's old, it is true, but now if any
Should for that cause despise it, we have many
Reasons, both just and pregnant, to maintain
Antiquity, and those too, not al vain.
We know (and not long since) there was a time,
Strong lines were not looked after, but if rime,
Othen it was excellent: who but believes,
But Doublets with stuffed bellies and big sleeves,
And those Trunke-hose, which now the age doth scorn,
Were all in fashion, and with frequency worn;
And what's now out of date, who is it can tell,
But it may come in fashion, and suit well?
With rigour therefore judge not, but with reason,
Since what you read was fitted to that season.

ROund through the compass of this e•rthly ball,
The massy substance hanging in the sky,
Hath fleeting Time pursued this froward age;
And searched the worlds corrupt enormities.
Here found I some, despite my hoary scalp,
There sound I Courtiers laughed my course to scorn,
In that place dainty mouthed Damsels scoff,
Sticking my feathers with their borrowed plumes,
As though my beauty were not good enough.
And now this fair concourse here met together,
That have cal•e
leisure to be hold their faults,
Within my furrowed bosom deep ingra•'d:
Like a steel forged impression (fixed firm)
Are met together: you will scorn my wants,
Laugh at my •anenes,
look basely, fume and frown•
But doe so, doe so, your proud eyes shall see
The punishment of City cruelty:
And if your hearts be not of Adamant,
Reform the mischief of degrees en•rate minds,
And make you weep in pure relenting kind.
SO, leave me now, and in mine absence, see
That not a Soldier perch upon the walls;
Least by the Citizens they be espied,
And thereupon they grow suspicious,
Be gone, and give the Sentinels in charge,
They have an eye unto the Southern Port:
And hear ye? if that any forces come,
Let them be straight received into the Castle,
But with as little tumult as you may.
It shall be done my Lord.
We must be secret, as befits the care,
And expedition of so great a cause;
Antwerpe is wealthy, but withal secure,
Our Soldiers want the crowns they surfeit with,
And therefore she mu•• spare from forth her store,
To help her neighbours; nay she shall be forced,
To strip her of her pouches, and on the backs
Of Spanish Soldiers, hang her costliest robes.
The plot already is determined of,
And say Cornelius doe but keep his word;
These swilling Epicures shall taste of death,
Whilst we survive to rifle their rich Coffers.
Here comes the man, welcome Cornelius,
I see you make religion of your word.
Speak softly good my Lord least ye be heard,
The Citizens are scouting here about.
Not one Gernelius dare approach so near,
The Castle shot keeps them in greater awe,
And for discovery by the eye, fear not;
Within this valley we may talk at large,
And no man see vs: say are you resolved,
To stand firm friend unto the Spaniard?
And Sancto Dimly vows you shall partake,
Both spoil and honour with the best of vs.
Suppose my Lord I gave you my consent,
In all the world there's not (at my command)
Aboue six hundred Almaignes; you your self,
Are in the Castle scarce a thousand strong,
And what are these to sack so great a town?
So populous and large as Antweerpe is.
The Citizens (were they but politic,
Careful and studious to preserve their peace)
Might an hours warning, fill their streets,
With forty thousand well appointed Soldiers.
I, but they are remiss and negligent,
Their bodies used to soft effeminate silks,
And their nice minds set all on dalliance;
Which makes them fat for slaughter, fit for spoil:
But say it were otherwise that in their peace
And days of plenty, whilst they flourished
They had fore-seene the danger might ensue,
And exercise themselves in feats of arms;
Yet wee being sole commander of the Castle,
And that commanding them, what let is there,
(Were we much weaker) but we might prevail?
When once the A larum sounds (like silly mice)
They'll hyde them in the crevice of their walls,
And some for ignorance, will stand amazed;
And some will be so tender of their flesh,
As they will scorn to bear the weight of steel,
No, no brave Almaigne if men ever had
A fit occasion to enrich themselves,
And fill the vast world with their e••hoing fame;
Now is that instant put into our hands;
And now may we be Lords of this proud town▪
My mind divines no less, and till my feet
Tread a venturous measure in their streets,
I shall be sick to think upon the deed.
I wish my Lord as much as you detain,
But such an enterprise must be well grounded,
Least in performance there be found defect.
What patient eye can look upon yond Tur•ets,
And see the beauty of that flower of Europe,
And in it be ravished with the sight of her?
Oh she is amorous as the wanton ayre.
And must be Courted: from her no
 〈◊〉 comes
A breath, as sweet as the Arabian spice.
Her garments are embroidered with puregolde;
And every part so rich and sump••os,
As Indies not to be compared to her,
She must be Courted,
 •ary her self invites,
And beckons vs unto her sportful bed;
What is he then more
 •umpish than rude Iron,
By such a load-f•are may not be attempted?
Oh brave Corneliu•, if within thy veins,
There be that heate of vallout? I presume;
Let vs for-slowe no time till wee obtain
To Revel in that bower of earthly bliss.
My Lord, what lies in me ye shall dispose,
My Regiment of Almaignes, and my self,
Will on the first assault revolt to you;
Mean space Isle give you close intelligence,
Of any thing the Citizens pretend:
But as I said, what makes this to the spoil,
Of such a might City as this is,
Unless we be confirmed with more supply?
Behold this scroll and be resolved in that,
From Nastricht first there comes a thousand horse,
Beside five hundred foot: under the guiding
Of Don Al••so de
 Verdugo: Then
From L•ire
 doth 〈◊〉 de Romero,
 bring
Five hundred foot; From A•lst two thousand more
Follow the conduct of Emanuell;
The Duke of Al•a likewise brings his power,
And for a better colour, to delude
These credulous inhabitants of Antwerpe,
He causes it be published he is dead,
And that his Soldiers guard his body hither,
To have it shipped for Spain to be entered:
Which well may serve to shadow his approach,
The rest by night shall have their entrance;
So that within two days I make account,
We shall be gathered to a perfect head,
Of (at the least) six thousand Spaniards.
I mary my Lord, this sounds somewhat like,
Now dares Cornelius promise victory.
But how intends your Lordship to begin,
And give an entrance to this business?
You know the Antwerpians never yet took part,
In any action against his Majesty,
But have remained as neutral, neither aiding
The Prince of Orange nor offending you:
How will you then enkindle flambes of war,
And take occasion to commence your quarrel?
Why any way; it shall be thus Cornelius,
Isle charge the Master Gunner of the Castle,
To make a shot or two upon the town;
And when they come to know the cause of it,
Isle say it was, because they doe not sink,
The Prince of Orange ships: but suffer them
To lye so near within the Liver
 〈◊〉,
Which not withstanding, we precisely know,
Doe hover there about, to no end else,
But to safe conduct victuals to the town.
Yet this excuse will serve to cloak our ha•e,
And show some reason for what after follows.
It cannot be but good my noble Lord,
And shortly (as their daily custom is)
Changing the Governor and other Burgers,
Intend a solemn banquet at the State-house.
Even then, and at that place, give you direction,
The Gunner take his Level, twill affright,
And strike the greater terror to their souls.
Enough, Isle play them Music to their meat,
And send such Revellers into the room,
As some of them shall have caroused their last,
The most I crave, is that Cornelius
Will be as constant as he hath professed.
Once more my Lord I gage my hand with yours,
And as he is a Soldier and a Knight,
Cornelius vows to be a friend to Spain.
I take thy word fair Knight, and back again
Return the like to thee; both I and mine,
For ever vow to love and honour thee:
Now break we off our secret conference,
And closely as we came unto this place,
So let vs circumspectly make retreat.
Walk thou into the town as if thou had
But only come abroad to take the ayre.
I to the Castle will with-draw my self
Down some back way, and ever as we need,
Be this our meeting place, till Antwerpe bleed.
Farewell my Lord, Cornelius is agreed.
What Ordinance have you laden on that part:
A Falcon and two Harguebuz of Crock.
What telst thou me of Harguebuz of Crock?
A pox upon your rascal squibs and crackers,
Have you been loading all this day till now,
And come you with your Harguebuz of Crock?
A plague upon it.
My Lord, blame your direction: nevertheless,
Not full assured of your Lordships pleasure,
We have raised the Cannons that came last from
 Harlam,
And planted them this morning for the purpose.
It was well advised; but Gunner for what part?
That's as it please your Honour to direct,
That's for the State-house Gunner, where the Duch
Sit swilling in the pride of their excess;
Commend vs to them, tell them we have sent
Music to make them merry at their Feast:
Go bid thy full-mouth'd Cannon▪ much good do it them.
Should we discharge some scurvy Culuering,
They'll think we are about some fire-worke,
To make them sport with.
For sure they fall a sleep upon full stomachs,
Shoot me their State-house through both the sides,
And tell them thou did it for their health,
To k•epe them
 waking.
I warrant you my Lord, Isle pierce her sides,
Or never think me worke-man whilst I live.
I will not stir till I have heard the shot.
Go light thy Linckstocke at some hellish brand,
To send black vengeance to that hated town;
Let every corn of powder be a spirit,
Thy mortal aim as ominous as death,
And never a splinter that the Bullet strikes,
But let it prove a very murdering piece,
Amongst the Burgers at their Banqueting,
To vomit horrid plagues upon them all.
There be thou like the Club of Hercules,
Amongst the Bouzing Bacchanalian centures,
To beat their Rhenish Cannes about their ears.
Good luck I hope hark how the sudden noise
In countring with the Cannons loud report,
Stops his full mouth, with the reuerberate sound,
And fills the circle of the empty ayre.
The Shot what from the Castle questionless.
The smoke and the report may tell you so.
And certainly intended at our lives.
Call to the Governor.
Hoe's walking here without the Castle•stay,
The Citizens have sent me to demand,
On what occasion, or by whose commandment,
You have discharged this shot upon the town?
At my command Sir, what is that to you?
Then thy command (I tell thee Sancto Danila)
Is devilish and unchristian;
Which passing through the State-house of the City,
Hath slain three persons.
Three froathy Rhenish fats that have drunk dead,
Or in their cups have fallen to cutting throats,
And fearing that it would be noised abroad,
To cover your foul Bestial Gurmandize,
Give it out to be a shot sent from the Castle.
That men are slain we'll not expostulate,
But Governor, was it by your commandment?
Tell me you men of Antwerpe,
If you doe startle at a Cannons burst,
Why suffer you the Prince of Orange
 Ships,
To ride upon the river at their pleasure?
And with their f•earring tops to mock our Fems,
The whilst the Sconces which doe
 •lancke the River,
Serve but for Fishers to unload their nets;
Whilst Cankering rust, devours your empty Cannons:
And they lye hulling up and down the stream?
Burgers of Antwerpe answer me to this.
They be of Zealand, and the Prince of
 Orange
Hath ever been a friend unto the State.
But enemy unto the King my Master;
Therefore they shall not ride upon the river;
Which if your own security doe suffer,
We'll make our Ban-dogs to awake your town.
Is that the cause and reason of your shot?
Burger it is.
You should have sent vs word of your dislike:
Why so we did, did we not send our post
Even now unto you?
And wrapped our Packet in a ball of lead?
I think we sent a bold Ambassador.
That spoke our mind in thunder: did he not?
You might before have known of our dislike,
But that we did perceive you would not see,
It was well you heard of vs.
No Citizens of Antwerpe, this the cause
That makes you careless and neglect our power,
The death of Princely Delve, had he lived,
The Fleet of Orange had not traded thus,
Nor braved our Castle.
I pray God they mean not to assault the town.
Tic Daluas Body brought unto the Castle.
I would he had come thus, when he came first
Into these Countries.
So would I, what's become of this damned fiend?
Let the devil look to that, for he has most right to him.
I would the cow hyde were off, wee might see the four
 quarters.
A plague go with him.
There will be old triumphing in hell.
There will be old supping of boiling lead.
That Delve was a bloody villain.
He was worse then the Spanish inquisition.
Well, if ever man would have eaten up the Ca∣niballes, it was
 he.
I fear nothing but one.
What's that?
That the people will curse him out of's grave.
I am glad they have cursed him into it.
Well, it was never heard that Delve was dead,
But there was some notable villainy followed it.
What dost thou think he will revive again?
If doe, the deuil's on it, Isle never trust death on's word for a
 half penny.
Come, we'll morn in sack for him.
Come, let's retire our selves into the State-house,
Tic Daluas body brought into the Castle.
March nearer to the Castle with your hearse,
Before you set it down.
What are those villains gone that railed upon me?
They are my Lord.
Set down and let me light,
I would not hear my self again so railed on,
Not for half Belgia.
Zwounds the dogs bark at me, a plague upon them all,
I think they doe •ot hate the Devil so;
Delve is never named but with a curse,
Think but these to•ges, this is a time to dye,
And hear these damned dogs revile me thus:
Well I am dead, but Elves spirit (ere long)
Shall haunt your ghosts, and with a fatal troop,
Come in the dreadful night about your walls,
Grimm death did ne'er affright the fearful martial,
As I will fright these Bouzing Begians:
Whose that aboue? Lord
 〈◊〉 Danila?
My Lord of Alua; enter the Castle.
O the Lord Verdugo, and his Regiment,
From Mascricht? tic well.
Iulian Romero and his Regiment from Leyre?
My Lord Romero where is Don Emanuell?
To bring the power that we expect from Alst.
Who's that? Lord Sancto Danila?
Hoe's entered on the other side the Castle,
Withal his power.
Not yet full ten, my mind presages good,
Antwerpe ere night, shall bath her self in blood.
Monsieur Champaign, great Antwerpes
 Gouer∣nor,
Will you refuse these fair and fresh supplies?
Sent from the Prince of Orange and the
 States,
Under our Conduct for your Cities guard?
Lord Marks Hauurye, we reject them not,
Nor yet neglect the love of that great Prince,
And our kind friend the Co-vnited States:
But •ince we have no
 need of such a power,
Why should we pester Antwerpe with such troupes,
To spend the victuals of the Citizens,
Which we can scarcely compass now for gilt.
The Prince &amp; States will furnish ye with sto•e,
To feed the Army and relieve the Town.
It may be so.
And it may not be so.
Outwords and honours be engaged for it.
Under correction my Lord Governor,
The Marks and Count Egmonts noble words,
(Although the Prince of Orange and the States
Should be forgetful) were a pawn of worth.
What says the Colonel of the Almaines to it?
This is Van Ends opinion my good Lord,
That the rich promise of such noble Peers,
As Marks Hanurie and Count Egmont are,
Is pawn •nough for
 all the Cities wealth.
The Almaine lies, wealth is worth more than words.
I way their promise with my sound belief,
And tie my thoughts to their assured trust,
Yet are there many reasons of import,
To bar•e your Armies
 entrance to this town.
The grand objection is decided.
True.
The lesser then are easily refeld.
Suppose the Prince &amp; States do Victual them,
Yet their •isorder
 in our Civil streets,
May be perni•ious,
 and breed mutiny.
By this supposal you enfeeble vs,
And tax our worth with indiscretion,
As though our skill and our Authority,
Stood upon bases of weak discipline.
We said not so, and yet their ryotings,
May taint our wives and ieoperdize our wealth.
In silence be it my Lord, you need thē not.
All riots shall be death by martial law,
And all commanders, shall be vigilent
Over their troops, that order may he kept.
My Lords of Egmount and of Hau•rye,
What are your numbers?
Just 3000, foot,
One thousand horse, 800. at the least.
An honourable tender of true friends,
To send such aid for safeguard of your City.
T will shake our bags too much to pay so many.
At whose expense shall all this army rest?
Some part your selves, some part the Prince will pay.
Six hundred Almaignes are our garrison,
A guard sufficient to defend our walls,
And men enough, because we need no more.
And they too many to be paid by vs.
O may these slaves refuse this succour sent,
Their misery shall bring their misery.
Count Egmont, surely Ant warp is
 bewitched,
Security hath slain their providence,
And riches makes them retchles of their friends;
We must assume the charge upon ourselves,
And pray the Prince and States to bear the pay;
Or else their private avarice, will pull
Public destruction on this flower of towns,
To the disgrace of all the Netherlands.
I will make tender of so much to them,
Two months the Prince of Orange and the States,
And we our selves, will pay four thousand men:
If afterword, our powers be not of use,
We shall withdraw them to their Provinces,
May this content you curious Citizens?
The offer is so Honourable now,
As modestly, we cannot challenge it:
Captain Cornelius what's your counsel?
This:
Say, that you fear the Spaniards will conceive
Some high displeasure, if you take them in,
My Lords these fat pursed peasants are so proud,
Friends and defence, are less esteemed then pelf.
Governor of Antwerpe, how are you resolved?
My Lords, the Prince of Orange and your selves,
And all the States deserve our duteous love
And humble service: first, for sending power,
Then promising pay and victuals for that power:
But with your pardon, yet there is a let,
That makes vs loath to take your army in.
What let Champaign?
The Spanish Governor,
Danila, commander of the Castle here,
If we receive your troops into our Town,
Will judge we have some purpose of revolt,
And raising arms against the King of Spain.
What if he doe?
His fiery spirit inflamed,
Will send our bullets from the Citadel,
And tear the sumptuous buildings of ou• town.
As late he did when we were banqueting,
And thought no harm, but drinking health to health,
He shot, and slew some innocent poor souls,
And rent our State-house and some buildings else.
He will rend you better if our purpose hold.
What was the cause?
Because we did not sink,
The Prince of Orange Ships, that lay to waft
Provision to our City up the River.
Observe by that you discreet Governors,
What love or faith the Spaniard holds with you,
That for his pride would have your City pine;
Having destroyed the corn on Flaunders side,
And crossed a bridge of Convoy to your town;
Then that the River should not victual you,
He wished you sink that shipping in the Skelt.
Collect by this the Spaniards cruelty,
Who though occasion should not come from you,
Would pick a quarrel for occasion,
To sack your City, and to suck your blood,
To satisfy his pride and luxury:
Let Harlem▪ Marstricht, Alst example you,
And many Cities models of his wrath,
Think on my Father and the County Horn,
Whose tragedy, if I recount with ruth,
May move the stones of Antwerpe to relent▪
They served the Spaniard as his Liedge-men sworn,
Yet, for they did but wish their country good,
He picked a quarrel, and cut off their heads.
Burgers the Spaniard waits to take your lives,
That he may spoil your town, your wealth, your wive•
Receive your friends, prevent his treachery,
Least unawares you taste his tirranye.
What benefit (good Country-men) gain we,
That prostitute our fortunes and our blood,
In your defence?
Say, shall we let them in?
In troth I think the Spaniard means no harm.
Mean what he may, we'll not offend such friends,
As these, the Prince of Orange and the State,
Your Army is at Kibdorpe Port you say?
There stay our forces.
We will let them in,
And quarter them with all convenient speed,
Van End draw up your Almaignes to one place,
And keep good rule for fear of civil brawls,
And now my Lords I will attend on you.
I will attend to look and guard my doors,
And keep my wealth, my wife, and daughter safe,
For fear these hungry soldiers get a snatch.
Yonker come here, haste to the Castle wall,
And call to speak with Sancto Danila,
Tell him from me, the Flies begin to swarm▪
The Sun grows hot, the herds do shake their horns,
The Shepherds bring great flocks home to the fold;
Say, if the Butcher slaughter not in t•no,
The beasts will surfeit, and the Soldiers pine,
Therefore begin before one glass be run,
And we shall win ere setting of the Sun:
Remember this, be secret and away.
Now (Antwerpe) comes the Spaniards holly-day,
With them join I, my share is in the gold,
I run with the Hare, and with the hound I hold;
This Sunday shall be dismal to the town,
The Burgers dye, their gallant wives go• down.
Before good wife, I fear that ell's not well,
Monsieur Champaign what's your opinion?
Doubtless, the Spaniards do intend some hurt,
Hark how the tumult still increases?
For shame,
Be not so fearful, say that for some offence,
Either commenced, or but in conceit;
The Spaniards were maliciously inclined:
Have ye not Soldiers to withstand their force?
What should you need to be solicitous,
Keep ye
 〈◊〉.
Nay wife thou dost mistake,
If thou imagine we intone• to fight;
Tic not 〈…〉 at
 the charge
To pay 〈…〉 should
 not they
Be at the care to see the City safe.
The City's safe enough without their care,
Will you to dinner?
Wherefore shoot they thus,
Unless there were some villainy abroach?
Wherefore shoot they but to try their pieces,
I warrant you husband tic no otherwise.
Here comes the Marks he can tell the news.
The cause my Lord of this intestine up•ore?
The cause is murder, misery and death:
You men of Antwerpe, if with all the speed
And expedition, that in men remains,
You take not weapons to repulse the foe,
That like a swarm of deadly stinging Hornets,
Have all this while lay hid within their nest;
But now doe fly abroad with dreadful noise,
As if so many Furies were awaked.
To arms then all that love your Countries peace.
How doe ye mean my Lord? or who are those
Your Lordship shadows, vnder-neath the name
Of swarming Hornets?
Are you so dull of•ence?
And still so lulled in your security?
Whom should I mean, but bloody Danila,
And furious Alua his compeere in arms,
That fill the Castle yard with their Battilions,
And strive to take possession of your streets:
To arms then straight, if you will keep them back.
First like that Alua is revived again?
As like as he intends to take the town.
But I suspect there is some treachery.
Will you believe his words, he doth but jest,
To try how we will take it if it were so.
Nay by his looks and by his sudden haste,
It should appear the Marks doth not jest.
To arms to arms, oh whore's the Governor?
Give order that your Citizens prepare,
To stand upon their guard, defend themselves,
For whom you trusted, turns his weapons point
Upon your bosoms: all the Almaigne force,
Is quite revolted, and the enemy
Entering your streets: Van End that damned slave,
Gives aid to Spain, and with his traitorous hand
Draws in destruction, if you look not to it.
Where are the Switzers should supply the Trenches?
Drunk in their lodgings, and in reeling forth,
The Spaniards (unresisted) murder them.
For honours s•ke, for
 wretched Antwerpes sake,
Stand not amazed, but with courageous hearts,
And forward hands, fight for your liberty.
Are yet your eye-lids open, are you yet
Awaked out of the slumber you were in?
Or will you still lye snorting in your sloth?
Be still persuaded you are safe enough?
Until the very instant, you doe feel
Their naked swoords glide through your weasond-pipes?
Or doe you think with belching P•ffes that fly
From your full paunches, you can blow them back?
Or is the bottom• of
 a deep carouse,
Able to drown them? will their fury melt
At the beholding of your dainty wives?
Or can submission be a stickler
In these hot brawls? I tell ye burgers no,
Fair words will be as oil to burning pitch;
And gold as Sulphur to kindled; flames,
Your daughters chastity must quench their lust;
And your dear wives,
 〈◊〉 their lawless arms:
I said as much but would not be believed,
Now tell me if I prophesied aright?
Or that my zealous words deserved rebuke?
Did I not say, the Crocodile did weep,
But to obtain his pray? the Sea look smooth,
But for a storm: would any thing be thought,
By the close confluence of the Spanish troops
Into the Castle, but some massacre?
Yet was I rated to object as much,
Reviled and bafled for my loyalty:
I 〈◊〉 Soldier,
 lean thy bitter words,
And help to fight for A•twerps liberty.
You have another groat to give me then,
I know your liberal minds will scorn t'impose,
The sweat of bloody danger on the brow
Of any man, but you'll reward him for it:
He shall atleast (when he hath lost his limbs)
Be sent for harbour to a spittle-house.
How say ye, shall he not? Good reason then,
But we should venture; yes, to laugh at you,
Whilst we behold the Spaniard cut your throats:
An object base 〈◊〉 set aworke;
A swettie Cobbler, whose best industry,
Is but to clout a Shoe, shall have his fee;
But let a Soldier, that hath spent his blood,
Is lame'd, 〈◊〉,
 or any way distressed,
Appeal for suc•our,
 then you look a sconce
As if you knew him not; respecting more
An Ostler, or some drudge that rakes your kennels,
Than one that fights for the common wealth.
It is thy country that doth bind thee to it,
Not any imposition we exact.
Binds me my country with no greater bonds,
Than for a groat to fight• then for a groat,
To be enfeebled, or to loose a limb?
Poor groates-worth of affection; Well, Isle learn
To pay my debt and to measure my desert
According to the rate: a groat I had,
And so much as a groat amounts unto you,
My sword shall pay ye in exchange of blows.
Citizens how now?
Oh Monsieur Champaign,
We are undone for want of discipline,
The Spaniards hurry into every street,
What shall we doe for safeguard of our lives?
What shall ye doe? stand every man it's door,
And take in's hand a Holbert or browne bill,
And study to defend him as he may.
I hear them coming, let vs shift away.
Marks d' Hauurie stay, thou can not scope.
And stay Count Egmont: Danilaes conquering sword,
Pursues thy life, therefore abide and yield it.
Insatiate Alua, that like Sun-ri•e ground,
Never sufficed with sweetest showers that fall,
But with a thousand mouths gapes still for more.
So thy desire of blood ne'er satisfied,
With the rich tribute of so many lives,
Whose guiltless blood hath dyed poor Belgius
 checks,
And changed her like a drunken Bacchanal,
Still with a thousand quenchless appe•••es,
Dost thirst for more, as if that epithet
Were the sole object of thy hearts best hope••
Know Tyrant, Marks Hauurie flies thee
 not,
As fearing all the uttermost thou can,
But the oppression of unequal power,
False treason, that betrayed our lives to thee,
And the sharpe scourge, that fond security,
Hath justly thrown on A•twerps wilfulness
These are the sluices that have brought on vs,
The swelling pride and tyranny of Spain,
Which Antwerpe careless off, although fore-warnde
By many bleeding instances about her,
Could not; nay, would not be advised at all.
Tell me but this, Alua and Danila both,
What state is there, be it ne'er so popular,
Abounding in the height of fortunes gifts;
And all felicities of worldly Pomp,
That sees sad desolation sit in tears,
Upon her neighbour Cities? wars keen edge,
Hath surrowed through their entrails, let them blood,
In every art•re
 that maintains life,
Yet will not dread her danger to be near?
But warm her at their fierce, sing at their sighs,
Revelling in her countless vanities,
As a perpetual date were set thereon.
Tell me I say, you that have seen all this,
And as devils, Saints in the black Calendar
Of wretchedest woe may truly be set down,
As Authors of these sad confusions?
Doe not you deem that state well worth the ills,
That this remissness brought upon the rest?
They cannot but confess so much Count Eg∣mont.
If this be granted what's your glory then?
An armed man to kill an naked soul:
A thousand Sickles thrust into a field,
Of Summer ripened and resistless corn:
A mighty tide to ouer-run a land;
Where no defence or bank to keep it back▪
This is your honour, this their misery,
That are not conquered, but dye wilfully.
War takes ho•le
 on all advantages.
What need advantage, where is no resist?
So much the better, this is our discipline,
Therefore submit or dye.
Not while I have a hand to lift my sword.
Nor you Count Egmont?
Alua, nor I.
Egmont will with honour both live and dye.
Hold when I bid ye; strike ye all at me?
Why stands thou then to guard an enemy?
Because I will, honour incites me to it,
The honour of this worthy Noble-man,
And his high spirit even in the face of death.
Yield thee brave Egmont, Alua doth entreat thee,
In pity of thy bold adventurous youth,
And hopeful Fortunes shining in thine eyes,
Thou see these slain, yet will• save thy life:
Thou see me wounded to preserve thy life.
I that was never pitiful before,
Am forced to pity thee, what would thou more?
Such pity Alua, as thou showed my Father,
And Noble Horn, such thou intendst tome,
Therefore proceed &amp; never pity me. They offer at him
 again
Strike not I chargeue: come Egmont come,
Is wear that thou shalt yield; strike, spare me not,
Alas thou art too faint; come, yield thee now,
I faith I will not hurt thee: So, have done,
Nay, no more weapons, thou art my prisoner.
And I will use thee very honourably.
Alua, let forth my life, &amp; then thou honorst m•
Not for the world, prisoner thou shalt to Spain,
And there be entertained to thy deserts.
Now pity, pack from Elves hart again,
Against my nature once I looked on thee,
For this C•unts
 sake: now to the deserts fly,
For havoc, spoil and murder now I cry.
Have mercy on a woman I beseech you,
As you are men and Soldiers:
If you be christians doe not doe me shame.
Search her.
Zwonds turn her inside outward.
Ransack her, every part of her.
For manhood spare me.
How nimbly death be-stirs him every where,
And I that am a weary of my life,
And would fine dye I cannot,
Death is so proud he will not look on me,
These muddy rogues that hoarded up their coin,
Now have their throats cut for the coin they have:
They that for two pence would have seen me starve,
And still my old rotten stump and I,
Trot up and down as long as we can wag.
As you are men▪ be merciful to me.
Cast lots who shall have her.
Isle give thee my share for thy part.
Isle have my share in her.
Off with her Jewels
How now, two Soldiers ransacking a woman?
O tic Champaignes wife that was the
 Governor,
Here is she, that would not have been seen
with a mouth upon her, for a thousand pound;
That spent as much on Munkeys, Dogs and Par•ets,
As would have kept ten Soldiers all the year.
Zblood I have seen her, where I have past by her
In the streets, to stop her nose with her sweet gloves,
For fear my smell should have infected her;
And now I live to see her l•general, and torn
By lousy tottered rogues: O Antwerpe, Antwerpe,
Now Madame Marchpaigne, minx, your Blows
And you are one.
Lets have her in the next corner.
Draw her along,
Take that she has it is sufficient,
But go no further, it is inhumaine to abuse a woman.
What rogue art thou, dare speak unto a Spa∣niard?
No rogue Sir, but a Soldier as you are,
And have had one leg more then I have now.
Sir, heir's my Passport, I have known the wars,
And have had the vantage of as fair a spoil as you have
 here.
Away you whoreson cripple rascal.
You tottered shake-rag'd rogues, what domi∣near you?
If Daluas self were here, he should not doe it.
Good Soldier, heir's one Jewel that they have not
That I doe value at a thousand crowns,
I pray thee take it.
What should I doe with it, can you tell?
To have my throat cut for it, ha:
No, no your Sister Mince-pies groat
Will doe me no pleasure now.
For Gods love, as you ever did respect a woman,
Help to convey me to some place of safety.
Where is it? not in Antwerpe.
Your closet will not serve your turn,
You cannot walk to your garden-house.
For Gods sake help me as you are a man.
Well, follow me, Isle doe the best I can.
Victory, victory, Antwerpe and victory.
So valiant Lords, this Music likes me well,
Now may we boldly say the town is ours:
Yet sheath not your victorious swoords awhile,
Till you have reaped the Harvest of your pain,
In which pursuit, torture, exact and kill,
No less then in your fury you have done.
If the proud Antwerpers (that doe survive)
Lay not their treasure at your conquering feet.
Though no resistance any where appear,
Yet let not anger so decline with you
Be proud of victory, as well ye may,
Knowing the worth of your attained prize.
Tic wealthy Antwerpe you have won, and how?
Not by a lingering siege, of months or years,
But in a moment; entering at a leaven,
By two a clock her haughty pride is shrunk,
And she in duty stoops to your will.
Can any here report the certain number,
Of those that have been slain during the conflict?
I had a note my Lord, as I remember,
The number of the dead, by vs cut off,
Is seventeen thousand.
But of our men,
How many fell there in this short assault?
Three hundred, or not many more my Lord.
For those three hundred, let ten thousand more,
Of this subjected City loose their lives,
Chain them together in the Market place,
By hundreds and two hundreds▪ and with shot,
Ring them about until they all be slain,
Spare neither widow, matron, not young maid,
Gray-bearded Fathers, nor the babe that sucks.
One Spaniards blood, I value better worth,
Then many hundreds of these drunken Dutch.
First, if it please ye, quarter we the town,
That every one may know his privilege.
Well thought upon Verdugo: thus it shall be.
The Burse, the State-house, and the Market place,
Belongs to me: the Castle and that side,
To Sancto Danila: on the other hand
The key, and water-port (Verdugo) is yours.
Saint Georges port, and Kibdop, we assign
To Lord Romeso: and for you Van End,
The North part of the City, Venus street,
Remains the subject of desired spoil:
So Lords, if I have well divided, speak;
If not, you shall be pleased before we part?
Your Lordship hath discreetly cast our lots,
And for my part, I doe accept of mine.
So doth Romero.
And Verdugo too.
And I no less, than who is best content.
About it then, be every one as quick,
In rifling of these rich Burgers, as he was
In the assault: the world may talk of vs,
As well for valour as our quick dispatch.
My Soldiers and my self will straight begin.
And mine shall follow.
Isle not be behind.
What will Verdugo?
Not be Idle long,
But who are these so saw cily intrude?
Who are ye? speak, that like unbidden guests,
Dare tempt the patience of incensed Alua?
We are of England (•astiles General)
Of England are ye•
 what although you be,
Back slaves unto the door from whence ye came,
And on your knees solicit Elves greatness:
If you doe look for mercy at his hands.
Back when he bids you; now down upon your knees,
And craule unto his presence to beg life.
Verdugo, drag him by the long tailed beard,
Alua doth scorn to waite upon their leisure.
Come forward with a pox; now speak your mind,
And speak discreetly, least you speak your last.
This cruelty is more then we deserve,
And more than we expected would be shown.
Tax ye me then with cruelty so soon?
You shall have cause.
Nay hear them speak my Lord.
What can they say to shield thēselues from death?
Nothing my Lord if in your angry spleen
You have already past your sentence on vs:
But would the Duke of Alua cool his rage,
And mildly hear vs: we would say my Lord,
That Englands league with Spain, King Phillips
 word,
Past to our gracious Mistress, were enough
To warrant all the lives of any such,
As are her subjects in this wretched town:
And not their lives alone, but safe protection
Both for their goods and money: but if now
Your Highness hath commission to break
The holy contract which your King hath made,
We must be patient and abide the worst.
Why what art thou that standst upon the league?
Governor (my Lord) of the English house.
Sir, you challenge the virtue of the league,
Yet understand not how the league is made.
So long as you converse not with the foes
Of royal Phillip, nor withstand his right,
You are exempt the rigour of his scourge;
But being here, in this rebellious town,
You must partake the punishment they feel.
We are not here great Lord, to join with them
In any bold confederacy of war,
But for the traffic, which all nations else,
(As well as England) have within this place.
Why left ye not the City then, perceiving
We meant to call their duty to account?
We had no sign of any such intent.
You cannot so be quit nor so excused,
Therefore provide before to morrow night,
To bring unto vs forty thousand Crowns,
For ransom of your house; or if you fail,
Both goods and lives shall all be forfeited:
So much we are content to yield unto,
Because we will not seem to break the league.
Alas my Lord, tic more then (at this time)
Our goods and money will amount unto,
Considering that our credit (by this trouble)
Is quite cut off, with any of the City.
Shift as you can, I vow to have no less,
And at the appointed time.
Consider of it,
His fauour's great in giving you such scope.
So is the Cat that dallies with the mouse,
But in the end, her pastime is his death;
We must provide, the Spaniards thirst is great,
And better that we quench it with our gold,
Than let them swallow and carouse our bloods:
I prithee Godfrie try thy friends abroad,
And any money that thou hast bring forth,
That we may make the sum which he desires.
Isle doe the best I can, though hard it be,
To find a friend in this extremity.
Let not your rough entreaty so molest,
The soul of him whose spirit already stoops,
Under the heavy burden of weak age;
You have my treasure, what more can you crave?
Thy 〈◊〉 so we
 please: there yet remains
A •ewell of more
 worth than all thy wealth,
Which (like a 〈◊〉) thou did hide from vs.
Thou hast a daughter, whom till we enjoy,
All 〈…〉 proceeds
 from vs, sits here,
〈…〉 point of my
 Scimitar;
〈…〉 speak?
〈…〉 in this
 tumult.
What 〈…〉 than her
 grave my Lord,
Can be 〈◊〉 she
 hath?
Torture the slave,
His guileful heart, that studies to conceal,
My dear hearts treasure, shall be forced in sighs
To publish, what his stubborn tongue denies.
Thou hearst old fellow, trifle than no longer,
But show him where thy daughter doth abide.
Why pause ye on my bidding let him dye,
That doubles with a Spaniard in his will.
Hear ye my Lord.
Not any whispering noise,
Not any tittle, doth not bear the sound,
Of beauties sweet fruition to mine ears.
My daughter li•es,
 but not within the reach
Of my command: a Nunnery in the arms
Of her religious peaceful privilege,
Doth clip her silly frighted Virgins life,
From whence my Lord she cannot be recalled.
Bear Art upon thy tongue, that may unlock
The gates of that in closed Sanctuary,
And first entreat; but if entreaty fail,
Then use command; if neither will prevail,
Yet so thou shalt not cease, but in the cords
Of violent fury drag the Damsel thence:
My soldiers shall attend to see it done,
That if, thou shrink, their weapons naked points,
May gordge thy sides, till thou bleed out thy life.
I would that Sacrifice might end this strife.
Away with him love faints through cold delay,
Tic Danila speaks, and what he will he may.
Of whence are you?
Of England Noble Lord,
A Factor to a London Merchant here,
Who having tried my friends, and strained my purse,
To make my ransom: am now carrying it
To mighty Alua, to redeem my life.
What value is it?
Full five hundred Dollors.
Is this the utmost penny thou can make?
The length and depth of my ability.
It will not servitor search thy chest for more
Or bide the torture we impose on such,
As cunningly, withhold what we demand.
There is not in the world (that I may call
Rightly mine own) one Stiuer or one Do•te,
More then is there comprised within th•• bag.
Give him the strippado;
 〈…〉
Out of your disioynted limbs other sums.
The world doth know, my conscience and just heaven,
That there is all (at this time) I possess.
Save what is thrown into some hollow vault,
Or sunk into some Well; or buried deep
Within the earth: so hoes the peasant up,
Now let him down; will ye confess as yet,
Where we may find the treasure you have hid?
That which (my Lord) is not, cannot be hid,
And to say that I know not, will but wrong
Your expectation, and deceive my self.
Let him rest my Lord, it seems the wretch
Argues the troth, and this is all he hath.
Hence greedy beggar, hark (peeld sheep)
Go hide thee in some bush, till waxing hours
Give thee another fleece to cloth thee with.
Yonder arises the bright morning Star.
Whose rich resplendour gilds my happy thoughts,
And opens mines of treasure to my soul;
Welcome fair sweet, mine arms shall be thy throne,
Where seated once, mock death, and laugh to scorn,
The boisterous threats, of blood besprinkled war,
Who whilst he shows wilde Frescoes in the streets,
And with his Gamballes, overthrows huge buildings,
Mingle their tottered ruins, with the limbs
And Clotted blood of many thousand souls:
Shall as an Antique in thy sight appear,
Yielding no more occasion to be feared,
Than painted shapes of Lyons on a wall.
Behold a Virgin, whose distilling tears
Turn the dry dust to paste, where she doth kneel,
Behold the Silver cognisance of age,
Soiled with dissolving drops of sorrows rage:
If me you touch with a lascivious hand,
As from his eyes descends a flood of tears;
So will you draw a river from his heart,
Of his lifes blood; both ways you shall obscure,
The honour of your name: if Virgin I,
Or aged he, misdo by tyranny.
Let conquest satisfy, since in the strength
Of your succes-full power, our City veils,
And lies in prostrate duty at your feet:
Or if not conquest, be appeased with gold,
Which in abundance pleads for our release,
Only refrain, our conscience to wound,
With that, for which there is no physic found.
I am impatient, she shall be my love,
Of all the spoils are reaped by painful war,
Blot beauty out, and what's our victory?
But as a banquet without company.
Arm you my Lord, and to the fight again,
A crew of straggling Soldiers (lately vanquished)
Have gathered head, and in the heate of rage,
Give fresh assault: the leader to the rest,
Is a lame fellow that doth want a leg,
Who lays about him like a devil of hell.
A troop of Muskets guard this damsel hence,
And to my lodging see her safely brought,
Why stir ye not? environ her with shot,
Whilst we extinguish (with a shower of blood)
This late kindled fire: be gone I say.
It is impossible to pass the streets,
They are so pesterd with this brainsick
 〈◊〉:
And hark my Lord, except you mount be time,
(The clamorous tumult draws so near this place,)
Both you and we shall be surprised by them.
Is there no Fortress near, nor house of strength,
Where I may leave my Love, till this black cloud,
Of swollen Hostility be ouer-blowne?
Not any (good my Lord) lead on your troops.
Then rather than another shall enjoy,
What Danila held esteemed in his eye,
Here it began, and here my love shall dye.
Another Stab her Father, both combined,
By natures laws, by natures law shall end.
Yet is not Antwerpe quite bereft of life,
So long as we two breath, to stand for her,
Nor shall her ransack pass, without some right
Of just revenge: witness this last assault,
Wherein the Scales of Justice have been filled,
With (at the least) a hundred Spaniards lives,
That thought their victory to be secure.
But who are these? a Burger, and with him
His tender daughter, having both sustained
The heavy stroke of death?
I knew them well.
They were my neighbours, no•re unto the Bu•se.
Had these gray hairs retained the reverent worth
Of grave experience, as they might have done;
And had you bin more rich in inward gifts,
And less magnificent in outward show,
Then had you lived, to dye a natural death:
And you to see some of his honoured years.
But pride and luxury, have ever been,
The gate of misery, and nurse of sin:
Yet though you me contemned, I grieve your fall,
And will in pity, give you burial.
Alas poor Lenchy, whether shall we go:
I cannot tell; come Martin let vs hide vs.
Where is my Father?
He is in our house.
Let vs go thither?
All the street is full of Spaniards; they have killed
Little Maria, and Hans Vanderbrooke.
Ah whether shall we go?
Let's hide vs here, no Spaniard will come hither.
Nay M. Hulders Orchard is hard by.
We'll get in there, and hyd's among the trees,
Come let vs run.
Alas the Spaniard's coming, what shall we doe?
Alas poor Martin we shall both be killed.
Alas poor Lenchy, kiss me pretty Sister,
Now we must dye.
Let's sit down here, and Mart. I will clip thee in
Mine arms, they shall not see thee.
But they will kill thee,
Alas where is my poor old Father now, and my poor mo∣there?
Kill, kill, kill.
Tu, Tu, Tu, Tu.
Fuora villiaco.
Follow, follow, follow, follow.
I pray you M. Spaniard hurt vs not,
We are poor children, we have done no harm.
Good Gaffer doe not kill my little brother.
Fuora villiaco, sa, sa, sa, sa,
Ah Master Spaniard doe not kill my Sister,
My father is a poor blind man, and he will dye,
If you kill her.
Cut the Bastards throats.
O kill vs not, we'll hang upon your arms,
Sweet Gaffer, stay and look me in the face,
Have you the heart to kill a pretty Girl?
Good Master Spaniard doe not kill vs,
Take any thing we have, but save our lives.
How the young brattes cling about our swords?
Zwounds, dash out their brains.
Where are my children? Martin, Lenchy speak,
I heard you cry speak pretty souls, where are you?
Husband, Harman, whether will you go?
Alas you fall into the enemies hands
For lack of sight.
My children wife, my children, where are they?
Here you blind traitor, whether you shall go,
To your throate-cutting.
Here Father, here, alas we shall be kilt.
O my sweet children,
Out you Brabant bitch, think you with whining
To preserve your whelps?
O spare the infants▪ and the aged blind,
These have not might, nor power to doe you hurt.
Cut all their throats.
Kill vs, but let our little children live.
Help mother help, or else we shall be kilt.
Hard hearted Soldiers, where have you bin bred?
Get honour on the proud resisting foe,
My self have bin a Soldier as you are,
Now blind with age:
Old men, weak women, and poor wretched infants,
Should be respected in the heate of slaughter.
O doe not this foul injury to arms;
Let my poor Babies lead me to my grave,
Where are you my poor children?
Father, here.
Where art thou Lenchy?
Here poor Father.
Old as I am, and I have told this town;
That you should sack it, I did prophecy.
Then Prophet, did thou prophecy of this?
Ah bloody Spaniard, that hast slain my children.
Bitch, art thou railing? take thou this.
And this,
Get you together with your damned brats.
O cruel Spaniard that dost spare no age nor sex,
Where art thou wife, and my poor little children?
Their blessed souls in Abrahams bosom rests,
Their bodies lye betwixt thy self and me,
By whom these pretty wretches were begot,
O let me join my freezing lips to thine,
Now farewell Antwerpe, say not we did fly,
Where with thy fall, old, young, and all must dye.
Think ye to purchase freedom at this rate?
Some thriftless prodigal bestows in wine,
Or spends in dalliance on his Courtesan,
Five thousand crowns:
 〈◊〉 like your store affords
No greater plenty▪ either from your chests,
That swell with surfeit of your avarice,
Rain down a larger shower of fruitful gold,
Or tender flowering pity, ne'er will spring.
I doe protest (my Lord) beside our Plate,
And household furniture, this is the sum,
Of all the wealth, at this time may be found
Within the English-house.
And is not plate
Good boot for Soldiers? have you that
And dare ye yet plead needy poverty?
Go fetch it me, or presently Isle send
A crew of such sharpe carvers to your gate,
As shall anotamize your panting hearts,
To fill their conquering hands with wished spoils.
The League with Angle. gave vs better hope.
Talk nor of league nor England, nothing sound
In our wars music, that can please the sense;
Unless it have the cheerful sound of gold.
What's he? examine him: if he bring gold,
Free passage have he; but if empty be
The hollows of his hands; or cannot point
By Demonstration, or express by speech,
Where it is fled, in this tempestuous storm,
That we by hugging it, may banish fear,
And burnish her pale cheeks with firmer red,
Let him have that belongs, the torturing Corde.
Excuse my want, that have already paid
To Sancto Da•ila, five hundred Dollors.
Why not as much to me?
I have it not,
Alas (my Lord) consider of my state,
I am but Factor for another man;
Yet of those goods committed to my charge,
Have I made bold (so much as I have said)
To free my life from further prejudice.
How art thou free, when Alua is not feed?
I hope (my Lord) one ransom will suffice,
For one poor life.
That ransom let me see.
Tic paid (my Lord) to Sancto Da•ila.
That which he hath is his, and none of mine,
unless thou can transform vs, and of two
Make but one person: go to, trifle no•,
But show me how I may be satisfied,
Or bide the peril that ensues thereon.
More satisfaction than I have (my Lord)
I cannot give, how ere you torture me.
That will we try, if rope and Gibbet hold,
Let him endure the punishment, he needs
Will wilfully impose upon himself.
Oh that you would at once with ruthless steel,
Carve up my breast, and let my blood suffice,
To quench your thirst for that I cannot give.
So, let him down, stand off and give him ayre,
Speak now, and tell vs where thy coin is hid?
Will ye believe me if I speak the truth?
So it be truth which thou intends to speak.
As I doe hope this troubled soul of mine,
Which now is ready to forsake this flesh,
Shall find a resting place with my redeem•:
The coin you seek, and all the coin I have,
Lies in the Coffers of proud Danila.
Lye there and pine then, for deluding me.
Here comes another; many strokes (at last)
Cut down the strongest Oak, much more, the tree
Hath but a few years growth, and that by storms,
And often whirle-windes shaken and decayed.
Hast thou bin lately fallen into the hands
Of such as have had rifling of thy purse?
I have good Sir.
What art, a Citizen?
Even what ye will, a miserable man.
It seems, I come too late to profit by thee?
You may imagine by my sick faint speech,
And by my faltering limbs distract and severed,
Whether I have bin tortured, yea or no.
Did they then torture thee for that thou had?
They did and had it.
Nothing then remains?
Nothing but this poor miserable life,
Which I would gladly were surrendered too.
They for that thou had, did torture thee,
I see that thou hast not: here we'll put
A period to thy days. Hang him out-right,
And so speed all, whose naked indigence,
Have not to feed Verdugo for expense.
My destiny, was to dye this shameful death,
Which I accept with thanks to him that gives it,
And England now and London both farewell,
Let after times of Spanish rigour tell.
Thus will I feast my self with Antwerpes spoil,
And glut my pining soul with tragic Acts,
Say pamperd Fro, where is thy treasure hid?
Speak truth, or breath thy last upon this steel,
The bloody tempered torment of this town.
Isle batter down your pride from whence it came,
And with your ornaments adorn vast hell.
Spare me Van End I am a harmless woman,
Astonished unto death with frighting words,
Refrain thy deeds, and let the stronger sort,
Be miserable patients of thy wrath
Pity prevails not, treasure is the fee,
That bribes the terror of my threatening breast;
And therefore speak, else hast thou spoke thy last.
Within that vault lies all my wretched wealth,
My gold my plate, my Jewels all are there.
Then, there that heap of glory lies for me,
Which is the way?
That is the cursed way,
Go thou accursed into that shade of hell,
The Image of that everlasting night,
Where thy damned ghost must dwell exempt from light.
What stir is here? what discontented rumour
Sends second message to my dull struck days,
Accustomed to the screeching yell of death?
Lady, what grievance? what is there to doe?
Oh gentle Soldier, heaven hath got me triumph,
Over that hell-borne fury, damned Van End,
That sold the beauty of this famos town:
And ravished Antwerpe of her Maiden joy.
For Gods sake let me come plague the dog,
Isle stone the Jew to death, and paint this Vault
With the unhallowed blood of wicked treason:
Here, wear this weighty Jewel in thy hat,
The town hath sent it for a token slave;
I bought this with the goat you gave me sir;
Soldiers must loath despised dingratitude.
This woman for her ransom sends you this;
Give these two unto Charon for your passing.
And with this last, present grim Beelzebub.
So sleep thy soul with princely Lucifer,
And take such fare as treason will afford.
Come Lady, thus you see good friends must part,
Lament not for his loss his time was come,
And friends from friends, must either go or run.
You see that all is lost, all spoiled and sacked,
What think you the best course to get away?
Is there no place of strength, nor hope of safety▪
No hope but death for three days being past
Since the first entered; now being in cold blood,
The Spaniard is as hot in execution,
As the first hour he entered on the town.
Like maimed men let's pass out one by one,
The safest way and with the least suspect.
Discovering of ourselves, and known for
Wallons, ther's not a man of vs shall pass the gates.
And if we troop thus as we doe together,
We shall be put to sword immediately.
It were best to seek some low part of the wall,
On the moat side, and so escape by swimming.
The Courts of guard, and Sentinels are kept,
And there's no hope of that.
Hark you hark you, whether will you fly? I wold know that;
 sbloud whether? whether? ha; where will you be relieved? there's not a town
 dare receive you: the Spaniard has all the country; you cannot stragle a foot
 out of the walls, but your throats are cut; what have you to carry with you,
 but your scurvy notched limbs? you damned rogues, whether will you go, to
 feed Wolves? A you whoreson rascals; and though these villanos Bur∣gers have
 (by their own security been the destruction of the City, a pox on them:
 yet it will bee laid to our charge, because we were in it.
By the mas the old Lieutenant says true, it will be so
 indeed.
You are all Wallons, but in the miserablest case that ever poor
 slaves were in: for you see, that if any man hate a man, call him but Wallon,
 the Spaniards cut his throat, what country-man so ere he be▪
Nay it is very true, it is most sure:
The Dutch on the other side, they hate you worse then Devils,
 because the Spaniards entered where you kept the Trenches.
Villains doe questionless, nay it is certain.
What will you doe then? here is my poor stump and I have
 stumbled through a thousand shot, &amp; yet we halt together; there was never
 one poor piece of Timber has been so singed as it has been:
 •blood it has been four times a
 fire under me, and yet we scramble to∣gether trotting, trotting: You'll bee
 starved every mo∣theirs Son of ye, and worried with dogs, and yet you'll
 fly.
Why Lieutenant Vaughan, what would ye have vs
 doe?
Dye like men, what should we doe, if there were any hope of
 safety but there is not, there is not.
Lieutenant Vaughan, lead vs, and we'll follow you to
 the death.
We'll not forsake you to the last gasp.
Yes, Isle halt before you, follow me as straight as you
 can▪
Yes, and cut some of their throats before wee dye.
They say the Spaniards and their whoores are at dice upon the
 Change: Isle lay my wooden leg before them, cast at it who will; but who stands
 there?
It is Lieutenant Vaughan as I take it, Lieutenant
 what news?
What news quoth our Captain! where have you been?
I took the Friery to escape the Spaniards.
Well, have seen the day Captain, you
 〈◊〉 rather been a c•ting throats, then at a Mass,
 •was not de∣•••ion  drove you to the place: so Captain,
 Captain, the world is turned: doe you remember the groat they off∣red me,
 when you came to train Soldiers? ha, give him a groat? ha, ha, I have since
 that seen their Mistresses 〈…〉
 by a lousy Lackey, as naked as a new shau'd Water-dog: &amp; Lord why went you
 to the Fryery? why to the Friar?
What should I doe when the poor Wallons fighting at the
 Trenches,
The Spaniards entering on the counterscarfe,
Had not a Soldier sent to second them.
The great swollen bellied Burgers get browne Bills,
As to drive rascal beggars from their doors;
The matting people so amazed with fear,
That turning head with every little noise,
Stopped up the entrance of the streets with throngs,
That when Count Egmont, Hauury and the rest,
Called to the Burgers for supplies of men,
The uncertain murmur of the multitude,
Increased but the confusion of the town:
The villainous and dastard recreant Almaines,
Kneel to the Spaniards, casting down their arms.
A those Almaines, those Almaines, they cried live Spaniards: a
 vengeance take them, they were called high Almaines, but they are low enough
 now; for a number∣ber of them are cut off by the waste: you may call them blanched
 Almaines and you will, for their guts are blanched about their heals.
By these disorders of witless Townsmen,
Perceiving that the Spaniards would prevail;
What should I doe but shift to save my life?
Capt. your life's in as great danger now as ere it was,
The Spaniard is as cruel in cold blood as ere he was;
O Captain, Captain, where is Antwerpe now?
It 〈◊〉 my native
 place, where should I then be free,
If made a sl•ue,
 where I was freely borne?
Ther's not a town almost in Brabant now,
That gives a man the safet• of a night:
What should we then doe living:
Have you and I seen that, that we have seen,
And come to this?
If you reserve the courage you were wont,
Of a brave Soldier and a Gentleman,
Let's doe something yet worthy the talking of,
I have won a company of poor hurt Soldiers,
Yet able to weld weapons and to fight.
And we will follow you, live or dye:
Love life and love death.
Through Elves quarter.
Why bravely spoke,
If you will take such part then as we doe,
Help me to lead these straggling companies,
And we'll amongst their quarters ere we dye.
My hand and heart, and doe engage my soul.
Why then come lads; why this is resolved like men,
If we must go, we'll go together then.
Confess ye slave where thou hast hid thy money,
Or we will hang thee on a Gibbet straight.
That ever I was borne; Gentlemen believe me,
I have no more than what I told you of,
Some thousand Guilders in my counting house.
You have no more than?
Not as I have faith
To God, and to the safety of my Country.
Then hang him presently.
Nay courteous Gentlemen,
As you are Spaniards famous for your acts,
Let me not dye.
The rogue would flatter vs,
S••ra,
 imagine tic too weak a key,
To tune our hearts to; when the cries of Babes,
Screekes of distressed women and old men,
Have not prevailed to qualify our rage:
Let vs dispatch him.
Gentlemen, but hear me.
If thou can tell vs where thy treasure's hid,
Or else for ever let thy lips be dumb.
Alas would ye have me lye?
Stay fellow Soldier,
I ha•e bethought me
 of a pretty trick,
To sift this butter-box a better way:
Wee 'll tie him by the thumbs unto this post,
And tickle him until he doe confess.
Contentyfaith, so at the least, suppose
We get no money yet we shall have sport.
Nay Gentlemen.
Sir, apply your wits,
Or with my sword Isle hack your Filchers off.
O that I were in'th bottom of my Seller.
Is thy money hid there? speak?
No truly sir,
But then I hope I should not hang byth thumbs.
He dallies with vs, tickle him a good.
Oh God, God, what shall I do, sweet gentlemen.
Confess then, sir.
O Lord I shall sound,
By these ten ends, I have nor plate nor coin,
Your General and Countrymen have all.
What 〈◊〉 we heer,
 a Burger tied •yth thumbs?
It is the Tallow-cake, the Rammish Fat,
That would not give a penny to a Soldier,
I know him well; now Sir how feel your
 self▪
Oh Gentlemen never so much distressed.
Your greazie paunch will not defend you then?
Not from these Spaniards, they
 〈…〉 think,
Nay far more covetous than devils of hell.
You cannot satisfy them with a groat,
But if I should requite thy wild contempt,
Here should I leave thee, that as thy treasure
Has bin a pray to their devouring lust,
So in this dung-hill of thy carrion flesh,
Their ravenous swoords might find a du•tie feast,
For nought but draff art thou composed of.
Nor fit for any thing but to feed worms,
Yet thou shalt find a difference twixt my thoughts
And the base temper of thy muddy mind:
Go live, if thou can scope their bloody hands,
Till want and beggary cut short thy days.
I thank you sir; I have (for all their threats)
One bag of Dollors cast into a well,
And that Isle give ye for this friendly succour.
Hence tumbrel from my sight, when boūty might
Have calmed my sharpe affliction then thy hand
Was fast close•d up;
 but now it is too late,
Thou would seem prodigal, away base churl.
Let me entreat you sir, to take that sum,
My heart repents me much, for what is past.
Guts, trouble me no more.
The Lord preserve you sir,
Surely you seem an honest Gentleman.
Wilt thou leave off thy prating and be gone?
With all my heart sir, and I thank you too.
How like Leuiathan, his clumsy limbs
Walk not but tumble, that sad common wealth,
Nursed such Droanes to suck her honey up,
In time of need shall find as small supply,
As he hath been to Antwerpes wretchedness:
But valiant Soldier, what is now to doe?
What, but to hunt the footsteps of pale death,
Until we rouse him in his sooty cave,
There, will no prospect of our Countries fall,
Offend our eye-sight; there no treachery
Of haughty Spaniards tread a bloody March;
Nor any base objection of ingrate,
And thankless Citizens sit in our doors:
But we shall quietly enjoy the peace,
For which we breath; there shall we be secure,
There free from thought of this worlds misery,
And there indeed find true felicity:
For there our travel shall be recompensed,
Our love requited, and our wounds repayed
With double merit. Haste then unto the place,
Upon the earth is nothing but disgrace.
I fly with thee true honourable mind,
And we together will that Mention find.
See Captain, now I have it on my breast,
The Honourable cognisance of death,
This purple river, from this weeping fount,
More glads and quickens my decayed spirit,
Than ever christ all spring in heate of Summer:
The weary traveller, his strength revives,
To draw out tedious hours still on earth,
But mine doth flourish to possess, anon
The blessed haven of eternity.
I trust I shall be there with as much speed,
My passport (I doe think) the Spaniards
Has sealed as deeply, and my journey laid
With no less easy travel to be there.
See, if thy bleeding wounds can speak to me,
Mine can as fast make answer unto
 thine.
Let me embrace this sweet affinity,
Like in our lives agreeing in our deaths:
But what doe I behold? thine eye-lids faint,
And the warm touch of thy desired cheek,
Begins to freeze; wilt thou anticipate
Those joys before me? gentle Captain slay,
There's but a minute that divides our hopes:
Oh he is dead, may his departing soul,
Usher my spirit aboue those fleeting clouds:
Death, why delayst thou? set thy lazy hand
To the divorcement of my loathed flesh.
I am prepared, my penitent sad thoughts,
Have long ago washed my contagious sin:
The blood that I have spilt (the Massacres
Procured and practised by this hand of mine)
Heaven lay not to my charge; for though my sword
Was never drawn but in a rightful cause,
Yet much misprision hath attended it;
That, and all else, this sigh craves pardon for,
Mine eyes were ne'er accustomed to tears,
Let it suffice, these wounds doe weep for them:
Antwerpe farewell, if thou have done me wrong,
This latest gasp, sends pardon from my tongue.
Now war hath wrapped his bloody colours up,
And sheathed his fatal sword with his, we ours,
Prefixing truce to our laborious arms;
This City late of christening the fame,
For wealth and glory: now remains the Map,
〈◊〉 destruction
 and perpetu•ll
 •in;
〈…〉 with
 slaughtered carcasses,
〈…〉 before were
 stuffed with pride,
An left as 〈…〉:
Oh in remorse of human clemency,
My heart (not thinks) could sigh, my eyes shed tears,
To call to mind and see their misery:
But they were wanton and lascivious,
Too much addicted to their private lust:
And that concludes their Martirdoome was just.
Hold, one of you, convey this serious letter
To warlike Alua, tell him as he wild,
After my forces lodged in Garrison,
Isle meet his Grace at Bridges, and from thence
Acquaint the Court of Spain with our success;
Pray God the tyranny expressed in Antwerpe,
Like to the echoing clamour of a Trumpet,
Speak not our deeds before our own approach.
My Lord, behold where lye the mangled bodies
Of those two fierce assailing Brabanters,
That all this while kept vs at such a bay,
And when we thought the town was won, procured
So great a deluge of •berian blood.
Let's drag them at our horses tails my Lord,
And as we pass through every town and village,
Make them example to the world for pride?
Who touches them but in disgrace, my sword
Shall lop his arm off▪ were they proud say thou?
Their pride was honourable, deserving love
Rather then hate; nay should we doe them right,
Had they been strengthened with convenient aid
We had been bea•••
 from the town again
And made exchange of conquest: which subdued
There never lived two
 〈◊〉 Heroieth spirits
That for their Country have deser•d as much
To be renowned; as ever
 〈◊〉 was
Or Romaine 〈◊〉 or
 the 〈…〉
They for their 〈◊〉 could but loose their Live•
These have inequall ser•ice done as much
Take up their bodies; of ten thousand others
Rest by our swords, and left un••vied
These two will we in person see interred,
And doe them right, the law of Arms require•;
So march we hence, striking a mournful sound
Till we have said our honoured foes in ground
Thus worldlings, Time in his unwonted love
Hath staid his course, to rubb the memory
Of actions long since cast behind his back
His care is fruitful, and doth wish to see
No heavy or disastrous chance befall
The sons of men if they will warned be
But when they 〈◊〉
 against my discipline
Wasting the treasure of my precious hour
No marvel then, like misery catch hold
On them, did fasten oh this woeful town
Whose bleeding fortune, whose lamenting
 〈◊〉
Whose streets besmeared with blood, whose blubred eyes
Whose tottered walls, whose buildings overthrown
Whose riches lost, and poverty made known:
May be a mean all Cities to affright
How they in sin and pleasure take delight

COme masters, I think it be past five a clock,
Is it not time we were at work:
My old Master heel be stirring anon.
I cannot tell whether my old master will be stirring or no: but I am sure I can hardly take my afternoons nap, for my young Moister Thomas,
He keeps such a quile in his study,
With the Sun, and the Moon, and the seven stars,
That I do verily think heel read out his wits.
He skill of the stars, theres goodman Car of Fulhum,
He that carried vs to the strong Ale, where goodie Trundell
Had her maid got with child: O he knows the Stars,
Heel tickle you Charles Wane in nine degrees,
That same man will tell you goodie Trundell,
When her Ale shall miscarry, only by the stars.
I thats a great virtue, indeed I think Thomas
Be nobody in comparison to him.
Well masters come, shall we to our hammers?
I content, first lets take our mornings draught,
And then to work roundly.
I agreed, go in Hodge.
Good morrow morn, I doe salute thy brightness,
The night seems tedious to my troubled soul:
Whose black obscurity binds in my mind,
A thousand sundry cogitations:
And now Aurora with a lively dye,
Adds comfort to my spirit that mounts on high.
Too high indeed, my state being so mean,
My study like a mineral of gold:
Makes my hart proud wherein my hopes inrowld,
My books is all the wealth I do possess, 
And unto them I have engaged my hart,
O learning how divine thou seems to me:
Within whose arms is all felicity,
Peace with your hammers leave your knocking there,
You doe disturb my study and my rest,
Leave off I say, you mad me with the noise.
Why how now Moister Thomas how now,
Will you not let vs work for you.
You fret my hart, with making of this noise.
How fret your hart, I but Thomas, you'll
Fret your fathers purse if you let vs from working.
I this tic for him to make him a gentleman,
Shall we leave work for your musing, thats well I faith,
But here comes my old moister now.
You idle knaves, what are you loitering now,
No hammers walking and my work to do:
What not a heate among your work to day.
Marry sir your son Thomas will not let vs work at all,
Why knave I say, have I thus carkde &amp; cared
And all to keep thee like a gentleman,
And dost thou let my servants at their work:
That sweat for thee knave, labour thus for thee,
Father their hammers doe offend my study.
Out of my doors knave if thou likest it not,
I cry you mercy is your ears so fine:
I tell thee knave these get when I doe sleep,
I will not have my Anvil stand for thee.
Theres money father I will pay your men.
Have I thus brought thee up unto my cost,
In hope that one day thou would relieve my age,
And art thee now so lavish of thy coin,
To scatter it among these idle knaves.
Father be patient, and content your self,
The time will come I shall hold gold as trash:
And here I speak with a presaging soul,
To build a palace where now this cottage stands,
As fine as is King Henries house at Sheen.
You build a house, you knave you'll be a beggar,
Now before God all is but cast away,
That is bestowed upon this thriftless lad,
Well had I bound him to some honest trade:
This had not been, but it was his morhers doing,
To send him to the University,
How build a house where now this cottage stands,
As fair as that at Sheen, he shall not here me,
A good boy Tom, I con thee thank Tom,
Well said Tom, gramarcies Tom,
Into your work knaves, hence you saucy boy.
Why should my birth keep down my mounting spirit,
Are not all creatures subject unto time:
To time, who doth abuse the world,
And filles it full of hodgepodge bastardy,
Theres legions now of beggars on the earth,
That their original did spring from Kings:
And many Monarchs now whose fathers were,
The riffe-raffe of their age: for Time and Fortune
Wears out a noble train to beggary,
And from the dunghill minions doe advance
To state: and mark in this admiring world,
This is but course, which in the name of Fate,
Is seen as often as it whirls about:
The River Thames that by our door doth pass,
His first beginning is but small and shallow:
Yet keeping on his course, grows to a sea.
And likewise Wolsey, the wonder of our age,
His birth as mean as mine, a Butchers son,
Now who within this land a greater man.
Then Cromwell cheer thee up, and tell thy soul,
That thou moist live to flourish and control.
Tom Cromwell, what Tom I say?
Do you call sir.
Here is moister Bowser come to know, if you have dispatched his petition, for the Lords of the counsel or no.
Father I have, please you to call him in.
Thats well said Tom, a good lad Tom.
Now Moister Cromwell, have you dispatched this petition?
I have sir, here it is, please you peruse it.
It shall not need, weal read it as we go by water:
And Moister Cromwell, I have made a motion
May do you good, and if you like of it.
Our Secretary at Antwarpe, sir is dead,
And the Merchants there hath sent to me,
For to provide a man fit for the place:
Now I do know none fitter then yourself,
If with your liking it stand moister Cromwell.
With all my hart sir, and I much am bound,
In love and duty for your kindness shown.
Body of me Tom make hast, least some body
Get between thee and home Tom.
I thank you good moister Bowser, I thank you for my boy,
I thank you always, I thank you most heartily sir,
Hoe a cup of Beer there for moister Bowser.
It shall not need sir, moister Cromwell will you go.
I will attend you sir.
Farewell Tom, God bless thee Tom,
God speed thee good Tom.
I hope this day is fatal unto some,
And by their loss must Bagot seek to gain,
This is the lodging of moister Fryskiball,
A liberal Merchant, and a Florentine,
To whom Banister owes a thousand pound,
A Merchant Banckrout, whose Father was my moister,
What do I care, for pity or regard,
He once was wealthy, but he now is fallen,
And this morning have I got him arrested,
At the suit of moister Friskiball,
And by this means shall I be sure of coin,
For doing this same good to him unknown:
And in good time, see where the merchant comes.
God morrow to kind moister Friskiball.
God morrow to yourself good moister Bagot,
And whats the news you are so early stirring:
It is for gain, I make no doubt of that.
It is for the love sir that I bear to you,
When did you see your debtor Banister?
I promise you, I have not seen the man,
This two months day, his poverty is such,
As I do think he shames to see his friends.
Why then assure yourself to see him straight,
For at your suit I have arrested him,
And here they will be with him presently.
Arrest him at my suit, you were to blame,
I know the mans misfortunes to be such,
As hes not able for to pay the debt,
And were it known to some he were undone.
This is your pitiful hart to think it so,
But you are much deceived in Banister,
Why such as he will break for fashion sake,
And unto those they owe a thousand pound,
Pay scarce a hundred, O sir beware of him,
The man is lewdly given, to Dice and Drabs,
Spends all he hath in harlots companies,
It is no mercy for to pity him.
I speak the truth of him, for nothing else,
But for the kindness that I bear to you,
If it be so, he hath deceived me much,
And to deal strictly with such a one as he,
Better severe then too much lenity,
But here is Moister Banister himself,
And with him as I take the officers.
O moister Friskiball you have undone me,
My state was well nigh overthrown before,
Now altogether downe-cast by your means.
O moister Friskiball, pity my husbands case,
He is a man hath lived as well as any,
Till envious fortune and the ravenous sea,
Did rob, disrobe, and spoil vs of our own.
Mistress Banister, I envy not your husband,
Nor willingly would I have used him thus:
But that I here he is so lewdly given,
Haunts wicked company, and hath enough,
To pay his debts, yet will not be known thereof.
This is that damned Broker, that same Bagot,
Whom I have often from my Trencher fed,
Ungrateful Villain for to use me thus:
What I have said to him is nought but truth.
What thou hast said, springs from an envious hart,
A Cannibal that doth eat men alive,
But here upon my knee believe me sir,
And what I speak, so help me God is true,
We scarce have meat to feed our little babes,
Most of our Plate is in that Brokers hand,
Which had we money to dephray our debt,
O think we would not bide that penury:
Be merciful, kind moister Friskiball,
My husband, children, and my self will eat,
But one meal a day, the other will we keep and sell,
As part to pay the debt we owe to you:
If ever tears did pierce a tender mind,
Be pitiful, let me some favour find.
Be not you so mad sir, to believe his tears,
Go to, I see thou art an envious man,
Good mistress Banister kneel not to me,
I pray rise up, you shall have your desire.
Hold officers be gone, theres for your pains,
You know you owe to me a thousand pound,
Here take my hand, if ear God make you able,
And place you in your former state again,
Pay me: but if still your fortune frown,
Upon my faith Isle never ask you crown:
I never yet did wrong to men in thrall.
For God doth know what to my self may fall.
This unexpected favour undeserved,
Doth make my hart bleed inwardly with joy,
Ne'er may ought prosper with me is my own,
If I forget this kindness you have shown.
My children in their prayers both night and day,
For your good fortune and success shall pray.
I thank you both, I pray go dinc with me,
Within these three days, if God give me leave,
I will to Florence to my native home,
Bagot hold, theres a Portague to drink,
Although you ill deserved it by your merit,
Give not such cruel scope unto your hart,
Besure the ill you do will be requited,
Remember what I say, Bagot farewell,
Come Moister Banister, you shall with me,
My fare is but simple, but welcome heartily.
A plague go with you, would you had eat your last,
Is this the thanks I have for all my pains,
Confusion light upon you all for me,
Where he had wont to give a score of crowns,
Doth he now foist me with a Portague:
Well I will be revenged upon this Banister.
Isle to his creditors, buy all the debt he owes,
As seeming that I do it for good will,
I am sure to have them at an easy rate,
And when tic done, in christendom he stays not,
But isle make his hart to ache with sorrow,
And if that Banister become my debtor,
By heaven and earth isle make his plague the greater.
Now gentlemen imagine, that young Cromwell,
In Antwarpe Ledger for the English Merchants:
And Banister to shun this Bigots hate,
Hearing that he hath got some of his debts,
Is fled to Antwarpe, with his wife and children,
Which Bagot hearing is gone after them:
And thither sends his bills of debt before,
To be revenged on wretched Banister,
What doth fall out, with patience sit and see,
A just requital of false treachery.
Thus far my reckoning doth go straight &amp; even,
But Cromwell this same ployding fits not thee:
Thy mind is altogether set on travel,
And not to live thus cloistered like a Nun,
It is not this same trash that I regard,
Experience is the jewel of my hart.
I pray sir are you ready to dispatch me.
Yes here is those sums of money you must carry,
You go so far as Frankford do you not.
I doe sir.
Well prithee make all the hast thou can,
For there be certain English gentlemen:
Are bound for Venice, and may happily want,
And if that you should linger by the way:
But in hope that you'll make good speed,
Theres two Angels to buy you spurs and wands.
I thank you sir this will ad wings indeed.
Gold is of power would make an Eagles speed. 
What gentlewoman is this that grieves so much,
It seems she doth address her self to me.
God save you sir, pray is your name moister Cromwell.
My name is Thomas Cromwell gentlewoman.
Know you not one Bagot sir, thats come to Antwarpe.
No trust me, I never saw the man,
But here are bills of debt I have received,
Against one Banister a Merchant fallen into decay.
Into decay indeed, long of that wretch,
I am the wife to woeful Banister:
And by that bloody villain am pursued,
From London here to Antwarpe,
My husband he is in the governors hands:
And God of heaven knows how heel deal with him,
Now sir your hart is framed of milder temper,
Be merciful to a distressed soul,
And God no doubt will trebell bless your gain.
Good mistress Banister, what I can, I will,
In any thing that lies within my power.
O speak to Bagot that same wicked wretch,
An Angels voice may move a damned devil.
Why is he come to Antwarpe as you here?
I hard he landed some two hours since.
Well mistress Banister assure your self.
Isle speak to Bagot in your own behalf:
And win him to all the pity that I can,
Mean time, to comfort you in your distress,
Receive these Angels to relieve your need,
And be assured that what I can effect:
To doe you good, no way I will neglect.
That mighty God that knows each mortals hart,
Keep you from trouble sorrow grief and smart.
Thanks courteous woman,
For thy hearty prayer:
It grieves my soul to see her misery,
But we that live under the work of fate,
May hope the best, yet knows not to what state
Our stars and destinies hath vs assigned,
Fickle is fortune and her face is blind.
So all goes well, it is as I would have it,
Banister he is with the Governor:
And shortly shall have guiues upon his heals,
It glads my hart to think upon the slave,
I hope to have his body rot in prison:
And after here, his wife to hang her self,
And all his children die for want of food,
The Jewels that I have brought to Antwarpe,
Are recond to be worth five thousand pound,
Which scarcely stood me in three hundredth pound,
I bought them at an easy kind of rate,
I care not which way they came by them
That sold them me, it comes not near my hart:
And least they should be stolen as sure they are,
I thought it meet to sell them here in Antwarpe,
And so have left them in the Governors hand,
Who offers me within two hundredth pound
Of all my price: but now no more of that,
I must go see and if my bills be safe,
The which I sent to moister Cromwell,
That if the wind should keep me on the sea,
He might arest him here before I came:
And in good time, see where he is: God save you sir.
And you, pray pardon me, I know you not.
It may be so sir, but my name is Bagot,
The man that sent to you the bills of debt.
O the man that pursues Banister,
Here are the bills of debt you sent to me:
As for the man you know best where he is,
It is reported you have a flinty hart,
A mind that will not stoop to any pity;
An eye that knows not how to shed a tear,
A hand thats always open for reward,
But moister Bagot would you be ruled by me:
You should turn all these to the contrary,
Your hart should still have feeling of remorse,
Your mind according to your state be liberal,
To those that stand in need and in distress;
Your hand to help them that do stand in want,
Rather then with your poise to hold them down,
For every ill turn show your self more kind,
Thus should I doe, pardon I speak my mind.
I sir, you speak to here what I would say,
But you must live I know, as well as I:
I know this place to be extortion,
And tic not for a man to keep him,
But he must lie, cog, with his dearest friend;
And as for pity, scorn it, hate all conscience,
But yet I doe commend your wit in this,
To make a show, of what I hope you are not,
But I commend you and tic well done,
This is the only way to bring your gain.
My gain: I had rather chain me to an ore,
And like a slave there toil out all my life,
Before id live so base a slave as thou:
I like an hipocrite to make a show,
Of seeming virtue and a devil within,
No Bagot, would thy conscience were as clear,
Poor Banister ne'er had been troubled here.
Nay good moister Cromwell be not angry sir,
I know full well you are no such man;
But if your conscience were as white as Snow,
It will be thought that you are other wise.
Will it be thought that I am other wise,
Let them that think so know they are deceived;
Shall Cromwell live to have his faith misconstered,
Antwarpe for all the wealth within thy Town,
I will not stay here not two hours longer:
As good luck serves my accounts are all made even,
Therefore isle straight unto the treasurer,
Bagot I know you'll to the governor,
Commend me to him, say I am bound to travail,
To see the fruitful parts of Italy,
And as you ever bore a Christian mind,
Let Banister some favour of you find.
For your sake sir isle help him all I can,
To starve his hart out ear he gets a groat,
So moister Cromwell doe I take my leave,
For I must straight unto the governor.
Farewell sir, pray you remember what I said,
No Cromwell, no, thy hart was ne'er so base:
To live by falsehood or by brokerie,
But falls out well, I little it repent,
Hereafter, time in travel shall be spent.
Your son Thomas, quoth you, I have been Thomast, I had thought it had been no such matter to a gone by water: for at Putnaie isle go you to Parish-garden for two pence, sit as still as may be, without any wagging or ioulting in my guts, in a little boat too: here 'wee were scarce four mile in the great greene water, but I thinking to go to my afternoons vnchines, as it was my manner at home, but I felt a kind of rising in my guts: at last one a the Sailors spying of me, be a good cheer says hee, set down thy victuals, and up with it, thou hast nothing but an Eel in thy belly: Well toote went I, to my victuals went the Sailors, and thinking I to bee a man of better experience then any in the ship, asked me what Wood the ship was made of: they all swore I told them as right as if I had been acquainted with the Carpenter that made it, at last wee grew near land,
and I grew villainous hungry, went to my bag, the devil a bit there was, the Sailors had tickled me, yet I cannot blame them, it was a part of kindness, for I in kindness told them what Wood the ship was made of, and they in kindness eat up my victuals, as indeed one good turn asks another: Well would I, could I, find my moister Thomas in this Dutch Town, he might put some English Bear into my belly.
What Hodge my fathers man, by my hand welcome,
How doth my father? whats the news at home?
Moister Thomas, O God moister Thomas, your hand, glove and all, this is to give you to understanding that your father is in health, and Alice Downing here hath sent you a Nutmeg, &amp; Bess Make water a race of Ginger, my fellow Will &amp; Tom hath between them sent you a dozen of points, &amp; good man Toll of the Goat a pair of mittons, my self came in person, and this is all the news.
Gramercy good Hodge, and thou art welcome to me,
But in as ill a time thou come as may be:
For I am travelling into Italy,
What say thou Hodge wilt thou bear me company.
Will I bear thee company Tom, what tell me of Italy, were it to the furthest part of Flaunders, I would go with thee Tom, I am thine in all weal and woe, thy own to com???maund, what Tom, I have passed the rigorous waives of Nep???tunes blasts, I tell you Thomas I have been in the danger of the floods, and when I have seen Bores begin to play the Ruffin with vs, then would I down of my knees and call upon Vul???can.
And why upon him.
Because as this same fellow Neptune is God of the Seas, so Vulcan is Lord over the Smiths, and therefore I being a Smith, thought his Godhood would have some care yet of me.
A good conceit, but tell hast thou dined yet?
Thomas to speak the truth, not a bit yet I.
Come go with me, thou shalt have cheer good store.
And farewell Antwarpe if I come no more.
I follow thee sweet Tom, I follow thee.
Is Cromwell gone then, say you moister Bagot,
What dislike I pray, what was the cause?
To tell you true, a wilde brain of his own,
Such youth as they cannot see when they are well:
He is all bent to travail, thats his reason,
And doth not love to eat his bread at home.
Well, good fortune with him, if the man be gone.
We hardly shall find such a one as he,
To fit our turns, his dealings were so honest:
But now sir, for your Jewels that I have,
What do you say, will you take my prise.
O sir, you offer too much vnderfoote.
Tic but two hundred pound between vs man,
Whats that in payment of five thousand pound.
Two hundred pound, byr'lady sir tic great,
Before I got so much, it made me sweat.
Well Moister Bagot, Isle proffer you fairly,
You see this Merchant moister Banister,
Is going now to prison at your suit.
His substance all is gone, what would you have,
Yet in regard I knew the man of wealth,
Never dishonest dealing, but such mishaps,
Hath fallen on him, may light on me, or you,
There is two hundred pound between vs,
We will divide the same, Isle give you one,
On that condition you will set him free:
His state is nothing, that you see your self,
And where nought is, the King must lose his right.
Sir, sir, you speak out of your love,
Tic foolish love sir sure to pity him:
Therefore content your self, this is my mind,
To do him good I will not bate a penny,
This is my comfort though thou dost no good,
A mighty ebb follows a mighty flood.
O thou base wretch whom we have fostered,
Even as a Serpent for to poison vs,
If God did ever right a women's wrong:
To that same God I bend and bow my heart,
To let his heany wrath fall on thy head,
By whom my hopes and joys are, butchered.
Alas fond woman, I pray thee pray thy worst,
The Fox fares better still when he is cursed.
Moister Bowser your welcome sir from England,
Whats the best news? how doth all our friends?
They are all well and do commend them to you,
Theres letters from your brother and your son:
So falre you well sir, I must take my leave,
My hast and business doth require such.
Before you dine sir, what go you out of town.
I faith unless I here some news in town,
I must away there is no remedy.
Moister Bowser what is your business, may I know it,
You may sir and so shall all the City.
The King of late hath had his treasury robed,
And of the choicest jewels that he had:
The value of them was some seven thousand pound,
The fellow that did steal the solewels, he is hanged,
And did confess that for three hundred pound,
He sold them to one Bagot dwelling in London:
Now Bigots fled, and as we here to Antwarpe,
And hither am I come to seek him our,
And they that first can tell me of his news,
Shall have a hundred pound for their reward.
How just is God to right the innocent.
Moister Bowser you come in happy time,
Here is the villain Bagot that you seek,
And all those jewels have I in my hands,
Officers look to him, hold him fast.
The devil ought me a shame, and now hath paid it.
Is this that Bagot? fellows bear him hence,
We will not now stand for his reply;
Lade him with Irons, we will have him tried
In England where his villainies are known.
Mischief, confusion, light upon you all,
O hang me, drown me, let me kill my self,
Let go my arms let me run quick to hell.
Away, bear him away, stop the slaves mouth.
Thy works are infinite, great God of heaven.
I hard this Bagot was a wealthy fellow.
He was indeed, for when his goods were zeased,
Of Jewels, coin, and Plate within his house,
Was found the value of five thousand pound,
His furniture fully worth half so much,
Which being all strained for, for the King,
He frankly gave it to the Antwarpe merchants,
And they again, out of their bounteous mind,
Hath to a brother of their company,
A man deceit by fortune of the Seas,
Given Bigots wealth, to set him up again:
And keep it for him, his name is Banister.
Moister Bowser, with this happy news,
You have revived two from the gates of death,
This is that Banister, and this his wife.
Sir I am glad my fortune is so good,
To bring such tidings as may comfort you.
You have given life unto a man deemed dead,
For by these news, my life is newly bred.
Thanks to my God, next to my Sovereign King,
And last to you that these good hopes doth bring.
The hundred pound I must receive as due
For finding Bagot, I freely give to you.
And Moister Banister, if so you please,
Isle bear you company, when you cross the Seas.
If it please you sir, my company is but mean,
Stands with your liking, Isle waite on you.
I am glad that all things do accord so well???
Come Moister Bowser, let vs in to dinner:
And Mistress Banister, be merry woman,
Come after sorrow now, lets cheer your spirit,
Knaves have their due, and you but what you merit.
Call ye this seeing of fashions?
Marry would I had staide at Putnaie still,
O Moister Thomas, we are spoiled we are gone.
Content thee man, this is but fortune.
Fortune, a plague of this Fortune makes me go wetshod, the rogues would not leave me a shoe to my feet, for my hoase they scorned them with their heals, but for my Doublet and Hat, O Lord they embraced me, and unlaced me, and took away my clothes, and so disgraced me.
Well Hodge, what remedy?
What shift shall we make now?
Nay I know not, for begging I am nought, for stealing worse: by my troth I must even fall to my old trade, to the Ham???mer and the Horse heals again: but now the worst is, I am not acquainted with the humour of the horses in this country, whether they are not coltish, given much to kicking, or no, for when I have one leg in my hand, if he should up and lay tother of my chops, I were gone, there lay I, there lay Hodge.
Hodge I believe thou must ????????? for vs both.
O Moister Thomas, have not I told you of this, have not I many a time and often, said Tom, or Moister Thomas, learn to make a Horse-shooe, it will be your own another day: this was not regarded. Hark you Thomas, what doe you call the fellows that robbed vs.
The Bandetto.
The Bandetto doe you call them, I know not what they are called here, but I am sure wee call them plain thieves in
England, O Thomas that we were now at Putnay, at the ale there.
Content thee man, here set up these two bills,
And let vs keep our standing on the bridge:
The fashion of this country is such,
If any stranger be oppressed with want,
To write the manner of his misery,
And such as are disposed to succour him,
Will doe it, what hast thou set them up?
I their up, God send some to read them,
And not only to read them, but also to look on vs:
And not altogether to look on vs, 
But to relieve vs, O cold, cold cold.
Whats here? two Englishmen robed by the Bandetto,
One of them seems to be a gendeman:
Tic pity that his fortune was so hard,
To fall into the desperate hands of thieves,
Isle question him of what estate he is,
God save you sir, are you an Englishman?
I am sir a distressed Englishman.
And what are you my friend.
Who I sir, by my troth I do not know my self what I am now, but sir, I was a smith sir, a poor Farrier of Putnay, thats my moister sir yonder, I was robbed for his sake sir.
I see you have been met by the Bandetto,
And therefore need not ask how you came thus???
But Friskiball why dost thou question them,
Of their estate and not relieve their need,
Sir the coin I have about about me is not much:
Theres sixteen Ducats, for to cloth yourselves,
Theres sixteen more to buy your diet with,
And theirs sixteen to pay for your horse hire:
Tic all the wealth you see my purse possesses,
But if you please for to enquire me out,
You shall not want for ought that I can doe,
My name is Friskiball a Florence Merchant,
A man that always loved your nation.
This unexpected favour at your hands,
Which God doth know, if ever I shall requite it,
Necessity makes me to take your bounty,
And for your gold can yield you nought but thanks,
Your charity hath helped me from despair.
Your name shall still be in my hearty prayer.
It is not worth such thanks; come to my house,
Your want shall better be relieved then thus.
I pray excuse me, this shall well suffice,
To bear my charges to Bononia,
Whereas a noble Earl is much distressed:
An Englishman, Russell the Earl of Bedford,
Is by the French King, sold unto his death,
It may fall out, that I may doe him good,
To save his life, Isle hazard my hart blood:
Therefore kind sir, thanks for your liberal gift,
I must be gone to aide him ther's no shift.
Isle be no hinderer to so good an act,
Heaven prosper you, in that you go about;
If Fortune bring you this way back again,
Pray let me see you: so I take my leave,
All good a man can wish, I doe bequeath.
All good that God doth send, light on your head,
Theres few such men within our climate bred.
How say you now Hodge, is not this good fortune.
How say you, Isle tell you what Moister Thomas
If all men be of this Gentleman's mind,
Lets keep our standings upon this Bridge,
We shall get more here with begging in oneday,
Then I shall with making Horshoes in a whole year.
No Hodge, we must begone unto Bononia,
There to relieve the noble Earl of Bedford:
Where if I fail not in my policy,
I shall deceive their subtle treachery.
Nay Isle follow you, God bless vs from the theeuing Bandettoes again.
Am I betrayed, was Bedford borne to die,
By such base slaves in such a place as this:
Have I escaped so many times in France,
So many battles have I over passed,
And made the French stir when they hard my name;
And am I now betrayed unto my death,
Some of their harts blood first shall pay for it.
They do desire my Lord to speak with you.
The traitors doe desire to have my blood,
But by my birth, my honour, and my name:
By all my hopes, my life shall cost them dear.
Open the door, isle venture out upon them,
And if I must die, then isle die with honour.
Alas my Lord that is a desperate course,
They have begirt you round about the house:
Their meaning is to take you prisoner,
And so to send your body unto France.
First shall the Ocean be as dry as sand,
Before alive they send me unto France:
Isle have my body first bored like a Sieve,
And die as Hector, against the Myrmidons,
Ear France shall boast Bedfordes their prisoner,
Treacherous France that against the law of arms:
Hath here betrayed thy enemy to death,
But be assured my blood shall be revenged,
Upon the best lives that remains in France,
Stand back, or else thou run'st upon thy death.
Pardon my Lord, I come to tell your honour,
That they have hired a Neopolitan:
Who by his Oratory hath promised them,
Without the shedding of one drop of blood,
Into their hands safe to deliver you,
And therefore craves none but himself may enter,
And a poor swain that attends on him.
A Neopolitan bid him come in,
Were he as cunning in his Eloquence:
As Cicero the famous man of Rome,
His words would be as chafe against the wind,
Sweete-tong'd Ulisses that made Aiaxe mad;
Were he and his tongue in this speakers head,
Alive he wins me not, then tic no conquest dead.
Sir are you the moister of the house,
I am sir.
By this same token you must leave this place,
And leave none but the Earl and I together,
And this my Peasant here to tend on vs.
With al my hart, God grant, you doe some good.
Now sir, whats your will with me?
Intends your honour, not to yield your self:
No good man goose, not while my sword doth last,
Is this your eloquence for to persuade me.
My Lord my eloquence is for to save you,
I am not as you judge a Neopolitan:
But Cromwell your servant, and an Englishman.
How Cromwell, not my Farriers son.
The same sir, and am come to succour you.
Yes faith sir, and I am Hodge, your poor Smith,
Many a time and oft, have I shooed your Dapper Gray.
And what avails it me that thou art here.
It may avail if you'll be ruled by me,
My Lord you know the men of Mantua;
And these Bononians are at deadly strife,
And they my Lord, both love and honour you,
Could you but get out of the Mantua port,
Then were you safe despite of all their force.
Tut man thou talk of things impossible,
Dost thou not see that we are round beset:
How then is it possible, we should escape.
By force we cannot, but by policy,
Put on the apparel here that Hodge doth wear,
And give him yours: the States they know you not,
For as I think they never saw your face,
And at a watch-word must I call them in,
And will desire, that we safe may pass
To Mantua, where Isle say my business lies,
How doth your Honour like of this devise?
O wondrous good: But wilt thou venture Hodge?
Will I O noble Lord, I do accord, in any thing I can,
And do agree, to set thee free, do fortune what she can.
Come then lets change our apparel straight.
Go Hodge make hast, least they chance to call.
I warrant you isle fit him with a suit. Exit Earl &amp; Hodge.
Heavens grant this policy doth take success,
And that the Earl may safely scope away.
And yet it grieves me for this simple wretch,
For fear they should offer him violence,
But of two evils, tic best to shun the greatest,
And better is it that he lives in thrall,
Then such a Noble Earl as he should fall.
Their stubborn harts, it may be will relent:
Since he is gone, to whom their hate is bent,
My Lord have you dispatched.
How dost thou like vs Cromwell, is it well?
O my Lord excellent, Hodge how dost feel thy self?
How do I feel my self, why as a Noble man should do
O how I feel honour come creeping on,
My Nobility is wonderful melancholy:
Is it not most Gentleman like to be melancholy,
Yes Hodge, now go sit down in his study.
And take state upon thee.
I warrant you my Lord, let me alone to take state upon
me: but hark you my Lord, do you feel nothing bite about you?
No trust me Hodge.
I they know they want their pasture; its a strange thing of this vermin, they dare not meddle with Nobility.
Go take thy place Hodge, Isle call them in.
All is done, enter and if you please.
What have you won him? will he yield himself?
I have ante please you, and the quiet Earl,
Doth yield himself to be disposed by you.
Give him the money that we promised him,
So let him go, whether it please himself.
My business sir lies unto Mantua,
Please you to give me safe conduct thither.
Go and conduct him to the Mantua Port,
And see him safe delivered presently. 
Go draw the curtains, let vs see the Earl,
O he is writing, stand apart a while.
Fellow William, I am not as I have been, I went from you a Smith, I write to you as a Lord: I am at this present writing, among the Polonyan Casiges. I do commend my Lordship to Raphe &amp; to Roger, to Bridget &amp; to Doritie, &amp; so to all the youth of Putnay.
Sure these are the names of English Noblemen,
Some of his special friends, to whom he writes:
But stay he doth address himself to sing. 
My Lord I am glad you are so frolic and so blithe,
Believe me noble Lord if you know all,
Your change your merry vain to sudden sorrow.
I change my merry vain, no thou Bononian, no,
I am a Lord and therefore let me go,
And doe defy thee and thy Sasigis,
Therefore stand off, and come not near my honour.
My Lord this jesting cannot serve your turn.
Dost think thou black Bononyan beast,
That I doe flout, doe gibe or jest,
No, no, thou Bear pot, know that I, a noble Earl a Lord pardie.
What means this Trumpets sound.
One come from the States of Mantua.
What would you with vs speak, thou man of Mantua?
Men of Bononia: this my message is,
To let you know the Noble Earl of Bedford:
Is safe within the town of Mantua,
And wills you send the peasant that you have,
Who hath deceived your expectation,
Or else the States of Mantua have vowed:
They will recall the truce that they have made,
And not a man shall stir, from forth your town,
That shall return unless you send him back.
O this misfortune how it mads my hart,
The Neopolitan hath beguiled vs all;
Hence with this fool: what shall we do with him,
The Earl being gone a plague upon it all.
No isle assure you I am no Earl, but a smith sir,
One Hodge, a smith at Putnay sir:
One that hath gulled you, that hath bored you sir.
Away with him, take hence the fool you came for.
I sir: and isle leave the greater fool with you.
Farewell Bononians, come friend a long with me,
My friend before, my Lordship will follow thee.
Well Mantua, since by thee the Earl is lost,
Within few days I hope to see thee crossed.
Thus far you see how Cromwelles fortune passed,
The Earl of Bedford being safe in ????????????
Desires Cromwells company into France,
To make requital for his ?????????,
But Cromwell doth deny the Earl his suit:
And tells him that those parts he meant to see,
He had not yet set footing on the land,
And so directly takes his way to Spain:
The Earl to France, and so they both do part,
Now let your thoughts as swift as is the wind,
Skip some few years, that Cromwell spent in travel,
And now imagine him to be in England:
Servant unto the moister of the Roules,
Wherein short time where he began to flourish,
An hour shall show you what few years did cherish.
Come sirs, be careful of your masters credit,
And as our bounty now exceeds the figure
Of common entertainment: so do you
With looks as free, as is your masters soul,
Give former welcome to the thronged tables,
That shall receive the Cardinals followers.
And the attendants of the Lord Chancellor.
But all my care Cromwell depends on thee,
Thou art a man, differing from vulgar form,
And by how much thy spirit is ranked above these,
In rules of Art, by so much it shines brighter by travel,
Whose observance pleads his merit,
In a most learned, yet vnaffecting spirit,
Good Cromwell cast an eye of fair regard,
Bout all my house, and what this ruder flesh,
Through ignorance, or wine, do miscreate,
Salve thou with courtesy: if welcome want,
Full bowls, and ample banquets will seem scant.
Sir, what soever lies in me,
Assure I will show my utmost duty.
About it then, the Lords will straight be here,
Cromwell, thou hast those parts would rather suit,
The service of the state, then of my house,
I look upon thee with a loving eye,
That one day will prefer thy destiny.
Sir the Lords be at hand,
They are welcome, bid Cromwell straight attend vs,
And look you all things be in perfect readiness.
O sir Christopher you are too liberal, what a banquet to?
My Lords if words could show, the ample welcome,
That my free hart affords you, I could then become a praetor:
But I now must deal like a feast Politician,
With your Lordshippes, defer your welcome till the banquet end,
That it may then salve our defect of fair:
Yet Welcome now and all that tend on you.
Thanks to the kind moister of the Roules,
Come and sit down, sit down sir Thomas Moore:
Tic strange, how that we and the Spaniard differ,
Their dinner, is our banquet after dinner,
And they are men of active disposition,
This I gather, that by their sparing meat:
Their body is more fitter for the wars,
And if that famine chance to pinch their mawes,
Being used to fast it breeds less palne.
Fill me some Wine: Isle answer Cardinal Wolsay:
My Lord we Spaniards are of more freer souls,
Then hungerstarued, and ill complexioned spaniards,
They that are rich in Spain, spare belly food;
To deck their backs with an Italian hood,
And Silks of Civil: And the poorest Snake,
That feeds on Lemmons, Pilchers, and near heated
His pallet with sweet flesh, will bear a case,
More fat and gallant, then his starved face,
Pride, the Inquisition, and this belly evil,
Are in my judgment, Spaines three headed devil.
Indeed it is a plague unto their nation,
And stager after in blind imitation.
My Lords with welcome, I present your Lordships
A solemn health.
I love health well, but when healths doe bring,
Pain to the head, and bodies surfeting:
Then cease I healths: nay spill not friend,
For though the drops be small,
Yet have they force, to force men to the wall.
Sir Christopher is that your man.
And like your grace he is a Scholar and a Lingest,
One that hath travelled many parts of Christendom my Lord.
My friend come nearer, have you been a traveller.
My Lord I have added to my knowledge, the lo Countries,
France, Spain, Germanie, and Italy:
And though small gain, of profit I did find,
Yet did it please my eye, content my mind.
What doe you think of the several states,
And princes Courts as you have travelled.
My Lord no Court with England may compare,
Neither for state nor civil government:
Lust dwells in France, in Italy, and Spain,
From the poor peasant to the Princes train,
In Germanie, and Holland riot serves,
And he that most can drink, most he deserves:
England I praise not: for I here was borne,
But that she laughs the others unto scorn.
My Lord there dwells within that spirit,
More then can be discerned by outward eye,
Sir Cristopher will you part with your man.
I have sought to proffer him to your Lordship,
And now I see he hath preferred himself.
What is thy name.
Cromwell my Lord.
Then Cromwell here we make thee Solicitor of our causes,
And nearest next our self:
Gardiner give you kind welcome to the man.
My Lord you are a royal Winer,
Hath got a man besides your bounteous dinner,
Well Knight, pray we come no more:
If we come often, or shut up thy door.
Sir Christopher hottest had thou given me,
Half thy lands: thou coldest not have pleased me:
So much as with this man of thine,
My infant thoughts do spell:
Shortly his fortune shall be lifted higher,
True industry doth kindle honours fire,
And so kind moister of the Roules farewell.
Cromwell farewell.
Cromwell takes his leave of you,
That near will leave to love and honour you.
Now Cromwells highest fortunes doth begin, 
Wolsay that loved him as he did his life:
Committed all his treasure to his hands,
VVolsay is dead, and Gardiner his man,
Is now created Bishop of UUinchestor:
Pardon if we omit all UUolsayes life,
Because our play depends on Cromwelles death,
Now sit and see his highest state of all;
His height of rising: and his sudden fall,
Pardon the errors is all ready past,
And live in hope the best doth come at last:
My hope upon your favour doth depend,
And look to have your liking ere the end.
Moister Cromwell since Cardinal VVolsayes death,
His majesty is given to understand:
Theres certain bills and writings in your hand,
That much concerns the state of England,
My Lord of VVinchester is it not so.
My Lord of Norfolk, we two wear meanwhile fellows,
And moister Cromwell, though our masters love:
Did bind vs, while his love was to the King,
It is no boot now to deny these things,
Which may be preiuditiall to the state:
And though that God hath raised my fortune hyer,
Then any way I looked for, or deserved.
Yet my life no longer with me dwell,
Then I prove true unto my Sovereign:
What say you moister Cromwell? have you those writings, I, or no?
Here are the writings, and upon my knees,
I give them up, unto the worthy Dukes,
Of Suffolk, and of Norffolke: he was my Moister,
And each virtuous part,
That lived in him, I tendered with my hart,
But what his head complotted against the state.
My countries love commands me that to hate:
His sudden death I grieve for, not his fall,
Because he sought to work my countries thrall.
Cromwell, the King shall here of this thy duty,
Whom I assure my self will well reward thee:
My Lord lets go unto his Majesty,
And show these writings which he longs to see.
How now, whose this Cromwell?
By by soul, welcome to England:
Thou once did save my life, did not Cromwell?
If I did so, it is greater glory for me, that you remember it,
Then of my self vainly to report it.
Well Cromwell, now is the time,
I shall commend thee to my Sovereign:
Cheer up thy self, for I will raise thy state,
A Russell yet was never found ingrate???
O how uncertain is the wheel of state,
Who lately greater then the Cardinal,
For fear, and love: and now who lower lies?
Gay honours are but Fortunes flatteries,
And whom this day, pride and promotion swells,
To morrow, envy and ambition quills.
Who sees the Cob-web entangle the poor Fly,
May boldly say the wretches death is nigh.
I know his state and proud ambition,
Was too too violent to last ouer-long.
Who soars too near the sun with golden wings,
Melts them, to ruin his own fortune brings.
Cromwell kneel down in king Henries name,
Arise sir Thomas Cromwell, thus begins thy fame.
Cromwell the majesty of England,
For the good liking he conceives of thee:
Makes thee moister of the jewel house,
Chief Secretary to himself, and with all,
Creates thee one of his highness privy Counsel.
Where is sir Thomas Cromwell is he knighted,
He is my Lord.
Then to add honour to his name,
The King creates him Lord keeper of his privy Seal:
And moister of the Roules,
Which you sir Christopher do now enjoy;
The King determines higher place for you.
My Lords, these honours are too high for my desert,
O content thee man, who would not choose it,
Yet thou art wise in seeming to refuse it.
Here is honours, titles, and ????????????,
I fear this climbing, will have ???????????????
Then come my Lords, lets altogether bring,
This new made Counsellor to Englands King.
But Gardiner means his glory shall be dimde:
Shall Cromwell live a greater man then I,
My envy with his honour now is bred,
I hope to shorten Cromwell by the head.
O Friskiball, what shall become of thee?
Where shalt thou go, or which way shalt thou turn,
Fortune that turns her too inconstant wheel,
Hath turned thy wealth and riches in the Sea,
All parts abroad where ever I have been,
Grows weary of me, and denies me succour,
My debtors they, that should relieve my want,
Forswears my money, says they owe me none:
They know my state too mean, to bear out law,
And here in London, where I oft have been,
And have done good to many a wretched man,
Am now most wretched here, despised my self,
In vain it is, more of their hearts to try,
Be patient therefore, lay thee down and die.
Come Join, come, lets see what heel doe for vs now? Iwis we have done for him, when many a time and often he might have gone a hungry to bed.
Alas man, now he is made a Lord, heel never look upon vs, heel fulfil the old Proverb: Set Beggars a horse-backe, and theile ride: A welli day for my Cow, such as he, hath made vs come behind hand, we had never pound our Cow else to pay our rent.
Well Join heel come this way: and by Gods dickers isle tell him roundly of it, and if hee were ten Lords: a shall know that I had not my Cheese and my Bacon for no???thing.
Doe you remember husband how hee would much up my Cheese cakes, he hath forgot this now, but weal remem???ber him.
I we shall have now three flappes with a Fox tail: but I faith isle gibber a joint, but isle tell him his own: staye who comes here, O stand up here hee comes, stand up.
Come away with these beggars here, rise up sir,
Come out the good people: run before there ho.
I wee are kicked away now, wee come for our own, the time hath been he would a looked more friend???lye upon vs: And you Hodge, we know you well enough though you are so fine.
Come hither sirrah, stay what men are these,
My honest Host of Hounslow, and his wife:
I owe thee money father, do I not.
I by the body of me do thou, would thou would paye me, good four pound it is, I have a the post at home.
I know tic true, sir give him ten Angels,
And look your wife, and you do stay to dinner:
And while you live: I freely give to you,
Four pound a year, for the four pound I ought you.
Art not changed, art old Tom still,
Now God bless the good Lord Tom:
Home Join home, isle dine with my Lord Tom to day,
And thou shalt come next week,
Fetch my Cow, home Join, home.
Now God bless thee, my good Lord Tom,
Isle fetch my Cow presently.
Sir, go to yon stranger, tell him I desire him
Stay at dinner, I must speak with him;
My Lord of Norffolke: see you this same bubble,
That same puff, but mark the end, my Lord mark the end.
I promise you, I like not something he hath done,
But let that pass, the King doth love him well.
God morrow to my Lord of Winchester,
I know you bear me hard, about the Abbie lands.
Have I not reason, when religion is wronged,
You had no colour for what you have done.
Yes the abolishing of Antichrist,
And of this Popish order from our Realm:
I am no enemy to religion,
But what is done, it is for Englands good,
What did they serve for but to feed a sort:
Oflazie Abbots, and of full fed Fryers,
They neither plow, nor sow, and yet they reap,
The fat of all the Land, and suck the poor:
Look what was theirs, is in King Henries hands,
His wealth before lay in the Abbie lands.
Indeed these things you have aledged my Lord,
When God doth know the infant yet unborn:
Will curse the time, the Abbeys were pulled down,
I pray now where is hospitality,
Where now may poor distressed people go:
For to relieve their need, or rest their bones,
When weary travel doth oppress their limbs,
And where religious men should take them in,
Shall now be kept back with a Mastiff dog,
And thousand thousand.
O my Lord no more: things past redress,
Tic bootless to complain.
What shall we to the Convocation house.
Weal fellow you my Lord, pray lead the way.
How, one Cromwell made Lord Keeper since I left Putnay
And dwelt in Yorkshire, I never hard better news:
Isle see that Cromwell, or it shall go hard.
My aged father: state set aside,
Father on my knee I crave your blessing:
One of my servants go and have him in,
At better leisure will we talk with him.
Now if I die, how happy were the day,
To see this comfort rains forth showers of joy.
This duty in him shows a kind of grace,
Go on before for time draws on apace.
I wonder what this Lord would have with me,
His man so strictly gave me charge to stay:
I never did offend him to my knowledge,
Well, good or bad, I mean to bide it all,
Worse then I am, now never can befall.
Come wife I take it be almost dinner time,
For moister Newton, and moister Crosbie sent to me:
Last night, they would come dine with me,
And take their bond in: I pray thee hie thee home,
And see that all things be in readiness.
They shall be welcome, husband isle go before,
But is not that man moister Friskiball:
O heavens it is kind moister Friskiball,
Say sir, what hap hath brought you to this pass.
The same that brought you to your misery.
Why would you not acquaint me with your state,
Is Banister your poor friend quite forgot:
Whose goods, whose love, whose life and all is yours.
I thought your usage would be as the rest,
That had more kindness at my hands then you,
Yet looked asconce, when as they saw me poor:
If Banister should bear so base a hart,
I never would look my husband in the face,
But hate him as I would a Cockatrise.
And well thou might, should Banister deal so,
Since that I saw you sir, my state is mended:
And for the thousand pound I owe to you,
I have it ready, for you sir at home,
And though I grieve your fortune is so bad:
Yet that my hap's to help you, makes me glad,
And now sir will it please you walk with me.
Not yet I cannot, for the Lord Chancellor,
Hath here commanded me to weight on him,
For what I know not: pray God tic for my good.
Never make doubt, of that isle warrant you,
He is as kind a noble gentleman:
As ever did possess the place he hath.
Sir my brother is his steward if you please,
Weal go along, and bear you company:
I know we shall not want for welcome there.
Withal my hart: but whats become of Bagot.
He is hanged, for buying jewels of the Kings.
A just reward for one so impious,
The time draws on, sir will you go along.
Isle follow you kind moister Friskiball.
Now moister Crosbie, I see you have a care,
To keep your word, in payment of your money.
By my faith I have reason upon a bond,
Three thousand pound is too much to forfeit,
Yet I doubt not Moister Banister.
By my faith your sum is more then mine,
And yet I am not much behind you too,
Considering that to day I paid at court.
Mass and well remembered:
Whats the reason the Lord Cromwels men,
We are such long skirts upon their coats,
They reach almost down to their very ham.
I will resolve you sir, and thus it is;
The Bishop of Winchester, that loves not Cromwell,
As great men are envied, as well as less.
A while ago there was a jar between them,
And it was brought to my Lord Cromwels ear,
That Bishop Gardiner would sit on his skirt,
Upon which word, he made his men long Blew coats,
And in the Court wore one of them himself:
And meeting with the Bishop, quoth he, my Lord
Here's skirt enough now for your Grace to sit on,
Which vexed the Bishop to the very hart,
This is the reason why they wear long coats.
Tic always seen, and mark it for a rule,
That one great man will envy still another:
But tic a thing that nothing concerns me:
What shall we now to Moister Banisters?
I come, weal pay him royally for our dinner.
Uncover there Gentlemen.
My noble Lords of Suffolk and of Bedford,
Your honours welcome to poor Cromwels house:
Where is my father? nay be covered Father,
Although that duty to these noble men, doth challenge it
Yet Isle make bold with them.
Your head doth bear the calendar of care:
What Cromwell covered, and his Father bare,
It must not be. Now sir to you,
Is not your name Friskiball and a Florentine.
My name was Friskiball, till cruel fate,
Did rob me of my name and of my state.
What fortune brought you to this country now?
All other parts hath left me succorlesse,
Save only this, because of debts I have,
I hope to gain for to relieve my want.
Did you not once upon your Florence bridge,
Help two distressed men, robbed by the Bandetro,
His name was Cromwell?
I never made my brain a calender of any good I did,
I always loved this nation with my heart.
I am that Cromwell that you there relieved,
Sixteen Ducats you gave me for to cloth me,
Sixteen to bear my charges by the way,
And sixteen more I had for my horse hier,
There be those several sums justly returned,
Yet with injustice, serving at my need,
And to repay them without interest,
Therefore receive of me these four several bags,
In each of them there is four hundred mark,
And bring me the names of all your debitors,
And if they will not see you paid, I will:
O God forbid, that I should see him fall,
That helped me in my greatest need of all:
Here stands my Father that first gave me life,
Alas what duty is too much for him:
This man in time of need did save my life,
And therefore cannot do too much for him.
By this old man I often times was fed,
Else might I have gone supperless to bed.
Such kindness have I had of these three men,
That Cromwell no way can repay again:
Now in to dinner, for we stay too long,
And to good stomachs is no greater wrong.
Sir, where be those men I caused to stay?
They do attend your pleasure sir within.
Bid them come hither, and stay you without,
For by those men, the Fox of this same land,
That makes a Goose of better then himself,
Weal worie him unto his latest home,
Or Gardiner will fail in his intent.
As for the Dukes of Suffolk and of Norffolke,
Whom I have sent for to come speak with me,
Howsoever outwardly they shadow it.
Yet in their hearts I know they love him not:
As for the Earl of Bedford he is but one,
And dares not gainsay what we do set down:
Now my friends, you know I saved your lives,
When by the law you had deserved death,
And then you promised me upon your oaths,
To venture both your lives to do me good.
We swore no more, then that we will perform.
I take your words, and that which you must do,
Is service for you God, and for your King,
To root a rebel from this flourishing land,
One thats an enemy unto the Church:
And therefore must you take your solemn oaths,
That you heard Cromwell the Lord Chancellor,
Did wish a dagger at King Henries hart:
Fear not to swear it, for I hard him speak it,
Therefore weal shield you from ensuing harms.
If you will warrant vs the deed is good,
Weal undertake it.
Kneel down, and I will here absolve you both,
This Crucifix I lay upon your head,
And sprinckle holy-water on your brows,
The deed is meritorious that you do,
And by it shall you purchase grace from heaven.
Now sir weal undertake it by our souls.
For Cromwell never loved none of our sort.
I know he doth not, and for both of you,
I will prefer you to some place of worth:
Now get you in, until I call for you,
For presently the Dukes means to be here. 
Cromwell sit fast, thy time's not long to reign,
The Abbeys that were pulled down by thy means,
Is now a mean for me to pull thee down:
Thy pride upon thy own head lights upon,
For thou art he hath changed religion:
But now no more, for here the Dukes are come.
Goodden to my Lord Bishop.
How fares my Lord? what are you all alone?
No not alone my Lords, my mind is troubled:
I know your honours muse wherefore I sent,
And in such hast: What came you from the King?
We did, and left none but Lord Cromwell with him.
O what a dangerous time is this we live in,
Theres Thomas Wolsay, hes already gone,
And Thomas Moore, he followed after him:
Another Thomas yet there doth remain,
That is far worse then either of those twain,
And if with speed my Lords we not pursue it,
I fear the King and all the land will rue it.
Another Thomas, pray God it be not Cromwell.
My Lord of Bedford, it is that traitor Cromwell.
Is Cromwell false, my hart will never think it.
My Lord of Winchester, what likelihood,
Or proof have you of this his treachery.
My Lord too much, call in the men within, 
These men my Lord upon their oaths affirm,
That they did here Lord Cromwell in his garden,
Wished a dagger sticking at the hart,
Of our King Henrie, what is this but treason?
If it be so, my hart doth bleed with sorrow.
How say you friends, what did you here these words?
We did and like your grace.
In what place was Lord Cromwell when he spake them?
In his Garden, where we did attend a suit,
Which we had waited for two year and more.
How long first since you heard him speak these words?
Some half year since???
How chance that you concealed it all this time?
His greatness made vs fear, that was the cause,
I, I, his greatness thats the cause indeed,
And to make his treason here more manifest,
He calls his servants to him round about,
Tells them of Wolsayes life, and of his fall,
Says that himself hath many enemies,
And gives to some of them a Park or Manor,
To others Leases, Lands to other some:
What need he doe thus in his prime of life,
And if he were not fearful of his death.
My Lord these likelihoods are very great.
Pardon me Lords, for I must needs depart,
Their proofs are great, but greater is my heart.
My friends take heed of that which you have said,
Your souls must answer what your tongues reports:
Therefore take heed, be wary what you doe.
My Lord we speak no more but truth.
Let them depart my Lord of Winchester,
Let these men be close kept,
Until the day of trial.
They shall my Lord??? hoe take in these two men, 
My Lords, if Cromwell have a public trial,
That which we do, is void by his denial:
You know the king will credit none but him.
Tic true, he rules the King even as he pleases.
How shall we do for to attach him then.
Marie my Lords thus, by an Act he made himself,
With an intent to entrap some of our lives,
And this it is: If any Councellor
Be convicted of high treason,
He shall be executed without a public trial,
This Act my Lords he caused the King to make.
A did indeed, and I remember it,
And now it is like to fall upon himself.
Let vs not slack it, tic for Englands good,
We must be wary, else heel go beyond vs.
Well hath your Grace said my Lord of Norffolke
Therefore let vs presently to Lambeth,
Thither comes Cromwell from the Court to night,
Let vs arest him, send him to the Tower,
And in the morning, cut off the traitors head.
Come then about it, let vs guard the town,
This is the day that Cromwell must go down.
Along my Lords, well Cromwell is half dead,
He shaked my hart, but I will shave his head.
My soul is like a water troubled,
And Gardiner is the man that makes it so,
O Cromwell I do fear thy end is near:
Yet Isle prevent their malice if I can,
And in good time, see where the man doth come,
Who little knows how nears his day of dome.
Your well encountered my good Lord of Bedford,
I see your honour is addressed to talk,
Pray pardon me, I am sent for to the king,
And do not know the business yet my self,
So fare you well, for I must needs be gone.
You must, well what remedy,
I fear too soon you must be gone indeed,
The king hath business, but little doest thou know,
Whose busy for thy life: thou thinks not so.
The second time well met my Lord of Bedford,
I am very sorry that my hast is such,
Lord Marks Dorset being ????????? to death,
I must receive of ????????? the ????????? seal
At Lambeth, soon my Lord weal talk our fill,
How smooth and easy is the way to death.
My Lord the dukes of Norfolk and of Suffolk,
Accompanied with the Bishop of Winchester,
Entreats you to come presently to Lambeth,
On earnest matters that concerns the state.
To Lambeth, so: go fetch me pen and ink,
I and Lord Cromwell there shall talk enough,
I and our last I fear and if he come, 
Hear take this letter, and bear it to Lord Cromwell,
Bid him read it, say it concerns him near,
Away begone, make all the hast you can,
To Lambeth do I go a woeful man.
Is the Barge ready I will straight to Lambeth,
And if this one days business once were past,
I'd take my ease to morrow after trouble,
How now my friend would thou speak with me.
Sir hears a letter from my Lord of Bedford.
O good my friend commend me to thy Lord,
Hold take those Angels, drink them for thy pains.
He doth desire your grace to read it,
Because he says it doth concern you near.
Bid him assure himself of that, farewell,
Tomorrow tell him shall he hear from me,
Set on before there, and away to Lambeth.
Halberds stand close unto the water side,
Sergeant at arms be bold in your office,
Herald deliver your proclamation.
This is to give notice to all the kings subjects
The late Lord Cromwell Lord Chancellor of England,
Visor general over the realm,
Him to hold and esteem as a traitor,
Against the Crown and dignity of England,
So God save the king.
Amen.
Amen, and root thee from the land,
For whilst thou lives truth cannot stand.
Make a lane there, the traitors at hand,
Keep back Cromwels men,
Drown them if they come on, Sergeant your office.
What means my Lord of Norfolk by these words,
Sirs come along.
Kill them if they come on.
Lord Cromwell in king Henries name,
I do arrest your honour of high treason.
Sergeant me of treason.
Kill them if they draw a sword.
Hold I charge you, as you love me draw not a sword,
Who dares accuse Cromwell of treason now.
This is no place to reckon up your crime,
Your Doue-like looks were viewed with serpents eyes,
With serpents eyes indeed, by thine they were,
But Gardiner do thy worst, I fear thee not,
My faith compared with thine as much shall pass,
As doth the Diamond excel the glass:
Attached of treason, no accusers by,
Indeed what tongue dares speak so soul a lie.
My Lord, my Lord, matters are too well known,
And it is time the king had note thereof.
The king, let me go to him face to face,
No better trial I desire then that,
Let him but say that Cromwels faith was feigned,
Then let my honour, and my name be stained:
If ever my hart against my king was set,
O let my soul in Judgment answer it,
Then if my faiths confirmed with his reason,
Against whom hath Cromwell then committed treason,
My Lord your matter shall be tried,
Mean time, with patience content your self.
Perforce I must with patience be content,
O dear friend Bedford doest thou stand so near,
Cromwell rejoices one friend sheds a tear,
And whether first, which way must Cromwell now?
My Lord you must unto the tower,
Lieutenant take him to your charge.
Well where you please, yet before I part,
Let me confer a little with my men.
As you go by water so you shall.
I have some business present to impart.
You may not stay Lieutenant take your charge.
Well, well my Lord, you second Gardeners text,
Norfolk farewell, thy turn will be the next.
His guilty conscience makes him rave my Lord.
I let him talk his time is short enough.
My Lord of Bedford, come you weep for him,
That would not shed half a tear for you.
It grieves me for to see his sudden fall.
Such success wish I to traitors still.
Why? can this news be true first possible,
The great Lord Cromwell arrested upon treason,
I hardly will believe it can be so,
It is too true sir, would it were otherwise,
Condition I spent half the wealth I had,
I was at Lambeth, saw him there arrested,
And afterword committed to the Tower.
What wast for treason that he was committed?
Kind noble Gentleman, I may rue the time,
All that I have, I did enjoy by him,
And if he die, then all my state is gone.
It may be doubted that he shall not die,
Because the King did favour him so much.
O sir, you are deceived in thinking so,
The grace and favour he had with the king,
Hath caused him have so many enemies:
He that in court secure will keep himself,
Must not be great, for then he is envied at.
The Shrub is safe, when as the Cedar shakes,
For where the King doth love aboue compare,
Of others they as much more envied are.
Tic pity that this noble man should fall,
He did so many charitable deeds.
Tic true, and yet you see in each estate,
Theres none so good, but some one doth him hate.
And they before would smile him in the face,
Will be the foremost to do him disgrace:
What will you go along unto the Court?
I care not if I do, and here the news.
How men will judge what shall become of him.
Some will speak hardly, some will speak in pity,
Go you to the Court, Isle unto the City,
There I am sure to here more news then you.
Why then soon will we meet again.
Now Cromwell hast thou time to meditate,
And think upon thy state, and of the time,
Thy honours came unsought, I and unlooked for,
Thy fall as sudden, and unlooked for to,
What glory was in England that I had not,
Who in this land commanded more then Cromwell,
Except the King who greater then my self,
But now I see, what after ages shall,
The greater man, more sudden is their fall.
And now I do remember the Earl of Bedford
Was very desirous for to speak to me,
And afterword sent to me a letter,
The which I think I have still in my pocket,
Now may I read it, for I now have leisure,
And this I take it is.
My Lord come not this night to Lambeth,
For if you do, your state is overthrown.
And much I doubt your life, and if you come:
Then if you love your self, stay where you are.
O God had I but read this letter,
Then had I been free from the Lions paw,
Deferring this, to read until to morrow,
I spurnd at joy, and did embrace my sorrow. 
Now moister Lieutenant, when's this day of death.
Alas my Lord would I might never see it,
Here are the Dukes of Suffolk and of Norffolke,
Winchester, Bedford, and sir Richard Ratcliffe,
With others, but why they come I know not.
No matter wherefore, Cromwell is prepared,
For Gardiner has my state and life insnard,
Bid them come in, or you shall do them wrong,
For here stands he, whom some thinks lives too long,
Learning kills learning, and instead of Inck
To dip his Pen, Cromwels heart blood doth drink.
Good morrow Cromwell, what alone so sad.
One good among you, none of you are bad,
For my part, it best fits me be alone,
Sadness with me, not I with any one.
What is the king acquainted with my cause?
We have, and he hath answered vs my Lord.
How, shall I come to speak with him my self?
The King is so advertised of your guilt.
He will by no means admit you to his presence.
No way admit me, am I so soon forgot,
Did he but yesterday embrace my neck,
And said that Cromwell was even half himself,
And is his Princely ears so much bewitched
With scandolous ignomy, and slanderous speeches,
That now he doth deny to look on me,
Well my Lord of Winchester, no doubt but you,
Are much in favour with his Majesty,
Will you bear a letter from me to his grace?
Pardon me, isle bear no traitors letters.
Ha, will you do this kindness then?
Tell him by word of mouth, what I shall say to you.
That will I.
But on your honour will you?
I on my honour.
Bear witness Lords,
Tell him when he hath known you,
And tried your faith but half so much as mine,
Heel find you to be the falsest hearted man
In England: Pray tell him this.
Be patient good my Lord in these extremes.
My kind and honourable Lord of Bedford,
I know your honour always loved me well,
But pardon me, this still shall be my theme,

OPen your Ears: For which of you will stop
The vent of Hearing, when loud Rumour speaks?
I, from the Orient, to the drooping West
(Making the wind my Post-horse) still unfold
The Acts commenced on this Ball of Earth.
Upon my Tongue, continual Slanders ride,
The which, in every Language, I pronounce,
Stuffing the Ears of them with false Reports:
I speak of Peace, while covert Enmity
(Under the smile of Safety) wounds the World:
And who but Rumour, who but only I
Make fearful Masters, and prepared Defence,
Whilst the big year, swollen with some other griefs,
Is thought with child, by the sterne Tyrant, War,
And no such matter? Rumour, is a Pipe
Blown by Surmises▪ Jealousies, Conjectures;
And of so easy, and so plain a stop,
That the blunt Monster, with vncounted heads,
The still discordant, wavering Multitude,
Can play upon it. But what need I thus
My well-known Body to Anathemize
Among my household? Why is Rumour here?
I run before King Harries victory,
Who in a bloody field by Shrewsbury
Hath beaten down young Hotspurre, and his Troops,
Quenching the flame of bold Rebellion,
Even with the Rebels blood. But what mean I
To speak so true at first? My Office is
To noise abroad, that Harry Monmouth fell
Under the Wrath of Noble Hotspurres Sword:
And that the King, before the Douglas Rage
Stooped his Anointed head, as low as death.
This have I rumoured through the peasant-Townes,
Between the Royal Field of Shrewsbury,
And this Worme-eaten-Hole of ragged Stone.
Where Hotspurres Father, old Northumberland,
Lies crafty sick. The Posts come tyring on,
And not a man of them brings other news
Then they have learned of Me. From Rumours Tongues,
They bring smooth-Comforts-false, worse then True-wrongs.
Who keeps the Gate here ho•?
Where is the Earl?
What shall I say you are?
Tell thou the Earl
That the Lord Bardolf doth attend him here.
His Lordship is walked forth into the Orchard, Please it your Honour, knock but at the Gate, And he himself will answer.
Here comes the Earl.
What news Lord Bardolf? Every minute now
Should be the Father of some Stratagem;
The Times are wilde: Contention (like a Horse
Full of high Feeding) madly hath broke loose,
And bears down all before him.
Noble Earl,
I bring you certain news from Shrewsbury.
Good, and heaven will.
As good as heart can wish:
The King is almost wounded to the death:
And in the Fortune of my Lord your Son,
Prince Harry slain out-right: and both the Blunts.
Killed by the hand of Douglas. Young Prince Iohn,
And Westmerland, and Stafford, fled the Field.
And Harry Monmouth's Brawn (the Hulk Sir Iohn)
Is prisoner to your Son. O, such a Day,
(So fought, so followed, and so fairly won)
Came not, till now, to dignify the Times
Since Caesars Fortunes.
How is this derived?
Saw you the Field? Came you from Shrewsbury?
I spake with one (my L.) that came frō thence,
A Gentleman well bred, and of good name,
That freely rendered me these news for true.
Here comes my Servant Travers, whom I sent On Tuesday last, to listen after News.
My Lord, I ouer-rod him on the way,
And he is furnished with no certainties,
More then he (happily) may retail from me.
Now Travers, what good tidings comes frō you?
My Lord, Sir Iohn Ʋmfreuill turned me back
With joyful tidings; and (being better horsed)
Out-rod me. After him, came spurring head
A Gentleman (almost fore-spent with speed)
That stopped by me, to breath his bloodied horse.
He asked the way to Chester: And of him
I did demand what News from Shrewsbury:
He told me, that Rebellion had ill luck,
And that young Harry Percies Spur was cold.
With that he gave his able Horse the head,
And bending forwards struck his able heals
Against the panting sides of his poor Jade
Up to the Rowel head, and starting so,
He seemed in running, to devour the way,
Staying no longer question.
Ha? Again:
Said he young Harry Percyes Spur was cold?
(Of Hot-Spurre, cold-Spurre?) that Rebellion,
Had met ill luck?
My Lord: Isle tell you what,
If my young Lord your Son, have not the day,
Upon mine Honour, for a silken point
Isle give my Barony. Never talk of it.
Why should the Gentleman that rode by Travers
Give then such instances of Loss?
Who, he?
He was some hielding Fellow, that had stolen
The Horse he rode-on: and upon my life
Speak at adventure. Look, here comes more News.
Yea, this mans brow, like to a Title-leafe,
Fore-tels the Nature of a Tragic Volume:
So looks the Strond, when the Imperious Flood
Hath left a witnessed Usurpation.
Say Morton, did thou come from Shrewsbury?
I ran from Shrewsbury (my Noble Lord)
Where hateful death put on his ugliest Mask
To fright our party.
How doth my Son, and Brother?
Thou trembl'st; and the whiteness in thy Cheek
Is apter then thy Tongue, to tell thy Errand.
Even such a man, so faint, so spiritless,
So dull, so dead in look, so woe-be-gone,
Drew Priams Curtain, in the dead of night,
And would have told him, Half his Troy was burned.
But Priam found the Fire, ere he his Tongue:
And I, my Percies death, ere thou report it.
This, thou would say: Your Son did thus, and thus:
Your Brother, thus. So fought the Noble Douglas,
Stopping my greedy ear, with their bold deeds.
But in the end (to stop mine Ear indeed)
Thou hast a Sigh, to blow away this Praise,
Ending with Brother, Son, and all are dead.
Douglas is living, and your Brother, yet:
But for my Lord, your Son.
Why▪ he is dead.
See what a ready tongue Suspicion hath:
He that but fears the thing, he would not know,
Hath by Instinct, knowledge from others Eyes,
That what he feared, is chanced. Yet speak (Morton)
Tell thou thy Earl, his Divination Lies,
And I will take it, as a sweet Disgrace,
And make thee rich, for doing me such wrong.
You are too great, to be (by me) gainsaid:
Your Spirit is too true, your Fears too certain.
Yet for all this, say not that Percies dead.
I see a strange Confession in thine Eye:
Thou shake thy head, and hold it Fear, or Sin,
To speak a truth. If he be slain, say so:
The Tongue offends not, that reports his death:
And he doth sin that doth belie the dead:
Not he, which says the dead is not alive:
Yet the first bringer of unwelcome News
Hath but a loosing Office: and his Tongue,
Sounds ever after as a sullen Bell
Remembered, knolling a departing Friend.
I cannot think (my Lord) your son is dead.
I am sorry, I should force you to believe
That, which I would to heaven, I had not seen.
But these mine eyes, saw him in bloody state,
Rend'ring faint quittance (wearied, and out-breath'd)
To Henrie Monmouth, whose swift wrath beat down
The neuer-daunted Percie to the earth,
From whence (with life) he never more sprung up.
In few; his death (whose spirit lent a fire,
Even to the dullest Peasant in his Camp)
Being bruited once, took fire and heate away
From the best tempered Courage in his Troops▪
For from his Mettle, was his Party steeled;
Which once, in him abated, all the rest
Turned on themselves, like dull and heavy Lead:
And as the Thing, that's heavy in it self,
Upon enforcement, flies with greatest speed,
So did our Men, heavy in Hotspurres loss,
Lend to this weight, such lightness with their Fear,
That Arrows fled not swifter toward their aim,
Then did our Soldiers (aiming at their safety)
Fly from the field. Then was that Noble Worcester
Too soon taken prisoner: and that furious Scot,
(The bloody Douglas) whose well-labouring sword
Had three times slain the appearance of the King,
Began veil his stomach, and did grace the shame
Of those that turned their backs: and in his flight,
Stumbling in Fear, was took. The sum of all,
Is, that the King hath won: and hath sent out
A speedy power, to encounter you my Lord,
Under the Conduct of young Lancaster
And Westmerland. This is the News at full.
For this, I shall have time enough to morn.
In Poison, there is Physic: and this news
(Having been well) that would have made me sick,
Being sick, have in some measure, made me well.
And as the Wretch, whose Feauer-weakned joints▪
Like strengthless Hindges, buckle under life,
Impatient of his Fit, breaks like a fire
Out of his keepers arms: Even so, my Limbs
(Weakened with grief) being now enraged with grief,
Are thrice themselves. Hence therefore thou nice crutch,
A scaly Gauntlet now, with joints of Steel
Must glove this hand. And hence thou sickly Quoife,
Thou art a guard too wanton for the head,
Which Princes, fleshed with Conquest, aim to hit.
Now bind my Brows with Iron, and approach
The ragged'st hour, that Time and Spite dare bring
To frown upon the enraged Northumberland.
Let Heaven kiss Earth: now let not Natures hand
Keep the wilde Flood confined: Let Order dye,
And let the world no longer be a stage
To feed Contention in a lingering Act:
But let one spirit of the First-borne Caine
Reign in all bosoms, that each heart being set
On bloody Courses, the rude Scene may end,
And darkness be the burier of the dead.
Sweet Earl, divorce not wisdom from your Honour.
The lives of all your loving Accomplices
Leane-on your health, the which if you give o'er
To stormy Passion, must perforce decay.
You cast the event of War (my Noble Lord)
And summed the account of Chance, before you said
Let vs make head: It was your presurmize,
That in the dole of blows, your Son might drop.
You knew he walked o'er perils, on an edge
More likely to fall in, then to get o'er:
You were advised his flesh was capable
Of Wounds, and Scars; and that his forward Spirit
Would lift him, where most trade of danger ranged,
Yet did you say go forth: and none of this
(Though strongly apprehended) could restrain
The stiffe-borne Action: What hath then befallen?
Or what hath this bold enterprise bring forth,
More then that Being, which was like to be?
We all that are engaged to this loss,
Knew that we ventured on such dangerous Seas,
That if we wrought out life, was ten to one:
And yet we ventured for the gain proposed,
Choked the respect of likely peril feared,
And since we are o're-set, venture again.
Come, we will all put forth; Body, and Goods,
It is more then time: And (my most Noble Lord)
I hear for certain, and do speak the truth:
The gentle Arch-bishop of York is up
With well appointed Powers: he is a man
Who with a double Surety binds his Followers.
My Lord (your Son) had only but the Corpse,
But shadows, and the shows of men to fight.
For that same word (Rebellion) did divide
The action of their bodies, from their souls,
And they did fight with queasiness, constrained
As men drink Potions; that their Weapons only
Seemed on our side: but for their Spirits and Souls,
This word (Rebellion) it had froze them up,
As Fish are in a Pond. But now the Bishop
Turns Insurrection to Religion,
Supposed sincere, and holy in his Thoughts:
He's followed both with Body, and with Mind:
And doth enlarge his Rising, with the blood
Of fair King Richard, scraped from Pomfret stones,
Derives from heaven, his Quarrel, and his Cause:
Tells them, he doth bestride a bleeding Land,
Gasping for life, under great Bullingbrooke,
And more, and less, do flock to follow him.
I knew of this before. But to speak truth,
This present grief had wiped it from my mind.
Go in with me, and council every man
The aptest way for safety, and revenge:
Get Posts, and Letters, and make Friends with speed,
Never so few, nor never yet more need.
Sir, you giant, what says the Doct. to my water?
He said sir, the water it self was a good healthy water: but for the party that owed it, he might have more diseases then he knew for.
Men of all sorts take a pride to gird at me: the brain of this foolish compounded Clay-man, is not able to invent any thing that tends to laughter, more then I invent, or is invented on me. I am not only witty in my self, but the cause that wit is in other men. I doe here walk before thee, like a Sow, that hath o'rewhelm'd all her Litter, but one. If the Prince put thee into my Ser∣vice for any other reason, then to set me off, why then I have no judgment. Thou whoreson Mandrake, thou art fitter to be worn in my cap, then to wait at my heals. I was never manned with an Agot till now: but I will set you neither in Gold, nor Silver, but in wild apparel, and send you back again to your Master, for a Jewel. The Juvenal (the Prince your Master) whose Chin is not yet fledged, I will sooner have a beard grow in the Palm of my hand, then he shall get one on his cheek: yet he will not stick to say, his Face is a Face-Royall. Heaven may finish it when he will, it is not a hair amiss yet: he may keep it still at a Face-Royall, for a Barber shall never earn six pence out of it; and yet he will be crowing, as if he had writ man ever since his Father was a Bachelor. He may keep his own Grace, but he is almost out of mine, I can assure him. What said M. Dombledon, about the Satin for my short Cloak, and Slops?
He said sir, you should procure him better Issue∣rance, then Bardolf: he wold not take his Bond &amp; yours, he liked not the Security.
Let him bee damned like the Glutton, may his Tongue be hotter, a whoreson Achitophel; a Rascally-yea-forsooth-knaue, to bear a Gentleman in hand, and then stand upon Security? The whoreson smooth-pates doe now wear nothing but high shoes, and bunches of Keys at their girdles: and if a man is through with them in ho∣nest Taking-vp, then they must stand upon Security: I had as lief they would put Rats-bane in my mouth, as offer to stop it with Security. I looked hee should have sent me two and twenty yards of Satin (as I am true Knight) and he sends me Security. Well, he may sleep in Security, for he hath the horn of Abundance: and the lightness of his Wife shines through it, and yet cannot he see, though he have his own Lantern to light him. Whore's Bardolf?
He's gone into Smithfield to buy your worship a horse.
I bought him in Paules, and he will buy me a horse in Smithfield. If I could get me a wife in the Stews, I were Manned, Horsed, and Wived.
Sir, here comes the Nobleman that committed the Prince for striking him, about Bardolf.
Wait close, I will not see him.
What's he that goes there?
Falstaff, and't please your Lordship.
He that was in question for the Robbery?
He my Lord, but he hath since done good service at Shrewsbury: and (as I hear) is now going with some Charge, to the Lord Iohn of Lancaster.
What to York? Call him back again.
Sir Iohn Falstaff.
Boy, tell him, I am deaf.
You must speak louder, my Master is deaf.
I am sure he is, to the hearing of any thing good.
Go pluck him by the Elbow, I must speak with him.
Sir Iohn.
What? a young knave and beg? Is there not wars? Is there not employment? Doth not the K. lack subjects? Do not the Rebels want Soldiers? Though it be a shame to be
on any side but one, it is worse shame to beg, then to be on the worst side, were it worse then the name of Re∣billion can tell how to make it.
You mistake me Sir.
Why sir? Did I say you were an honest man? Set∣ting my Knight-hood, and my Souldiership aside, I had lied in my throat, if I had said so.
I pray you (Sir) then set your Knighthood and your Souldier-ship aside, and give me leave to tell you, you lye in your throat, if you say I am any other then an honest man.
I give thee leave to tell me so? I lay aside that which grows to me? If thou got any leave of me, hang me: if thou take leave, thou were it better be hanged: you Hunt-counter, hence: Avaunt.
Sir, my Lord would speak with you.
Sir Iohn Falstaff, a word with you.
My good Lord: give your Lordship good time of the day. I am glad to see your Lordship abroad: I heard say your Lordship was sick. I hope your Lordship goes abroad by advise. Your Lordship (though not clean past your youth) hath yet some smack of age in you: some rel∣lish of the saltness of Time, and I most humbly beseech your Lordship, to have a reverend care of your health.
Sir Iohn, I sent you before your Expedition, to Shrewsbury.
If it please your Lordship, I hear his Majesty is returned with some discomfort from Wales.
I talk not of his Majesty: you would not come when I sent for you?
And I hear moreover, his Highness is fallen into this same whoreson Apoplexy.
Well, heaven mend him. I pray let me speak with you.
This Apoplexy is (as I take it) a kind of Lethar∣gie, a sleeping of the blood, a whoreson Tingling.
What tell you me of it? be it as it is.
It hath it original from much grief; from study and perturbation of the brain. I have read the cause of his effects in Galen. It is a kind of deafness.
I think you are fallen into the disease: For you hear not what I say to you.
Very well (my Lord) very well: rather an't please you) it is the disease of not Listening, the malady of not Marking, that I am troubled withal.
To punish you by the heals, would amend the attention of your ears, &amp; I care not if I be your Physician
I am as poor as Iob, my Lord; but not so Patient: your Lordship may minister the Potion of imprisonment to me, in respect of Poverty: but how I should bee your Patient, to follow your prescriptions, the wise may make some dram of a scruple, or indeed, a scruple it self.
I sent for you (when there were matters against you for your life) to come speak with me.
As I was then advised by my learned Council, in the laws of this Land-seruice, I did not come.
Well, the truth is (sir Iohn) you live in great infamy
He that buckles him in my belt, cānot live in less.
Your Means is very slender, and your wast great.
I would it were otherwise: I would my Means were greater, and my waste slenderer.
You have misled the youthful Prince.
The young Prince hath misled me. I am the Fell∣low with the great belly, and he my Dog.
Well, I am loath to gall a new-heal'd wound: your days service at Shrewsbury, hath a little gilded over your Nights exploit on Gads-hill. You may thank the unquiet time, for your quiet o're-posting that Action.
My Lord?
But since all is well, keep it so: wake not a sleeping Wolf.
To wake a Wolf, is as bad as to smell a Fox.
What? you are as a candle, the better part burnt out
A Wassell-Candle, my Lord; all Tallow: if I did say of wax, my growth would approve the truth.
There is not a white hair on your face, but should have his effect of gravity.
His effect of gravy, gravy, gravy.
You follow the young Prince up and down, like his evil Angel.
Not so (my Lord) your ill Angel is light: but I hope, he that looks upon me, will take me without, weighing: and yet, in some respects I grant, I cannot go: I cannot tell. Virtue is of so little regard in these Costor∣mongers, that true valour is turned Beare-heard. Pregnan∣cie is made a Tipster, and hath his quick wit wasted in giving Recknings: all the other gifts appertinent to man (as the malice of this Age shapes them) are not worth a Gooseberry. You that are old, consider not the capaci∣ties of vs that are young: you measure the heat of our Li∣uers, with the bitterness of your gals: &amp; we that are in the vaward of our youth, I must confess, are wags too.
Do you set down your name in the scroll of youth, that are written down old, with all the Charrac∣ters of age? Have you not a moist eye? a dry hand? a yale∣low cheek? a white beard? a decreasing leg? an increasing belly? Is not your voice broken? your wind short? your wit single? and every part about you blasted with Anti∣quity? and will you cal your self young? Fie, fie, fie, sir Iohn.
My Lord, I was borne with a white head, &amp; some∣thing a round belly. For my voice, I have lost it with hal∣lowing and singing of Anthems. To approve my youth farther, I will not: the truth is, I am only old in judge∣meant and understanding: and he that will caper with me for a thousand Marks, let him lend me the money, &amp; have at him. For the box of the ear that the Prince gave you, he gave it like a rude Prince, and you took it like a sense∣ble Lord. I have checked him for it, and the young Lion re∣pents: Marry not in ashes and sacke-cloath, but in new Silk, and old Sack.
Well, heaven send the Prince a better companion.
Heaven send the Companion a better Prince: I cannot rid my hands of him.
Well, the King hath severed you and Prince Har∣rye, I hear you are going with Lord Iohn of Lancaster, a∣against the Archbishop, and the Earl of Northumberland
Yes, I thank your pretty sweet wit for it: but look you pray, (all you that kiss my Lady Peace, at home) that our Armies join not in a hot day: for if I take but two shirts out with me, and I mean not to sweat ex∣traordinarily: if it bee a hot day, if I brandish any thing but my Bottle, would I might never spit white again: There is not a dangerous Action can peep out his head, but I am thrust upon it. Well, I cannot last ever.
Well, be honest, be honest, and heaven bless your Expedition.
Will your Lordship lend me a thousand pound, to furnish me forth?
Not a penny, not a penny: you are too impatient to bear crosses. Fare you well. Commend me to my Cousin Westmerland.
If I do, fillop me with a three-man-Beetle. A man can no more separate Age and Covetousness, then he can part young limbs and lechery: but the Gout galls the
one, and the pox pinches the other; and so both the De∣grees prevent my curses. Boy?
Sir.
What money is in my purse?
Seven groats▪ and two pence.
I can get no remedy against this Consumption of the purse. Borrowing only lingers, and lingers it out, but the disease is incurable. Go bear this letter to my Lord of Lancaster, this to the Prince, this to the Earl of Westmerland, and this to old Mistress Ʋrsula, whom I have weekly sworn to marry, since I perceived the first white hair on my chin. About it: you know where to find me. A pox of this Gout, or a Gout of this Pox: for the one or the other plays the rogue with my great toe: It is no matter, if I do halt, I have the wars for my colour, and my Pension shall seem the more reasonable. A good wit will make use of any thing: I will turn dis∣eases to commodity.
Thus have you heard our causes, &amp; know our Means:
And my most noble Friends, I pray you all
Speak plainly your opinions of our hopes,
And first (Lord Marshall) what say you to it?
I well allow the occasion of our Arms,
But gladly would be better satisfied,
How (in our Means) we should advance our selves
To look with forehead bold and big enough
Upon the Power and puisance of the King.
Our present Musters grow upon the File
To five and twenty thousand men of choice:
And our Supplies, live largely in the hope
Of great Northumberland, whose bosom burns
With an incensed Fire of Injuries.
The question then (Lord Hastings) stands thus
Whether our present five and twenty thousand
May hold-vp-head, without Northumberland:
With him, we may.
I marry, there's the point:
But if without him we be thought to feeble,
My judgment is, we should not step too far
Till we had his Assistance by the hand.
For in a Theme so bloody faced, as this,
Conjecture, Expectation, and Surmise
Of Aids uncertain, should not be admitted.
It is very true Lord Bardolf, for indeed
It was young Hotspurres case, at Shrewsbury.
It was (my Lord) who lived himself with hope,
Eating the ayre, on promise of Supply,
Flattering himself with Project of a power,
Much smaller, then the smallest of his Thoughts,
And so with great imagination
(Proper to mad men led his Powers to death,
And (winking) leaped into destruction.
But (by your leave) it never yet did hurt,
To lay down likely-hoods, and forms of hope.
Yes, if this present quality of war,
Indeed the instant action: a cause on foot,
Lives so in hope: As in an early Spring,
We see the appearing buds, which to prove fruit,
Hope gives not so much warrant, as Despair
That Frosts will bite them. When we mean to build,
We first survey the Plot, then draw the Model,
And when we see the figure of the house,
Then must we rate the cost of the Erection,
Which if we find out-weighes Ability,
What do we then, but draw anew the Model
In fewer offices? Or at least, desist
To build at all? Much more, in this great work,
(Which is (almost) to pluck a Kingdom down,
And set another up) should we survey
The plot of Situation, and the Model;
Consent upon a sure Foundation:
Question Surveyors, know our own estate,
How able such a Work to undergo,
To weigh against his Opposite? Or else,
We fortify in Paper, and in Figures,
Using the Names of men, instead of men:
Like one, that draws the Model of a house
Beyond his power to build it; who (half through)
Gives o'er, and leaves his part-created Cost
A naked subject to the Weeping Clouds,
And waste, for churlish Winters tyranny.
Grant that our hopes (yet likely of fair birth)
Should be still-borne, and that we now possessed
The utmost man of expectation:
I think we are a Body strong enough
(Even as we are) to equal with the King.
What is the King but five &amp; twenty thousand?
To vs no more: nay not so much Lord Bardolf.
For his divisions (as the Times do brawl)
Are in three Heads: one Power against the French,
And one against Glendower: Perforce a third
Must take up vs: So is the vnfirme King
In three divided: and his Coffers sound
With hollow Poverty, and Emptiness.
That he should draw his several strengths together
And come against vs in full puissance
Need not be dreaded.
If he should do so,
He leaves his back unarmed, the French, and Welch
Baying him at the heals: never fear that.
Who is it like should lead his Forces hither?
The Duke of Lancaster, and Westmerland:
Against the Welsh himself, and Harry Monmouth.
But who is substituted against the French,
I have no certain notice.
Let vs on:
And publish the occasion of our Arms.
The Common-wealth is sick of their own Choice,
Their ouer-greedy love hath surfeited:
An habitation giddy, and unsure
Hath he that builds on the vulgar heart.
O thou fond Many, with what loud applause
Did thou beat heaven with blessing Bullingbrooke,
Before he was, what thou would have him be?
And being now trimmed in thine own desires,
Thou (beastly Feeder) art so full of him,
That thou prouok'st thy self to cast him up.
So, so, (thou common Dog) did thou disgorge
Thy glutton-bosome of the Royal Richard,
And now thou would eat thy dead vomit up,
And howl to find it. What trust is in these Times?
They, that when Richard lived, would have him dye,
Are now become enamoured on his grave.
Thou that threw dust upon goodly head
When through proud London he came sighing on,
After the admired heals of Bullingbrooke,
Cri'st now, O Earth, yield vs that King again,
And take thou this (O thoughts of men accursed)
"Past, and to Come, seems best; things Present, worst.
Shall we go draw our numbers, and set on?
We are Times subjects, and Time bids, be gon.
Mr. Fang, have you entered the Action?
It is entered.
Wher's your Yeoman? Is it a lusty yeoman?
Will he stand to it?
Sirrah, whore's Snare?
I, I, good M. Snare.
Here, here.
Snare, we must Arrest Sir Iohn Falstaff.
I good M. Snare, I have entered him, and all.
It may chance cost some of vs our lives: he will stab
Alas the day: take heed of him: he stabbed me in mine own house, and that most beastly: he cares not what mischief he doth, if his weapon be out. Hee will foin like any devil, he will spare neither man, woman, nor child.
If I can close with him, I care not for his thrust.
No, nor I neither: Isle be at your elbow.
If I but fist him once: if he come but within my Vice.
I am undone with his going: I warrant he is an infinitiue thing upon my score. Good M. Fang hold him sure: good M. Snare let him not scope, he comes continue∣antly to pie-corner (saving your manhoods) to buy a sad∣dl, and hee is indicted to dinner to the Lubbers head in Lombardstreet, to M. Smoothes the Silkman. I pra'ye, since my Exion is entered, and my Case so openly known to the world, let him be brought in to his answer: A 100. Mark is a long one, for a poor lone woman to bear: &amp; I have borne, and borne, and borne, and have bin fub'd off, and fub'd-off, from this day to that day, that it is a shame to be thought on. There is no honesty in such dealing, unless a woman should be made an Ass and a Beast, to bear e∣very Knaves wrong.
Yonder he comes, and that arrant Malmesey-Nose Bar∣dolfe with him. Do your Offices, do your offices: M. Fang, &amp; M. Snare, do me, do me, do me your Offices.
How now? whose Mare's dead? what's the matter?
Sir Iohn, I arrest you, at the suit of Mist. Quickly.
Away Varlets, draw Bardolf: Cut me off the Villains head: throw the Queen in the Channel.
Throw me in the channel? Isle throw thee there. Wilt thou? wilt thou? thou bastardly rogue. Murder, mur∣der, O thou Hony-suckle villain, wilt thou kill Gods of∣ficers, and the Kings? O thou hony-seed Rogue, thou art a honyseed, a Man-queller, and a woman-queller.
Keep them off, Bardolf.
A rescue, a rescue.
Good people bring a rescue. Thou wilt not? thou wilt not? Do, do thou Rogue: Do thou Hempseed.
Away you Scullion, you Rampallian, you Fustil∣lirian: Isle tucke your Catastrophe.
What's the matter? Keep the Peace here, hoe.
Good my Lord be good to me. I beseech you stand to me.
How now sir Iohn? What are you brawling here?
Doth this become your place, your time, and business?
You should have been well on your way to York.
Stand from him Fellow; wherefore hang upon him?
Oh my most worshipful Lord, and't please your Grace, I am a poor widow of Eastcheap, and he is are∣sted at my suit.
For what sum?
It is more then for some (my Lord) it is for all: all I have, he hath eaten me out of house and home; hee hath put all my substance into that fat belly of his: but I will have some of it out again, or I will ride thee of Nights, like the Mare.
I think I am as like to ride the Mare, if I have any vantage of ground, to get up.
How comes this, Sir Iohn? Fie, what a man of good temper would endure this tempest of exclamation? Are you not ashamed to enforce a poor Widow to so rough a course, to come by her own?
What is the gross sum that I owe thee?
Marry (if thou were it an honest man) thy self, &amp; the money too. Thou did swear to me upon a parcel gilt Goblet, sitting in my Dolphin-chamber at the round table, by a sea-cole fire, on Wednesday in Whitson week, when the Prince broke thy head for lik'ning him to a sin∣ging man of Windsor; Thou did swear to me then (as I was washing thy wound) to marry me, and make me my Lady thy wife. Can you deny it? Did not good wife Keech the Butchers wife come in then, and cal me gossip Quick∣lie? coming in to borrow a mess of Vinegar: telling vs, she had a good dish of Prawns: whereby you did desire to eat some: whereby I told thee they were ill for a greene wound? And did not thou (when she was gone down stairs) desire me to be no more familiar with such poor people, saying, that ere long they should call me Madam? And did you not kiss me, and bid me fetch thee 30.s? I put thee now to thy Book-oath, deny it if thou can?
My Lord, this is a poor mad soul: and she says up &amp; down the town, that her eldest son is like you. She hath bin in good case, &amp; the truth is, poverty hath distra∣cted her: but for these foolish Officers, I beseech you, I may have redress against them.
Sir Iohn, sir Iohn, I am well acquainted with your manner of wrenching the true cause, the false way. It is not a confident brow, nor the throng of words, that come with such (more then impudent) sauciness from you, can thrust me from a level consideration, I know you have pra∣ctis'd upon the easie-yeelding spirit of this woman.
Yes in troth my Lord.
Prithee peace: pay her the debt you owe her, and vnpay the villainy you have done her: the one you may do with sterling money, &amp; the other with currant repentance.
My Lord, I will not undergo this sneape without reply. You call honourable Boldness, impudent Sauciness: If a man will curtsy, and say nothing, he is virtuous: No, my Lord (your humble duty remēbred) I will not be your suitor. I say to you, I desire deliverance from these Officers being upon hasty employment in the Kings Affairs.
You speak, as having power to do wrong: But answer in the effect of your Reputation, and satisfy the poor woman.
Come hither Hostess.
Now Master Gower; What news?
The King (my Lord) and Henrie Prince of Wales
Are near at hand: The rest the Paper tells.
As I am a Gentleman.
Nay, you said so before.
As I am a Gentleman. Come, no more words of it
By this Heavenly ground I tread on, I must be fine to pawn both my Plate, and the Tapestry of my die∣ning Chambers.
Glasses, glasses, is the only drinking: and for thy walls a pretty slight Drollery, or the Story of the Prodigal, or the Germane hunting in Waterwork, is worth a thousand of these Bed-hangings, and these Fly-bitten Tapestries. Let it be ten pound (if thou can.) Come, if it were not for thy humours, there is not a better Wench in England. Go, wash thy face, and draw thy Action: Come, thou must not bee in this humour with me, come, I know thou was it set on to this.
Prithee (Sir Iohn) let it be but twenty Nobles, I loath to pawn my Plate, in good earnest la.
Let it alone, Isle make other shift: you'll be a fool still.
Well, you shall have it although I pawn my Gown. I hope you'll come to Supper: You'll pay me al∣together?
Will I live? Go with her, with her: hooke-on, hooke-on.
Will you have Doll Teare-sheet meet you at sup∣per?
No more words. Let's have her.
I have heard bitter news.
What's the news (my good Lord?)
Where lay the King last night?
At Basingstoke my Lord.
I hope (my Lord) ell's well. What is the news my Lord?
Come all his Forces back?
No: Fifteen hundred Foot, five hundred Horse
Are marched up to my Lord of Lancaster,
Against Northumberland, and the Archbishop.
Comes the King back from Wales, my noble L?
You shall have Let•s of me presently.
Come, go along with me, good M. Gowre.
My Lord.
What's the matter?
Master Gowre, shall I entreat you with me to dinner?
I must waite upon my good Lord here.
I thank you, good Sir Iohn.
Sir Iohn, you loiter here too long being you are to take Soldiers up, in Countries as you go.
Will you sup with me, Master Gowre?
What foolish Master taught you these man∣ners, Sir Iohn?
Master Gower, if they become me not, hee was a Fool that taught them me. This is the right Fencing grace (my Lord) tap for tap, and so part fair.
Now the Lord lighten thee, thou art a great Fool.
Trust me, I am exceeding weary.
Is it come to that? I had thought weariness durst not have attached one of so high blood.
It doth me: though it discolours the complexion of my Greatness to acknowledge it. Doth it not show vildely in me, to desire small Beer?
Why, a Prince should not be so loosely studied, as to remember so weak a Composition.
Belike then, my Appetite was not Princely got▪ for (in troth) I do now remember the poor Cry∣ture, Small Beer. But indeed these humble consider∣tions make me out of love with my Greatness. What a disgrace is it to me, to remember thy name? Or to know thy face to morrow? Or to take note how many pair of Silk stockings you hast? (Viz. these, and those that were thy peach-colour'd ones:) Or to bear the Inuentorie of thy shirts, as one for superfluity, and one other, for use. But that the Tennis-Court-keeper knows better then I, for it is a low ebb of Linen with thee, when thou kept not Racket there, as thou hast not done a great while, be∣cause the rest of thy Low Countries, have made a shift to eat up thy Holland.
How ill it follows, after you have laboured so hard, you should talk so idly? Tell me how many good young Princes would do so, their Fathers lying so sick, as yours is?
Shall I tell thee one thing, Points?
Yes: and let it be an excellent good thing.
It shall serve among wits of no higher breed∣ing then thine.
Go to: I stand the push of your one thing, that you'll tell.
Why, I tell thee, it is not mere, that I should be sad now my Father is sick: albeit I could tell to thee (as to one it pleases me, for fault of a better, to call my friend) I could be sad and sad indeed too.
Very hardly upon such a subject.
Thou think me as far in the Devils Book, as thou, and Falstaff, for obduracy and persistence. Let the end try the man. But I tell thee, my hart bleeds inward∣lie, that my Father is so sick: and keeping such wild com∣pany as thou art, hath in reason taken from me, all osten∣tation of sorrow.
The reason?
What would thou think of me, if I should weep?
I would think thee a most Princely hypocrite.
It would be every mans thought: and thou art a blessed Fellow, to think as every man thinks: never a mans thought in the world, keeps the Rode-way better then thine: every man would think me an Hypocrite in∣dee•e. And what accites your most worshipful thought to think so?
Why, because you have been so lewd, and so much ingraffed to Falstaff.
And to thee.
Nay, I am well spoken of, I can hear it with mine own ears: the worst that they can say of me is, that I am a second Brother, and that I am a proper Fellow of my hands: and those two things I confess I cannot help. Look, look, here comes Bardolf.
And the Boy that I gave Falstaff, he had him from me Christian, and see if the fat villain have not trance¦formed him Ape.
Save your Grace.
And yours, most Noble Bardolf.
Come you pernicious Ass, you bashful Fool, must you be blushing? Wherefore blush you now? what a Maidenly man at Arms are you become? Is it such a matter to get a Pottle-pots Maiden-head?
He called me even now (my Lord) through a red Lattice, and I could discern no part of his face from the
window: at last I spied his eyes, and me thought he had made two holes in the Ale-wives new Petticoat, &amp; pee∣ped through.
Hath not the boy profited?
Away, you whoreson upright Rabbit, away.
Away, you rascally Altheas dream, away.
Instruct vs Boy: what dream, Boy?
Marry (my Lord) Althea dreamed, she was de∣liuer'd of a Firebrand, and therefore I call him his dream.
A Crownes-worth of good Interpretation: There it is, Boy.
O that this good Blossom could bee kept from Cankers: Well, there is six pence to preserve thee.
If you do not make him be hanged among you, the gallows shall be wronged.
And how doth thy Master, Bardolph?
Well, my good Lord: he heard of your Graces coming to Town. There's a Letter for you.
Delivered with good respect: And how doth the Martlemas, your Master?
In bodily health Sir.
Marry, the immortal part needs a Physician: but that moves not him: though that bee sick, it dyes not.
I do allow this Wen to bee as familiar with me, as my dog: and he holds his place, for look you he writes.
Iohn Falstaff Knight: (Every man must know that, as oft as hee hath occasion to name himself:) Even like those that are kin to the King, for they never prick their finger, but they say, there is some of the kings blood spilt. How comes that (says he) that takes upon him not to conceive? the answer is as ready as a borrow∣ed cap: I am the Kings poor Cousin, Sir.
Nay, they will be kin to vs, but they will fetch it from Iaphet. But to the Letter: —Sir Iohn Falstaff, Knight, to the Son of the King, nearest his Father, Harry Prince of Wales, greeting.
Why this is a Certificate.
Peace.
I will imitate the honourable Romaines in brevity.
Sure he means brevity in breath: short-winded. I commend me to thee, I commend thee, and I leave thee. Bee not too familiar with Points, for hee misuses thy Favours so much, that he swears thou art to marry his Sister Nil. Re∣pent at idle times as thou may, and so farewell.
Thine, by yea and no: which is as much as to say, as thou uses him. Jack Falstaff with my Familiars: Iohn with my Brothers and Sister: &amp; Sir Iohn, with all Europe.
My Lord, I will steep this Letter in Sack, and make him eat it.
That's to make him eat twenty of his Words.
But do you use me thus Ned? Must I marry your Sister?
May the Wench have no worse Fortune. But I never said so.
Well, thus we play the Fools with the time &amp; the spirits of the wise, sit in the clouds, and mock vs: Is your Master here in London?
Yes my Lord.
Where suppes he? Doth the old Bore, feed in the old Frank?
At the old place my Lord, in East-cheape.
What Company?
Ephesians my Lord, of the old Church.
Sup any women with him?
None my Lord, but old Mistress Quickly, and M. Doll Teare-sheet.
What Pagan may that be?
A proper Gentlewoman, Sir, and a Kinswoman of my Masters.
Even such Kin, as the Parish Heyfors are to the Towne-Bull?
Shall we steal upon them (Ned) at Supper?
I am your shadow, my Lord, Isle follow you.
Sirrah, you boy, and Bardolph, no word to your Master that I am yet in Town.
There's for your silence.
I have no tongue, sir.
And for mine Sir, I will govern it.
Fare ye well: go.
This Doll Teare-sheet should be some Rode.
I warrant you, as common as the way between S. Albans, and London.
How might we see Falstaff bestow himself to night, in his true colours, and not our selves be seen?
Put on two Leather Jerkins, and Aprons, and waite upon him at his Table, like Drawers.
From a God, to a Bull? A heavy declension: It was Ioues case. From a Prince, to a Prentice, a low trance∣formation, that shall be mine: for in every thing, the pur∣pose must weigh with the folly. Follow me Ned.
I prithee loving Wife, and gentle Daughter,
Give an even way unto my rough Affairs:
Put not you on the visage of the Times,
And be like them to Percie, troublesome.
I have given over, I will speak no more,
Do what you will: your Wisdom, be your guide.
Alas (sweet Wife) my Honour is at pawn,
And but my going, nothing can redeem it.
Oh yet, for heavens sake, go not to these Wars;
The Time was (Father) when you broke your word,
When you were more endeared to it, then now,
When your own Percy, when my heart-deere Harry,
Threw many a Northward look, to see his Father
Bring up his Powers: but he did long in vain.
Who then persuaded you to stay at home?
There were two Honours lost; Yours, and your Sons.
For Yours, may heavenly glory brighten it:
For His, it stuck upon him, as the Sun
In the gray vault of Heaven: and by his Light
Did all the Chivalry of England move
To do brave Acts. He was (indeed) the Glass
Wherein the Noble-Youth did dress themselves.
He had no Legs, that practiced not his Gate:
And speaking thick (which Nature made his blemish)
Became the Accents of the Valiant.
For those that could speak low, and tardily,
Would turn their own Perfection, to Abuse,
To seem like him. So that in Speech, in Gate,
In Diet, in Affections of delight,
In Military Rules, Humours of Blood,
He was the Mark, and Glass, Copy, and Book,
That fashioned others. And him, O wondrous! him,
O Miracle of Men! Him did you leave
(Second to none) vn-seconded by you,
To look upon the hideous God of War,
In disadvantage, to abide a field,
Where nothing but the sound of Hotspurs Name
Did seem defensible: so you left him.
Never, O never doe his Ghost the wrong,
To hold your Honour more precise and nice
With others, then with him. Let them alone:
The Marshall and the Arch-bishop are strong.
Had my sweet Harry had but half their Numbers,
To day might I (hanging on Hotspurs Neck)
Have talked of Monmouth's Grave.
Beshrew your heart,
(Fair Daughter) you doe draw my Spirits from me,
With new lamenting ancient Ouer-sights.
But I must go, and meet with Danger there,
Or it will seek me in another place,
And find me worse provided.
O fly to Scotland,
Till that the Nobles, and the armed Commons,
Have of their Puissance made a little taste.
If they get ground, and vantage of the King,
Then join you with them, like a Rib of Steel,
To make Strength stronger. But, for all our loves,
First let them try themselves. So did your Son,
He was so suffered; so came I a Widow:
And never shall have length of Life enough,
To rain upon Remembrance with mine Eyes,
That it may grow, and sprout, as high as Heaven,
For Recordation to my Noble Husband.
Come, come, go in with me: it is with my Mind
As with the Tide, swelled up unto his height,
That makes a still-stand, running neither way.
Fine would I go to meet the Arch-bishop,
But many thousand Reasons hold me back.
I will resolve for Scotland: there am I,
Till Time and Vantage crave my company.
What hast thou brought there? Apple-Iohns? Thou know Sir Iohn cannot endure an Apple-Iohn.
Thou say true: the Prince once set a Dish of Apple-Iohns before him, and told him there were five more Sir Iohns: and, putting off his Hat, said, I will now take my leave of these six dry, round, old-wither'd Knights. It angered him to the heart: but hee hath for∣got that.
Why then cover, and set them down: and see if thou can find out Sneaks Noise; Mistress Teare-sheet would fine have some Musique.
Sirrha, here will be the Prince, and Master Points, anon: and they will put on two of our Jerkins, and Aprons, and Sir Iohn must not know of it: Bardolph hath brought word.
Then here will be old Vtis: it will be an ex∣cellent stratagem.
Isle see if I can find out Sneak.
Sweet-heart, me thinks now you are in an ex∣cellent good temperalitie: your Pulsidge beats as ex∣traordinarily, as heart would desire; and your Colour (I warrant you) is as red as any Rose: But you have drunk too much Canaries, and that's a marvelous sear∣ching Wine; and it perfumes the blood, ere wee can say what's this. How doe you now?
Better then I was: Hem.
Why that was well said: A good heart's worth Gold. Look, here comes Sir Iohn.
When Arthur first in Court—(empty the Iordan) and was a worthy King: How now Mistress Dol?
Sick of a Calm: yea, good-sooth.
So is all her Sect: if they be once in a Calm, they are sick.
You muddy Rascal, is that all the comfort you give me?
You make fat Rascals, Mistress Dol.
I make them? Gluttony and Diseases make them, I make them not.
If the Cooke make the Gluttony, you help to make the Diseases (Dol) we catch of you (Dol) we catch of you: Grant that my poor Virtue, grant that.
I marry, our Chains, and our Jewels.
Your Brooches, Pearls, and Owches: For to serve bravely, is to come halting off: you know, to come off the Breach, with his Pike bent bravely, and to Surge∣rye bravely; to venture upon the charg'd-Chambers bravely.
Why this is the old fashion: you two never meet, but you fall to some discord: you are both (in good troth) as Rheumatike as two dry Tostes, you can∣not one bear with another Confirmities. What the good-yere? One must bear, and that must bee you: you are the weaker Vessel; as they say, the emptier Vessel.
Can a weak empty Vessel bear such a huge full Hogs-head? There's a whole Merchants Venture of bordeaux stuff in him: you have not seen a Hulk better stuffed in the Hold. Come, Isle be friends with thee Jack: Thou art going to the Wars, and whether I shall ever see thee again, or no, there is no body cares.
Sir, Ancient Pistol is below, and would speak with you.
Hang him, swaggering Rascal, let him not come hither: it is the foule-mouth'dst Rogue in Eng∣land.
If hee swagger, let him not come here: I must live amongst my Neighbours, Isle no Swaggerers: I am in good name, and fame, with the very best: shut the door, there comes no Swaggerers here: I have not lived all this while, to have swaggering now: shut the door, I pray you.
Dost thou hear, Hostess?
'Pray you pacify your self (Sir Iohn) there comes no Swaggerers here.
Dost thou hear? it is mine Ancient.
Tilly-fally (Sir Iohn) never tell me, your ancient Swaggerer comes not in my doors. I was before Master Tisick the Deputy, the other day: and as hee said to me, it was no longer ago then Wednesday last: Neighbour Quickly (says hee;) Master Dombe, our Minister, was by then: Neighbour Quickly (says hee) receive those that are Civil; for (saith hee) you are in an ill Name: now hee said so, I can tell whereupon: for (says hee) you are an honest Woman, and well thought on; therefore take heed what Guests you receive: Receive (says hee) no swaggering Companions. There comes none here. You would bless you to hear what hee said. No, Isle no Swaggerers.
Hoe's no Swaggerer (Hostess:) a tame Cheater, hee: you may stroke him as gently, as a Puppy Grey∣hound: hee will not swagger with a Barbary Hen, if her feathers turn back in any show of resistance. Call him up (Drawer.)
Cheater, call you him? I will bar no honest man my house, nor no Cheater: but I doe not love swag∣gering; I am the worse when one says, swagger: Feel Masters, how I shake: look you, I warrant you.
So you doe, Hostess.
Doe I? yea, in very truth doe I, if it were an As∣pen Leaf: I cannot abide Swaggerers.
'Saue you, Sir Iohn.
Welcome Ancient Pistol. Here (Pistol) I charge you with a Cup of Sack: doe you discharge upon mine Hostess.
I will discharge upon her (Sir Iohn) with two Bullets.
She is Pistoll-proofe (Sir) you shall hardly of∣fend her.
Come, Isle drink no Proofs, nor no Bullets: I will drink no more then will doe me good, for no mans pleasure, I.
Then to you (Mistress Dorothy) I will charge you.
Charge me? I scorn you (scurvy Companion) what? you poor, base, rascally, cheating, lacke-Linnen-Mate: away you mouldy Rogue, away; I am meat for your Master.
I know you, Mistress Dorothy.
Away you Cut-purse Rascal, you filthy Bung, away: By this Wine, Isle thrust my Knife in your mouldy Chappes, if you play the saucy Cuttle with me. Away you Bottle-Ale Rascal, you Basket-hilt stale Juggler, you. Since when, I pray you, Sir? what, with two Points on your shoulder? much.
I will murder your Ruff, for this.
No, good Captain Pistol: not here, sweet Captain.
Captain? thou abominable damned Cheater, art thou not ashamed to be called Captain? If Captains were of my mind, they would truncheon you out, for ta∣king their Names upon you, before you have earned them. You a Captain? you slave, for what? for tearing a poor Whores Ruff in a Bawdy-house? Hee a Captain? hang him Rogue, hee lives upon mouldy stew'd-Pruines, and dried Cakes. A Captain? These Villains will make the word Captain odious: Therefore Captains had need look to it.
'Pray thee go down, good Ancient.
Hark thee hither, Mistress Dol.
Not I: I tell thee what, Corporal Bardolph, I could tear her: Isle be revenged on her.
'Pray thee go down.
Isle see her damned first: to Pluto's damned Lake, to the Infernal Deep, where Erebus and Tortures wild also. Hold Hook and Line, say I: Down: down Dogs, down Fates: have wee not Heron here?
Good Captain Peesel be quiet, it is very late: I beseek you now, aggravate your Choler.
These be good Humours indeed. Shall Pack-Horses, and hollow-pamper'd Jade of Asia, which can∣not go but thirty miles a day, compare with Caesar, and with Cannibals, and Trojan Greeks? nay, rather damn them with King Cerberus, and let the Welkin roar: shall wee fall foul for Toys?
By my troth Captain, these are very bitter words.
Be gone, good Ancient: this will grow to a Brawl anon.
Die men, like Dogs; give Crowns like Pins: Have we not Heron here?
On my word (Captain) there's none such here. What the good-yere, doe you think I would deny her? I pray be quiet.
Then feed, and be fat (my fair Calipolis.) Come, give me some Sack, Si fortune me torment, sperato me con∣tent. Fear wee broad-sides? No, let the Fiend give fire: Give me some Sack: and Sweet-heart lye thou there: Come wee to full Points here, and are et cetera's no∣thing?
Pistol, I would be quiet.
Sweet Knight, I kiss thy Neaffe: what? wee have seen the seven Stars.
Thrust him down stayres, I cannot endure such a Fustian Rascal.
Thrust him down stayres? know we not Gallo∣way Nagges?
Quoit him down (Bardolph) like a shoue-groat shilling: nay, if hee doe nothing but speak nothing, hee shall be nothing here.
Come, get you down stayres.
What? shall wee have Incision? shall wee em∣brew? then Death rock me asleep, abridge my doleful days: why then let grievous, ghastly, gaping Wounds, vntwin'd the Sisters three: Come Atropos, I say.
Here's good stuff toward.
Give me my Rapier, Boy.
I prithee Jack, I prithee doe not draw.
Get you down stayres.
Here's a goodly tumult: Isle forswear keeping house, before Isle be in these tirrits, and frights. So: Mur∣there I warrant now. Alas, alas, put up your naked Wea∣pons, put up your naked Weapons.
I prithee Jack be quiet, the Rascal is gone: ah, you whoreson little valiant Villain, you.
Are you not hurt in the Groin? me thought hee made a shrewd Thrust at your Belly.
Have you turned him out of doors?
Yes Sir: the Rascal's drunk: you have hurt him (Sir) in the shoulder.
A Rascal to brave me.
Ah, you sweet little Rogue, you: alas, poor Ape, how thou sweetest? Come, let me wipe thy Face: Come on, you whoreson Chops: Ah Rogue, I love thee: Thou
art as valorous as Hector of Troy, worth five of Agamem∣non, and ten times better then the nine Worthies: ah Villain.
A rascally Slave, I will toss the Rogue in a Blown∣ket.
Doe, if thou dare for thy heart: if thou dost,
Isle canvas thee between a pair of Sheets.
The Musique is come, Sir.
Let them play: play Sirs. Sit on my Knee, Dol. A Rascal, bragging Slave: the Rogue fled from me like Quick-siluer.
And thou followd'st him like a Church: thou whoreson little tydie Bartholomew Bore-pigge, when wilt thou leave fighting on days, and foyning on nights, and begin to patch up thine old Body for Heaven?
Peace (good Dol) doe not speak like a Deaths-head: doe not bid me remember mine end.
Sirrha, what humour is the Prince of?
A good shallow young fellow: hee would have made a good Pantler, hee would have chipp'd Bread well.
They say Poines hath a good Wit.
Hee a good Wit? hang him Baboon, his Wit is as thick as Tewksburie Mustard: there is no more con∣ceit in him, •hen is in a Mallet.
Why doth the Prince love him so then?
Because their Legs are both of a bigness: and hee plays at Quoits well and eats Conger and Fennel, and drinks off Candles ends for Flap-dragons, and rides the wilde-Mare with the Boys, and iumpes upon Ioyn'd-stooles, and swears with a good grace, and wears his Boot very smooth, like unto the Sign of the Leg; and breeds no bate with telling of discreet stories: and such other Gambol Faculties hee hath, that show a weak Mind, and an able Body, for the which the Prince admits him; for the Prince himself is such another: the weight of an hair will turn the Scales between their Haber-de-pois.
Would not this Naue of a Wheel have his Ears cut off?
Let vs beat him before his Whore.
Look, if the withered Elder hath not his Poll clawed like a Parrot.
Is it not strange, that Desire should so many years out-liue performance?
Kiss me Dol.
Saturn and Venus this year in Conjunction?
What says the Almanac to that?
And look whether the fiery Trigon, his Man, be not lisping to his Masters old Tables, his Note-Booke, his Councell-keeper?
Thou dost give me flattering Busses.
Nay truly, I kiss thee with a most constant heart.
I am old, I am old.
I love thee better, then I love ere a scurvy young Boy of them all.
What Stuff wilt thou have a Kirtle of? I shall receive Money on Thursday: thou shalt have a Cap to morrow. A merry Song, come: it grows late, wee will to Bed. Thou wilt forget me, when I am gone.
Thou wilt set me a weeping, if thou say so: prove that ever I dress my self handsome, till thy re∣turn: well, hearken the end.
Some Sack, Francis.
Anon, anon, Sir.
Ha? a Bastard Son of the Kings? And art not thou Poines, his Brother?
Why thou Globe of sinful Continents, what a Life dost thou lead?
A better then thou: I am a Gentleman, thou art a Drawer.
Very true, Sir: and I come to draw you out by the Ears.
Oh, the Lord preserve thy good Grace: Well∣come to London. Now Heaven bless that sweet Face of thine: what, are you come from Wales?
Thou whoreson mad Compound of Majesty: by this light Flesh, and corrupt Blood, thou art welcome.
How? you fat Fool, I scorn you.
My Lord, hee will drive you out of your re∣avenge, and turn all to a merriment, if you take not the heat.
You whoreson Candle-myne you, how wildly did you speak of me even now, before this honest, ver∣tuous, civil Gentlewoman?
'Blessing on your good heart, and so she is by my troth.
Did thou hear me?
Yes: and you knew me, as you did when you ran away by Gads-hill: you knew I was at your back, and spoke it on purpose, to try my patience.
No, no, no: not so: I did not think, thou wast within hearing.
I shall drive you then to confess the wilful abuse, and then I know how to handle you.
No abuse (Hall) on mine Honour, no abuse.
Not to dispraise me? and call me Pantler, and Bread-chopper, and I know not what?
No abuse (Hal.)
No abuse?
No abuse (Ned) in the World: honest Ned none. I dispraised him before the Wicked, that the Wicked might not fall in love with him: In which doing, I have done the part of a careful Friend, and a true Subject, and thy Father is to give me thanks for it. No abuse (Hal:) none (Ned) none; no Boys, none.
See now whether pure Fear, and entire Cow∣ardise, doth not make thee wrong this virtuous Gentle∣woman, to close with vs? Is she of the Wicked? Is thine Hostess here, of the Wicked? Or is the Boy of the Wicked? Or honest Bardolph (whose Zeal burns in his Nose) of the Wicked?
Answer thou dead Elm, answer.
The Fiend hath pricked down Bardolph irrecoue∣rabble, and his Face is Lucifers Priuy-Kitchin, where hee doth nothing but roast Mault-Wormes: for the Boy, there is a good Angel about him, but the Devil out∣bids him too.
For the Women?
For one of them, she is in Hell already, and burns poor Souls: for the other, I owe her Mo∣ney; and whether she bee damned for that, I know not.
No, I warrant you.
No, I think thou art not: I think thou art quit for that. Marry, there is another Indictment upon thee, for suffering flesh to bee eaten in thy house, contrary to the Law, for the which I think thou wilt howl.
All Victuallers doe so: What is a Joint of Mutton, or two, in a whole Lent?
You, Gentlewoman.
What says your Grace?
His Grace says that, which his flesh rebels against.
Who knocks so loud at door? Look to the door there, Francis?
Peto, how now? what news?
The King, your Father, is at Westminster,
And there are twenty weak and wearied Posts,
Come from the North: and as I came along,
I met, and ouer-tooke a dozen Captains,
Bare-headed, sweating, knocking at the Taverns,
And asking every one for Sir Iohn Falstaff.
By Heaven (Poines) I feel me much to blame,
So idly to profane the precious time,
When Tempest of Commotion, like the South,
Borne with black Vapour, doth begin to melt,
And drop upon our bare unarmed heads.
Give me my Sword, and Cloak:
Falstaff, good night.
Now comes in the sweetest Morsel of the night, and wee must hence, and leave it vnpickt. More knocking at the door? How now? what's the mat∣la?
You must away to Court, Sir, presently,
A dozen Captains stay at door for you.
Pay the Musicians, Sirrha: farewell Hostess, farewell Dol. You see (my good Wenches) how men of Merit are sought after: the vndeseruer may sleep, when the man of Action is called on. Farewell good Wenches: if I be not sent away post, I will see you again, ere I go.
I cannot speak: if my heart bee not ready to burst— Well (sweet Jack) have a care of thy self.
Farewell, farewell.
Well, fare thee well: I have known thee these twenty nine years, come Pescod-time: but an honester, and truer-hearted man— Well, fare thee well.
Mistress Teare-sheet.
What's the matter?
Bid Mistress Teare-sheet come to my Master.
Oh run Dol, run: run, good Dol.
Go, call the Earls of Surrey, and of Warwick:
But ere they come, bid them ore-reade these Letters,
And well consider of them: make good speed.
How many thousand of my poorest Subjects
Are at this hour asleep? O Sleep, O gentle Sleep,
Natures soft Nurse, how have I frighted thee,
That thou no more wilt weigh my eye-lids down,
And steep my Senses in Forgetfulness?
Why rather (Sleep) lie thou in smokey Cribs,
Upon uneasy Pallads stretching thee,
And huisht with bussing Night, flies to thy slumber,
Then in the perfumed Chambers of the Great?
Under the Canopies of costly State,
And lulled with sounds of sweetest Melody?
O thou dull God, why lie thou with the wild,
In loathsome Beds, and leave the Kingly Couch,
A Watch-case, or a common Larum-Bell?
Wilt thou, upon the high and giddy Mast,
Seal up the Ship-boyes Eyes, and rock his Brains,
In Cradle of the rude imperious Surge,
And in the visitation of the Winds,
Who take the Ruffian Billows by the top,
Curling their monstrous heads, and hanging them
With deafening Clamours in the slippery Clouds,
That with the hurly, Death it self awakes?
Can thou (O partial Sleep) give thy Repose
To the wet Sea-Boy, in an hour so rude:
And in the calmest, and most stillest Night,
With all appliances, and means to boot,
Deny it to a King? Then happy Lowe, lye down,
Uneasy lies the Head, that wears a Crown.
Many good-morrowes to your Majesty.
Is it good-morrow, Lords?
It is One a Clock, and past.
Why then good-morrow to you all (my Lords:)
Have you read o'er the Letters that I sent you?
We have (my Liege.)
Then you perceive the Body of our Kingdom,
How foul it is: what rank Diseases grow,
And with what danger, near the Heart of it?
It is but as a Body, yet distempered,
Which to his former strength may be restored,
With good advice, and little Medicine:
My Lord Northumberland will soon be cooled.
Oh Heaven, that one might read the Book of Fate,
And see the revolution of the Times
Make Mountains level, and the Continent
(Weary of solide firmness) melt it self
Into the Sea: and other Times, to see
The beachy Girdle of the Ocean
Too wide for Neptunes hippos; how Chances mocks
And Changes fill the Cup of Alteration
With divers Liquors. It is not ten years gone,
Since Richard, and Northumberland, great friends,
Did feast together; and in two years after,
Were they at Wars. It is but eight years since,
This Percie was the man, nearest my Soul,
Who, like a Brother, toiled in my Affairs,
And laid his Love and Life under my foot:
Yea, for my sake, even to the eyes of Richard
Gave him defiance. But which of you was by
(You Cousin Neuil, as I may remember)
When Richard, with his Eye, brim-full of Tears,
(Then checked, and rated by Northumberland)
Did speak these words (now proved a Prophecy:)
Northumberland, thou Ladder, by the which
My Cousin Bullingbrooke ascends my Throne:
(Though then, Heaven knows, I had no such intent,
But that necessity so bowed the State,
That I and Greatness were compelled to kiss:)
The Time shall come (thus did hee follow it)
The Time will come, that foul Sin gathering head,
Shall break into Corruption: so went on,
Fore-telling this same Times Condition,
And the division of our Amity.
There is a History in all men's Lives,
Figuring the nature of the Times deceased:
The which observed, a man may prophecy
With a near aim, of the maine chance of things,
As yet not come to Life, which in their Seeds
And weak beginnings lye entreasured:
Such things become the Hatch and Brood of Time;
And by the necessary form of this,
King Richard might create a perfect guess,
That great Northumberland, then false to him,
Would of that Seed, grow to a greater falseness,
Which should not find a ground to root upon,
Unless on you.
Are these things then Necessities?
Then let vs meet them like Necessities;
And that same word, even now cries out on vs:
They say, the Bishop and Northumberland
Are fifty thousand strong.
It cannot be (my Lord:)
Rumour doth double, like the Voice, and Echo,
The numbers of the feared. Please it your Grace
To go to bed, upon my Life (my Lord)
The Powers that you already have sent forth,
Shall bring this Prize in very easily.
To comfort you the more, I have received
A certain instance, that Glendour is dead.
Your Majesty hath been this fort-night ill,
And these unseasoned hours perforce must add
Unto your Sickness.
I will take your counsel:
And were these inward Wars once out of hand,
Wee would (dear Lords) unto the Holy-Land.
Come-on, come-on, come-on: give me your Hand, Sir; give me your Hand, Sir: an early stirrer, by the Rood. And how doth my good Cousin Silence?
Good-morrow, good Cousin Shallow.
And how doth my Cousin, your Bed-fellow? and your fairest Daughter, and mine, my God-Daughter Ellen?
Alas, a black Ouzell (Cousin Shallow.)
By yea and nay, Sir, I dare say my Cousin William is become a good Scholar? hee is at Oxford still, is hee not?
Indeed Sir, to my cost.
Hee must then to the Innes of Court shortly: I was once of Clements Inn; where (I think) they will talk of mad Shallow yet.
You were called lusty Shallow then (Cousin.)
I was called any thing: and I would have done any thing indeed too, and roundly too. There was I, and little Iohn Do it of Staffordshire, and black George Bare, and Francis Pick-bone, and Will Squele a Cot-sal-man, you had not four such Swindge-bucklers in all the Innes of Court again: And I may say to you, wee knew where the Bona-Roba's were, and had the best of them all at commandment. Then was Jack Falstaff (now Sir Iohn) a Boy, and Page to Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Nor∣folk.
This Sir Iohn (Cousin) that comes hither anon a∣bout Soldiers?
The same Sir Iohn, the very same: I saw him break Scoggan's Head at the Court-Gate, when hee was a Crack, not thus high: and the very same day did I fight with one Simpson Stock-fish, a Fruiterer, behind Greyes-Inne. Oh the mad days that I have spent! and to see how many of mine old Acquaintance are dead?
Wee shall all follow (Cousin.)
Certain: it is certain: very sure, very sure: Death is certain to all, all shall dye. How a good Yoke of Bullocks at Stamford Fair?
Truly Cousin, I was not there.
Death is certain. Is old Double of your Town living yet?
Dead, Sir.
Dead? See, see: hee drew a good Bow: and dead? hee shot a fine shoot. Iohn of Gaunt loved him well, and betted much Money on his head. Dead? hee would have clapped in the Clout at Twelue-score, and carried you a fore-hand Shaft at fourteen, and four∣teene and a half, that it would have done a mans heart good to see. How a score of Ewes now?
Thereafter as they be: a score of good Ewes may be worth ten pounds.
And is old Double dead?
Here come two of Sir Iohn Falstaffes Men (as I think.)
Good-morrow, honest Gentlemen.
I beseech you, which is Justice Shallow?
I am Robert Shallow (Sir) a poor Esquire of this County, and one of the Kings Justices of the Peace: What is your good pleasure with me?
My Captain (Sir) commends him to you: my Captain, Sir Iohn Falstaff: a tall Gentleman, and a most gallant Leader.
Hee greetes me well: (Sir) I knew him a good Back-Sword-man. How doth the good Knight? may I ask, how my Lady his Wife doth?
Sir, pardon: a Soldier is better accommoda∣ted, then with a Wife.
It is well said, Sir; and it is well said, indeed, too: Better accommodated? it is good, yea indeed is it: good phrases are surely, and every where very com∣mandible. Accommodated, it comes of Accommodo: very good, a good Phrase.
Pardon, Sir, I have heard the word. Phrase call you it? by this Day, I know not the Phrase: but I will maintain the Word with my Sword, to bee a Soldier-like Word, and a Word of exceeding good Command. Accommodated: that is, when a man is (as they say) accommodated: or, when a man is, being
whereby he thought to be accommodated, which is an excellent thing.
It is very just: Look, here comes good Sir Iohn. Give me your hand, give me your Worships good hand: Trust me, you look well: and bear your years very well. Welcome, good Sir Iohn.
I am glad to see you well, good M. Robert Shall∣low: Master Sure-card as I think?
No sir Iohn, it is my Cousin Silence: in Commissi∣on with me.
Good M. Silence, it well befits you should be of the peace.
Your good Worship is welcome.
Fie, this is hot weather (Gentlemen) have you provided me here half a dozen of sufficient men?
Marry have we sir: Will you sit?
Let me see them, I beseech you.
Whore's the Roll? Whore's the Roll? Whore's the Roll? Let me see, let me see, let me see: so, so, so, so: yea marry Sir. Raphe Mouldy: let them appear as I call: let them do so, let them do so: Let me see, Where is Mouldy?
Here, if it please you.
What think you (Sir Iohn) a good limbed fell∣low: young, strong, and of good friends.
Is thy name Mouldy?
Yea, if it please you.
It is the more time thou were used.
Ha, ha, ha, most excellent. Things that are mole∣die, lack use: very singular good. Well said Sir Iohn, very well said.
Prick him.
I was pricked well enough before, if you could have let me alone: my old Dame will be undone now, for one to doe her Husbandry, and her Drudgery; you need not to have pricked me, there are other men fitter to go out, then I.
Go too: peace Mouldy, you shall go. Mouldy, it is time you were spent.
Spent?
Peace, fellow, peace; stand aside: Know you where you are? For the other sir Iohn: Let me see: Simon Shadow.
I marry, let me have him to sit under: he's like to be a cold soldier.
Whore's Shadow?
Here sir.
Shadow, whose son art thou?
My Mothers son, Sir.
Thy Mothers son: like enough, and thy Fa∣theirs shadow: so the son of the Female, is the shadow of the Male: it is often so indeed, but not of the Fathers substance.
Do you like him, sir Iohn?
Shadow will serve for Summer: prick him: For wee have a number of shadows to fill up the Muster-Booke.
Thomas Wart?
Whore's he?
Here sir.
Is thy name Wart?
Yea sir.
Thou art a very ragged Wart.
Shall I prick him down,
Sir Iohn?
It were superfluous: for his apparel is built up∣on his back, and the whole frame stands upon pins: prick him no more.
Ha, ha, ha, you can do it sir: you can doe it: I commend you well.
Here sir.
What Trade art thou Feeble?
A Women's Taylor sir.
Shall I prick him, sir?
You may: But if he had been a mans Taylor, he would have pricked you. Wilt thou make as many holes in an enemies Bat∣tail, as thou hast done in a Women's petticoat?
I will doe my good will sir, you can have no more.
Well said, good Women's Tailor: Well said Courageous Feeble: thou wilt bee as valiant as the wrath∣full Dove, or most magnanimous Mouse. Prick the wo∣mans Taylor well Master Shallow, deep Moister Shall∣low.
I would Wart might have gone sir.
I would thou were a mans Tailor, that you might mend him, and make him fit to go. I cannot put him to a private soldier, that is the Leader of so many thou∣sands. Let that suffice, most Forcible Feeble.
It shall suffice.
I am bound to thee, reverend Feeble. Who is the next?
Peter Bull calf of the Greene.
Yea marry, let vs see Bull calf.
Here sir.
Trust me, a likely Fellow. Come, prick me Bull∣calfe till he roar again.
Oh, good my Lord Captain.
What? dost thou roar before the art pricked.
Oh sir, I am a diseased man.
What disease hast thou?
A whoreson cold sir, a cough sir, which I caught with Ringing in the Kings affairs, upon his Coronation day, sir.
Come, thou shalt go to the Wars in a Gown: we will have away thy Cold, and I will take such order, that thy friends shall ring for thee. Is here all?
There is two more called then your number: you must have but four here sir, and so I pray you go in with me to dinner.
Come, I will go drink with you, but I cannot tarry dinner. I am glad to see you in good troth, Master Shallow.
O sir Iohn, doe you remember since wee lay all night in the Winde-mill, in S Georges Field.
No more of that good Master Shallow: No more of that.
Ha? it was a merry night. And is Iane Night-worke alive?
She lives, M. Shallow.
She never could away with me.
Never, never: she would always say she could not abide M. Shallow.
I could anger her to the heart: she was then a Bona-Roba. Doth she hold her own well.
Old, old, M. Shallow.
Nay, she must be old, she cannot choose but be
old: certain shoe's old: and had Robin Night-worke, by old Night-worke, before I came to Clements Inn.
That's fifty five years ago.
Ho, Cousin Silence, that thou had seen that, that this Knight and I have seen: ho, Sir Iohn, said I well?
Wee have heard the Chimes at mid-night, Ma∣ster Shallow.
That wee have, that wee have; in faith, Sir Iohn, wee have: our watch-word was, Hem-Boyes. Come, let's to Dinner; come, let's to Dinner: Oh the days that wee have seen. Come, come.
Good Master Corporate Bardolph, stand my friend, and here is four Harry ten shillings in French Crowns for you: in very truth, sir, I had as lief be hanged sir, as go: and yet, for mine own part, sir, I do not care; but rather, because I am unwilling, and for mine own part, have a desire to stay with my friends: else, sir, I did not care, for mine own part, so much.
Go-too: stand aside.
And good Master Corporal Captain, for my old Dames sake, stand my friend: she hath no body to doe any thing about her, when I am gone: and she is old, and cannot help her self: you shall have forty, sir.
Go-too: stand aside.
I care not, a man can die but once: wee owe a death. I will never bear a base mind: if it be my desti∣no, so: if it be not, so: no man is too good to serve his Prince: and let it go which way it will, he that dies this year, is quit for the next.
Well said, thou art a good fellow.
Nay, I will bear no base mind.
Come sir, which men shall I have?
Four of which you please.
Sir, a word with you: I have three pound, to free Mouldy and Bull calf.
Go-too: well.
Come, sir Iohn, which four will you have?
Doe you choose for me.
Marry then, Mouldy, Bull calf, Feeble, and Shadow.
Mouldy, and Bull calf: for you Mouldy, stay at home, till you are past service: and for your part, Bull calf, grow till you come unto it: I will none of you.
Sir Iohn, Sir Iohn, doe not your self wrong, they are your likeliest men, and I would have you served with the best.
Will you tell me (Master Shallow) how to choose a man? Care I for the Limb, the Thewes, the stature, bulk, and big assemblance of a man? give me the spirit (Master Shallow.) Whore's Wart? you see what a ragged appearance it is: hee shall charge you, and discharge you, with the motion of a Pewterers Ham∣mer: come off, and on, swifter then hee that gibbets on the Brewers Bucket. And this same halfe-fac'd fellow, Shadow, give me this man: hee presents no mark to the Enemy, the foe-man may with as great aim level at the edge of a Pen-knife: and for a Retreat, how swiftly will this Feeble, the Women's Taylor, run off. O, give me the spare men, and spare me the great ones. Put me a Caliver into Warts hand, Bardolph.
Hold Wart, Traverse: thus, thus, thus.
Come, manage me your Caliver: so▪ very well, go-too, very good, exceeding good. O, give me always a little, lean, old, chopped, bald Shot. Well said Wart, thou art a good Scab: hold, there is a Tester for thee.
Hee is not his Crafts-master, hee doth not doe it right. I remember at Mile-end-Greene, when I lay at Clements Inn, I was then Sir Dagonet in Arthurs Show: there was a little quiver fellow, and hee would manage you his Piece thus: and hee would about, and about, and come you in, and come you in: Rah, tah, tah, would hee say, Bounce would hee say, and away again would hee go, and again would he come: I shall never see such a fellow.
These fellows will doe well, Master Shallow Farewell Master Silence, I will not use many words with you: fare you well, Gentlemen both: I thank you: I must a dozen mile to night. Bardolph, give the Soldiers Coats.
Sir Iohn, Heaven bless you, and prosper your Affairs, and send vs Peace. As you return, visit my house. Let our old acquaintance be renewed: per∣adventure I will with you to the Court.
I would you would, Master Shallow.
Go-too: I have spoke at a word. Fare you well.
Fare you well, gentle Gentlemen. On Bar∣dolph, lead the men away. As I return, I will fetch off these Justices: I doe see the bottom of Justice Shall∣low. How subject wee old men are to this vice of Lie∣ing? This same starved Justice hath done nothing but prate to me of the wildenesse of his Youth, and the Feats hee hath done about Turnball-street, and every third word a Lye, duer paid to the hearer, then the Turks Tribute. I doe remember him at Clements Inn, like a man made after Supper, of a Cheese-paring. When hee was naked, hee was, for all the world, like a forked Radish, with a Head fantastically carved upon it with a Knife. Hee was so forlorn, that his Dimensions (to any thick sight) were invincible. Hee was the very Genius of Famine: hee came ever in the rere-ward of the Fashion: And now is this Vices Dagger become a Squire, and talks as familiarly of Iohn of Gaunt, as if hee had been sworn Brother to him: and Isle be sworn hee never saw him but once in the Tilt-yard, and then he burst his Head, for crowding among the Marshals men. I saw it, and told Iohn of Gaunt, hee beat his own Name, for you might have trussed him and all his Ap∣parrell into an Eele-skinne: the Case of a Treble Hoe-boy was a Mansion for him: a Court: and now hath hee Land, and Beef. Well, I will be acquainted with him, if I return: and it shall go hard, but I will make him a Philosophers two Stones to me. If the young Dace be a Bait for the old Pike, I see no reason, in the Law of Nature, but I may snap at him. Let time shape, and there an end.
What is this Forest called?
It is Gualtree Forest, and't shall please your Grace.
Here stand (my Lords) and send discoverers forth,
To know the numbers of our Enemies.
Wee have sent forth already.
It is well done.
My Friends, and Brethren (in these great Affairs)
I must acquaint you, that I have received
New-dated Letters from Northumberland:
Their cold intent, tenure, and substance thus.
Here doth hee wish his Person, with such Powers
As might hold sortance with his Quality,
The which hee could not levy: whereupon
Hee is retired, to ripe his growing Fortunes,
To Scotland; and concludes in hearty prayers,
That your Attempts may ouer-liue the hazard,
And fearful meeting of their Opposite.
Thus do the hopes we have in him, touch ground,
And dash themselves to pieces.
Now? what news?
West of this Forest, scarcely off a mile,
In goodly form, comes on the Enemy:
And by the ground they hide, I judge their number
Upon, or near, the rate of thirty thousand.
The just proportion that we gave them out.
Let vs sway-on, and face them in the field.
What well-appointed Leader fronts vs here?
I think it is my Lord of Westmerland.
Health, and fair greeting from our General,
The Prince, Lord Iohn, and Duke of Lancaster.
Say on (my Lord of Westmerland) in peace:
What doth concern your coming?
Then (my Lord)
Unto your Grace doe I in chief address
The substance of my Speech. If that Rebellion
Came like it self, in base and abject Routs,
Led on by bloody Youth, guarded with Rage,
And countenanced by Boys, and Beggary:
I say, if damned Commotion so appear,
In his true, native, and most proper shape,
You (Reverend Father, and these Noble Lords)
Had not been here, to dress the ugly form
Of base, and bloody Insurrection,
With your fair Honours. You, Lord Arch-bishop,
Whose Sea is by a Civil Peace maintained,
Whose Beard, the Silver Hand of Peace hath touched,
Whose Learning, and good Letters, Peace hath tutored,
Whose white Inuestments figure Innocence,
The Dove, and very blessed Spirit of Peace.
Wherefore doe you so ill translate your self,
Out of the Speech of Peace, that bears such grace,
Into the harsh and boisterous Tongue of War?
Turning your Books to Graves, your Ink to Blood,
Your Pens to Lances, and your Tongue divine
To a loud Trumpet, and a Point of War.
Wherefore doe I this? so the Question stands.
Briefly to this end: Wee are all diseased,
And with our surfeiting, and wanton hours,
Have brought our selves into a burning Fever,
And wee must bleed for it: of which Disease,
Our late King Richard (being infected) died.
But (my most Noble Lord of Westmerland)
I take not on me here as a Physician,
Nor doe I, as an Enemy to Peace,
Troop in the Throngs of Military men:
But rather show a while like fearful War,
To diet rank Minds, sick of happiness,
And purge the obstructions, which begin to stop
Our very Veins of Life: hear me more plainly.
I have in equal balance justly weighed,
What wrongs our Arms may do, what wrongs we suffer,
And find our Griefs heavier then our Offences.
Wee see which way the stream of Time doth run,
And are enforced from our most quiet there,
By the rough Torrent of Occasion,
And have the summary of all our Griefs
(When time shall serve) to show in Articles;
Which long ere this, wee offered to the King,
And might, by no Suit, gain our Audience:
When wee are wronged, and would unfold our Griefs,
Wee are denied access unto his Person,
Even by those men, that most have done vs wrong.
The dangers of the days but newly gone,
Whose memory is written on the Earth
With yet appearing blood; and the examples
Of every Minutes instance (present now)
Hath put vs in these ill-beseeming Arms:
Not to break Peace, or any Branch of it,
But to establish here a Peace indeed,
Concurring both in Name and Quality.
When ever yet was your Appeal denied?
Wherein have you been galled by the King?
What Peer hath been suborned, to grate on you,
That you should seal this lawless bloody Book
Of forged Rebellion, with a Seal divine?
My Brother general, the Common-wealth,
I make my Quarrel, in particular.
There is no need of any such redress:
Or if there were, it not belongs to you.
Why not to him in part, and to vs all,
That feel the bruises of the days before,
And suffer the Condition of these Times
To lay a heavy and unequal Hand upon our Honours?
O my good Lord Mowbray,
Construe the Times to their Necessities,
And you shall say (indeed) it is the Time,
And not the King, that doth you injuries.
Yet for your part, it not appears to me,
Either from the King, or in the present Time,
That you should have an inch of any ground
To build a Grief on: were you not restored
To all the Duke of Norfolkes Seignories,
Your Noble, and right well-remembred Fathers?
What thing, in Honour, had my Father lost,
That need to be revived, and breathed in me?
The King that loved him, as the State stood then,
Was forced, perforce compelled to banish him:
And then, that Henry Bullingbrooke and hee
Being mounted, and both roused in their Seats,
Their neighing Coursers daring of the Spur,
Their armed Staves in charge, their Beavers down,
Their eyes of fire, sparkling through sights of Steel,
And the loud Trumpet blowing them together:
Then, then, when there was nothing could have stayed
My Father from the Breast of Bullingbrooke;
O, when the King did throw his Warder down,
(His own Life hung upon the Staff hee threw)
Then threw hee down himself, and all their Lives,
That by Indictment, and by dint of Sword,
Have since mis-carryed under Bullingbrooke.
You speak (Lord Mowbray) now you know not what.
The Earl of Hereford was reputed then
In England the most valiant Gentleman.
Who knows, on whom Fortune would then have smiled?
But if your Father had been Victor there,
Hee ne'er had borne it out of Coventry.
For all the Country, in a general voice,
Cried hate upon him: and all their prayers, and love,
Were set on Herford, whom they doted on,
And blessed, and graced, and did more then the King.
But this is mere digression from my purpose.
Here come I from our Princely General,
To know your Griefs; to tell you, from his Grace,
That hee will give you Audience: and wherein
It shall appear, that your demands are just,
You shall enjoy them, every thing set off,
That might so much as think you Enemies.
But hee hath forced vs to compel this Offer,
And it proceeds from Policy, not Love.
Mowbray, you overween to take it so:
This Offer comes from Mercy, not from Fear.
For lo, within a Ken our Army lies,
Upon mine Honour, all too confident
To give admittance to a thought of fear.
Our Battle is more full of Names then yours,
Our Men more perfect in the use of Arms,
Our Armour all as strong, our Cause the best;
Then Reason will, our hearts should be as good.
Say you not then, our Offer is compelled.
Well, by my will, wee shall admit no Parley.
That argues but the shame of your offence:
A rotten Case abides no handling.
Hath the Prince Iohn a full Commission,
In very ample virtue of his Father,
To hear, and absolutely to determine
Of what Conditions wee shall stand upon?
That is intended in the Generals Name:
I muse you make so slight a Question.
Then take (my Lord of Westmerland) this Schedule,
For this contains our general Grievances:
Each several Article herein redressed,
All members of our Cause, both here, and hence,
That are insinewed to this Action,
Acquitted by a true substantial form,
And present execution of our wills,
To vs, and to our purposes confined,
Wee come within our awful Banks again,
And knit our Powers to the Arm of Peace.
This will I show the General. Please you Lords,
In sight of both our Battles, wee may meet
At either end in peace: which Heaven so frame,
Or to the place of difference call the Swords,
Which must decide it.
My Lord, wee will doe so.
There is a thing within my Bosom tells me,
That no Conditions of our Peace can stand.
Fear you not, that if wee can make our Peace
Upon such large terms, and so absolute,
As our Conditions shall consist upon,
Our Peace shall stand as firm as Rocky Mountains.
I, but our valuation shall be such,
That every slight, and false-deriued Cause,
Yea, every idle, nice, and wanton Reason,
Shall, to the King, taste of this Action:
That were our Royal faiths, Martyrs in Love,
Wee shall be winnowed with so rough a wind,
That even our Corn shall seem as light as Chafe,
And good from bad find no partition.
No, no (my Lord) note this: the King is weary
Of dainty and such picking Grievances:
For hee hath found, to end one doubt by Death,
Revives two greater in the Heirs of Life.
And therefore will hee wipe his Tables clean,
And keep no Tell-tale to his Memory,
That may repeat, and History his loss,
To new remembrance. For full well hee knows,
Hee cannot so precisely weed this Land,
As his mis-doubts present occasion:
His foes are so en-rooted with his friends,
That plucking to vnfixe an Enemy,
Hee doth unfasten so, and shake a friend.
So that this Land, like an offensive wife,
That hath enraged him on, to offer strokes,
As he is striking, holds his Infant up,
And hangs resolved Correction in the Arm,
That was vprear'd to execution.
Besides, the King hath wasted all his Rods,
On late Offenders, that he now doth lack
The very Instruments of Chastisement:
So that his power, like to a Fanglesse Lion
May offer, but not hold.
It is very true:
And therefore be assured (my good Lord Marshal)
If we do now make our atonement well,
Our Peace, will (like a broken Limb united)
Grow stronger, for the breaking.
Be it so:
Here is returned my Lord of Westmerland.
The Prince is here at hand: pleases your Lordship
To meet his Grace, just distance 'tweene our Armies?
Your Grace of York, in heauen's name then forward.
Before, and greet his Grace (my Lord) we come.
You are well encountered here (my cousin Mowbray)
Good day to you, gentle Lord Archbishop,
And so to you Lord Hastings, and to all.
My Lord of York, it better showed with you,
When that your Flock (assembled by the Bell)
Encircled you, to hear with reverence
Your exposition on the holy Text,
Then now to see you here an Iron man
Cheering a rowt of Rebels with your Drum,
Turning the Word, to Sword; and Life to death:
That man that sits within a Monarchs heart,
And ripens in the Sunne-shine of his favour,
Would hee abuse the Countenance of the King,
Alack, what Mischiefs might hee set abroach,
In shadow of such Greatness? With you, Lord Bishop,
It is even so. Who hath not heard it spoken.
How deep you were within the Books of Heaven?
To vs, the Speaker in his Parliament;
To vs, the imagine Voice of Heaven it self:
The very Opener, and Intelligencer,
Between the Grace, the Sanctities of Heaven,
And our dull workings. O, who shall believe,
But you mis-vse the reverence of your Place,
Employ the Countenance, and Grace of Heaven,
As a false Favourite doth his Princes Name,
In deeds dishonourable? You have taken up,
Under the counterfeited Zeal of Heaven,
The Subjects of Heavens Substitute, my Father,
And both against the Peace of Heaven, and him,
Have here vp-swarmed them.
Good my Lord of Lancaster,
I am not here against your Fathers Peace:
But (as I told my Lord of Westmerland)
The Time (mis-order'd) doth in common sense
Crowd vs, and crush vs, to this monstrous Form,
To hold our safety up. I sent your Grace
The parcels, and particulars of our Grief,
The which hath been with scorn should from the Court:
Whereon this Hydra-Sonne of War is borne,
Whose dangerous eyes may well be charmed asleep,
With grant of our most just and right desires;
And true Obedience, of this Madness cured,
Stoop tamely to the foot of Majesty.
If not, wee ready are to try our fortunes,
To the last man.
And though wee here fall down,
Wee have Supplies, to second our Attempt:
If they mis-carry, theirs shall second them.
And so, success of Mischief shall be borne,
And Heir from Heir shall hold this Quarrel up,
Whiles England shall have generation.
You are too shallow (Hastings)
Much too shallow,
To sound the bottom of the after-Times.
Pleases your Grace, to answer them directly,
How farre-forth you doe like their Articles.
I like them all, and doe allow them well:
And swear here, by the honour of my blood,
My Fathers purposes have been mistook,
And some, about him, have too lavishly
Wrested his meaning, and Authority.
My Lord, these Griefs shall be with speed redressed:
Upon my Life, they shall. If this may please you,
Discharge your Powers unto their several Counties,
As wee will ours: and here, between the Armies,
Let's drink together friendly, and embrace,
That all their eyes may bear those Tokens home,
Of our restored Love, and Amity.
I take your Princely word, for these redresses.
I give it you, and will maintain my word:
And thereupon I drink unto your Grace.
Go Captain, and deliver to the Army
This news of Peace: let them have pay, and part:
I know, it will well please them.
High thee Captain.
To you▪ my Noble Lord of Westmerland.
I pledge your Grace:
And if you knew what pains I have bestowed,
To breed this present Peace,
You would drink freely: but my love to ye,
Shall show it self more openly hereafter.
I doe not doubt you.
I am glad of it.
Health to my Lord, and gentle Cousin Mowbray.
You wish me health in very happy season,
For I am, on the sudden, something ill.
Against ill Chances, men are ever merry,
But heaviness fore-runnes the good event.
Therefore be merry (Cousin) since sudden sorrow
Serves to say thus: some good thing comes to morrow.
Believe me, I am passing light in spirit.
So much the worse, if your own Rule be true.
The word of Peace is rendered: hark how they shout.
This had been cheerful, after Victory.
A Peace is of the nature of a Conquest:
For then both parties nobly are subdued,
And neither party looser.
Go (my Lord)
And let our Army be discharged too:
And good my Lord (so please you) let our Trains
March by vs, that wee may peruse the men
Wee should have coap'd withal.
Go, good Lord Hastings:
And ere they be dismissed, let them march by.
I trust (Lords) wee shall lye to night together.
Now Cousin, wherefore stands our Army still?
The Leaders having charge from you to stand,
Will not go off, until they hear you speak.
They know their duties.
Our Army is dispersed:
Like youthful Steers, vnyoak'd, they took their course
East, West, North, South: or like a School, broke up,
Each hurries towards his home, and sporting place.
Good tidings (my Lord Hastings) for the which,
I doe arrest thee (Traitor) of high Treason:
And you Lord Arch-bishop, and you Lord Mowbray,
Of Capital Treason, I attach you both.
Is this proceeding just, and honourable?
Is your Assembly so?
Will you thus break your faith?
I pawned thee none:
I promised you redress of these same Grievances
Whereof you did complain; which, by mine Honour,
I will perform, with a most Christian care.
But for you (Rebels) look to taste the due
Meet for Rebellion, and such Acts as yours.
Most shallowly did you these Arms commence,
Fondly brought here, and foolishly sent hence.
Strike up our Drums, pursue the scattered stray,
Heaven, and not wee, have safely fought to day.
Some guard these Traitors to the Block of Death,
Treasons true Bed, and yeelder up of breath.
What's your Name, Sir? of what Condition are you? and of what place, I pray?
I am a Knight, Sir:
And my Name is Colleuile of the Dale.
Well then, Colleuile is your Name, a Knight is your Degree, and your Place, the Dale. Colleuile shall still be your Name, a Traitor your Degree, and the Dun∣geon your Place, a place deep enough: so shall you be still Colleuile of the Dale.
Are not you Sir Iohn Falstaff?
As good a man as he sir, who ere I am: doe ye yield sir, or shall I sweat for you? if I doe sweat, they are the drops of thy Lovers, and they weep for thy death, therefore rowze up Fear and Trembling, and do obser∣uance to my mercy.
I think you are Sir Iohn Falstaff, &amp; in that thought yield me.
I have a whole School of tongues in this belly of mine, and not a Tongue of them all, speaks any other word but my name: and I had but a belly of any indiffe∣renc, I were simply the most active fellow in Europe: my womb, my womb, my womb undoes me. Here comes our General.
The hey• is past, follow no farther now:
Call in the Powers good Cousin Westmerland.
Now Fall•taffe, where have you been all this while?
When every thing is ended, then you come.
These tardy Tricks of yours will (on my life)
One time, or other, break some Gallows back.
I would bee sorry (my Lord) but it should bee thus: I never knew yet, but rebuke and check was the reward of Valour. Doe you think me a Swallow, an Are∣row, or a Bullet? Have I, in my poor and old Motion, the expedition of Thought? I have speeded hither with the very extremest inch of possibility. I have foundered nine score and odd Posts: and here (trauell-tainted as I am) have, in my pure and immaculate Valour, taken Sir Iohn Colleuile of the Dale, a most furious Knight, and valorous Enemy: But what of that? hee saw me, and yielded: that I may justly say with the hooke-nos'd fellow of Rome, I came, saw, and ouer-came.
It was more of his Curtsy, then your deser∣uing.
I know not: here hee is, and here I yield him: and I beseech your Grace, let it be booked, with the rest of this days deeds; or I swear, I will have it in a particular Ballad, with mine own Picture on the top of it (Colleuile kissing my foot:) To the which course, if I be enforced, if you do not all show like gilt two-pences to me; and I, in the clear Sky of Fame, o're-shine you as much as the Full Moon doth the Cinders of the Eel∣meant (which show like Pinnes-heads to her) believe not the Word of the Noble: therefore let me have right, and let desert mount.
Thine's too heavy to mount.
Let it thine then.
Thine's too thick to shine.
Let it doe something (my good Lord) that may doe me good, and call it what you will.
Is thy Name Colleuile?
It is (my Lord.)
A famous Rebel art thou, Colleuile.
And a famous true Subject took him.
I am (my Lord) but as my Betters are,
That led me hither: had they been ruled by me,
You should have won them dearer then you have.
I know not how they sold themselves, but thou like a kind fellow, gau'st thy self away; and I thank thee, for thee.
Have you left pursuit?
Retreat is made, and Execution stayed.
Send Colleuile, with his Confederates,
To York, to present Execution.
Blunt, lead him hence, and see you guard him sure.
And now dispatch we toward the Court (my Lords)
I hear the King, my Father, is sore sick.
Our News shall go before vs, to his Majesty,
Which (Cousin) you shall bear, to comfort him:
And wee with sober speed will follow you.
My Lord, I beseech you, give me leave to go through Gloucestershire: and when you come to Court, stand my good Lord, 'pray, in your good report.
Fare you well, Falstaff: I, in my condition,
Shall better speak of you, then you deserve.
I would you had but the wit: it were better then your Dukedom. Good faith, this same young so∣ber-blooded Boy doth no• love me, nor a man cannot make him laugh: but that's no marvel, hee drinks no Wine. There's never any of these demure Boys come to any proof: for thin Drink doth so ouer-coole their blood, and making many Fish-Meales, that they fall into a kind of Male Greene-sicknesse: and then, when they marry, they get Wenches. They are generally Fools, and Cowards; which some of vs should be too, but for inflammation. A good Sherris-Sack hath a two-fold operation in it: it ascends me into the Brain, dries me there all the foolish, and dull, and cruddy Vapours, which environ it: makes it apprehensive, quick, forge∣tiue, full of nimble, fiery, and delectable shapes; which delivered o'er to the Voice, the Tongue, which is the Birth, becomes excellent Wit. The second property of your excellent Sherris, is, the warming of the Blood: which before (cold, and settled) left the Liver white, and pale; which is the Badge of Pusillanimity, and Cowar∣dize: but the Sherris warmes it, and makes it course from the inwards, to the parts extremes: it illuminateth the Face, which (as a Beacon) gives warning to all the rest of this little Kingdom (Man) to Arm: and then the Vital Commoners, and in-land petty Spirits, muster me all to their Captain, the Heart; who great, and puffed up with his Retinue, doth any Deed of Courage: and this Valour comes of Sherris. So, that skill in the Weapon is nothing, without Sack (for that sets it a-worke:) and Learning, a mere Hoard of Gold, kept by a Devil, till Sack commences it, and sets it in act, and use. Hereof comes it, that Prince Harry is valiant: for the cold blood hee did naturally inherit of his Father, hee hath, like lean, stirrill, and bare Land, manured, husbanded, and tyll'd, with excellent endeavour of drinking good, and good store of fertile Sherris, that hee is become very hot, and valiant. If I had a thousand Sons, the first Principle I would teach them, should be to forswear thin Pot∣tions, and to addict themselves to Sack.
How now Bardolph?
The Army is discharged all, and gone.
Let them go: Isle through Gloucestershire, and there will I visit Master Robert Shallow, Esquire: I have him already tempering between my finger and my thumb, and shortly will I seal with him. Come away.
Now Lords, if Heaven doth give successful end
To this Debate that bleeds at our doors,
Wee will out Youth lead on to higher Fields,
And draw no Swords, but what are sanctified.
Our Navy is addressed, our Power collected,
Our Substitutes, in absence, well invested,
And every thing lies level to our wish;
Only wee want a little personal Strength:
And pause vs, till these Rebels, now afoot,
Come underneath the yoke of Government.
Both which we doubt not, but your Majesty
Shall soon enjoy.
Humphrey (my Son of Gloucester) where is the Prince, your Brother?
I think hoe's gone to hunt (my Lord) at Wind∣sor.
And how accompanied?
I doe not know (my Lord.)
Is not his Brother, Thomas of Clarence, with him?
No (my good Lord) hee is in presence here.
What would my Lord, and Father?
Nothing but well to thee, Thomas of Clarence.
How chance thou art not with the Prince, thy Brother?
Hee loves thee, and thou dost neglect him (Thomas.)
Thou hast a better place in his Affection,
Then all thy Brothers: cherish it (my Boy)
And Noble Offices thou may effect
Of Mediation (after I am dead)
Between his Greatness, and thy other Brethren.
Therefore omit him not: blunt not his Love,
Nor loose the good advantage of his Grace,
By seeming cold, or careless of his will.
For hee is gracious, if hee be observed:
Hee hath a Tear for Pity, and a Hand
Open (as Day) for melting Charity:
Yet notwithstanding, being incensed, hoe's Flint,
As humorous as Winter, and as sudden,
As Flaws congealed in the Spring of day.
His temper therefore must be well observed:
Chide him for faults, and doe it reverently,
When you perceive his blood inclined to mirth:
But being moody, give him Line, and scope,
Till that his passions (like a Whale on ground)
Confound themselves with working. Learn this Thomas,
And thou shalt prove a shelter to thy friends,
A Hoop of Gold, to bind thy Brothers in:
That the united Vessel of their Blood
(Mingled with Venom of Suggestion,
As force, perforce, the Age will power it in)
Shall never leake, though it doe work as strong
As Aconitum, or rash Gun-powder.
I shall observe him with all care, and love.
Why art thou not at Windsor with him (Tho∣mas?)
Hee is not there to day: hee dines in Lone∣don.
And how accompanied? Can thou tell that?
With Points, and other his continual foal∣lowers.
Most subject is the fattest Soil to Weeds:
And hee (the Noble Image of my Youth)
Is ouer-spread with them: therefore my grief
Stretches it self beyond the hour of death.
The blood weeps from my heart, when I doe shape
(In forms imaginary) the unguided Days,
And rotten Times, that you shall look upon,
When I am sleeping with my Ancestors.
For when his head-strong Riot hath no Curb,
When Rage and hot-Blood are his Counsailors,
When Means and lavish Manners meet together;
Oh, with what Wings shall his Affections fly
Towards fronting Peril, and opposed Decay?
My gracious Lord, you look beyond him quite:
The Prince but studies his Companions,
Like a strange Tongue: wherein, to gain the Language,
It is needful, that the most immodest word
Be looked upon, and learned: which once attained,
Your Highness knows, comes to no farther use,
But to be known, and hated. So, like gross terms,
The Prince will, in the perfectness of time,
Cast off his followers: and their memory
Shall as a Pattern, or a Measure, live,
By which his Grace must mere the lives of others,
Turning past-euills to advantages.
It is seldom, when the Bee doth leave her Comb
In the dead Carrion.
Who's here? Westmerland?
Health to my Sovereign, and new happiness
Added to that, that I am to deliver.
Prince Iohn, your Son, doth kiss your Graces Hand:
Mowbray, the Bishop, Scroope, Hastings, and all,
Are brought to the Correction of your Law.
There is not now a Rebels Sword unsheathed,
But Peace puts forth her Olive every where:
The manner how this Action hath been borne,
Here (at more leisure) may your Highness read,
With every course, in his particular.
O Westmerland, thou art a Summer Bird▪
Which ever in the haunch of Winter sings
The lifting up of day.
Look, heere's more news.
From Enemies, Heaven keep your Majesty:
And when they stand against you, may they fall,
As those that I am come to tell you of.
The Earl Northumberland, and the Lord Bardolf,
With a great Power of English, and of Scots,
Are by the Sheriff of Yorkshire overthrown:
The manner, and true order of the fight,
This Packet (please it you) contains at large.
And wherefore should these good news
Make me sick?
Will Fortune never come with both hands full,
But write her fair words still in foulest Letters?
She either gives a Stomach, and no Food,
(Such are the poor, in health) or else a Feast,
And takes away the Stomach (such are the Rich,
That have abundance, and enjoy it not.)
I should rejoice now, at this happy news,
And now my Sight fails, and my Brain is giddy.
O me, come near me, now I am much ill.
Comfort your Majesty.
Oh, my Royal Father.
My Sovereign Lord, cheer up your self, look up.
Be patient (Princes) you doe know, these Fits
Are with his Highness very ordinary▪
Stand from him, give him ayre:
He will straight be well.
No, no, hee cannot long hold out: these pangs,
The incessant care, and labour of his Mind,
Hath wrought the Mure, that should confine it in,
So thin, that Life looks through, and will break out.
The people fear me: for they doe observe
Unfathered Heirs, and loathly Births of Nature:
The Seasons change their manners, as the Year
Had found some Months asleep, and leaped them over.
The River hath thrice flowed, no ebb between:
And the old folk (Times doting Chronicles)
Say it did so, a little time before
That our great Grand-fire Edward sicked, and dyed.
Speak lower (Princes) for the King reason∣uers.
This Apoplexy will (certain) be his end.
I pray you take me up, and bear me hence
Into some other Chamber: softly 'pray.
Let there be no noise made (my gentle friends)
Unless some dull and favourable hand
Will whisper Music to my weary Spirit.
Ca• for the Music in the other Room.
Set me the Crown upon my Pillow here.
His eye is hollow, and hee changes much.
Less noise, less noise.
Who saw the Duke of Clarence?
I am here (Brother) full of heaviness.
How now? Rain within doors, and none abroad? How doth the King?
Exceeding ill.
Heard hee the good news yet?
Tell it him.
Hee altered much, upon the hearing it.
If hee be sick with Joy,
He will recover without Physic.
Not so much noise (my Lords)
Sweet Prince speak lowe.
The King, your Father, is disposed to sleep.
Let vs with-draw into the other Room.
Will it please your Grace to go along with vs?
No: I will sit, and watch here, by the King.
Why doth the Crown lye there, upon his Pillow,
Being so troublesome a Bed-fellow?
O polished Perturbation! Golden Care!
That keep the Ports of Slumber open wide,
To many a watchful Night: sleep with it now,
Yet not so sound, and halt so deeply sweet,
As hee whose Brow (with homely Biggen bound)
Snores out the Watch of Night. O Majesty!
When thou dost pinch thy Bearer, thou dost sit
Like a rich Armour, worn in heat of day,
That scald with safety: by his Gates of breath,
There lies a dowlney feather, which stirs not:
Did hee suspit•, that light and weightless dowlne
Perforce must move. My gracious Lord, my Father,
This sleep is sound indeed: this is a sleep,
That from this Golden Rigoll hath divorced
So many English Kings. Thy due, from me,
Is Tear•, and heavy Sorrows of the Blood,
Which Nature, Love, and filial tenderness,
Shall (O dear Father) pay thee plenteously.
My due, from thee, is this Imperial Crown,
Which (as immediate from thy Place, and Blood)
Derives it self to me. Lo, here it sits,
Which Heaven shall guard:
And put the worlds whole strength into one giant Arm,
It shall not force this Lineal Honour from me.
This from thee, will I to mine leave,
As it is left to me.
Warwick, Gloucester, Clarence.
Doth the King call?
What would your Majesty? how fares your Grace?
Why did you leave me here alone (my Lords?)
We left the Prince (my Brother) here (my Liege)
Who undertook to sit and watch by you.
The Prince of Wales? where is hee? let me see him.
This door is open, hee is gone this way.
Hee came not through the Chamber where wee stayed.
Where is the Crown? who took it from my Pillow?
When wee with-drew (my Liege) wee left it here.
The Prince hath taken it hence:
Go seek him out.
Is hee so hasty, that hee doth suppose
My sleep, my death? Find him (my Lord of Warwick)
Chide him hither: this part of his conjoins
With my disease, and helps to end me.
See Sons, what things you are:
How quickly Nature falls into revolt,
When Gold becomes her Object?
For this, the foolish ouer-carefull Fathers
Have broke their sleeps with thoughts,
Their brains with care, their bones with industry.
For this, they have engrossed and piled up
The cankered heaps of strange-atchieued Gold:
For this, they have been thoughtful, to invest
Their Sons with Arts, and Martial Exercises:
When, like the Bee, culling from every flower
The virtuous Sweets, our Thighs packed, with Wax,
Our Mouths with Honey, wee bring it to the Hive;
And like the Bees, are murdered for our pains.
This bitter taste yields his engrossements,
To the ending Father.
Now, where is hee, that will not stay so long,
Till his Friend Sickness hath determined me?
My Lord, I found the Prince in the next Room,
Washing with kindly Tears his gentle Cheeks,
With such a deep demeanour, in great sorrow,
That Tyranny, which never quaffed but blood,
Would (by beholding him) have washed his Knife
With gentle eye-drops. Hee is coming hither.
But wherefore did hee take away the Crown?
Lo, where hee comes. Come hither to me (Harry.)
Depart the Chamber, leave vs here alone.
I never thought to hear you speak again.
Thy wish was Father (Harry) to that thought:
I stay too long by thee, I weary thee.
Dost thou so hunger for my empty Chair,
That thou wilt needs invest thee with mine Honours,
Before thy hour be ripe? O foolish Youth!
Thou seek the Greatness, that will overwhelm thee.
Stay but a little: for my Cloud of Dignity
Is held from falling, with so weak a wind,
That it will quickly drop: my Day is dim.
Thou hast stolen that, which after some few hours
Were thine, without offence: and at my death
Thou hast sealed up my expectation.
Thy Life did manifest, thou lou'dst me not,
And thou wilt have me dye assured of it.
Thou hid'st a thousand Daggers in thy thoughts,
Which thou hast whetted on thy stony heart,
To stab at half an hour of my Life.
What? can thou not forbear me half an hour?
Then get thee gone, and dig my grave thy self,
And bid the merry Bells ring to thy care
That thou art Crowned, not that I am dead.
Let all the Tears, that should be dew my Hearse
Be drops of Balm, to sanctify thy head:
Only compound me with forgotten dust.
Give that, which gave thee life, unto the Worms:
Pluck down my Officers, break my Decrees;
For now a time is come, to mock at Form.
Henry the fifth is Crowned: Up Vanity,
Down Royal State: All you sage Counsailors, hence:
And to the English Court, assemble now
From every Region, Apes of Idleness.
Now neighbor-Confines, purge you of your Scum:
Have you a Ruffian that swill swear? drink? dance?
Revel the night? Rob? Murder? and commit
The oldest sins, the newest kind of ways?
Be happy, he will trouble you no more:
England, shall double gelled, His treble guilt.
England, shall give him Office, Honour, Might:
For the Fifth Harry, from curbed License plucks
The muzzle of Restraint; and the wilde Dog
Shall flesh his tooth in every Innocent.
O my poor Kingdom (sick, with civil blows)
When that my Care could not with-hold thy Riots,
What wilt thou do, when Riot is thy Care?
O, thou wilt be a Wilderness again,
Peopled with Wolves (thy old Inhabitants.
O pardon me (my Liege)
But for my Tears,
The most Impediments unto my Speech,
I had forestalled this dear, and deep Rebuke,
Ere you (with grief) had spoke, and I had heard
The course of it so far. There is your Crown,
And he that wears the Crown immortally,
Long guard it yours. If I affect it more,
Then as your Honour, and as your Renown,
Let me no more from this Obedience rise,
Which my most true, and inward duteous Spirit
Teaches this prostrate, and exterior bending.
Heaven witness with me, when I here came in,
And found no course of breath within your Majesty,
How cold it struck my heart. If I do fine,
O let me, in my present wildenesse, dye,
And never live, to show the incredulous World,
The Noble change that I have purposed.
Coming to look on you, thinking you dead,
(And dead almost (my Liege) to think you were)
I spake unto the Crown (as having sense)
And thus upbraided it. The Care on thee depending,
Hath fed upon the body of my Father,
Therefore, thou best of Gold, art worst of Gold.
Other, less fine in Char•act, is more precious,
Preserving life, in Med•cine potable:
But thou, most Fine, most Honoured, most Renowned,
Hast eat the Bearer up.
Thus (my Royal Liege)
Accusing it, I put it on my Head,
To try with it (as with an Enemy,
That had before my face murdered my Father)
The Quarrel of a true Inheritor.
But if it did infect my blood with Joy,
Or swell my Thoughts, to any strain of Pride,
If any Rebel, or vain spirit of mine,
Did, with the least Affection of a Welcome,
Give entertainment to the might of it,
Let heaven, for ever, keep it from my head,
And make me, as the poorest Vassal is,
That doth with awe, and terror kneel to it.
O my Son!
Heaven put it in thy mind to take it hence,
That thou might join the more, thy Fathers love,
Pleading so wisely, in excuse of it.
Come hither Harry, sit thou by my bed,
And hear (I think, the very latest Counsel
That ever I shall breath: Heaven knows, my Son)
By what by-pathes, and indirect crook'd-wayes
I met this Crown: and I my self know well
How troublesome it sate upon my head.
To thee, it shall descend with better Quiet,
Better Opinion, better Confirmation:
For all the soil of the Achievement goes
With me, into the Earth. It seemed in me,
But as an Honour snatched with boisterous hand,
And I had many living, to upbraid
My gain of it, by their Assistances,
Which daily grew to Quarrel, and to Blood-shed,
Wounding supposed Peace.
All these bold Fears,
Thou see (with peril) I have answered:
For all my Reign, hath been but as a Scene
Acting that argument. And now my death
Changes the Mood: For what in me, was purchased,
Falls upon thee, in a more Fairer sort.
So thou, the Garland wear successively.
Yet, though thou stand more sure, then I could do,
Thou art-not firm enough, since griefs are greene:
And all thy Friends, which thou must make thy Friends
Have but their stings, and teeth, newly tak'n out,
By whose fell working, I was first advanced,
And by whose power, I well might lodge a Fear
To be again displaced. Which to avoid,
I cut them off: and had a purpose now
To lead out many to the Holy Land;
Least rest, and lying still, might make them look
Too near unto my State.
Therefore (my Harry)
Be it thy course to busy giddy Minds
With Foreign Quarrels: that Action hence borne out,
May waste the memory of the former days.
More would I, but my Lungs are wasted so,
That strength of Speech is utterly denied me.
How I came by the Crown, O heaven forgive:
And grant it may, with thee, in true peace live.
My gracious Liege:
You won it, wore it: kept it, gave it me,
Then plain and right must my possession be;
Which I, with more, then with a Common pain,
Against all the World, will rightfully maintain.
Look, look,
Here comes my Iohn of Lancaster:
Health, Peace, and Happiness,
To my Royal Father.
Thou bring me happiness and Peace (Son Iohn:
But health (alack) with youthful wings is flown
From this bare; withered Trunk, Upon thy sight
My worldly business makes a period.
Where is my Lord of Warwick?
My Lord of Warwick.
Doth any name particular, belong 〈◊〉 •he Lodging, where I first did swooned?
It is called Jerusalem, my Noble Lord.
Laud be to heaven:
Eu• there my life must end.
It hath been prophesied to me many years,
I should not dye, but in Jerusalem:
Which (vainly) I supposed the Holy-Land.
But bear me to that Chamber, there Isle lye:
In that Jerusalem, shall Harry dye.
By Cock and Pie, you shall not away to night.
What Day, I say.
You must excuse me, M. Robert Shallow.
I will not excuse you: you shall not be excused.
Excuses shall not be admitted: there is no excuse shall serve: you shall not be excused.
Why Day.
Here sir.
Day, Day, Day, let me see (Day) let me see: William Cooke, bid him come hither. Sir Iohn, you shall not be excused.
Marry sir, thus: those Precepts cannot bee served: and again sir, shall we sow the head-land with Wheat?
With red Wheat Day. But for William Cook: are there no young Pigeons?
Yes Sir.
Here is now the Smiths note, for Shooing,
And Plough-Irons.
Let it be cast, and paid: Sir Iohn, you shall not be excused.
Sir, a new link to the Bucket must needs bee had: And Sir, doe you mean to stop any of Williams Wages, about the Sack he lost the other day, at Hinckley Fair?
He shall answer it:
Some Pigeons Day, a couple of short-legg'd Hens: a joint of Mutton and any pretty little tine Kickshaws, tell William Cooke.
Doth the man of War, stay all night sir?
Yes Day:
I will use him well. A Friend in th Court, is better then a penny in purse. Use his men well Day, for they are are∣rant Knaves, and will backbite.
No worse then they are bitten. sir: For, they have marvelous foul linen.
Well conceited Day: about thy Business, Day.
I beseech you sir,
To countenance William Ʋisor of Woncot, against Cle∣meant Perkes of the hill.
There are many Complaints Day, against that Ʋisor, that Ʋisor is an arrant Knave, on my know∣ledge.
I grant your Worship, that he is a knave Sir:) But yet heaven forbid Sir, but a Knave should have some Countenance, at his Friends request. An honest man sir, is able to speak for himself, when a Knave is not. I have served your Worship truly sir, these eight years: and if I cannot once or twice in a Quarter bear out a knave, against an honest man, I have but a very little credit with your Worship. The Knave is mine honest Friend Sir, therefore I beseech your Worship, let him bee Count∣nanc'd.
Go too,
I say he shall have no wrong: Look about Day.
Where are you Sir Iohn? Come, off with your Boots.
Give me your hand M. Bardolf.
I am glad to see your Worship.
I thank thee, with all my heart, kind Master
Bardolf: and welcome my tall Fellow:
Come Sir Iohn.
Isle follow you, good Master Robert Shallow. Bardolf, look to our Horses. If I were saw'de into Quantities, I should make four dozen of such bearded Hermits staves, as Master Shallow. It is a wonderful thing to see the semblably Cohetence of his men's spirits, and his: They, by observing of him, do bear themselves like foolish Justices: Hee, by conversing with them, is turned into a Iustice-like Serving-man. Their spirits are so married in Conjunction, with the participation of So∣ciety, that they flock together in consent, like so ma∣ny Wilde-Geese. If I had a suite to Master Shallow, I would humour his men, with the imputation of being near their Master. If to his Men, I would currie with Moister Shallow, that no man could better command his Servants. It is certain, that either wise bearing, or eg∣norant Carriage is caught, as men take diseases, one of another: therefore, let men take heed of their Comp∣no. I will devise matter enough out of this Shallow, to keep Prince Harry in continual Laughter, the wearing out of six Fashions (which is four Terms) or two Ac∣tions, and he shall laugh with Interuallums. O it is much that a Lye (with a flight Oath) and a jest (with • sad brow) will doe, with a Fellow, that never had the Ache in his shoulders. O you shall see him laugh, till his Face be like a wet Cloak, ill laid up.
Sir Iohn.
I come Master Shallow, I come Master Shallow.
How now, my Lord Chief Justice, when∣there away?
How doth the King?
Exceeding well: his Cares
Are now, all ended.
I hope, not dead.
Hoe's walked the way of Nature,
And to our purposes, he lives no more.
I would his Majesty had called me with him,
The service, that I truly did his life,
Hath left me open to all injuries.
Indeed I think the young King loves you not.
I know he doth not, and do arm my self
To welcome the condition of the Time,
Which cannot look more hideously upon me,
Then I have drawn it in my fantasy.
Here come the heavy Issue of dead Harry:
O, that the living Harry had the temper
Of him, the worst of these three Gentlemen:
How many Nobles then, should hold their places,
That must strike sail, to Spirits of wild sort?
Alas, I fear, all will be ouer-turn'd.
Good morrow Cousin Warwick, good morrow.
Cla. Good morrow, Cousin.
We meet, like men, that had forgot to speak.
We do remember: but our Argument
Is all too heavy, to admit much talk.
Well: Peace be with him, that hath made vs heavy
Peace be with vs, least we be heavier.
O, good my Lord, you have lost a friend indeed:
And I dare swear, you borrow not that face
Of seeming sorrow, it is sure your own.
Though no man be assured what grace to find,
You stand in coldest expectation.
I am the sorrier, would it were otherwise.
Well, you must now speak Sir Iohn Falstaff fair,
Which swims against your stream of Quality.
Sweet Princes: what I did, I did in Honour,
Led by the Imperial Conduct of my Soul,
And never shall you see, that I will beg
A ragged, and forestalled Remission.
If Troth, and upright Innocence fail me,
Isle to the King (my Master) that is dead,
And tell him, who hath sent me after him.
Here comes the Prince.
Good morrow: and heaven save your Majesty
This new, and gorgeous Garment, Majesty,
Sits not so easy on me, as you think.
Brothers, you mix your Sadness with some Fear:
This is the English, not the Turkish Court:
Not Amurah, an Amurah succeeds,
But Harry, Harry: Yet be sad (good Brothers)
For (to speak truth) it very well becomes you:
Sorrow, so Royally in you appears,
That I will deeply put the Fashion on,
And wear it in my heart. Why then be sad,
But entertain no more of it (good Brothers)
Then a joint burden, laid upon vs all.
For me, by Heaven (I bid you be assured)
Isle be your Father, and your Brother too:
Let me but bear your Love, Isle bear your Cares;
But weep that Horrie's dead, and so will I.
But Harry lives, that shall convert those Tears
By number, into hours of Happiness.
We hope no other from your Majesty.
You all look strangely on me: and you most,
You are (I think) assured, I love you not.
I am assured (if I be measured rightly)
Your Majesty hath no just cause to hate me.
No? How might a Prince of my great hopes forget
So great Indignities you laid upon me?
What? Rate? Rebuke? and roughly send to Prison
The immediate Heir of England? Was this easy?
May this be washed in Lethe, and forgotten?
I then did use the Person of your Father;
The Image of his power, lay then in me,
And in the administration of his Law,
Whiles I was busy for the Commonwealth,
Your Highness pleased to forget my place,
The Majesty, and power of Law, and Justice,
The Image of the King, whom I presented,
And struck me in my very Seat of Judgment▪
Whereon (as an Offender to your Father)
I gave bold way to my Authority,
And did commit you. If the deed were ill,
Be you contented, wearing now the Garland,
To have a Son, set your Decrees at nought?
To pluck down Justice from your awful Bench?
To trip the course of Law, and blunt the Sword
That guards the peace, and safety of your Person?
Nay more, to spurn at your most Royal Image,
And mock your workings, in a Second body?
Question your Royal Thoughts, make the case yours:
Be now the Father, and propose a Son:
Hear your own dignity so much profaned,
See your most dreadful Laws, so loosely slighted;
Behold your self, so by a Son disdained▪
And then imagine me, taking you part,
And in your power, soft silencing your Son:
After this cold consideration, sentence me;
And, as you are a King, speak in your State,
What I have done, that misbecame my place,
My person, or my Lieges Sovereignty.
You are right Justice, and you weigh this well:
Therefore still bear the Balance, and the Sword:
And I do wish your Honours may increase,
Till you do live, to see a Son of mine
Offend you, and obey you, as I did.
So shall I live, to speak my Fathers words:
Happy am I, that have a man so bold,
That dares do Justice, on my proper Son;
And no less happy, having such a Son,
That would deliver up his Greatness so,
Into the hands of Justice. You did commit me:
For which, I do commit into your hand,
The unstained Sword that you have used to bear:
With this Remembrance; That you use the same
With the like bold, just, and impartial spirit
As you have done against me. There is my hand,
You shall be as a Father, to my Youth;
My voice shall sound, as you do prompt mine ear,
And I will stoop, and humble my Intents,
To your well-practis'd, wise Directions.
And Princes all, believe me, I beseech you:
My Father is gone wilde into his Grave,
(For in his Tomb, lye my Affections)
And with his Spirits, sadly I survive,
To mock the expectation of the World;
To frustrate Prophesies, and to race out
Rotten Opinion, who hath writ me down
After my seeming. The Tide of Blood in me,
Hath proudly flowed in Vanity, till now.
Now doth it turn, and ebb back to the Sea,
Where it shall mingle with the state of Floods,
And flow henceforth in formal Majesty.
Now call we our High Court of Parliament,
And let vs choose such Limbs of Noble Counsel,
That the great Body of our State may go
In equal rank, with the best governed Nation,
That War, or Peace, or both at once may be
As things acquainted and familiar to vs,
In which you (Father) shall have foremost hand.
Our Coronation done, we will accite
(As I before remembered) all our State,
And heaven (consigning to my good intents)
No Prince, nor Peer, shall have just cause to say,
Heaven shorten Harries happy life, one day.
Nay, you shall see mine Orchard: where, in an Arbor we will eat a last years Pippin of my own graf∣fing, with a dish of Caraways, and so forth (Come Co∣sin Silence, and then to bed.
You have here a goodly dwelling, and a rich.
Barren, barren, barren: Beggars all, beggars all Sir Iohn: Marry, good ayre. Spread Day, spread Day: Well said Day.
This Day serves you for good uses: he is your Serving-man, and your Husband.
A good Varlet, a good Varlet, a very good Var∣let, Sir Iohn: I have drunk too much Sack at Supper. A good Varlet. Now sit down, now sit down: Come Cousin.
Ah sir (quoth-a) we shall doe nothing but eat, and make good cheer, and praise heaven for the merry year: when flesh is cheap, and Females dear, and lusty Lads rome here, and there: so merrily, and ever among so merrily.
There's a merry heart, good M. Silence, Isle give you a health for that anon.
Good M. Bardolf: some wine, Day.
Sweet sir, sit: Isle be with you anon: most sweet sir, sit. Master Page, good M. Page, sit: Proface. What you want in meat, we'll have in drink: but you bear, the heart's all.
Be merry M. Bardolf, and my little Soldier there, be merry.
Be merry, be merry, my wife he's all.
For women are Shrews, both short, and tall:
It is merry in Hall, when Beards wag all;
And welcome merry Shrouetide. Be merry, be merry.
I did not think M. Silence had bin a man of this Mettle.
Who I? I have been merry twice and once, ere now.
There is a dish of Lether-coats for you.
Day.
Your Worship: Isle be with you straight. A cup of Wine, sir?
A Cup of Wine, that's brisk and fine, &amp; drink unto the Lemon mine: and a merry heart lives long-a.
Well said, M. Silence.
If we shall be merry, now comes in the sweet of the night.
Health, and long life to you, M. Silence.
Fill the Cup, and let it come. Isle pledge you a mile to the bottom.
Honest Bardolf, welcome: If thou want any thing, and wilt not call, beshrew thy heart. Welcome my little tyne thief, and welcome indeed too: Isle drink to M. Bardolf, and to all the Cavaliers about London.
I hope to see London, once ere I die.
If I might see you there, Day.
You'll crack a quart together? Ha, will you not M. Bardolf?
Yes Sir, in a pottle pot.
I thank thee: the knave will stick by thee, I can assure thee that. He will not out, he is true bred.
And Isle stick by him, sir.
Why there spoke a King: lack nothing, be merry.
Look, who's at door there, ho: who knocks?
Why now you have done me right.
Do me right, and dub me Knight, Samingo. Is it not so?
It is so.
Is it so? Why then say an old man can do somewhat.
If it please your Worship, there's one Pistol come from the Court with news.
From the Court? Let him come in.
How now Pistol?
Sir Iohn, 'saue you sir.
What wind blew you hither, Pistol?
Not the ill wind which blows none to good, sweet Knight: Thou art now one of the greatest men in the Realm.
Indeed, I think he bee, but Goodman Puff of Barson.
Puff? puff in thy teeth, most recreant Coward base. Sir Iohn, I am thy Pistol, and thy Friend: halter skelter have I rode to thee, and tidings do I bring, and lucky joys, and golden Times, and happy News of price.
I prithee now deliver them, like a man of this World.
A footra for the World, and Worldlings base,
I speak of Africa, and Golden joys.
O base Assyrian Knight, what is thy news?
Let King Couitha know the truth thereof.
And Robin-hood, Scarlet, and Iohn.
Shall dunghill Cures confront the Hellicons?
And shall good news be baffel'd?
Then Pistol lay thy head in Furies lap.
Honest Gentleman,
I know not your breeding.
Why then Lament therefore.
Give me pardon, Sir.
If sir, you come with news from the Court, I take it, there is but two ways, either to utter them, or to conceal them. I am Sir, under the King, in some Authority.
Under which King?
Bezonian, speak, or dye.
Under King Harry.
Harry the Fourth? or Fifth?
Harry the Fourth.
A footra for thine Office.
Sir Iohn, thy tender Lamb-kinne, now is King.
Harry the Fift's the man, I speak the truth.
When Pistol lies, do this, and figge-me, like
The bragging Spaniard.
What, is the old King dead?
As nail in door.
The things I speak, are just.
Away Bardolf, Saddle my Horse,
Master Robert Shallow, choose what Office thou wilt
In the Land, it is thine. Pistol, I will double charge thee
With Dignities.
O joyful day:
I would not take a Knighthood for my Fortune.
What? I do bring good news.
Carry Master Silence to bed: Master Shallow, my Lord Shallow, be what thou wilt, I am Fortunes Steward. Get on thy Boots, wee I ride all night. Oh sweet Pistol: Away Bardolf: Come Pistol, utter more to me: and withal devise something to do thy self good. Boot, boot Master Shallow, I know the young King is sick for me. Let vs take any mans Horsfes: The Laws of Eng∣land are at my commandment. Happy are they, which have been my Friends: and woe unto my Lord Chief Justice.
Let Vultures vil'de seize on his Lungs also:
Where is the life that late I led, say they?
Why here it is, welcome those pleasant days.
No, thou arrant knave: I would I might die, that I might have thee hanged: Thou hast drawn my shoulder out of joint.
The Constables have delivered her over to me: and she shall have Whipping cheer enough, I warrant her. There hath been a man or two (lately) killed about her.
Nut-hooke, nut-hooke, you Lye: Come on, Isle tell thee what, thou damned Tripe-visag'd Rascal, if the Child I now go with, do miscarry, thou had better thou had struck thy Mother, thou Paper-fac'd Vile∣lain.
O that Sir Iohn were come, hee would make this a bloody day to some body. But I would the Fruit of her Womb might miscarry.
If it do, you shall have a dozen of Cushions again, you have but eleven now. Come, I charge you both go with me: for the man is dead, that you and Pi∣stole beat among you.
Isle tell thee what, thou thin man in a Censor; I will have you as soundly swindg'd for this, you blew-Bottel'd Rogue: you filthy famished Correctioner, if you be not swinged, Isle forswear half Kirtles.
Come, come, you shee-Knight-arrant, come.
O, that right should thus overcome might. Well of sufferance, comes ease.
Come you Rogue, come:
Bring me to a Justice.
Yes, come you starved Blood-hound.
Goodman death, goodman Bones.
Thou Anatomy, thou.
Come you thin Thing:
Come you Rascal.
Very well.
More Rushes, more Rushes.
The Trumpets have sounded twice.
It will be two of the Clock, ere they come from the Coronation.
Stand here by me, M. Robert Shallow, I will make the King do you Grace. I will leer upon him, as he comes by: and do but mark the countenance that hee will give me.
Bless thy Lungs, good Knight.
Come here Pistol, stand behind me. O if I had had time to have made new Liveries, I would have be∣stowed the thousand pound I borrowed of you. But it is no matter, this poor show doth better: this doth infer the zeal I had to see him.
It doth so.
It shows my earnestness in affection.
It doth so.
My devotion.
It doth, it doth, it doth.
As it were, to ride day and night,
And not to deliberate, not to remember,
Not to have patience to shift me.
It is most certain,
But to stand stained with Travail, and sweating with desire to see him, thinking of nothing else, putting all affairs in oblivion, as if there were nothing else to bee done, but to see him.
It is semper item: for obsque hoc nihil est. It is all in every part.
It is so indeed.
My Knight, I will inflame thy Noble Liver, and make thee rage. Thy Dol, and Helen of thy noble thoughts is in base Durance, and contagious prison: Hauled thy∣there by most Mechanical and dirty hand. Rowze up Revenge from Ebon den, with fell Alecto's Snake, for Dol is in. Pistol, speaks nought but troth.
I will deliver her.
There roared the Sea: and Trumpet Clangour sounds.
Save thy Grace, King Hall, my Royal Hall.
The heavens thee guard, and keep, most royal Imp of Fame.
'Saue thee my sweet Boy.
My Lord Chief Justice, speak to that vain man.
Have you your wits?
Know you what it is you speak?
My King, my Jove; I speak to thee, my heart.
I know thee not, old man: Fall to thy Prayers:
How ill white hairs become a Fool, and Easter?
I have long dreamed of such a kind of man,
So surfeit-swell'd, so old, and so profane:
But being awake, I do despise my dream.
Make less thy body (hence) and more thy Grace,
Leave gourmandizing; Know the Grave doth gape
For thee, thrice wider then for other men.
Reply not to me, with a Foole-borne Jest,
Presume not, that I am the thing I was,
For heaven doth know (so shall the world perceive)
That I have turned away my former Self,
So will I those that kept me Company.
When thou dost hear I am, as I have bin,
Approach me, and thou shalt be as thou was it
The Tutor and the Feeder of my Riots:
Till then, I banish thee, on pain of death,
As I have done the rest of my Misleaders,
Not to come near our Person, by ten mile.
For competence of life, I will allow you,
That lack of means enforce you not to evil:
And as we hear you do reform your selves,
We will according to your strength, and qualities,
Give you advancement. Be it your charge (my Lord)
To see performed the tenure of our word. Set on.
Master Shallow, I owe you a thousand pound.
I marry Sir Iohn, which I beseech you to let me have home with me.
That can hardly be, M. Shallow, do not you grieve at this: I shall be sent for in private to him: Look you, he must seem thus to the world: fear not your advance∣meant: I will be the man yet, that shall make you great.
I cannot well perceive how, unless you should give me your Doublet, and stuff me out with Straw. I beseech you, good Sir Iohn, let me have five hundred of my thousand.
Sir, I will be as good as my word. This that you heard, was but a colour.
A colour I fear, that you will dye, in Sir Iohn.
Fear no colours, go with me to dinner:
Come Lieutenant Pistol, come Bardolf,
I shall be sent for soon at night.
Go carry Sir Iohn Falstaff to the Fleet,
Take all his Company along with him.
My Lord, my Lord.
I cannot now speak, I will hear you soon:
Take them away.
Si fortune me tormento, spera me contento.
I like this fair proceeding of the Kings:
He hath intent his wonted Followers
Shall all be very well provided for:
But all are banished, till their conversations
Appear more wise, and modest to the world.
And so they are.
The King hath called his Parliament,
My Lord.
He hath.
I will lay odds, that ere this year expire,
We bear our Civil Swords, and Native fire
As far as France. I hear a Bird so sing,
Whose Music (to my thinking) pleased the King.
Come, will you hence?
FIRST, my Fear: then, my Curtsy: last, my Speech. My Fear, is your Displeasure: My Curtsy, my Duty: And my speech, to Beg your Pardons. If you look for a good speech now, you undo me: For what I have to say, is of mine own making: and what (indeed) I should say, will (I doubt) prove mine own marring. But to the Purpose, and so to the Venture. Be it known to you (as it is very well) I was lately here in the end of a displeasing Play, to pray your Patience for it, and to promise you a Better: I did mean (indeed) to pay you with this, which if (like an ill Venture) it come unluckily home, I break; and you, my gen∣tle Creditors lose. Here I promised you I would be, and here I commit my Body to your Mercies: Bate me some, and I will-pay you some, and (as most Debtors do) promise you infinitely.
If my Tongue cannot entreat you to acquit me: will you command me to use my Legs? And yet that were but light payment, to Dance out of your debt: But a good Conscience, will make any possible satisfaction, and so will I. All the Gen∣tlewomen here, have forgiven me, if the Gentlemen will not, then the Gentlemen do not agree with the Gentlewowen, which was never seen before, in such an As∣sembly.
One word more, I beseech you: if you be not too much cloid with Fat Meat, our humble Author will continue the Story (with Sir Iohn in it) and make you merry, with fair Katherine of France: where (for any thing I know) Fall∣staff shall dye of a sweat, unless already he be killed with your hard Opinions: For Old-Castle dyed a Martyr, and this is not the man. My Tongue is weary, when my Legs are too, I will bid you good night; and so kneel down before you: But (indeed) to pray for the Queen.

HAste nephew, what, a sluggard? Fie for shame, Shall he that was our morning Cock, turn Owl, And locke out day light from his drowsy eyes?
Pray pardon me for once, lord uncle, for Isle bee sworn, I had such a dream this morning: me thought one came with a commission to take a Sorrel curtoll, that was stole•…e from him, 〈◊〉 hee could find him. And because I feared he woul•… •…ay claim to my sorrel curtoll in my stable I ran to the Smith to have him set on his mane again, and his tail presently, that the Com∣mission-man might not think him a curtoll. And when the Smith would not doe it, I fell a beating of him, so that I could not wake for my life till I was revenged on him.
This is your old valor nephew, that will fight slay∣ping as well as waking.
Slut Aunt, what if my dream had been true▪ (as it might have been for any thing I knew) there's never a smith in Italy, shall make an Ass of me in my sleep, if I can choose.
Well said, my furious nephew: but I see
You quite forget that we must rouse to day
The sharp-tuskt Bore: and blaze our huntsmanship before the duke.
Forget Lord uncle? I hope not; you think belike
my wits are as brittle as a Beetle, or as skittish as your Bar∣barie Mare: one cannot cry weh•…, but straight she cries tihi.
Well guest cousin Hysteron Proteron.
But which way will the dukes grace hunt to day?
Toward Count Lassos house his Grace will hunt, Where he will visit his late honoured mistress.
Who Lady Mar•…arot, that dear•… young dame? Will his antiquity, never lean his iniquity?
Why how now nephew? turned Parnassus lately?
Nassus? I know not: but I would I had all the dukes living for her sake, Id make him a poor duke in faith.
No doubt of that, if thou •…adst all his living.
I would not stand dreaming of the matter as I do now.
Why how doe you dream nephew?
Mary all last night me thought I was tying her shoo∣string.
What all night •…ying her shoostring?
I that I was, and yet I ti•…d it not neither; for as I was tying it, the string broke me thought, and then me thought, having but one point at my hose, me thought, I gave her that to tie her shoo with all.
A point of much kindness I assure you.
Whereupon, in the v•…rye nick me thought the Count came rushing in, and I ran rushing out, with my heals about my hose for haste.
So, will you leave your dreaming, and dispatch?
Mum, not a word m•…re, Isle go before, and overtake you presently.
My Lord I fancy not these hunting sports,
When the bold game you follow turns again,
And stares you in the facel: et me behold
A cast of Falcons on their merry wings,
Daring the stooped prey, that shifting flies:
Or let me view the fearful Hare or Hind,
To•…t like a music point with harmony
Of well mouthed hounds. This is a sport for Princes,
The other rude Boars yield fit game for Boors.
Thy timorous spirit blinds thy judgment, wife,
Those are most royal sports that most approve
The huntsmans prowess, and his hardy mind.
My Lord, I know too well your virtuous spirit,
Take heed for Gods love if you rouse the Bore,
You come not near him, but discharge aloof
Your wounding Pistol, or well aimed Dart.
I Mary wife this counsel rightly flows
Out of thy bosom, pray thee take less care,
Let Ladies at their tables judge of Bores,
Lords in the field: And so farewell sweet love;
Fail not to meet me at Ear•…e Lassos house.
Pray pardon me for that: you know I love not These solemn meetings.
You must needs, for once
Constrain your disposition; and indeed
I would acquaint you more with Lady Margaret,
For special reason.
Very good, my Lord. Then I must needs go fit me for that presence.
I pray thee doe, farewell.
Here comes my fri•…nd.
Good day my Lord; why does your grace confront
So clear a morning with so cloudy looks?
Ask thou my griefs, that know my desprate love
Curbed by my fathers sterne r•…alitie:
Must not I morn that know not whether yet
I shall en•…oy a stepdame or a wife?
A wife prince, never doubt it; your deserts
And youthful graces have engaged so far,
The beauteous Margaret, that she is your own.
O but the eye of watchful jealousy
Robs my desires of meanest enjoy her favour.
Despair not: there are means enough for you,
Suborn some servant of some good respect,
Thats near your choice, who though she needs no wooing,
May yet imagine you are to begin,
Your strange young love suit, and so speak for you,
Bear your kind letters, and get safe access.
All which when he shall do; you need not fear
His trusty secrecy, because he dares not
Reveal escapes, where of himself is Author,
Whom you may best attempt, she must reveal;
For if she loves you, she already knows,
And in an instant can resolve you that.
And so she will, I doubt not: would to heaven
I had fit time, even now to know her mind:
This counsel feeds my heart with much sweet hope.
Pursue it then; t'will not be hard t'effect:
The Duke haz none for him, but Medic
That fustian Lord, who in his buckram face,
Bewrays, in my conceit, a map of baseness.
I, theres a parcel of vnconstrued stuff,
That unknown Minion raised to honours height,
Without the help of Virtue, or of Art,
Or (to say true) nay of honest part:
O how she shames my father! he goes like
A Princes foote-man, in old fashioned silks,
And most times, in his hose and doublet only,
So miserable, that his own few men
Doe beg by virtue of his livery;
For he gives none for any service done him,
Or any honour, any least reward.
Tic pity such should live about a Prince:
I would have such a noble counterset, nailde
Upon the Pillory, and after, whipped
For his adultery with nobility,
Faith I would fine disgrace him by all means,
As enemy to his base-bred ignorance,
That being a great Lord, cannot write nor read.
For that, weelle follow the blind side of him,
And make it sometimes subject of our mirth.
See, what news with your Nephew Pogio?
None good I warrant you.
Where should I find my Lord Uncle?
Whats the huge haste with you?
O ho, you will hunt to day.
I hope I will.
But you may hap to hop without your hope: for the truth is, Kilbucke is run mad.
Whats this?
Nay, it is true sir: and Ki•…buck being run mad, bit Ringwood so by the left buttock, you might have turned your nose in it.
Out Ass.
By heaven you might my Lord: do ye think I he?
Zwoundes, might I? lets blanket him my Lord: a blanket here.
Nay, good my Lord Vincentio, by this rush I te•…l you for good will: and Venus your brache there, runs so proud, that your Hunts man cannot take her down for his life.
Take her up fool, thou would say.
Why sir, he would soon take her down and he could take her up I warrant her.
Well said, ham mer, hammer.
Nay, good now lets alone, and theres your horse, Gray Strozza too haz the staggers, and haz struck bay. Beatrice, your Barberry mare so, that she goes halting a this fashion, most filthy.
What poison blisters thy unhappy tongue
Evermore braying forth unhappy news,
Our hunting sport is at the best my Lord:
How shall I satisfy the Duke your father,
Defrauding him of his expected sport?
See, see, he comes.
Is this the copy of the speech you wrote, Seignior Sarpego?
It is a blaze of wit pocticall,
Read it, brave Duke, with eyes pathetical.
We will peruse it strait: well met Vine•…tio,
And good Lord Strozza, we commend you both
For your attendance: but you must conceive,
Tic no true hunting we intend to day,
But an inducement to a certain show,
Wherewith we will present our beateous love,
And therein we bespeak your company.
We both are ready to attend your Highness.
See then, here is a Poem that requires
Your worthy censures; offered if it like
To furnish our intended amorous show:
Read it Uincentio.
Pardon me my Lord, Lord Medices reading, will express it better▪
My patience can digest your scoffs my Lord.
I care not to proclaim it to the world:
I can nor write, nor read; and what of that?
I can both see and hear, as well as you.
Still are your wits at war: here, read this poem.
The red faced Sun hath firkt the flundering shades,
And cast bright ammell on A•…raes brow.
High words and strange:
Read on Vincentio.
The busky groves that gag-tooth'd boars do shroud With cringle crangle horns do ring aloud.
My Lord, my Lord, I have a speech here worth ten of this, and yet Isle mend it too.
How likes Vincentio?
It is strangely good,
No inkehorne ever did bring forth the like•…,
Could these brave prancing words with Actions spur,
Be ridden thoroughly, and managed right,
T'would fright the audience, and perhaps delight.
Doubt you of action sir?
I, for such stuff.
Then know my Lord, I can both act and teach
To any words; when I in Padua schooled it,
I plaid in one of Plautus Comedies,
Namely, Curc•…o, where his part I acted,
Proiecting from the poor sum of four lines,
Forty fair actions.
Lets see that I pray.
Your Highness shall command,
But pardon me, if in my actions heate
Entering in post post haste I chance to take up
Some of your honoured heels;
Y'ad best leave out that action for a thing that I know sir.
Then shall you see what I can do without •…t.
See see, he hath his furniture and all.
You must imagine, Lords, I bring good news,
Whereof being princely proud I scour the street
And ouer-tumble every man I meet.
Beshrew my heart if he take up my heals.
Date viam mihi Note, at{que} Ignoti.
Dum ego, hîc, officium meum facio.
Fugite omnes at{que} abite, &amp; de via secedite, no quem
in cursu; aut capite, aut cubito, aut pectore offendam, a•…t genu.
Thanks good Seigneur Sarpego.
How like you Lords, this stirring action?
In a cold morning it were good my Lord.
But something harsh upon repletion.
Sir I have ventured, being enioynde to eat
Three scholars commons, and yet drew it neat.
Come sir, you meddle in too many matters; let vs •… pray tend on our own show at my lord Lassos.
Doing obeisance then to every lord
I now consort you sir even tot•… corde.
My lord, away with these scholastique wits,
Lay the invention of your speech on me,
And the performance too; isle play my part,
that you shall say, Nature yields more then Art.
Be it so resolved; vnartificiall truth
An vnfaind passion can decipher best.
But t'wil be hard my lord, for one vnlearnd.
Vnlearnd? I cry you mercy sir; vnlearnd?
I mean, untaught my lord, to make a speech,
As a pretended Actor, without close,
More gracious then your doublet and your hose.
What, think you son we mean t'expresse a speech
Of special weight without a like attire?
Excuse me then my lord; so stands it well.
Haz brought them rarely in, to pageant him.
What; think you lord; we think not of attire?
Can we not make vs ready at this age?
Alas my lord, your wit must pardon his.
I hope it will, his wit is pitiful.
I pray stand by my Lord; you're troublesome.
To none but you; am I to you my Lord?
Not unto me.
Why then you wrong me Strozza.
Nay, fall not out my Lords.
May I not know
What your speech is my Liege?
None but my self, and the Lord 〈◊〉.
No, pray my Lord
Let none partake with vs.
No be assured,
But for another cause; a word Lord Strozza,
I tell you true, I fear Lord Medic
Will scarce discharge the speech effectually:
As we go therefore, isle explain to you
My whole intent; that you may second him
If need and his debility require.
•…hanks for this grace my Liege.
My Lord; your son.
Why how now son? forbear; yet tic no matter
Wee talk of other busi•…esse Medic
And come, we will prepare vs to our show.
Which as we can, weal cast to overthrow.
Stand by there, make place.
Say now Bass•…; you on whom relies
The general disposition of my house,
In this our preparation, for the Duke
Are all our officers at large instructed,
For fit discharge of their peculiar places?
At large my lord instructed.
Are all our chambers hung? Think you our house amply capacious to lodge all the train?
Amply capacious: I am passing glad.
And now then to our mirth and musical show,
Which after supper we intend t'indure,
Welcomes chief dainties: for choice cates at home,
Ever attend on Princes; mirth abroad,
Are all parts perfect.
One I know there is.
And that is yours.
Well guest in earnest Lord,
I need not er ubescere, •…o take
So much upon me: That my back will bear.
Nay, he will be perfection it self,
For wording well, and dexterous action too.
And will these waggish pages, hit their songs?
Remi fa solla?
O they are practising; good boys, well done;
But where is Pogio? there you're overshot.
To lay a capital part upon his brain,
Whose absence tells me plainly he will neglect him.
O no my Lord, he dreams of nothing else,
And gives it out in wagers, he will excel;
And see, (I told your Lo:) he is come.
How now my Lord, have you borrowed a Snit for me: Seigneur Bassiolo, can all say, are all things ready? the Duke is hard by, and little thinks that Isle be an Actor in faith, I keep all close my Lord.
O, tic well done, call all the Ladies in,
Sister and daughter, come, for Gods sake come,
Prepare your courtliest carriage for the Duke.
Corte And Niece, in any case remember this,
Praise the old man, and when you see him first,
Look me on none but him, smiling and lovingly:
And then, when he comes near, make beisance low,
With both your hands thus moving, which not only
Is as it were courtly, and most comely too,
But speaks (as who should say) come hither Duke;
And yet says nothing, but you may deny.
Well taught sister.
I, and to much end:
I am exceeding fond to humour him.
Hark, does he come with music? what, and bound?
An amorous device: daughter, observe.
Now let•… gull Medi•…, I doe not doubt,
But this a•…ire put on, will put him out.
Weal doe our best to that end, therefore mark.
Lady, or Princess, both your choice commands.
These spirits and I, all servants of your beauty,
Present this royal captive to your mercy.
Captive to me a subject.
I, fair Nymph;
And how the worthy mystery befell
〈◊〉 here, this wooden god can tell.
Now my Lord.
No•… the time man, speak.
Peace.
Pea 〈◊〉 Vincentio.
Swonds my Lord,
Shall I stand by and suffer him to shame you?
My Lord Medic?
Will you not speak my Lord?
How can I?
But you must speak in earnest:
Would not your Highness h•… him speak my Lord?
Yes, and I will speak, and perhaps speak so,
As you shall never mend: I can I know.
Doe then my good Lord.
Medic, forth.
Goddess, fair god•…, for no less, no less.
No. less, no less▪ no more, no more: speak you.
Swounds they have put me out.
Laugh your fair goddess,
This nobleman disdains to be your fool.
V•…entio, peace.
Swounds my Lord, i•… is as good a show:
Pray speak Lord Strozza.
Honourable dame.
Take heed you be not out I pray my Lord.
I pray forbear my Lord Vincentio:
How this distressed Prince came thus inthralde,
I must relate with words of height and wonder:
His Grace this morning visiting the woods,
And straying far, to find game for the Chase,
At last, out of a myrtle grove he roused
A vast and dreadful Boar, so sterne and fire•…▪
As if the Feend fell Cruelty her self
Had come to fright the woods in that strange shape.
Excellent good.
Too good a plague on him.
The princely Savage being thus on foot,
Tearing the earth up with his thundering hoof,
And with the'nragde Aetna of his breath.
Firing the ayre, and scorching all the woods,
Horror held all vs Huntsmen from pursuit,
Only the Duke incensed with our cold fear,
Incouragde like a second Hercules.
Zwounds, too good man.
Pray thee let me alone:
And like the English sign of great Saint George•….
Plague of that Simile.
Gave valorous ex•…mple, and like fire,
Hunted the monster close, and charged so fierce,
That he enforced him (as our sense conc•…'d)
To leap for soil into a crystal spring,
Where on the sudden strangely vanishing,
Nimph-like for him, out of the waives arose
Your sacred figure like Diana armed,
And (as in purpose of the beasts revenge)
Discharged an arrow through his Highness breast▪
Whence yet no wound or any blood appeared▪
With which, the angry shadow left the light:
And this Enchanter with his power of spirits,
Brake from a cave, scattering enchanted sounds,
That struck vs senseless, while in these strange bands,
These cruel spirits thus enchained his arms,
And led him captive to your heavenly eyes▪
Th'intent whereof on their report relies.
Bright Nymph, that Boar figured your •…ueltie,
Chared by love, defended by your beauty.
This amorous Huntsman here, we thus inthral'd,
As the attendants on your Graces charms,
And brought him hither by your by•…os hands.
To be releast, or live in endless bands.
Daughter, release the Duke: alas my Liege.
•…hat meant your Highness to endure this wrong?
Enlarge him Niece, come dame, it must be so▪
What Madam, shall I arrogate so much?
His Highness pleasure is to grace you so.
Perform it then sweet love, it is a deed
Worthy the office of your honoured hand.
Too worcester•…hie I confess my Lord for me,
If it were serious: but it is in sport,
And women are fit Actors for such pageants.
Thanks gracious love; why made you strange of this?
I rest no less your captive then before,
For me untying, you have tied me more.
Thanks Strozza for your speech, no thanks to you.
No, thank your •…on my Lord.
T'was very well,
Exceeding well performed on every part,
How say you Bass•…aloe?
Rare I protest my Lord.
O, my Lord Medic became it rarely,
Me thought I liked his manly being out;
It becomes Noblemen to do•… nothing well.
Now then will it please your Grace to grace our house,
And still vouchsafe our service further honour.
Lead vs my Lord, we will your daughter lead.
You do not lead, but drag her leaden steps.
How did you like my speech?
O fie upon it, your The•…oricke was too fine.
Nothing at all:
I hope saint Georges sign was gross enough:
But (to be serious) as these warnings pass,
Watch you your father, Isle watch 〈◊〉,
That in your loue-suit, we may shun suspect:
To which end, with your next occasion, urge
Your love to name the person she will choose,
By whose means you may safely write or meet.
Thats our chief business: and see, here she comes.
My Lord, I only come to say, you're welcome▪
And so must say, farewell.
One word I pray.
Whats that?
You needs must presently devise,
What person trusted chiefly with your guard,
You think is aptest for me to corrupt,
In making him a mean for our safe meeting?
My fathers Usher, none so fit,
If you can work him well: and so farewell,
With thanks my good Lord Strozza for your speech.
I thank you for your patience, mocking Lady.
O what a fellow haz she picked vs out?
One that I would have choosde past all the rest,
For his close stockings only.
And why not?
For the most constant fashion of his hat?
Nay then, if nothing must be left vnspoke,
For his strict form, thus still to wear his cloak.
W•…ll sir, he is your own, I make no doubt:
For to these outward figures of his mind,
He hath two inward swallowing properties
Ofany gudgeons; servile Avarice,
And overweening thought of his own worth,
Ready to snatch at every shade of glory:
And therefore, till you can directly board him,
Waft him aloof with hats, and other favours,
Still as you meet him.
Well, let me alone,
He that is one mans slave, is free from no•….
Come Lady, sit you here: Page, fill some Sack,
I am to work upon this aged Dame,
To glean from her, if there be any cause
(In loving others) of her Nieces coins
To the most gracious love suite of the Duke:
Here noble Lady, this is healthful drink
After our supper.
O, tic that my Lord,
That of all drinks keeps life and soul in me.
Here, fill it Page, for this my worthy love▪
O how I could embrace this good old widow.
Now lord, when you do thus, you make me think
Of my sweet husband; for he was as like you;
Even the same words, and fashion: the same eyes,
Manly, and choleric, even as you are just,
And even as kind as you for all the world.
O my sweet widow, thou dost make me proud.
Na•…, I am too old for you.
Too old, thats nothing,
Come pledge me wench, for I am dry again,
And strait will charge your widowhood fresh in faith:
Why thats well done.
Now fie on it, hears a draught.
O, it will warm your blood: if you should sip,
T would make you heart burned.
Faith and so they say:
Yet I must tell you, since I plied this gear,
I have been hinted with a whoreson pain here,
And every moon almost with a shrewd fever,
And yet I cannot leave it: for thank God,
I never was more sound of wind and limb.
Look you, I warrant you I have a leg,
Holds out as handsomely.
Beshrew my life,
But tic a leg indeed, a goodly limb.
This is most excellent.
O that your Niece
Were of as mild a spirit as your self.
Alas Lord Medic, would you have a girl.
As well seen in behaviour as I?
Ah shees a fond young thing, and grown so proud▪
The wind must blow at west still, or sheele be angry.
Mass so me think; how coy shees to the duke?
I lay my life she haz some younger love.
Faith like enough.
Gods me, who should it bee?
If it be any; Page, a little Sack.
If it be any: hark now; if it be,
I know not, by this Sack, but if it be,
Mark what I say, my Lord; I drink tee first.
Well said good widow, much good do thy heart▪
So; now what if it be?
Well, if it be;
To come to that I said, for so I said,
If it be any, Tic the Shrewd young Prince,
For eyes can speak, and eyes can understand▪
And I have marked her eyes; yet by this cup,
Which I will only kiss.
O noble Crone,
Now such a huddle and kettle never was.
I never yet have seen; not yet I say,
But I will mark her after for your sake.
And doe I pray; for it is passing like;
And there is Strozza, a sly Counsailor
To the young boy: O I would give a limb,
To have their knavery limm'd and painted out.
They stand upon their wits and paper learning:
Give me a fellow with a natural wit,
That can make wit of no wit; and wade through
Great things with nothing, when their wits stick fast,
O they be scurvy Lords.
Faith so they be,
Your Lordship still is of my mind in all,
And •…en so was my husband.
Gods my life,
Strozza▪ hath Euesdropt here, and ouer-heard vs.
They have descried me; what Lord Medic
Courting the lusty widow?
I, and why not?
Perhaps one does as much for you at home.
What, choleric man? and toward wedlock too?
And if he be my Lord; he may do worse.
If he be not; madame he may do better.
My Lords, and Madame, the Dukes grace entreats you
T'attend his new-made Duchess for this night,
Into his presence.
We are ready sir.
Come strew this room afresh; spread here this car∣pet,
Nay quickly man, I pray thee; this way fool,
Lay me it smooth, and Even; look if he will;
This way a little more: a little there.
Hast thou no forecast? •…loot me thinks a man
Should not of mere necessity be an Ass.
Look how he strowes here too: Come sir Giles Goosecap,
I must do all my self, lay me um thus:
In fine smooth threaues, look you sir, thus in threaues.
Perhaps some tender Lady will squat here,
And if some standing Rush should chance to prick her,
She would squeak &amp; spoil the songs that must be sung.
See where he is; now to him, and prepare
Your family•…itie.
Save you master Bassiolo,
I pray a word sir; but I fear I let you.
No my good Lord, no let.
I thank you sir.
Nay pray be covered; O I cry you mercy,
You must be bare.
Ever to you my Lord,
Nay, not to me sir,
But to the fair right of your worshipful place.
A shame of both your worships.
What means your Lordship?
Only to doe you right sir, and my self ease.
And what sir, will there be some show to night?
A slender presentation of some music
And some thing else my Lord.
It is passing good sir,
Isle not be over bold t'aske the particulars.
Yes, if your Lordship please.
O no good sir,
But I did wonder much; for as me thought
I saw your hands at work.
Or else my Lord
Our business would be but badly done.
How virtuous is a worthy mans example?
Who is this throne for pray?
For my Lords daughter,
Whom the duke makes to represent his duchess.
T'will be exceeding fit; and all this room
Is passing well prepared; a man would swear,
That all presentiments in it would be rare.
Nay, see if thou can lay um thus in threaues.
In threaues dee call it?
I my Lord in threaues.
A pretty term:
Well sir I thank you highly for this kindness,
And pray you always make as bold with me
For kindness more then this, if more may bee.
O my Lord this is nothing.
Sir, tic much.
And now isle leave you sir; I know you're busy.
Faith sir a little.
I commend me •…ee Sir.
A courteous prince believe it; I am sorry
I was no bolder with him; what a phrase
He used at parting▪ I commend me tee▪
Be h•…ate in faith;
Good master Usher, will you dictate to me,
Which is the part precedent of this night-cap,
And which posterior? I do ignorare
How I should wear it.
Why sir; this I take it
Is the precedent part; I, so it is.
And is all well sir think you?
Passing well.
Why sir come on; the Usher shall be judge:
See master Usher: this same Fungus here,
Your Lords retainer, whom I hope you rule,
Would wear this better Jerkin for the Rush-man,
When I doe play the Broome-man; and speak first.
Why sir, I borrowed it, and I will wear it.
What sir, in spite of your Lords gentleman, Vs•…r:
No spite •…ir, but you have changed twice already,
And now would have it again.
Why thats all one sir,
Gentility must be fa•…asticall.
I pray thee Fungus let master Pogio wear it.
And what shall I wear then?
Why here is one, that was a Rush-mans Jerkin, and I pray, were it not absurd then; a Broome-man should wear it?
Foe, theres a reason, I will keep it •…ir.
Will sir; then do your office moister Usher,
M•…ke him put off his Jerkin; you may pluck
His coat over his cares, much more his Jerkin.
Fungus y'ad best be ruled.
Best •…ir! I care not.
No sir? I hope you are my Lords re•…ainer.
I need not care a pudding for your Lord:
But spare not, keep it, for perhaps Isle play
My part as well in this, as you in that,
Well said, master Pogio; my Lord shall know it.
Look master Usher, are these wags well dressed?
I have been so in labour with-vm truly.
You've had a very good deliueran•…e, Lady:
How I did take her at her labour there,
I use to gird these Ladies so sometimes.
1 I pray my Lord, must not I wear this hair?
I pray thee ask my Usher; Come, dispatch,
The duke is ready: are you ready there?
2 See master Usher; must he wear this hair?
Pray master Usher, where must I come in?
2 Am not I well for a Bug, master Usher?
What stir is with these boys here, God forgive me,
If it were not for the credit on it, I'd see
Your apish trash a•…re, ere I'd endure this.
1 But pray good master Usher.
Hence ye Brats,
You stand upon your tyre; but for your action
Which you must use in singing of your songs,
Exceeding dexterously and full of life,
I hope you'll then stand like a sort of blocks,
Without due motion of your hands, and heads,
And wresting your whole bodies to your words,
Look too't, you're best; and in; Go; All go in:
Come in my masters; lets be out anon.
What, are all furnish•… well?
All well my Lord.
More lights then here, and let loud music sound.
Sound Music.
Advance your self, fair Duchess to this Throne▪
As we have long since raised you to our heart,
Better decorum never was beheld,
Then twixt this state and you: And as all eyes
Now fixed on your bright Graces think it fit,
So frame your favour to continue it.
My Lord; but to obey your earnest will,
And not make serious scruple of a •…oy,
I scarce durst have pres•…de this minute•… height.
Usher, cause other m•…sick; begin your show.
Sound Consort; warn the Pedant to be ready.
Madam, I think you'll see a pretty show.
I can expect no less in such a presence.
Lo what attention and state beauty breeds,
Whose moaning silence no shrill herald needs.
Lords of high degree,
And Ladies of low curtsy,
I the Pedant here,
Whom some call schoolmaster,
Because I can speak best,
Approc•… before the rest.
A very good reason.
But there are others coming,
Without mask or mumming:
For they are not ashamed,
If need be, to be named,
Nor will they hide their faces,
In any place or places;
For though they seem to come,
Loded with Rush, and Broom:
The Broomeman you must know,
Is seigneur Pogio,
Nephew, as shall appear,
To my Lord Strozza here.
O Lord, I thank you sir, you grace me much.
And to this noble dame,
Whom I with finger name.
A plague of that fools finger.
And women wi•…l ensue,
Which I must tell you true,
No women are indeed,
But Pages made for need,
To fill up women's places.
By virtue of their faces,
And other hidden graces.
A hall, a hall; whist, still, be mum,
For now with silver song they come.
Heroes, and Heroines, of gallant strain,
Let not these Brooms, motes in your eyes remain,
For in the Moon, theres one bears with'red bushes:
But we (dear wights) do bear greene brooms, green rushes,
Where of these verdant herbals cleeped Broom,
Do pierce and enter every Ladies room,
And to prove them high borne, and no base trash,
Water with which your phisnomies you wash,
Is but a Broom. And more truth to deliver,
Grim Hercules swept a stable with a river,
The wind that sweeps foul clouds out of the ayre,
And for you Ladies makes the Welkin fair,
Is but a Broom: and O Dan Titan bright,
Most clearkly called the Scauenger of night,
What art thou, but a very broom of gold?
For all this world not to be cried nor sold;
Philosophy, that passion sweeps from thought,
Is the souls Broom, and by all brave wits sought,
Now if Philosophers but Broomemen are,
Each Broomeman then is a Philosopher.
And so we come (gracing your gracious Graces)
To sweep Cares cobwebs from your cleanly faces.
Thanks good master Broomeman,
For me Rushman then,
To make Rush ruffle in a v•…pse of ten,
A Rush which now your heals doe lie on •…ere.
Cry mercy •…ir.
Was meanwhile used for a pungent spear,
In that odd battle, never fought but twice
(As Homer •…ings) betwixt the frogs and mice,
Rushes make True-loue know•…; Rushes 〈◊〉,
Your Rush maugre the beard of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉:
And when with gentle, amorous, •…ay 〈◊〉 〈◊〉,
Each Lord with his fair Lady sue•…tly swims
On these cool Rushes; they may with these bibles,
Cradles for children make; children for cradles,
And lest some Momus here might now •…rye push,
Saying our pageant is not worth a Rush,
Bundles of Rushes, lo, we bring along,
To pick his teeth that bi•…es them with his tongue.
See, see, thats Lord M•…dice.
Gods me, my Lord,
Haz hee picked you out, pi•…ing of yo•…r t•…h?
What pick you ou•… of that?
Not such sty•…e stu•…
As you pick from your teeth.
Leave this war with Rushes,
Good master pedant; pray forth with your show.
Lo thus far th•…n (brave duke) you see
Mere entertainment; Now our gl•…
Shall march forth in 〈◊〉:
And this q•…eint Duchess here shall see
The fault of virgin Nicety,
First wooed with Rural courts•…e,
Disb•…rthen them; prance on this ground,
And make your •…xit with your Round.
Well have they de•…nc'd as it is meet,
Both with their •…imble heads and •…eet.
Now, as our cou•…rye girls held off,
And rudely did their lovers scoff;
Our Nymph 〈◊〉 •…hall on•…lie glance
By your fair eyes, and look 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
Upon h•…r female friend that wo•…es her.
Who is in plain 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 to loose her.
And after them, to conclude all,
The p•…rlue of our Pa•…oral.
A female bug, and eke her friend,
Shall only come a•…d sing, and end
This Lady and Duchess we conclude,
Fair Virgins must not be too rude:
For though the rural wilde and •…ntike,
Abused their loves as they were franuke;
Ye•… take you in your Ivory clutches,
This noble Duke, and be his D•…tches.
Thus thanking all for their tacit,
I vo•… the room, and cry valet.
Generally well, and pleasingly performed.
Now I resign this borrowed majesty,
Which •…ate unseemly on my worthless head,
With humble service to your Highness hands.
Well you became it Lady, and I know
All here could wish it might be ever so.
Hears one says 〈◊〉 to that.
Plague on you, peace.
Now let it please your Highness to accept
A homely banquet, to close these rude sports.
I thank your Lordship much.
Bring lights, make place.
How dee my Lord?
O master broomeman, you did passing well.
A you mad sl•…ue you! you are a tickling Actor.
I was not out like my Lord Medic.
How did you like me Aunt?
O rarely, rarely.
O thou hast d•…no a work of memory,
And raised our house up higher by a story.
Friend, how conceit you my young mother here?
Fitter for you my Lord, than for your 〈◊〉.
No more of that sue•…e friend, those are bugs words.
Thou art my trusty s•…ruined •…nd thou k•…oust,
I have been ever bountiful Lord to thee,
As still I will be: be thou thankful then,
And doe me now a service of import.
Any my Lord in compass of my life.
To morrow then the Duke intends to hunt,
Where Strozza my despiteful enemy,
Will give attendance busy in the chase,
Wherein (as if by chance, when others shoot
At the wilde Boar) do thou discharge at him,
And with an arrow, cleave his canckerd heart.
I will not fail my Lord.
Be secret then.
And thou to me shalt be the dearest of men.
Now Vanity and Policy enrich me
With some rid•…culous fortune on this Usher.
Wheres Master Usher?
Now I come my Lord.
Besides, good sir, your show did show so well,
Did it in deed my Lord?
O sir, believe it;
It was the best fashiond and well ordered thing
That ever eye beheld: and there withal,
The fit attendance by the servants used,
The gentle guise in serving eu•…rye guest,
In other entertainments; every thing
About your house so sortfully disposed,
That e•…en as in a turne-spit called a Jack,
One vice assists another; the great wheels
Turning but softly, make the less to whirre
About their business; every different part
Concurring to one commendable end:
So, and in such conformance, with rare grace,
Were all things ordered in your good lords house.
The most fit simile that ever was.
But shall I tell you plainly my conceit,
Touching the man that I think caused this order?
I good my Lord.
You note my simile.
Drawn from the turne-spit.
I see you have me,
Even as in that quaint engine you have seen,
A little man in shreds stand at the winder,
And seems to put all things in act about him,
Lifting and pulling with a mighty stir,
Yet adds no force to it, nor nothing does:
So, (though your Lord be a brave Gentleman)
And seems to do this business,
He does nothing;
Some man about him was the festival robe,
That made him show so glory•…us and divine.
I cannot tell my Lord, yet I should know if any such there were.
Should know quoth you;
I warrant you know: well, some there be
Shall have the fortune to have such rare men,
(Like brave beasts to their Arms) support their state,
When others of as high a worth and breed,
Are made the wasteful food of them they feed:
What state hath your Lord made you for your service?
He haz been my good Lord, for I canspend
Some fifteen hundred crowns in lands a year,
Which I have gotten since I served him first.
No more then fifteen hundred crowns a year?
It is so much as makes me li•…e my Lord,
Like a poor Gentleman.
Nay, tic pretty well:
But certainly my nature does esteem
Nothing enough for virtue; and had I
The Duke my fathers means, all should be spent,
To keep brave men about me: but good sir,
Accept this simple jewel at my hands,
Till I can work persuasion of my friendship,
With worthier arguments.
No good my Lord,
I can by no means •…erite the free bounties
You have bestowed besides.
Nay, be not strange,
But doe your self right, and be all one man
In all your actions, doe not think•… but some
Have extraordinary spirits like your self,
And will not stand in their society,
On birth and riches: but on worth and virtue,
With whom there is no niceness, nor respect
Of others comm•…n friendship; be he poor
Or baselv borne, so he be rich in soul,
And noble in degrees of qualities,
He shall be my f•…iend sooner then a King.
T•… a most kingly i•…dgement in your lordship,
Faith sir I know not, but tic my va•…no humour.
O, ti•… an honour in a Nobleman.
You've some lords now so politic and proud,
They scorn to give good looks to worthy men.
O fie upon um; by that light my lord,
I am but servant to a Noble•…man,
But if I would not sko•…no such puppet lords,
Would I wear breathless.
You sir? so you may,
For they will cog so when they wish to use men,
With, pray be covered sir, I beseech you sit,
Whoe's there? waite of Master Usher to the door.
O, these be godly gudgeons: whore's the deeds?
The perfect Nobleman?
O good my Lord.
Away, away, ere I would flatter so,
I wo•…lt eat rushes like lord Medici.
Well, well my Lord, would there were more such P•…in∣ces.
Alas, it were pity sir, they would be gulled
O•…t of their very skins.
Why how are you my lord?
Who I, I care not:
If I be guild wh•…re I profess plain love,
T'will be their faults you know.
O it were their shames.
Well, take my jewel, you shall not be strange,
I love not man•…e words.
My lord, I thank you, I am offew words too.
Ti•… •…riendlie said,
You prove your self a friend, and I would have you
Advance your thoughts, and lay about for state,
Worthy your virtues: be the Minion
Of some great King or Duke: theres Medici,
The Minion of my Father: O the Father!
What difference is there? but I cannot flatter
A word to wise men.
I perceive your Lordship.
Your Lordship? talk you now like a friend?
Is this plain kindness?
Is it not my Lord?
A palpable flattering figure for men common:
A my word I should think, if it were another,
He meant to gull me.
Why tic but your due.
Tic but my due: if you'll be still a stranger:
But as I wish to choose you for my friend,
As I intend when God shall call my father,
To doe I can tell what: but let that pass,
Thus tic not fit; let my friend be familiar,
V•…e not me Lordship, nor yet call me Lord,
Nor my whole name Vincentio; but vince,
As they call Jack or Will, tic now in use,
Twixt men of no equality or kindness.
I shall be quickly bold enough my Lord.
Nay, see how still you use that co•… term, Lord
What argues this, but that you shun my friendship?
Nay▪ pray say not so.
Who •…hold not say so?
Will you •…fford me now no name at all?
What should I call you?
Nay, then tic no matter.
But I told you Vince.
Why then my sweet Vince.
Wh•…e so then; and yet •…ull there is a fault,
In using these kind words, without kind deeds:
Pray •…ee imbra•…e me too.
Why then sweet Vince.
Why now I thank you, sblood shall friends be strange?
Where there is plamenesse, there is ever truth:
An•… I will still be plame since I am true:
Come let vs lie a little, I am weary.
And so am I, I swear since yesterday.
You may sir by my faith; and sir, hark thee,
What lordship would thou wish to haueifaith,
When my old father dies?
Who I? alas.
O not you, well sir, you shall have none,
You are as coy a piece as your Lords daughter.
Who, my mistress?
Indeed, is she •…our Mistress?
I faith sweet Vince, since she was three year old.
And are not wee too friends?
Who doubts of that?
And are not two friends one?
Even man and wife.
Then what to you she is, to me she should be.
Why Vince, thou would not have her?
O not I: I doe not fancy any thing like you▪
Nay but I pray thee tell me.
You do not mean to marry her your self?
Not I by heaven.
Take heed now, do not gull me.
No by that candle.
Then will I be plain.
Think you she dotes not too much on my father?
O yes, no doubt on it.
Nay, I pray you speak.
You seely man you, she cannot abide him.
Why sweet friend pardon me, alas I knew not.
But I doe note you are in some things simple,
And wrong your self too much.
Thank you good friend,
For your plain dealing, I doe me•…no so well.
But who saw e•…er summer mixed with winter?
There must be equal years where firm love is.
Could we two love so well so soddainely
Were we not some thing equaller in years.
Than he and she are?
I cry ye mercy sir, I know we could not, but yet be not •…oo bitter,
Considering love is fearful. And sweet friend,
I have a letter t'intreate her kindness.
Which if you would convey.
I, if I would sir?
Why faith, dear friend, I would not die requitelesse.
Would you not so sir?
By heaven a little thing would make me box you,
Which if you would convaie? why not I pray?
Which (friend) thou shalt convey.
Which friend, you shall then.
Well friend, and I will then.
And use some kind persuasive words for me?
The best I swear that my poor tongue can forge.
I, well said, poor tongue: O tic rich in meekenesle;
You are not known to speak well? You have won
Direction of the Earl and all his house,
The favour of his daughter, and all Dames
That ever I saw, come within your sight,
With a poor tongue? A plague a your sweet lips.
Well, we will doe our best: And faith my Uince,
She shall have an vnweldie and dull soul,
If she be nothing moved with my poor tongue,
Call it no better; Be it what it will.
Well said in faith; Now if I doe not think
Tic possible, besides her bare receipt
Of that my Letter, with thy friendly tongue.
To get an answer of it, never trust me.
An answer man? Sbloud make no doubt of that.
By heaven I think so; now a plague of Nature,
That she gives all to some, and none to others.
How I endear him to me! Come Vince, rise,
Next time I see her, I will give her this:
Which when she sees, sheele think it wondrous strange
Love should go by descent, and make the son
Follow the father in his amorous steppes.
She needs must think it strange, that never yet saw
I durst speak to her, or had s•…arce his sight.
Well Vince, I swear thou shalt both see and kiss her.
Swears my dear friend? by what?
Even by our friendship.
O sacred oath! which, how long will you keep?
While the•…e be bees in Hybla, or white swans
In bright Meander; while the banks of Po
Shall bear brave lilies; or Italian dames
Be called the Bone robes of the world.
Tic elegantly said: and when I fail,
Ler there be found in Hybla hives no bees;
Let no swans swim in bright Meander stream▪
Nor lilies spring upon the ban•…s of Po,
Nor let one fat Italian dame be found,
But lean and brawn-falne; I, and scarcely so•…nd.
It is enough, but lets embrace with all.
With all my hart.
So, now farewell swe•…t Vince.
Farewell my wo•…thie friend, I think I have him.
I had forgot the parting phrase he taught me, I commend me t'ee sir.
At your wish•… ruice sir:
O fine friend, he had forgot the phrase:
How serious apish souls are in vain form:
Well, he is mine, and he being trusted most
With my dear jove, may often work our meeting,
And being thus ingagde, dare not re•…eale.
Horse, horse, horse, my lord, horse, your father is going a hunting.
My Lord horse? you ass 〈◊〉 d'e•… call my Lord horse?
Nay, he speaks huddles still, lets sl•… h•… tongue.
Nay good uncle now, sbloud, what cap•…, merchants you be; so the Duke took me up even now: my lord uncle here, and my old lord Lasso, by heaven you're 〈◊〉 too witty for me, I am the veriest fool on you all, •…e be sworn.
Therein thou art worth vs all, for thou know thy self.
But your w•…atom was in a pretty t•…g l•…st night; was it not I pray?
O, for taking my drink a little? faith my Lord, for that you shall have the best sport p•…ntly with Mad•… Cor•…,
that e•…er was; I have made her so drunk, that she does nothing b•… kiss my Lord Medic.
See she comes riding the Duke, shees passing well mounted▪ believe it.
Good wench forbear.
My Lord, you must put forth your self among La∣dies, I warrant you have much in you, if you would show it; see, a cheek a twenty; the body of a George, a good leg still; still a good calfe▪ and n•…t slabby, nor hanging I war•…ned you; a braw•…e of a thumb here, and it were a p•…d p•…; Niece Meg •…ou shalt have the sweetest bedfellow on him, that ever call•…d Lady husband; try him you shamefaced babble you, 〈◊〉 him.
Good Madame be ruled.
What a nice thing it is, my Lord, you must set forth this g•…re▪ and k•…e her; in faith you must; get you tog•…her and be naugh•… awhile, get you together.
Now what a merry harmless dame it is!
My Lord Medic, you are a right noble man, &amp; will do a woman right in a wrong matter and need be; prav do you give the duke ensample upon me; you come a wooing to me now; I accept it.
What •…an you sister?
Pray my Lo•…d away; consider me as I am, a woman.
Lord, how I have wh•…d her?
You come a woo•…ng to me now; •…ay •…ee Duke mark my Lord Medi•…; and do you mar•…e me 〈◊〉; Stand you aside, m•… Lord▪ 〈◊〉, and you; g•… pl•…; now •…y L•… •…e∣dice, •…ut case I b•… st•…ge a 〈◊〉 y•…t y•… like•… 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 to it. Come •…e me my L•…d, be not 〈◊〉.
Not I Mad•…, 〈◊〉 come no•… 〈◊〉 •…ng 〈◊〉 •…ou.
〈1 line〉 〈1 line〉.
〈◊〉 fester, v'〈◊〉 too 〈◊〉; 〈◊〉 will you goat 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
〈1 line〉.
Whats the matter?
Dee think I am drun•…e?
I think so truly.
But are you sure I am drunk?
Else I would not think so.
But, I would be glad to be sure on it.
I assure you then.
Why then say nothing; &amp; Isle begone God buy lord, duke
Isle come again anon.
I hope your Grace will pardon her my liege,
For tic most strange; shees as discreet a dame
As any in these countries, and as sober,
But for this only humour of the cup
Tic good my Lord sometimes:
Come, to our hunting; now tic time I think.
 The very best time of the day, my Lord.
Then my Lord, I will take my leave till night,
Reserving thanks for all my entertainment,
Till I return; in mean time, lovely dame,
Remember the high state you last presented, 
And think it was not a mere festival show,
But an essential type of that you are
In full consent of all my faculties
And hark you good my Lord.
See now, they whisper
Some private order, (I dare lay my life)
For a forced marriage t'wixt my love and father▪
I therefore must make sure: and noble friends,
Isle leave you all, when I have brought you forth,
And seen you in the chase; meane-while observe
In all the time this solemn hunting lasts,
My father and his minion Medic,
And note, if you can gather any sign,
That they have mist me, and suspect my being,
If which fall out, send home my Page before.
I will not fail my Lord.
Now take thy time.
I warrant you my Lord, he shall not scope me.
Now my dear Mistress, till our sports intended end with my absence, I will take my leave.
B•…lo, attend you on my daughter.
I will my Lord.
Now will the sport begin; I think my love Will handle him, as well as I have done.
Madam, I take my leave, and humbly thank you.
Welcome good madam; maids wait on my Lady.
So mistress, this is fit.
Fit sir, why so?
Why so? I have most fortunate news for you.
For me sir? I beseech you what are they?
Merit and Fortune, for you both agree;
Merit what you have, and have what you merit.
Lord with what Rhetoric you prepare your news▪
I need not; for the plain contents they bear
Uttered in any words, deserve their welcome,
And yet I hope the words will serve the turn.
What, in a letter?
Why not?
Whence is it?
From one that will not shame it with his name▪ And that is Lord Vincentio.
King of heaven!
Is the man mad?
Mad Madam, why?
O heaven, I muse a man of your importance,
Will offer to bring me a letter thus?
Why, why good Mistress, are you hurt in that?
Your answer may be what you will your self.
I, but you should not doe it: Gods my life,
You shall answer it.
Nay, you must answer it.
I answer it! are you the man I trusted?
And will betray me to a stranger thus?
Thats nothing, dame, all friends were strange•…s first.
Now was there ever woman overseen so,
In a wise mans discretion?
Your brain is shallow, come, receive this letter▪
How dare you say so? when you know so well
How much I am engaged to the duke?
The duke? a proper match: a grave old gentman:
Haz be•…rd at will; and would, in my conceit,
M•…ke a most ex•…ellent pattern, for a potter
To have his pictu•…e stamped on a Jug.
To keep ale-•…nights in memory of sobriety.
Here gentle•… m•…dam, take it.
Take it si•…?
A•… I common taker of lo•…e letters?
Common? why when received you one before?
•…ome, tic no matter; I had thought your care
Of my bestowing, would not tempt me thus
To one I know not; but it is because
You know I dote so much on y•…ur direction.
On my direction?
No sir, Not on yours.
Well mistress, if you will take my advice
At a•…y time, then take this letter now.
Tic strange, I wonder the coy gentleman,
That seeing me so oft, would never speak,
Is on the 〈◊〉 so far wrapped to write.
It showed his judgment, that he would not speak
Knowing with what a strict and jealous eye
He should be noted; hold, if you love yourself;
Now will you take this letter? pray be ruled.
Come, you have such another plague tongue,
And yet in faith I will not.
Lo•…d of heaven,
What, did it bu•…no your hands? hold, hold, I pray,
And let the words within it fire your heart.
I wonder how the devil, he found you ou•…
To be his spokesman,—O the duke would thank you,
If he knew how you urged me for his son.
The duke? I have fretted her,
Fuen to the liver, and had much ado
To •…ache her take it, but I knew t'was sure;
For he that cannot turn and w•…nde a woman
Like silk about his finger, is no man,
Isle make her answer't too.
O here's good stuff.
Hold, pray take it for your pains to bring it.
Lady you err in my reward a little,
Which must be a kind answer to this letter.
Nay then in faith, it were best you brought a Priest;
And then your client; and then keep the door.
God me I never knew so rude a man.
Well, you shall answer; Isle fetch pen and paper.
Poor Usher, how were thou wrought to this brake?
Men work on one another for we women,
Nay each man on himself; and all in one
Say; No man is content that lies alone.
Here comes our gulled Squire.
Here Mistress, write.
What should I write?
An answer to this letter.
Why sir, I see no cause of answer in it,
But if you needs will show how much you rule me,
Sit down; and answer it, as you please your self,
Here is your paper, lay it fair before you.
Lady, content, Isle be your Secretorie.
I fit him in this task; he thiukes his pen
The Shaft of Cupped, in an amorous letter.
Is here no great worth of your answer say you?
Believe it, tic exceedingly well writ.
So much the more unfit for me to answer,
And therefore let your Stile and it contend.
Well, you shall see I will not be far short,
Although (indeed) I cannot write so well
When one is by, as when I am alone.
O, a good Scribe must write, though twenty talk, and he talk to •…hem too.
Well, you shall see.
A proper piece of Scribeship theres no doub•…;
Some words, pic•…t out of Procl•…motions,
Or great men's Speeches; or well s•…lling Pamphlets:
See how he rubs his •…emples 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
His Muse lies in the backe-〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉,
Which thick and gross, is hard to be brought forward,
What? is it loath to come?
No, not a whi•…:
Pray hold your peace a little.
He sweates, with bringing on his heavy stile,
Isle ply him still, till he sweat all his wit out,
What man, not yet?
Swoons, yowle not extort it from a man,
How do you like the word Endear?
O fie upon it.
Nay, then I see your judgment: what say you to con∣dole?
Worse and worse.
O brave•… I should make a sweet answer, if I should use no words but of your admittance.
Well sir, write what you please.
Is model a good word with you?
Put them together I pray.
So I will I warrant you.
See, see, see, now it comes pouring down.
I hope you'll take no exceptions to believe it.
Out upon it, that phrase is so run out of breath in trifles, that we shall have no belief at all in earnest shortly. Believe it tic a pretty feather; believe it a dainty Rush; believe it an excellent Cocks-combe.
So, so, so, your exceptions sort very collaterally.
Collaterally? theres a fine word now; wrest in that if you can by any means.
I thought she would like the very worst of them all, how think you? do not I write, and hear, and talk too now?
By my soul, if you can tell what you write now, you write very readily.
That you shall see straight.
But do you not write that you speak now?
O yes, doe you not see how I write it? I can not write when any body is by me, I.
Gods my life, stay man; you'll make it too long.
Nay, if I can not tell what belongs to the length of a Ladies device in faith.
But I will not have it so long.
If I cannot fit you?
O me; how it comes upon him? pre thee be short.
Well, now I have done, &amp; now I will read i•…; your Lord∣ships motive accōmodating my thoughts, with the very model of my hearts mature consideration: it shall not be out of my Element to negotiate with you in this amorous duello; where∣in I will condole with you, that our project cannot be foe col∣laterally made, as our endeared hearts may very well seem to insinuate.
No more: no more; fie upon this.
Fie upon this? hes accursed that haz to doe with these unsound women, of judgment: if this be not good in faith.
But tic so good, t'will not be thought to come from a women's brain.
Thats another matter
Come, I will write my self.
A Gods name Lady: and yet I will not loose this I warrant you; I know for what Lady this will serve as fit; now we shall have a sweet piece of indictment.
How spell you foolish?
F, oo, l, i. sh▪ she will presume t'endite that cannotspel:
How spell you Usher?
Sblood, you put not in those words together, do you?
No, not together.
What is betwixt I pray?
Ass the.
Ass the? betwixt foolish, and Usher,
Gods my life, •…oolish Ass the Usher?
Nay then you are so jealous of your wit: now read all I have written I pray.
I am not so foolish as the Usher would make me: O so foolish as the Usher would make me? Wherein would I make you foolish?
Why sir, in willing me to believe he loved me so well, being so mere a stranger.
O, is it so? you may say so indeed.
Cry mercy sir, and I will write so too, &amp; yet my hand is so vile, Pray thee sit thee down and write as I bid thee.
With all my heart •…eddy, what shall I write now?
You shall wri•…e this sir, I am not so foolish to think you love me, being so mere a stranger.
So mere a stranger!
And yet I know, love works strangely.
Love works strangely.
And therefore take heed, by whom you speak for love.
Speak for love.
For he may speak for himself.
May speak for himself.
Not that I desire it,
Desire it.
But if he do▪ you may speed, I confess.
Speed I conf•…sse.
But let that p•…sse, I do not love to discourage any by∣die.
Discourage •…y body.
Do you or he •…icke out what you can; &amp; so farewell.
And so fare well. Is this all?
I, and he may thank your Sirens tongue that it is so much.
A proper Letter if you mark it.
Well sir, though it be not so proper as the writer; yet tic as proper as the •…diter; Every wo•…an cannot be a g•…n∣tleman Usher; they that cannot go be•…ore, must come behind.
Well Lady, this I will carry instantly, I commend me tee Lady.
Pitiful Usher, what a pretty sle•…light,
Goes to the work•…ng up of every thing?
What swe•…t variety se•…ues a women's wit?
W•… make men few to vs for that we wi•…h.
Poor men; hold o•…t a while; and do not sue,
And spite of Custom we will s•…e t•… •…ou.
O Go•…, how weary I am? Aunt, M•…dam. Cynanche, Aunt?
How now?
O God, Aunt: O God Aunt: O God.
What bad news brings this man? where•… is my Lord?
O Aunt, my Uncle, hes shot.
Shot, ay me!
How is he shot?
Why with a forked shaft
As he was hunting, full in his left side.
O me accursed, where is hee? bring me, where?
Coming with Doctor Beniuemus,
Isle leave you, and go tell my Lord Vincentio.
See the sad sight, I dare not yield to grief,
But force faind patience to recomfort him:
My Lord, what chance is this? how fares your lordship?
Wounded, and faint with anguish, let me rest.
A chair.
O Doctor, first a deadly hurt?
I hope not Madam, though not free from danger▪
Why pluck you not the arrow from his side?
We cannot Lady, the forckt head so fast
Sticks in the bottom of his sollide rib.
No mean then Doctor rests there to adduce it?
This only, my good Lord, to give your wound
A greater orifice, and in sunder break
The pierced rib; which being so near the mid•…if,
And opening to the region of the heart,
Will be exceeding dangerous to your life.
I will not see my bosom mangled so,
Nor sternely be anatomizde alive,
Isle rather perish with it sticking still.
O no; sweet doctor think upon some help.
I told you all that can be thought in Art,
Which since your Lordship will not yield to use,
Our last hope rests in Natures secret aide,
Whose power at length may happily expel it.
Must we attend at deaths abhorred door,
The torturing delays of slavish Nature?
My life is in mine own powers to dissolve:
And why not then the pains that plague my life?
Rise furies, and this fury of my bane,
〈◊〉 and conquer; what men madness call
(Th•…t hath no eye to sense, but frees the foul,
Exempt of hope, and fear with instant fate)
Is m•…nliest reason; manliest reason then,
Resolve and rid me of this brutish life,
Hast•…n the cowardly protracted cure
Of all diseases: King of Physicians, death,
Isle dig thee from this Mine of mise•…ie.
O hold my Lord, this is no christian part,
Nor yet scarce manly, when your mankind foe,
Imperious death shall make your groans his trumpets
To summon resignation of lifes Fort,
To fly without resistance; you must force
A countermine of Fortitude, more deep
Than this poor Mine of pains, to blow him up,
And spite of him live victor, though subdued:
Pat•…ence in torment, is a valor more
Than e•…er crowned T•…' Alcmenean Conqueror.
Rage is the vent of torment, let me rise.
Men doe but cry, that rage in miseries,
And scarcely beaten children, become cries:
Pains are like women's clamours, which the less
They find men's patience stirred, the more they cease.
Of this tic said, afflictions bring to God,
Because they make vs like him, drinking up
Joys that deform vs with the lusts of sense,
And turn our general being into soul,
Whose actions simply formed and applied,
Draw all our bodies frailties from respect.
Away with this vnmedcinable balm
Of worded breath; for bear friends, let me rest,
I swear I will be bands unto my self.
That will become your lordship best indeed.
Isle break away, and leap into the Sea.
Or from some Turret cast me headlong down,
To shiver this frail carcass into dust.
O my dear Lord, what unlike words are these▪
To the late fruits of your religious Nobles?
Leave me fond woman.
Isle be hewn from hence
Before I leave you; help me gentle Doctor▪
Have patience good my Lord.
Then lead me in,
Cut off the timber of this cursed Shaft,
And let the forked pile canker to my heart.
Dear Lord, resolve on humble sufferance.
I will not hear thee, woman, be content.
O never shall my counsels cease to knock
At thy impatient ears, till they fl•…e in
And salve with Christian patience, Pagan sin.
This is her letter sir, you now shall see
How seely a thing tic in respect of mine,
And what a simple woman she haz proved,
To refuse mine for hers; I pray look here.
Soft sir, I know not, I being her sworn servant,
If I may put up these disgraceful words,
Given of my Mist•…is, without touch of honour.
Disgraceful words; I protest I speak not
To disgrace her, but to grace my self.
Nay then sir, if it be to grace your self,
I am content; but otherwise you know,
I was to take exceptions to a King.
Nay, you're ith right for that; but read I pray▪ if there be not more choice words in that letter, than in any thr•…e of G•…e∣uaras golden epistles, I am a very ass. How think you 〈◊〉?
By heaven no less sir, it is the best thing;
Gods what a beast am I.
Is is no matter,
I can set it together again.
Pardon me sir, I protest I was ravished: but was it possi∣ble she should prefer hers before this?
O sir, she cried fie upon 〈◊〉.
Well, I must say nothing, love is blind you know, and can find no fault in his beloved.
Nay, thats most certain.
〈◊〉 me: Isle have this letter.
No good Vince, tic not worth it.
Isle have it 〈◊〉, hears enough in it 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 for my letters as long as I live; Isle 〈◊〉 it to breed on as it were:
But I much wonder you could make her write.
Indeed there were some words belongd to that.
How strong an influence works in 〈◊〉 placed words,
And yet there must be a prepared love,
To give those words so mighty a command,
Or it were impossible they should move so much:
And will you tell me true?
In any thing.
Does not this Lady love you?
Love me? why yes; I think 〈◊〉 does not hate me.
Nay but in faith, does she not love you dearly?
No I protest.
Nor have you never 〈◊〉 her?
〈◊〉 her, thats nothing.
But you know my meaning:
Have you not been, as one would say, before me?
Not I, I swear.
O, you're too true to tell.
Nay be my troth, she haz, I must confess,
Used me with good respect, and nobly still,
But for such matters.
Very little more,
Would make him take her maidenhead upon him:
Well friend, I rest yet in a little doubt,
This was not hers.
T'was by that light that shines,
And Isle go fetch her to you to confirm it.
O passing friend.
But when she comes, in any case be bold,
And come upon her with some pleasing thing,
To show you're pleased: how ever she behaves 〈◊〉,
As for example; if she turn her back,
Use you that action you would doe before,
And court her thus; Lady, your back part is as fair to me, as is your fore part.
T'will be most pleasing.
I, for if you love
One part aboue another, tic a sign
You like not all alike, and the worst part
About your Mistress, you must think as fair,
As sweet, and dainty, as the very best,
So much, for so much, and considering too,
Each several limb and member in his kind.
As a man should.
True, will you think of this?
I hope I shall.
But if she chance to laugh,
You must not lose your countenance, but devise
Some speech to show you pleased, even being laughed at.
I, but what speech?
Gods precious man! do something of your self?
But Isle devise a speech.
Inspire him folly.
Or 〈◊〉 no matter, be but bold enough,
And laugh when she laughs, and it is enough:
Isle fetch her to you.
Now was there ever such a demilance,
To bear a man so clear through thick and thin?
Or hark you sir, if she should steal a laughter
Under her fan, thus you may say, sweet Lady,
If you will laugh and lie down, I am pleased.
And so I were by heaven; how know you that?
Slid man▪ Isle hit your very thoughts in these things.
Fetch her sweet friend, Isle hit your words I warrant,
Be bold then Vince, and press her to it hard,
A shamefaced man, is of all women barred.
How easly worthless men take worth upon them,
And being over credulous of their own words,
Doe vnderprize as much the worth of others.
The fool is rich, and absurd riches thinks
All merit is rung out, where his purse chinks.
My Lord, with much entreaty hears my Lady.
Nay Madam, look not back: why Vince I say?
Vince? O monstrous jest!
To her for shame.
Lady, your back part is as sweet to me
As all your force part.
He missed a little: he said her back part was sweet, when
He should have said fair; but see, she laughs most fitly,
To bring in the tother: Vince, to her again, she laughs.
Laugh you fair Dame?
If you will laugh and lie down, I am pleased.
What villainous stuff is here?
Sweet Mistress, of mere grace embolden now
The kind young Prince here, it is only love
Upon my protestation, that thus daunts
His most Heroic spirit: so a while
Isle leave you close together; Vince, I say—
O horrible hearing, does he call you 〈◊〉?
O I, what else? and I made him embrace me,
〈◊〉 a most familiar league of friendship.
But wherefore did you court me so absurdly?
Gods me, he taught me, I spake out of him.
O fie upon it, could you for pity make him
Such a poor creature? 〈◊〉 abuse enough
To make him take on him such saucy friendship;
And yet his place is great; for hes not only
My fathers Usher, but the worlds beside,
Because he goes before it all in folly.
Well, in these homely wiles, must our loves mask,
Since power denies him his 〈◊〉 right,
But is there no mean to dissolve that power,
And to prevent all further wrong to vs,
Which it may work, by forcing Marriage rites,
Betwixt me and the Duke?
No mean but one,
And that is closely to be married first,
Which I perceive not how we can perform:
For at my fathers coming back from hunting,
I fear your father and himself resolve,
To bar my interest with his present nuptials.
That shall they never doe; may not we now
Our contract make, and marie before heaven?
Are not the laws of God and Nature, more
Than formal laws of men? are outward rites,
More virtuous then the very substance is
Of holy nuptials solemnised within?
Or shall laws made to curb the common world,
That would not be contained in form without them,
Hurt them that area law unto themselves?
My princely love, tic not a Priest shall let vs:
〈◊〉 since th'eternall acts of our pure souls,
Knit vs with God, the soul of all the world,
He shall be Priest to vs; and with such rites
As we can here devise, we will express,
And strongely ratify 〈◊〉 hearts true vows,
Which no external violence shall dissolve.
This is our only mean t'enioy each other:
And, my dear life, I will devise a form
To execute the substance of our minds,
In honoured 〈◊〉. First then hide your face
With this your spotless white and virgin veil:
Now this my scarf Isle knit about your arm,
As you shall knit this other end on mine,
And as I knit it, here I vow by Heaven,
By the most sweet imaginary joys,
Of vntride nuptials; by loves ushering fire,
Fore-melting beauty, and loves flame it self.
As this is soft and pliant to your arm
In a circumference flexure, so will I
Be tender of your welfare and your will,
As of mine own, as of my life and soul,
In all things, and for ever; only you
Shall have this care in fullness, only you
Of all dames shall be mine, and only you
Isle court, co•…end and joy in, till I die.
W•…th like conceit only our arm this I tie,
And here in sight of heaven, by it I swear,
By my love to you, which commands my life,
By the dear price of such a constant husband,
As you have vowed to be: and by the joy
I shall embrace by all means to requite you:
•…e be as apt to govern as this silk,
As private as my face is to this veil,
And as far from offence, as this from blackness.
I will be courted of no man but you,
In, and for you shall be my joys and woes:
If you be sick, I will be sick, though well:
If you be well, I will be well, though sick:
Your self alone my complete world shall be,
•…en from this hour, to all eternity.
It is enough, and binds as much as marriage.
Isle see in what plight my poor lover stands,
Gods me•…a beckons me to have me gone,
It seems hes entered into some good vain:
Isle hence, love cures when he vents his pain.
Now my sweet life, we both remember well
What we have vowed shall all be kept entire
Maugre our fathers wraths, danger and death:
And to confirm this, shall we spend our breath?
Be well advised, for yet your choice shall be
In all things as before, as large and free.
What I have vowed▪ 〈◊〉 keep •…uen past my death.
And I: and now in token I dissolve
Your virgin state, I take this snowy veil,
From your much fairer face, and claim the dues
Of sacred nuptials: and now fairest heaven,
As thou art infinitely raised from earth,
Diffrent and opposite, so bless this match,
As far removed from Customs popular sects,
And as unstained with her abho•…'d respects.
Mistress, away, Pogio runs up and down,
Calling for Lord Vine•…; come away,
For hitherward he bends his clamorous haste.
Remember love.
Or else forget me heaven.
Why am I sought for by this Pogio?
The Ass is great with child of some ill news,
His mouth is never filled with other sound.
Where is my Lord Vincentio, where is my Lord?
Here he is Ass, what an exclaiming keep thou?
Slood, my Lord, I have followed you up and down like a Tantalus pig, till I have worn out my hose here abouts▪ Isle be sworn, and yet you call me Ass still; But I can tell you passing ill news my Lord.
I know that well sir, thou never bring other; whats your news now, I pra•…▪
O Lord, my Lord uncle is shot in the side with an arrow.
Pl•…gues take thy tongue, is he in any danger?
O danger; I, he haz lien speechless this two hours,
And talks so idly.
Accursed news, where is he, bring me to him▪
Yes, do you lead, and Isle guide you to him.
How fares it now with my dear Lord and husband?
Come near me wife, I fare the better far
For the sweet food of thy divine advice,
Let no man value at a little price.
A virtuous women's counsel, her winged spirit,
Is fe•… herd oftentimes with heavenly words;
And (like her beauti•…) ravishing, and p•…re.
The weaker body, still the stronger soul,
When good endeavours do her powers apply,
Her love draws nearest mans felicity,
O what a treasure is a virtuous wife,
Discreet and loving, Not one gift on earth,
Makes a mans life so highly bound to heau•…▪
She gives him do•…ble forces, to endure
And to enjoy; by being one with him,
Feeling his Joys and Griefs with equal senc•…;
And like the twins Hyp•…ates reports:
If he fetch sighs, she draws her breath as short:
If he lament, she melts her self in tears:
If he be glad, she triumphs; if he st•…e,
She moou's his way; in all things his sweet Ap•…:
And is in alteratious passing strange.
Himself d•…ely varied without change:
Gold is right precious; but his price infects
With pride and avarice; Authority l•…
Hats from men's heads; and bows the strongest knees▪
Yet cannot bend in rule the weakest hey•…ts;
Music delights but one sense; No•… choice meats
One quickly fades, the other stir to sin▪
B•…t a true wife, both sense and soul delights,
And mixes not her good with any ill;
Her virtues (ruling hearts) all powers command;
All Store without her, leaves a man b•… poor;
And with her, Poverty is exceeding Store;
No time is tedious with her, her true worth
Makes a true husband think, his arms enfold;
(With her alone) a complete world of gold.
I wish (dear love) I could deserve as much▪
As your most kind conceit hath well expressed:
But when my best is done, I see you wounded;
And neither can recur nor ease your pains.
Cynanche, thy advise hath made me well;
My free submission to the hand of heaven
Makes it redeem me from the rage of pain▪
For though I know the malice of my wound
Shoots still the same distemper through my vain•…,
Yet the Judicial patience I embrace,
(In which my mind spreads her impassiue powers
Through all my suffering parts;) expels their frail•…;
And rendering up their whole life to my soul,
Leaves me nought else but soul; and so like her,
Free from the passions of my •…ing blood.
Would God you were so; and that too much payne.
Were not the reason, you felt sense of none.
Think thou me mad Cynanche? for mad men,
By pains vngouernd, have no sense of payne.
But I, I tell you am quite contrary,
Eased with well governing my submitted payne▪
Be cheerd then wife; and look not for, in me,
The manners of a common wounded man.
Humility hath raised me to the stars;
In which (as in a sort of Crystal Globes)
I sit and see things hid from humane sight.
I, even the very accidents to come
Are present with my knowledge; the seventh day
The arrow head will fall out of my side.
The seventh day wife, the forked head will out.
Would God it would my Lord, and leave you we•…
Yes, the seventh day, I am assured it will:
And I shall live, I know it; I thank heaven,
I know it well; and isle teach my physician,
To build his cares hereafter upon heaven
More then on earthly medcines; for I know
Many things shown me from the op'ned skies,
That pass all arts. Now my physician
Is coming to me, he makes friendly haste;
And I will well requite his care of me.
How know you he is coming?
Passing well; and that my dear friend lord Vincentio Will presently come see me too; isle stay (My good physician) till my true friend come.
Ay me, his talk is idle; and I fear,
Foretells his reasonable Soul now leaves him.
Bring my Physician in, hoe's at the door.
Alas, theres no Physician.
But I know it;
See, he is come.
How fares my worthy Lord?
Good Doctor, I endure no pain at all,
And the seventh day, the arrows head will out.
Why should it fall out the seventh day my Lord?
I know it; the seventh day it will not fail.
I wish it may, my Lord.
Yes, t'will be •…o,
You come with purpose to take present leave,
But you shall stay a while; my Lord Vincen•…o
Would see you fine and now is coming hither:
How knows your Lordship? have you sent for him?
No but it is very true; hoe's now hard by,
And will not hinder your affairs a whit.
How want of rest distempers his light brain?
Brings my Lord any train?
None but himself.
My nephew Pogio now hath left his Grace.
Good Doctor go, and bring him by his hand,
(Which he will give you) to my longing eyes,
Tic strange, if this be true.
The Prince I think,
Yet knows not of your hurt.
Yes wife, too well,
See he is come; welcome my princely friend:
I have been shot my Lord; but the •…euenth day
The arrows head will fall out of my side,
And I shall hue.
I doe not fear your life,
But, Doctor, is it your opinion,
That the seventh day the arrow head will out?
No, it is not his opinion, it is my knowledge:
For I doe know it well; and I do wish
Even for your only sake, my noble Lord,
This were the seventh day; and I now were well,
That I might be some strength to your •…art state,
For you have many perils to endure:
Great is your danger; gre•…; four vniustill
Is passing foul and mortal; would to God
My wound were something we•…l, I might be with you,
Nay do not whisper, I know what I say,
Too well for you, my Lore•…▪ I wonder heaven
Will let such violence threat an innocent life.
What ere it be, dear friend, so you be well,
I will endure it all; your wounded state
Is all the danger I fear towards me.
Nay, mine is nothing; For the seventh day
This a•…row head will out, and I shall live,
And so shall you, I think; but very hardly.
It will be hardly, you will scope indeed.
Be as will be; pray heaven your prophecy
Be happily accomplished in your self,
And nothing then can come amiss to me.
What says my Doctor? thinks he I say true?
If your good Lordship could but rest a while,
I would hope well.
Yes, I shall rest I know,
If that will help your indgement.
Yes, it will,
And good my Lord, lets help you in to try.
You p•…ease me m•…ch, I shall sleep instantly.
Why should the humorous boy forsake the chase?
As if he took advantage of my absence,
To some act that my pre•…ence would offend.
I warrant you my Lord, it is to that end:
And I believe he wrongs you in your love.
Children presuming on their parents kindness,
Care not what unkind actions they commit
Against their quiet: And were I as you,
I would affright my son from these bold parts,
And father him as I found his deserts.
I swear I will: and can I prove he aims
At any interruption in my love,
Isle 〈◊〉 his life.
We soon shall see,
For I have made Madam Corteza search
With pick-locks, all the Ladies Cabinets
About Earl Lassos house; and •…f •…here be
Traffic of love, twixt any one of them,
And yoūr suspected son; t'will soon appear,
In some sign of their amorous merchandise;
See where she comes, loded with 〈◊〉 &amp; paper•….
See here, my Lord, I have robed all their Caskets,
Know you this Ring? this Carquanet? this Chain?
Will any of these letters serve your turn?
I know not these things; but come: let me read some of these letters.
Madam, in this deed
You deserve highly of my Lord the Duke.
Nay my Lord Medic, I think I told you
I could do pretty well in these affairs:
O these young Girls engross up all the love
From vs, (poor Beldams;) but I hold my hand,
Isle ferret all the Cunni-holes of their kindness
Ere I have done with them.
Passion of death!
See, see, Lord Medic, my trait'rous son,
Hath long joyed in the favours of my love:
Woe to the womb that bore him: and my care
To bring him up to this accursed hour,
In which all cares possess my wretched life.
What father, would believe he had a son
So full of treachery to his innocent state?
And yet my Lord, this letter •…hues no meeting,
But a desire to meet.
Yes, yes, my Lord,
I doe suspect they meet; and I believe
I know well where too; I believe I doe;
And therefore tell me; does no creature know,
That you have left the chase thus suddenly?
And a•… come hither? have you not been seen
By any of these Lovers?
Not by any.
Come then, come follow me; I am persuaded
I shall go near to show you their kind hands.
Their confidence, that you are still a hunting,
Will make your amorous son that stole from thence,
Bold in his loue-sports; Come, come, a fresh chase,
I hold this pickelocke, you shall hunt at view.
What, do they think to seape? An old wives eye
Is a blew Crystal full of sorcery.
If this be true, the traitrous boy shall die.
Tell me I pray you, what strange hopes they are
That feed your coy conceits against the Duke,
And are preferred before th'aslured greatness
His highness•… graciously would make your for•…nes?
I have small hopes, my Lord; but a desire
To make my nuptial choice of one I love,
And as I would be loath t'impaire my state;
So I, affect not honours that exceed it.
O you are very temperate in your choice,
Pleading a judgment past your sex, and years.
But I believe some fancie' will be found,
The forge of these gay Glosses: if it be,
I shall decipher what close traitor tic
That is your Agent in your secret plots.
Swoons.
And him for whom you plot; and on you all
I will revenge thy disobedieuce,
With such severe correction, as shall fright
All such deluders f•…om the like attempts:
But chiefly he shall smart that is your factor▪
O me, accursed!
Mean time Isle cut
Your poor craft short in faith.
Poor craft indeed,
That I, or any others use, form.
Well Dame, if it be nothing but the jar
Of your vnfiued fancy; that procures
Your wilful coyness to my Lord the Duke,
No doubt but Time, and Judge•…ned will conform it
To such obedience, as so great desert
Proposde to your acceptance doth require.
To which end doe you co•…sail her Bassio l•….
And let me see Maid against the Duks return,
Another tincture set upon your looks
Then here•…ofore; For be assured at last
Thou shalt con•…ned, or else incur my curse:
Advise her, you Bassiolo.
I, my good Lord;
Gods pity, what an errant Ass was I,
To entertain the Princes crafty friendship?
Slood, I half suspect, the villain gulled me;
Our Squire I think is star•…'d.
Nay Lady it is true,
And you must frame your •…ancie to the Duke,
For I protest I will not be corrupted,
For all the friends and fortunes in the world,
To gull my Lord that trusts me.
O sir, now,
You're true too late.
No Lady, not a whit,
Slood, and you think to make an Ass of me,
May chance to rise betimes; I know it, I know.
Out servile coward, shall a light suspect,
That hath no slendrest proof of what we do,
Infringe the weigh•…e faith that thou hast sworn,
To thy dear friend the Prince that dotes on thee;
And will in pieces cut thee for thy falsehood;
I care not; Isle not hazard my estate,
For any Prince on earth: and Isle disclose
The complot to your father, if you yield not
To his obedience.
Doe if thou dare,
Even for thy scrapped up living, and thy life,
Isle tell my father then, how thou did woo 〈◊〉
To love the young Prince; and did force me too,
To take his Letter•…; I was well inclined,
I will be sworn. before, to love the Duke,
But thy vile railing at him, made me hate him.
I rail at him?
I marie did you sir,
And said he was a pattern for a Potter,
Fit t'haue his picture stamped on a stone Jug,
To keep Ale-knights in memory of Sobriety.
Sh'as a plague memory.
I could have loved him else; nay, I did love him,
Though I dissembled it, to bring him on,
And I by this time might have been a Duchess:
And now I think on it better: for revenge,
Isle have the Duke, and he shall have thy head,
For thy false wit within it, to his love.
Now go and tell my Father, pray be gone.
Why and I will go.
Go, for Gods sake go, are you here yet?
W•…ll, now I am resolved.
Tic bravely done, farewell: but do you hear sir?
Ta•…e this with you besides; the young Prince keeps
A certain letter you had writ for me,
(Endearing, and Condoling, and Mature)
And if you should deny things, that I hope
Will stop your i•…pudent mouth: but go your ways,
If you can answer all this, why tic well.
Well Lady, if you will assure me he•…re,
You will refrain to meet with the young Prince,
I will say nothing.
Good sir, say your worst,
For I will meet him, and that presently.
Then be content I pray, and leave me out,
And meet hereafter as you can your selves.
No, no sir, no, tic you must fetch him to me,
And you shall fetch him, or Isle do your arrand.
Swounds what a spite is this, I will resolve
T'endure the worst; tic but my foolish fear,
The plot will be discovered: O the gods!
Tic the best sport to play with these young dames;
I have dissembled, Mistress, all this while
Have I not made you in a pretty taking?
O tic most good; thus you may play on me;
You cannot be content to make me love
A man I hated till you spake for him,
〈◊〉 such •…nchanting speeches, as no friend
Could possi•…lie resist: but you must use
Your villainous wit, to drive me from my wits:
A plague of that bewitching tongue of yours;
Would I had never heard your scurvy words.
Pardon dear Dame, Isle make amends in faith,
Think you that Isle play false with my dear Vince•…
I swore 〈◊〉 sooner Hybla should want bees,
And Italy bon•… robes, then I; faith
And so they shall.
Come, you sh•…ll meet, and double meet, in spite
O•… all your foes, and D•…kes that dare maintain them,
A plague of a•…l old doters, I disd aine them:
S•…d like a friend; O let me comb the cokscombe.
Here is the place will doe the deed in faith;
This Duke will show thee how youth puts down age,
I and perhaps how youth does put down youth.
If I shall see my love in any sort
Prevented, or abused, th'abuser dies.
I hope there is no such intent my Liege,
For sad as death should I be to behold it.
You must not be too confident my Lord,
Or in your daughter or in them that guard her.
The Prince is pol•…eke, and envies his Father:
And though •…t for himself, nor any good
Intended to your daughter, yet because
He knows t'would kill his father, he would seek her.
Whist▪ wh•…st, they come.
Come, meet me boldly, come,
And let them come from hunting when they dare.
Haz the best spirit.
Spirit? what a plague,
Shall a man fear Capriches? you forsooth
Must have your love come t'ee, and when he comes,
Then you grow shamefaced, and he must not touch you:
But fie, my Father comes, and foe, my Aunt,
O 〈◊〉 a 〈◊〉 hearing, first not think you?
Nay, pray thee doe not mock her gentle friend.
Nay, you are even as wise a wooer too,
If she turn from you you even let her turn,
And say; you doe not love to force a Lady.
It is too much rudeness; gosh hat, what's a Lady?
Must she not be touched? what. is she copper think you?
And will not bide the touch stone? kiss her Vince,
And thou dost love me, kiss her.
Lady, now
I were too simple if I should not offer.
O God sir, pray away, this man talks idly.
How shay by that; now by that candle there,
Were I as Vince is, I would handle you
In ruftie tuft wise, in your right kind.
O, you have made him a sweet beagle, ha'y not?
It is the most true beleeuer in himself:
Of all that sect of folly faith's his fault.
So to her Vince, I give thee leave my lad,
Sweet were the words my mistress spake, when tears fell from He lies down her eyes. by them.
Thus, as the Lyon lies before his den,
Guarding his whelps, and streakes his careless limbs,
And when the Panther, Fox, or Wolf comes near
He never deigns to rise, to fright them h•…nce,
But only puts forth one of his sterne paws,
And 〈◊〉 his dear wh•…lps safe, as in a hutch,
So I pr•…sent his person, and keep mine.
Fox •…s, go by I put my terror forth, 
Let all the world 〈◊〉 what they can,
Her bargain best she makes,
That hath the wit to choose a man,
To pay for that he takes. 
Dispatch sweet whelps the bug, the Duke comes strait:
O tic a gre•…e old lo•…er that same Duke,
And chooses Minions rarely, if you mark him.
The noble Medic, that man, that Bobbadilla▪
That foolish kn•…ue, that hose and d•…blet •…inckard.
Swounds my Lord, rise, lets endure no more.
A little, pr•…y my Lord, for I b•…leeue
We shall discover very notable knave•…y.
Al•…s how I am gre•…'d and shamed in this.
Never care you Lord brother, theres no harm done.
But th•…t sweet Creature▪ my good Lords sister,
Madam Cortezza, she, the noblest Dame
That ever any vein of honour bled;
There were a wise now, for my Lord the Du•…e
Had he the grace to choose her, but in •…eede,
To spe•…ke her true•… prais•…, I must use some s•…udy.
Now truly brother, I did e•…er think
This man the honestest man that ere you k•…pt.
So sect•…, so, because he praises you.
Nay sit, but you shall he•…re him further yet.
Were not her head sometimes a li•…tle light,
And so unapt for mat•…er of much weight,
She were the fittest, a•…d the wort•…est Dame
To leap a window, and to break her neck,
That ever was.
Gods pity, are•…ant kna•…e,
I ever thought him a dissembling varlot.
Well, now my hearts be wary, for by this,
I fear the Duke is coming; Isle go watch,
And give you warning: I commend me •…ee.
O fine phrase,
And very timely used.
What now sweet life, shall we resolve upon?
We never shall enjoy each other here.
Direct you then my Lord, what we shall doe,
For I am at your will, and will endure
With you, the cruellest absence, from the state
We both were borne too, that can be supposed.
That would extremely grieve me, could my self
Only endure the ill, our hardest fates,
May lay on both of vs; I would not care,
But to behold thy sufferance, I should die.
How can your Lordship wrong my love so much,
To think the more woe I sustain for yo•…,
Breeds not the more my comfort? I alas
Have no mean else, to make my merit even
In any measure, with your eniment worth.
Now •…st I exercise my timorous lovers,
Like fresh armed soldiers, with some false alarms,
To ma•…e them yare and wary of their foe
The boisterous bearded Duke: Isle rush upon them
With a most hideous cry, the Duke, the Duke, the Duke.
Ha, ha, ha, wo ho, come again I say,
The Duke's not come in faith.
Gods precious man,
What did you mean to put vs in this fear?
O sir, to make you look about the more;
Nay, we must teach you more of this I tell yo•…:
What, can you be too safe sir? what I say,
Must you be pamperd in your vanities?
Ah, I do domineer and rule the roast.
Was ever such an Ingle? would to God,
(If it were not for our selves) my father saw him.
Minion, you have your prayer, and my curse,
For your good Housewifery.
What says your Highness?
Can you endure these injuries any more?
No more, no more, advise me what is best,
To be the penance of my graceless son?
My Lord, no mean but death or banishment,
Can be fit penance for him: if you mean
T'inioy the pleasure of your love your self.
Give him plain death my Lord, and then you're sure
Death or his banishment, he shall endure,
For wreak of that joys exile I sustain.
Come, call our Guard, and apprehend him strait.
I have s•…me Jewels then my dearest life,
Which with what ever we can get beside,
Shall be our means, and we will make escape.
Sblood, the Duke and all come now in earnest;
The Duke, by heaven, the Duke.
Nay, then in faith
Your jest is too too stale.
Gods p•…etious,
By these ten bones, and by this hat and heart,
The Duke and all comes, see, we are cast away.
Lay hands upon them all, pursue, pursue.
Stay thou ungracious girl.
Lord Medic,
Lead you our Guard, and see you app•…ehend
The treacherous boy▪ nor let him scope with life,
Unless he ye•…lt to his external exile.
It is princely said my Lord—
And take my Usher.
Let me go into exile with my Lord,
I will not live, if I be left behind.
Impudent Damsel, would thou follow him?
He is my husband, whom •…ls should I follow?
Wretch, thou speak treason to my Lord the Duke.
Yet love me Lady, and I p•…rdon all.
I have a husband, and must love none else.
Dis•…ightfull Dame, Isle dis inherit him,
And thy good Father here shall cast off thee,
And both shall feed on ayre, or starve•…, and die.
If this be justice, let it be our dooms:
If free and spotless love in equal years,
With honours vnimpaired deserve such ends,
Let vs approve what justice is in friends.
You shall I swear: sister, take you her close
Into your chamber, locke her fast alone,
And let her stir nor speak with any one.
She shall not brother: come Ness, come with me.
Heaven save my love, and I will suffer gladly.
Haste Iulio, follow thou my sons pursuit,
And will Lord Medic not to hurt nor touch him,
But either banish him, or bring him back:
Charge him to use no violence to his life.
I will my Lord.
O Natu•…e! how alas
Art thou and Reason thy true guide opposde?
More bane thou take, to guide Sense, led amiss,
Then being guided, Reason gives thee bliss.
Now see good Doctor, t'was no frantic fancy,
That made my tongue presage this head should fall
Out of my wounded side the seventh day;
But an inspired rapture of my mind,
Submitted and conioynde in patience,
To my Creator, in whom I fore-saw
(Like to an Angel) this divine event.
So is it plain, and happily approved,
In a right christian president, confirming
What a most sacred medcine Patience is,
That with the high thirst of our souls, clear fire
Exhausts corpora 〈◊〉 humour; and all pain,
Casting our flesh off, while we it retain.
Make some religious vow then my dear Lord,
And keep it in the proper memory,
Of so Celestial and free a grace.
Sweet wife, thou rest my good Angel still,
Suggesting by all means, these ghostly counsels.
Thou weariest not thy husbands patient ears,
With motions for new fashions in attire,
For change of Jewels, pastimes, and nice cates,
Nor studiest eminence, and the higher place
Amongst thy consorts, like all other Dames:
But knowing more worthy objects appertain
To every woman that desires t'inioy
A blessed life in marriage: thou contemn'st
Those common pleasures, and pursu'st the rare,
Using thy husband in those virtuous gifts:
For which, thou first did choose him, and thereby
Cloy not with him, but love him endlessly.
In reverence•… of thy motion then, and zeal•…
To that most sovereign power, that was my cure.
I make a vow to go on soot to Rome,
And offer humbly in S. Peters Temple,
This fatal Arrow head: which work, let none judge
A snperstitious Rite, but a right use,
Proper to this peculiar instrument,
Which visiblie resignde to memory,
Through every eye that sees, will stir th•… soul
To Gratitude and Progress, in the use
Of my tried patience which in my powers ending,
Would shut th'example out of future lives.
No act is superstitious, that applies
All power to God, deuoting hearts, through eyes.
Spoke with the true tongue of a Nobleman:
But noware all these excitations toys,
And Hono•… fa•…s his brain with other joys.
I know your true f•…iend, Prince Vincentio
Will triumph in this excellent effect
Of your late 〈◊〉.
O, my dear fr•…ds name
Presents my thoughts, with a most mortal danger,
To his right inno•…ned life: a monst•…s fact
Is now effected on him.
Where? or how?
I doe not well those circumstances know,
But am assured, the substance is too t•…e.
Come reverend Doctor, let vs harken out
Where the young Prince remains, and bear with you
Medcines t'allay 〈◊〉 danger: if by wounds,
Bear precious Balsam, or s•…e s•…gne juice;
If by fell poison, some choice A•…te,
If by black witch•…, our good s•…ts and prayers
Shall exorcise the devilish wrath of hell,
Out of his princely bosom.
Where? where? where? whore's my Lord vnche, my Lord my uncle?
Here's the ill tydings-bringer; what news now, with thy unhappy presen•…?
O my Lord my Lord Vincentio, is almost kilt by my Lord Med•….
See Doctor, see, if my pr•…ge be true.
And well I know if he have hurt the Prince,
It is treacherously done, or with much help.
Nay sure he had no help, but all the Dukes Guard; and they set upon him end•…d; and after he had defended him∣self, dee see? he drew▪ &amp; having as good as wounded the Lord Medic almost, he struck a•… him, and •…d h•…, dee mark?
What tale is here? where is this mischief done?
At Monks well, my Lord, Isle g•…de you to him pre∣sen•…y
I doubt it no•…; fools are best g•…des to ill,
And mischiefs ready way l•…s open still.
Lead sir I pray.
Queen•… your self, Nec; though your love be slain,
You have another that's worth two of him.
It is not possible; it cannot be
That heaven should suffer such imp tie.
T is true, I swear niece.
O most unjust truth▪
Isle cast my self down headlong from this Tower,
And force an inst•… pass•…ge for my soul,
To seek the wandering spirit of my Lord.
Will you do so Niece? That I hope you will not,
And yet there was a Maid in Saint Marks street,
For such a matter did so; and her clo•…hes
Flew up about her so as she had no harm:
And grace of God your clothes may •…e up too,
And save you harmless; for your cause and hers
Are en as like as can be.
I would not s•…ape;
And certainly I think the death is easy.
Ot'is the eafiest death that ever was,
Look N•…e, it is so far hence to the ground.
You should bee quite dead, long before you felt it.
Yet do not leap N•…e.
I will kill my self
With running on some sword; or drink strong poison;
Which d•…h is e•…est I would fine endure.
Sure Cleopatra was of the same •…de,
And did so; she was honoured ever since,
Yet do not you so Niece.
Wretch that I am; my heart is soft and faint;
And trembles at the very•… •…hought of death,
Though thoughts ten-folde more gre•…uous do torment it;
Isle f•…le death by degrees; and first deform
This my accursed face with ugly wounds,
That was the first cause of my dear loves death.
That were a cruel deed; yet Adelasia;
In Pettis Palace of Petit p•…asure,
For all the world, with such a knife as this
Cut off her cheeks, and nose, and was commended
More then all Dames that kept their faces whole;
O do not cut it.
Fie on my faint hear•…,
It will not give my hand the wished strength;
Behold the just plague of a sensual life,
That to preserve it self in Reasons spite,
And shun deaths horror, feels it ten times more.
Unworthy women, why doe men adore
Our fading Beauties, when th•…ir worthiest lives,
Being lost for vs, we dare not die for them?
Hence haplesse Ornaments that adorned this head:
Disorder ever these entering carlos
And leave my beauty like a wilderness,
That never mans 〈◊〉 mo•…e may dare t'inuade.
Isle tell you N•…ce; and yet I will not tell you,
A thing that I desire to have you doe.
But I will tell you only what you might doe,
Cause I would pleasure you in all I cud.
I have an Ointment h•…re, which we Dames use,
To take off hair•… •…hen it does grow too lowe▪
Upon our foreheads, and that for a need,
If you should rub it hard upon your face,
Would blister it, and make it look most vildely.
O G•…e me that Aunt.
Give it you verge•…? that were well indeed:
Shall I be thought to tempt you to such matters?
None (of my faith) shall know it: gentle Aunt,
Bestow it on me, and Isle ever love you.
Gods pity, but you shall not spoil your face.
I will not then indeed.
Why then Niece take it:
But you shall swear you will not.
No, I swe•…re.
What, doe you force it from me? Gods my dear,
Will you mis-vse y ur face so? what, all over?
Nay, if you be so desperate, Isle be gone—
〈◊〉▪ plesse b•…aunt, turn the ugliest face
Th•… ever Aethiop, or frightful fiend
Showed in the amazed eye of profaned light:
See precious Love, if thou be it in ayre,
And can break darkness, and the strongest Towers,
With thy dissolved intellectual powers,
See a wo•…e tormen•… s•…ffered for thy death,
Then ifit had extended his black force,
In seven-fold horror to my hated life.
Smart precious ointment. smart. and to my brain
Sweat thy enu•…nom'd fury, make my eyes
Burn with thy sulphre▪ like the lakes of hell,
That fear of me may sh•…er him to dust,
That eat his own child with the jaws of lust—
I wonder how far they pursued my Son•…,
That no return of him or them appears,
I fear some haplesse accident is chanced,
That makes the news so loath to pierce mine ears.
High heaven vouchsafe no such eff•…ct succeed
Those wretched ca•…es that from my house flow,
But that in h•…elesse love all acts may end.
What shall I do? Ala•… I cannot rule
My desp•…rate Niece, all her sweet face is spoiled,
And I dare keep her prisoner no more:
See, see, she comes frantic and all undressed.
Tyrant! beho•…d how thou hast used thy love,
See, thief to N•…ur, thou hast killed and robed,
Killed what my self killed, robed what makes thee poor▪
Beauty (a Lovers treasure) thou hast lost▪
Where none can find it; all a poor Maids dow•…
Thou hast forced from me: all my joy and hope.
No man will love me more; all Dames excel me,
This ugly thing is now no more a face,
Nor any vile form in all Earth resembled,
But thy foul tyranny; for which all the pains
Two faithful Lovers feel, that thus are parted,
All joys they might have felt, turn all to pains;
All a young virgin thinks she does endure,
To loose her love and beauty; on thy heart
Be heaped and pressed down till thy soul depart.
Haste Liege, your son is dangerously hurt.
Lord 〈◊〉 contemning your command,
By me delivered, as your Highness willed,
Set on him with your Guard; who •…rooke him down;
And th•…n the coward Lord, with mortal wounds,
And 〈◊〉 insolence, ploughed up his soft breast;
Which barbarous f•…ct in part is laid on you,
For first enjoining it, and •…owl exclai•…mes
In pity of your son, your subjects breathe
Against your unnatural fury; amongst whom
The good Lord Strozza desperately raves,
And vengeance for his friends injustice craves.
See where he comes burning in zeal of friendship.
Where is the tyrant? let me stri•…e his eyes
Into his brain, with horror of an object.
See Pagan Narrow; see how thou hast ri•…
Thy 〈◊〉 bosom; rooted up that flower,
From whence thy now spent life should spring anew,
And in him kilt (that would have bred thee fresh)
Thy mother and thy father.
Good friend cease.
What hag with child of Monster, would have nursed
Such a prodigous longing? But a father
Would rather eat the brawn out of his arms
Then glut the mad worm of his wilde desires
With his dear issues entrails.
Honoured friend;
He is my father, and he is my Prince,
In both whose rights he ma•… command my life.
What is a father? •…urn his entrails gulfs
To swallow children, wh•…n they have begot them?
And whats a Prince? Had all been virtuous men,
There never had been Prince upon the earth,
And so no subject; all men had been Princes:
A virtuous •…an is subject to •…o Prince,
But to his soul and honour; which are laws,
That carry Fire and Sword within themselves
Never corrupted never out of rule;
What is there in a Prince? That his least lu•…te
Are valued at the lives of other men,
When common faults in him should prodigies be,
And his gross dotage r•…there 〈◊〉 then soothed.
How thick and 〈◊〉 my plagues descend▪
Not giving m•… mazed powers a time to speak:
Pour mo•…e rebuke upon me worthy Lord,
For I have guilt and patience for them all:
Yet know, dear son, I did forbid thy harm:
This Gentleman can witness, whom I sent
With all comm•…nd of haste to •…terdict
This forward man in mischief; not to touch thee:
Did I not In•…io? utter nought but truth.
All your guard heard, my Lord, I gave your charge,
With loud and violent •…orations.
After all which, Lord Medic cowardly hurt him.
The Guara. He did my Princely Lord.
Believe then son,
And know me pierced as deeply with thy wounds:
And pardon virtuous Lady that have lost
The dearest treasure proper to your sex.
Ay me, it seems by my unhappy means!
O would to God, I could with present cure
Of these unnatural wounds; and moaning right
Of this abused beauty, join you both,
(As last I left you) in eternal nupt•…else.
My Lord, I know the malice of this man,
Not your unkind consent hath used vs thus.
And since I make no doubt I shall survive
These fatal dangers; and your grace is pleased,
To give free course to my unwounded love;
It is not this outward beauties ruthful loss,
Can any thought discourage my desires:
And therefore, dear life, doe not wrong me so,
To think my love the shadow of your beauty,
I woo your virtues, which as I am sure
No accident can alter or impair;
So, be you certain nought can change my love.
I know your honourable mind my Lord,
And will not do it that unworthy wrong,
To let it spend her forces in contending
(Spite of your sense) to love me thus deformed:
Love must have outward objects to delight him,
Else his content will be too grave and sour.
It is enough for me my Lord, you love,
And that my beauties sacrifice redeemde
My sad fear of your slaughter. You first loved me
Closely for beauty; which being with'red thus,
Your love must fade; when the most needful rights
Of Fate, and Nature, have dissolved your life,
And that your love must needs be all in soul,
Then will we meet again: and then (dear Love)
Love me again; for then will beauty be
Of no respect with loves eternity.
Nor is it now; I wooed your beauty first
But as a lover: now as a dear husband,
That title and your virtues bind me ever.
Al•…s, that title is of little force
To stir up men's affections: when wives want
Outward excitements, husbands loves grow scant.
Assist me Heaven, and Art, give me your Mask,
Open thou little store-house of great Nature,
Use an Elixir drawn through seven years fire,
That like Medeas Cauldron, can repair
The ugliest loss of living temp'rature:
And for this princely pair of virtuous Turtles,
Be lavish of thy precious influence
Lady, t'attone your honourable strife,
And take all let from your loves tender eyes▪
Let me for ever hide this stain of Beauty,
With this recureful Mask; here be it fixed
With painelesse operation; of it self,
(Your beauty having brooked three days eclipse)
Like a dissolved cloud it shall fall off,
And your fair looks regain their freshest rays:
So shall your Princely friend, (if heaven consent)
In twice your suffered date renew recur,
Let me then have the honour to conjoin
Your hands, conformed to your constant hearts.
Grave Be•…uenius, honourable Doctor,
On whose most sovereign Aesculapian hand,
Fame with her richest miracles attends,
Be fortunate, as ever heretofore,
That we may q•…ite thee both with gold and honour,
And by thy happy means, have power to make
My Son, and his much injured love amends,
Whose well proportioned choice we now applaud,
And bless all those that ever furthered it.
Where is your discreet Usher my good Lord,
The special furtherer of this iq•…all match?
Brought after by a couple of your Guard.
Let him be fetched, that we may doe him grace.
Isle fetch him my Lord: away, you must not go: O here
He comes; O master Usher, I am •…ore for you, you must pre∣sently be chopped in pieces.
Wo to that wicked Prince that ere I saw him.
Come, come, I gull you master Usher, you are like to be the Dukes Minion man; dee think I would have been seen in your company, and you had b•…en out of favour? Here's my friend moister Usher, my Lord.
Give me your hand friend, pardon vs I pray,
We much have wronged your worth, as one that knew the fitness of this match aboue our selves.
Sir, I did all thing for the best, I swear,
And you must think I would not have been gul'd,
I know what's fit sir; as I hope you know now:
Sweet Vince, how fa•…'st thou, be of honoured cheer.
Vince does he call him? O Fool, dost thou call
The Prince Vince, like his equal?
O my Lo•…d, Alas
You know not what haz past twixt vs two;
Here in thy bosom I will •…e sweet Vince,
And die if thou die, I protest by heaven.
I know not what this means.
Nor I my Lord:
But sure he saw the fitness of the match,
With freer and more noble cies then we.
Why I s•…w that as well as he my Lord; I knew t'was a foolish match betwixt you two; did no•… you think so my Lord Vincentio? Lord uncle, did not I say at fi•…st of the Duke▪ will his Antiquity never leave his Imqu•…tie?
Go to, too much of this; but ask this Lord,
If he did like it.
Who, my Lord Medic?
Lord Stinkard Man, his name is▪ 〈◊〉 him Lord Stin∣kard▪ did you like the match? say.
My Lord Stinker•…, did you like the match betwixt the Duke, and my Lady Margaret?
〈◊〉 Sicophant, I will have thy l•…fe.
Unworthy Lo•…d, put up: •…hirst'st •…ou more blood?
T•…y life is •…tt'st to be called in question,
For thy most murthrous cowardice on my son▪
Thy forwardness to every cruelty
Calls thy pretended Nobles in suspect.
Nobles my Lord? set by your princely favour,
That gave the lustre to his painted state,
Who ever viewed him but with deep contempt,
As reading vileness in his very looks?
And if he prove not son of some base drudge,
Trimmed up by Fortune, being disposed to jest
And dally with your state, then that good Angel,
That by divine relation spake in me,
Fore-telling these foul dangers to your son▪
And without notice brought this reverend man
To rescue him from death: now fails my tongue,
And Isle confess, I doe him open wrong.
And so thou dost; and I return all note
Of infamy or baseness on thy throat:
Damn me my Lord, if I be not a Lord.
My Liege, with all desert, even now you said
His life was duly forfet, for the death
Which in these b•…rbarous wounds he sought your son;
Vouchsafe me then his life, in my friends right,
For many ways I know he merits death;
Which, (if you grant) will instantly appear,
And that I feel with some rare miracle.
His life is thine Lord Strozza, Give him death.
What my Lord,
Will your grace cast away an innocent life?
Villain thou least, thou guilty art of death
A hundred ways, which now Isle execute.
Recall your word my Lord.
Not for the world.
O my dear Liege, but that my spirit prophetike
Hath inward feeling of such sins in hi•…,
As ask the forfeit of his life and soul,
I would, before I took his life, give leave
To his confession, and his penitence:
O, he would tell you most notorious wonder•…,
Of his most impious state; but life and soul
Must suffer for it in him, and my hand
Forbidden is from heaven to let him live,
Till by confession he may have forge uenesse.
Die therefore monster.
O be not so uncharitable sweet friend,
Let him confess his sins, and ask heaven pardon.
He must not Princely friend, it is heavens justice
To plague his life and soul, and heir's heavens justice.
O save my life my Lord.
Hold good Lord Strozza,
Let him confess the sins that heaven hath told you,
And ask forgiveness.
Let me good my Lord,
And Isle confess what you accuse me of;
Wonders indeed, and full of damned deserts.
I know it, and I must not let thee live
To ask forgiveness.
But you shall my Lord,
Or I will take his life out of your hand.
A little then I am content my Liege:
Is thy name Medic?
No my Noble Lord,
My true name is Mendice.
Mendice? see,
At first a Mighty scandal done to Honour.
Of what country art thou?
Of no Country, I,
But borne upon the Se•…s, my mother passing
Twixt Za•…t and Uenice.
Where were thou christened?
I was never christened,
But being brought up with beggars▪ called Mendice.
Strange, and unspeakable.
How came thou then
To bear that port thou did, entering this Court?
My lord when I was young, being able limbed,
A Captain of the Gipsies entertained me,
And many years I lived a loose life with them:
At last I was so fauor'd, that they made me
The King of Gipsies; and being told my fortune
By an old Sorceress, that I should be great
In some great Princes love, I took the treasure
Which all our company of Gipsies had
In many years, by several stealths collected,
And lea•…ing them in wars, I lived abroad,
With no less show then now: and my last wrong
I did to Nobles, was in this high Court.
Never was heard so strange a counterfeit.
Did thou not cause me to be shot in hunting?
I did my Lord, for which, foe•… heavens love pardon.
Now let him live my Lord, his bloods least drop
Would stain your Court, more then the Sea could cleanse:
His solo's too foul to expiate with death.
Hence then, be ever banished from my rule▪
And live a monster, loathed of all the world.
Isle get boys and bait him out a'th Court my Lord.
Doe so I pray thee, rid me of his sight.
Come on my Lord Stinckerd, Isle play Fox, Fox, co•…e out of thy hole with you in faith.
Isle run and hide me from the sight of heaven.
Fox, Fox, go out of thy hole; a two legged Fox,
A two legged Fox.
Never was such an accident disclosed.
Let vs forget it honourable friends,
And satisfy all wrongs with my sons right,
In solemn marriage of his love and him.
I humbly thank your Highness honoured Doctor▪
The Balsam you infused into my wounds,
Hath eased me much, and given me sudden strength
Enough t'assure all danger is exempt,
That any way may let the general joy,
My Princely Father speaks of in our nuptials.
Which my dear Son shall with thy full re•…re
Be celebrate in greater Majesty,
Than ever graced our greatest Ancestry.
Then take thy love, which heaven with all joys ble•…e,
And make ye both mirrors of happiness.

WEll done my lusty bloods, Well done. Fit, fit observance for this May-morning; Not the May-Moneth alone, they take when it comes; Nor the first week of that Month; Nor the first day; but the first minute of the first hour, of the first day. Loose no time bloods, loose no time; though the Sun go to bed never so much before you, yet be you up before him; call the golden sluggard from the silver arms of his Lady, to light you into yours, when your old father January here in one of his last days, thrusts his fore-head into the depth of Mays fragrant bosom: What may you Aprils perform then? O what may you doe? Well yet will I say thus much for my self, wheresoever the affections of youth are, there must needs be the instruments, and where the instruments are, there must of necessity be the faculties; What am I short of them then? A sound old man, ably constituted, holsomly dieted, that took his May
temperately at their ages, and continued his own; why should he not continue their ages in his own? By the Mass I feel nothing that stands against it, and therefore sweet May I salute thee with the youngest: I have love to employ thee in, as well as the proudest young princock, and so have at you Mistress Frances China: have at you Mistress Frank: In•e sprede my nets for you in faith, though they be my very purse nets, wherein what heart will not willingly lye pan∣ting?
How now? Gods my life, I wonder what made this May-morning so cold, and now I see it is this January that intrudes into it; what paper is that he holds in hand trow we?
Here have I put her face in rime, but I fear my old vain will not stretch to her contentment. O hair, no hair but beams stolen from the Sun.
Out upon her, if it be she that I think, she has a Fox red cranion;
A fore-head that disdains the name of fair.
And reason, for it is a folwe one.
A matchless eye.
True, her eyes be not matches.
A cheek, vermilion red.
Painted I warrant you.
A far commanding mouth.
It stretches to her ears in deed.
A nose made out of wax.
A red nose, in sincerity.
This could I send, but person, person does it: A good presence, to bear out a good wit; a good face, a pre∣tie Court leg, and a deft dapper personage, no superfluous dimensions, but fluent in competence; for it is not Hector but Paris, not the full armefull, but the sweet handful that Ladies delight in.
O notable old whyniard.
Such a size of humanity now, and brain enough
in it, it is not in the strength of a woman to withstand; well she may hold out a parl•e or two, for it is a weak fort that obeys at the first or second summons, if she resist the third she is discharged, though she yield in future: for then it appears it was no fault of hers: but the man that would take no denial. What rests now? means for access: True. O an honest Bawd were worth gold now.
A plague upon him, I had thought to have ap∣pear'd to him, but now if I doe, he will take me for the man he talks on: I will therefore post by his dull eye-sight, as in hast of business.
What Signior Angelo? soft I command you.
Gods precious, what mean you Sir?
I would be loath to be out-runne I assure you Sir: was I able to stay you?
Your ability stood too stiff Sir, beshrow me else.
O most offencelesse fault, I would thou would blaze my imperfection to one thou know, in faith.
Well Sir another time, tell me where she is, and Isle doe so much for you gratis. Good morrow Sir.
Nay stay good Angelo.
My business says nay Sir, you have made me stay to my pain Sir, I thank you.
Not a whit man I warrant thee.
Go to then, briefly, to whom shall I commend your imperfections, will you tell me if I name her?
That I will, y•aith Boy.
Is not her hair, no hair, but beams stolen from the Sun?
Black, black as an Ouzell.
A fore-head that disdains the name of fair.
Away Witch, away:
A matchless eye.
Nay fie, fie, fie. I see you are a very Devil Angelo. And in earnest, I jested, when I said my desire of thy friend∣ship touched my self, for it concerns a friend of mine just
of my standing.
To whom then would he be remembered that I can solicit?
To sweet Mistress Franciscina: with whom I hear thou art ready to lye down, thou art so great with her.
I am as great as a near Kinseman may be with her Sir, not otherwise:
A good consanguinity: and good Angelo, to her with thou deliver from my friend, in all secrecy, these poor brace of bracelets?
Perhaps I will Sir, when I know what the Gentle∣man and his intent is.
Never examine that man; I would not trouble you with carrying too much at once to her, only tell her, such a man will resolve her, naming me: and I doe not greatly care, if I take the pains to come to her, so I stay not long, and be let in privily: and so without making many words: here they be▪ put them up closely I beseech thee, and deliver them as closely.
Well Sir, I love no contention with friends, and therefore pocket many things, that otherwise I would not: but I pray Sir licen•e me a question. Doe not I know this Gentleman that offers my Cozen this kindness?
Never saw him in thy life, at least never knew him; but for his bounty sake to all his well willers, if this message be friendly discharged, I may chance put a dear friend of him into your bosom: Sir, and make you profit∣bly acquainted.
But I pray you Sir, is he not a well elderly Gentle∣man?
Wide, wide; as young as day, I protest to thee.
I know he is young too, but that is in ability of by∣die, but is he not a pretty little squat Gentleman, as you shall see amongst a thousand?
Still from the cushion, still, tall and high, like a Cedar.
I know he is tall also, but it is in his mind Sir, and it is not Hector but Paris, not thy full armefull, but the sweet handful that a Lady delights to dandle.
Now the good Devil take thee, if there be any such in hell, hell I beseech thee.
Well, well Signior Lorenzo, in faith the little Squire is thought to be as parlesse a piece of flesh, for a piece of flesh, as any hunts the hole pale of Venus I protest t'ee.
I cannot contain my self, in faith Boy, if the Wenches come in my walk, I give 'em that they come for, I dally not with hem.
I know you doe not Sir, his dallying days be done.
It is my infirmity, and I cannot doe withal, to die for it.
I believe you Sir.
There are certain envious old fellows, my neigh∣bours, that say, I am one vnwieldly and stiff: Angelo, did ever hear any wench complain of my stiffenesse?
Never in my life: your old neighbours measure you by themselves.
Why ther's the matter then?
But in faith Sir: doe you ever hope to win your purpose at my losing hands, knowing her (as all the world does) a woman of that approved lowliness of life, and so generally tried?
As for that take thou no care, shoe's a woman, is she not?
Sure I doe take her to have the flesh and blood of a woman.
Then good enough, or then bad enough, this to∣ken shall be my Gentleman Usher to prepare my access, and then let me alone with her.
I marry Sir, I think you would be alone with her; Well Sir, I will doe my best, but if your Gentleman Usher should not get entrance for you now, it would be a grief
to me.
Fear it not man: Gifts and gold, take the strong'st hold; Away, here comes a snudge that must be my son in law: I would be loath he should suspect these tricks of youth in me, for fear he fear my daughter will trot after me.
Fare you well Sir.
Godge you God morrow Sir, godge you God morrow.
God morrow neighbour Gasparo: I have talked with my daughter, whom I doe yet find a greene young plant, and therefore unapt to bear such ripe fruit, I think I might have said rotten, as your self: But she is at my disposition, and shall be at yours in the end, here's my hand, and with my hand take hers.
Nay by my faith Sir, you must give me leave to shake her portion by the hand first.
It is ready told for you Sir, come home when you will and receive it,
and see, yonder she comes; away, she cannot yet abide you, because she fears she can abide you too well.
Well, I will come for her potion Sir, and till then, God take you to his mercy.
Adieu my good son in law, Isle not interrupt her, let her meditate a my late motion.
It is strange to see the impiety of parents,
Both priuiledgd by custom, and professed,
The holy institution of heaven;
Ordaining marriage for proportiond minds,
For our chief humane comforts; and t'encrease
The loved images of God in men:
Is now perverted to th'increase of wealth;
We must bring riches forth, and like the Cuckoo
Hatch others eggs; Join house to house, in choices
Fit timber-logs and stones, not men and women:
Ay me, here's one I must shun, woude embrace.
O stay and hear me speak or see me dye.
How now? what have we here? what a loathsome creature man is being drunk: Is it not pity to see a man of good hope, a toward Scholar, writes a theme well, scannes a verse very well, and likely in time to make a proper man, a good leg, specially in a boot, valiant, well spoken, and in a word, what not? and yet all this overthrown as you see, drowned, quite drowned in a quart pot.
O these same wicked healths, breed monstrous diseases.
Aurelio, speak man, Aurelio?
Pray heaven all be well.
O speak, if any spark of speech remain.
It is thy dear Aemilia that calls.
Well, well, it becomes not a friend to touch the deadly wounds of his friend with a smiling countenance.
Touch thee? sblood I could find in my heart to beat thee; up in a fools name, up: what a Scene of fop∣rye have we here?
Prithee have done.
Up Cuckoo Cupids bird, or by this light Isle fetch thy father to thee.
Good Lodouico, if thou love me, leave me; thou come to consaile me from that, which is joined with my soul in eternity: I must and will doe what I doe.
Doe so then, and I protest thou shalt never like thy lips after my Kinsewoman, while thou liu'st: I had thought to have spoken for th•e, if thou had taken a man∣lie course with her: but to fold up thy self like an Vrchine, and lye a caluing to bring forth a husband: I am ashamed to think on it: sblood I have heard of wenches that have been won with singing and dancing, and some with riding, but never heard of any that was won with tumbling in my life.
If thou knew how vain thou seem.
I doe it of purpose, to show how vain I hold thy disease, S'hart art thou the first that has shot at a wenches heart and mist it? must that shot that mist her wound thee? let her shake her heals in a shrowes name: were she my Cozen a thousand times, and if I were as thee, I would make her shake her heals too, before I would shake mine thus.
O vanity, vanity.
S'death, if any wench should offer to keep posses∣zion of my heart against my will, I'd fire her out with Sack and Sug•r, or smoke her out with Tobacco, like a hornet, or purge for her, for love is but a humour: one way or other I would vent her, thats infallible.
For shame hold thy tongue, me thinks thy wit should feel how stale are these love storms, and with what general privilege love pierces the worthiest. Seek to help thy friend, not mock him.
Marry, seek to help thy self then, in a halters name, doe not lie in a ditch, and say God help me, use the lawful tools he hath lent thee. Up I say I will bring thee to her.
She'll not endure me:
She shall endure thee doe the worst thou can to her, I and endure thee till thou can not endure her; But then thou must use thy self like a man, and a wise man, how deep soever she is in thy thoughts, carry not the prints of it in thy looks; be bold and careless, and stand not sau∣tring a far of, as I have seen you, like a Dog in a firm∣typot, that licks his chops and wags his tail, and fine would lay his lips to it, but he fears tic too hot for him: thats the only way to make her too hot for thee. He that holds religious and sacred thought of a woman, he that bears so reverend a respect to her, that he will not touch her but with a kissed hand and a timorous heart; he that adores her like his Goddess: Let him be sure she will shun him like her flaue. Alas good souls, women of themselves are tractable and testable enough, and would return Quid for
Quote still, but we are they that spoile'em, and we shall ans∣were for it another day. We are they that put a kind of wan∣ton Melancholy into 'em, that makes 'em think their noses bigger then their faces, greater then the Sun in bright∣ness; and where as Nature made 'em but half fools, we make 'em all fool. And this is our palpable flattery of them, where they had rather have plain dealing Well, in conclu∣zion, Isle to her instantly, and if I doe not bring her to thee, or at the least some special favour from her, as a feather from her fan, or a string from her shoo, to wear in thy hat, and so forth, then never trust my skill in poultry whilst thou liu'st again.
THou shalt not to the wars, or if thou dost Isle bear thee company, dear Quint. doe not offer to forsake me.
Hands off wife, hang not upon me thus; how can I maintain thee but by using my valour? and how can I use that, but in action and employment? go in, play at cards with your Cozen Angelo here, and let it suffice I love thee.
Come sweet Cozen, doe not cloy your husband with your love so, especially to hinder his preferment; who shall the D•ke have to employ in these Marshall necessities if not Captain Quintiliano, he bears an honourable mind, and tic pity but he should have employment. Let him get a company now, and he will be able to maintain you like a Duchess hereafter.
Well said Signior Angelo, gossaue me you speak like a true Cozen indeed, does he not Quint?
He does so, and I thank him; yet see how the fool puts finger in the eye still.
Isle cheer her up, I warrant you Captain; come
Cousin, lets in to tables.
Farewell sweet Mistress.
Farewell my good servant.
Now take away thy hand, and show thou did laugh all this while; good Lord who would not marry to have so kind a wife make much on him?
After Boy, give your attendance.
Could you not spare me money for mine hostess, where you put me to board? you're a whole fortnight are∣r•rages.
Attend I say, the hostess of the Lyon has a leg like a Cyant, want for nothing Boy, so she score truly.
Faith Sir, she has chaulk't up twenty shillings al∣ready, and swears she will chalk no more.
Then let her choke, and choke thou with her: S'blood hobby horse, and she had chalked up twenty pounds, I hope the world knows I am able to pay it with a wet fin∣ger.
Alas Sir, I think you're able, but the world does not know it.
Then the worlds an ignorant Sir, and you are an innocent, vanish Boy, away.
I hope he will foist some money for my score, out of this gull here.
It is a plaguy good wag Quint. first not?
Isle make him a good one here I ha done with him; but this same loving fool my wife now, will never leave weeping, till I make her believe I will not have a company. Who would be encumbered with these soft hearted creatures, that are ever in extremes, either too kind, or too unkind?
Save me, it is true, it is a hard thing must please'em in sadness.
Damn me, if I doe not pity her with my heart; plague on her kindness, she has half persuaded me to take no company.
Nay sweet Quint: then how shall I be a Liefte∣nant?
Well, and my promise were not past to thee, I am a villain if all the world should part Frank and me; think I love thee therefore, and will doe thee credit: It will cost me a great deal a this same foolish money to buy me drum and ensign, and furnish me thoroughly, but the best is I know my credit.
Sfut Quint, we'll want no money man, Isle make my row of houses fly first.
Let'em walk, let'em walk; Candle rents: if the wars hold, or a plague come to the town, theill be worth nothing.
True, or while I am beyond Sea, some sleepy wench may set fire ith bed-straw.
Right, or there may come an earthquake, and ouerturne'em.
Just, or there may be conjuring, and the wind may down with'em.
Or some crafty pettifogger may find a hole in the title, a thousand casualties belongs to 'em.
Nay, they shall walk, thats certain, Isle turn 'em into money.
Thats thy most husbandly course in faith Boy, thou moist have twenty in the hundred for thy life, Isle be thy man for two hundred.
Will it in faith Quint? gossaue me tic done.
For your life, not otherwise.
Well, I desire no more, so you'll remember me for my Lieftenantship.
Remember thee? it is thine own already Boy, a hundred pounds shall not buy it from thee; give me thy hand. I doe here create thee Lieutenant Innocentio.
If you have a company Captain.
If I have: damn me if such another word doe not make me put thee out ath' place again; if I have a com∣pany, Sfut, let the Duke deny me one, I would it were come to that once, that employment should go with the vnde∣server,
while men of service sit at home, and feed their an∣ger with the blood of red lattices. Let the Duke deny me to day, Isle renounce him to morrow. Isle to the enemy point blank, I'm a villain else:
And I by heaven I swear.
Well if that day come, it will prove a hot day with some body.
But Captain, did not you say that you would enter me at an Ordinary, that I might learn to converse?
When thou wilt Lieutenant; No better time then now, for now you are in good clothes, which is the most ma∣teriall point for thy entrance there.
I but how should I behave my self?
Marry Sir, when you come first in, you shall see a crew of Gallants of all sorts:
Nay Captain if I come first in I shall see no by∣die.
Tush man, you must not doe so, if you have good clothes and will be noted let am all come in before you, and then as I said shall you see a lusty crew of Gallants, some Gentlemen, some none; but thats all one: he that bears himself like a Gentleman, is worthy to have been borne a Gentleman: some aged have beards, and some have none, some have money, and some have none, yet all must have meat: Now will• all these I say at you• first entrance won∣der at you, as at some strange Owl: Examine your person, and observe your bearing for a time. Doe you then ath' to∣there side seem to neglect their observance as fast, let your countenance be proof against all eyes, not yielding or con∣fizzing in it any inward defect. In a word be impudent e∣nough, for thats your chief virtue of society.
Is that? faith and I need not learn that, I have that by nature I thank God.
So much the better, for nature is far aboue Art, or judgment. Now for your behaviour; let it be free and negligent, not clogged with ceremony or observance, give
no man honour, but upon equal terms; for look how much thou giu'st any man aboue that, so much thou take from thy self: he that will once give the wall, shall quickly be thrust into the kennel: measure not thy carriage by any mans eye, thy speech by no mans ear, but be resolute and confident in doing and saying, and this is the grace of a right Gentleman as thou art.
Sfut, that I am I hope, I am sure my father has been twice Warden on's company.
Thats not a pear matter man, ther's no prescrip∣tion for Gentility, but good clothes and impudence: for your place, take it as it false, but so as you think no place to good for you; fall too with ceremony whatsoever the com∣pany be: and as near as you can, when they are in their Mutton, be thou in thy Wood-cocke, it shows resolution. Talk any thing, thou care not what, so it be without of∣fence, and as near as thou can without sense.
Let me alone for that Captain I warrant you.
If you chance to tell a lye, you must bind it with some oath, as by this bread, for breads a binder you know.
True.
And yet take heed you swear by nomans bread but your own, for that may breed a quarrel: aboue all things you must carry no coals.
By heaven not I, Isle freeze to death first.
Well Sir, one point more I must remember you of. After dinner there will be play, and if you would be counted complete, you must venture amongst them; for o∣therwise, theill take you for a Scholar or a Poet, and so fall into contempt of you: for there is no virtue can scope the account of baseness if it get money, but gaming and law; yet must you not loose much money at once, for that argues little wit at all times.
As gossaue me, and thats my fault; for if I be in once, I shall loose all I have about me.
Is true, Lieutenant? byr'lady Sir Isle be your mode∣rotor,
therefore let me see how much money have you about you?
Not much, some twenty mark or twenty pound in gold.
It is too much to loose by my faith, Lieutenant; give me your purse Sir, hold ye, heers two brace of Angels, you shall venture that for fashion sake, Isle keep the rest for you, till you have done play.
That will be all one, for when thats lost I shall never leave till I get the rest from you: for I know thou wilt let me have it if I ask it.
Not a penny by this gold.
Prithee doe not then, as gossaue me and you do:
And I doe, hang me; Come lets to the Duke.
NAy Mistress, pray even go in again, for I have some inward news for you.
What are those pray.
Tic no matter Mistress till you come in, but make much a time in the mean time, good fortune thrusts her self upon you in the likeness of a fine young Gentleman, hold up your apron and receive him while you may, a Gods name.
How say by that? you're a very wise counselor.
Well Mistress, when I was a Maid, and that's a good while ago I can tell you.
I think very well.
You were but a little one then I wise.
Nor you neither I believe.
Faith it's one of the furthest things I can remem∣ber.
But what when you were a Maid?
Marry Mistress I took my time, I warrant you. And ther's Signior Leonoro now, the very flower of Venice, and one that loves you dearly I ensure you.
God forgive him if he doe, for Isle be sworn I no∣for deserved his love, nor never will while I live.
Why then, what say to Signior Collatin•! ther's a dainty piece of Venzon for you, and a fervent lover indeed.
He? I dare say, he knows not what wood loves shafts are made of, his Signiory would think it the deepest dis∣paragement could be done to him, to say that ever he spent sigh for any Dame in Italy.
Well, you have a whole browne dozen a suitors at least, I am sure; take your choice amongst'em all, if you love not all, yet you may love three or four on 'em to be doing withal.
To be doing withal? love three or four?
Why not, so you love 'em moderately. What must that strange made piece Theagines that you cry out up∣on so often, have all from other, and yet know not where he is?
O my Theagine, not Theagines, thy love hath turned me woman like thy self, shall thy sight never turn me man again. Come lets to the Minster, God hear my prayers as I intend to stop mine ears against all my suitors.
Well Mistress, yet peradventure, they may make you open before the Priest have a penny for you,
Heir's a coil to make wit and women friends: come hither wench, let me have thee single; now sit thee down, and hear good counsel next thy heart, and God give thee grace to lay it to thy heart.
Fie Cozen, will this wilde tongue of yours never receive the bridle?
Yes, thou shalt now see me stroke my beard, and speak sententiously: thou tell•st me thy little father is in hand with a great rich marriage for thee, and would have thee commit matrimony with old Gasparo, art thou willing with it?
I rather wish my self married to a thousand deaths.
Then I perceive thou know him not; did he no∣for woo thee?
I protest, I never changed three words with him in my life; he hath once or twice wooed my father for me, but never me.
Why thats the reason thou love him not, because thou take in none of his valiant breath to inflame thee, nor vouchsaf'st his knowledge; Isle tell thee what he is, an old sapless trunk, fit to make touch-wood of hollow, and bald like a blasted Ok, on whose top Ravens sit and croak the portents of funerals; one that noints his nose with clow•ed cream, and Pomatum. His breath smells like the butt end of a shoo-makers horn. A leprous scaly hide like an Elephant. The son of a Sow-gelder, that came to town (as I have heard thy father himself say) in a tottred •uffer cote, high shoes, and yet his hose torn aboue'em; A long pikestaff in his neck (and a tord in his teeth) and a wa•et on his right shoulder, and now the cullion hath with
Nouerint vniuersi eaten up some hundred Gentlemen: he must needs rise a Gentleman as it were out of their Ashes, or disparage a Gentlewoman, to make himself a Gentle∣man, at least by the wives side.
The worse my fortune to be entangled with such a winding bramble.
Entangled? Nay if I thought twould ever come to that, I'd hire some shag-ragge or other for half a chickeene to cut's throat, only to save thy hands from doing it; for I know thou would poison him within one month; love thee he will never, and that must be thy happiness: for if he doe, look to be coop't up like a prisoner, condemned to execution, scarce suffered to take the air, so much as at a window, or waited on continually by an old beldam: not to keep thee company, but to keep thee from company: thy pocket searched, thy cabinets ransacked for letters: ever in opposition, unless (like the Moon) once a Month in con∣iunction; wealth thou moist have indeed, but enjoy it as in a dream, for when thou wake thou shalt find nothing in thy hand;
and (to keep my tale in goodness) see how all the ill that can be spoken of him is expressed in his presence.
O ugly, and monstrous spectacle.
Now tell me whether thou would make choice of him or a young gallant in prime of his choicenesse; one that for birth, person, and good parts, might m•ritoriously marry a Countess; and one to whom his soul is not so dear as thy self.
For all the world such another as he that comes here now: mark him well, see whether Gasparo and he be not a little different.
How now? Sounds Aurelio? stay beast, wilt thou make such a blessed opportunity curse thee? Isle fetch her out to thee.
Wretch that I am, how she lothes me? if I abide her, I shall consume in the lightnings of her anger.
Here's a life indeed; what's he gone? passion of death, what a babe it is? I could find in my heart to jerk him, but temper me friendship, no remedy now; now wit turn his defects to perfection. Why Cousin hoe's quite out of sight. By my life I commend him; why this is done like thy self Aurelia, were she the Queen of love and woude run from thee, fly thou from her; why now I love thee, for I see you are worthy of my love, thou carry a respect to thine own worth, and wilt express it with spirit; I dare say, thou look to have had him fall on his knees, and adored thee, or beg his life at thy hands: or el•e turned Queen Dido, and pierce his tender heart with sword full sharpe; no faith wench, the case is altered, love made Hercules spin, but it made him rage after: there must go time to the bridling of every passion; I hope my friend will not love a wench a∣against her will, if she woude have met his kindness half way, so: if she skit and recoil, he shoots her off warily, and away he goes: I marry Sir, this was a Gentlemanly part indeed. Farewell Cousin, be thou free in thy choice too, and take a better and thou can a Gods name.
Nay dear Cousin, a word.
A word? what's the matter? I must needs after him, and clap him ath'backe, this spirit must be cherished.
Alas what would you wish me to doe?
Why, nothing.
Would you counsel me to marry him against my fathers will?
Not for the world, leave him, leave him, leave him: you see hoe's resolved, he will take no harm an you, no∣for fear to embrew your hands with his liver I warrant you.
Come you are such an other.
This same riches with a husband, is the only thing in the world, I protest; good Gasparo, I am sorry I have abused thee in faith, for my Cozens sake; how prettily the wretch came crawling by with his crooked knees even now:
I have seen a young Gentlewoman, live as merry a life with an old man, as with the proudest young upstart on'em all: farewell Cousin, I am glad you are so wise in faith.
If you go, I die: fie on this affection, it rages with suppression. Good Cousin, I am no longer able to con∣tinue it, I love, Aurelio better then it is possible for him to love me.
Away, away, and could not this have been done at first, without all these superfluous disgracings? O this same vnhearty niceness of women, is good for nothing but to keep their huswife hands still occupied in this warp of dissembling.
Well• wench redeem thy fault, and write a kind letter to him presently, before this resolution of his take too deept root in him.
Nay sweet Cousin, make me not so immodest, to write so suddenly, let me have a little time to think upon it.
Think me on nothing till you write: think as you write, and then you shall be sure to write as you think. Women doe best when they least think on it.
But rather then write I will meet him at your pleasure.
Meet him? dost thou think that I shall ever draw him again to meet thee, that rush't from thee even now with so just a displeasure?
Nay good Cousin, urge not my offence so bitterly, our next meeting shall pay the forfeit of all faults.
Well you are my pretty Cousin, and Isle doe my best to bring him to thee again, if I cannot, I shall be sorry in faith, thou wr't so injuriously strange to him. But where shall this interview be now.
There is the mischief, and we shall hardly avoid it, my father plies my haunts so closely: and uses means by our maid to entrap vs, so that this Terrace at our back gate is the only place we may safely meet at: from whence I can stand and talk to you. But sweet Cousin you shall
swear, to keep this my kindness from Aurelio, and not intimate by any means that I am any thing acquainted with his coming.
Slife, dost think I am an Ass? to what end should I tell him? hee and Isle come wandering that way to take the air, or so, and Isle discover thee.
By mere chance as it were.
By chance, by chance, and you shall at no hand see him at first, when I bring him for all this kindness you bear him.
By no means Cousin.
Very good: And if you endure any conference with him, let it be very little; and as near as you can, turn to your former strangeness in any case.
If doe not Cousin, trust me not.
Or if you think good, you may flirt away again as soon as you see him, and never let your late fault be any warning t'ee.
I will doe all this, I warrant thee Cousin.
Will you so Cozen fool? can thou be brought to that silly humour again by any persuasions? by Gods Lord, and you be strange again, more then needs must, for a temperate modesty, Isle brook's neck down from thee, but he shall doe as he did to thee.
Now, fie upon you Cousin, what a fool doe you make me?
Well Dame, leave your superfluous nicety in ear∣nest▪ and within this hour I will bring him to this Terrace.
But good Cousin if you chance to see my chamber window open, that is upon the Terrace, doe not let him come in at it in any case.
Sblood how can he? can he come over the wall think?
O Sir, you men have not devices with ladders of topes to scale such walls at your pleasure, and abuse vs poor wench•.
Now a plague of your simplicity, would you dis∣courage him with prompting him? well Dame, Isle provide for you.
As you love me Cousin, no words of my kindness from me to him.
Go to, no more ado.
GOd ye God morrow Sir, truly I have not heard a sweeter breath then your Page has.
I am glad you like him Mistress Temperance.
And how dee Sir?
That I must know of you Lady, my welfare de∣pends wholly upon your good speed.
How say Sir? and by my soul I was coming to you in the morning when your young man came to me; I pray let him put on, unless it be for your pleasure.
He is young, and can endure the cold well enough bare-headed.
A pretty sweet child it is I promise you.
But what good news Mistress Temperance, will your Mistress be won to our kind meeting?
Faith Isle tell you Sir, I took her in a good mood this morning, and broke with her again about you, and she was very pleasant as she will be many times.
Very well, and is there any hope of speed?
No by my troth Gentleman, none in the world, an obstacle young thing it is, as ever I broke with all in my life: I have broke with a hundred in my days, tho I say it, yet never met her comparison.
Are all my hopes come to this Mistress Temperance?
Nay it is no matter Sir, this is the first time that e∣for
I spake to any in these matters, and It shall be the last God willing.
And even now she had broke with a hundred and a hundred.
But doe you love her Sir indeed?
Dost thou make a question of that?
Pardon me I pray Sir, I mean dee love her as a Gentleman ought to doe, that is, to consume•ate matrimony with her as they say?
Thats no matter to you Mistress Temperance, doe you procure our meeting, and let my favour be at her hands as I can enforce it.
You say like an honest Gentleman; a woman can have no more: and faith Sir I wish you well, and every day la dinner my Mistress uses to go to her chair or else lie down upon her bed, to take a nap or so, to avoid idleness as many good huswifes do, you know, and then doe I sit by her and •ew, or so: and when I see her fast asleep, Lord doe I think to my self, (as you know we waiting women have many light thoughts in our heads) Now if I were a man, and should bear my Mistress an ill will, what might I doe to her now.
Indeed then you have very good opportunity.
The best that may be, for she sleeps like a sucking P•gge, you may jog her a hundred times, and she'll stir no more then one of your stones, here.
And could you put a friend in your place think you?
Nay byr'lady Sir, back with that leg, for if any thing come on it but well, all the burden will lye upon me.
Why what can come of it? only that by this means I may solicit her love my self.
I but who knows if the Devil (God bless vs) should be great wee', how you would use her?
What dost thou take me for a beast, to force her that I would make my wife?
Beast Sir; Nay ther's no beastliness in it neither, for a man will show like a man in those cases: and besides, you may mar the bed, which every body will see that comes in; and that I would not for the best gown I shall wear this twelve Month.
Well, to put thee out of that fear, it shall be worth such a gown to thee.
I thank you for that Sir, but thats all one, and thus Sir, my old Master Honorio, at two a clock will be at Tilting, and then will his son Signior Aurelio, and his man Augelo, be abroad; at which hour if you will be at the back gate, and muffle your self handsomely, you may linger there till I call you.
I marry Sir, so I may be there long enough.
Nay, but two a clock, now, now is my hour Sir.
Very well, and till then farewell.
Boy to you heartily.
Boy to him indeed if he knew all.
I Have provided thee a ladder of ropes, therefore resolve to meet her, go wash thy face, and prepare thy self to die, Isle go make ready the ladder.
But when is the happy hour of our meeting?
Marry Sir, thats something uncertain, for it de∣pends wholly upon her fathers absence, and when that will be God knows: but I doubt not it will happen once within this twelvemonth.
Sounds a twelvemonth.
Nay hark you, you are all upon the spur now, but how many lovers have served seven twelue-Moneths prenticeships, for the freedom of their Mistress favours? notwithstanding to shorten your torments, your man An∣gelo
must be the mean, to draw the lap wing her father from his nest, by this device that I tell you.
I did ever dream that once in my life good fortune would warm her cold hand in my naked bosom. And that once is now come, Isle lay hold upon it, in faith; I have you my little squire, I have you upon mine Anueill, upon which I will mallet you and work you; coining crowns, chickens, bracelets, and what not out of you; for procuring you the dear gulag of my sweet heart mistress Francischina.
I am glad it rests in my kind servant Angelo. Angelo, well met, it lies in thee now, make me no more thy master, but thy friend, and for ever happy in thy friendship.
In what part of me does that lie Sir, that I may pull it out, for you presently?
My friend Lodouico here hath told me, what thou reuealedst to him to day, touching his uncle Lorenzo, and his louesute to Francischina.
Slight I told it him in secret sir.
And so did I tell it him Angelo, I am a Jew else.
It may well be sir, but what of that?
This Angelo, he would have thee procure my old uncles absence from home this afternoon, by making him meet or pretending his meeting with his mistress, and thy sweet heart Francischina.
Which if thou dost Angelo, be sure of reward to thy wishes.
What talk you of reward sir? to the loving and dutiful servant, it is a greater encouragement to his service to hear his master say, God a mercy Angelo, spy out An∣gelo, Isle think of thy pains one day Angelo, then all your base rewards and preferments: yet not to hinder your hand sir, I will extend mine to his service presently, and get your old uncle (Signior Lorenzo) out of the ways long enough I warrant you.
Tic honestly said, which when thou hast perfor∣med, enforce vs
I will not fail sir, I was resolved to make him a∣way before they spake to me, in procuring his access to Fran∣cischina, for what is his presence at her house, but his ab∣sense at his owns? and thus shall I with one trewell daube two walls,
see how fitly she meets me. I will stand close here as if it were in my shop of good fortune, &amp; in respect of all ornamēts I can help her to, I will out of the fullness of my joy, put her out of her study and encounter her thus; Do ye lack gentlewoman, do ye lack: very fair new gowns, kirtles, petticots, wrought smocks, bracelets, do ye lack gentlewoman, do ye lack?
What means my love by these strange salutations?
Pre thee ask me no questions; hold take these bracelets, put up this purse of gold quickly, and if thou wilt have any of these things, I have cried to thee, speak and tic performed.
From whose treasury comes all this, I pre thee?
Lorenzo, Lorenzo, a gentleman of much antique∣tie, and one that for his love hath burned hundreds of hearts to powder; yet now it false out, that his tree of life is scorched and blasted with the flames of thy beauty, ready to wither eternally, unless it be speedily comforted with the sweet drops of thy nose.
Gods my life, is that old squire so amorous?
You wrong him to term him old, he can draw his bow, ride his horse, use his sword, and trail his pike under Loves colours, as well as ever he did.
I believe that easily.
Well, go thy ways in and prepare to entertain him now thy husband is from home, only with good words, and best kindnesses, making him put all into deeds till his treasury be deedlesse.
You speak as if I had nothing to respect but his entertainment, when you know how close and timely it must be put in execution, considering with what envious eyes my neighbours survey me.
Think thou, I consider not all this? he shall come in disguised, wench, and do thou devise for our mirth, what ridiculous disguise he shall come in, and he shall assume it.
What a magnifico of the City, and one of the Se∣nate, think thou he will not see into that inconvenience?
No more then no Senator, for in this case, my issue∣rance is that Cupped will take the scarf from his own eyes, and hoodwink the old buzzard, while two other true tur∣tles enjoy their happiness: get thee in I beseech thee love, tell thy gold, and say thy prayers.
Now for a far fetched device to fetch over my loue-squire.
I see him within eare-shot; well may beauty in∣flame others, riches may tempt others; but for me, mine ears and mine eyes, are proof against all the Sirens, and Venuses, in all the seas of the world; beauty is a whore, ri∣ches a baud, and Isle trust none an you.
What ails poor Angelo?
Nay mistress Frank, if you prove disloyal once, farewell all constancy in women.
How now man? what's the matter?
O Sir are you so near? I shall trust your expire∣ence in women the better while I live.
I pre thee why so?
Say true Sir, did you never solicit your loue-sute to fair mistress Francischina?
Never I protest Angelo.
Upon my life it is a strange thing; I would have sworn all Italy, could not so suddenly have fastened a favour upon her, I looked for a siege of Troy at least, to surprise the turrets of her continence; but to yield at the first sight of her assailants colours, and before any Cannon was mounted a∣fore her, it is one of the loosest parts of a modest woman that ever I heard of.
How say thou? did not I tell thee as much? be∣ware of an old colt while you live, he can tell when to strike I warrant you.
Women and feathers? now fie on that affinity.
Alas Angelo, a feeble generation, soon over∣come God knows, the honester mind, the sooner over∣come.
Gods my life, what light huswife would yield at first to a stranger, and yet does this whirligig stand upon terms of honour forsooth? tenders her reputation as the Apple of her eye; she has a jealous and a cutting husband, envious neighbours, and will die many deaths rather then by any friends open access to her, be whip't naked with the tongues of scandal and slander; and a whole sanctuary of such ceremonies.
O she does worthily in that Angelo, and like a wo∣man of honour, thou hast painted her perfection in her faults thou find, and tickil'st me with her appetite.
And to avoid all sight of your entrance, you must needs come in some disguise she says; so much she tenders your high credit in the City, and her own reputation, for∣sooth.
How, come in some disguise?
A toy, a very toy which runs in her head with such curious feet Sir, because if there be any resemblances of your person seen to enter her house, your whole sub∣stantiall self will be called in question; any other man she says, might better adventure with the least thing changed about 'em then you with all; as if you were the only noted mutton-monger in all the City.
Well Angelo, heaven forgive vs the sins of our youth.
That's true Sir, but for a paltry disguise, being a magnifico, she shall go sneck up.
Soft good Angelo, soft, let's think on it a little: what disguise would serve the turn says she?
Faith, I know not what disguise she would have for you: she would have you come like a Calfe with a white face, I think, she talks of Tinkers,
peddlers, porters, chimney-sweepers, fools and Physicians, such as have free egress and regress into men's houses with∣out suspicion.
Out upon 'em, would she have me undergo the shame and hazard of one of those abjects?
In faith I told her so, a squire of that worship, one of the Senate, a grave Justicer, a man of wealth, a magnifico?
And yet by my troth, for the safeguard of her ho∣nor, I would doe much; me thinks a Friars weed were nothing.
Out vppon't, that disguise is worn thread bare up∣on every stage, and so much villainy committed under that habit; that it is grown as supicious as the vilest. If you will hearken to any, take such a transformance, as you may be sure will keep you from discovery: for though it be the stale refuge of miserable Poets, by change of a hat or a cloak, to alter the whole state of a Comedy, so as the father must not know his own child forsooth, nor the wife her hus∣band, yet you must not think they doe it earnest to car∣rye it away so: for say you were stuffed into a motley coat, crowded in the case of a base Viol, or buttond up in a cloak∣bag, even to your chin, yet if I see your face, I am able to say this is signior Lorenzo, and therefore unless your disguise be such that your face may bear as great a part in it as the rest, the rest is nothing.
Good reason, in faith Angelo; and what, shall I then smurch my face like a chimney sweeper, &amp; wear the rest of his smokiness?
Isle tell you sir, if you be so mad to condescend to the humour of a foolish woman, by consideration that Jove for his love took on him the shape of a Bull, which is far worse then a chimney sweeper, I can fit you rarely.
As how I pre thee?
There is one little snail you know, an old chimney sweeper.
What, hee that sings, Maids in your smocks, hold
open your locks, fluds.
The very same sir, whose person (I borrowing his words) you will so lively resemble, that himself in per∣son cannot detect you.
But is that a fit resemblance to please a lover An∣gelo?
For that sir, she is provided: for you shall no so∣ner enter but off goes your rusty skabberd, sweet water is ready to scour your filthy face, milk, &amp; a bath of fernebraks for your fusty body, a chamber perfumed, a wrought shirt, night cap, and her husbands gown, a banquet of Oysters pies, Potatoes, Skirret roots, Eringes, and divers other whetstones of venery.
O let me hug thee Angelo.
A bed as sustained as her hair, sheets as delicate as her skin, and as sweet as her breath, pillows imitating her breasts, and her breasts to boot, Hypocras in her cups, and Nectar in her lips, Ah, the gods have been beasts for less felicity.
No more good Angelo, no more, how shall I re∣quite the happiness thou wilt bring me too? haste any mind of marriage?
Not much sir, but an extraordinary wife might tempt me.
By my troth and she were not promised, thou should∣dest have my daughter: but come lets to our disguise, in which I long to be singing.
Isle follow you presently.
How now Angelo?
Why sir, I am providing means to lead your old uncle out ath'way, as you willed me, by drawing him into the way of Quintilianoes wife, my sweet heart, and so make room for him by Quintilianoes room: you that lead him any way, must needs seek him out and employ him to some tavern.
He will be with me presently Angelo, and here's a freshman come from Padua, whom I will powder with his acquaintance, and so make him an excellent morsel to rel∣lish his carouses.
Go to Sir, by this light you'll be complained on, there cannot be a fool within twenty mile of your head, but you engross him for your own mirth: Noble-mens tables cannot be served for you.
Stut, Isle complain of them man, they hunt me out and hang upon me, so that I cannot be rid on'em, but they shall get some body else to laugh at, or Isle turne'em over to our Poets, and make all the world laugh at'em.
Well Sir, here comes your man, make him sure from his wife, and I'll make the tother sure with her.
SEe Signior Gionanelle, here comes the famous Captain you would so fine bee acquainted withal; be acquainted with him at your peril: Isle defend you from his swaggering humour, but take heed of his chea∣ting.
I warrant you Sir, I have not been matriculated at the University, to be meretriculated by him: salted there to be colted here.
Very well Sir, lets hear him.
I have examined the particulars of your bill Master Taylor, and I find them true Orthography, thy payment shall be correspondent: marry I will set no day, because I am loath to break.
Alas Sir, pray let this be the day: consider my charge. I have many children, and this my poor child here whom I have brought up at school, must loose all I have bestowed on him hitherto, if I pay not his Master presen••y
the quartridge I owe him.
Fool dost thou delight to hear thy son beg in Latin, pose him Lieutenant.
How make you this in Latin boy? My father is an honest Taylor.
That will hardly be done in true Latin Sir.
No? why so Sir?
Because it is false English sir.
An excellent Boy.
Why is it false English?
Marry sir, as bone Mulier is said to be false Latin, because though bone be good, Mulier is nought; so to say my father is an honest Taylor, is false English; for though my father be honest, yet the Taylor is a thief.
Believe it a rare shred, not of home-spunne cloth upon my life: Taylor, go, send the schoolmaster to me at night and Isle pay him.
Thank you good Captain, and if you doe not pay him, at night my wife will come to you her self, that's certain, and you know what a tongue she has.
Like the sting of a Scorpion, she nails mine ears to the pillory with it, in the shame and torment she does me. Go I will void this Bill and avoid her.
I thank you sir.
Lieutenant, is not this a brave gullery? The slave has a pretty wife, and she will never have me pay him, because she may ever come to my chamber, as she says, to rail at me, and then she goes home and tells her husband she has tickled me in faith.
By my life, a rare jest.
Thou moist see this Boy is no shred of a Taylor, is he not right of my look and spirit?
Right as a line, in faith.
And will agree in the halter.—Save you Cap∣taine Quintiliano.
And dost thou live my noble Lodouico? Boy, take
my cloak, when shells have a rouse, ha? my Lieutenant and I were drunk last night, with drinking health on our knees to thee.
Why, would not your legs bear you Sir?
How many miles to midsommer? S'blood, whose fool are you? are not you the tassel of a Gander?
No indeed not I Sir: I am your poor friend Sir glad to see you in health.
Health? S'fut, how mean you that? dee think I came lately out ath' powdering Tubbe?
Gossaue me Sir it was the furthest part of my thought.
Why you're not angry, are you?
No, nor you shall not be.
S'blood, I hope I may and I will.
Be and you dare Sir.
Dare?
I, dare.
Plague on thee, you are the made Lodouico in the world, s'fut doe thou stab me, and you have a mind too't, or bid me stab my self, is this thy friend? dost thou love Lodouico?
With my heart I protest Sir.
S'heart, a lies in's throat that does not; and whence come thou wag, ha?
Even new arrived from Padua Sir to see fashi∣o•s.
Give me thy hand, you are welcome▪ and for thy fashions, thou shalt first drink and wench it: to which end we will carouse a little, some six or seven miles hence, and every man carry his wench.
But where shall we have them Captain?
Haue'em Lieutenant? if we haue'em not, my Va∣lentine shall be one, and she shall take a neighbour or two with her to see their nursed childes or so; we'll want for no wenches I warrant thee,
But who comes here?
O tic my Barber.
S'blood how thy trades men haunt thee.
Alas they that live by men, must haunt'em,
God save you Sir.
How now Cutberd, what news out of Barberry?
Sir, I would borrow a word with you in private.
Be brief then Cutbeard, thou look lean me thinks, I think you are newly married.
I am indeed Sir.
I thought so, keep on thy hat man, twill be the less perceived, what, is not my Taylor and you friends yet? I will have you friends thats certain, Isle maintain you both else.
I know no enmity betwixt vs Sir, you know Captain I come about another matter.
Why but Cutbeard, are not you neighbours? your trades Cousin german, the Taylor and the Barber? does not the Taylor sow? doest not thou Barber reap? and doe they not both band themselves against the common enemy of mankind, the louse? are you not both honest men alike? is not he an arrant knave? you next door to a knave, because next door to him?
Alas Sir, all this is to no purpose, there are cer∣taine odd crowns betwixt vs you know.
True Cutbeard, wilt thou lend me as many more to make'em even Boy?
Faith Sir, they have hung long enough a con∣science.
Cut'em down then Cutbeard, it belongs to thy profession if they hang too long.
Well Sir if this be all, Isle come by'em as I can, and you had any honesty.
S'blood honesty you knave? doe you tax any Gentleman in this company for his honesty?
Blame me not sir, I am undone by him, and yet
I am still of as good credit in my Parish as he too.
S'blood Rascal, as good credit as I?
Nay pre thee Captain forbear.
Good Captain be gone.
Let me alone; Isle not strike him by this hand, why hark ye Rogue: put your credit in balance with mine? dost thou keep this company? here's Signior Lodouico, one of the Clarissimi, a man of worship: here's a Gentleman of Padua, a man of rare parts, •n excellent scholar, a fine Ciceronian.
Well sir.
And here's my Lieutenant, I hope thou know the Worshipful man his father with the blew beard, and all these are my companions; and dare you a barbarous slave, a squirting companion, compare with me? but here's the point; now behold and see: Signior Giouenelle, lend me four or five pounds, let it be five pounds, if you have so much about you.
Here's my purse sir, I think there be just so much in it.
Very good, now Cutbeard, are you a slanderous cut-throat or no? will thy credit doe this now? without scrip or scroll. But thou wilt think this is done for a colour now; doe you not lend it me simply?
What a question's that?
For how long?
At your pleasure Captain.
Why so, here you poling Rascal, here's two crowns out of this money: now I hope wilt believe it is mine, now the property is altered.
Why you might a done this before then.
No Cutbeard, I have been burned in the hand for that, Isle pay ne'er a knave an ye all money, but in the pre∣sense of such honest Gentleman that can witness it; of my conscience I have paid it thee half a dozen times; go to sir be gone.
Fare ye well sir.
Thank you Signior Giouenelle; though you're sure of this money again at my hands, yet take heed how this same Lodouico get it from you, he's a great shirker; but you have no more money about thee hast thou?
Not a do it, by this candle.
All the better, for he would cheat thee on it, if thou had ever so much, therefore when thou come to Pa∣dua, ply thy book and take good courses, and it is not this again shall serve thy turn at my hands, I swear to thee.
Thank you good Captain.
Signior Lodouico, adieu.
Not so sir, we will not part yet, a carouse or two me thinks is very necessary betwixt vs.
With all my heart Boy, into the Emperors head here.
Content.
SAy Sir, have you plaid the man and housed the Captain?
I have housed and lodged him in the Emperors head Tavern, and there I have left him glorified with his two gulls, so that presume of what thou wilt at his house, for he is out of the way by this time both ways.
It is very well handled sir, and presume you &amp; your friend my master Aurelio of what may satisfy you at your
uncles, for he is now going out of the way, and out of him∣self also: I have so besmeared him with a chimney sweepers resemblance, as never was poor Snail, whose counterfeit he triumphs in, never thinking I have daubd his face suffice∣ent, but is at his glass as curiously busied to beautify his face (for as of Moo'rs so of chimney sweepers) the blackest is most beautiful as any Lady to paint her lips.
Thou art a notable villain.
I am the fitter for your employment Sir: stand close I beseech you, &amp; when I bring him into the streets, encoun∣la and bait him in stead of Snail, but in any case let none else know it.
Not for the world.
If you should tell it to one, so you charge him to say nothing, it were nothing, and so if one by one to it play holy water frog with twenty, you know any secret is kept sufficiently; and in this, we shall have the better sport at a Bear baiting, fare ye well Sir.
SIgnior Lodonico good even to you.
The like to Signior Honorio, and hark you Sir, I must be bound with my uncle Lorenzo, and tell you a plea∣sant secrete of him, so in no sort you will utter it.
In no sort as I am a Gentleman.
Why Sir hee is to walk the streets presently in the likeness of Snail the chimney sweeper, and with his cry.
What is hee Sir? to what end I beseech you Sir will hee disfigure himself so?
In faith Sir I take it for some matter of policy, that concerns town government.
Towne-bull government, do you not mean so Sir?
O no Sir, but for the general business of the City I take it.
Well sir well we will not examine it too far, but guess at it.
So sir when he comes forth do you take one corner to encounter him as I will doe another, and taking him for Snail, imagine hee went about stealing of City venison, (though he do not,) and make what sport you think good with him, always provided it be cleanly, and that he may still think he goes invisible.
I warraut ye Signior Lodouico, and thank you heartily for this good cause of our honest recreation.
Scarce honest neither sir, but much good do it you, as it is,
O that my son, your friend Aurelio, were here to help to candy this jest a little.
Alas sir, his sick stomach can abide no sweet meates, hoe's all for aye me, we'll make the Jest relish well enough I warrant you: Lorenzo my uncle an old Senator, one that has read Marcus Aurelius, Gest Romanorum, the Mirror of Magistrates, &amp;c. to be led by the nose like a blind Bear that has read nothing. Let my man read how hee deserves to be baited.
It is a pretty wonder in faith Signior Lodouico.
Slife, it were a good deed, to get boys to pin cards at his back, hang squibs at his tail, ring him through the town with basins, besnowball him with rotten eggs, and make him ashamed of the Commission before hee scale it.
What says Signior Lodouico, I beseech you sir? me thinks his pleasant disposition should intend some waggerie.
I will tell you Signior Gasparo, but in any case you must say nothing.
In no case will I say any thing sir.
Then this is the case: Signior Lorenzo (your pro∣babble father in law) in the case of Snail the chimney sue∣per, will straight tread the streets for his pleasure.
For his pleasure?
For his pleasure sir, say it be so, wonder not, but jest at it, consider what pleasure the world says he is most given to, and help bait him hereafter, but in any case cleanly, and say nothing.
O monstrous, I conceive you, my father in law, will his daughter have his tricks think you?
Faith for that you must even take fortune de la pace, kiss the Pox, and be patient like your other neighbours. So, here stand I, chose you another place.
O me, what if a man should call him to sweep a chimney in earnest, what would he doe? Isle put him too't a my credit, and here will I stand.
How now sir, are you well yet think you?
A little more here good Angelo.
Very well sir, you shall have enough.
It will be the most perfect disguise that ever was imitated.
Isle warrant you that in faith sir; ya're fitted be∣yond the forehead for a right counterfeit; It is well now sir?
Yet a little more here Angelo, and then master Painter let Michael Angelo himself amend thee.
For a perfect natural face, I care not if all the world explain it.
So now take this glass, and give me my furniture, and have at your smoky chimney.
Have at your smokey chimney Mistress Frank: here 〈◊〉 take up your occupation, and down with Snail for a chimney sweeper.
A•ay, see if the coast be clear.
I will sir.
Take good view, look about to the doors and windows.
Not a dog at a door, not a cat at a window.
Appear in your likeness, and not with your quality.
Chimney sweep; work for chimney sweep, wilt do sirha?
Admirably.
Does my suit become me?
Become you sir? would to heaven mistress Frank could bring you to the wearing of it always.
Isle forth in faith then; Maids in your smocks, set open your locks,
Down, down, down:
Let Chimney sweeper in:
And he will sweep your chimneys clean,
Hey derry, derry, down.
How dost like my cry, ha?
Out of all cry, I forbid Snail himself to creep beyond you.
As God help, I begin to be proud on it: Chim∣ney sweep.
Gods pity, who comes yonder?
My nephew Lodowicke; Gods me, Isle start back again.
Nay ther's no starting now, he will see you go into your house then; fall into your note; stand to Snails person and I warrant you.
Chimney sweep.
How now Snail, how dost thou?
Thank your good worship.
Me thinks thy song is more hearty then it was wont to be, and thou look much better.
Thank God and good friends sir; and a merry heart that prolongs life. Chimney sweep.
Nay good Snail, lets talk a little, you know Rose mine uncle Lorensoes maid Snail!
That I do well sir.
She complains of you Snail, and says, you're the bawdiest old knave in venery.
Alas sir, she wrongs me: I am not fed thereof∣la, let her look for that commendation in her richer customers.
Who are they Snail? I hope you doe not mean mine uncle her Master; hoe's mine uncle and I love him well, and I know the old lickspiggot will be nibbling a little when he can come too't: but I must needs say he will do no hurt, hoe's as gentle as an Adder that has his teeth taken out.
You're a merry Gentleman sir; and I have haslie la∣bore in hand, I must crave pardon.
Chimney sweep.
What old Snail? how dost thou and thy chim∣nays?
Marry sir I was asking him questions about one of them.
What Signior Lodouico? what one is that I pray?
Mine uncle Lorenzos maid Rose sir, and hee will needs persuade me, her old master keeps her for his own saddle.
Her old master? I dare swear they wrong him that say so; his very age would make him ashamed to be ouerta∣ken with those goatish licences.
True sir, and his great authority in the City, that should whip such unseasonable lechers about the walls of it.
Why, you're in the right sir, and now you talk of your uncle, I heard say Captain Quintiliano cheated him yesterday of five pounds, as hee did a young Gentleman of Padua this morning of as much more.
Faith sir he drew such a kind of tooth from him indeed.
Is it possible he should be so wrought upon by him? Now certain I have ever held him a most wise Gen∣tleman.
An arrant Rooke by this light; a capable cheating
stock; a man may carry him up and down by the ears like a pipkin.
But do you think he will let the Captain pass so?
Why alas, what should he doe to him sir? the pa∣stur is so bare with him, that a goose cannot graze upon it.
Marry sir then would I watch him a time when he were abroad, and take out my pennyworths of his wife, if hee drew a tooth from me, I would draw another from her.
Well, God be with your worships: chimney sue∣per, I thought I should never have been rid of them,
Chimney sweep.
What old Snail, dost thou cry chimney sweep still? why they say thou art turned mighty rich of late.
I would they said true sir?
Yes by the mass, by the same token, that those• riches make thy old name for venery increase upon thee.
Foolish tales sir, foo•each tales.
Yes by the mass, Snail, but they be told for such certain tales, that if thou hast a daughter to mar∣rye with ten thousand crowns, I would see her pithole, before I would deal with her, for fear she should trot through her fathers trumperies.
Alas sir your worship knows, I have neither daughter nor riches, Idle talk sir, Idle talk: chimney sweep.
Nay stay Snail, and come into my house, thou shalt earn some money of me, I have a chimney to sweep for thee.
I thank your worship, I will waite upon you next morning early sir: but now I have promi'st to sweep ano∣there mans chimney in truth.
But goodd Snail take mine in the way.
What does he cry chimney sweep, and refuse to sweep 'em?
No master, alas you know I live by it, and now I
cry as I go to work that I have promi'st, that I may get more against other times: what would ye have me do tree•e?
Alas poor S•aisle; farewell good Snail, farewell.
Lord keep your good worship. — And a very vengeance, I beseech the black father of vengeance.
Poor uncle, he begins to be melancholy, has lost his song among's
Was never such man touched with such over∣sight?
Bear with age, Signior Gasparo, bear with age, and let vs all tender his credit as we have vowed, and be silent; he little thought to have been thus betrayed as he is; and where secrecy is assured, it bears with many bad a∣ctions in the very best I can tell you, and so good Signior Lodouico adieu, and I heartily thank you.
Adieu good Signior Honorio.
Adieu to you likewise sir.
Likewise to you sir. Alas poor uncle, I have mon∣strously abused him; and yet marvelous worthy, for he disparageth the whole blood of vs; and I wish all such old sheepebiters might always dip their fingers in such sauce to their mutton; but thus will he presently bee safe; for by this hee is near his sweet hearts house, where he is like to be entertained with worse cheer then we made him. Quintilliano is now carousing in the Emperors head, while his own head buds horns to carouse in; and in the mean time will my amorous friend and I, make both their absences shooing horns to draw on the presence of Aemilia.
what says your worship now? Do you not walk invisible, all your ancient acquain∣tance, your own nephew to talk with you and never dis∣cover you?
But Angelo, a villainous fear shook me the whiles I swear, for still I was afraid my tongue would have liked a∣way the soot of my face, and betrayed me; but Snail, hi∣thereto thy rusty shell has protected me: persevere till I have yonder house a my head, hold in thy horns, till they look out of Quintillianoes forehead: for an old man to make a young man cuckold, is one of Hercules labours.
That was the cleansing of other men's stables.
To make youth rampant in age, and age peasant in youth, to take a man down at his own weapon; to call back time in one, and thrust him headlong upon another.
Now your worship is Oracle to your own mira∣cles; how you shine in this smoky cloud? which you make the golden net to embrace Venus, you've past the pikes in faith and all the Iayles of the loue-god swarm in yonder house, to salute your recovery.
Well Angelo, I tell thee, now we are past the danger, I would not for 40 crowns but have heard, what I have heard.
True sir, now you know what the world thinks on you, it is not possible for a great man, that shines always in his greatness, to know himself; but O twice young Lender, see where your Hero stands with torch of her beauty to di∣rect you to her tower, advance your sweet note, &amp; upon her.
Chimney sweep, work for chimney sweep.
Come in chimney sweeper.
O Angelo.
Why now sir thine Angelo is your good Angel; enter and prosper, and when you are in the midst of your happiness, think of him that preferred you.
Angelo, give him not too much time with me, for fear of the worst, but go presently to the back gate, and use my husbands knock, then will I presently thrust him into my cole-house: and there shall the old flesh-mon∣ger fast for his iniquity.
Well said mine own Frank in faith, we shall trim him betwixt vs, I for the most slovenly case in the town; she, for the most sluttish place in the house: Never was old horse-man so notoriously ridden; well, I will presently knock him into the cole-house, and then haste to Lodouico, to know when he shall be releast.
HEre's thy ladder, and ther's thy gallows, thy Mistress is thy hangman, and must take thee down: This is the Terrace where thy sweet heart tarries; what would thou call it in Rime?
Celestial sphere, wherein more beauty shines.
Room for a passion.
Then on Dardanian Ida, where the pride
Of heavens selected beauties strived for prize.
Nay you shall know, we have watered our houses in Helicon. I cannot abide this talking and undoing Poetry, leave your me••ifluous numbers: yonder's a sight will sty•e all reason from your rime I can tell you; down of your knees you sl•ue, adore. Now lets hear you invoke, O the saple hams of a lover, go to, doe not, stand up close, for she must not see you yet, though she know you are here.
Cozen Lodowicke?
Who calls Lodowicke?
What t•mpest hath cast you on this solitary shore? Is the party come?
The party? now a plague of your modesty, are
your lips too nice to name Aurelio?
Well, is he come then?
He, which he? s'fut name your man with a mis∣chief to you, I understand you not.
Was there ever such a wild-braine? Aurelio.
Aurelio? •ord how loath you are to le• any sound of him come out an you, you hold him so dear within, Isle present her with a •ight, will startle her nicety a little better; hold you, fasten the end of this ladder I pray.
Now Iesus bless vs, why cousin, are you mad?
Go to you spirit of a feather, be not so soft hear∣ted, leave your nicety, or by this hemp Isle so hamper thy af∣fections in the halter of thy lovers absence, making it up in a gordian knot of forgetfulness, that no Alexander of thy allurements, with all the swords of thy sweet words, shall ever cut in pieces.
Lord, how you roll in your rope-ripe terms.
Go to, tell me, will you fasten the ladder or no?
I know not what I should say t'ee: I will fasten it, so only your self will come up.
Only my self will come up then.
Nay sweet Cousin, swear it.
If I should swear thou would curse me: take my word in a halters name, and make the ladder as fast to the Terrace, as thou would be to Aurelio.
Nay see if he doe not make me give over again?
Was there ever such a blew kitling? fasten it now• or by heaven thou dost loose me for ever.
Well sir, remember your word; I will fasten it, but in faith Cousin, is not the Gentleman, and his parting chol∣ler parted yet?
In faith with much ado:
Nay, nay, choose him; I shall live, if they be not• and if I live till his choler kill me, I shall live till he leave lo∣uing me, and that will be a good while first.
Lord, Lord, who has informed you of such a∣morose
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
fervency in him: are you so confident in his kind∣ness?
Nay by my troth, tic but a careless confidence neither, which always last longer then that which is timo∣rous: well Cousin, here I have fastened it for your pleasure; but alas, the fear of my fathers coming does so distract me that I scarce know what I doe or say.
Your father? dost think we would venture all this proper••tion, and not make him safe?
But are you sure he is safe?
Am I sure this is Aurelio? look upon him wench, is it not thy love? thy life? come sir, mount.
O cousin Lodwicke, doe you thus cousin and betray me?
Cousin, Cousin, thou hast acted thy dissembling part long enough, in the most modest judgment, and passing na∣turally: give over with thy credit then, unmask thy love, let her appear in her native simplicity, strive to conceal her no longer from thy love, for I must needs tell thee he knows all.
What does he know?
Why all that thou told me, that thou love him more then he can love thee, that thou hast set up thy resolve∣tion, in despite of friends or foes, weals or woes, to let him possess thee wholly, and that thou did woo me to bring him hither to thee: All this he knows; that it was thy device to prepare this ladder, and in a word, all the speech that past betwixt thee and me he knows, I told him every word truly and faithfully Gods my Judge.
Now was there ever such an immodest creature?
Via, with all vain modesty, leave this colouring, and strip thy love stark naked, this time is too precious to spend vainly; mount I say.
Model of heavenly beauty.
Sounds, wilt thou melt into rime a the tother side? shall we have lines? change thy stile for a ladder, this
will bring thee to Parnassus, up I say.
Unworthy I t'approach the furthest step to that felicity that shines in her.
O spurblinde affection, I have seen a fellow, to a worse end ascend a ladder with a better will, and yet this is in the way of marriage, and they say, marriage and hanging have both one constellation. To approve the which old saying, see if a new ladder make 'em not agree.
Peace, some body comes.
That you heard, was but a mouse, so boy I war∣rant thee.
O sacred goddess, what so ever thou art
That in mere pity to preserve a soul
From undeserved destruction, hast vouchsaf't
To take Aemiliaes shape.
What a poetical sheep is this? S'life, will you stand riming there upon a stage, to be an eye-marke to all that pass? is there not a chamber by? withdraw I say for shame, have you no shame in you? here will come some body presently I lay my life on it.
Dear mistress, to avoid that likely danger,
Vouchsafe me only private conference,
And it is the fulness of my present hopes.
Aurelio, Occasion is bald, take her by the forelock; so, so. In Hymens name get you together, here will I stand Sentinel. This is the back gate to Honorios house, which shall be Aurelios, if God give him grace to weep for his fathers death in time. And in this garden, if I could see the chaste Lucresse, or the affable mistress Temperance, I might (thus wrapped in my cloak) steal a little courtship through the chink of a pale. But indeed I think it safer to sit closer, and so to cloud the sum of my visnomy, that no eye discern it.
So be it, thats my resolution. Now to my contemplation, this is no Panderism, is it?
No, for there is neither money nor credit proposed or expo∣cted, and besides there is no unlawful act intended, no not this same lasciua actio enemy: I think for his part, much less hers: go to, let me do my kinswoman, and her sex right, sit at rest with me then reputation, and conscience, fall asleep with the world, but this same idle attendance is the spite of it, Idleness is accounted with other men a sin, to me it is a penance, I was begot in a stirring season, for now hath my soul a thousand fancies in an instant, as what wench dreams on when she lies on her back, when one hen lays an egg and another sits it, whether that hen shall mother that chic∣ken? If my bull leap your cow, is not the calfe yours? yes no doubt, for Aedificium cadet solo says the Lawyer: and then to close all comes in a sentence, Non omnia possumus omnes: for some are borne to riches, others to verses, some to be bachelors, others to be cuckolds, some to get crowns, and others to spend'm, some to get children, and others to keepe'em: and all this is but idleness, would to God I had some scurvy poem about me to laugh at,
but mark, yonders a motion to be seen.
Yonder he sits in faith, well done true love, good Signior Leonoro, he keeps promise the best, he does not see me yet.
It is the stayed Madam Temperance, a pretty pinnace she has been in her days, and in her nights too, for her bur∣then, and reasonable good under sail, and see she hath dis∣covered a sail, see, see, she hales him in, ha? tic this way to the rewards, slight it is this way: I hope the baud knows not me, and yet I know not, she may be a witch, for a whore she was before I knew her, a baud I have known her any time this dozen years, the next step to honour then is a witch, because of Nature, for where the whore ends, the baud begins, and the corruption of a baud, is the generation of a witch. And Pythagoras holds opinion, that a witch turns to a wild Cat, as an old Ostler turns to an ambling nag.
This is the back gate, where Temperance should meet me at this hour.
I wonder she fails, for I see her not.
Why sits that fellow there trow? come let's hover here abouts twill not be long ever we encounter.
So, now this riddle is expounded, this baud took me for this aduenturer whom (twenty to one) she atten∣ded, to waft him into Lucretias chamber, what a beast was I, not to apprehend this advantage, thus muffled as I am, she could not have perceived me till I had been in, And I might safely have staid a while without endangering my lo∣uers:
S'light she takes me still for her first man.
Come, come, gingerly for Gods sake, gingerly.
SE• Lionel, yet she is not come, and the privy at∣te•dant is gone.
I wonder what it was.
I •ear me some other client of hers, whom she pr•fe•res before me, come, we must not linger here too long together, we'll enter on this backside, to the Emperors head, where we will stay a little, and then make the last trial of this bawds honesty.
Come A•cient, lets leave our company a little, and ayre our selves in this backside.— Who goes there?
A friend.
The word.
God save you Captain Quintiliano.
Shot him Ancient, a spy, the word's the Em∣perours head, and thither you shall go sir.
Pardon me good Captain.
Come, be not retrograde to our desires.
I attend a friend of mine.
You have attended him already, I am witness too't, done it and he dare, whatsoever he bee, and he shall attend thee another while, and he will: You are as good a man as he, and he be the Duke himself, for a Clarissimo; entertain him Ancient, bid the Clarissimo, welcome, Isle call a drawer, and we'll have some wine in this Arbor.
You're very welcome Signior Clarissimo, desire you more acquaintance sir.
My name is Leonoro sir, &amp; indeed I scarce know you.
No sir, and you know me, you must know as much as I know, for Scientia and Scientificus is all one; but that's all one, in truth sir, you shall not spend a penny here, I had money, I thank God even now, and peradventure shall have again ever we part, I have sent to a friend of mine.
Here honourable Clarissimo, I drink to thee.
Thank you good Captain.
S'fut, winesucker, what have you filled vs here, baldredash? taste Leonoro.
Me thinks it is sack.
Let vs taste sir, it is claret, but it has been fetched again with Aqua vitae.
S'light me thinks it is taken salt water, who drew this wine you rogue?
My fellow Sam drew it sir, the wine's a good neat wine, but you love a pleasanter grape, I'll fit your pal∣late sir.
Is this thy boy Leonoro?
For fault of a better sir.
Before heaven it is a sweet faced child, me thinks he should show well in women's attire: and hee took her by the lily white hand, and he laid her upon a bed. Isle help thee to three crowns a week for him, and she can act well. Hast ever practised my pretty Ganimede?
No, nor never mean sir.
Mean sir? No marry Captain, there will never
be mean in his practise I warrant him.
O finely taken; Sirha, Clarissimo, this fellow was an arrant Asle this fore-noone, before he came to be an An∣tient.
But whore's your Lieutenant Captain?
Sounds man, hoe's turned swaggerer.
First possible?
Swaggerer by this light he; and is in the next room writing a challenge to this tall Gentleman my An∣tient here.
What, mutinous in your own company?
S'fut man, who can bridle the asses valour?
S'blood and any man think to bridle me.
But what was the quarrel?
Why sir, because I entertained this Gentleman for my Ancient, (being my dear friend and an excellent school∣ler) he takes pepper in the nose and sneeses it out upon my Ancient; now sir (he being of an vncol•carrying spirit) false foul on him, calls him gull openly; and ever since I am fine to drink with 'em in two rooms, dare not let'em come together for my life, but with pen and inke-hornes, and so my Lieutenant is in the next chamber casting cold Ink upon the
flame of his courage, to keep him from the blot of cowardice, see where he comes with his challenge: good Clarissimo hold my Ancient.
Good Ancient, forbear in a Tavern.
Revenge noble Lieutenant, hast thou done it?
S'light I think I have pepperd him, but it was his own seeking you know.
Thats certain.
Sounds my seeking sir?
Hold him Leonoro; and if it be possible, per∣swade him to hear the challenge from the enemies own mouth.
Isle undertake he shall Captain: Good Ancient let me entreat you.
Well sir, because you're a stranger to me, you shall doe more with me.
Thank you good ancient.
Read fiery Lieutenant, read boy, legibly.
Here it is sir: Signior Giouenelli, it is not ignorant unto you, that even now you crossed me over the cocks-comb.
I did so sir: I will not deny it I warrant you.
Good Ancient peace.
And that openly, or else it would never have grieved me.
That openly was all indeed.
And moreover, very irreverently to call me gull, and ass to my face: And therefore, though I held it good discretion in me to wink at the blow, not seeing to take notice of it.
Good discretion in deed.
Yet know that I will have satisfaction from you.
Well sir, and you shall.
Nay good Ancient hear him.
And desire you to send me word, whether you will maintain it or no, hoping that you will not offer that discourtesy to doe me wrong, and stand to it when you have done.
That were foul indeed.
And as for the words, in that you called me gull, and Ass to my face, resolve me by letter (for I do not think fit we should meet) first whether you spake any such words or no: and secondly by whom you meant'em. And it by me (as I think you durst not) confess you are sorry for'hem: and if I have offended you, I heartily ask you forgiveness. And so farewell.
Before heaven Ancient, this would have tickled you, but good Leonoro, and thou be a right Clarissimo, lets make'em friends, and drink to one another: S'fut, we have no wine here me thinks, whore's this Aperner?
Here Sir.
Have you mended your hand sir.
I Captain, and if this please not your taste, either you or I cannot taste a cup of wine.
Sounds you're very saucy sir, here Lieutenant, drink to thy Ancient, and void mutinies with your officer, mar∣shall law is dangerous.
Is he content I should drink to him?
He is I warrant thee.
Why then Ancient good luck t'ee.
Let come Lieutenant, I pledge you.
Why so, now my company is cured again, before it was wounded. Come honourable Clarissimo, lets retire to our strength, taste a fresh carouse or two, and then march home with Music. Tipster, call vs in some Music.
I will sir.
STrike up Scrapers, honourable Clarissi∣mo, and thy sweet Atones, adieu, re∣member our device at the show soon.
I will not fail Captain, farewell t'ee both: come Lionel, now let vs try the truth of Madam Tem∣perance, and see if she attend vs.
I hope by this time she remembers her promise sir.
How now Lieutenant, whore's my Ancient?
Marry Captain you've left him casting the recko∣ning ith'chimney.
Why then his purse and his stomach will be emp∣tie
together, and so I cashier him; let the scholar report at Padua, that Venice has other manner of learning belongs to it: what does his Continuum &amp; Contiguum here? let'em go to the Ink pot and beware of the wine pot.
Fill red cheeked Bacchus, let the Bordeaux grape
Skip like la voltos in their swelling veins.
Te dan, dan title, te dan de dan title didle, &amp;c.
O God Captain that I could dance so.
He took her by (strike up fiddlers) the lily white hand and he laid her upon the bed. Oh what a spirit have I now? I long to meet a Sergeant in this humour, I would but have one whiff at one of these same peuter buttoned shoulder-clappers, to try whether this chopping knife or their pestels were the better weapons. Here's a blade Boy, it was the old Dukes first predecessors; Isle tell thee what Lieutenant, this sword has dubbed more Knights then thy knife has opened Oysters.
First possible Captain, and me thinks it stands a lit∣tle.
No matter for that, your best mettald blades will stand soonest: so, now we have attained our Mansion house. At which Isle sing a verse shall break the doors. O noble
Hercules, let no S•ygian lake.
Te dan dan title, te dan de dan title didle, &amp;c.
Farewell scrapers, your reward now shall be that I will not cut your strings nor break your sidles, via, away.
Come Captain, lets enter, I long to see my Mi∣stress, I warrant shoe's a heavy Gentlewoman for your ab∣sense.
S'fut she's an Ass, honour woos me, preferment calls me, and I must lye pampered in a wenches lap, because she dotes on me. Honour says no, Lieutenant, Pugna pro patria, we must too't in faith and seek our portion amongst the scratched faces.
Mistress, Mistress, is he gone?
Whoe's that cais there?
I heard no body.
No? there was one called Mistress: I say who called Mistress, s'blood I hope I am not drunk.
In truth sir I heard no body.
I tell thee I smelt a voice here in my entry, s'fut Isle make it smell worse and'cheare it again.
O me, he will draw upon his own shadow in this humour, if it take the wall of him. Follow him Fannio, look he doe no harm for God sake.
Help, help, help.
Name of God, what's there to doe?
Good Captain doe not hurt me.
Sounds is hell broke loose? why Snail, though you can sing songs and doe things Snail, I must not allow ye to creep into my wives cole-house, what Snail into my withdrawing chamber?
I beseech your Worship hear me speak.
O Snail, this is a hard case; no room serve your turn, but my wives cole-house, and her other house of of∣fice annexed to it? a privy place for her self, and me some∣times, and will you use it being a stranger? s'light how comes this about? up sirha and call your Mistress.
A plague of all disguises.
Alas poor Snail, what did thou make here?
I protest sir for no harm, my Mistress called me in to sweep her chimney, and because I did it not to her mind, she made me doe penance in her cole-house.
Search him Captain and see, if he have stolen nothing.
Kill me, hang me, if I have.
Yes Snail, and besides I hear complaints of you, you're an old luxurious hummerer about wenches Snail, does this become your gravity sir? Lieutenant, fetch me a cole-sacke, Isle put him in it and hang him up for a sign.
I beseech your Worship be good to me.
Good Captain pardon him, since he has done nothing but swept your chimney worse then my Mistress would have it swept, he will doe it better another time.
Well Snail, at this Gentleman's request, (to whom I can deny nothing) I release you for this once, but let me take you no more thus I advise you.
Not while I live good Captain.
Hence, trudge you d•judge, go away.
A plague of all disguises.
I have looked about all the house for my Mistress sir, but I cannot find her.
Go then, look all about the town for her too; come in Lieutenant, lets repose a little after our liquor.
Dear life, be resolute, that no respect
Heighted aboue the compass of your love,
Depress the equal comforts it retains;
For since it finds a firm consent in both,
And both our births and years agree so well,
If both our aged parents should refuse,
For any common object of the world,
To give their hands to ours, let vs resolve
To live together like our lives and souls.
I am resolved my love; and yet alas,
So much affection to my fathers will
Consorts the true desires I bear to you,
That I would have no spark of our love seen,
Till his consent be asked, and so your fathers.
So runs the mutual current of my wish,
And with such staid and circumspect respects,
We may so serve and govern our desires,
That till fit observation of our fathers,
Prefer the motion to them; we may love
Without their knowledge and the skill of any,
Save only of my true friend Lodowicke.
I wonder where he is.
Not far I know,
For in some place, he watches to prevent
The feared danger of your fathers presence.
SOunds stay for the love of your honour sir.
A plague of all disguises Angelo.
What reason have you to curse them? has not one of them kept you safe from the shame of the world, as much as a poor disguise might doe; but when your ridiculous fears will cast it off, even while it is on, so running through the streets, that they rise all in an uproar after you▪ alas what is the poor disguise to blame sir?
Well then fortune is to blame, or some thing; come as thou did help to daub me, help to cleanse me, I pre¦thee.
Let alone a while sir for Gods sake, Isle go see whether the Captain be gone from home or no.
Out upon that course Angelo; I am frighted out of it, come enter my house, enter.
What, will you enter your house sir before you know who is in it: keep your self close, and let me first enter and discover.
I know there is no body.
You cannot know it sir, I heard even now that divers of the Senate were determined to come and sit in Counsel there.
A tale, a very tale Angelo, enter for the love of heaven, enter and vnsmother me.
What shall I doe? my poor Master is berai'd, O that same faithless Lodowicke, that could drown the swag∣gering Captain no better in his drunkenness; alas how should I salve this?
How now? whom doe I see? my daughter and a yonker together? passion of death, hell and damnation, what lecherous capricorn reigns this unhappy day? old and young in a predicament? O fie of filthy sin and concu∣piscence, I will conceal my rage a while that it may break forth in fury; Isle shift me presently Angelo, and go fetch the Provost.
O unspeakable madness, will you for ever disho∣nor your daughter, and in her your self sir?
Talk not to me, out upon this abominable con∣cupiscence, the pride of the flesh, this witchcraft of the Di∣uell: talk not to me, justice cries out an't in the streets, and I will see it punish't, come good Angelo to help to shift me.
Isle follow you Sir instantly; Master, Master.
Angelo? what news?
Miserable Master, cast down your ladder, and come down instantly.
Alas, why, Angelo is my father coming.
Let vs not talk but come down I say.
Dear life, farewell, we'll shortly meet again,
So parts the dying body from the soul;
As I depart from my Aemilia.
So enter frighted souls to the low world,
As my poor spirit upon this sudden doubt,
What may succeed this danger.
Come away, you'll be whipped anon for your amou∣rosity, hast for shame hast, &amp;c.
Once more and ever, fare my dear life well.
Leave your amorous congees &amp; get you in Dame▪
sir you and I will talk as it were betwixt the pales, now, get you and shift you of this suit presently.
Shift me Angelo? why man?
Ask me no questions, but go home and shift you presently, and when I have done a little business here with∣in, Isle come and tell you my device: there hath more chance it then you are aware of, and then I can stand to tell you; away therefore presently go home and shift you.
Very good sir, I will be ruled by you, and after lear•e the mysteries.
Now will I let the little squire shift and cleanse himself without me, that he may be longer about fetching the Provost, and in the mean time will I take my Masters suit (of which the little squire took note) and put it on my sweet heart Francischina, who shall presently come and sup∣ply my Masters place, with his Mistress; for the little squire amazed with his late affrights and this sudden offencefull spectacle of his daughter, took no certain note who it was that accosted her; for if he had, he would have blamed me for my Master, only the colour of his garment sticks in his fancy, which when he shall still see where he left it, he will still imagine the same person wears it, and thus shall his daughters honour and my Masters be preserved with the finest sugar of invention. And when the little squire disco∣uers my sweet heart, she shall swear, she so disguised her self, to follow him, for her love to him; ha, ha ha, O the wit of man when it has the wind of a woman.
HOld, hold, I pre thee hold; I yield my rapier,
Let my submission, my presumption salve.
Ignoble Lodwicke, should I take thy life,
It were amends too little for the wrong.
O the precious heavens:
How was I gul'd? haud, hide thy self for shame.
And henceforth have an eye before thy fingers.
Well do not jest it out, for I protest
If this disguise, which my inhumane fate
Puts on my proper sex, be by thy means
Seen through, by any other then thy self,
The quarrel twixt vs shall be more then mortal.
And thy dishonour to a friendless stranger
(Exiled his native country, to remnine
Thrall to the mercy of such unknown meats
As fortune makes the rulers of my life)
Shall spread it self beyond my misery,
Nay, mix not cause of mirth with passion,
Do me the grace t'vnfold thy name and state,
And tell me what my whole estate may doe,
To salve this wrong unwittingly I did thee?
And set the plantife thoughts of thy hard fate
In such peace, as my friendship may procure:
And if I fail thee, let Jove fail my soul,
When most this earth makes it need help of heauē.
In the more then temper my late rage
And show your virtues perfectly derived
From the Venetian nobles; for my name
It is Lucre•tio, which to fit this habit
I turned Lucretia: the rest that rests
To be related of my true estate,
Isle tell some other time: least now your presence
Might dumbly tell it (if it should be seen)
To all the world, or else make it suspect
My female life of lightness: then with thanks
And vow of all true friendship, for th'amends
Your kindness makes me, take your sword again,
And with it while I live the power of mine
In any honoured use shall command.
Then till we meet, and may laugh at this error,
Isle once more try the free peace of my chamber.
Do so sweet friend: a plague of Gingerly?
Where is that stale and fulsome Gingerly,
She brought me to a fury, Isle be sworn
Rather then man or woman: a flat beating:
I found her supposed mistress fast asleep,
Put her to the touchstone, and she prou' a man.
He waked, and with a more then manly spirit
Flew in my face, and gave me such a dash
In steed of kissing, of these licorish lips
That still my teeth within them bled I swear
Gingerly, Gingerly, a plague a you.
But now how does my lovers on the Terrace?
HOld, take my doublet too, my hat and all, and quickly hie thee to thy sweet.
S'ounds, see sir see, your proper Sentinel, that when you needed him, gave you a slip.
Friend Lodouico, by my life, well welcome to this my fathers backside.
Well sir, well, I would I had kissed almost your fa∣theirs backside so I had no•er known it.
A my life he faints extremely, he left you even now to purchase him the amorous interview of your fair cousin Lucretia that lies here.
Gods me, sweet friend, would thou use such a slight to any one that lay within my walk? who was thy mean to her?
I lay my life, tame madam Temperance, the no∣torious Pander.
S'•ut friend, wat a notorious oversight was that? and what a violent injury unto thy friend?
A plague upon you both, you scurvy hind, have
you no gull but me to whet your wit upon?
My friend a privy lover? I'd have sworn
Love might spend all his shafts at butterflies
As well as at his bosom.
It was your fault then,
For I have noted a most faithful league
Betwixt him and his barber now of late,
And all the world may see, he does not leave
One hair on his smooth chinn, as who should say,
His haplesse love was gone against the hair.
S'bloud &amp; these rogues knew how I was deceived,
They'd stout me into motley, by this light.
Well sir, I ever thought y'ad the best wit
Of any man in Venice next mine own,
But now Isle lay the bucklers at your feet,
A pox upon thee, tame your bald hewed tongue,
Or by the Lord of heaven Isle pull it out.
O my sweet friend, come Isle know more of this,
And tell thee all our fortune, hence good Angelo.
O, if this man had patience to his brain,
A man might load him till he smart again.
Patience worthy friend, hee knows you love him for his knavish wit.
THou shalt not stay sweet Temperance, tell vs the manner of our war and we'll leave thee presently.
Why that pearl's man Lodowicke, according to your appointment was jump at three with me, just, •even full at your hour; Muffled as I wild you, ee'ne your fashion and your very leg for all the earth, and followed me in so gingerly, that by my troth I must needs say, he was worthy the pleasuring; but in what a taking was I when I perceived
his voice? &amp; when I saw my mistress &amp; he together by the ears?
What did thy mists fight with him?
O king a heaven, she ran upon his naked weapon the most finely that ever lived, and I ran away in a swoon for fear.
Has she a good courage?
It seems she is too honest for our companies, a little more good Temperance.
And when he saw me, he called me punk, and pander, and doxy, &amp; the vilest nicknames as if I had ben an arrand naugh∣ty-packe.
It is no matter Temperance, hoe's known and thou art known.
I thank heaven for it, and ther's all indeed, I can stay no longer.
Farewell honest Temperance: how was it possible, Lo∣douico should fit all these circumstances without the confederacy and treachery of this beldam? well Lodouico must satisfy this doubt when I see him.
That will be at the May night show at Signior Honorios.
I would not meet him there, I shall offend him, but there I must needs be, and have thee disguised like a woman.
Me sir?
No remedy, the Captain Quintilliano and I have deuis'd it to gull his Lieutenant: for thou shalt dance with him, we will thrust him upon thee, and then for his courting and gifts, which we will tell him he must win thee withal, I hope thou wilt have wit enough to receive the tone, and pay him again with the to∣there, come Lionel let me see how naturally thou can play the woman.
Better then you think for.
COme Lientenant, this nap has set a nap of sobriety upon our brains, now lets sit here &amp; consult, what course were best for vs to take in this dangerous mansion of mans life.
I am for you in faith Captain &amp; you go to consult once.
I know it Lieutenant, say then what think thou? we talked of employmēt, of action, of honour, of a cōpany &amp; so forth.
Did we so Captain?
Did we so Ass? S'fut, were thou drunk before thou went to the tavern, that thou hast now forgotten it?
Cry you mercy good Captain, I remember I am your Lieutenant.
Well sir, and so thou shalt be called still, and I Captain, though we never lead other company then a sort of quart pots.
Shall we Captain, bith mass then lets never have other company in deed.
Why now you are wise, and hast a mind transformed with maine right, and to confirm thee, I will compare the noble service of a feast with the honourable service of the field, and then put on thy hand to which thou wilt.
Thank you good Captain, but do you think that war is nought sir?
Exceeding nought.
Why then sir take heed what you say, for it is dange∣rous speaking against any thing that is nought, I can tell you.
Thou say wisely Lieutenant, I will not then use the word nought, nor speak ill of either, but compare them both, and choose the better.
Take heed then good Captain, there be some prick∣cared in elligencers conveyed into some wall or other about vs.
If there were I care not, for to say true, the first model of a battle was taken from a banquet. And first touching the offices of both: for the general of the field, there is the master of the feast, for the Lieutenant General, the mistress, for the Ser∣geant Mayor, the Steward, for the Gentleman usher, the Marshall, for master of the Ordinance the Sewer, and all other officers.
Yet you're reasonable well Captain.
Then for the preparation, as in a field is all kind of are∣tillery, your Cannon, your Demicannon, Culuerings, falkons, Sacres, minions, &amp; such goodly ornaments of a field, I speak no hurt of em thou see, Isle have nothing to do do with 'am.
Hold you still there Captain.
Besides other munition of powder and shot, and so for
the feast, you have your Court, cubbords planted with flagons, cannes, cups, beakers, bowls, goblets, basins and ewers: And more glorious show I wise then the tother, and yet I speak no hurt of the other.
No Isle be sworn Captain.
Besides your munition of manchet, napery plots, spoons, glasses and so forth; Then for your kitchen artilieri•, there shall you see all your brass pieces mounted in order, as your beefe-pots, your chaldrons, your kettles, chafingdishes, ladies, spits, a more edifying spectacle then your Cannon &amp; Culuering, and yet I speak no hurt of them neither.
No Captain, thus far, I go wee.
Then sir, as in the field the drum, so to the feast the dresser gives the Alarm, Ran tan tara, tan tan tantara tan.
O how it stirs my stomach?
First then sets forward a wing of light horse, as salads, broths, sauces, flew'd meats, and other kickshores▪ and they give a charge, then do the battle join Captain Capon in white-brith, Lieutenant calves head.
Thats my place.
Ancient Surloigne, a man of a goodly presence, and full of expectation, as you ancient ought to bee, then have you Sergeant Piemeat, Corporal Conny, Lanceprizado Lark, Gentle∣men, Panbakex, &amp; all the species of a company.
Would we might fall to the fight once.
Why now grows the fight hot man, now shall you see many a tall piece of beef, many a tough capon go down, and hee'rs the trial of a mans stomach, all the while the Are∣tillery plays on both hands, the Canons lay about them, the flagons go off, thick and threefold, and many a tall man goes halting off, some quite overthrown both horse and foot.
O my heart bleeds.
That is, thy teeth water. In conclusion, as the rem∣nant of the feast, (I mean such dishes as escaped the fury of the fight) if they be serviceable, are reserved to furnish out another day if they be maimed or spoiled, they are sent abroad to relieve prisons and hospitals. So the remainder of the fight, if they be serviceable, they are reserved to supply a second field, for the
fragments of the fight, viz. the maimd soldiers, they are sent like∣wise to furnish prisons and hospitals, how say thou now Lieu∣tenant, shall we to the feast, or to the fight?
No fighting good Captain, to the feast for Gods sake.
Tha'rt a my mind right, and so will we presently march on to the sack of the Emperors head, then to the May-night feast, and show at Signior Honorios, and there will be a wench there boy, a delicate young morsel, a kinswoman of Sig∣nior Honorios, and her fathers only child, he a mighty rich Cla∣rissimo, and her shalt thou court, win her and wear her, thou hast wit at will.
But shall that wench be her fathers son and heir Captain?
She shall be his heir, a mine honesty.
But shall not my Mistress your wife bee at that show?
She shall, and we could find her; Fannio has been abroad this hour to seek her: the Ass is stepped into some cor∣ner or other mourning for my absence.
See who comes here?
Come Cousin, march fair, me thinks thou become a Page excellent naturally, cheer up thy heart wench.
Fie for shame kiss in the streets?
Why not? truth seeks no corners, and it was a true loves kiss, and so is this.
Ware riot, dost thou mark Lieutenant?
Gods pity, my husband.
What were these Captain?
Upon my life the hindmost of them, is a wench in mans attire, did thou not mark besides his slabbering about her, her big thighs and her sp•ay feet.
By the meskin me thought they were so indeed.
S'life, the hungry knave her squire, could not hold in the open streets.
What should she be?
The Doxy was muffeld in her cloak, I had but a glimpse of her; but s'light I will know her, she passes not so, come we'll follow. Isle beat the Rogue and take away's whore from him.
COme courage Cousin, wee have sailed the man of War out of sight, and here wee must put into harbour. Hist, haw Amila?
O welcome good Angelo.
Here take in, go, get up lightly, away, take heed you slip not Cousin, remember you're short heeled.
Hold fast for Gods sake.
Nay hold you fast, you'•l shame vs all else; so Jove re∣ceiue thy soul• I take away the ladder: Now till you have d•cei∣ued the Provost, farewell, remember your l•s•on Cousin.
I warrant you.
How unhappily did we miss 'em? they slipped into some vaulting house, I hold my life.
Faith it's good we mist'em, she was some stale punk I warrant her.
Twenty to one she is some honest mans wife of the Parish that steals abroad for a trimming, while he sits secure at home, little knowing, God knows, what hangs over his head; the poor Cuckold esteeming her the most virtuous wife in the world. And shoude one tell him, he had seen her dressed like a Page following a knave thus, Isle lay my life he would not believe it.
Why no Captain, wives take all the faith from their husbands. And that makes 'em doe so many good works as they doe.
Mercy for that in faith Lieutenant, stand close.
My Mistress in mans apparel say thou?
Thy Mistress in mans apparel I assure thee, and attended by Angelo.
Would to heaven I had seen her, can tell whither she went.
Full butt into Lorenzoes house, and if thou knew him, thou know wherefore, an ill-fauourd trimming is her errand.
It is very well, she trims my Captain prettily, in the
mean time his head pays for all, and yet alas poor hornestocke, he thinks her to have no fault, but her too much dotage upon him, well my conscience will not let me keep her counsel, he shall know on it.
Why man if both of vs should tell him her fault he will not believe vs.
No, nor if he had seen it with his own own eyes I think, I shall never forget how the profound Cockatrice hung on his sleeve to day, and he shoude not from her sight, she would follow him into the wars, one day should make an end of both their loves and lives, and then to see him the withal, my Captain began to stroote, and batle the pride of his merits that so height∣ned her affection.
True, and how the foppasty his Lieutenant, stepped in to persuade with her, to take it patiently, for friends must part, we came not all together, and we must not go all together.
Well, twill not be for any man to follow him, if this were known once.
Lord how all the boys in the town would flock a∣bout him as he walks the streets, as it were about a bagge-pipe, and hoot the poor Cuckold out of his hornecase.
Well, and I were worthy to give him counsel, he should even fair and well hang himself.
No, no, keep it from him, and say thou found her at a women's labour.
A plague of her labour, the Captains brows sweat while she labours.
If I were in thy case, I should laugh out right when I saw him.
That dare not I doe, but as often as he turns his back to me, I shall be here V with him thats certain: or when I foal∣low him and his cheating stock Innocentio, in the streets, I shall imagine still I am driving an Ox and an Ass before me, and cry phtroh, ho• ptrough.
S'light Captain take this and take all.
Not a word for the world, for if we should take notice of his words the slave would deny all, leave it to me to sif• it in privy•e. Now sir, what news with you? whore's your Mistress,
that you range thus at your pleasure?
In health sir I trust.
Come forward you rogue you: come forward, whi∣there creep you behind so? whore's your Mistress sir?
At a poor women's labour sir.
Very well sir, come Lieutenant, go you before, and doe you follow him sir.
What before my Captain sir: you shall pardon me.
Before you rogue, before.
SIgnior Lorenzo, and Gasparo, you're very welcome, we shall have good company and sport to entertain you ere long I hope, shall we not Angelo?
Yes sir, I have invited all you commanded me.
This is the honest man indeed, that took the pains to come for me.
And for me also.
No pains but pleasure sir, I was glad I had such good means to be known to your Worship.
Nay, I have known you before, to be the servant of Signior Honorio here, I take it.
Not my servant Signior Lorenzo, but my sons.
O, your son Aurelios servant? believe me you or your son (in mine opinion, though I say it before him) made good choice of him: for he hath a good honest face, and to a man of judgment (I tell you) that's as good as a good surety for him. I will be better acquainted with you sir, pray you give me your hand.
Both my hand and heart sir, shall be ever at your service.
Thanks my good friend, Isle make thee laugh anon Angelo.
I thank your Worship, you have done so often.
A notable wag Signior Gasparo.
How curiously Lorenzo thinks he carries the matter?
How now Gentlemen, first a merry secret, that you smile so?
No secret Signior Lorenzo, but a merry conceit we were thinking on, to furnish our show anon, if it had been thought on in time.
What was that I pray?
Marry sir, we had good sport to day with Snail the chimney-sweeper.
Had you so sir?
That ever was.
Lord that I had been amongst you, but what more of him sir?
Marry sir, we were thinking how we might m•rrily deceive our company that is to come, if we could have gotten him some M•gn•ficoes suit of the City, whom for his lit•le stature and ••an face he might resemble, that in that habit he might have stolen some kind favours from the Ladies, to make him amends and please him for the anger we put him in.
It would have made excellent merriment.
You are his best Master sir, and if it please you to send me for him by some token, Isle go for him; otherwise he will not come to these Gentlemen.
Shall he come Gentlemen?
If you •lease sir.
Why then hark• thee Angelo; not for the world.
Think you me such an Ass sir?
Shall he have one of my little brothers suites, and come in amongst the Dames for him?
If you could, it would fit him exceedingly.
Much; now laugh Angelo: what Gentleman was that I spied aloft with my daughter think thou?
I know not sir; I beseech your Worship who was it?
Frank, in mans apparel Angelo.
O wonderful.
We cannot invent a token, for my love Angelo.
O excellent.
We will hit it anon Gentlemen.
At your leisure sir.
The swaggerer her husband, had note of it by his Page, and yet the same Page hath persuaded him, since that it was but a gullery.
It is a notable crack; and his Master hath such a pure belief in his wife, that hoe's apt to believe any good of her.
True Angelo, enough for this time; thou shalt make as if thou went for Snail, and return without him, saying thou can not find him.
Agreed sir.
Now Gentlemen, we have deuis'd a wile to bring Snail amongst vs, and I have given Angelo order for a suit for him, that is my little brothers, and him he shall counter∣feit; go Angelo seek him out.
I will sir.
Thank you for this good Signior Lorenzo.
It will quicken the company well.
For their sakes and yours, I have done it Gentle∣men; and see the fair flock come upon vs.
Welcome fair Ladies, but especially you Lady, that are so mere a stranger, Signior Lorenzo you know young Leonoro?
Very well sir, a gallant spark.
And I think you know his father.
Know him? I faith sir there was a reveller, I shall never see man doe his lofty tricks like him while I live.
This Gentlewoman is his Niece sir.
His Niece? she shall doe her self wrong not to be acquainted with her dear uncles companion:
You know not this Gentlewoman sir?
Not very well sir indeed, but entertainment must be given, mercy Frank for thy mans apparel, a plague of all
swaggering husbands. Nay I must forth in faith, Signior Ho∣norio▪ this is for your sake, am I not a kind help to your en∣la•ainement?
An exceeding kind one sir, and I exceedingly thank you.
The mockers are come sir.
Doe you and your fellows attend them in.
We will sir.
Sit gētle Ladies till the mockers raise you to dance.
WElcome Gallants, O the roome's too scant, a hall Gentlemen.
See how womanly my Boy looks Quintiliano.
Twill be rare sport; Lieutenant, that sweet wench in the branched gown is the heir I told thee of.
Gods me, Isle to her and kiss her.
O no, you must not unmask.
No, no, Isle kiss her with my mask and all.
No Lieutenant, take her and court her first, and then kiss her.
To her slave.
There's thy wife too, Quintiliano▪
True, little knows she I am so near her; Isle single her out, and try what entertainment a stranger may find with her.
Do• so, and we'll take up the tother.
I can by no means find Snail sir.
The worse luc••, but what remedy?
Gramercy Angelo▪ but Signior Lorenzo, me thinks I miss one flower in this female• garland.
Whose that?
Your Niece Lucretia▪
By my soul it is true; whats the reason Angelo Lucretia is not here?
I know no reason but her own will sir.
Ther's somewhat in it certain. They dance again.
Did you see the play to day I pray?
No, but I see the fool in it here.
Doe you so forsooth? where is he pray?
Not far from you sir, but we must not point at any body here.
Thats true indeed, cry mercy forsooth, doe you know me through my mask?
Not I sir▪ she must have better skill in baked meats then I, that can discern a woodcock through the crust.
Thats true indeed, but yet I thought I'd try you.
What N•phew Lodwicke, I thought you had been one of the mask•rs.
I use no masking sir with my friends.
No signior Lodowick, but you're a very truant in your school of frien•ship▪ that come so late to your friends.
Somewhat has crossed him sure.
Somewhat shall cross him; Lodouico let me speak with you.
With me sir?
You are the man sir, I can scarce say the Gentle∣man, for you have done a wrong the credit of a Gentleman cannot answer.
Would I might see his face, that durst say so much.
Observe him well, he shoes his face that will prove it when thou dare.
How now Leonoro, you forget your self too much, to grow outrageous in this company.
Aurelio, doe not wrong me, and your self, I undertake your quarrel, this man hath dishonord your Kins∣woman Lucretia, whom (if I might) I intended to marry.
Some error makes you mistake Leonor•, I assure my self.
What interruption of our sport is this gentlemen?
Are not my Nephew and Leonoro friends?
He charges me with dishonoring his mistress Lu∣•ratio.
Byr'lady Lodouico, the charge touches you deeply, you must answer it.
I only desire I may sir, and then will refer me to your censures.
Well Nephew, well; will you never leave this your haunt of fornication? I school him, and doe all I can, but all is lost.
Good Uncle give me leave to answer my other accuser, and then Isle descend, and speak of your fornicate∣on, as the last branch of my division.
Very well, be brief.
I will sir; The ground upon which this man builds his false imagination, is his sight of me at Honorios back gate, since dinner, where muffled in my cloak, kind Madam Temperance, the attendant of Lucretia, from the Terrace, wa•ted me to her with her hand; taking me (as now I un∣derstand) for this honest Gentleman, I not knowing what use she had to put me to, obaid the attraction of her signal, as gingerly as she bad me. (A plague upon her gingerly) till she locked me into Lucretias chamber, where Lucretia lying asleep on her bed, I thought it rudeness to wake her; and (imagining when she waked she had something to say to me) attended her leisure at my ease, and lay down softly by her; when (having chaster and simpler thoughts then Leonoro imagines) because he measures my wast by his own) in the very coldness and dullness of my spirit, I fell suddenly asleep. In which my fancy presented me with the strangest dream, that ever yet possessed me.
Pray God you did but dream Nephew.
You shall know that by knowing the event of it.
Go to, pray let vs hear it.
Me thought Lucretia and I were at maw, a game Uncle that you can well skill of.
Well sir I can so.
You will the more muse at my fortune; or my o∣uersights. For my game stood, me thought, upon my last two tricks, when I made sure of the set, and yet lost it, having the varlet and the five finger to make two tricks.
How had that been possible?
That had been no misfortune sure but plain o∣uersight.
But what was the reason you thought you lost it sir?
You shall hear; she had in her hand the Ace of Hearts, me thought, and a Coate-carde, she led the board with her coat, I plaid the varlet, and took up her coat, and meaning to lay my five finger upon her Ace of hearts, up start a quite contrary card; up she rises withal, takes me a dash a the mouth, drew a rapier he had lay by him, and out of doors we went together by the ears.
A tapier he had lay by him?
What a she turned to a he? dost thou not dream all this while Nephew.
No nor that time neither, though I pretended it; let him be fetched, I warrant you he will show as good cards as the best on you, to prove him an heir Male, if he be the el∣dest child of his father.
This is exceeding strange: go Angelo, fetch her and her hand-maide.
I will sir, if her valor be not too hot for my fin∣gers.
Could such a disguise be made good all this while without my knowledge? to say truth, she was a stranger to me, her father being a Sicilian: fled thence for a disastrous act, and coming hither grew kindly acquainted with me, and called me brother. At his death committing his suppo∣sed daughter to my care and protection, till she were restored to her estate in her native Country.
Was he in hope of it?
He was, and in near possibility of it himself, had he lived but little longer.
Here's the Gentlewoman you talked of sir, nay you must come forward too grave Mistress Temperance.
How now sir? who wants gentility now I beseech you?
Who have we here?
Stand not amazed, nor disparage him: you see sir, this habit truly doth suit my sex, howsoever my hard for∣tunes have made me a while reject it.
What hard fortunes?
Those you know of my father sir: who feared my following of him in my native likeness, to the haven, where he by stealth embarked vs, and would have discovered him, his offence being the slaughter of a Gentleman, that would h•ue slain him.
But did you not tell me you were betrothed be∣fore this misfortune happened, to a young Gentleman of Sicily, called Theagines?
I told you I was betrothed to one Theagine, not Theagines, who indeed was a woman,
And yet whosoever had seen that Theagine since might have taken him for a man.
Do you know her Gentlewoman?
It seems you will not know her.
Hark how my boy ply•es the knave with her.
A noble rogue, S'fut Lieutenant, wilt thou suffer thy nose to be wiped of this great heir•?
S'•ight sir you are no handkercher are you?
Pre thee forbear, more happy then unlooked for 〈◊〉 this dear accident: adopted and noble father, this is the Gentlewoman to whom I told you I was betrothed, the happy news she had to relate to me, made her a traveller, the more search of her passage made her a Page, and her good fortune obtained her — this honest Gentleman to her Master, who I thank him, being (as he supposed me) •ou'd me, accept vs both for your children.
Most gladly and with no less care, then mine own protect you.
S'fut, how now Leonora? new fireworks?
New sir, who wants gentility? this is a gentlemanly part of you to keep a wench in a Pages furniture?
It was more then I knew Sir, but this shall be a warning to me while I live, how I judge of the instrument by the case again.
Nay it is you friend Lodouico that are most to blame, that holding the whole feminine sex in such con∣tempt, wou•d yet play the pickpurse, and steal a poor maids maidenhead out of her pocket sleeping.
It was but to cous•n me.
And to be before me in love.
And to laugh at me.
Nay, jest not at me sweet Gentles, I v'sd plain and mannerly dealing, I neither v'sd the brokage of any▪ as you know who did Le•noro, nor the help of a ladder to creep in at a wenches chamber window (as you know who did Aurelio.) Nor did I case my self in buckram, and cry chim∣ney sweep (where are you uncle?) but I was trained to it by this honest matron here.
Meddle not with me sir.
I am beholding to her, she was loath to have me lead apes in hell.
Look that you keep promise with me Lady, when will thy husband be from home?
Not so soon as I would wish him, but whensoe∣for you shall be welcome.
I very kindly thank you Lady.
Gods me, I took you for Sigmor Placenti•.
S'fut, thou least in thy throat, thou knew me as well as my self.
What, Signior Quintilian, and friend Innocentio? I looked not for you here▪ &amp; you're much the better welcome.
Thanks dad Honorio, and lives my little squire? when shall I see thee at my house lad?
A plague a your house, I was there too lately.
See Lordings, her's two will not let go till they have your consents to be made surer.
By my soul, and because old Gasparo here has been so cold in his love suit, if she be better pleased with Au∣relio, and his father with her, heaven give abundance of good with him.
So you stand not too much upon goods, I say, Amen.
Faith use him as your son and heir, and I desire no more.
So will I of mine honour, are you agreed youths▪
And most humbly gratulate your high fa••rs.
Faith &amp; Jove give 'em joy together for my part.
Yet is here another nail to be driven, heir's a virtuous Matron, Madam Temperance, that is able to doe much good in a commonwealth, a woman of good parts, sells complexion helps maids to services, restores maidenheads, brings women to bed, and men to their bedsides.
By my faith, but save votre grace sir.
Hath drinks for love, and gives the diet.
Byr'lady, and thats not amiss for you sir.
For me, with a plague tee?
No nor for any man thats not sound I mean sir.
S'fut ma•ters these be good parts in the old wench, wilt thou have her Lieutenant? sheele be a good stay to the rest of thy living, the gallants will all honour thee at thy house I warrant thee.
Fore God Captain I care not if I have.
Well young Gentleman, perhaps it should not be the worst for you.
Why law, thy virtues have own her at first sight, she shall not come to thee empty, for Isle promise thee that Isle make her able to bid any Gentleman welcome to a piece of mutton and rabbit at all times.
Byr'lady, a good Ordinary.
Thow't visit sometimes Dad.
That I will in faith boy in authority wise.
Why then strike hands, and if the rest be pleased,
Let all hands strike as these have struck before,
And with round Echoes make the welkin roar.

HEnce Clouds of melancholy
•le be no longer subject to your sismes,
But thou dear soul, whose nerues and artires
•n dead resoundings summon up revenge,
And thou shalt hate, be but appeased sweet h•arse
The dead remembrance of my living father
And with a hart as air, swift as thought
I'll excuse justly in such a cause
Where •ruth leads, what coward would not fight
Ill acts move some, but myna's a cause is right
See the powers of heaven in apparitions
And fight full aspects as in•en•ed
That • thus tardy am to doe an act
which justice and a fathers death exits,
Like threatening methors antedates destruction.
Again I come, I come, I come,
Bee silent thou •••igies of fair virtue
That like a goodly syen were it plucked up
By murderous, winds, infectious blasts and gusts
I will not leave thee, until like thy self,
I'ue made thy enemies, then hand in hand
We'll walk to paradise—again more blessed
Isle to yon promonts top, and their survey,
What shipwrecked passengers the belgique sea
Casts from her fomy entrails by mischance.
Roar sea and winds, and with celestial fires,
Quicken high projects, with your highest desires.
Yet this is somewhat like, but brambles, you are to bu∣sie,
were I at Luningberge, and you caught me thus, I should
go near to ask you at whose suit, but now I am out of sent,
And fear no •orients, for I think these woods and waters are
common wealths that need no such subjects nay they keep
not a Constable at sea, but a mans ouerwhelmd without
order.—Well, dry land I love thee, though thou swarm
with millions of devourers, yet hast thou no such swallow as
the sea.
Thou lie, there lives upon the earth more •jests
With wide devouring throats, then can bee found
Of ravenous fishes in the Ocean:
The huge Leuiathan is but a shrimp
Compared with our Balena on the land
I am of your mind; but the Whale has a wide mouth
To swallow fleeting waters, and poor fish,
But we have Epicures and Cormorants,
Whom neither sea, nor land can hardly serve
They feed them fat, while arms and honour starve,
Desert looks pale as death, like those bare bones.
Ha—amazed.
See thou them trembling, slave here were Arms?
That served the troth less state of Luningberge.
So doe I sir serve the dukes son of the state,
Ha, ha, I laugh to see how dastard fear
Hastens the death doomed wretch to his distress,
Say did thou serve the duke of Luningberge.
His son Otho sir, •'me a poor follower of his
And my master is airing of himself at your Cell,
Is he that escaped the wrack young Luningberg?
I sir, the same sir, you are in the right sir.
Revenge I kiss thee, vengeance you're at liberty,
Would thou having lost a father as I have,
Whose very name dissolves my eyes to tears
Could duty and thy love so different prove,
Not to avenge his death whose better part
Was thine, thou his, when he fell part of thee
Fell with him each drop, being part thine own
And would not be revenged;
Yes on the murderer,
On him, or any man that is a••ied
Has but one •uncle of blood, of which hes part
He was my father, my hart still bleeds
Nor can my wounds be stopped, till an incision,
I'ue made to bury my dead father in:
Therefore without protraction, sighing, or excuses
Swear to be true, to aid assist me, not to stir
Or contradict me in any enterprise
I shall now undertake, or hereafter.
I swear.
Were I persuaded that thou could shed tears,
As doth the Egyptian serpents near the Nile;
If thou would kiss and kill, embrace and stab,
Then thou should live, for my invective brain
Hath cast a glorious project of revenge
Even as thou kneel'st, wilt thou turn villain speak.
Oh sir when was I otherwise, from my creation nothing
else, I was made of no other stuff, villainy is my only patri∣money:
though I bee an irreligious slave, yet I bear a religious
name, though I want courage, yet in talk, I'll put them all
down, though I have nothing in me that is good:
Yet i'll—
Forbear thy Lord is coming isle go in
And royally provide for such a Prince,
Say thou hast met the kindest host alive,
One that adores him, with no less zeal
Then rich men gold, or true religious heaven
Dissemble cunningly, and thou shalt prove
the minion of my thoughts, friend to my love.
Well sir ne'er fear me this is an excellent fellow
A true vile•aine fitter for me then better company,
This is Hence Hoffmans son.
that stole down his fathers Anatomy from the gallows at
Leningberge, I'tis the same upon the dead scull ther's the iron
Crown that burnt his brains out, what will come of this, I
neither know nor care: but here comes my lord.
How chers my most noble, my most honourable, my most
gracious; yea my most grieved prince.
A fearful storm
And full of horror.
Trust me Lorrique besides the inlie grief
That swallows my content when I perceive
How greedily the fierce unpitying sea, and waives,
Devoured our friends another trouble grieves my vexed eyes
With gashtly apparitions, strange aspects
Which either I doe certainly behold
Or else my soul divining some sad fate
Fills my maginary powers with shapes
Hideous and horrid.
My lord let your hart have no commerce with that
Mart of idle imaginations, rouse up your nobleness
To apprehend comfort, kindness ease and what otherwise
Entertained so solitary a place as this, can the
Ancient subject of the state of Leningberg collect
Tic I take it the son to that Viz-admirall that
Turned a terrible pirate.
Let vs turn back into the sea again
Yielding our bodies to the ruthless sound
That hath divided vs and our late friends
Rather then see choice Hoffman.
Courage brave Otho, he will use thee kindly.
Here he comes, sweet host here is the dukes heir of
Leningberge doe homage and after entertain him and me his
Follower with the most conspictious pleasures
That lies in thy poor hability.
Before I speak to my most sacred Lord
I join my soft lips to the •ollid earth
And with an honoured benison I bless
The hour, the place, the time of your arrive
For now my savage life, lead amongst beasts
Shall be turned civil by your grarious help
I see thy true hearts love drop down in tears
And this embrace shows I am free from fears
My disturbed blood runs smoothly through my veins
And I am bold to call thee friend, bold to entreat
Food for by wrack I have lost ship, friends and meat.
You that attend my Lord enter the cave
Bring forth the homely Cakes their hands prepared
While I entreat his excellence sit down
Villain bring nothing buta burning Crown.
What's that thou bid him bring, a burning Crown
Still you suspect my harmless inocence
What though your father with the power state
And your just uncle duke of Brusia
After my father had in thirty fights
Filled all their treasures with somens spoils
And paid poor soldiers from his treasury
What though for this his merits he was named
A prescript out law for a little debt
Compelled to fly into the Belgique sound
And live a pirate.
Prithee speak no more
Thou raysest new doubts in my troubled heart
By repetition of thy fathers wrongs
Then hee was wronged you grant but not by you,
You virtuous gentleman
Sate like a just •judge of the vnder-shades,
And with an unchanged Rhadamantine look,
Beheld the fiesh mangled with many scars
Par'd from the bones of my offended father
And when hee was a bare anatomy,
You saw him chained unto the common gallows,
Hoffman.
Nay hear me patiently kind Lord
My innocent youth as guilty of his sin,
Was in a dungeon hidden from the sun,
And there I was condemned to endless night
Except I past my vow never to steal
My fathers fleshless bones from that base tree
I know nor who it was, I guess your mother,
She kneeled and wept for me, (but you did not)
Beseeching from that vow I might be freed
Then did I swear if Nations foreign power
Compelled me to take down those naked bones
I never would release them from those chains
Never entomb them, but immediately
Remove them from that gallows to a tree
I kept mine oath: look Luningberg; tic done
Behold a father hanged up by his son
Oh horrible aspect murderer stand off
I know thou meanst me wrong
My Lord behold these precious twines of light
Burnt out by day eclipsed when as the sun
For shame obscured himself this deed was done
Where none but schrich owls sung, thou receptacle
thou organ of the soul;
Rest, go rest, and you most lovely Couplets
Legs and arms reside, for ever here
This is my last farewell, what doe you weep?
Oh Lorrique I am betrayed, slave touch me not
Not touch thee? yes, and thus trip down thy pride.
You pla'ct my father in a Chair of state:
This earth shall bee your throne, villain come forth
And as thou mean to save thy forfeit life,
Fix on thy Masters head my burning Crown,
While in these Cords, I in eternal bands
Bind fast his base and coward trembling hands.
Lorrique, art thou turned villain to my life.
Isle turn any thing sir rather then nothing, I was taken
life promised to betray you, and I love life so well, that I would
not loose it for a Kingdom, for a Kings Crown, an Empire.
On with the Crown.
Oh tortor aboue measure.
My father felt this pain▪ when thou had pleasure.
Thy father dyed for piracy.
Oh peace, had he bi••judge himself, he would have showed
He had bin clearer then the Crystal morn!
But wretches sentenced never find defence,
How ever guiltless bee their innocence,
No more did hee, no more shalt thou, no ruth
Pitied his winter age, none helps thy youth.
Oh Lorrique tortor, I feel an Aetna burn
Within my brains, and all my body else
Is like a hill of Ice, all these Belgique seas
That now, surround vs cannot quench this flame
Death like a tyrant seizes me unawares,
My sin•was shrink like leaves parcht with the sun
My blood dissolves, nerues and tendons fail
Each part's disioynted, and my breath expires
Mountsoule to heaven, my body burns in fire.
Hoe's gon.
Go let him come Lorrique
This but the prologue to the'nsuing play.
The first step to revenge, this seane is donne
Father I offer thee thy inurtherers •on.
Princes of Saxony and Austria,
Though your own worcester••sare of sufficient weight
To justify the honourable love borne by Lodowick to bright Lucybell,
Yet since your parents live and as I hear
There is between them some dissention,
Blame vs not for detaining yo• thus long
Till we had notice how the business stood
Your royal entertain great Ferdinand,
Exceeding expectation in our stay,
Bind vs to thanks, and if my brother please
To hold his challenge for a Tournament
In praise of Lucibellas excellence,
No doubt our father and the Austrian duke
Will be in person at so royal sport.
We trust they will.
I doe assure your grace
The Austrian and the duke of Saxony
By true report of pilgrims at my cell
From either of there courts set hetherward
Some six days since.
Thanks Rodorick for this news
They are more welcome then the sad discourse
Of Leningberg our nephews timeless wrake
Which adds sorrow to the mourning g•iefes
Abound in vs for our Duchess death.
I truly Princes, my father has had but hard luck since your
coming to his court, for ought I know you are bred of ill
weather, come before you are sent for, yet if my most gracious
father say you are welcome, I his more gracious son take you
by the hands, though I can tell you my mothers death comes
somewhat near my heart, but I am a prince, and princes have
power more then common people to subdue their passions.
We know your worthiness is experienc't in all true
wisdom.
True, I am no fool, I have bin at Wittenberg, where
wit grows.
Peace thou vnshapen honour, my states shame,
My ages co•sieve, and my black sins curse,
Oh had thou never bin, I had bin then,
A happy childless man, now among men,
I am the most unhappy, one that knows
No end of mine, and of my peoples woes.
I tell you Princess, and most gracious maid;
I doe not wear these sable ornaments
For Isabel• 〈◊〉 death, though she were dear,
Nor are my eyelids overflown with tears,
For Otho of Luningberg, wrecked in the Soun,
Though he were• a•• my hope: but heir's my care,
A wit•esse fool must needs be Prussias h•ire.
Well, and you were not my father,—s'nailes, and I
would not draw rather then put up the fool, would I
might never win this lady at tilt and tournament: •s
Knights, I defy you both, for her; even you Lodowick, that
loves her, and your brother that loves you: look to
me, Stilt, and I have practised these two days: s'nailes god
forgive me to swear, she shall not be carried away so.
We are glad to hear your grace so •esolute.
As I am a Prince, and a D•kes heir, though I say it
my self, I am as full of resolution as the proudest of you
all
I thank Prince Lodowick he he's bound my youth
To bee the conquerors prize, and if my stars
Allott me to be yours, I will be proud,
For how so ere you seem not fashioned
Like me, and cunning Courtiers; I protest,
By some small love I bear thee in mine eye,
Your worthy beauty, wealth and dignity.
Heart you would not unhorse Hercules for her fa∣there,
isle practice again at Dantzike, you say in the Dukes
mead; isle meet thee Medias: ther's my glove•
For a gauntle•, though my father count me a fool, you shall
find me none.
Would I might never find thee any thing,
For thou indeed art nothing in •steam,
My sad soul sinks with sorrow at thy sight,
Health to the right gracious, generous, virtuous,
and valorous Ferdinand Duke of Prussia.
Hermit dost thou not know this young mans face?
I'st not Lorique, that met vs at thy cell
With letters from our brother Luningberg?
It is that gentleman.
I am no l•sse.
thou said thou wast my nephews play fellow,
Appointed to await his virtuous person,
How is it then thou were so ill advised
To take the land away, and forsake thy Lord?
Whom I have never seen, nor never may,
Though in his life my hope and comfort lay.
Be it known right gracious: Lorrique had never so
little grace, as to leave his loved lord for weather or water,
for torture or fire, for death or for life, since I first came to
move in a pilgrims proportion; much disguised, being so
proper a man: but only for those six words; that I was
sent wholly to give notice of his coming.
But thou hast left him now sunk in the sea.
I left the ship sunk, and his highness saved•, for
when all hope had left Master and pilot, sailor and swabber,
I cause my Lord to leap into the cock, and for fear she
should be sunk with too much company; I capered out▪
and cut the cable: rouse, quoth the ship against the rocks,
roomer cry I in the cock, my Lord wept for the comp∣ny:
I laughed to comfort him; last by the power of heaven,
goodness of stars, kindness of winds, mercy of the waives,
our cock and wee were cast a shore under Reeshopscurre,
we clamberd up, but having escaped drowning, were in dan∣ger
of killing.
What there betided you?
Marry 〈◊〉 Lord a young villain, son of a damned
pirate, a maid ravisher.
Be brief, what was he?
Clois Hoffman.
Oh my heart! did the false rebel hurt his sovereigns
son?
No my Lord, the prince so hought and hoft him,
that he had no other help but to his heals, and then I, my
good Lord, being to•footed, •utstript him in running, tripped
him by strength, and in fine, finely cut's throat.
Where is the villains body?
Marry even heaved over the scarr, and sent a swim∣ming
toward Burtholme, his old habitation; if it bee not
intercepted by some Scale, Shark, Sturgeon, or such like.
Where is our nephew?
He intends to stay at the same hermitage, where I
saluted your excellence, with news of my lords excellen∣cies
intent, to visit you▪ for that his apparel is some∣what
sea-sicke, and he wants shift.
A chariot, and rich robes attend Lorrique.
And his rewa•d, be thirteen hundred dollars,
For he hath driven dolor from our heart.
Princes, and Princess, in your kindest love,
Attend our person to the hermitage,
where we shall meet the heir of two great States,
Rich Luningberg, and warlike Prussias,
Otho living, we'll disinherit our fond son:
And bless all Dantzike, by our son elect,
Hermit you have at home, a guest of ours,
Your little cell, is a great princes court;
Had you bin there to entertain young Otho,
He would have took your welcome thankfully,
Where now he mourns, for want of company.
I will go on before my gracious Lord.
Nay I am jealous of my approaching joy,
And fearful, any eye but mine, should gain
The pleasure of my glad divining soul;
Forward come all, in my delight take part,
He that's now glad, adds joy to gladness heart.
If there live ere a surgeon that dare say
He could doe better: isle play Mercury,
And like fond Mercies flea the Quacksaluer•
There were a sort of filthy Mountebanks,
Exp•rt in nothing but in idle words,
Made a days work•, with their incision knives
On my oppressed poor father: silly man,
Thrusting there dastard fingers in his flesh,
That durst not while he lived, behold his face;
I have fitted my anatomy
In a fair• chain to; father this youth scorned
When he was set in an ascending throne,
To have you stand by him; would he could see,
How the case alters, you shall hang by him,
And hang before him to, for all his pride,
Come image of bare death, join side, to side,
With my long injured fathers naked bones;
He was the prologue to a Tragedy,
That if my destinies deny me not,
Shall pass those of Thyestes, Tereus,
Iocasta, or Duke Iasons jealous wife;
So shut our stage up, there is one act done
Ended in Othos death; it was somewhat single;
Isle fill the other fuller, if Lorrique,
That I have late sworn to be murders slave,
Swears hee will protest me to be Othos,
Whom Prussia his uncle unknown loves;
If I be taken for him well: Oh then!
Sweet vengeance make me happiest of all men:
Prussia, I come as comets against change:
As apparitions before mortal ends;
If thou accept me for thy nephew, so;
Uncle, isle uncle thee of thy proud life.
Father farewell, isle to the hermitage,
Where if I be received for Luningberg,
I will have thy dry bones, sanguined all over
With thy foes blood, Rhamnusia help thy priest,
My wrong thou know, my willingness thou see.
Come Stilt, bestir your stumps; you know I must
be a tilter.
I my lord, I know you should be one, but I hope
you are not so mad.
what dost thou count it madness to run a tilt.
I my Lord, for you that cannot sit a hobby, you'll
hardly manage your tilthorse.
Why? they say Stilt, that stone Mares are gentler, see
if thou can get me one of them.
Not before next grass; I could help you now to a
stone mule, a stone ass.
Well, isle try one course with thee at the half pike,
and then go, come draw thy pike.
That's not your fit word; you must say, advance
your pike, and you must be here sir, and here, you'll never
learn for all my teaching.
I have answered you Stilt, that Princes have no need
to bee taught, and I have even determined with my self,
not to run at tilt, least I hazard my horse and harness:
therefore isle to the court, and only see my new cousin,
that they said was drowned: and then retire to my (astle
at Helsen, and there write a new poem, that I have taken
pains in, almost these ten years: It is in praise of pick∣toothes.
That will be excellent my Lord, the barbers will
buy those poems abominably.
Nay sir, isle get a patent from the Duke, my father,
for the Cum Priuilegio for that poem, Ad imprimendum
solum; besides thou shalt have a priniledge, that no man
shall sell tooth pickes without thy seal: my father says I
am a fool, but I think I bestow my time to look out for
setting a new nap upon his threadbare Common wealth:
Who's that knocks? who dares disturb our honourable
meditation? hark Stilt, dost thou see no noise?
No, but I hear a noise.
A hall then; my father and my new cousin: stand
aside, that I may set my countenance, my beard brush and
mirror, Stilt, that set my countenance right to the mirror
of Knight-hood, for your mirror of magistrates is some∣what
to sober▪ how lik'st me?
Oh excellent! heers your casting bottle.
Sprinkle, good Stilt, sprinkle, for my late practise
hath brought me into strange favour: ha mother of me,
thou had almost blinded the eyes of excellence; but
omnia been, let them approach now, and I appear not like
a Prince, let my father cashier me, as some say hee will.
Cashier you? no, doe but manage your body, and
have here, and here your congees, and then quid sequi∣tur,
Stilt knows, and all the court shall see.
Ferdinand by the divine grace, prince of Heidel∣berg
lord of Pomer, and Duke of Prussia, for sundry reasons
h•m moving, the quiet state of his people especially:
which as a witl•sse and insufficient prince, disinherits Ie∣rome
Heidelberg his known son, and adopted Otho of
Iuningberg his sisters son, as heir, immediately to suc∣ceed
after his death in all his provinces. God save Duke
Ferdinand, and Otho his heir.
Amen, Heaven witness, how my heart is pleased,
With the conceit of Prussias after-peace,
By this election.
Why? but hear you father▪
Away, disturb vs not, let's in and feast,
For all our country in our choice is blessed.
Why, but Stilt, what's now to be done Stilt?
Nay that's more then I know: this matter will
trouble vs more then all your poem of picktooths, s'nailes:
you were better be vnknighted then vnprinc'd, I have lost
all my hope of preferment, if this hold.
No more Stilt, I have it here; it is in my head, and out
it shall not come, till red revenge in robes of fire, and mad∣ding
mischief run and rave: they say I am a fool Stilt,
but follow me; isle seek out my notes of Machiauel, they say
hoe's an odd politician.
I faith hoe's so odd, that he hath driven even hone∣sty
from all men's hearts.
Well, sword come forth, and courage enter in,
Breast break with grief; yet hold to be revenged:
Follow me Stilt; widows unborn shall weep,
And beardless boys with armour on their backs
Shall bear vs out, Stilt we will tread on stilts,
Through the purple pavement of the court,
Which shall bee, let me see, what shall it be?
No court, but even cave of misery.
Ther's an excellent speech Stilt, follow me, pursue me,
will accquire,
And either die, or compass my desire.
Oh brave master, not a Lord: O, Stilt will stalk, and
make the earth a stage,
But hee will have thee lord in spite of rage.
Sir since you are content, you here shall find,
A sparing supper, but a bounteous mind:
Bad lodging, but a heart as free, and generous,
As that which is fed with generous blood,
Your hermitage is furnished for a prince.
Last night this roof covered the sacred heads
Of five most noble, fair, and gracious Princes,
Duke Ferdinand himself, and Otho his nephew,
The sons of Saxon, and •he Austrian Princess.
Oh god! that girl, which fled my Court and love,
Making love colour for her heedles flight,
Pardon great prince: are you the Austrian duke?
Hermit I am, Saxons proud wanton sons
Were entertained like Priam's Firebrand
At Sparta: all our State gladly appeared
Like cheerful Lacedemons, to receive
Those Daemons that with magic of their tongues,
Bewitched my Lucibells my Helen's ears.
Who travels so late? who knocks so hard?
Turn to the east end of the Chapel, pray;
We are ready to attend you.
Which is the way to Dantzike?
There is no way to Dantzike you can find
Without a guide thus late, come near I pray,
look to our horses, by your leave master Hermit,
We are soon bidden, and will prove bold guests:
God save you sir.
That should bee Saxons tongue.
Indeed I am the Duke of Saxony.
Then art thou father to lascivious sons,
That have made Austria childless.
O subtle duke, thy craft appears in framing thy ex∣cuse,
Thou dost accuse my young sons innocence:
I sent them to get knowledge, learn the tongues,
Nor to be metamorphis'• with the view
Of flattering beauty, peradventure painted.
No; I defy thee •ohn of Saxony;
My Lucibell for beauty needs no art,
Nor doe I think the virtues of her mind
Ever inclined to this ign•ble course
But by the charms and forcings of thy sons.
Oh would thou durst maintain thy words proud Duke.
I hope great Princes, neither of you dare
Commit a deed so sacrilegious: This holy cell
Is dedicated to the son of peace;
The foot of war never profaned this floor,
Nor doth wrath here with his cons•ming voice
Affright these buildings; charity with prayer,
Humility with abstinence combined,
Are here the guardians of a grieved mind.
Father we obey thy 〈◊〉 voice;
Duke Iohn of Saxony, receive my faith;
Ti•l our ears hear the true course thy so•nes
Have taken with my fond and mis-led child.
I proclaim truce, Why dost thou •ullen stand?
If thou mean peace, give me thy Princely hand.
Thus doe I plight thee troth, and promise peace,
Nay, but thy eyes agree not with thy heart;
In vows of combination, ther's a grace
That shows the intention in the outward face,
Look cheerfully, or I expect no league•.
First give me leave to view a while the person,
Of this He•mer, Austria note him well,
Is he not like your brother Rodorick?
Hoe's like him, but I heard he lost his life
Long since in Persia, by the Sophies wars.
I heard so much my Lords, but that report
Was purely feigned, spread by my erring tongue,
As double as my heart, when I was young▪
I am that Rodorick that aspired your throne;
That vile false brother who with rebel breath,
Drawn sword, and treacherous heart threatened your death▪
My brother I nay, then i'faith old Iohn lay by
Thy sorrowing thoughts, turn to thy wonted vein,
And be mad Iohn of Saxony again.
Mad Rodorick, art alive? my mothers so •nne
Her joy and her last birth; oh she conjure•d me
To use thee thus, and yet I banished thee:
Body of me; I was unkind I know,
But thou deserve it then; but let it go:
Say thou wilt leave this life thus truly idle,
And live a Statesman, thou shalt share in reign,
Commanding all but me thy sovereign.
I thank your Highness; I will think on it:
But for my sins this sufferance is more fit.
Tut, title, tatle, tell not me of sin.
Now Austria once again thy Princely hand:
Isle look thee in the face, and smile, and swear,
If any of my sons have wronged thy child,
Isle help thee in revenging it my self;
But if as I believe they• mean, but honour,
As it appears by these justs proclaimed.
Then thou shalt be content to name him thine,
And thy fair daughter isle account as mine.
Agreed.
Ah Austria! t'was a world when you and I
Ran these Carreers; but now we are stiff and dry.
I am glad you are so pleasant my good Lord.
T'was my old mood, but I was soon turned sad▪
With over grieving for this long lost lad;
And now the Boy is grown, as old as I,
His very face as full of gravity.
Please your Graces enter,
I know the servants that attend one me
By the appointment of Duke Ferdinand
By this have covered.
Why then let's in: brother I trust, and brother
Hold you this hand, Rodorick hold thou the other,
By heaven my heart with happiness is crow'nd,
In that my long lost brother now is found:
so run on fate, my destinies are good,
Revenge hath made me great by shedding blood:
I am supposed the heir of Luningberg,
By which I am of Prussia Prince elect.
Good: who is wronged by this? Only a fool:
And it is not fit that idiots should bear rule.
My Lord I have as you enjoined, enticed Saxons elder
son to talk with you: and here hee comes with his
most excellent, amorous, and admirable Lady.
Hast thou the Hermits weeds for my disguise?
All ready, fit, fit' in the next chamber, your beard is
point-vice, not a hair amiss.
Faithful Lorrique in thy unfaithfulness:
I kiss thy cheek, and give thee in that kiss
The mo•tie of all my earthly bliss.
Good: I am half a Monarch: half a fiend
Blood I begun in and in blood must end
yet this Clois is an honest villain, he's conscience in his kill∣ling
of men: he kills none but his fathers enemies, and there
issue, it is admirable, it is excellent, it is well it is meritorious,
where? in heaven? no, hell.
Now friend, where is prince Otho?
Sad, sir, and grieved.
Why? prithee why?
Alas I know not why.
The hermit Rodorigo talked with him
Somewhat of you, and somewhat of the Duke,
About surprising you and murdering Lodowick:
Or such a thing, nay sure it was such a thing.
Surprising me and murdering Lodowicke.
By whom? by what complot?
Sure by the Duke, the Duke's an odd old lad:
I know, this nigh• ther's set a double guard,
And ther's some trick in that: but patience:
Here comes the Hermit: holy reverent man!
Somewhat important, wings his aged feet
With speedy nimbleness: heaven grant that all be well▪
Princes in pity of your youth, your love,
Your virtues, and what not, that may move ruth,
I offer you the tender of your lives,
Which yet you may preserve: but if you stay,
Death and destruction waits your delay.
Who hath conspired our deaths? speak reuere••
man.
The Duke of Prussia, doting on this face;
Worthy indeed of wonder, being so fair,
This night hath plotted, first to murder you;
The guard are set that you may not escape,
Within, without, and round about the court;
Only one way, thorough Prince Otho his lodging
Is left; here is the key, and for more proof
Of my great zeal and care, on with these robes.
Within are Grecian habits for your heads;
Nay if you love life do not stand amazed,
But take the path toward my hermitage,
Yet I advise you, that you go not in;
There may be plots to, for ought I know;
But turn down by the river, ther's a way
Leads to a little Chapel; in that porch
Stay, till I visit you with better news;
I will but call my brother, and then go.
That were a going never to return:
I'll send him after you, be well assured.
Oh god! the Duke of Prussia grown thus false,
such shows of friendship, and so little faith.
Come Lucibella lets embrace this mean,
Duke Ferdinand shall with a sorrowing heart,
Repent this base dishonourable plot:
Father, our fortunes if they sort aright,
shall with continual thankfulness require
This virtuous and this charitable care:
Farewell: we'll wait thee in the Chapel porch
Bring Prince Medias our kind brother thither,
And thou shalt add good works to charity:
Once more farewell Lorrique; ther's for thee,
Commend me to thy Lord, tell him this wrong
Of his false uncle, sha•l mere full revenge:
But doe to him our duties. Come chaste, fair,
We must not now by 〈◊〉 and turnameut
Maintain thy honour: for thy champion Knight,
Is for'st by treason to unwilling flight.
so run to mischief: Oh my dear Lorrique•
When I have summed up my account of death,
And robed those fathers of there lifes and joy,
That robed me of my joy, my fathers life,
Thus thy hand clasped in mine, we'll walk and meditate,
And boast in the revenges I have wrought;
That done; isle seat thee by m• throne of state,
And make thee rival in those governments,
That by thy secrecy thou li••'•t me to;
Shalt be a Duke at least.
I thank your Grace, but pray resolve me,
what you now intend,
To these three Princes Lodowick, and Medias,
And the thrice beauteous Princess Lucibell.
Death certain: call in Medias, if my plot prove
good, 〈◊〉 make one brother shed the others blood.
I am nimble as your thought, devise, i'll execute
what you command.
A pre•ious villain: a good villain too▪
W•ll if he be no worse; that is doe worse,
And honey me in my death-stinging thoughts,
I will prefer him: he shall be preferred
To hanging peradventure; why not? it is well
His sufferance here may save his soul from hell.
Hee comes; what news my faithful servant? wher's the Prince.
Hoe's talking with the lady Lucibell,
And when I said your Highness sent for him,
Hee 'gan with courtly salutations,
To take his leave and to attend your grace.
Well god-a-mercy friend, thou got me grace:
But more of that at leisure: take this gown;
My cloak, a chair; I must turn melancholy.
Second what ere I say, approve my words,
That we may move Medias to mad rage.
God save your excellence: what sad, dull, heavy?
Or are you now in meditation
Which part to take to morrow at the Tilt?
The mead is ringd with tents of stranger Knights,
Whose rich devices, and caparisons
Exceed the Persian Monark's, when he met
Destruction and pale death sent from the sword
Of Philips son, and his stout Macedons
Cheerely Prince Otho ther's such a warlike sight
That would stir up a leaden heart to fight.
For what?
For honour and fair Luicbell.
Oh Prince Medias! it is ill combined
When honour is with fickle beauty joined.
Where is your most Princely brother?
I cannot tell I left him with his loved Lucibell.
But she has got another love,
Dishonoured all this rich assembly,
Left the m•moriall of such infamy,
As cannot die while men have memory.
How? p•ay you how? what hath the princess done?
she with a Grecian is but new fled hence,
Belike some other love of hers before:
Our tilt and tournament is spoiled and crossed.
The fair we should defend, her faith hath lost.
Fled with a Grecian? saw you them go Prince Otho?
I, I, I saw them go.
And would not stay them?
My true servant knows,
How at the sight of such inconstancy
My gentle heart was smitt with inward grief
And I sunk down with sorrow.
s'death; what path? which way? that I may track her harlot-steps,
Fled now: gone now: isle go seek Lodowicke
Nay then you add an irreligious work,
To there lascivious act; follow your self,
I and my man will bear your company
Lorrique, as I think, thou nam'dst a chapel,
A Hermit, some such thing: I have lost the form.
I heard her say, she could not travel far,
He told her, they would rest the dead of night▪
Near to a chapel, by a hermitage.
Where is that chapel? wher's that hermitage?
If you love honour Princely Luningberg,
Lets to that chapel: if you know the way,
That I may kill our shame, ere it s•e day.
Isle guide you to the chapel, aid your arm▪
In your revenge, against that Grecian,
But for the Lady spare her, she is fair.
I will doe what I can; oh hell of life!
Who, but a fool would strive to win a wife?
shall we call Lodowick?
no•, t'would smite his soul in sunder, split his heart,
If he should hear of such adulterate wrong,
Cover the fault or punish as you please:
Yet I would save her fine, for she deserve•
pity for beanty.
Nothing, no for nothing.
She is as harlots, fair, like gilded tombs
Goodly without; within all rottennes:
shoe's like a painted fire upon a hill,
set to allure the frost-nipt passengers,
And starve them after hope: she is indeed•
As all such strumpets are, Angel in show,
Devil in heart: Come, come if you love me go.
Follow Lorrique; we are in the right way.
To hell I fear: tush let all fear go by,
Whoo'l shun a bad way with good company.
Are you not faint divinest Lucibell?
No, the clear moon strowes silver in our path,
And with her moist eyes weeps a gentle dew
Upon the the spotted pavement of the earth,
Whi•h softens every flower whereon I tread
Besides; all travel in your company
Seems but a walk made in some goodly bower,
Where loves fair mother strips her paramour.
This is the Chapel, and behold a bank,
Covered with sleeping flowers, that miss the Sun:
Shall Wee repose vs till Medias come?
The Hermit will soon bring him, let's sit down▪
Nature, or art hath taught these boughs to spread,
In manner of an arbour o'er the bank.
No, they bow down as veils to shadow you▪
And the fi•sh flowers beguiled by the light
Of your celestial eyes, open there leaves,
And when they entertain the lord of day
You bring them comfort like the Sun in May.
Come▪ come, you men will flatter beyond mean:
Will you sit down? and talk of the late wrong
Intended by the Duke of Prussia?
Fairest forget it, leave till we are clear freed hence,
I will defy him, and cause all the knights
Assembled for our purposed tournament,
To turn there keen swords against his catiue head.
Prithee no more, I feel thy blood turn hot,
And wrath inflames thy spirit, let it cease;
Forgive this fault, convert this war to peace.
O breath sweet touch with what a heavenly charm
Doe your soft fingers my wa•-•houghts disarm,
Prussia had reason to attempt my life
Enchanted by the magic of these looks,
That cast a luster on the blushing stars.
Pardon chaste Queen of beauty, make me proud
To rest my toild head on your tender knee,
My chin with sleep is to my bosom bowed;
Fair if you please a little rest with me.
No, isle be Sentinel; isle watch for fear
Of venomous worms, or wolves, or wolfish thieves:
My hand shall fan your eyes, like the filmed wing
Of drowsy morpheus; and my voice shall sing
In a low compass for a Lucibell.
Sleep sweet, perhaps isle sleep for company.
I thank you; I am drowsy, sing I pray;
Or sleep: doe what you please, I am heavy, I;
God night to all our care: oh! I am blessed
By this soft pillow where my head doth rest.
By my troth I am sleepy too: I cannot sing,
My heart is troubled with some heavy thing.
Rest one these violets, whilst I prepare,
In thy soft slumber to receive a share:
Blush not chaste Moon to see a virgin lie
So near a Prince, it is no immodesty:
For when the thoughts are pure, no time, no place,
Hath power to work fair chastities disgrace;
Lodowick I clasp thee thus, so arm clip arm,
So sorrow fold them that wish true love harm.
Art sure tha'st found them?
Look, are these they?
Adulterer: stiumpet.
Oh!
Oh!
Vnhumane deed to kill both.
Both have abu•'d our glory, both shall bleed,
how now! what have ye done? my Lodowick bleeds
Some savage beast hath fixed his ruthless fang
In my soft body: Lodowick, I faint▪
Dear wake; my Lodowick: alas what means
Your breast to be thus wet? I'st blood or sweat▪
Who troubles me?
Brother.
Who is that? Medias.
I, accursed I,
Wher's the good Hermit? thank him for his love▪
Yet tell him; Ferdinand of Prussia
Hath a long arm; some murderer of his
hath kilt vs sleeping.
Kilt thee? oh no! I trust the careful destinies deny
So hard a fate: it is I alone am kilt.
Come Lodowick, and close up my night-vaild eyes
That never may again behold the day.
What means Medias?
Hold me not Prince Otho.
I will revenge my self upon my self▪
For Parricide for damned parricide:
I have kilt my brother sleeping in the arms
Of the divinest form that ever held breath.
I have kilt loves Queen defaced with my foul hand,
The goodliest frame that ever nature built
And driven the graces from the mansion
Wherein they have continued from their birth;
She now being dead, she'll dwell no more on earth.
What moved you to it brother?
Jealous rage, suspicion by Prince Otho,
That Lucibell had fled with a base Greek,
Oh me accursed! I am borne to shame.
But I am wretcheder, that from the lou•
Devoted to the house of Saxony,
Have thus begot this monster cruelty:
I lay within an arbour, whence I saw
The princess, and your self in this disguise
Departing secretly my uncles court:
I judged you for a Greek as you appeared.
Told Prince Medias of your secret flight;
And hee led on by fury followed you
Where thus deceased by night and your attire,
Hath robed your heart of life, his own of joy.
Forgive me brother, pardon fairest maid,
And ere the icy hand of ashy death
Foe•d your fair bodies in this sable veil;
Discover why you put on this disguise.
To scope the lustful Duke of Prussia,
Who purposed this night to murder me,
And ravish her whom death hath made his pray
My Lucibell, whose lights are masked with clouds
That never will be cleared.
My uncle, fie, who buz'd into your head
This damned lie?
it's no lie.
No lie: it is true, it is true,
The reverent Hermit Rodorick told it vs.
The Hermit is a villain damned in hell
Before the worlds creation, if he see it
My Princely uncle purposed such a thought.
Look to the Princess, ther's life in her:
Cheer up your heart Prince Lodowicke, courage man.
Your being of comfort may recover her,
While I bring forth the Hermit and disprove
This false assertion: Rodorick is a slave
A vile and irreligious hypocrite,
No Hermit, but a devil if he dare
Affirm such falsehood of Duke Ferdinand.
Rodorick is not as you report him sir,
Nor did he ere•belie Duke Ferdinand.
No did? why then did you maliciously
Advise Prince Lodowick and fair Lucibell
To fly the Prussian court this dismal night.
Who I? I spake not with them,
Yes ye did.
Where was it that he spake with you? tell vs where?
At Dantzike in the Duke of Prussias court.
Who heard him besides you?
The Princess Lucibell.
As heaven shall help my fleeting soul, I did.
why speaks my dukedoms hope in hollow sounds?
Look up fair child heir's Saxony and I
Thy father, Lucibella look on me;
I am not angry that thou fled'st away
But come to grace thy nuptials; prithee speak.
Father I thank you: Lodowick reach me thy hand
How cold thou art; death now assails our hearts,
Having triumphed over the outward parts;
Farewell a while, we die but part, to meet
Where joys are certain, pleasures endless, sweet.
Father, this latest boon of you I crave,
Let him, and me, lie in one bed, and grave.
Oh me! oh miserable wretched me.
Hover a little longer blessed soul,
glide not away too fast: mine now forsaks his earthly man∣zion
and on hopes gilt wings will gladly mount with thine,
where Angels sing celestial ditties to the King of Kings.
brother adieu, your rashness I forgive, pardon me father,
pardon; Austria your daughter is become a bride for death:
the dismal even before her wedding day. Hermit God
pardon thee: thy double tongue hath cause this error:
but in peace farewell. Hee that lifts vs to Heaven keep
thee from Hell.
Oh strange conjecture! what should move this Prince
To charge me with such horrid cruelty?
Isle tell thee hypocrite.
Stay Medias stay,
〈◊〉 is thy uncle Rodorigo, and besides,
My hon or and Duke Austria's shall bee gaged,
He never parted from our company in his own hermitage•
Since day declined, and glimmering twilight ushered in the night.
Not from his hermitage?
No not he.
•'st possible?
By Heaven he did not.
Then there is villainy, practice, and villainy
Medias hath bin wronged and drawn to kill
His natural brother, with him to destroy
The rarest piece of natures workmanship,
No doubt by practise and base villainy
The Hermit not at court? strange! wondrous!
Oh for my fonne, and Austria's worthy child.
Thou weep in scorn, and very tear of thine
Cou•rs a smile: Saxony, I defy
All truce, all league of love, guard thee proud Duke;
Thy sons have made me childless; Isle have thee
Con•ort in death with my wronged girl and me.
Help Prince Medias: Hermit, oh the Heavens!
The Austrian Duke sinks down upon the earth.
Proud Iohn of Saxony: hast thou no wound?
Not any Austria; neither touched I thee.
Somebody touched me home: vain world farewell
Dying I fall on my dead Lucibell.
Sir what are you that take on you to part?
It's by your weapon that the Duke is fallen.
If I thought so, i'd fall upon the point,
But I am innocent of such an ill:
Kill my good kinsman, Duke of Austria;
Then were Prince Otho of Luningberg set down
In sad despairs black book to rave and die;
But I am free from such imprety.
Are you Prince Otho of Luningberg?
He is, and heir apparent to Duke Ferdinan•
May be the Moon deceives me, and my grief•
As well in the distinguishing of sounds,
As sight: I have heard of young Luningberg,
And seen him to at Hoffmans overthrow,
He looked not like you, neither spake like you.
Father, it is he: Lorrique his man attends him,
That fellow which is all composed of mirth
Of mirth? of death: why should I think of mirth
After so foul a murder? come lend hands
To give this Princely body funeral rites,
That I may sacrifice this hand and heart
For my peace-offerings on their sepulchers.
Nay, boy, thou shall not leave old Saxony
Childless for all this sorrow: Prince, and if Otho
Help in my son with noble Austria,
Lodowick shall be my burden: brother yours
The lovely but the luckless Lucibell.
So tread a heavy measure; now lets go
To inter the dead, our hearts being dead with woe.
Ther's life in Lucibell, for I feel
A breath, more odoriferous then balm
Thirle through the corrall pore•s of her lips,
Apparent signs of life, her pu•ses beat;
Oh if I could but yet recover her,
T'would satisfy the State of Austria,
That else would be disturbed for want of heirs
Heaven be propitious, guide my artless hand,
To preserve fainting life in this clear form.
Grant this thou soul of all Divinity,
And I will strive what ever mortal may
To serve thee on my knees both night and day.
Tarry Prince Otho and see their bodies balm'd,
I pray you think me not in passion dull;
I must withdraw, and weep, my heart is full.
Oh reverent man, thou bear the richest fruit;
That ever fell in the vnripired spring,
Go lay her soft, she had ill fatero fall;
But rich or fair or strong, death swallows all,
Hole•! Lorrique, leave our horse; draw near.
Help me to sing a hymn unto the fates
Composed of laughing interiections.
Why my good Lord? what accidents
Have chance it, that tickle so your spleen?
Oh my dear self: thou trusty treasurer of my re∣avenge•
Kneel down, and at my bidding kiss the earth;
And on her cold ear whisper this strict charge:
That she provide the best of her perfumes,
The fat of Lambs raped from the bleating Ewes,
The sweetest smelling wood she can devise;
For I must offer up a sacrifice,
To blessed occasion that hath seconded
With opportune means my desire of wreak▪
Now I have kis't the earth, let me partake
In your great joy, that seems to exceed.
Are Lodowick, and the Princess murdered?
Tic done, go, hie thee to Prince Ferdinand;
Tell him how misadventure and mistrust
Hath kilt Prince Lodowick and bright Lucibell:
By Prince Medias hand: add to that chance,
Another unexpected accident:
Say that the Dukes of Austria and Saxony,
Being by the Hermit Rodorick entertained,
And hearing outcries in the dead of night,
Came and beheld the tragic spectacle,
Which sight did so enrage the Austrian Duke,
That he, assailed the Saxon, but fell slain,
On his 〈◊〉 daughter, now deflowered by death.
Is Austria then slain by Saxony?
Come, come, hoe's dead, either by him or me,
No matter, hoe's gone: ther's more to go.
Run with the news; away.
Father, set you the army in qeraye, while I invoke:
The General Folks: Fibs, forman, and
Friends all, Officers ail, help to marshall; Prince
Ierom my Lord shall remunerate that, is shall be
Full of thanksgiving, while nature is able to
Nourish, or sustain; Father you have order to stay the
rest, be sententious, and full of circumstance I advise you;
and remember this, that more then mortality fights on
our side; For we have treason and iniquity to maintain
our quarrel.
Ho! what say my son? treason and ini∣quity?
Reason, and equity I meant Father; ther's little
controuersity in the words: but like a Captain courage∣os,
I pray go forward, remember the place you are, in no
more, but this; the days of old, no more, but that; and
the glory Father; Knighthood at least, to the utter defa∣cing
of you and your posterity, No more but so.
Well, go thy ways: thou art able to put fire
into a Flint stone; thou hast as rheumatic a tongue to
persuade as any is between Pole and Pomer; but thou art
even kitt after kind, I am thy father, and was infamous
for my exprobations, to discourage a dissembly of tall
soldiers before thou w•rt borne, and I have made them
stand to it tooth and nail; how say you, most valiant and
reprobate Country men: have ye not heard I have bin a
stinger, a tickler, a wormer.
Yet; noble, ancient Captain Stilt, ye have re∣moved
men's hearts I have heard that of my father (God
rest his soul,) when ye were but one of the common all
soldiers that served old Sarloys in Norway.
I then was, and Sarloys was; a gentleman would
not have given his head for the washing; but hee is cut
of, as all valiant cavaliers shall; and they be no more nag∣ligent
of themselves; But to the purpose: wee are dissem∣bled
together, and fallen into ba•tail beray in the behalf
Prince Ierom a virtuous Prince, a wise Prince, and a most
respectless Prince; my son Timothies master, and the un∣lawful
heir of this land. Now sir the old Duke has put out
a declamation, and says our rising is no other then a re∣surrection,
for the Prince inspires not against his father;
but the Duke inspires against his son, using him most natu∣rally,
charitably, and abominably, to put him from inter∣cession
of the crown; wherefore as ye bee true men,
and obstinate subjects to the State uncover your heads, and
cast up your caps and cry a Ierom, a Ierom,
Om, A Ierom, a Ierom, a Ierom.
Most noble Countrymen I cannot but cond le in
joy, and smile in tears to see you assembled in my right,
but this is the lamentation that I poor Prince must
make, who for my fathers proclamation am like for to
loose my head; except you stand to me, for they are com∣ming
on with bows, bills, and guns, against vs: but if
you be valiant, and stand to me lustily, allth' earth 'shall roar
but we'll have victory.
Upon those traitors valiant gentlemen:
Let not that bea•• the multitude confront,
With garlicke-breath and their confused cries
The Majesty of me their awful Duke,
Strike their Typhoean body down to fire
That dare against vs, their sovereign conspire.
Come, come, you shall have your hands full, and you
Come where we have to doe, stand to it Stilt.
stand to it? heir's the father and the son will stand,
though all the rest fly away.
I warrant you Prince, when the battle comes
to joining, my son and I will bee invisible, and they over∣come
vs, isle give you leave to say I have no pith in me; up∣on
um true Prince upon um.
I thought twou'd come to that;
I thought we should bring
The false Prince on his knees.
What means my Dukedoms hope to turn thus
base? arise, and smite thy foe•s.
I see them not my most honoured uncle; pity I beseech
These silly people, that offend as babes,
Not understanding, how they doe •ffend:
And s•ffer me chief agent in this wrong,
To plead their pardons with a peaceful tongue.
We scorn pardons, Peace and pity; We'll
have a Prince of our own choosing, Prince Ierom.
I, I, Prince lorom or no body; be not obstacle old
Duke, let not your own flesh and blood bee inherited of
your Dukedom, and a stranger displaced in his retority:
for and you doe, wee will take no comparison of you and
your army, but fall upon you like temperance and light∣ning.
Upon your peril; gentlemen assail.
If any bosom meet the brunt of war,
Mine shall be first opposed; these honest men
That rise in arms for my young Cozens right
Shall be Protected whilst Prince Charles can stand.
Why see now what a thing Majesty is;
Stilt and the rest of my good people; my cousin)
Charles looking but in the face of our excellence
Cannot choose but take our part.
Nay but trust him not my Lord; take heed of him,
Aware your enemies at any hand.
Why should you make this intercession
For these base abjects, whose presumptuous hearts
Have drawn their rebel bodies against their head:
Entreat not for them, they are all but dead.
Forbear a little worthy Countrymen.
Nay we deny that, wear none of your Countrymen;
you are an are•ant arrant Alien.
True son uncere peregrination, and one that was not
borne within our Dukes damnation, and therefore not to
be remitted to any vpstantiall degree of office amongst vs:
that's the fine, that's the confusion of all.
But hear me.
I, I▪ pray hear him; nay I charge you all upon pain
of death that you hear my cozen.
he Well wee will are him: come on, speak, what
wlil ye say?
O I beseech you save your lives and goods,
For the Dukes squadrons armed with wrath and death,
Watch but the signal when to cease on you,
That can no more with stand their approved strengths
Then sparrows can contend with towering hawks:
Or against the Eagles air•:
This act of yours by gathering to a head,
Is treason capital, and without grace
Your lives are forfeit to extremest law.
Mas he says true son; but what's the remedy?
None at all father, now wee are in, wee must go
through stitch.
Yes, there is remedy: cast your weapons down,
And arm your selves with mercy of your Prince
Who like a gracious shepherd ready stands
To take his lost sheep home in gentle hands.
As for your Prince, I will for him entreat
That he may be restored again in love,
And unto offices of dignity, as either Taster,
Sewer, Cupbearer, the place himself thinks
Fittest for his state, and for my part when
That unhappy time of Princely Ferdinands
Sad death shall, come:—
Which moment:—
But should I as I say behold that hour,
Although I am elected for your Prince,
Yet would I not remove this gentleman,
Bat rather serve him as his councellor.
Give me your hand of that Cozen; well said, now
get a pardon for me, and my merry men all; and then let
me be my fathers Taster, being the office belonging to his
eldest son; I Being the same, and then you shall see me
behave my self, not as a rebel, or reprobate, but as a most
reasonable Prince, and sufficient subject.
Well since my Lord he's said the word, bring that
of spake he to pass and ye shall have my word too, and old
Stilt my fathers, being a man of good reproach I tell you,
and condemnation in his country.
I that I am my Lord, I have lived in name and shame
•hese threescore, and seven winters, all my neighbours can
•are me testament, and accord.
Well, rest ye quiet; Sovereign on my knees
I beg your Highness grant to there request:
Suppose them silly, simple, and your own;
To shed their blood were just, yet rigorous,
The praise of Kings is to prove gracious.
True soul of honour, substance of my self,
Thy merit wins thee mercy, go in peace,
Lay by your unjust arms, live by your sweat,
And in content the bread of quiet eat.
Godsaue Duke Ferdinand.
Pray Father, forgive me, and my man,
And my mans father by our single selves;
For we have bin the capital offenders.
I truly my Lord, we raised the resurrection,
I pardon all; give thee my Tasters place:
Honour this Prince that hath thus won you grace.
Y-S. God save Duke Ferdinand, and Prince Otho.
I and me too.
And Prince Ierom too; well son, isle leave thee a
Courtier still, and get me home to my own desolation,
where isle labour to compel away excessity: and so fareyee
well.
This business over: worthy nephew Charles,
Let vs go visi• the sad Saxon Duke,
The mourning Hermit,
That through affection wrought his brothers fall.
Isle wait your Highness to that house of woe,
Where sad mischance sits in a purple chair,
And vnderncath her beetle cloudy brows
smiles at unlocked for mischsefes; oh there
Doth grief vnpainted, in true shape appear.
Shrill trumpets sound a flourish
For the cries of war are drowned.
Nay but cozen cozen, i'st not necessary I wait
Upon mine own father? and stilt upon me?
It's most expedient, be obsequious.
No doubt his •xcellence will l••e that well.
Dieu vou guard Monsieur.
Welcome my friend, hast any suit to me?
Away Monsieur, if you be the grand Prince•
Legitimate of Prussia, I have for tender
To your Excellence de service of one poor
Gentle home of Champaign.
I am not he you look for gentlemen,
My cozen is the true and lawful Prince.
I sir I am the legitimate, and am able to entertain
A gentleman though I say it and he be of any quality,
Lorrique, now or never play thy part:
This Act is even our Tragedies best hart.
Let me alone for plots, and villainy,
Only commend me to this fool the Prince.
I tell thee, I am the Prince, my cozen knows it,
That's my cozen, this is stilt my man.
A vostree service Monsieur most Genereux.
No doubt he is some cunning gentleman
Your Grace may doe a deed befitting you
To entertain this stranger.
It shall bedone cozen; isle talk with him a little
And follow you, go commend me to my father
Tell him I am coming, and Stilt, and this stranger, bee
mindful cozen, as you will answer to my Princely in∣diguation.
Well sir, I will be careful, never doubt;
Now scarlet Mistress from thick sable clouds
Thrust forth thy blood-staind hands, applaud my plot,
That giddy wonderers may amazed stand
While death smites down suspectles Ferdinand.
Sweet Prince I scarce understand this fellow well,
but I like his conceit in not trusting Prince otho; you must
give him the remove that's flat.
I be, gar, hee be chose again you, hee give you good
word so be dat, but he will have one fisgig or dia by gar
for company on in principality be no possible.
Well, I apprehend thee, I have a certain Princely
feeling in my self that he loves me not.
Hold ye there my Lord, I am but a poor fellow
and have but a simple living left me; yet my brother were
he a very natural brother of mine own, should hee b•e
dopted, I would dopt him, and herrite him, i'll fit him.
I but how Stilt, but how?
By gar my Lord, I will tell you fine knacks, for make
him kick up his heals, and cry wee, or be gar
I be hang, and so shall I be to, and for de grand love I bear
you, for de Lady Issabella's sake your most tres-excellent
Lady moder,
Did, thou know her French doctor? did thou?
I as beggars doe the Ladies that are their Almesgi∣givers.
By gar you lye, like Iacknape, I love de Lady.
With a boon coeur, and for her sake here take dissame, and
dis same, put dis in de cup, where de competitor Prince
otho shall drink; by gar it will poison him bravely.
That were excellent my Lord, and it could be done,
and no body know on it.
I, but he always drinks in my Fathers cup.
I so let be, let de Duke drink a de same.
What poison my father? no, I like not that so well.
You shall drink too, and I too and when wee bee
sick, as we shall baue as shall have a petit rumble in de belly; dan take a
dis same, and give your sadra dis: but your cozin none of
it, and bygar no body shall be dead, and kick, and cry oh,
but Otho.
That's excellent, master;
This is the poison then, and this is the medicine?
I dat be true.
Well Physician, attend in my chamber here, till Stilt
and I return; and if I pepper him not, say I am not worcester∣thy
to be called a Duke, but a drawlatch.
Farewellawe, and iebbit a vow; and wee speed by
thy practice we'll crush a cup of thine own country
wine.
Go speed to spoil your selves.
Doctor lie there, Lorrique, like thy self appear
So now isle post vuto the Hermitage, and smile
While silly fools act treason act through my guile.
See Princely uncle black dormitory,
Where Austria and Prince Lodowick are laid
On the cold bed of earth, where they must sleep
Till earth and ayre, and sea consume by fire.
Their rest be peace, their rising glorious;
Sad mourners, give your partners leave to kneel,
And make their offertory on this tomb,
That does contain the honourablest earth
That ever went upright in Germany,
Welcome Duke Ferdinand, come, come, keel, kneel▪
Thus should each friend another sorrow feel.
Is Lucibella in this monument?
No, shoe's recovered from deaths violence;
But through her wounds and grief distract of sense.
Heaven help her, here she comes;
Kneel still, I p•ay.
Oh me accursed I why live I this black day▪
Oh a sword, I pray you kill me not,
For I am going to the rivers side.
To fetch white lilies, and b•ew daffodils
To stick in Lodowicks bosom, where it bled,
And in mine own; my true love is not dead,
No you're deceiud in him, my father is:
Reason he should, he made me run away▪
And Lodowick too, and you Medias too;
Alack for woe, yet what a the remedy?
We must run all away: yet all must dye.
It is so, I wrought it in a sampler,
It was heart in hand, and true loves knots and words,
All true stitch by my troth: the posy thus:
No flight dear love but death, shall sever vs;
Nor that did not neither; he lies here does he not?
Yes lovely madam, pray be patient.
Iso I am, but pray tell me true,
Could you be patient, or you, or you, or you,
To loose a father and a husband too:
Ye could, I cannot; open, door here hoe!
Tell Lodowick, Lucibell would speak with him;
I have news from heaven for him, he must not die,
I have robed Prometheus of his mooing fire:
Open the door, I must come in, and will,
Isle beat my self to ayre, but Isle come in.
Alas her tender hands smiting the ston•
Beweep their mistress rage in tears of blood.
Fair Lady be of comfort, it is in vain
To invoke the dead to life again.
I gentle Daughter be content, I pray▪
Their fate is come, and ours is not, far off.
Here is a hand over my fate hath power▪
And I now sink under the stroke of death,
But that a purer spirit fills my breast
And guides me from the footsteps of despair,
A heavenly motion full of charity,
Your self to kill you self were such a sin
As most divines hold deadly.
I but a knave may kill one by a trick,
Or lay a plot, or so, or cog, or prate,
Make strife, make a mans father hang him,
Or his brother, how think you goodly Prince,
God give you joy of your adoption;
May nor tricks be used?
Alas poor Lady.
I thats true, I am poor, and yet have things,
And gold ring, and amidst the leaves greene
Lord how dee, well I thank god, why thats well,
And you my Lord, and you too; never a one weep,
Must I shed all the tears? well he is gone,
And he dwells here ye said, ho i'll dwell with him,
Death, dastard, Devil, robber of my life
Thou base adulterer, that partst man and wife
Come I defy thy darts.
O sweet for bear.
For pities sake a while her rage restrain
Last she doe violence upon herself.
O never fear me, there is somewhat cri••
Within mono: tells me there's knaves abroad
Bids me be quiet, lay me down and sleep
Good night good gentlefolkes, brother your hand,
And yours good father, you are my father now,
Doe but stand here, l'fe sun a little course
At base, or barley-breake, or some such toy,
To catch the fellow, and come back again,
Nay look thee now, let go, or by my troth
Isle tell my Lodowick how ye use his love:
So now god-buye, now god-night indeed:
Lie further Lodowick▪ take not all the room,
Be not a churl, thy Lucibell doth come.
Follow her brother, follow son Mathies,
Be careful guardians of the troubled maid;
While I con•err with Princely Ferdinand
About an embassy to Aüstria,
With true reports of there disastrous haps.
Well, I will be her guardian and her guide,
By me her senses have bin weakened,
But i'll contend with charitable pain,
To serve her, till they be restored again.
A virtuous, noble resolution.
Worthy Prince Rodorigo, when tempestuous woe
Abates her violent storm, I shall have time
To chide you for unkindness, that have lived
In solitary life with vs so long.
Believe me Saxon Prince you did vs wrong:
Would I might never live in no worse state;
For contemplation is the path to heaven.
My new conversing in the world is proved
Luckless and full of sorrow; fare-ye-well
My heavens, alone, all company seems hell.
My nephew call for winemy soul is dry
I am sad at sight of so much misery.
Is the Dukes taster there?
I am at hand with my office.
Fill for the Duke good cozen, taste it first.
I have no mind to it Stilt, for all my antidote.
I warrant you Master let Prince Otho drink next,
Here cozen, will you begin to my father?
I thank you kindly, i'll not be so bold,
It is your office; fill unto my Lord.
Well god be with it, it's gon down, and now isle
send the medicine after; Father pray drink to my cozen
for hee is so mannerly that he will not drink before you.
Pray ye doe my Lord, for Prince Otho is best worcester∣thy
of all this company to drink of that cup, which and
he doe, I hope he shall ne'er drink more.
Good for tune after all this sorrow Saxony.
O worthy Ferdinand, fortune and I are parted, she
has played the minion with me, turned all her favours in
to frowns, and in scorn robed me of all my hopes, and in
one hour o'er turned me from the top of her proud
wheel.
Build not on fortune, shoe's a sickle dame
And those that trust unto her sphere are fools.
Fill for his Excellence.
Here cozen for your Excellence, pray drink you to
the Duke of Saxony.
Not I kind cozen, I list not to drink.
Gods Lady, I think Stilt, wee are all undone, for I
feel a iumbling worse and worse.
O give the Duke some of the medicine
What medicine talk thou of? what ails my son?
O lord, father, and ye mean to be a lives man take
some of this.
Why? this is deadly poison unprepared.
True, but it was prepared for you and me by an ex∣cellent
fellow, a french Doctor?
I, he is one that had great cqre of you.
Villain what was he? drink not Saxony
I doubt I am by treason poisoned.
Heaven keep that fortune from my dread Lord.
Treason ye Princes, treason to the lives
Of Ferdinand the D•ke of Prussia
My Princely master! Otho of Luningberg
Who should intend vs treason?
This fond Prince.
Never to you Father, but to my cozen Charles▪
indeed I meant to poison him, but I have pepperd my
self.
I never gave thee cause.
That's nothing to the purpose, but my Lord took
occasion by the council of a French Doctor.
Physicians for the Duke, •y uncle faints.
Surgeons for the Prince, my master falls.
Call no Physicians, for I feel it too late,
The subtle poison mingled with my blood
'Nums all the passages, and• nimble death
Fleets on his p•rple currents to my heart.
Father, I am dying too, oh now I depart,
Be good to Stilt my man, he was accessory
to all this.
I truly: was I sir therefore I hope you'll be good
to me, I helped to mingle the poison as the French Doctor,
and my master charged me.
What's that French Doctor?
What's become of him?
Wee left him in the court in my masters cham∣ber.
I sir woe worth him, farewell Stilt, farewell fathers
I ask you pardon with repentant eyes;
Fall stars, O Stilt, for thus thy master dyes.
Take hence that maytor for the fool his man.
I pray provide for me sit;
Let him be tortured, then upon a wheel
broke like a traitor and a murderer.
O lord sir. I meant you no hurt, but to Prince Charles
Away, distur be vs not with idle talk.
Provide quoth a• and you call this providing, pray
let me, provide for my self, alas my poor father, he will
creep upon crutches into his grave when, he hears his
proper'st Stilt is cut off by the stumps.
Hence with that fellow.
Pray, not so hasty, you would scarce bee
so forward, and you were going as I am, to the gal∣lowes.
How cheers my royal uncle •
Like ship that having long contended with
The waives, is at last with one proud billow
Smite into the ruthless swallow of the sea.
For thee alas I perceive this plot was lay de;
But heaven had greater mercy-on •hy youth,
And one my people, that shall find true rest
Being with a Prince so wise and virtuous blessed.
Farewell most noble Iohn of Saxony,
Bear thy unmatched grief with a mind bent
Against the force of all temptations;
By my example Princely brother, see,
How vain our lives and all our glories bee.
God for thy mercy! treason upon treason,
How now young Otho what art thou poisoned too?
Would God I were, but my sad stars reserve
This simple building for extremer ruin:
Oh that French doctor.
I that worst of hell.
No torment shall content vs in his death.
Nay soft and fair, let him be taken first;
How now sad brother, are you come to see
This Tragic end of worthy Ferdinand?
I heard of it too soon, and come too late.
Well brother leave the Duke, and waite on me▪
Medias, and the heartgreiu'd Lucibell
Shall go with vs to Wittenberg, and shun
That fatal land filled with destruction.
But Lucibella like a chased hind
Flies through the thickets, and neglects the briars,
After her runs your Princely son Medias,
As much disturbed, though not so much distract,
Vowing to follow her, and if he can,
Defend her from despairing actions.
And we will follow them, Prince Otho adieu
Care goes with vs, yet we leave grief with you,
Inter your uncle, punish traitors crimes,
Look to your person▪ hese are dangerous times,
Lords take this body, bear it to the court,
And all the way sound a sad heavy march,
Which you may truly keep, then people tread
A mournesfull march indeed,
Go on before, isle stay a while, and weep
My tributary tears paid on the ground
Where my true joy your Princemy uncle fell:
Isle follow to drive from you all distress
And comfort you, though I be comfortless.
Art not thou plumped with laughter my Lorrique,
All this excellent, but worthy Lord,
There is an accident this instant chanc'st
Able to overthrow in one poor hour
As well your hopes as these assurances.
Whats that Lorrique? what can fortune doe
That may divert my stray•e of policy.
You know all Prussia take you for the son
Of beauteous Martha,
I they suppose me to be Otho her son,
And son to that false Duke whom I will kill
Or curse my stars
His star is sunk already, death and he
Have vowed an endless league of amity.
Had I Briareus hands, i'd strine with heaven
For executing wrath before the hour,
But wishes are in vain, hoe's gone.
Our son is somewhat slack as wee conceive
By this delaying, while our heart is feared,
And our eyes dim'd with expectation
As are the lights of such as on the beach
With many a longing, yet a little proof
Stand waiting the return of those they love.
His Excellence no doubt hath great affairs
But his familiar friend Lorrique is come.
kneel not Lorrique, I prithee glad my heart
With thy tongues true report of my son Otho
Whom since his Princely Father is decea'st
I am come from oppressed with grief
In person to salute him for our Duke.
Your mother like affection, and high care,
His H•igh•es doth return with dut•os thanks
Deferring pardon of your excellence,
In that he did not first salute your grace:
But dis••al accidents and bloody deeds,
Poisoning streasons, so disturb this state
Chiefly this gentle mind since the late death
Of your right princely brother Ferdinand
That like the careful Captain of a band
He is compelled to bee the last in field;
Yet he protests by me, and I for him:
That no soft rest shall enter his grecu'd eyes
Till he behold your presence, more desired
Then the large Empire of the wide earth;
Only he prays that you would take your rest
For in your soft content his heart is blessed.
Spread me a Carpet on the humble earth:
My hand shall be the pillow to my head.
This stepmy bolster, and this place my bed.
Your Highness will take harm▪
Nay, never fear.
A heart with sorrow filled sleeps any where,
Will our son come to night?
Madam hee will.
See our train lodged, and then Lorrique attend
For captain of the guard; that wait on vs,
Go all away, no body stay with me
Except our son, come if we chance to call,
Trouble vs not, god night unto you all.
Quo fugiat mortal genm? nil denique tutum est,
Crudelis name morsomnia false secat?
Nil durum, nil non mortise penetrabile telis,
Omnia vi demit, morse vio •nesa sua.
Tic true, the wise, the fool, the rich, the poor
The fair, and the deformed fall; their life turns
Ayre: the King and Captain are in this alike
None hath free hold of life, but they are still
When death heavens steward comes, tenants at will.
I lay me down, and rest in thee my trust,
If I wake never more, till all flesh rise
I sleep a happy sleep, sin in me dyes.
Art sure she is a sleep!
I cannot tell, be not too hasty.
She stirs not, she is fast.
Sleep sweet fair Duchess, for thou sleep thy last:
Endymions love, muffle in clouds thy face,
And all ye yellow tapers of the heaven
Veil your clear brightness in Cimerian mistmis;
Let not one light my black deed beautiste;
For with one stroke virtue and honour dyes.
And yet we must not kill her in this kind:
Weapons draw blood, blood shed will plainly prove
The worthy Dntchesse, worthless of this death
Was murdered, and the guard are witnesses,
None entered but our selves.
Then strangle her, here is a towel fit.
Good: kneel and help, compass her neck about,
Alas poor Lady thou sleep here secure
And never dream of what thou shalt endure.
Nay, good my Lord dispatch.
What ruthless hind
Shall I wrong nature that did ne'er compose
One of her sex so perfect? prithee stay,
Suppose we kill her thus about her neck,
Circles of purple blood will change the hue
Of this white porphyry and the red lines
Mixed with a deadly black, will tell the world
She dyed by violence, then t'will be inquired
And we held ever hateful for the act.
Then place beneath her nostrils this small box
Containing such a powder that hath power,
Being set on fire to suffocate each sense
Without the sight of wound, or show of wrong.
That's excellent, fetch fire, or doe not, stay:
The candle shall suffice, yet that burns dim;
And drops his waxen tears as if it mourned
To be an agent in a deed so dark.
Will you confound your self by dotage speak,
S'wounds isle confound her, and she linger thus.
Thou were it as good, and better,—note my words:
Run unto the top of dreadful scarre,
And thence fall headlong on the under rocks,
Or set, thy breast against a cannon fired,
When iron death flies thence on flaming wings,
Or with thy shoulders, Atlas like attempt,
To bear the ruins of a falling tower,
Or swim the Ocean; or run quick to hell;
(as dead assure thy self no better place)
Then once look frowning on this angels face
Confound her? black confusion be my grave
Whisper one such word more, thou die base slave.
I have done, isle honour her if you command.
She stirs, and when she wakes observe me well,
Sooth up what ere, I say, touching Prince Otho.
Prince Otho, is our son come? who's there Lore∣rique?
What shall I answer her?
Whose that thou talk with?
The most indebted servant to your Grace
Of any creature underneath the Moon.
I prithee friend be brief, what is thy name?
I know thee not, what business hast thou here?
Art thou a messenger come from our son?
If so acquaint vs with the news thou bring.
I saw your Highness son, Lorrique here knows,
the last of any living.
Living? heaven help,
I trust my son he has no commerce with death.
Your son no doubt is well, in blessed state.
My heart is smitten through thy answer,
Lorrique, where is thy gracious Lord?
In heaven I hope.
True madam, he did perish in the wrack
When he came first by sea from Lubecke haven.
What false impostor then hath mock't my care?
Abused my Princely brother Ferdinand?
Gotten his Dukedom in my dead sons name?
I grant him an impostor, therein false
But when your Highness hears the circumstance,
I know your wisdom and meek piety
Will Judge him well deserving in your eyes.
What can be said now I have lost my son?
Or how can this base two-tongu'd hypocrite
Excuse concealing of his masters death.
Unhappy Martha, in thy age undone,
Robbed of a husban'd, cheated of a son.
Hear me with patience for that pities sake
You showed my captive body, by the tears
You shed, when my poor father dragd to death
Endured all violence at their hands:
By all the mercies poured on him and me
That like cool rain somewhat allayed the heate
Of our sad torment, and red sufferings;
Here me but speak a little to repay
With gratitude the favours I received.
Art thou the luckless son of that sad man
Lord of Burtholme some time admiral?
I was his only son, whom you set free,
Therefore submissively I kneel and crave,
You would with patience hear your servant speak;
Be brief, my swollen heart is at point to break.
I stood upon the top of the high scarre,
Where I beheld the splitted ship let in
Devouring ruin in the shape of waives,
Some got on Rafts, but were as soon cast off
As they wear seated; many strid the mast,
But the seas working was so violent,
That nothing could preserve them from their fury,
They did and were entombed in the deep.
Except some two the surges washed a shore
Prince Charles being one, who on Lorriques back
Hung w••h clasped hands, that never could unfold,
Why not as well as he Lorrique doth live,
Or how was he found clasped upon his back
Except he had had life to fold his hands.
Madam, your Highness errs in that conceit,
For men that dye by drowning, in their death,
Hold surely what they clasp, while they have breath.
Well he held me, and sunk me too.
Isle witness, when I had recovered him
The Princes head being split against a Rock
Past all recover, Lorrique in desperate rage,
Sought sundry means to spoil his new-gain'd; life▪
Exclay ming for his master: cursing heaven,
For being unjust to you, though not to him,
For robbing you of comfort in your son
Oh gracious Lady said this grieved man
Could I but work a means to called me her grief.
Some reasonable course to keep black care
From her white bosom; I were happy then;
But knowing this, her heart will sink with woe
And I, am ranked with miserablest men,
I gods my witness, these were my laments,
Till Hoffman being as willing, as my self;
Did for his love to you, that pitied him.
Take on him to be called by your sons name,
Which now he must refuse except your Grace
Attept his service in Prince Otho's place,
If this that you protest be true, your care
Was like a long reprieve, the date worn out;
The execution of my woe is come,
And I must suffer it with patience:
Where have you laid the body of my son?
Within the chapel of an hermitage,
Some half a mile hence.
Isle build me there a Cell,
Made like a tomb, till death, therein isle dwell:
Yet for thy wrongs young man attend my words
Since neither Ferdinand, nor Saxony,
Have any heirs, to sway their several states;
Isle work what lies in •e to make thee Duke,
And since thou art accepted for my son,
Attempting it only to doe me good
I here adopt thee: mine christen thee Otho,
Mine eyes are now the font, the water tears,
That doe baptise thee in thy borrowed name.
I thank your Highness, and of just heaven crave
The ground I wrong you in, may turn my grave.
Lights to our chamber, now our fears are past,
What we long doubted, is proved true at last.
Attend vs son.
We'll wait upon your Grace.
Son, this is somewhat, this will bear the eyes
Of the rude vulgar, but this serves not me;
Dukedoms I will have them my sword shall win,
If any interposer cross my will,
But new made mother, ther's another fire
Burns in this liver lust, and hot desire,
which you must quench; must? I and shall; I know
Women will like how ever they say no;
And since my heart is knit unto her eyes
If she, being sanctimonious, hate my •uit,
In love this course isle take, if she deny;
Force her: true, so: si non blanditijs, vi.
Have you not found her yet?
Not I,
Nor I.
Then I beleeeue borne by her fits of rage
She he's done violence to her bright same,
And fallen upon the bosom of the Balt.
What reason leads ye to believe it, son?
I did perceive her some half hour since
Clambering upon the steepness of the rock,
But whether up or down I could not guess
By reason of the distance.
Stand aside, she comes, let her not scope vs now.
What has she got apparel? I and rich,
Poor soul, she in her idle lunacy
Hath took it from some house where t'will be mist.
Lets circle her about, least spying vs
she run away with wonted nimbleness,
Fairest well met.
Well overtaken sir.
What have ye here?
And you too heartily.
I am sure you know.
Why that's well, I like that, that you are well
and you, and you: god buy.
Nay, nay you must not go, we'll hold you now.
Why that's well, done, Pray come, see my house
I have a fine house now, and goodly knacks
And gay apparel; look ye here, this is brave;
And two lean porters starved for lack of meat,
Pray let go minearmes, look here they bee.
Oh horrid sight!
Nay, never start I pray; is it not like I keep
A princely house, when I have such fat porters at my gate;
What should this mean? why in this wood
So thick, so solitary, and remote
From common road of men, should these hang thus▪
Brother your Hermitage is not far hence,
When knew you any execution here?
I never knew any, and these bones are greene,
This less anatomy hath not hung long
The bigger, by the moss and dryness seems
Of more coutinuance.
What's on there heads?
why golden Crowns, my porters shall bee Kings▪
And hide there barebones with these gay weeds.
I doe remember the Admiral
that kept the Island of Burtholme
Was by the Duke of Prussia adjudged
To have his head feared with a burning crown,
And after made a bare Anatomy,
Which by his son was from the gallows stolue;
I, that same son of his, but where lives he
No doubt, he doth possess some cave hard by.
Come, go with me, isle show you where he dwells,
Or some body; I know not who it is;
Here, look, look here, here is a way goes down,
Down, down a down, hey down, down.
I sung that song, while Lodowicke sl•pt with me.
This is some Cave, let's boldly enter in,
And learn the mystery of that sad sight,
Come Lady, guide vs in, yon know the way.
True, thats the way, you cannot miss the path;
The way to death and black destruction
Is the wide way; no body is now at home,
Or tarry, peradventure here comes some will tell you more.
Stand close, this is Lorrique, I doe not know the
Lady comes with him.
I have seen that countenance.
Stand close, I pray, my heart divines,
Some strange and horrid act will be reueald.
Nay that's most true, a fellow with a red cap told me so
And bad me keep these clothes, and give them
To a fair Lady in a mourning gown;
Let go my arms; I will not run away
I thank you now, now you shall see me stay,
By my troth I will, by my maidenhead I will.
Lorrique return into the beaten path,
I asked thee for a solitary plot,
And thou hast brought me to the dismallest grove
That ever eye beheld, no woodnimphes here
Seek with their agile steps to outstrip the Roe,
Nor doth the sunsucke from the queachy plot
The rankness and the venom of the Earth
It seems frequentlesse for the use of men:
Some basilisks, or poisonous serpents den!
It is indeed an vndelight full walk;
But if I doe not err in my belief,
I think the ground, the trees, the rocks, the springs,
Have since my Princely Master Charles his wrack
Appeared more dismal, then they did before,
I• memory of his vntimelesse fall.
For hereabouts, hereabouts the place,
Where his •ayre body lay deformed by death
Here Hoffmans son, and I enbalm'd him
After we had concluded to de•cave
Your sacred person, and Duke Ferdinand
By causing Hoffman to assume his name.
This is very strange.
Nay tarry, you shall hear all the knavery anon.
And whore's the Chapel that you laid him in?
I'ts an old Chapel, near the Hermitage:
But was the Hermit at his burial?
No, Hoffman and I only dug the grave
Played Priest and Clarke, to keep his burial close?
Most admirable!
Nay, pray you peace.
Alas! poor son, the soul of my delights;
Thou in thy end were robed of Funeral rites,
None sung thy requiem, no friend closed thine eyes,
Nor laid the hallowed earth upon thy lips,
Thou were not houseled, neither did the bells ring
Blessed peals, nor towel thy funeral knell,
Thou wo••st to death, as those that sink to hell;
Where is the apparel that I bad him wear
Against the force of witches and their spells.
We buried it with him it was his shroud,
The desert woods no fitter means allowed.
I think he lies.
Now by my troth, that gentleman smells knave.
Swear one thing to me, ere we leave this place;
Whether young Hoffman did the most he might to save my son.
By heaven it seems hee did, but all was vain
The flinty rocks had cut his tender scull,
And the rough water washed away his brain.
Liar, liar, like dish.
How now what woman's this? what men are these?
Apoore maiden mistress, he's a suite to you,
And it is a good suite, very good apparel.
Lo, here I come a wooing my ding, ding,
Lo, here we come a suing, my darling,
Lo, here I come a praying, to biaea, bidea.
How doe you Lady, well I thank God, will you buy
a barganei pray, i'ts fine apparel.
Run my lives blood, comfort my troubled heart,
That trembles at the sight of this attire:
Lorrique, look on them, know thou not these clothes?
Nor the distracted bringer? prithee speak.
Ay me, accursed and damned; I know them both;
The bringer is the Austrian Lucibell•
I, you say true, I am the very same,
The apparel was my Lords, your Princely son's.
This is not seaweed, if my son were drowned
Then why thus dry is his apparel found?
O me accursed, o miserable me?
Fall heaven, and hide my shame, gape earth, rise sea,
Swallow, orewhelme me, wherefore should I live,
The most perfidious wretch that ever breathed,
And base consenter to my dear Lords death.
Nay, look you here, do you see these poor starved
ghosts; can you tell whose they be?
Alas! what are they? what are you that seem
In civil habits to hide ruthless hearts;
Lorrique, what are they? what wilt thou attempt?
Help Gentlemen, if ye be Gentlemen,
And stay this fellow from despairing ill.
I was ordained unto perdition, stay me not;
For when ye know the mischiefs I have done,
(at least, consented to, through coward fear)
You would not stop me, if I skipped in quick
To that black, bottomless and ruthless, gulf,
Where everlasting sorrows like linked chains
Fetter the wretched in eternal night.
what hast thou done?
Knavery I warrant you, tell truth and shame the
Devil my boy, doe, and thou shalt have a fine thing by and
by.
I take your Highness for that reverend Duchess
Late wife unto the Duke of Prussia.
I am the wretched childless widow sir.
Princess hear me, and I will briefly tell
How you came childless, you brotherlesse,
You husbandless, and fatherless, all, all,
Isle tell you, having ended, act my fall.
Well, forward;
Be it so, I have deserved a greater cruelty,
To bee kept living when I long to dye.
I charge thee setting by all circumstance,
Thou utter what thou know: my heart is steel,
Nor can it suffer more then it doth feel.
Then thus, Prince Charles and I escaped the wrack,
Came safe a shore to this accursed plot,
Where we met Hoffman, who upon yon tree
Preserved his fathers bare anatomy,
The biggest of them two were those strong bones
That acted mighty deeds.
Hoffman the son full of revenge and hate,
Against every hand that wrought his fathers hurt,
Yet gilded ore his envy with fair shows,
And entertained vs with as friendly terms
As falsehood could invent; and it is well known▪
Bitter deceit uses the sweetest speech.
At length he took advantage, bound my Lord,
And in a chain tied him to yonder rock,
While with a burning Crown he feared in twain
The purple Veins, strong sinews, arteries, uerues,
And every cartilage about the head,
In which sad torment the mild Prince fell dead.
Did Hoffman this? and thou conceal'st the deed?
Pardon my fear, Dread Madam.
well, go on, I am confident to hear all cruelty,
And am resolved to act some, if no hand
Will else attempt the murderers and, but mine.
Be patient; you will find associates:
For there are many murderers more behind.
what did hee with the body of my son?
Buried the slesh, the bones are they that hang
Close by his fathers.
Let them hang a while
Hope of revenge in wrath doth make me smile.
Pray let him tell the rest.
This acted, Hoffman forced me to conceal
The murder of my Lord, and threatened more
Then death by many torments, till I swore
To call him Otho, and say he was your son▪
I swore and kept my oath.
O Heaven.
O Devil.
Nay, I pray you peace.
Thensent he me for you, and you he sent,
Or as I best remember, lead you on
Unto the Chapel porch, where hee himself
Appointed them to stay, and there you know
What happened in your wrath.
To me a sleep,
And to my harmless Lodowick in my arms.
On on, that deed is writ among the acts of guilt:
A brothers sword a brothers life blood spilt.
Proceed, what's next? kilt he not Austria?
He did.
O villain did he kill my Father?
And make my brother kill my husband too?
Go forward.
After all those hated murders
He taught the foolish prince in the disguise
Of a French Doctor to prepare a poison,
Which was the death of Princely Ferdinand:
Next plot hee purposed your graces death,
And had opposd my strength of my tears,
You had bin murdered as you lay a sleep.
Let's hear no more, seek out the hated wretch,
And with due torture let his life be forced
From his despised body.
Doe I pray.
All the Land will help,
And each man be a justice in this act.
Well, I that never knewreuenges power,
Have entertained her newly in my breast:
Determine what's to doe.
Even what you will; would I were with my Lod•wick a sleep
In the Elision fields, where no fears dwell;
For earth appears as vile to me as hell.
Let me be Prologue to your scene of wrath,
And as the Roman Cateline resolved
His doubtful followers by exhausting blood
From the live body, so draw mine, cast mine
Upon the troubled and offended earth;
Offer blood fit for an infernal sacrifice,
Wine is not powered but on celestial offerings:
Therefore I advise you
As you hope to thrive in your revenge, smite me.
That have bin pander to this injury.
Thou merit'st death indeed.
Stay judge him not, let me a little plead in his excuse,
And this one sentence serves; a manaompel'd
To evil acts, cannot be justly held
A wilful malefactor; the law still
Looks upon the deed, ne'er on the will:
Besides although I grant the matter small
And very safe to raise a multitude,
That by their power might cease the m•rderer,
Yet two especial reasons cross that course:
First: many having notice of our plot,
One babbling tongue may utter out intent,
And Hoffman being warned is surely armed
Having the fort and treasure in his power,
And be his cause more then notorious ill,
He may with gold maintain it at his will
Scope vs, for no doubt hoe's full of sleights:
Besides, Revenge should have proportion,
By sly deceit he acted every wrong,
And by deceit I would have him entrapped;
Then the re•enge were fit, just, and square,
And t'would more vex him that is all composed
Of craft and subtlety to be outstripped
In his own fashion, then a hundred deaths.
Therefore by my advice pardon Lorrique
Upon condition, that he lay some plot
To intercept the other.
We are agreed.
Your mercy doth all bounds of hope exceed,
And if you will repose that trust in me,
By all the protestations truth can make,
Before the Sun have run his mid-dayes course,
I will to morrow! yield him to your hands.
Show vs the means.
The means is in the Duchess policy.
If she can smooth the murder but a while.
Isle turn deceit to overthrow his fraud.
Then with fair words his flatteries e•tertayne,
And when he doth importune you for love,
Desire him first to show you the first place,
Where he beheld Prince Charles after the wrack
Say you have earnestly entreated me,
But I have lead you in a labyrinth
Of no effect; he full of heate and •used,
Glad of occasion will no doubt alone
Conduct you to this fatal horrid cave,
Thy king by force, or fair means, to attain
His false hearts longing, and your honours stain;
But being in the height of his base pride,
The Duke, the Hermit, Lodowick and my self,
Will change his pleasures into wretched
And redeemelesle misery.
The plot is good, Madam, are you agreed?
To any thing how ever desperate.
I but by your leave, Lady, and Lords all, what if
This knave that has bin, play the knave still,
And tell tales out of school; how then?
I know not what to swear by; but no soul
Longs for the sight of endless happiness,
With more desire, then mine thirsts for his death:
By all the gods that shall give ill men li•e,
I am resolved chief agent in his end.
We credit thee, join hands, and ring him round,
Kneel, on his head lay our right hands, and swear
Vengeance against Hoffman.
Vengeance, vengeance, fall
On him, or sudden death upon vs all.
Come, part, we to the cave,
You to the Court:
Justice dig murders grave.
Nay, Isle come, my wits are mine again
Now faith grows firm to punish faithless men.
Not to be found? hell which way is she gon?
Her Highness charged vs to call you her son,
The mystery we know not, but we know,
You are not Princely Otho of Luningberg.
No matter what I am; tell me the way she went
With that Lorrique; speak, or by heaven
Hell shall receive you all.
Be not in raged she comes,
And with her comes trusty Lorrique.
Madam, I feared you, and my heart was sick,
With doubt some ouer-desperate accident
Had drawn you to the melancholy paths,
That lye within the verge of this rough scarre.
Your doubt was but an Embryo; I indeed
Desired Lorrique to bring me to the place
Where you beheld the shipwreck of my son;
And he hath led me up and down the wood,
But never brought me to the fatal beach,
It were not fit you should see the sad place,
That still seems dismal since the Princes death.
Dead? is our sovereign Lord the Prince dead?
Inquire no more of that, I will anon
Resolve you of his fate, this time for bear,
Esteem this gentleman your Lord and Prince.
Wee hold him so, sith you command vs so.
Will you go forward, Madam?
Willingly, so you will promise me to walk to morrow
And see the Earth that gently did receive
My sons wrack't body from the churlish some.
Isle wait upon your Grace, set forward there,
Tricks, and devices! longings! well it is good:
Isle swim to my desires, through seas of blood.
Fox you'll be taken, hunter you are fallen
Into the pit you dug; I laughed to see
How I out-strip the Prince of villainy.
Hoffman for me told such a smoothing tale,
That had not this strange accident befallen
In finding of the cave; I had bin held
More d•ere then ever, in the Duchess eyes:
But now she'll hold me hard, what ere she say,
Yet is her word past that she'll pardon me,
And I have wealth hoor'd up which isle bear
To some strange place: rich men live any where.
What? are you gadding sir? what moos your flight?
Coin not excuses in your crouching come,
What cause have you to ••ie and seek strange hoards
For your wealth gotten by my liberal gift?
And my desert, my Lord.
Well be it your desert;
But what's the cause you'll fly this country?
As I live, my Lord, I have no such intent▪
But with your leave, I was debating things,
As if it should chance thus, and thus, why then
It were better be far of, but otherwise
My love and life, low at your service lye.
You are a villain damned as low as hell;
An hypocrite, a fawning hypocrite:
I know thy heart, come Spaniel up, arise,
And think not with your antiques and your lies
To go beyond me, you have played the slave,
Betrayed me to the Datchesse, told her all,
Disappointing all my hopes with your base tongue,
Ore••rn'd the height of my intendments,
For which isle hurl thee from my mountain wrack,
Into the lowest Cavern of pale death.
Alas my Lord for bear, let me be heard.
Thou hast betrayed me, therefore never talk.
By heaven—
O hell! why should thou think on heaven.
Stay, and believe me, think you I am mad,
So great a foe to my own happy chance,
When things are sorted to so good an end,
That all is hid, and we held in regard:
After such horrid, and perfidious acts,
Now to betray my self; be reasonable,
And think how shallow such an act would seem
In me, chief agent in so many ills.
Thou hast a tong•e as glib and smooth to lies,
As full of false inventions, and base fraud,
As prone to circumvent believing souls,
As ever heretic or traitor used,
Whose speeches are as honey, their acts gall,
Their words raise up, but their hands ruin all.
By virtues glorious soul.
Blasphemer peace, swear not by that thou hat'st;
Virtue, and thou have no more sympathy,
Then day with night, Heaven with Hell.
Thou know, I know thy Villainies excel
Why then by vile•any, by blood, by slights,
By all the horrors tortures can present,
By Hell, and by revenges purple hand
The Duchess had no conference with me,
But only a desire to see the place
That first received her son, whom she believes
The unrelenting waives and flinty rocks,
Had severed from sweet life after the wrack.
May I believe thee?
Have I fayld you yet?
Measure my former acts, and you shall find
My foul allied to yours, wholly estranged
From all I •for loved.
No more, have done.
Tha'st won me to continue thee my friend;
But I can tell thee somewhat troubles me,
Some dreadful misadventure my soul doubts,
And I conceive it with no common thought,
But a most potent apprehension;
For it confounds imaginary sense,
Sometimes inflames my blood, another while
'Nums all the Currents that should comfort life,
And I remain as it were a senseless stone.
Come, come, I know the cause, you are in love,
And to be so, is to be any thing.
Doe you not love the Duchess?
Yes, I doe.
Why there's the matter, then, be ruled by me,
To morrow morning she desires to see
The shore, that first received her sea-wrackt son,
And to be vnaccompained she loves;
Except some one or two, you and I:
Now when you have her near your dismal I cave,
Force her, I dot man, make no scruple do it,
Else you shall never win her to your bed:
Doe a mans part, please her before she go,
Or if you see, that she turns violent,
Shut her perpetual prisoner in that den;
Make her a Philomel, prove Tereus:
Do it, never fear it.
Why she will be mist.
By whom? by fools▪ gross, dull, thick sighted fools,
whom every mist can blind, I'll sway them all,
With exclamation that the grieved Duchess
when she beheld the sea that drowned her son,
S•ood for a while like weeping Niobe,
As if she had bin stone: and when we strived
With mi•de persuasions to make less her woe
She mad•r then the wife of Athamas
Leaped suddenly into the troubled sea,
Whose surges greedy of so rich a prey,
Swallowed her up, while we in vain exclaimed
Against Heaven and hell, against fortune and her fate,
Oh my good vi•lain! how I hug thy plots,
This shall be done, shoe's mine: run sue•t slow hours,
Make a short night hasten on day apace,
Rough arms wax soft soft beauty to embrace.
Why so, now your fear will q•ickly end,
Thou wilt not talk of this?
Will I be hanged?
Nee're take me for a blab, you'll find me none.
I have a another secret, but—
Come what first? come, this breast is yours,
My heart's your treasury.
Thou must be secret, it is a thing of weight
concerns thee near.
Were it as near as life, come, pray speak.
Hark in thine ear, I would not have the ayre
Be privy to this purpose, wilt thou swear?
What? to bee secret? if the least jot I tell
Let all my hopes sink suddenly to hell.
Thou hast thy wish, down villain, keep this close.
Unthankful murderer, is this my mead?
Oh slave, tha'st kilt thy heart in wounding mine,
This is my day, to morrow shall be thine.
Go fool; now thou art dead, I need not fear.
Yet as thou were my servant just and true,
Isle hide thee in the ditch: give dogs there due,
He that will prove a mercenary slave
To murder, seldom finds so good a grave,
Hoe's gone, I can now spare him, Lorrique farewell;
Commend me to our friends thou meet in hell:
Next plot for Medias and old Saxony,
There ends shall finish our black tragedy.
How little care had we to let her escape,
Especially on this so needful time,
When we are vowed to wait upon revenge.
No doubt our uncles care will keep her safe,
Nor is she in her fits so violent
As she was wont, look where my
Uncle comes, sustaining with one hand
A dying man, and one the other side,
Fair Lucibell supports the fainting body.
Look you here, you maruai'ld why I went,
Why this man drew me unto him, can you help
Him now. Hoffman has hought him too.
Brother who first you bring thus ash pale;
I'st not Lorrique;
I am, and it is in vain to strive for longer hope.
I cannot, only be provident; I greatly fear
The murdrous traitor out of mere suspect
Will plot some stra•agem against the life
Of the chaste Duchess, help her what you can,
Against the violence of that wicked man.
Hast thou not told him, what we doe intend?
No, as heaven help me in my wretched end,
Be confident of that, now I must fall
Never again to rise, you know his wrongs:
Be careful Princes to revenge them all.
Well, farewell fellow, thou art now paid home
For all thy counce•ling in knavery,
Good Lord! what very fools are very knaves!
There cunning bodies often want due graves.
Son, daughter, brother, follow my advice,
Let vs no longer keep this hateful plot,
Least we be circumuented.
True, it is to put on open arms.
Tic now too late, we are beset
With soldiers, we must fight, and since it must be;
Let's to it valiantly.
Princes prepare not to resist your foes,
Wee are as firm as life unto your blood.
The Duchess Martha greetes old Saxony,
Prince Medias, Rodorick, and fair Lucibell:
To me she hath discovered the damned plots
Of that perfidious Hoffman, and hath sent
These armed soldiers, to attend on you.
We thank her Highness, but we think in vain
Both you and we attend; Lorrique lies slain
By Hoffmans sly suspicion; best be joined
To appr•hend him publicly.
There is no need, our Duchess hath apparelled
Her speech in a greene livery,
She salutes him fair, but her heart
Like his actions, is attired
In red, and blew, and sable ornaments.
But tell vs where they are?
At hand she comes, with him alone her plot is,
She comes in happy time for all your good.
Cease words, use deeds
Revenge draws nigh.
Come set his body like a scarcrow,
This bush shro•d you, this you,
Stand close true soldiers, for revenge.
I: doe, doe, doe, I pray you heartily doe,
stand close.
I wonder much why you ask me for Lorrique,
What is Lorrique to you, or what to me?
I tell you he is damned, enquire no more,
His name •s hatefuller then death.
Heaven! what alterations these!
Can I believe you love me as you swore,
When you are so inconstant to your friend?
He is no friend of mine whom you affect,
Pardon me Madam, such a fury reigns
Over my boiling blood, that I envy
Any one on whom you cast anamorous eye.
What grown so loving? marry heaven defend,
Wee shall deceive you if you dote on vs,
Foot I have sworn to lead a widows life,
And never more to be termed married wife.
I, but you must.
Must? use not force, I pray.
Yield to my love, and then with meekest word•
And the most humble actions, isle entreat
Your sacred beauty; deny me? isle turn fire,
More wild then wrath, come then agree,
If not to marry, yet in unseen sports
To quench these Lawless heats that burn in me.
What my adopted son become my lover?
And make a want on minion of his mother?
Now fie upon you fie you're too obscene
If like your words, your thoughts appear unclean.
By heaven I doe not jest, go to, believe me,
It is well you laugh; smile on, I like this:
Say, will you yield?
At the first? fie no.
That were an abject course, but let vs walk
Into some covert, there are pretty caves,
Lucky to lovers suites, for Virgil sings;
That Dido being driven by a sharpe storm
Into a Lybian cave, was there enticed
By siluer-tongu'd Aeneas to affect;
And should you serve me so, I were undone,
Disgraced in Germany by every Boor,
Who in their rymes would jest at Marthas name
Calling her minion to her cozen son.
Fairer then Dido, or loves amorous Queen;
I know a cave, where in the bright days eyes
Looked never but a skance through a small creek,
Or little cranny of the fretted scarre;
There I have sometimes lived, there are fit seats,
To sit and chat, and coll, and kiffe, and steal
Loves hid•n pleasures, come, are you disposed
To venture entrance? if yo• be, assay,
It is death to quick desire, use no delay.
Virtue and modesty bids me say no,
Yet trust me Hoffman tha'rt so sweet a man,
And so beloved of me, that I must go.
I am crowned the King of pleasure.
Hateful slave, thou goosed to meet destruction
in the cave.
S'death who stands here?
What's that? Lorriques pale ghost?
I am amazed: nay slave stand of:
Thy weapons sure, the prize is ours.
Come forth dear friends, murder is in our powers
Yield thee, base son of shame.
How now whats here? am I betrayed?
By dotage, by the falsehood of a face?
Oh wretched fool fallen by a women's hand
From high revenges sphere, the bliss of souls.
Cut out the murderers tongue.
What doe you mean?
Whom have I murdered; wherefore bind ye me;
They are Justices to punish thy bare bones,
Look with thy blood-shed eyes on these bare bones,
And tell me that which dead Lorrique confessed
Who first thou villained that least? who wast?
Why Otho thy sons, and that's my fathers by him.
O marcel•sse and cruel murderer
To leave me childl•sse.
And me husbandless.
Me brotherlesse. oh smooth tongued hypocrite
How thou did draw me to my brothers death.
Talk no more to him, he seeks dignity,
Reason he should receive his desperate hire,
And wear his crown made flaming hot with fire:
Bring forth the burning crown there.
Doe old dog, thou helpst to worry my dead Father
And must thou kill me too? it is well, it is fit,
I that had sworn unto my fathers soul
To be revenged on Austria, Saxony,
Prussia, Luningberg, and all there heirs:
Had prospered in the downfall of some five;
Had only three to offer to the fiends,
And then must fall in love; oh wretched eyes
That have betrayed my heart; bee you accursed;
And as the melting drops run from my brows,
So fall they on the strings that guide your heart
Whereby their oily heat may crack them first,
I so, boyle on thou foolish idle brain,
For giving entertainment to loves thoughts.
A man resolved in blood, bound by a vow
For no less vengeance, then his fathers death,
Yet become amorous of his foes wife!
Oh sin against all conceit! worthy this shame
And all the tortures that the world can name.
Call upon heaven, base wretch, think on thy soul.
In charity and prayer
To no purpose without charity.
We pardon thee, and pray for thy souls health.
So doe not I for yours, nor pardon you;
You kilt my father, my most warlike father,
Thus as you deal by me, you did by him;
But I deserve it that have slackt revenge
Through fickle beauty, and a women's fraud;
But Hell the hope of all despairing men,
That wring the poor, and eat the people up,
As greedy beasts the harvest of their spring:
That Hell, where cowards have their seats prepared▪
And barbarous asses, such as have robed souldrers of
Reward, and punish true desert with scorned death.

I Tell you true Sir, but to every man
I would not be so lavish of my speech,
Only to you my dear and private friend,
Although my wife in every eye, be held
Of beauty and of grace sufficient,
Of honest birth and good behaviour,
Able to win the strongest thoughts to her,
Yet in my mind I hold her the most hated
And loathed object that the world can yield.
Oh M. Arthur, bear a better thought
Of your chaste wife, whose modesty hath won
The good opinion and report of all:
By heaven you wrong her beauty, she is fair.
Not in mine eye.
O you are cloyed with dainties M. Arthur
And too much sweetness glutted hath your taste,
And makes you loath them: At the first
You did admire her beauty, praised her face,
Were proud to have her follow at your heals
Through the broad streets, when all censuring tongues
Found themselves busied as she past along,
To extol her in the hearing of you both,
Tell me I pray you and dissemble not,
Have you not in the time of your first love,
Hugd such new popular and vulgar talk,
And glorified still to see her bravely decked?
But now a kind of loathing hath quite changed
Your shape of love into a form of hate,
But on what reason ground you this hate?
My reason is my mind, my ground my will,
I will not love her: If you ask me why
I cannot love her, let that answer you.
Be judge all eyes, her face deserves it not,
Then on what root grows this hie branch of hate
Is she not loyal, constant, loving, chaste,
Obedient, apt to please, loath to displease,
Careful to live, chary of her good name,
And jealous of your reputation?
Is she not virtuous, wise, religious?
How should you wrong her to deny all this?
Good M. Arthur let me argue with you.
Oh M. Anselme, grown a Lover, fie,
What might she be, on whom your hopes rely?
What fools they are that seem most wise in love,
How wise they are, that are but fools in love:
Before I was a Lover, I had reason
To judge of matters, censure of all sorts,
Nay I had wit to call a Lover fool,
And look into his folly with bright eyes,
But now intruding Love dwells in my brain,
And frantically hath shouldered reason thence,
I am not old, and yet alas I dote:
I have not lost my sight, and yet am blind,
No bondsman, yet have lost my liberty,
No natural fool, and yet I want my wit.
What am I then, let me define my self,
A doatar young, a blind man that can see,
A witty fool, a bond-man that is free.
Good aged youth, blind seer, &amp; wise fool,
Loose your free bonds, and set your thoughts to school.
Tic told me M. Lusam, that my son
And your chaste daughter whom we matched together,
Wrangle and fall at odds, and brawl, and chide.
Nay I think so, I never looked for better;
This tic to marry children when they are young,
I said as much at first, that such young brats
Would gre together, even like dogs and cats.
Nay pray you M. Lusam say not so,
There was great hope, though they were matched but young
Their virtues would have made then sympathise,
And live together like two quiet Saints,
You say true, there was great hope indeed
They would have lived like Saints, but wheres the fault?
If fame be true, the most fault's in my son.
You say true M. Arthur, tic so indeed.
Nay sir, I do not altogether excuse
Your daughter, many lay the blame on her,
Ha say you so, bithmasse tic like enough,
For from her childhood she hath been a shrove.
A shrove, you wrong her, all the towhe admires her,
For mildness, chastnesse, and humility.
Fore God you say well, she is so indeed.
The City doth admire her for these virtues.
O sir, you praise your child too palpably,
Shoe's mild and chaste, but not admired so much.
I so I say, I did not mean admired.
Yes if a man do well consider her,
Your daughter is the wonder of her sex.
Are you advised of that, I cannot tell
What tic you call the wonder of her sex,
But she is, is she, I indeed she is.
What is she?
Even what you will, you know best what she is.
Yon is her husband, let vs leave this walk,
How full are bad thoughts of suspicion;
I love, but loath my self for loving so,
Yet cannot change my disposition.
Med???e cure teipsum.
Hei mihi quote mellis amor est medicabilis her ???is.
All your persuasions are to no effect,
Never allege her virtues nor her beauty,
My settled unkindness hath begot
A resolution to be unkind still,
My ranging pleasures love variety.
Oh too unkind unto so kind a wife,
Too vritules to one so virtuous,
And too unchaste unto so chaste a matron.
But soft sir, see where my two fathers are
Busily talking, let vs shrink aside,
For if they see me, they are bent to chide.
I think tic best to go straight to the house
And make them friends again: what think you sir?
I think so too.
Now I remember too, that's not so good,
For divers reasons I think best stay here,
And leave them to their wrangling, what think you?
I think so too.
Nay we will go that's certain.
I tic best, tic best in sooth: theres no way but to go.
Yet if our going should breed more unrest,
More discord, more dissention, more debate,
More wrangling where there is enough already,
It were better stay then go.
Fore God tic true,
Our going may perhaps breed more debate,
And then we may too late wish we had staid:
And therefore if you will be ruled by me,
We will not go that's flat: Nay if we love
Our credits, or our quiets, lets not go.
But if we love their credits or their quiets we must go
And reconcile them to their former love:
Where there is strife betwixt a man and wife tic hell,
And mutual love may be compared to heaven:
For then their souls and spirits are at peace.
Come M. Lusam, now tic dinner time,
When we have dined, the first work we will make,
Is to decide their jars for pity sake.
Welfare a good hart, yet are you advise,
Go said you M. Arthur, I will run,
To end these broils that discord hath begun.
Come hither Pipkin, how chance you tread so softly?
For fear of breaking Mistress.
Art thou afraid of breaking, how so?
Can you blame me Mistress, I am cracked already.
Cracked Pipkin, how, hath any cracked your crown?
No Mistress, I thank God my crown is currant, but.
But what?
The maid gave me not my supper yesternight, so that indeed my belly wambled; and standing near the great sea-coale fire in the hall, and not being full, on the sudden I cracked, and you know Mistress a Pipkin is soon broken.
Sir run to the Exchange, and if you there
Can find my husband, pray him to come home.
Tell him I will not eat a bit of bread
Until I see him: prithee Pipkin run.
But Lady Mistress, if I should tell him so, it may be he would not come, were it for no other cause but to save charges, Isle rather tell him, if he come not quickly, you will eat up all the meat in the house, and then if he be of my stomach he will run every foot, and make the more hast to dinner.
I thou moist jest, my heart is not so light,
It can digest the least conceit of joy:
Entreat him fairly, though I think he loves
All places worse that he beholds me in,
Wilt thou be gone?
Whither Mistress, to the Change?
I to the Change.
I will Mistress, hoping my M. will go so oft to the Change, that at length he will change his mind, and use you more kindly, ?? it were brave if my Moister could meet with a Merchant of ill ventures to bargain with him for all his bad conditions, and he sell them out???right, you should have a quieter heart, and we all a queen???la house: but hoping Mistress you will pass over all these Jar???es and squabels in good health, as my Moister was at the making the ????????? I commit you.
Make haste again I prithee, till I see him
My heart will never be at rest within me:
My husband hath of late so much estranged
His words, his deeds, his heart from me,
That I can seldom have his company:
And even that seldom with such discontent,
Such frowns, such chidings, such impatience,
That did not truth &amp; virtue arm my thoughts,
They would confound me with despair &amp; hate,
And make me run into extremities.
Had I deserved the least bad look from him,
I should account my self too bad to live,
But honouring him in love and chastity,
All judgements censure freely of my wrongs.
Pipkin what said she when she sent for me?
Faith moister she said little, but she thought more,
For she was very melancholy.
Did I not tell you she was melancholy?
For nothing else but that she sent for me,
And fearing I would come to dine with her.
O you mistake her even upon my soul,
I durst affirm you wrong her chastity.
See where she doth attend your coming home.
Come moister Arthur, shall we in to dinner?
Sir be gone, and see it served in.
Will you not speak unto her?
No not I, will you go in sir?
Not speak to me, nor once look towards me?
It is my duty to begin I know,
And I will break this Ice of courtesy.
You are welcome home sir.
Hark moister Lusam, if she mock me not,
You are welcome home sir, am I welcome home,
Good faith I care not if I be or no.
Thus you misconstrue all things M. Arthur,
Look if her true love melt not into tears.
She weeps, but why? that I am come so soon
To hinder her of some appointed guests,
That in my absence revels in my house:
She weeps to see me in her company,
And were I absent, she would laugh with joy.
She weeps to make me weary of the house,
Knowing my hart cannot away with grife.
Knew I that mirth would make you love my bed,
I would enforce my hart to be more merry.
Do you not hear, she would enforce her hart,
All mirth is forced that she can make with me.
O misconceit, how bitter is thy taste?
Sweet M. Arthur, Mistress Arthur too,
Let me entreat you reconcile these jars,
Odious to heaven, and most abhord of men.
You are a stranger sir, but by your words
You do appear an honest Gentleman:
If you profess to be my husbands friend,
Persist in these persuasions: and be Judge
With all indifference in these discontents.
Sweet husband, if I be not fair enough
To please your eye, range where you list abroad,
Only at coming home speak me but fair:
If you delight to change, change when you please,
So that you will not change your love to me.
If you delight to see me drudge and toil,
Isle be your drudge, because tic your delight.
Or if you think me unworthy of the name
Of your chaste wife, I will become your maid,
Your slave, your servant, any thing you will,
If for that name of servant, and of slave,
You will but smile upon me now and then.
Or if as I well think you cannot love me,
Love where you list, only say but you love me:
Isle feed on shadows let the substance go.
Will you deny me such a small request?
What will you neither love nor flatter me?
O then I see your hate here doth but wound me,
And with that hate it is your frowns confound me.
Wonder of women: why hark you M. Arthur,
What is your wife a woman or a Saint?
A wife, or some bright Angel come from heaven?
Are you not moved at this strange spectacle?
This day I have beheld a miracle.
When I attempt this sacred nuptial life,
I beg of heaven to find me such a wife.
Ha, ha, a miracle, a progedie,
To see a woman weep is as much pity
As to see Foxes digd out of their holes:
If thou wilt pleasure me, let me see thee less,
Grieve much: they say grief often shortens life,
Come not too near me, till I call hee wife.
And that will be but seldom, I will tell thee
How thou shalt win my hart, die suddenly,
And Isle become a lusty widower:
The longer thy life lasts the more my hate,
And loathing still increases towards thee.
When I come home &amp; find thee cold as earth,
The?? will I love thee: thus thou know my mind.
Come M. Lusam, let vs in to dine.
O sir, you too much affect this evil,
Pore Saint, why were thou yoked thus with a devil.
If thou wilt win my heart, die suddenly,
But that my soul was bought at such a rate,
At such a high price as my Saviours blood,
I would not stick to loose it with a stab.
But virtue banish all such fantasies.
He is my husband, and I love him well,
Next to my own souls health I tender him:
And would give all the pleasures of the world,
To buy his love if I might purchase it.
Isle follow him, and like a servant waite,
And strive by all means to prevent his hate.
This is my sons house, were it best go in,
How say you moister Lusam?
How go in, how say you sir?
I say tic best.
I sir, say you so, so say I too.
Nay, nay, it is not best, Isle tel you why,
Happily the fire of hate is quite extinct
From the dead embers, now to rake them up,
Should the least spark of discontent appear,
To make the flame of hatred burn a fresh,
The heate of this dissention might scorch vs,
Which in his own cold ashes smothered up,
May dye in silence, and revive no more:
And therefore tell me, is it best or no?
How say you sir?
I say it is not best.
Mass you say well sir, &amp; so say I too.
But shall we loose our labour to come hither,
And without sight of our two children?
Go back again, nay we will in that's certain.
In quoth, do you make a doubt of that?
Shall we come thus far, and in such post hast,
And have our children here and both within,
And not behold them ere our back return?
It were unfriendly, and unfatherly:
Come M. Arthur, pray you follow me.
Nay but hark you sir, will you not knock?
Is it best to knock?
I knock in any case.
It was well you put it in mind to knock,
I had forgotten it else I promise you.
Tush, first not my sons and your daughters door,
And shall we two stand knocking? Lead the way.
Knock at our childrens doors, that were a Jest,
Are we such fools to make our selves so strange
Where we should still be boldest? In for shame.
We will not stand upon such ceremonies.
Speak in what cue sir do you find your hart,
Now thou hast slept a little on thy love?
Like one that strives to shun a little plash
Of shallow water, and avoiding it,
Plunges into a River past his depth.
Like one that from a small spark steps aside,
And falls in headlong to a greater flame:
But in such fierce scorch not thy self for shame.
If she be fire, thou art so far fro?? burning,
That thou hast scarce yet warmd thee at her face
But list to me, Isle turn thy hart from love,
And make thee loath all of the feminine sex.
They that have known me, knew me once of name
To be a perfect wencher: I have tried
All sorts, all sects, all states, and find them still
Inconstant, fickle, always variable.
Attend me man, I will prescribea method
How thou shalt win his without al peradue??ture,
That would I gladly hear.
I was once like thee,
A fighter, melancholy, humorist,
Crosser of arms, a gore without garters,
A hatband-hater, and a busk-point wearer,
One that did use much bracelets made of hair,
Rings on my fingers, Jewels in mine ears,
And now and then a wenches Carkanet,
That had two letters for her name in Pearl:
Skarfes, garters, bands, wrought waistcoats, gold, stitched caps,
A thousand of those female fooleries,
But when I looked into the glass of Reason, strait I began
To loath that female bravery, and henceforth
Study to cry peccaui to the world.
I pray you to your former argument,
Prescribe a means to win my best beloved.
First be not bashful, bar all blushing tricks,
Be not too apish female, do not come
With foolish Sonnets to present her with,
With legs, with courtesies, congees, and such like:
Nor with pend speeches, or too far fetched sighs,
I hate such antic quaint formality.
Oh but I cannot watch occasion,
She dashes every profer with a frown.
A frown, a fool art thou afraid of frowns?
He that will leave occasion for a frown,
Were I his Judge (all you his case bemoan)
His doom should be, ever to lie alone.
I cannot choose but when a wench says nay,
To take her at her word and leave my suit.
Continue that opinion, and be sure
To die a virgin chaste, a maiden pure.
It was my chance once in my wanton days
To Court a wench, hark and Isle tell thee how:
I came unto my Love, and she looked coy,
I spake unto my Love, she turned aside,
I tushed my Love, and began with her to toy,
But she sat mute for anger, or for pride:
I strived and kissed my Love, she cried away:
Thou would have left her thus, I made her stay.
I caught my Love, and wrung her by the hand,
I took my Love and set her on my knee,
And pulled her to me, ?? you spoil my band,
You hurt me sir, pray let me go quoth she.
I am glad quoth I, that you have found your tongue,
And still my Love I by the finger wrong.
I asked her if she loved me, she said no,
I bad her swear, she strait calls for a book:
Nay then thought I, tic time to let her go,
I eased my knee, and from her cast a look,
She leaves me wondering at these strange affairs,
And like the wind she trips me up the stairs.
I left the room below and up I went,
Finding her thrown upon her wanton bed:
I asked the cause of her sad discontent,
Further she lies, and making room she sed,
Now sweating kiss me, having time and place:
So clings me too her with a sweet embrace.
First possible, I had not thought till now
That women could dissemble. M. Fuller
Here dwells the sacred mistress of my hart,
Before her door Isle frame a frivolous walk,
And spying her, with her devise some talk.
What stir is this, lets step but out the way
And hear the utmost what these people say.
Thou art a knave, although thou be my son,
Have I with care and trouble brought thee up,
To be a staff and comfort to my age,
A Pillar to support me, and a Crutch
To lean on in my second infancy,
And doest thou use me thus? thou art a knave.
A knave, I mary, and an arrant knave:
And sir, by old M. Arthurs leave,
Though I be weak and old, Isle prove thee one.
Sir, though it be my fathers pleasure thus
To wrong me with the scorned name of knave,
I will not have you so familiar,
Nor so presume upon my patience.
Speak M. Arthur, is he not a knave?
I say he is a knave.
Then so say I.
My Father may command my patience,
But you sir that are but my Father in law,
Shall not so mock my reputation,
Sir you shall find I am an honest man.
An honest man.
I sir, so I say.
Nay if you say so, Isle not be against it;
But sir you might have used my daughter better,
Then to have beat her, spurnd her, raild at her
Before our faces.
I therein son Arthur,
Thou shewdst thy self no better then a knave.
I mary did he, I will stand to it,
To use my honest daughter in such sort,
He showed himself no better then a knave.
I say again I am an honest man,
He wrongs me that shall say the contrary.
I grant sir that you are an honest man,
Nor will I say unto the contrary.
But wherefore do you use my daughter thus?
Can you accuse her of inchastitie,
Of loose demeanour, disobedience, or disloyalty?
Speak what thou can thou object against my daughter.
Accuse her, here she stands, spit in her face
If she be guilty in the least of these.
O Father be more patient, if you wrong
My honest husband, all the blame be mine,
Because you do it only for my sake.
I am his hand-maid, since it is his pleasure
To use me thus, I am content therewith,
And bear his checks and crosses patiently.
If in mine own house I can have no place,
Isle seek it elsewhere, and frequent it less,
Father I am now past one and twenty years,
I am past my Fathers pampring, I suck not:
Nor am I dandled on my mothers knee:
Then if you were my Father twenty times,
You shall not choose but let me be my self.
Do I come home so seldom, and that seldom
Am I thus baited? Wife remember this.
Father farewell, and Father in law adieu:
Your son had rather fast, then feast with you.
Well go too wild oats, spend thrift, prodigal,
Isle cross thy name quite from my reckoning book:
For these accounts, faith it shall skathe thee somewhat,
I will not say what somewhat it shall be.
And it shall skathe him somewhat of my purse,
And daughter I will take thee home again,
Since thus he hates thy fellowship,
Be such an eye-sore to his sight no more,
I tell thee thou no more shalt trouble him.
Will you divorce whom God hath tied toge???there?
Or break that knot the sacred hand of heaven
Made fast betwixt vs? Have you never read
What a great curse was laid upon his head
That breaks the holy band of marriage,
Diuorsing husbands from their chosen wives?
Father I will not leave my Arther so,
Not all my friends can make me prove his foe.
I could say somewhat in my sons reproof,
Faith so could I.
But till I meet him I will let it pass.
Faith so will I.
Daughter farewell, with weeping eyes I part,
Witness these tears, thy griete suss near my hart.
Weeps M. Arthur, nay then let me cry:
His cheeks shall not be wet, and mine be dry.
Fathers farewell, spend not a tear for me:
But for my husbands sake let these woes be.
For when I weep, tic not for my own care,
But fear least folly bring him to despair.
Sweet Saint continue still this patience,
For time will bring him to true penitence.
Mirror of virtue, thanks for my good cheer,
A thousand thanks.
It is so much too dear,
But you are welcome for my husbands sake,
His guests shall have best welcome I can make.
Then marriage, nothing in the world more com???mon,
Nothing more rare then such a virtuous woman.
My husband in this humour, well I know
Plays but the unthrift, therefore it behooves me
To be the better huswife here at home,
To save and get, whilst he doth laugh and spend:
Though for himself he rio???s it enlarge,
My needle shall defray my households charge.
Now M. Anselme to her, step not back,
Bustle your self, see where she sits at work:
Be not afraid man, shoe's but a woman,
And women, the most Cowards seldom fear:
Think but upon my former principles,
And twenty pound to a dream you speed.
I, say you so?
Beware of blushing sir,
Offer and too much eloquence:
Rail on her husband his misusing her,
And make that serve thee as an argument,
That she may sooner yield to do him wrong:
Were it my case, my Love and I to plead,
I have it at singers ends, who could miss the clout
Having so fair a white, such steady aim,
This is the upshot, now bid for the game.
Fair Mistress God save you.
What a circustance doth he begin with, what an Ass is he
To tell her at the first that she was fair?
The only means to make her to be coy:
He should have rather told her she was foul,
And brought her out of love quite with her self:
And being so, she would the less have cared
Upon whose secrets she had laid her love:
He hath almost mart all with that word fair.
Mistress God save you.
What a block is that
To say God save you, is the fellow mad,
Once to name God in his ungodly suit?
You are welcome sir. Come you to speak with me,
Or with my husband, pray you whats your will?
She answers to the purpose, whats your will?
O zoanes that I were there to answer her.
Mistress my will is not so soon expressed,
Without your special favour, and the promise
Ofloue and pardon if I speak amiss.
O Ass, ?? Duns, ?? blockhead that hath left
The plain broad hie way, and the readiest path
To travel round about by circumstance:
He might have told his meaning in a word,
And now hath lost his opportunity:
Never was such a truant in Loves school,
I am ashamed that ere I was his Tutor.
Sir you may freely speak what ere it be,
So that your speech suits with modesty.
To this now could I answer passing well.
Mistress I pitying that so fair a creature.
Still fair, and yet I warned the contrary.
Should by a villen be so foully used as you have been.
I that was well put in,
If time and place were both convenient.
Have made this bold intrusion to present
My love and service to your sacred self.
Indifferent, that was not much amiss.
Sir, what you mean by service and by love
I will not know: but what you mean by villain
I fine would know.
That villain is your husband:
Whose wro??gs towards you, are bruited thorough the land.
O can you suffer at a Peasants hands
Unworthy once to tush this silken skin,
To be so rudely beat and buffeted?
Can you endure from such infectuous breath
Able to blast your beauty, to have names
Of such empoisoned hate flung in your face?
O that was good, nothing was good but that:
That was the lesson that I taught him last.
O can you hear your never tainted fame
Wounded with words of shame and infamy?
O can you see your pleasures dealt away,
And you to be debarred all part of them,
And bury it in deep oblivion?
Shall your true right be still contributed
Amongst hungry Bawds, insatiable Courtesans?
And can you love that villain by whose deed
Your soul doth sigh, &amp; your distressed hart bleed?
All this as well as I could wish my self.
Sir I have heard thus lo??g with patie??ce,
If it be me you term a villains wife,
Insooth you have mistook me all this while,
And neither know my husband nor my self,
Or else you know not man and wife is one:
If he be called a villain, what is she
Whose hart, and love, &amp; soul, is one with him?
Tic pity that so fair a Gentleman
Should fall into such villains company.
Oh sir take heed, if you regard your life,
Meddle not with a villain, or his wife.
O that same word villain hath mart all.
Now where is your instructio??? wheres the wench?
Where are my hopes? where your directions?
Why man, in that word villain you mart all.
To come unto an gonest wife and call
Her husband villain, were she ne'er so bad,
Thou might well think she wold not brooke that name
For her own credit, though no love to him.
But leave not thus, but try some other mean,
Let not one way thy hopes make frustrate clean.
I must persist my Love against my will,
He that knows all things, knows I prove this ill.
Come boys, come boys, rehearse your part???
And then ad prandium tamiam incipe.
Forsooth my lessons torn out of my book.
Que caceris Chartis deseruisse decat,
Torn from your book, Isle tear it from your breech,
How say you Mistress Virga, will you suffer
Hic puer bone indolu, to tear
His Lessons, eaues and Lectures from his book?
Truly forsooth I laid it in my seat
While Robin Glade and I went into Camps:
And when I came again my book was torn.
O mus a Mouse, was ever heard the like?
O domus a house, M. I could not mend it.
O pediculus a Louse, I knew not how it came.
All toward boys, good scholars of their times,
The least of these is past his Accidence,
Some at Queen mihi, here's not a boy
But he can construe all the Gramer Rules,
Sed vbi sunt solids, not yet come:
Those tarde vementes, shall be whipped.
Vbi est Pikin, whore's that laizie knave?
He plays the Truant every Saturday:
But Mistress Vi???ga, Lady Willowby
Shall teach him that Dilucoli surgery,
Est saluberrimum, here comes the knave.
Tarde, tarde, tarde.
Tarde, tarde, tarde.
Huc ades Pipkin, reach a better rod,
Cur tam tarde vemo, speak, where have you bin?
Is this a time of day to come to school?
Vbi finisti, speak, where hast thou bin?
Magister, quomodo vales.
Is that responsio fitting my demand?
Etiam certe, you ask me where I have bin, and I say Quomodo vales, as much to say, come out of the alehouse.
Untruss, untruss, nay help him, help him.
Queso preceptor, queso? for Gods sake do not whip me:
Quidest gramatica?
Not whip you, Quidest gramatica, whats that?
Gramatica est, that if I untrust, you must needs whip me upon them, quidest gramatica.
Why then dic mihi, speak, where hast thou bin?
Forsooth my mistress sent me of an errant to fetch my M. from the Exchange, we had strangers at home at dinner, and but for them I had not come tarde queso pre???captor.
Construe your lesson, pearce it, ad vngem Et condemnato, to Isle pardon thee.
That I will M. and if you'll give me leave.
Propriaabque; maribus tribuuntur Mascula dices expone, expone.
Co??ster it M. I will, Dices they say, Propria the pro???per man, que maribus, that loves mary-bones, mascula, mis???called me.
A pretty quaint &amp; new construction.
I warrant you M. if there be mary bones in my lesson, I am an old dog at them. How construe you this M. Rostra disertus amat?
Disertus a disert, amat doth love, rostra, rostmeat.
A good construction on an empty stomach, M. now I have consterd my lesson, my mistress would pray you to let me come home to go of an errand.
Your tres sequntur, and away.
Canis a hog, ra???a a dog, Porcus a Frog,
Abeundum est mihi.
Yours s??????ra to then, and ad prandium.
Apis a bed, ge?????? k???ee, ??????leanus Doctor De???? Figinti minus vsus est ?????????.
By In???os lip, and ????????? thumb 
It was bonus, bone, bonum.
Vitrum glass, spice grass, tu es Asinus, you are an Ass, Precor tibi felicem noctem.
Claudite jam libros pueri sat prate bibistis,
Look when you come again, you tell me Vbi fuistis.
He that minds trish trash, &amp; will not have care of his rodix,
He I will be lish lash, and have a fling at his podix.
A pretty wench, a passing pretty wench,
A sweeter duck all London cannot yield,
She cast a glance on me as I past by,
Not Helen had so ravishing an eye.
Here is the Pedant Sir Aminadab,
I will enquire of him if he can tell
By any circumstance whose wife she:
Such fellows commonly have intercourse
Without suspicion, where we are debarred.
God save you gentle Sir Aminadab.
Salve tu quoabque;, would you speak with me?
You are I take it, and let me not lie,
For as you know, Mentirinon est meum,
Young M. Arthur, quid vis, what will you?
You are a man I much rely upon:
There is a pretty wench dwells in this street,
That keeps no shop, nor is not public known:
At the two posts, next turning of the Lane,
I saw her from a window looking out:
O could you tell me how to come acquainted
With that sweet Lass, you should command me sir,
Even to the utmost of my life and power.
Dij bone, bone, tic my Love he means,
But I will keep it from this Gentleman,
And so I hope make trial of my Love.
If I obtain her, thou shalt win thereby,
More then at this time I will promise thee.
Quando venis aput, I shall have two horns on my Caput.
What if her husband come &amp; find one there?
Nuncquam, time never fear,
She is unmarried I swear.
But if I help you to the deed,
Tu vis narrare, how you speed.
Tell how I speed, I sir I will to you:
Then presently about it. Many thanks
For this great kindness Sir Aminadab.
If my Puella prove a drab
Isle be revenged on both: ambo shall die,
Shall die by what, for ego I
Have never handled I thank God,
Other weapon then a rod:
I dare not fight for all my speeches,
Sed cave, if I take him thus
Ego sum expers at untruss.
We Moister Justice Reason come about
A serious matter that concerns vs near.
I mary doth it sir concern vs near:
Would God sir you would take some order for it.
Why look ye M. Lusam, you are such another
You will be talking, what concerns vs near,
And know not why we come to M. Justice.
How, know not I?
No sir not you.
Well I know somewhat, though I know not that,
Then on I pray you.
Forward I pray, yet the case is plain.
Why sir as yet you do not know the case.
Well he knows somewhat, forward M. Arthur.
And as I told you, my unruly son
Once having bid his wife home to my house,
There took occasion to be much aggrieved
About some household matters of his own,
And in plain terms they fell in controversy.
Tic true sir, I was there the selfsame time,
And I remember many of the words.
Lord what a man are you, you were not there
That time, as I remember you were rid
Down to the North, to see some friends of yours.
Well I was somewhere, forward M. Arthur.
All this is well, no fault is to be found
In either of the parties, pray say on.
Why sir I have not named the parties yet,
Nor tushed the fault that is complaind upon.
Well you tushed somewhat: forward M. Arthur.
And as I said, they fell in controversy:
My son not like a husband gave her words
Of great reproof, despite, and contumely.
Which she poor soul digested patiently:
This was the first time of their falling out.
As I remember at the self same time
One Thomas the Earl of Surreys gentleman
Dined at my table.
O I knew him well.
You are the strangest man, this gentle???man
That I speak of, I am sure you never few,
He came but lately from beyond the sea.
I am sure I know one Thomas, forward sir.
And is this all? make me a M?????????emus,
And fend the offender straitwaies to the gail.
First know the offender, how began the strife
Betwixt this gentlewoman and my son,
Since when sir he hath used her not like one
That should partake his bed, but like a slave.
My coming was, that you being in office
And in authority, should call before you
My unthrift son, to give him some advise,
Which he will take better srom you, then me
That am his Father. Heir's the gentlewoman
Wife to my son, and daughter to this man,
Whom I perforce compelled to live with vs.
All this is well, here is your son you say,
But she that is his wife you cannot find.
You do mistake sir, heir's the gentlewoman,
It is her husband that will not be found.
Well all is one, for man and wife are one:
But is this all?
I all that you can say,
And much more then you can well put off.
Nay if the case appear thus evident,
Give me a cup of wine, what man and wife
To disagree, I prithee fill my cup:
I could say somewhat, tut, tut, by this wine,
I promise you, tic good Canary Sack.
Fathers you do me open violence
To bring my name in question, and produce
This gentleman and others here to witness
My husbands shame in open audience:
What may my husband think when he shall know
I went unto the Justice to complain:
But M. Justice here more wise then you,
Says little to the matter, knowing well
His office is no whit concerned herein:
Therefore with favour I will take my leave.
The woman saith but reason M. Arthur,
And therefore give her licence to depart.
Here is dry Justice not to bid vs drink,
Hark thee my friend, I pretheelend thy cup:
Now M. Justice hear me but one word,
You think this woman hath had little wrong?
But by this wine which I intend to drink.
Nay save your oath, I pray you do not swear,
Or if you swear, take not too deep an oath.
Content you, I may take a lawful oath
Before a Justice: therefore by this wine.
A profound oath, well sworn, &amp; deeply took,
Tic better thus, then swearing on a book.
My daughter hath bin wronged exceedingly.
O sir, I would have credited these words
Without this oath: but bring your daughter hither,
That I may give her counsel ere you go.
Mary Gods blessing on your heart for that,
Daughter give ear to Justice Reasons words.
Good woman, or good wife, or Mistress, if you have done amiss, it should seem you have done a fault; and making a fault, theres no question?? but you have done amiss: but if you walk uprightly, and neither lead to the right hand nor the left, no question but you have neither led to the right hand nor the left, but as a man should fey, walked uprightly: but it should appear by these plain???tiffs, that you have had some wrong, If you love your spouse entirely, it should seem you affect him fervently; and if he hate you monstrously, it should seem he loathes you most exceedingly: and theres the point, at which I will leave, for the time passes away: therefore to con???clude, this is my best counsel, look that thy husband so fall in, that hereafter you never fall out.
Good counsel, passing good instruction,
Follow it daughter. Now I promise you,
I have not heard such an Oration
This many a day: what remains to doo?
Sir I was called as witness to this matter,
I may be gone for ought that I can see.
Nay stay my friend, we must examine you,
What can you say concerning this debate
Betwixt young M. Arthur and his wife?
Faith just as much I think as you can say
And thats just nothing.
How nothing? come depose him, take his oath,
Swear him I say, take his confession.
What can you say sir in this doubtful case?
Why nothing sir.
We cannot take him in contrary tales,
For he says nothing still, and that same nothing
Is that which we have stood on all this while:
He hath confessed even all, for all is nothing.
This is your witness, he hath witnessed nothing.
Since nothing then so plainly is confessed,
And we by cunning answers and by wit
Have wrought him to confess nothing to vs,
Write his confession.
Why what should we write?
Why nothing: heard you not as well as I
What he confessed? I say write nothing down.
Mistress we have dismissed you, love your husband,
Which whilst you do, you shall not hate your husband.
Bring him before me, I will urge him with
This Gentleman's express confession
Against you: send him to me, Isle not fail
To keep just nothing in my memory.
And sir now that we have examined you,
We likewise here discharge you with good leave.
Now M. Arthur, and M. Lusam too,
Come in with me, unless the man were here
Whom most especially the cause concerns,
We cannot end this quarrel: but come near,
And we will taste a glass of our March beer.
I prithee tell me Brabo, what Planet think thou governed at my conception, that I live thus openly to the world?
Two Planets raind at once, Venus thats you,
And Mars thats I, were in conjunction.
Prithee, prithee, in faith that conjunction co???pulatiue, is that part of speech that I live by.
Ha, ha, to see the world, we swaggerers
That live by oaths and big-mouth'd menaces,
Are now reputed for the tallest men:
He that hath now a black muchato
Reaching from ear to ear, or turning up
Puncto reuerso, bristling towards the eye:
He that can hang two hansom tools at his side,
Go in disguised attire, wear Iron enough,
Is held a tall man and a soldier.
He that with greatest grace can swear gogs zounds,
Or in a Tavern make a drunken fray,
Can cheat at Dice, swagger in bawdy houses,
Wear velvet on his face, and with a grace
Can face it out with as I am a soldier.
He that can clap his sword upon the board
Hoe's a brave man, and such a man am I.
She that with kisses can both kill &amp; cure,
That lives by love, that swears by nothing else
But by a kiss, which is no common oath:
That lives by lying, and yet oft tells truth;
That takes most pleasure when she takes most pains:
Shoe's a good wench my boy, and such am I.
She that is past it, and prays for them that may.
Is an old Bawd as you are Mistress Splay.
O do not name that name, do you not know
That I could never endure to hear that name.
But if your man would leave vs, I would read
The lesson that last night I promised you.
I prithee leave vs, we would be alone.
And will and must: if you bid me be gone,
I will withdraw, and draw on any he
That in the worlds wide round dare cope with me.
Mistress farewell, to none I never speak
So kind a word. My saluations are,
Farewell and be hanged, or in the devils name.
What they have been my many frays can tell,
You cannot fight therefore to you farewell.
O this same swaggerer is the bulwark of my repute???tion
But Mistress Splay, now to your lecture that you promised me:
Daughter attend, for I will tell thee now
What in my young days I my self have tried:
Be ruled by me and I will make thee rich.
You God be praised are fair, and as they say
Full of good parts, you have been often tried
To be a woman of good carriage,
Which in my mind is very commendable.
It is indeed. Forward good mother Splay.
And as I told you, being fair, I wish
Sweet daughter you were as fortunate.
When any suitor comes to ask thy love,
Look not into his words, but into his sleeve.
If thou can learn what language his purse speaks,
Be ruled by that, thats golden eloquence.
Money can make a slavering tongue speak plain.
If he that loves thee be deformed and rich,
Accept his love, gold hides deformity.
Gold can make limping Vulcan walk upright,
Make squint eyes look strait, a crabd face look smooth,
Guilds Copernoses, makes them look like gold.
Fills ages wrinkles up and makes a face
As old as Nestors, look as young as Cupids.
If thou wilt arm thy self against all shifts,
Regard all men according to their gifts.
This if thou practise, thou when I am dead
Wilt say old mother Splay soft laid thy head.
Soft who comes here? begone good Mistress Splay,
Of thy rules practise this is my first day.
God for thy passion what a beast am I,
To scar the bird that to the net would fly.
By your leave Mistress.
What to do Moister?
To give me leave to love you.
I had rather afford you some love to leave me.
I would you would as soon love me, as I could leave you.
I pray you what are you sir?
A man Isle assure you.
How should I know that?
Try me by my word, for I say I am a man,
Or by my deed, Isle prove my self a man.
Are you not Moister Arthur?
Not M. Arthur, but Arthur, and your servant sweet Mistress Mary.
Not Mistress Mary, but Mary and your handmaid, sweet Moister Arthur.
That I love you, let my face tell you: that I love you more then ordinarily, let this kiss testify: and that I love you fernently and entirely, ask this gift, and see what it will answer you. My self, my purse, and all being wholly at your service.
That I take your love in good part, my thanks shall speak for me: that I am pleased with your kiss, this
interest of an other shall certify you: and that I accept your gift, my prostrate service and self shall witness with me. My love, my lips, and sweet self, are at your service: wilt please you to come near sir?
O that my wife were dead, here would I make
My second choice, would she were buried,
From out her grave this Marigold should grow,
Which in my nuptials I wold wear with pride.
Die shall she, I have doomed her destiny.
Tic news M. Arthur to see you in such a place,
How doth your wife?
Faith Mistress Mary at the point of death,
And long she cannot live, she shall not live
To trouble me in this my second choice.
I pray forbear sir, for here comes my Love,
Good sir for this time leave me: by this kiss
You cannot ask the question at my hands
I will deny you: pray you get you gone.
Farewell sweet Mistress Mary.
Sweet adieu:
Stand to me bill, and head-peece sit thou close,
I hear my Love, my wench, my duck, my dear,
Is sought by many suitors, but with this
Isle keep the door, and enter he that dare.
Virga be gone, thy twigs Isle turn to steel,
These fingers that were expert in the Jerk,
In steed of lashing of the trembling pods,
Must learn posh and knock, and beat and mall,
Cleave pates, and caputs he that enters here
Comes on his death, morse mort, is he shall taste.
Alas poor fool, the Pedants mad for love,
Thinks me more mad that I would marry him:
Hoe's come to watch me with a rusty bill,
To keep my friends away by force of arms,
I will not see him but stand still aside,
And here observe him what he means to doo.
O vtinam, that he that loves her best
Durst offer but to tush her in this place.
Per Iehoua, &amp; Iunonem hoc,
Shall posh his Coxcomb such a knock,
As that his soul his course shall take
To Limbo, and Auernus lake.
In vain I watch in this dark hole,
Would any living durst my manhood try,
And offer to come up the stairs this way.
O we should see you make a goodly fray.
The wench I here watch with my bill,
Amo, amas, amaui still.
Queen audit let him come that dare,
Death, hell, and Limbo be his share.
Wheres mistress Mary, never a post here,
A bar of Iron against which to try my sword?
Now by my beard a dainty piece of steel.
O Jove what a qualm is this I feel?
Come hither Mall, is none here but we two?
When did thou see the starveling Schoolmaster?
That Rat, that shrimp, that spindleshanck, that Wren, that sheep-biter, that lean chittiface, that famine, that lean Envy, that all bones, that bare Anatomy, that Jack a Lent, that ghost, that shadow, that Moon in the wane.
I wail in woe, I plunge in pain.
When next I find him here Isle hang him up
Like a dried Sawsedge, in the Chimneys top:
That Stock-fish, that poor Iohn, that gut of men.
O that I were at home again.
When he comes next turn him into the streets,
Now come lets dance the shaking of the sheets.
Queen que quote, hence boisterous bill, come gentle Rod.
Had not grim Malkin stamped and stared,
Aminadab had little cared:
Or if in stead of this browne bill,
I had kept my mistress Virga still,
And he upon an others back,
His points untrust, his breeches slack:
My countenance he should not dash,
For I am expert in the lash.
But my sweet Lass my love doth fly,
Which shall make me by poison die.
Perfidem, I will rid my life,
Either by poison, sword, or knife.
Sir when saw you your Moister?
Faith Mistress when I last looked upon him.
And when was that?
When I beheld him.
And when was that?
Mary when he was in my sight, and that was ye???sterday, since when I saw not my moister, nor looked on my M. nor beheld my moister, nor had any sight of my M.
Was he not at my father in laws?
Yes mary was he.
Did thou not entreat him to come home?
How should I mistress, he came not there to day.
Did not thou say he was there?
True mistress he was there, but I did not tel ye when??,
He hath bin there divers times, but not of late.
About your business, here Isle sit and wait
His coming home, though it be ne'er so late.
Now once again go look him at the Change,
Or at the Church with Sir Aminadab,
Tic told me they use often conference:
When that is done, get you to school again.
I had rather play the truant at home, then go seek my M. at school: let me see what age am I, some four &amp; twenty, and how have I profited, I was five year learning to crish Cross from great A. and five year lone???ger coming to F. I there I stuck some three year be???fore I could come to q. and so in process of time I came to e pierce e, and comperce, and tittle, then I got to a. e. i. o. u. after to our Father, and in the sixteenth year of my age, and the fifteenth of my going to school, I am in good time gotten to a Noun, by the same token there my hose went down: then I got to a Verb, there I be???began first to have a beard: the?? I came to Iste, ista, istud, there my M. whipped me till he fetched the blood, and so forth: so that now I am come the greatest scholar in the school: for I am bigger then two or three of them. But I am gone, farewell mistress.
Love none at all, they will forswear themselves,
And when you urge them with it, their replies
Are, that Jove laughs at Lovers perjuries.
You told me of a Jest concerning that,
I prithee let me hear it.
That thou shalt.
My mistress in an humour had protested,
That aboue all the world she loved me best,
Saying with suitors she was oft molested,
And she had lodged her hart within my breast:
And swear (but me) both by her mask &amp; fan,
She never would so much as name a man.
Not name a man quoth I, yet be advised,
Not love a man but me, let it be so:
You shall not think quoth she my thoughts disguised,
In flattering language, or dissembling show:
I say again, and I know what I do,
I will not name a man alive but you.
Into her house I came at vnaware,
Her back was to me and I was not seen,
I stole behind her till I had her fair,
Then with my hands I closed both her eyne,
She blinded thus, begins to bethink her
Which of her Loves it was that did hood-winck her,
First she begins to guess &amp; name a man
That I well knew, but she had known far better.
The next I never did suspect till than:
Still of my name I could not hear a letter,
Then mad, she did name Robin, and then Iames,
Till she had reckoned up some twenty names,
At length when she had counted up her score,
As one among the rest she hit on me:
I asked her if she could not reckon more,
And plucked away my hands to let her see.
But when she looked back and saw me behind her
She blushed, and asked if it were I did blind her?
And since I swear both by her mask and fan,
To trust no she tongue, that can name a man.
Your great oath hath some exceptions:
But to our former purpose, you is Mistress Arthur,
We will attempt another kind of wooing,
And make her hate her husband if we can.
But not a word of passion or of love.
Have at her now to try her patience,
God save you mistress.
You are welcome sir.
I pray you wheres your husband?
Not within.
Who M. Arthur? him I saw even now
At mistress Maries the brave Courtesans.
Wrong not my husbands reputatio?? so,
I neither can nor will believe you sir.
Poor gentlewoman how much I pity you,
Your husband is become her only guest:
He lodges there, and daily diets there,
He riots, revels, and doth all things,
Nay he is held the M. of misrule,
Amongst a most loathed and abhorred Crew:
And can you being a woman suffer this?
Sir, sir, I understand you well enough,
Admit my husband doth frequent that house
Of such dishonest usage, I suppose
He doth it but in zeal to bring them home
By his good counsel, from that course of sin:
And like a Christian, seeing them astray
In the broad path that to damnation leads,
He uses thither to direct their feet
Into the narrow way that guides to heaven.
Was ever woman gulled so palpably?
But Mistress Arthur think you as you say?
Sir what I think I think, and what I say
I would I could enjoin you to believe.
Faith mistress Arthur I am sorry for you,
And in good sooth, I wish it lay in me
To remedy the least part of these wrongs
Your unkind husband daily proffers you.
You are deceived he is not unkind,
Although he bear an outward face of hate,
His hart and soul are both assured mine.
Fie mistress Arthur, take a better spirit,
Be not so timorous to rehearse your wrongs,
I say your husband haunts bad company,
Swaggerers, cheaters, wanton Courtesans.
There he defiles his body, staines his soul,
Consumes his wealth, undoes himself and you,
In danger of diseases, whose wild names
Are not for any honest mouths to speak,
Nor any chaste ears to receive and hear.
O he will bring that face admired for beauty,
To be more loathed then a leprous skin:
Divorce your self now whilst the clouds grow black,
Prepare your self a shelter for the storm,
Abandon his most loathed fellowship:
You are young mistress, will you loose your youth?
Tempt no more devil, thy deformity
Hath changed it self into an angels shape,
But yet I know thee by thy course of speech:
Thou gets an apple to betray poor Eve,
Whose outside bears a show of pleasant fruit,
But the wild branch on which this apple grew,
Was that which drew poor Eve from Paradise.
Thy Sirens song could make me drown my self,
But I am tied unto the mast of truth.
Admit my husband be inclined to vice,
My virtues may in time recall him home,
But if we both should desperate run to sin,
We should abide certain destruction.
But hoe's like one that over a sweet face
Puts a deformed vizard for his soul,
Is free from any such intents of ill:
Only to try my patience, he puts on
An ugly shape of black intemperance.
Therefore this blot of shame which he now wears,
I with my prayers will purge, wash with tears.
Fuller.
Anselme.
How lik'st thou this?
As schoole-boyes Ierkes, Apes whips, as Lions Cocks,
As Furies do fasting days, and devils crosses,
As maids to have their marriage days put off:
I like it as the thing I most do loath,
What wilt thou do? for shame persist no more
In this extremity of frivolous love.
I see my doctrine moves no precise ears,
But such as are professed inamoratos.
O I shall die.
Tush live to laugh a little,
Here's the best subject that thy love affords,
Listen a while and hear this: hoboy speak.
As in ptesenti, thou loath'st the gift I sent thee,
Nolo plus tarry but die, for the beauteous marry,
Fain wold I die by a sword, but what sword shall I die by?
Or by a stone, what stone? nullus lapis iacet ibi.
Knife I have none to sheath in my breast, or empty my full veins,
Here is no wall or post which I can soil within my bruised brains.
First will I therefore say 2. or 3. Creeds and Auemaries,
And after go buy a poison at the Apothecaries.
I prithee Anselme but observe this fellow,
Doest not hear him? he would die for love,
That mishapped love thou would condemn in him,
I see in thee, I prithee note him well.
Were I accursed that I were such a Lover,
I should be with my self quite out of love:
I prithee lets persuade him still to live.
That were a dangerous case, perhaps the fellow
In desperation would to sooth vs up,
Promise repentant recantation,
And after fall into that desperate course,
Both which I will prevent with policy.
O death come with thy dart, come death when?? I bthe
Morse vim veni morse, and from this misery rid me.
She whom I loved, whom I loved, eve?? she my sweet pret Mar
Doth but flout &amp; mock, &amp; Jest, and dissimulary.
Isle fit him finely: in this paper is
The Juice of Mandrake, by a Doctor made
To cast a man whose leg should be cut off,
Into a deep, a cold and senseless sleep,
Of such approved operation,
That who so takes it, is for twice twelve hours
Breathless, and to all men's judgements past all sense:
This will I give the pedant but in sport,
For when tic known to take effect in him,
The world will but esteem it as a Jest:
Besides it may be a means to save his life,
For being perfect poison as it seems,
His meaning is, some covetous slave for coin
Will sell it him, though it be held by law
To be no better then flat felony.
Uphold the Jest, but he hath spied vs, peace.
Gentiles God save you,
Here is a man I have noted oft, most learned in Physic,
One man he helped of the Cough, another he heald of the tisick:
And I will board him thus: Salve ?? Salve Magister.
Gratus mihi aduenis quid me cum vis.
Optatum venis paucis to volo.
Si quid industry nostra tibi faciet dic queso.
Attend me sir, I have a simple house,
But as the learned Diogenes saith
In his Epistle to Tertullian,
It is extremely troubled with great Rats,
I have no mus pusse nor grey eyed Cat
To hunt them out. O could your learned Art
Show me a means how I might poison them:
T??????s dum suus, sir Aminadab.
With all my hart, I am no Rat-catcher,
But if you need a poison, here is that
Will pepper both your Dogs &amp; Rats and Cats:
Nay spare your purse, I give this in good will,
And as it proves I pray you send to me,
And let me know, wold you ought else with me?
Minim quidem, heir's that you say will take them?
A thousand thanks sweet sir, I say to you
As Tully in his Aesops Fables said,
Ag???tibi gratias, so farewell, vale.
A dew. Come let vs go, I long to see
What the event of this new Jest will bee.
Good morrow gentlemen, saw you not this way
As you were walking, Sir Aminadab?
M. Arthur as I take it.
Sir the same.
Sir I desire you more familiar love,
Would I could bid my self unto your house,
For I have wished for your acquaintance long.
Sweet M. Anselme I desire yours too:
Will you come dine with me at home to morrow,
You shall be welcome I assure you sir.
I fear sir I shall prove too bold a guest.
You shall be welcome if you bring your friend.
O Lord sir, we shall be too troublesome.
Nay now I will enforce a promise from you,
Shall I expect you?
Yes with all my heart.
A thousand thanks. Yonders the schoolmaster.
So till to morrow twenty times farewell.
I double all your farewells twenty fold.
O this acquaintance was well scraped of me,
By this my Love to morrow I shall see.
This poison shall by force expel,
Amorem love, Infernum hell.
Per hoc venenum ego I,
For my sweet lovely Lass will die.
What do I hear of poison, which sweet means
Must make me a brave frolic widower?
It seems the doting fool being forlorn
Hath got some compound mixture, in despair
To end his desperate fortunes and his life:
Isle get it from him, and with this make way
To my wives night, and to my Loves fair day.
In nominee domino, friends farewell:
I know death comes here's such a smell.
Pater &amp; matter, father and mother,
Fritter &amp; soror, sister and brother,
And my sweet Mary, not these drugs,
Do send me to the Infernal bugs,
But thy unkindness, so adieu,
Hob-goblins now I come to you.
Hold man I say, what will the mad mad do?
I have I got thee, thou shalt go with me:
No more of that, fie Sir Minadab
Destroy your self: If I but hear hereafter
You practice such revenge upon your self,
All your friends shall know that for a wench,
A paltry wench, you would have kilt your self.
O tace queso, do not name
This frantic deed of mine for shame:
My sweet magister not a word,
Isle neither drown me in a ford
Nor give my neck such a scope,
To embrace it with a hempen rope;
Isle die no way till nature will me,
And death come with his dart and kill me.
If what is past you will conceal,
And nothing to the world reveal,
Nay as Quintillian said of yore,
Isle strive to kill my self no more.
On that condition Isle conceal this deed,
To morrow pray come and dine with me:
For I have many strangers, amongst the rest,
Some are desirous of your company.
You will not fail me?
No in sooth, Isle try the sharpness of my tooth,
In steed of poison, I will eat
Rabets, Capons, and such meat:
And so as Pithagor as says,
With wholesome fare prolong my days.
But Sir will Mistress Mall be there?
She shall, she shall man never fear.
Then my spirit becomes stronger,
And I will live and stretch longer:
For Ouid said, and did not lie,
That poisoned men do often die.
But poison henceforth Isle not eat,
Whilst I can other victuals get:
To morrow if you make a feast,
Be sure sir I will be your guest.
But keep my counsel, vale tu,
And till to morrow sir adieu:
At your Table I will prove
If I can eat away my love.
O I am glad I have thee, now devise
A way how to bestow it cunningly:
It shall be thus: to morrow Isle pretend
A recocilement twixt my wife and me,
And to that end I will inuit thus many:
First Justice Reason, as the chief man there.
My Father Arther, old Lusam, young Lusam, M. Fuller,
And M. Anselme I have bid already.
Then will I have my lovely Mary too,
Be it but to spite my wife before she die:
For die she shall before to morrow night.
The operation of this poison is
Not suddenly to kill, they that take it
Fall in a sleep, and then tic past recur,
And this will I put in her Cup to morrow.
This tic to have such a Moister, I have sought him at the Change, at the school, at every place, but I cannot find him no where. O cry mercy, my Mistress would in???treat you to come home.
I cannot come to night, some urgent business
Will all this night employ me otherwise.
I believe my Mistress would con you as much thank to do that business at home as abroad.
Here take my purse, and bid my wife provide
Good cheer against to morrow, there will be
Two or three strangers of my late acquaintance.
Sir go you to Justice Reasons house,
Inuit him first with all solemnity.
Go to my Fathers, and my Father in laws,
Here take this note.
The rest that come I will inuit my self,
About it with what quick dispatch thou can.
I warrant you Moister Isle dispatch this business with more honesty, then you'll dispatch yours. But My???ster will the gentlewoman be there?
What gentlewoman?
The gentlewoman of the old house, that is as well known by the colour she lays of her chees, as an Ale???house
by the painting is laid of his Lattice: she that is like Homo, Common to all men: she that is beholding to no Trade, but lives of her self.
Sir be gone, or I will send you hence.
Isle go, but by this hand Isle tell my Mistress as soon as I come home, that Mistress light-heeles comes to dinner to morrow.
Sweet Mistress Mary Isle inuit my self:
And there Isle frolic, sup, and spend the night.
My Plot is currant, here tic in my hand
Will make me happy in my second choice,
And I may freely challenge as mine own,
What I am how infore't to seek by stealth.
Love is not much unlike Ambition,
For in them both all lets must be removed
Twixt every Crown &amp; him that would aspire,
And he that will attempt to win the same,
Must plundge up to the depth ore head &amp; ears,
And hazard drowning in that purple sea.
So he that loves, must needs through blood and fire,
And do all things to compass his desire.
Come spread the Table: Is the hall well rubbed,
The cushions in the windows neatly laid,
The Cupboard of plate set out, the Casements stuck
With Rosemary and Flowers, the Carpets brushed?
I forsooth Mistress.
Look to the kitchen Maid, and bid the Cooke take down the Oven stone, the pies be burnt: here take my keys and give him out more spice.
Yes forsooth Mistress.
Whore's that knave Pipkin, bid him spread the cloth,
Fetch the clean diaper napkins from my chest,
Set out the gilded salt, and bid the fellow
Make himself handsome, get him a clean band.
Indeed forsooth Mistress he is such a sloven
That nothing will sit handsome about him,
He had a pound of soap to scour his face,
And yet his brow looks like the chimney stock.
Heel be a sloven still: Maid take this Apron,
And bring me one of Linen, quickly Maid.
I go forsooth.
There was a curtsy, let me see it again.
I that was well. I fear my guests will come
Ere we be ready, what a spite is this.
Mistress.
What's the matter?
Mistress I pray take Pipkin from the fire,
We cannot keep his fingers from the roast.
Bid him come hither, what a knave is that.
Fie, fie, never out of the kitchen,
Still broiling by the fire.
I hope you will not take Pipkin from the fire
Till the broth be enough.
Well sir get a Napkin and a Trencher
And wait to day. So let me see my Apron.
Mistress I can tell ye one thing, my M. wench
Will come home to day to dinner.
She shall be welcome if she be his guest.
But heir's some of our guests are come already,
A Chair for Justice Reason sir.
Good morrow Mistress Arthur, you are like a good huswife,
At your request I am come home, what a Chair!
Thus age seeks ease: where is your husband Mistress?
What a cushion too!
I pray you ease your tail Sir.
Mary and will good fellow, twenty thanks.
M. Hue as welcome as hart can tel, or tong can think.
I thank you M. Pipkin, I have got many a good dish of broth by your means.
According to the aunciet Courtesy you are well???come: according to the time and place, you are heartily welcome: when they are busied at the board, we will find our selves busied in the Buttrie: and so sweet Hugh accor???ding to our scholars phrase, Gratulor aduentum tuum.
I will answer you with the like sweet Pipkin, gratias.
As much grace as you will, but as little of it as you can good Hugh. But here comes more guests.
More stools &amp; cushions for these gentlemen.
What M. Justice Reason, are you here?
Who would have thought to have met you in this place?
What say mine eyes, is Justice Reason here?
Mountains may meet, and so I see may wee.
Well when men meet they meet,
And when they part, they oft leave one another comp???ny:
So we being met, are met.
Truly you say true:
And M. Justice Reason speaks but reason.
To hear how wisely men of law will speak.
Good morrow gentlemen.
What are you there?
Good morrow Mistress, and good morrow all.
If I may be so bold in a strange place,
I say good morrow, and as much to you.
I pray gentlemen will you sit down?
We have been young like you, and if you live
Unto our age, you will be old like vs.
Be ruled by reason, but whose here?
Saluete omnes, and good day
To all at once, as I may say,
First Moister Justice, next old Arthur,
That gives me pension by the quarter:
To my good Mistress, and the rest,
That are the founders of this feast.
In brief I speak to omnes all,
That to their meat intend to fall.
Welcome Sir Aminadab, ?? my son
Hath profited exceeding well with you,
Sit down, sit down, by Mistress Arthurs leave.
Gentlemen, welcome all, whilst I deliver
Their private welcomes, Wife be it your charge,
To give this Gentlewoman entertainment.
Husband, I will: ?? this is she usurps
The precious interest of my Husbands love:
Though as I am a woman, I could well
Thrust such a leaud companion out of doors,
Yet as I am a true obedient Wife,
Id kiss her feet to do my Husbands will.
You are entirely welcome Gentlewoman,
Indeed you are, pray do not doubt of it.
I thank you Mistress Arthur, now by my little ho???nestie,
It much repents me to wrong so chaste a woman.
Gentles, put ore your legs, first M. Justice,
Here you shall sit.
And here shall mistress Arthur sit by me.
Pardon me sir, she shall have my wives place.
Indeed you shall, for he will have it so.
If you will needs, but I shall doo you wrong to take your place.
I by my faith you should.
That is no wrong which we impute no wro??g, I pray you sit.
Gentlemen all, I pray you seat your selves:
What sir Aminadab, I know where your hart is.
Mum not a word, Pox vobis, peace:
Come gentiles Isle be of this mess.
So, who gives thanks?
Sir that will I.
I pray you too it by and by, whore's Pipkin,
Wait at the board, let M. Reasons man
Be had into the buttry, but first give him
A napkin and a trencher. Well said Hugh,
Wait at your Masters elbow, now say grace.
Gloria deo, sirs proface,
Attend me now whilst I say grace.
For bread and salt, for grapes and malt,
For flesh and fish, and every dish:
Mutton and beef, of all meates chief:
For Cow-heels, chitterlings, tripes and sows,
And other meat thats in the house:
For racks, for breasts, for legs, for loins,
For pies with raisons, and with proines:
For fritters, pancakes, and for frays,
For venison pasties and minced pies:
Sheephead and garlic, brawn and mustard,
Wafers, spiced cakes, tart and custard,
For capons, rabets, pigs and geese,
For apples, caraways and cheese:
For all these and many more,
Benidicanus domino.
Amen.
I con you thanks, but sir Aminadab,
Is that your scholar? now I promise you
He is a toward stripling of his age.
Who I forsooth, yes indeed forsooth I am his school???ler, I would you should well think I have profited under him too, you shall hear if he will pose me.
I pray you lets hear him.
Huc ades Pipkin.
Adsum.
Quote Casus sunt, how many Cases are there?
Mary a great many:
Well answered a great many, there are six,
Six a great many, tic well answered,
And which be they?
A Bow-case, a Cap-case, a Combe-case, a Lute???case, a Fidle-case, and a Candle-case.
I know them all, again well answered:
Pray God my youngest boy profit no worse.
How many parsons are there?
Isle tell you as many as I know, if you'll give me leave to reckon them.
I prithee doo.
The Parson of Fanchurch, the Parson of Pancridge, and the Parson of.
Well sir about your business: now will I
Temper the Cup my loathed wife shall drink:
Daughter me thinks you are exceeding sad:
Faith daughter so thou art exceeding sad:
Tic but my countenance, for my hart is merry,
Mistress were you as merry as you are welcome,
You should not sit so sadly as you do.
Tic but because I am seated in your place,
Which is frequented seldom with true mirth.
The fault is neither in the place nor me.
How say you Lady to him you last did lie by?
All this is no more prebibo tibi.
I thank you sir, Mistress this draught shall be
To him that loves both you and me.
I know your meaning.
Now to me;
If she have either love or charity.
Hear M. Justice, this to your grave years,
A mournful draught God wot, half wine, half tears.
Let come my wench, here youngsters, to you all,
You are silent, here's that will make you talk.
Wenches, me think you sit like Puritants,
Never a Jest abroad to make them laugh?
Sir, since you move speech of a Puritant,
If you will give me audience I will tell ye
As good a Jest as ever you did hear.
A Jest, thats excellent.
Before hand lets prepare our selves to laugh,
A Jest is nothing if it be not graced:
Now, now, I pray you when begins this Jest?
I came unto a Puritant to woo her,
And roughly did salute her with a kiss:
Away quoth she, and rudely pushed mefro her,
Brother, by yea and nay I like not this,
And still with amorous talk she was saluted,
My artless speech with scripture was confuted.
Good, good indeed, the best that ere I heard.
I promise you it was exceeding good.
Oft I frequented her abroad by night,
And courted her, and spake her wondrous fair,
But ever somewhat did offend her sight,
Either my double ruff, or my long hair:
My scarf was vain, my garments hung too low,
My Spanish shoe was cut too broad at toe.
Ha, ha, the best that ever I heard.
I parted for that time, and came again,
Seeming to be conformd in look and speech,
My shoes were sharpe toed, and my band was plain,
Close to my thigh my metamorphis'd breech:
My cloak was narrow Capte, my hair cut shorter,
Off went my Scarf, thus marched I to the Porter.
Ha, ha, was ever heard the like?
The Porter spying me, did lead me in,
Where his fair mistress sat reading on a chapter:
Peace to this house quoth I, and those within,
Which holy speech with admiration wrapped her,
And ever as I spake, and came her no,
Seeming divine, turned up the white of eye.
So, so, what then, what then?
Forward, I pray forward sir.
I spake divinely, and I called her sister,
And by this means we were acquainted well:
By yea and nay, I will quoth I and kissed her,
She blushed &amp; said that long tongued men would tell,
I seemed to be as secret as the night,
And said, on sooth I would put out the light.
In sooth he would, a passing passing Jest.
O do not swear quoth she, yet put it out,
Because I would not have you break your oath.
I felt a bed there as I groapt about,
In troth quoth I, here will we rest vs both.
Swear you in troth quoth she, had you not sworn
I had not don't, but took it in foul scorn,
Then you will come quoth I; though I be loath,
Isle come quoth she, be it but to keep your oath.
Tic very pretty, but now whens the Jest?
O forward to the Jest in any case.
I would not for angel loose the Jest.
Here is right the dunghill Cock that finds a pearl,
To talk of wit to these, is as a man
Should cast out Jewels to a heard of swine,
Why in the last words did consist the Jest.
I, in the last words? ha, ha, ha,
It was an excellent admired jest,
To them that understood it.
It was indeed, I must for fashions sake
Say as they say, but otherwise, ?? God.
Good M. Arthur thanks for our good cheer.
Gentlemen??, welcome all, now hear me speak;
One special cause that moved me lead you hither,
Is for ancient grudge that hath long since
Continued twixt my modest wife and me,
The wrongs that I have done her, I recant.
In either hand I hold a several Cup,
This in the right hand, Wife I drink to thee,
This in the left hand pledge me in this draught,
Burying all former hatred, so have to thee.
The welcom'st pledge that yet I ever took:
Were this wine poison, or did taste like gall,
The honey sweet condition of your draught,
Would make it drink like Nectar, I will pledge you,
Were it the last that'I should ever drink.
Make that account; thus Gentlemen you see,
Our late discord brought to a unity.
Ass quam bonum &amp; quam iucundum,
Est habitare featres in vnum.
My heart doth taste the sweetness of your pledge,
And I am glad to see this sweet accord.
Glad quoth, theres not one amongst vs,
But may be exceeding glad.
I am, I marry am I, that I am.
The best accord that could betide their loves.
The worst accord that could betide my love.
What rising Gentles, keep your places,
Isle close up your stomachs with a grace.
O Domino &amp; Chare putter,
That giu'st vs wine in stead of water,
And from the Pond and River clear,
Make nappie Ale and good March Beer,
That send vs sundry sorts of meat,
And every thing we drink or eat,
To maids, to wives, to boys, to men,
Laus Deo sancte Amen.
So much good do ye all, and Gentlemen,
Accept your welcomes better then your cheer.
Nay so we doo, Isle give you thanks for all.
Come M. Justice, you do walk our way,
And M. Arthur, and old Hugh your man,
Weal be the first will strain courtesy.
God be with you all.
Propimus ego sum, Isle be the next,
And man you home, how say you Lady?
I pray you do, good sir Aminadab.
Sir, if it be not too much trouble to you,
Let me entreat that kindness at your hands.
Entreat; fie, no sweet Lass command.
Sic so nuns, now take the upper hand.
Come wife, this meeting was all for our sakes,
I long to see the force my poison takes.
My dear, dear husband, in exchange of hate,
My love and heart shall on your service waite.
So doth my love on thee, but long no more,
To her rich love, thy service is too poor.
For shame no more, you had best expostulate
Your love with every stranger, leave these sighs,
And change them to familiar conference.
Trust me the virtues of young Arthurs wife,
Her constancy, modest humility,
Her patience, and admired temperance,
Have made me love all women kind the better.
O my mistress, my mistress, shees dead, shees gone, shees dead, shees gone.
What's that he says?
Out of my way, stand back I say, all joy from earth is fled,
She is this day as cold as clay, my Mistress she is dead:
O Lord, my mistress, my mistress.
What mistress Arhur dead? my soul is vanished,
And the worlds wonder from the world quite banished:
O I am sick, my pain grows worse and worse,
I am quite struck thorough with this late discourse.
What faints thou ma??? Isle lead thee hence for shame,
Sound at the tidings of a women's death?
Intolerable, and beyond all thought,
Come my loves fool, give me thy hand to lead,
This day one body and two hearts are dead.
But now she was as well as well might be,
And on the sudden dead; joy in excess
Hath overrun her poor disturbed soul.
Isle after and see how Moister Arthur takes it.
His former hate far more suspicious makes it.
My M. hath left his gloves behind where he sat in his chair, and hath sent me to fetch them, it is such an old snudge, he will not loose the dropping of his nose.
O Mistress, ?? Hugh, ?? Hugh, ?? Mistress, Hugh I must
needs beat thee, I am mad, I am lunatike, I must fall upon thee, my Mistress is dead.
O M. Pipkin, what do you mean, what do you mean M. Pipkin?
O Hue, ?? Mistress, ?? Mistress, ?? Hue.
O Pipkin, ?? God, ?? God, ?? Pipkin.
O Hue, I am mad, bear with me, I cannot choose, ?? death, ?? Mistress, ?? Mistress, ?? death.
Death quoth, he hath almost made me dead with beating.
I wonder why the knave my man stays thus,
And comes not back, see where the villain loiters.
O M. Justice, M. Arthur, M. Lusam, wonder not why I thus blow and bluster, my Mistress is dead, dead is my Mistress, and therefore hang your selves, o?? my Mistress, my Mistress.
My sons wife dead?
My daughter.
Mistress Arthur, here comes her husband.
O here the wofuls husband comes alive,
No husband now, the wight that did uphold
That name of husband is now quite orethrowne,
And I am left a haplesse Widower.
Fine would I speak, if grief would suffer me.
As Moister Arthur says, so say I,
If grief would let me, I would weeping die,
To be thus haplesse in my aged years,
O I would speak, but my words melt to tears.
Go in, go in, and view the sweetest Course
That ere was laid upon a mournful room,
You cannot speak for weeping sorrows doom.
Badnewes are rife, good tidings seldom come.
What frantic humour doth thus haunt my sense,
Striving to breed destruction in my spirit?
When I would sleep, the ghost of my sweet love,
Appears unto me in an Angels shape,
When I am wake, my fantasy presents
As in a glass, the shadow of my love:
When I would speak, her name intrudes it self
Into the perfect echoes of my speech.
And though my thought beget some other word,
Yet will my tongue speak nothing but her name:
If I do meditate it is on her,
If dream on her, or if discourse on her,
I think her ghost doth haunt me, as in times
Of former darkness old wives tales report,
Here comes my bitter Genius, whose advice
Directs me still in all my actions.
How now, from whence come you?
Faith from the street, in which as I past by,
I met the modest Mistress Arthurs Course:
And after her as mourners, first her husband,
Next Justice Reason, then old M. Arthur,
Old M. Lusam, and young Lusam too,
With many other kinsfolks, neighbours, friends,
And others that lament her Funeral,
Her body is by this laid in the vault.
And in that vault my body I will lay,
I prithee leave me, thither is my way.
I am sure you jest, you mean not as you say.
No, no, Isle but go to the Church and pray.
Nay then we shall be troubled with your humour.
As ever thou did love me, or as ever
Thou did delight in my society,
By all the rights of friendship, and of love,
Let me entreat thy absence but one hour,
And at the hours end I will come to thee.
Nay if you will be foolish, and past reason,
Isle wash my hands like Pilot, from thy folly,
And suffer thee in these extremities.
Now it is night, &amp; the bright lamps of heaven
Are half burnt out, now bright Adelbora
Welcomes the cheerful Day-star to the Fast,
And harmless stillness hath possessed the world.
This is the Church, this hollow is the Vault,
Where the dead body of my Saint remains,
And this the Coffin that enshrines her body,
For her bright soul is now in paradise.
My coming is with no intent of sin,
Or to defile the body of the dead,
But rather take my last farewell of her,
Or languishing and dying by her side.
My airy soul post after hers to heaven,
First with this latest kiss I seal my love.
Her lips are warm, and I am much deceived
If that she stir not: &amp; this Golgotha,
This place of dead men's bones is terrible,
Presenting fearful apparitions.
It is some spirit that in the Coffin lies,
And makes my hair start up an end with fear,
Come to thy self faint heart, she sits upright,
O I would hide me, but I know not where;
Tush if it be a spirit, tic a good spirit,
For with her body living, ill she knew not,
And with her body dead, ill cannot meddle.
Who am I? or where am I?
O she speaks, and by her language now I know she lives.
O who can tell me where I am become?
For in this darkness I have lost my self,
I am not dead, for I have sense and life,
How come I then in this Coffin buried?
Anselme be bold she lives, and Destiny
Hath trained thee hither to redeem her life.
Lives any amongst these dead? none but my self.
O yes, a man whose heart till now was dead,
Lives and survives at your return to life:
Nay start not, I am Anselme, one who long
Hath doted on your fair perfection,
And loving you more then became me well,
Was hither sent by some strange providence,
To bring you from these hollow vaults below,
To be a liver in the world again.
I understand you, and I thank the heavens,
That sent you to revive me from this fear,
And I embrace my safety with good will.
Mane Citus lectum fuge mollem discute somnum,
Temple pet as supplex &amp; venerarum deum.
Shake off thy sleep, get up betimes, go to the church and pray,
And never fear, God will thee hear, &amp; keep thee all the day.
Good counsel boys, observe it, mark it well,
This early rising, this diliculo,
Is good both for your bodies and your minds.
Tic not yet day, give me my Tinder-box,
Mean time unloose your sachels &amp; your books,
Draw, draw, and take you to your lessons boys.
O Lord M. whats that in the white sheet?
In the white sheet my boy, Dic vbi, where?
Vide Moister, vide illic there.
O Domino, Domino, keep vs from evil,
A charm from flesh, the world, &amp; the devil.
O tel me not my husband was ingrate,
Or that he did attempt to poison me,
Or that he laid me here, and I was dead,
These are no means at all to win my love.
Sweet Mistress, he be quath'd you to the earth,
You promised him to be his wife till death,
And you have kept your promise, but now since
The world, your husba??d, &amp; your friends suppose
That you are dead, grant me but one request,
And I will swear never to solicit more,
Your sacred thoughts to my dishonest love.
So your demand may be no prejudice
To my chaste name, no wrong unto my husband,
No suit that may concern my Wedlock breach,
I yield unto it, but to pass the bands of modesty &amp; cha???steady,
First will I be queath my self again
Unto this grave, and never part from hence,
Then taint my soul with black impurity.
Take here my hand &amp; faithful hart to gage,
That I will never tempt you more to sin:
This my request is, since your husband dotes
Upon a leaud lascivious Courtesan,
Since he hath broke the bands of your chaste bed,
And like a murderer sent you to your grave,
Do but go with me to my mothers house,
There shall you live in secret for a space,
Only to see the end of such leaud lust,
And know the difference of a chaste wives bed,
And one whose life is in all looseness led.
Your mother is a virtuous Matron held,
Her counsel, conference, and company,
May much avail me, there a space Isle stay,
Upon condition as you said bettor,
You never will move your unchaste suit more.
My faith is pound, ?? never had chaste wife,
A husband of so leaud and unchaste life.
Mistress I long have served you, even since
These bristled hairs upon my grave like chin
Were all unborn: when I first came to you
These Infant feathers of these ravens wings,
Were not once begun.
No indeed they were not.
Now in my two Muchatoes for a need,
Wanting a rope, I well could hang my self:
I prithee Mistress, for all my long service,
For all the love that I have borne thee long,
Do me this favour now to marry me.
Marry come up you blockhead, you great ass,
What would thou have me marie with a devil,
But peace, no more, here comes the silly fool
That we so long have set our lime-twigs for,
Be gone, and leave me to entangle him.
What Mistress Mary!
O good moister Arthur, where have you been this week, this month, this year?
This year said I? where have you been this age?
Unto a Lover every minute seems time out of mind.
How should I think you love me,
That can endure to stay so long from me?
In faith sweet heart I saw thee yesternight.
I true, you did, but since you saw me not,
At twelve a clock you parted from my house,
And now tic morning, and new stricken seven.
Seven hours thou staidst fro?? me, why did thou so?
They are my seven years Prentiship of woe.
I prithee be patient, I had some occasion
That did enforce me from thee yesternight.
I you are soon enforced, fool that I am,
To dote on one that nought respects me:
Tic but my fortune, I am borne to bear it,
And every one shall have their destiny.
Nay weep not wench, thou woundst me with thy tears.
I am a fool, and so you make me too,
These tears were better kept, then spent in waste,
On one that neither tenders them nor me:
What remedy, but if I chance to die,
Or to miscarry with that I go withal,
Isle take my death that thou art cause thereof.
You told me, that when your wife was dead,
You would forsake all others, and take me.
I told thee so, &amp; I will keep my word,
And for that end I came thus early to thee:
I have procured a licence, and this night:
We will be married in a lawless Church.
These news revive me, &amp; do somewhat ease
The thought that was new gotten to my heart.
But shall it be to night?
I wench, to night.
A senne??? and odd days since my wife died
Is past already, and her timeless death,
Is but a nine days talk, come go with me,
And it shall be dispatched presently.
Nay then I see thou love me, &amp; I find
By this last motion??, thou art grown more kind.
My love and kindness like my age shall grow,
And with the ????????? increase, and thou shalt see,
The older I grow, the kinder I will bee.
I so I hope it will but as for mine,
That with my age shall day by day decline.
Come shall we go?
With thee to the worlds end.
Whose beauty most admire, and all commend.
Tic true as I relate the circumstance,
And she is with my mother safe at home,
But yet for all the hate I can allege
Against her husband, nor for all the love
That on my own part I can urge her too,
Will she be won to gratify my love.
All things are full of ambiguity,
And I admire this wondrous accident.
But Anselme, Arthur's about a new wife, a bone raba,
How will she take it when she hears this news?
I think even as a virtuous Matron should;
It may be that report may from thy mouth
Beget some pity from her ??????inti heart,
And I will urge her with it presently.
Unless report be false, they are linked already,
They are fast as words can tie them: I will tell thee
How I by chance did meet him the last night.
One said to me, this Arthur did intend
To have a wife, and presently to marry:
Amidst the street I met him as my friend,
And to his Love a present he did carry.
It was some ring, some stomacher, or toy,
I spake to him, and bad God glue him joy.
God give me joy quoth he, of what I pray?
Marry quoth I, your wedding that is toward.
Tic false quoth he, &amp; would have gone his way.
Come, come, quoth I, so near it, &amp; so froward:
I urged him hard by our familiar loves,
Prayed him withal not to forget my gloves.
Then he began, your kindness hath been great,
Your courtesy great, and your love not common,
Yet so much favour pray let me entreat,
To be excused from marrying any woman.
I knew the wench that is become his Bride,
And smiled to think how deeply he had lide,
For first he swore he did not court a maid,
A wife he could not, she was else-where tied,
And as for such as widows were, he said,
And deeply swore, none such should be his bride,
Widow, nor wife, nor maid, I asked no more,
Knowing he was betrothed unto a whore.
Is it not Mistress Mary that you mean,
She that did dine with vs at Arthurs house?
The same, the same, here comes the Gentle woman,
Oh Mistress Arthur, I am of your counsel,
Welcome from death to life.
Mistress, this gentleman hath news to tel ye,
And as you like of it, so think of me.
Your husband hath already got a wife,
A huffing wench in faith, whose rufflng silks,
Make with their motion, music unto love,
And you are quite forgotten.
I have sworn to move this my unchaste demand no more.
When doth your colour change?
When doth your eyes Sparkle with fire to revenge these wrongs?
When doth your tongue break into rage and wra?????????
Against that scum of manhood, your vile husband,
He first misvde you.
And yet can you love him?
He left your chaste bed, to defile the bed
Ofsacred marriage with a Courtesan.
Yet can you love him?
And not content with this,
Abused your honest name with staundrous words,
And filled your hushed house with unquietness.
And can you love him yet?
Nay did he not with his rude fingers dash you on the face,
And double dye your Corrall lips with blood?
Hath he not torn those Gold wires from your head,
Wherewith Apollo would have strung his Harp,
And kept them to play music to the Gods?
Hath he not beat you, and with his rude fists,
Upon?? that Crimson temperature of your cheeks,
Laid a lead colour with his boisterous blows.
And can you love him yet?
Then did he not
Either by poison, or some other plot,
Send you to death, where by his Providence,
God hath preserved you by wondrous miracle?
Nay after death hath he not scandalised
Your place, with an immodest Courtesan?
And can you love him yet?
And yet, and yet, and still, and ever whilst I breathe this ayre:
Nay after death my vnsubstantiall soul,
Like a good Angel shall attend on him,
And keep him from all harm.
??????t is he married, much good do his heart,
????????? God she may content him better far
Then I have done: long may they live in peace,
Till I disturb their solace; but because
I fear some mischief doth hangore his head,
Isle weep mine eyes dry with my present care,
And for their healths make hoarse my tongue with prayer.
Art sure she is a woman? if she be,
She is create of Natures purity.
O yes, I too well know she is a woman,
Henceforth my virtue shall my love withstand,
And on my striving thoughts get the upper ha??d.
Then thus resolved, I straight will drink to thee,
A health thus deep, to drown thy melancholy.
Not have my will, yes I will have my will,
Shall I not go abroad but when you please?
Can I not now and then meet with my friends,
But at my coming home you will control me?
Marry come up.
Where are thou patience?
Nay rather wheres become my former spleen?
I had a wife would not have used me so.
Why you Jack sauce, you Cuckold, you what not,
What am not I of age sufficient
To go and come still when my pleasure serves,
But must I have you sir to question me?
Not have my will? yes I will have my will.
I had a wife would not have used me so,
But she is dead.
Not have her will, sir she shall have her will,
She says she will, and sir I say she shall.
Not have her will? that were a Jest indeed.
Who says she shall not, if I be disposed
To man her forth, who shall find fault with it?
What's he that dare say black's her eye?
Though you be married sir, yet you must know
That she was ever borne to have her will.
Not have her will, Gods passion I say still,
A woman's no body that wants her will.
Where is my spirit, what shall I main???taine
A strumpet with a Brabo and her bawd,
To beard me out of my authortie.
What am I from a moister made a slave?
A slave? nay worse, dost thou maintain my man,
And this my maid? tic I maintain them both.
I am thy wife, I will not be dressed so
While thy Gold lasts, but then most willingly
I will bequeath thee to flat beggary.
I do already hate thee, do thy worst,
Nay touch me if thou dare: what shall he beat me?
Isle make him seek his fingers amongst the dogs,
That dares to touch my Mistress: never fear,
My sword shall smooth the wrinkles of his brows
That bends a frown upon my Mistress.
I had a wife would not have used me so,
But God is just.
Now Arthur, if I knew
What in this world would most torment thy soul,
That I would doo: would all my evil usage
Could make thee straight despair, and hang thy self.
Now I remember, where is Arthurs man
Pipkin, that slave? go turn him out of doors,
None that loves Arthur, shall have house-roome here.
Yonder he comes, Brabo discard the fellow.
Shall I be overmastered in my own?
Be thy self Arthur, strumpet he shall stay.
What shall he Brabo, shall he Mistress Splay?
Shall he? he shall not: breathes there any living,
Dares say he shall, when Brabo says he shall not?
Is there no law for this? she is my wife,
Should I complain, I should be rather mocked:
I am content, keep by thee whom thou list.
Discharge whom thou think good, do what thou wilt,
Rise, go to bed, stay at home, or go abroad
At thy good pleasure keep all companies:
So that for all this, I may have but peace.
Be unto me as I was to my wife,
Only give me what I denied her then,
A little love, and some small quietness.
If he displease thee, turn him out of doors.
Who me? turn me out of doors? is this all the wages I shall have at the years end, to bee turned outof doors? you Mistress, you are a.
A what? speak, a what? touch her, and touch me; taint her, and taint me, speak, speak, a what?
Marry a woman that is kin to the frost.
How do you mean that?
And you are a kin to the Latin word, tovnder???stand.
And whats that?
Subaudi, subaudi: and sir, doo you not use to pink doublets?
And why?
I took you for a cutter, you are of a great kindred; you are a common couzener, every body calls you cou???sen: besides, they say you are a very good Warrener, you have been an old Coney catcher: but if I bee turned a begging, as I know not what I am borne too, and that you ever come to the said Trade, as nothing is unpossible, Isle set all the Common-wealth of beggars on your back, and all the Congregation of vermin shall be put to your keeping, and then if you bee not more bitten then all the
Compaine of beggars besides, Isle not have my will: zounds turned out of doors, Isle go and set up my Trade, a dish to drink in that I have within, a wallet that Isle make of an old shirt, then my speech for the Lords sake, I be???seech your worship, then I must have a lame leg, Isle go to footeball and break my shins, and I am provided for that.
What stands the villain prating, hence you slave.
Art thou yet pleased?
When I have had my humour.
Good friends for manners sake a while with???draw.
It is our pleasure sir to stand aside.
Mary what cause hast thou to use me thus?
From nothing I have raised thee to much wealth,
It was more then I did owe thee: many a pound,
Nay many a hundred pound I spent on thee
In my wives time, and once but by my means
Thou hands bin in much danger, but in all things
My purse and credit ever bare thee out:
I did not owe thee this, I had a wife
That would have laid her self beneath my feet
To do me service, her I set at nought
For the entire affection I bare thee.
To show that I have loved thee, have I not
Aboue all women made chief choice of thee?
An argument sufficient of my love,
What reason then hast thou to wrong me thus?
It is my humour.
O but such humours honest wives should purge:
He show thee a far greater instance yet
Of the true love that I have borne to thee,
????????? knew my brothers wife, was she not fair?
So so.
But more then fair, was she not vertuos
Endued with the beauty of the mind?
Faith so they said.
Hark in thine ear, Isle trust thee with my life,
Then which what greater instance of my love:
Thou knew full well how suddenly she died,
To enjoy thy love even then I poysonder her.
How poisoned her! accursed murderer,
Isle ring this fatal larum in all ears,
Then which what greater instance of my hate.
Wilt thou not keep my counsel?
Villain no, thoult poison me as thou hast poisoned her.
Dost thou reward me thus for all my love?
Then Arthur fly and seek to save thy life,
O difference twixt a chaste and unchaste wife.
Pursue the murderer, apprehend him strait.
Why whats the matter Mistress?
This villain Arthur poisoned his first wife,
Which he in secret hath confessed to me:
Go and fetch war??????nts from the Justices
To attach the murderer, he once hanged and dead,
His wealth is mine: pursue the slave thats dead.
Mistress I will, he shall not pass this land
But I will bring him bound with this strong hand.
O what are the vain pleasures of the world,
That in their actions we affect them so?
Had I been borne a servant, my low life
Had stedie stood from all these miseries:
The waving reeds stand free from every gust,
When the tall oaks are rent up by the roots:
What is vain beauty but an Idle breath?
Why are we proud of that which so soon changes?
But rather wish the beauty of the mind,
Which neither time can alter, sickness change,
Violence deface, nor the black hand of envy,
Smudge &amp; disgrace, or spoil, or make deformd.
O had my riotous husband borne this mind,
He had been happy, I had been more blessed,
And peace had brought our quiet souls to rest.
O whither shall I fly to save my life,
When murder and despair dogs at my heals?
O misery, thou never foundst a friend,
All friends forsake men in adversity:
My brother hath denied to succour me,
Upbraiding me with name of murderer.
My uncles double bar their doors against me;
My father hath denied to shelter me,
And cursed me worse then Adam did vile Eve.
I that within these two days had more friends
Then I could number with Arithmatike,
Have now no more then one poor Cipher is,
And that poor Cipher I supply my self.
All that I durst commit my fortunes too,
I have tried, &amp; find none to relieve my wants,
My sudden flight, and fear of future shame,
Left me vnfurnisht of all necessaries,
And these three days I have not tasted food.
It is my husband, ?? how just is heaven!
Poorly disguised, and almost hunger-staru'd.
How comes this change?
Doth no man follow me?
O how suspicious guilty murder is,
I starve for hunger, and I die for thirst:
Had I a kingdom I would sell my Crown
For a small bit of bread: I shame to beg,
And yet perforce I must or beg or starve.
This house belike longs to some gentlewoman,
And here is a woman, I will beg of her:
Good mistress look upon a proore mans wants.
Whom do I see? tush Arthur she is dead:
But that I saw her dead and buried,
I would have sworn it had been Arthurs wife:
But I will leave her, shame forbids me beg
On one so much resembles her.
Come hither fellow, wherefore dost thou turn
Thy guilty looks and blushing face aside?
It seems thou hast not been brought up to this.
You say true mistress: then for charity,
And for her sake whom you resemble most,
Pity my present want and misery.
It seems thou hast been in some better plight,
Sit down I prithee, men though they be poor,
Should not be scorned: to ease thy hunger, first
Eat these Conserves: and now I prithee tell me,
What thou hast been, thy fortunes, thy estate,
And what she was that I resemble most?
First look that no man see, or overhear vs,
I think that shape was borne to do me good.
Hast thou known one that did resemble me?
I Mistress, I cannot choose but weep
To call to mind the fortunes of her youth.
Tell me, of what estate or birth was she?
Borne of good parents, &amp; as well brought up.
Most fair, but not so fair as virtuous,
Happy in all things but her marriage.
Her riotous husband, which I weep to think,
By his leaud life made them both miscarry.
Why dost thou grieve at their adversities?
O blame me not, that man my kinsman was,
Nearer to me a kinsman could not be,
As near allied was that chaste woman too,
Nearer was never husband to his wife:
He whom I termed my friend, no friend of mine,
Proving both mine and his own enemy,
Poisoned his wife, ?? the time he did so,
Joyed at her death, inhumane slave to do so,
Exchanged her love for a base strumpets lust;
Foul wretch, accursed villain, to exchange so.
You are wise, and blessed, and happy to repent so,
But what became of him and his new wife?
O hear the justice of the highest heaven,
This strumpet in reward of all his love,
Pursues him for the death of his first wife,
And now the woeful husband languishes,
Flies upon pursued by her fierce hate,
And now too late he doth repent her sin,
Ready to perish in his own despair,
Having no means but death to rid his care.
I can endure no more but I must weep,
My blabbing tears cannot my counsel keep.
Why weep you Mistress? if you had the heart
Of her whom you resemble in your face,
But she is dead, and for her death,
The spuage of either eye,
Shall weep red tears till every vain is dry.
Why weep you friend, your rainy drops keep
Repentance wipes away the drops of sin.
Yet tell me friend, he did exceeding ill,
A wife that loved and hononr'd him, to kill.
Yet say one like her, far more chaste then fair,
Bids him be of good comfort, not despair.
Her solo's appeasd with her repentant tears,
Wishing he may survive her many years.
Fine would I give him money to supply
His present wants, but fearing he should fly,
And getting over to some foreign shore,
These rainy eyes should never see him more.
My hart is full, I can no longer stay,
But what I am my love must needs bewray.
Farewell good fellow, and take this to spend,
Say one like her commends her to your friend.
No friend of mine, I was my own souls foe
To murder my chaste wife, that loved me so.
In life she loved me dearer then her life,
What husband here, but would wish such a wife.
I hear the Officers with hue and cry,
She saved my life but now, and now I die.
And welcome death, I will not stir from hence,
Death I deserved, Isle die for this offence.
Here is the murderer, and Reasons man
You have the warrant: Sirs lay hands on him,
Attach the slave, and lead him bound to death.
No by my faith M. Brabo, you have the better hart, at least you should have: I am sure you have more Iron and steel, then I have, do you lay hands upon him, I pro???mise you I dare not.
Constables forward, forward Officers,
I will not thrust my finger in the fire.
Lay hands on him I say, why step you back?
I mean to be the hindmost, least that any
Should run away and leave the rest in peril:
Stand forward, are you not ashamed to fear?
Nay never strive, behold I yield my self,
I must commend your resolution,
That being so many and so weapond,
Dare not adventure on a man unarmed.
Now lead me to what prison you think best,
Yet use me well, I am a Gentleman.
Truly M. Arthur we will use you as well as heart can think, the Justices sit to day, and my Mistress is chiefo, you shall command me.
What hath he yielded? if he had withstood vs,
This Curtelax of mine had cleft his head:
Resist he durst not when he once spied me.
Come lead him hence, how likest thou this sweet witch?
This fellows death will make our mistress is rich.
I say I care not whose dead or alive,
So by their lives or deaths, we two may thrive.
Come bear him away.
Old M. Arthur and M. Lusam, so it is, that I have heard both your complaints, but understood neither, for you know Legere &amp; non la negligere est.
I come for favour, as a father should,
Pitying the fall and ruin of his son.
I come for justice, as a father should,
That hath by violent murder lost his daughter.
You come for favour, and you come for justice,
Justice with favour is not partial,
And using that, I hope to please you both.
Good M. Justice think upon my son.
Good M. Justice think upon my daughter.
Why so I do, I think upon them both,
But can do neither of you good:
For he that lives must die, and she thats dead,
Cannot be revived.
Lusam, thou seekst to rob me of my son, my only son.
Hee robbed me of my daughter, my only daughter.
And robbers are flat felons by the law.
Lusam, I say thou art a blood-sucker,
A tyrant, a remorseless Caniball:
Old as I am Isle prove it on thy bones.
Am I a blood-sucker or Caniball?
Am I a tyrant that do thirst for blood?
I if thou seekst the ruin of my son,
Thou art a tyrant and a blood-sucker.
I if I seek the ruin of thy son I am indeed.
Nay more thou art a dotard.
And in the right of my accursed son,
I chalendge thee the field, meet me I say
To morrow morning besides Islington,
And bring thy sword &amp; buckler if thou dare.
Meet thee with my sword &amp; buckler, theres my glove,
Isle meet thee to revenge my daughters death.
Call thou me dotard, though these threescore years,
I never handled weapon but a knife
To cut my meat, yet will I meet thee there.
Gods precious call me dotard.
I have cause,
Just cause to call thee dotard, have I not?
Nay thats another matter have you cause,
Then God forbid that I should take exceptions
To be called dotard of one that hath cause.
My Masters you must leave this quarrelling, for quarrellers are never at peace, and me?? of peace while they are at quiet are never quarrelling; so you whilst you fall into brawls, you cannot choose but Jar. Here comes your son accused, &amp; your wife the accuser: stand forth both. Hugh be ready with your pen and Ink to take their exa???minations and confessions.
It shall not need, I do confess the deed,
Of which this woman here accuses me:
I poisoned my first wife, and for that deed
I yield me to the mercy of the law.
Villain, thou meanst my only daughter,
And in her death depriuedst me of all joys.
I mean her, I do confess the deed,
And though my body taste the force of Law,
Like an offender, on my knee I begs,
Your angry soul will pardon me her death.
Nay if he kneeling do confess the deed,
No reason but I should forgive her death.
But so the law must not be satisfied,
Blood must have blood, and men must have death,
I think that cannot be dispensed withal.
If all the world else would forgive the deed,
Yet would I earnestly putsue the law.
I had a wife would not have used me so,
The wealth of Europe could not hire her tongue,
To be offensive to my patient ears,
But in exchanging her, I did prefer
A devil before a Saint, night before day,
Hell before heaven, and dross before tried gold,
Never was bargain with such damage sold.
If you want witness to confirm the deed,
I heard him speak it, and that to his face
Before this presence I will justify,
I will not part hence till I see him swing.
I heard him too, pity but he should die,
And like a murderer be sent to hell,
To poison her, and make her belly swell.
Why stay you then, give judgment on the slave,
Whose shameless life deserves a shameful grave.
Deaths bitter pangs are not so full of grief,
As this unkindness: every word thou speak,
Is a sharpe dagger thrust quite through my heart.
As little I deserve this at thy hands,
As my kind patient wife deserved of me,
I was her torment, God hath made thee mine,
Then wherefore at just plagues should I rapine?
Where did thou buy this poison? for such drugs
Are felony for any man to sell.
I had the poison of Aminadab,
But innocent man, he was not accessory
To my wives death, I clear him of the deed.
No matter, fetch him, fetch him, bring him
To answer to this matter at the bar:
Hue, take these Officers and apprehend him.
Isle aide him too, the schoolmaster I see
Perhaps may hang with him for company.
This is the day of Arthurs examination
And trial for the murder of his wife:
Lets hear how Justice Reason will proceed,
In censuring of his strict punishment.
Anselme content, lets thrust in among the throng.
O Domino, what mean these knaves,
To lead me thus with bills and glaues?
O what example would it bee,
To all my pupils for to see,
To tread their steps all after me:
If for some fault I hanged be:
Somewhat surely I shall mar,
If you bring me to the bar.
But peace, betake thee to thy wits,
For yonder Justice Reason sits.
Sir Dad, Sir Dab, here is one accuses you
To give him poison being ill employed,
Speak how in this case you can clear your self.
Hei mihi, what should I say, the poison give?? I deny:
He took it perforce fro?? my hands, and domino why not I
Got it of a gentleman, he most frecly gave it,
Ask he knew me, a means was only to have it.
Tic true I took it from this man perforce,
And snatched it from his hand by rude constraint,
Which proves him in this act not culpable.
I but who sold the poison unto him?
That must be likewise known, speak schoolmaster.
A man verbosus, that was a fine generosus,
He was a great guller, his name I take to be Fuller:
See where he stands that unto my hands conueyeda powder,
And like a knave sen her to her grave obscurely to shroud her.
Lay hands on him, are you a poison seller?
Bring him before vs, sir what say you,
Sold you a poison to this honest man?
I sold no poison, but I gave him one
To kill his Rats.
Ha, ha, I smell a Rat.
You sold him poison then to kill his Rats?
The word to kill, argues a murdrous mind:
And you are brought in compass of the murder:
So set him by we will not hear him speak.
That Arthur Fuller and the schoolmaster
Shall by the Judges be examined.
Sir if my friend may not speak for himself
Yet let me his proceedings justify.
Whats he that will a murder justify?
Lay hands on him, lay hands on him I say,
For iustifiers are all accessories,
And accessories have deserved to die.
A way with him, we will not hear him speak,
They all shall to the high Commissioners.
Nay stay them, stay them yet a little while,
I bring a warrant to the contrary,
And I will please all parties presently.
I think my wives ghost haunts me to my death,
Wretch that I was to shorten her lives breath.
Whom do I see my sons wife?
What my daughter?
Is it not Mistress Arthur that we see,
That long since buried we supposed to bee.
This man is co??damned for poisoning of his wife,
His poisoned wife yet lives, and I am she:
And therefore justly I release his bands.
This man for suffering him these drugs to take,
Is likewise bound, release him for my sake.
This gentleman that first the poison gave,
And this his friend to be releasd I crave.
Murder there cannot be where none is kilt,
Her blood is saved whom you supposed was spilled.
Father in law I give you here your son,
The act's to do, which you supposed was donne.
And father now joy in your daughters life,
Whom heaven hath still kept to be Arthurs wife.
O welcome, welcome, daughter now I see,
God by his power hath preserved thee.
And tic my wench whom I supposed was dead,
My joy revives, and my sad woe is fled.
I know not what I am, nor where I am,
My souls transported to an ecstasy,
For hope and joy confound my memory.
What do I see, lives Arthurs wife again?
Nay then I labour for his death in vain.
What seeret force did in nature lurk;
That in her soul the poison would not work?
How can it be the poison took no force?
She lives with that which wold have kilt a horse.
Nay shun me not, be not ashamed at all,
To heaven not me, for grace and pardon fall.
Look on me Arthur, blush not at my wrongs.
Still fear &amp; hope my grief &amp; woe prolongs.
But tell me by what power thou did survive?
with my own hands I tempered that wild draught
That sent thee breathless to thy grandsires grave,
If that were poison I received from him.
That egonescio, but this dram
Received I of this gentleman.
The colour was to kill my Rats,
But it was my own life to dispatch.
Is it even so, then this ambignous doubt
No man can better then my self decide.
That compound powder was of Poppy made and Man???drakes,
Of purpose to cast one into a sleep,
To ease the deadly pain of him whose leg
Should be sawd off, that powder gave I to the school my???ster.
And that same powder, even that item,
You took from me the same per sidem:
And that same powder I comixt with wine,
Our godly knot of wedlock to untwine.
But daughter who did take thee from thy grave?
Discourse it daughter.
Nay that labour save.
Pardon me M. Arthur, I will now
Confess the former frailty of my love.
Your modest wife with words I tempted oft,
But neither ill I could report of you,
Nor any good I could forge for my self
Would win her to attend to my request:
Nay after death I loved her, in so much
That to the vault where she was buried,
My constant love did lead me thorough the dark,
There ready to have tan my last farewell,
The parting kiss I gave her I felt warm,
Briefly, I bare her to my mothers house,
Where she hath since lived the most chaste &amp; true,
That since the worlds creation eye did view.
My first wife stand you here, my second there,
And in the midst my self: he that will choose
A good wife from a bad, come other of me
That have tried both, in wealth and misery.
A good wife will be careful of her fame,
Her husbands credit, and her own good name:
And such art thou. A bad wife will respect
Her pride, her lust, and her good name neglect,
And such art thou. A good wife will be still
In industrious, apt to do her husbands will.
But a bad wife, cross, spiteful and matting,
Never keep home, but always be a gadding:
And such art thou. A good wife will conceal
Her husbands dangers, and nothing reveal
That may procure him harm, and such art thou.
But a bad wife corrupts chaste wedlocks vow.
On this hand virtue, and on this hand sin,
This who would strive to loose, or this to win?
Here lives perpetual joy, here burning woe,
Now husbands choose on which hand you will go.
Seek virtuous wives, all husbands will be blessed,
Fair wives are good, but virtuous wives are best,
They that my fortunes will peruse, shall find
No beauties like the beauty of the mind.

HOw fares the King, my Lord?
speaks he cheerely?
Even as a dying man, whose life
Like to quick lighting, which is
no sooner seen, but is extinct.
Is the Kings will confirmed?
I, thats the point that we level at.
But oh, the confirmation of that will, tic all, tic all.
That will confirm my Daughter Queen.
Right, &amp; my Son is married to your daughter.
My Lord, in an even plain way, I will
Derive the Crown unto your Daughters head.
What though the King hath left behind,
Two Sisters, lawful and immediate heirs,
To succeed him in his Throne Lies it not
In our powers to contradict it?
Have we not the King and Counsels hands unto it?
Tut, wee stand high in mans opinion,
And the worlds broad eye.
Here comes Sir Thomas Wyatt.
Sir Thomas booted and spurred, whether away so fast?
It boots me not to stay,
When in this land rebellion bears such sway.
Gods will, a Court! Tic changed
Since Noble Henries days.
You have set your hands unto a will.
A will you well may call it:
So wills Northumberland:
So wills great Suffolk,
Against Gods will, to wrong those Princely Maids.
Will you not subscribe your hand with other of the Lords?
Not with me, that in my hands,
Surprise the Sovereignty?
Isle dimbed my soul for no man, no for no man,
who at dooms day must answer for my sin:
Not you, nor you my Lords,
Who named Queen Iane in noble Henries days,
Which of you all durst once displace his issue?
My Lords, my Lords, you whet your knives so sharp,
To carve your meat,
That they will cut your fingers.
The strength is weakness that you build upon,
The King is sick, God mend him, I, God mend him:
But were his soul from his pale body free,
Adieu my Lords, the Court no court for me.
Farewell, I fear thee not.
The Fly is angry, but hee wants a sting,
And all the Counsel: only this perverse
And peevish Lord, hath only denied his hand
To the inuesting of your princely Daughter.
Hoe's idle, and wants power.
Our Ocean shall these petty brookes devour,
Here comes his Highness Doctor.
How fares his Highness?
His body is past help.
We have left our practice to the Divines,
That they may cure his soul
Past physics help, why then past hope of life,
Here comes his Highness Preacher:
Life reverent man.
Life, life, though death his body doe dissever,
Our King lives with the King of heaven for ever.
Dead! send for Heralds, call me Purseuants,
Wher's the King at arms? in every market town
Proclaim Queen Iane.
Best to take the opinion of the Counsel.
You are too timorous. We in our selves
Are power sufficient: the King being dead.
This hand shall place the crown
On Queen Ions head.
Trumpets and Drums, with your notes resound,
Her royal name, that must in state be crowned. 
Our Cousin King is dead.
Alas, how small an Urn contains a King?
He that ruled all, even with his princely b•…eath,
Is forced to stoop now to the stroke of death.
Heard you not the proclamation?
I hear of it, and I give credit to it
What great men fear to be,
Their fears grow greater.
Our Fathers grow ambitious
And would force vs sail in mighty tempests,
And are not Lords of what they doe possess.
Are not thy thoughts as great?
I have no thoughts so rank, so grown to head,
As are our Fathers pride.
Troth I doe enjoy a Kingdom having thee.
And so my pain be prosperous in that,
What care I though a Sheep-cote be my Palace
Or fairest roof of honour.
See how thy blood keeps course with mine:
Thou must be a Queen, aye me! a Queen,
The flattering belles that shrilly sound
At the Kings funeral with hollow hearts,
Will cowardly call thee Sovereign:
For indeed thou would prove but an Usurper.
Who would wear fetters though they were all of gold?
Or to be sick, though his faint brows
For a wearing Night-cap, wore a Crown.
Thou must assume, a title that goes on many feet,
But tic an office, wherein the hearts of Scholars,
And of Soldiers will depend upon thy Hearse.
Were this rightly scand,
Wee scarce should find a King in any Land.
Honour and happy reign
Attend the new Majesty of England.
To whom my Lord bends this your aue.
To your grace dread Sovereign,
You are by the Kings will, and the consent
Of all the Lords, chosen for our Queen.
O God! me thinks you sing my death,
In parts of musickes loudness,
Tic not my turn to rise.
The voice of the whole Land-speakes in my tongue
It is concluded your Majesty must ride,
From hence unto the Tower: there to stay
Until your Coronation.
O God!
Why sighs your Majesty?
My Lord and Father, I pray tell me,
Was your Fathers Father ere a King?
Never, and it like your grace.
Would I might still continue of his lyne,
Not travel in the clouds.
It is often seen, the heated blood
That covets to be royal, leaves off ere it be noble,
My learned careful King, what must we go?
We must.
Then it must be so.
Set forward then.
The Tower will be a place of ample state,
Some lodgings in it, will like dead men's skulls,
Remember vs of frailty.
We are led with pomp to prison,
O prophetic soul.
Lo we ascend into our chairs of State,
Like funeral Coffins, in some funeral
Pomp descending to their graves. But we must on.
How can we fare well, to keep our Court:
Where Prisoners keep their cave?
Thus like a Nun, not like a Princess borne,
Descended from the Royal Henries loins:
Live I inuirond in a house of stone,
My Brother Edward lives in pomp and state,
I in a mansion here all ruinate.
Their rich attire, delicious banqueting:
Their several pleasures: all their pride and honour,
I have forsaken for a rich prayer Book.
The Golden Mines of wealthy India,
Is all as dross compared to thy sweetness.
Thou art the joy, and comfort of the poor,
The everlasting bliss in thee we find.
This little volume enclosed in this hand,
Is richer then the Empire of this land.
Pardon me Madam, that so boldly
I press into your Chamber. I salute your
Highness with the high stile of Queen.
Queen! may it be?
Or jest you at my lowering misery.
Your Brother King is dead,
And you the catholic Queen must now succeed.
I see my God, at length hath heard my prayer.
You Sir Harry, for your glad tidings,
Shall be held in honour and due regard.
Health to the Lady Mary.
And why not Queen, Sir Thomas?
Ask that of Suffolk duke, &amp; great Northumber∣land
Who in your steed hath Crowned another.
another Queen, Sir Thomas wee alive,
The true immediate heirs of our dread Father?
Nothing more true then that:
Nothing more true then you are the true heir,
Come leave this Cloister and be seen abroad,
Your very sight will stir the peoples heats,
and make them cheerely, for Queen Maries cry.
One comfort I can tell you: the tenants of the Dukes
Northumberland and Suffolk denied their aid,
In these unlawful arms: to all the Counsel
I denied my hand, and for King Henries Issue still will stand.
Your Counsel, good sir Thomas, is so pithy
That I am won so like it.
Come let vs straight from hence,
From Framingham:
Cheer your spirits.
Isle to the Dukes at Cambridge, and discharge them all:
Prosper me God in these affairs,
I loved the Father well, I loved the Son,
And for the Daughter I through death will run. 
wher's Captain Bret?
Here my Lord.
Are all our numbers full?
They are my Lord.
See them arain'd, I will set forward steright.
Honourable friends, and native peers,
That have chosen me to be the leader of these martial
troops, to march against the sister
Of our late dead Sovereign.
Bear witness of my much unwillingness,
In furthering these attempts,
I rather joy to think upon our ancient victories
Against the French and Spaniard,
Whose high pride we seueld with the waives of british shore
Dying the haven of Brit, with guilty blood,
T•…ll all the Harbour seemed a sanguine poole:
Or we desire these arms, we are now to war
Against the perfidious northern enemy,
Who trembling at our first shock voice and sight,
Like cowards turned their backs with shm•…efull flight
But those rich spoils are past: we are now to go,
Being native friends, against a native foe.
In your hands we leave the Queen elected,
She hath seizure of the Tower,
If you'be confident, as you have sworn
Your selves true li•…ge men to her highness
She no doubt, with royal favour will remunerate
The least of your 〈◊〉. Farewell
My tears into your bosoms f•…ll,
With one 〈◊〉 I doe include you all.
My Lord most loved with what a mourning heart
I take your farewell, let the after signs
Of my imploym ned witness. I protest.
Did not the sacred person of my Queen,
Whose weal I tender as my souls chief bliss,
Urge my abode, I would not think it shame
To trail a pike where you were general.
But wishes are in vain, I am bound to stay,
And urgent business calls your grace away.
See, on my knees I humbly take my leave,
And steep my words with tears.
Kind Arundell, I bind thee to my love.
Once more farewell.
Heavens give your grace success.
Commend vs to the Queen and to your Son,
Within one week, I hope war will be done.
Come my Lords, shall vs march.
I, I, sor Gods sake on.
Tic more then time my friends, that we were gone. 
What ho Porter! open the gate.
I beseech your honour to pardon me,
The Couns•… hath given 〈◊〉 command
Not 〈◊〉 shall 〈◊〉 this way.
Why you idle fellow, am I not sent upon the Queens affairs, commanded by the Lords? and know you not that I am Treasurer? come open the Gate, 〈◊〉 doe you know not what.
Well my Lord, I doe adventure on your word.
The Dukes displeasure: all the Counsel board
Bésides, may be my heavy enemies,
But go a Gods name, I the worst will prove,
And if I die, I die for him I love.
I thank thee, and will warrant thee from death. Is my Horse ready?
It is my Lord
Then will I fly this fearful Counsel board, 
My heart misgives me, I have done amiss,
Yet being a Counsellor one of the number
Nothing can prove amiss.
Now shall I know the worst.
Here comes my Lord of Arundell.
Porter, Did the Lord Treasurer pass this way?
But now my gracious Lord.
Ungracious Villain, follow,
Bring him back again,
If not, by fair means bring him back by force:
And hear you sir, as you go, will the Lord Mayor and some Aldermen of his Brethren, and some espe∣ciall Citttzens of note, to attend our further pleasures presently. 〈◊〉 Treasurer fled: the Duke is but newly are∣rested, some purpose, on my life, to cross their plots: weeleset strong watches, see Gates and walls well mand: tic ten to one but princely innocence,
Is these strange 〈◊〉 wisest violence.
Though' your attempt, Lord Treasurer be such,
That hath no colour in these troublous times,
But an apparent purpose of revolt,
From the deceased Kings will, and our degree,
Yet, for you are a Counsellor of note,
One of our number, and of high degree,
Before we any way presume to judge,
We give you leave to speak in your behalf.
My Lord, the business of these troublous times,
Binding vs al, still to respect the good of common weal:
Yet doth it not debar private regard of vs &amp; of our own
The general weal is treasured in your breast,
And all my ablest powers have bin employed
To stir them there, yet have I borne a part,
Laying the commons troubles next my heart,
My oversight in parting without leave:
Was no contempt, but only for an hour.
To order home affairs, that none of mine,
In these nice times should unto faction clime.
Nay my good Lord, be plain with vs, I pray,
Are you not grieved that we have given consent
To Lady Ions election?
My Lords I am not,
Speak like a Gentleman, upon your word
Are you not disc•…ntent?
Troth to be plain, I am not pleased,
That two such princely Maids lineally descended,
From our royal King, and by his testimony,
Confirmed heir, if that their Brother dying Issules,
And one that never dream't, it never desired
The rule of Sovereignty,
But with virgins tears hath oft bewaild her misery,
Should politically by vs be named a Queen.
You have said nobly, sit and take your place.
My Lords, Sir Thomas Wyatt craves access unto your honours.
Let him come near.
Rome for Sir Thomas Wyatt.
A divine spirit teach your honours truth,
Open your eyes of judgment to behold
The true Legitimate, Mary your undoubted sovereign.
A rise sir Thomas, sit and take your place.
Now to our former business:
The obligation wherein we all stood bound
To the deceased late Kings will and our decree,
His cousin Iane, and the two absent Dukes
Cannot be concealed without great reproach
To vs and to our Issue.
We have sworn in presence of the sacred host of heaven
Unto our late young Lord, to both the Dukes,
That no impeachment should divert our hearts
From the impeachment of the Lady Iane.
To this end we have ceased her in the tower,
By public proclamation made her Queen:
To this end we have armed the Duke, with power
Given them commission under our own hands
To pass against the Lady. You perform in hostile ma∣ner
And no doubt, the spleen of the undaunted spirit
Of Northumbers Earl, will not be called
With writings of repeal.
Advice in this, I hold it better far
To keep the course we run then seeking champion•…,
Hazard our lives, our heirs and the Realms.
In actions roving •…rome the bent of truth,
We have no persident thus to persist
But the bare name of worldly policy.
If others have ground from Justice, and the law,
As well divine as politic agreeing,
They are for no cause to be disinherited.
If you not seven years since •…o that effect,
Swore to the Father to maintain his seed,
What dispensation hath acquitted you
From your first sacred vows?
You'll say, the will extorted from a child.
O! let m•…no eyes in naming that sweet youth,
Observe their part,
Pouring down tears, sent from my swelling heart.
God, mother, I term child? but isle go on,
Say that the will were his, forced by no trick,
But for religions love his simple act,
Yet note how much you err.
You were sworn before to a mans will,
and not a will alone,
But strengthened by an act of Parliament.
Besides this sacred proof. The Princely Maids,
Had they no will nor act to prove their right?
Have birthrights no pri•…ledge, being a plea so strong,
as cannot be refeld, but by plain wrong?
Now were you touched. The Lady in tower,
alas shoe's innocent of my claim.
Trust me, she would thinks •…t a most happy life,
To leave a Queens, and keep a Ladies name.
And for the Dukes, your warrants sent them forth,
Let the same warrant call them back again.
If they refuse to come, the Realm, not they
Must be regarded. Be strong and bold:
We are the peoples factors. Save our Sons
From killing one another, be afraid,
To tempt both heanen and earth, so I have said.
Why then give order that she shall be Queen,
Send for the Mayor, her errors wele forget,
Hoping she will forgive.
Never make doubt, setting her ceremonious or∣der by.
She is pure within, and mildly chaste without.
Give order to keep fast the Lady Iane,
Dissolve the the Counsel. Let vs leave the Tower, and in the City hold our audience.
You have advised well honourable Lords,
So will the Citizens be wholly ours,
and if the Dukes be cross, weal cross their powers.
Lance persado, quarter, quarter,
What shall we quarter Captain?
Why the Soldiers?
Why they are not hanged nor drawn'e yet?
Sir I mean quarter them, that the offended multi∣tude, may pass in safety.
May we not take tools of the pie•… &amp; the aple-wo∣men
Not in any sort the Dukes pleasure will pasle free.
The Cōmons shall be used with al cōmon courtesy
That goes in rank like beans and chees•…-cakes on their
heads in stead of Caps.
Sir•…, this is a famous University, and those school∣lers, those lofty buildings and goodly houses,
Founded by noble Patrons. But no more. Set
a strong watch. That be your 〈◊〉 care.
What 〈◊〉 Soldiers•…?
Fear not, good speech, thuse rude arms I bear,
First n•…t to fight, Sweet, gentle Peace away,
But to succour your lives, pass peaceibly away.
Cry 〈◊〉 save the Queen as you go, and God send you a good market.
God save the Queen, what Queen? there lies the se•…se
When we have none, it can be no offence.
What carry you there in your basket? Mat. Eggs •…or∣sooth.
Well, cry God save Queen Iane as you go, and
God s•…nd you a good Market.
Is the right Queen called Iane? alack for woe,
at the first she was not christened so.
Thus old and young still descant on her name,
Nor lend no ear, when wee horstile proclaim.
I fear, I fear. Fear Bret, what should thou fear?
Thou hast a breast composed of adamant.
Fa•…l what ill betide, my anchor is cast,
and I in Harbour ride.
My Lord tic true, you sent unto the Counsel for fresh supplies, what succour, what supplies? Happy is he can draw his neck out of the collar, and make his peace with Marie.
How stands the Treasurer addicted to vs?
I had forgot: when we wear at counsel,
He stole away, and went home to his house,
And by much entreaty was won to return,
In brief they all incline to Queen Mary
My Lord farewell, each hastic hour:
Will coulder tidings cell.
Come they in thunder, we will meet with them?
In the loudest language that their ordinance speaks,
Ours shall answer theirs.
Call me a Herald, and in the market place Proclaim
Queen •…an. The streets are full,
The town is populous, the people gape for novelty.
Trumpets speak to them,
That they may answer with an echoning cry,
God save Queen Iane, God save her Majesty.
Ha? a bare report of Trumpets!
Are the slaves horse, or want they art to speak?
O me! This Town consi•…s on famous Colleges,
Such as know both how, and what, and when to speak,
Well, yet wee will proceed,
and smother what close envy hath decreed.
Ambrose my Son, what news?
O my thrice honoured Father,
Boy, speak the worst,
That which sounds deadly est, let me hear that first.
The Lords have all re uolted from your faction
Wee in our selves are strong.
In Baynard Castle was a counsel held,
Whether the Mayor and Sheriffs did resort,
And it was concluded to proclaim Queen Mary.
Then they revolt the alegeance from my Daugh∣la, and give it to another:
True my thrice honoured Father,
Besides, my brother Guilford and his wife
Where she was proclaimed Queen, are now
close Prisoners, namely in the Tower.
God take them to his mercy, they had need,
Of grace and patience, for they both must bleed,
Poor Innocentsoules, they both from guilt are free.
O my thrice honoured Father! might I advise
you, fly to your manner, there study for your safety.
Boy, thou say well,
And since the Lords have all revolted from me,
My self will now revolt against my self.
Call me a Herald to fill their empty ears,
Assist me Son, my good Lord Huntington,
Even in this market Town proclaim Queen Mary.
Mary by the grace of God, Queen of England,
France and Ireland, defendres of the Faith. Amen.
Amen, I bear a part,
I with my tongue, I doe not with my heart,
Now they can 〈◊〉, now they can bale and yell,
Base minded slaves, sink may your souls to hell.
My honoured Lord, the Counsel greetes you with these Letters.
Stay Moister Roose, ere you depart receive an an∣swear and reward.
In the Sovereign name of Mary our Queen
You •…al upon the sight hereof,
Surcease your arms, discharge your Soldiers,
And presently repair unto the Court,
Or else to be held as an Arch-Ttaitor.
Tic short &amp; sharp, Moister Roose, we do obey your
warrant: but I pray tel me, how doth all our friends at
Court? is there not a great mortality amongst them?
Is there not a number of them dead of late since I came thence?
My gracious Lord not any.
O moister Roose, it cannot bee, I will assure you
At my departure thence, I left living there at least
Five hundred friends, and now I have not one,
simply not one: friends! ha, ha, ha, Commission
Thou must be my friend.
And stand betiwixt me and the stroke of death,
Were thy date out, my lives date were but short,
They are cold friends, that kills their friends in sport
Here come•…s your honoured friend the Earl of Arundell.
My 〈◊〉 friend!
I am no friend to Traitors: in my most high &amp;
Princely Sovereigns name,
I doe are•…st your honour of high Treason.
A Traitor Arundell? have I not your hand in my
commission? let me peruse it: as I 〈◊〉 tic here,
and by your warrant have so strict proceeded.
Is the limits of my warrant broke answer me.
It may be that it hath pleased her Majesty
To pardon vs, and for to punish you.
I know no other reason, this I must,
I am commounded, and the act is Just.
And I obey you: when we parted last
My Lord of Arundel, our farewell was
〈◊〉 then our greeting now.
Then you cried God speed,
Now you come on me ere you say take heed:
Then you did owe me your best bloods: nay greened
You could not spend them in my service.
O then it was a double death to stay behind,
But I am overtook and you are kind,
I am, beshrew you else, but I submit,
My crime is great, and I must answer it.
You must with your three Sons, be guarded safe
Unto the Tower: with you, those Lords and Knights
That in this faction did associate you,
For so I am enjoined.
Then peaciuely, let 〈◊〉 conduct you thither,
O my Children! my soul weeps endless tears for you.
O at the general Sessions, when all souls
Stand at the bar of Justice,
And hold up their new immortalised hands,
O then lot the 〈◊〉 of their tragic ends
Be racd out of the bed-rowle of my sins:
When ere the black book of my crime's unclasped.
Let not these scarlet Letters be found there:
Of all the rest, only that page be clear.
But come to my arraignment, then to death,
The Queen and you have long aimed at this head,
If to my Children, she sweet grace extend,
My soul hath peace, and I embrace my end. 
Three days are past, Monday, Tuesday and Wed∣nesday too
Yet my protesting servant is not come.
Himself conducted me to this hard lodging,
A simple Cabin, for so great a Prince,
And then he swore, but oaths you see are vain•…,
That he would hourly come and visit me:
I that was wont, to sir 〈◊〉 in estate,
Am now through hunger almost desolate.
My Lord.
Ned Homes, speak hast thou brought me meat?
With much a doe my Lord, meat, bread &amp; wine,
While you refresh your self, I will record
The cause of my long stay.
I prithee doe, need bids me eat,
Need bids me hear thee too.
The night I left you in the hollow tree,
My house was searched.
Go on, go on.
And I no sooner entered but attached,
Threatened the Rack: and if I did not yield
Your gracious self into their graceless hands.
And thou hast don't, thou hast betrayed me.
Done it! o betray you? O no!
First would I see my loved wife and Children
Murdered, and tossed on spears, before I would
Deliver your grace unto their hands,
For they intend your death.
Go on, go on.
and offered a thousand Crowns to him that can
Bring news of your abode, it was offered in my hands.
Which I beseech may stop my Vital breath,
When I am feed with gold to work your death.
See yonder sits the Duke.
I kiss thee in requital of this love.
and in requital of so great a grace,
I kiss your hand that dares to kiss my face.
So Iudas kissed his Moister: cease the Duke.
Ah me! Ned Homes we are undone,
Both thou and I betrayed.
My Lord, late Duke of Suffolk, in her highness name I doe arrest you of high Treason.
I doe obey, and only crave this kindness,
You would be good unto my Servant Homes,
Where in relieving me, hath but performed
The duty of a servant to his Lord.
You are deceived sir in your servant much,
Hee is the man that did betray you.
Here Moister Homes, towards your thousand pounds,
Here is a hundred marks,
Come to the Exchequer, you shall have the rest.
Hast thou betrayed me? yet with such a tongue,
so smoothly oilde, slight of my dangers fear,
O break my heart, this griefe's too great to bear.
Pardon me my Lord.
God pardon thee, and lay not to thy soul
This grievous •…inn: Farewell.
And when thou spend this ill got gold
Remember how thy Moister•… life was sold.
Thy Lord that gave thee Lordships, made thee great,
Yet thou betraidst him as he sat at meat.
On to my grave, tic time that I were dead,
When he that held my heart betrays my head.
O God, O God, that ever I was borne,
This deed hath made me (slave) to abject scorn.
O poor shrimp, how art thou fallen away for want of mouching? O Colen cries out most tirannically, the little gut hath no mercy, whats here vittailes? O rare! O good! Feed chops, drink throat, good vict∣ails makes good blood.
But stay, whose here? more Sheriffs more searchers?
O no, this is Homes that betrayed his honest Moister,
How, with a Halter about his neck? I hope hee doth
not mean to hang himself? isle step a side.
This is the place, where I betrayed my Lord,
This is the place where oft I have relieved:
and villain I, betrayed him to the Jaws of death,
But here before I further will proceed
Here will I bury this enticing gould,
Lye there damned fiend never serve human more,
This is rare, now in this mood hee would hang himself tu•…re excellent.
Shall I ask mercy? no it is too late,
Heaven will not hear, and I am desperate.
So, so, a very good ending, would all false Servants
might drink of the same sauce.
Gold, you are firstmine, you must help
To shift my self into some counterfeit suite
Of apparel, and then to London:
If my old Moister be hanged, why so:
If not, why rustic and lusticke:
Yet before I go, I doe not care if I throw this Dog in
a Ditch: come away dissembler: this cannot choose but be
a hundred pound it ways so heavy.
By Gods assistance, and the power of heaven,
after our Troubles we are safely set,
In our inheritance, for which we doe subscribe
The praise and benefit to God, next thanks
To you my Lords. Now shall the sanctuary,
And the house of the most high be newly built.
The ancient honours due unto the Church,
Buried within the Ruin Monasteries,
Shall lift their stately heads, and rise again
To astonish the destroyers wandering eyes.
Zeal shall be decked in gold,
Religion not like a virgin robbed of all her ponipe,
But briefly shining in her Iemmes of state,
Like a fair bride be offered to the Lord.
To build large houses pull no churches down,
Rather in rich the Temple with our crown.
Better a poor Queen, then the Subjects poor.
May it please your grace to give release
Unto such ancient Bishops that have lost their
Honours in the church affairs.
We have given order to the Duke of Norfolk to release them.
Your sacred Highness will no doubt be mind∣
full of the late Oath you took at 〈◊◊〉
O my Lord of Arundell, wee remember that,
But shall a Subject force his Prince to swear
Contrary to her conscience and the Law?
Wee here release unto our faithful people,
one 〈◊〉 Subsidy,
Due unto the Crown in our dead Brothers days.
The Commonalty shall not be 〈◊〉 burdened
In our reign, let them be liber all in Religion,
and wee will spare their treasure to themselves:
Better a poor Prince then the Nation poor,
The Subjects Treasure, in the Sovereigns store.
What is your Highness pleasure about the Rebels?
The Queene-like Rebels,
Mean you not Queen Iane?
Guilford and Iane, with great Northumberland, and haughty Suffolkes Duke.
The Duke of Suffolk is not yet apprehended,
Therefore my Lords,
Some of you most dear to vs in love,
Be careful of that charge:
The rest weal leave for try all of the other prisoners.
The Lady Iane most mighty Sovereign,
Alyde to you in blood: for shes the
Daughter of your Fathers Sister.
Mary the Queen of France: Charles Brandons
Wife your Niece, your next of blood, except your sister,
Deserves some pity, so doth youthful Guilford.
Such pity as the law alowes to Traitors.
They were misled by their ambitious Fathers,
What Son to obey his Father proves a Traitor,
Must buy their disobedience with their death.
My Lord of Winchester, still thirsts for 〈◊〉.
Went no more, the law shall be their Judge,
Mercy to mean offenders weal ostend,
Not unto such that dares usurp our Crown.
Count Edmond the Ambassador from Spain,
attends your highness answer, brought those
Letters sent from the Emperor
In his Sons behalf.
In the behalf of lovely Princely Philip,
Whose person wee have shrined in our heart?
at the first sight of his delightful picture
That picture should have power to tingle
Love in Royal breasts: the Darts of love are words, pic∣tures,
conceit, heel prevail by any,
Your counsel Lords about this foreign business.
I say and it like your royal Majesty,
a royal treaty, and to be confirmed,
and I allow the match.
Allow it Lords, we have cause
To thank our God, that such a mighty Prince
as Phillip is, Son to the Emperor,
Heir to wealthy Spain, and many spacious
Kingdoms, will vouchsase — 
Vouchsafe! my Lord of Winchester, pray what?
To grace our mighty Sovereign with his honourable Title.
To marry with our Queen: mean•… you not so?
I doe, what then?
O God! is she a beg•…r, a forsaken Maid,
that she hath need of grace from forr•…in princes?
By Gods dear mother, O God p•…rdon sue•…e I,
Me thinks she is a fair and lovely Prince,
Her only beauty (were she of mea•…e birth)
Able to make the greatest 〈◊〉,
I the great Emperor of the 〈◊〉 Cham,
That hath more•… 〈◊〉 under his Command,
Then spanish Philip's like to inherit towns,
To come and lay his Sc•…pter at her feet,
And to entreat her to vouchsafe the grace
To take him and his Kingdom to her mercy.
W•…at you are too hot.
And you to proud vouchsafe? O base!
I hope sheele no•… vouchsafe to take the Emperors
son to her dear mercy.
〈◊〉 my Lord of Winchester I pra'y.
Then 〈◊〉 I say, we have cause to thank our God,
That such a mighty Prince will look•… so lowe,
As to respect this Island and our Queen.
Pardon me Madam, hee respect your 〈◊〉 more th•… your person? think of that.
Went, you wrong the affection of the Prince,
For he desires no 〈◊〉 nor towns,
Nor to bear any office, rule or state,
Either by person or by Substitu•…,
Nor yet himself to be a Counsellor in our affairs.
What need hee (Noble Lords) to ask the
fruit, when he demands the tree?
No Castle, 〈◊〉, nor Towers of strength,
It boots not, when the chiefest Tower of all
The key that opens unto all the Land.
I mean our Gracious Sovereign must be his,
But he will bear no office in the land,
And yet will marry with the Queen•… of all.
Nor be of counsel in the Realms affairs,
And yet the Queen enclosed in his arms:
I doe not like this strange marriage
The Fox is subtle, and his head once 〈◊〉
The slender body easily will follow.
I grant, he offers you in name of dowre,
The yearly sum of threescore thousand Duc∣cats.
Besides, the seventeen famous Provinces,
And that the heir suceeding from your loins,
Shall have the Sovereign rule of both the R•…alms.
What, shall this move your Highness to the match?
Spain is too far for England to inherit,
But England near enough for Spain to woe.
Has not the Kings of England (good Sir Thomas)
Espoused the Daughters of our Neighbour Kings?
I grant, your predecessors oft have sought
Their Qu•…no from France,
And sometimes to from Spain.
But never could I hear that England yet
Has bin so base, to seek a King from either:
Tic policy dear Queen, no love at all.
Tic love great Queen, no policy at all.
Which of you all, dares justify this match,
And not be touched in conscience with an oath?
Remember, O remember I beseech you,
King Henries last will, and his act at Court,
I mean that royal Court of Parliament,
That does prohibit Spaniards from the Land,
That Will and Act, to which you all are sworn,
And doe not damme your souls with perjury.
But that wee know thee Wyatt to be true
Unto the Crown of England and to vs,
Thy overboldness should bee paid with death.
But cease, for fear your liberàll tongue of∣fend,
With one consent my Lords you like this match?
We doe great Sovereign.
Call in Count Edmond Honourable Lords.
Wee have determined of your Embassy,
and thus I plight, our love to Philips heart,
Embark you straight, the wind blows wondrous fair:
Till he shall land in England, I am all care.
And ere hee land in England, I will offer
My loyal breast for him to tread upon.
O who so forward Wyatt as thy self,
To raise this troublesome Queen in this her Throne?
Philip is a Spaniard, a proud Nation,
Whom naturally our Country men abhor.
Assist me gracious heavens, and you shall see
What hate I bear unto their Slavery.
Isle into Kent, there muster up my friends,
To save this Country, and this Realm defend.
God morrow to the Patron of my woe.
God morrow to my Lord, my lovely Dud∣ley.
Why doe you look so sad my dearest Lord?
Nay why doth Iane, thus with a heavy eye,
And a defected look, salute the day?
Sorrow doth ill become thy silver brow,
Sad grief lies dead, so long as thou lives fair,
In my Ions joy, I doe not care for care.
My looks (my love) is sorted with my heart,
The Sun himself, doth scantly show his face,
Out of this firm grate, you may perceive the Tow∣er-Hill
Thronged with store of people,
As if they gaped for some strange Novelty.
Though sleep doe seldom dwéll in men of care,
Yet I did this night sleep, and this night dream't,
My Princely father great (Northumberland)
Was married to a stately Bride:
And then me thought, just on his Bridal day,
A poisoned draught did take his life away.
Let not fond visions so appal my Love,
For dreams doe oftentimes contrary prove.
The nights are tedious, and the days are sad,
And see you how the people stand in heaps,
Each man sad, looking on his opposed object,
As if a general passion possessed them?
Their eyes doe seem, as dropping as the Moon,
As if prepared for a Tragedy.
For never swarms of people there doe tread,
But to rob life, and to i•…ch the dead
And show they wept.
My Lord they did so, for I was there.
I pra'y resolve vs good Moister Lieutenant
Who was it yonder, that rendered up his life
To natures death?
Pardon m•… my Lord, tic felony to acquaint you with death of any Prisoner, yet to resolve your grace, it was your Father, great Northumber∣land, that this day lost his head.
Peace rest his soul, his sins be buried in his grave,
And not remembered in his Epitaph: but who comes 〈◊〉?
My Father Prisoner!
O Iane! now •…light but fearethy Title &amp; thy state,
Thou now must leave for a small grave.
Had I bin contented to a bin great, I had stood,
But now my rising, is pulled down with blood.
Farewell, point me my house of prayers.
Is grief so short? two's wont to be full of words,
Tic true, but now Deaths lesson, bids a could a∣due.
Farewell, thus friends on desperate journeys part,
Breaking of words with tears, that swells the heart.
It is the pleasure of the Queen that you part lodgings.
Till your Arrainement, which must be to morrow.
Good Moister Lieutenant let vs pray to∣gether.
Pardon me Madam I may not, they that owe you, sway me.
Entreat not Iane, though she our bodies part,
Our souls shall meet. Farewell my love.
My Dudley, my own heart. 
Hold Drum, stand Gentlemen,
Give the word along: stand, stand:
Masters, friends, Soldiers, and therefore Gentle∣men,
I know some of you wear warm purses
Lined with gold, to them I sp•…ke not,
But to such lean knaves that cannot put up
Crosses, thus I say, fight valiantly,
And by the mary God, you that have all
Your life time silver lacked,
Shall now get Crowns, marry they must be cracked.
No matter, weal change them for white mo∣ney.
But it must needs be so, dear Country∣men,
For Soldiers are the masters of wars mint,
Blows are the stamps, they set upon with bullets,
And broken pates are when the brains lies spilt:
These light crowns, that with blood are double guilt,
But thats not all, that your stout hearts shall earn,
Stick to this glorious quarrel, and your names
Shall stand in Chronicles ranked 〈◊〉 with King•…
You f•…e your Country from base spanish thrall,
From Ignominious slavery,
Who can digest a Spaniard, that's a true English∣man?
Would he might choke that digest him.
Hee that loves freedom and his Country,
Cry a Wyatt: he that will not, with my heart
Let him stand forth, shake hands,
And weal depart.
A Wyatt, a Wyatt, a Wyatt.
Forbear, or with the breath thy Trumpet spends,
This shall let forth thy soul.
I am a Herald, and challenge safety
By the law of arms.
So shalt thou when thou art lawfully employed
What loud knaves that?
No kna•… Sir Thomas, I am a true man
to my Queen, to whom thou art a Traitor.
Knock him down.
Knock him down, fie no,
Weal handle him, he shall sound before he go.
Hee comes from Norfolk and those few∣ning Lords, in Maries name, weighing out life to them that will with baseness bury it
Cease on him as a pernicious enemy.
Sir George be ruled,
Since we profess the Art of War,
Let's not be hist at for our ignorance,
Hee shall pass and repose, juggle the best he can,
Lead him into the Cry•…. Norry set forth
Set forth thy brazen throat and call all Rochester
About thee: doe thy office, fill their
Light heads with proclamations, doe,
Catch Fools with Lime-twigs dipped with pardons.
But Sir George and good sir Harry Isley,
If this Gallant open his mouth too wide,
Powder the Varlet, pistol him, fire the Roof that's ore his mouth
He craves the law of Arms, and he shall have it,
Teach him our law, to cut's throat if he prate.
If louder reach thy Proclamation,
The Lord have mercy upon thee.
Sir Thomas, I must doe my office.
Come. Weal doe ours too,
I, I, doe, blow thy self hence 
Whoreson proved Herald, because he can
give arms, he thinks to cut vs off by the elbows.
Masters and fellow Soldiers, say, will you leave old
Tom Went?
No, no, no.
A March! 〈◊〉 Norfolkes Drum upon my life.
I pra'y see what Drum it is.
The word is given, arm, arm flies through the camp
As loud, though not so full of dread 〈◊〉 thunder:
For no mans 〈◊〉 look pale, but every face,
Is lifted up aboue his foremans head,
And every Soldier does on 〈◊〉 stand,
shaking a drawn sword in his threatening hand.
At whom, at whose Drum?
At Norfolk, Norfolkes Drum:
With him comes Arundell, you may behold
The silken faces of their 〈◊〉 show,
Nothing but 〈◊◊〉 in the wind,
Norfolk rides 〈◊〉, his crest well known,
Proud, as if all our heads were now hi•… own.
Soft, he shall pay more for them.
Sir Robert Rodston, bring our 〈◊〉,
To 〈◊〉 our 〈◊〉, let all our archery,
Fall off in 〈◊〉 of shot a both sides of the van,
To gall the first Horse of the enemy
That shall come fiercely on:
Our 〈◊〉, bid th•…m to charge, charge my 〈◊〉.
Charge, charge.
Saint George for England, Went for poor Kent,
Blood lost in Countries q•…arrell, is nobly spent.
Base 〈◊〉, hard hearted fugi•…,
He that you sent with Norry, false sir George
〈◊◊〉 to Norfolk.
Sir George Harper fled?
〈◊◊〉 thought better of a Counter •…ite,
His name was Harper, was it not? 〈◊〉 him go,
Hence 〈◊〉 all 〈◊〉 for his sake shall stand,
But for plain nine pence, throughout all the land.
They come, no man give ground in these hot Ca•…es,
Be Englishmen and 〈◊〉 them to their faces. Exeunt
Yonder the Traitor marches with a ste•…le bow.
Bent on his Sovereign, and his kingdoms peace:
To wave him to vs with a flag of truce,
And tender him soft mercy,
Were to call our right in question,
Therefore put in act, your resolute intendments,
If rebellion be suffered to take head,
She lives too long, treason doth swear•…e.
Therefore give signal to the fight,
Tic good, tic good, my Lord.
Whore's Captain Bret?
Here my Lord.
To doe honour to you and those five hundred
Londoners that march after your colours,
You shall charge the Traitor in the Vantgard
Whilst my self with noble Arundell
And stout Iarningam, •…econd you in the maine,
God and Saint George, this day fight on our side.
While thus we tame a desperate Rebels pride.
Countrymen and friends, And you the most valiant sword and Buckler∣Men of London, the Duke of Norfolk in honour has promoted you to the Vangard, and why to the Van∣guard? but because he knows you to 〈◊◊〉 men, mar•…tall men, men of good stomachs, 〈◊〉 hot 〈◊〉, very actions for valour, such as scorns to shrink for a wetting, who will 〈◊〉 off any thing with head and shoulders.
Well forward•…, good commander for wards,
I am to lead you, &amp; whether? to fight: and with whom? with Wyatt: and what is Wyatt? a most fa∣mous and Arch-Traytor, to nobody by this hand that I know.
Nay, speak out good Captain.
I say again•…, is worthy Norfolk gone?
I, 〈◊〉, gon, 〈◊〉.
I say again, th•…t Wyatt 〈◊〉 thus, In 〈◊〉 with the 〈◊◊〉 thus at his tail, is worthy to be hanged like a 〈◊〉 in the King∣domes 〈◊〉, say I well my Lads?
Forwards, forwards.
And 〈◊◊◊〉 off his head shall have for 〈◊◊〉 — 
What shall I have? 〈◊◊〉.
The pox, the plague, and all the deseases, the 〈◊◊〉 and 〈◊〉 can throw upon 〈◊〉.
〈◊〉 not 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 flat.
And wherefore is Wyatt up?
Because he cannot keep•… his 〈◊〉.
No, Wyatt is up to 〈◊〉 the Spaniards down, to keep King P•…illip out, whose coming in will give the Land such a Phillip, •…will make it 〈◊〉 a∣gen.
A would it were come to th•…t, wee would, wee wold leave off Philips 〈◊〉 f•…ll to 〈◊〉.
Philip is a Spaniard, and what is a Spani∣art?
A Spaniard is no Englishman that I know.
Right, a Spaniard is a Camocho, a Calliman∣co, nay which 〈◊〉 worse, a Dondego, and what is a Dondego?
A Dondego is a kind of Spanish Stockfish, or poor Iohn.
No, a Dondego is a desperate Viliago, a very Castilian, God bless vs.
There came but one Dundego into England, &amp; hee made all Paules stink again, what shall a whole a•…∣my of Dondegoes doemy sweet Countrymen?
Marry they will make vs all smell abhomi∣nobly, hee comes not here that's flat.
A Spaniard is ca•…d so, because hoe's a Spaniard his ya•…d is but a span.
That's the reason our Englishwomen love them not.
Right, for he caries not the English mans yard •…∣bout him, if you deal with him look for 〈◊◊〉 sure: if you give an inch he will take an ell: 〈◊〉 he give an ell, heel take an inch. Therefore my fine, spr•…, dapp•…, finical, 〈◊〉, if you 〈◊〉 now, 〈◊〉 you have always bin, counted politic Londiners, t•…y to the stronger side, leave Aru•…ll, leave Norfolk, and love Bret.
Weal fling our flat Caps at them.
Wear your o•… Neates-leather s•…ooes? Scorn Spanish Leather, cry a fig for the Spaniard: (feed I) well bollies?
I, I, I.
Why then fiat, fiat, and every man dye at his foot, that cries not •… Wyatt, a Wya•….
A Wya•…, Wyatt, a Wyatt.
Sweet music, Gallant fellow-Londi∣ners.
Y faith wee are the Mad caps, we are the 〈◊〉.
You shall be all Lord Majors at least,
Those eight 〈◊◊〉 shall doe service
now against their Masters Norfolk and Arundell,
They may t•… their heals more then their hands
for saving of their lives,
When soldiers turn surveyors and measure Lands,
God help poor 〈◊〉.
Soldiers and friend•…, let v•… all play no•…ble blood,
Hounds, and hunt them step by step,
We hear the Lawyers plead in Armour steed of
Gowns, if they fall out about the case they Jar,
Then they may c•… each 〈◊◊◊〉 the Bar.
Soft, this is Ludg are, stand 〈◊◊〉 knock.
Who knocks?
A Wyatt, a true friend,
Open your gates, you louring Citizen•…,
I bring you freedom, from a 〈◊〉 Prince,
The Qu•… has heard your suite,
And tic her pleasure the C•…tie gates,
Stand open to 〈◊〉 vs.
A•…aunt thou Traitor, thinks thou by for∣gerie
To enter London with rebellious arms?
Know that these gates are bard against thy entrance
And it shall cost the lives of twenty thousand true
subjects to the Q•…even before a Traitor enters.
Shoot him through.
Stay, lets know him first.
Kill him, then le•… know him afterwards.
Look on my face, and blushing, see with shame, thy treasons Charecter'd.
Tic the Lord Pembroke.
What have wee to doe with the Lord P•…∣broke, wheres the Queens Lieutenant?
I am Lieutenant of the City now.
Are you Lord Mayor?
The greatest Lord that breathes enters not beer, without express command from my dear Queen.
She commands hy vs.
I doe command thee in her highness name,
To leave the City 〈◊〉, or by •…y honour,
A piece of ordinance shall be strait discharged,
To be thy deaths man, &amp; shoot thee to thy grave.
Then heer,s no entrance.
No, none.
What should wee doe following Wyatt any longer.
O London, London, thou perfidious Town,
Why hast thou broke, thy promise to thy friend?
That for thy sake, and for thy general sake,
Hath thrust my self into the mouth of danger?
March back to Fleet-streete, if that Wy•…t die,
London unjustly, buy thy treachery.
Wold I could steal away from Wyatt, it should be the first thing that I would doe,
Wheres all my Soldier•…? what all gone,
And left my Drum and colours without guard?
O infelicity of careful men!
Yet will I sell my ho•…oured blood as dear,
•…s ever did faithful subject to his Prince.
Pembroke revolts, and flies to Wyats side.
Hoe's dimbed in hell that speaks it.
O my good Lord! tic spread,
That Pembroke and Count Arundell both are fled.
Sfoote who said so? what devil dares stir my patience•… •…ounds I was talking with a •…ue of va∣gabonds that legedd at Wiats tail, and am I thus paid•… for my pains?
And there being mist, some villain finding you out of sight hath raised this slander on you, but come my Lord.
Isle not fight.
Nay sweet Earl.
Zounds fight, and hear my name dishonou∣red?
Went is march•… down Fleete-streete: after him.
Why doe not you, and you, pursue him?
If I strike one blo•… may my hand 〈◊〉 off.
And if I doe by this — 
Come leave your swearing,
Did not countries care urge me to this quarrel?
For my part I would not strike a blow.
No more would I, isle eat no wrongs,
Let's all die, and isle die.
Stand on your Guard, for this way Wyatt is pursuit a maine.
Follow, follow.
Stand Traitor stand, or thou shalt ne'er stand •…ore.
Lords I yield, an easy conquest tic to win the field,
After al's lost I am wounded, let me have a surgeon,
that I may go 〈◊〉 unto my grau•….
Tic not the name of Traitor paules me,
Nor plucks my weapon from my hand.
Use me how you can, though you say Traitor,
I am a Gentleman.
Your dreadful shaking me, which I defy,
Is a poor loss of life, I wish to die,
Death 〈◊◊〉 spirit, no more then can my bed,
Nor will I change one hair, loosing this head.
Come guard him, guard him.
No matter where,
I hope for nothing, therefore nothing fear.
My Lord of Norfolk, will it please you sit
By you the noble Lord of Arundell,
Since it hath pleased her sacred Majesty,
To nominate vs here Commissioners:
Let vs without all partiality be open eard,
To what they can 〈◊〉: whore's the Lieutenant of the Tower?
〈◊〉 my good 〈◊〉.
Fetch forth the prisoners,
Place them 〈◊〉 in 〈◊〉 of state.
Clarke of the 〈◊◊◊〉 requires.
Guilford Dudley, hold up thy 〈◊〉 at the bar.
〈1 line〉
And would to God, this 〈◊◊◊◊◊〉,
Might have 〈◊◊◊◊◊◊〉,
For 〈◊◊〉, and 〈◊◊◊〉 weal.
Iane Gray, Lady Iane Gray,
Hold up thy 〈◊◊◊◊〉.
A hand as 〈◊〉 from 〈◊◊〉,
At the white livery, worn by the Angels in their makers sight.
You are here indicted by the names of Guilford Dudly, Lord Dudley; Iane Gray, La∣die Iane Gray; of 〈◊〉 and high Treason, a∣against our most 〈◊〉 Lady the Queens Majesty.
That is to say, that you Guilford Dudley, and Lady Iane Gray, have by all possible 〈◊〉 sought to procure unto your selves, the Royal•… of the Crow•… of England, to the •…∣ting of our new Sovereign Lady the Qu•… Majesty, the true and lawful l•…full to that •…∣mous King Henrie the eight, and have •…∣lie adorned your selves with the states Garland im∣periall, and have granted 〈◊〉, Commissi∣once, and such like, for levying of men and Souldi∣ers to bee sent against the said 〈◊〉: what answer you to this In•…, 〈◊◊◊◊〉?
Our answer 〈◊〉 be several like 〈◊◊〉:
Yet Noble 〈◊◊◊〉 the 〈◊〉,
May we not make some Apology unto the Cou•…
It is 〈◊◊◊〉 of the Law, therefore directly pl•… unto the 〈◊〉, and then you shall be 〈◊〉.
〈◊〉 the law?
〈1 line〉,
For what 〈◊◊◊◊◊〉,
And you 〈◊◊◊◊〉 our deaths.
〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 you 〈◊〉 of these crimes or not
Isle answer first I am, and I am not,
〈◊〉 should we 〈◊〉 unto the last unguilty;
You 〈◊〉 large conscience 〈◊〉 to 〈◊〉
The 〈◊〉 brow with stile of 〈◊〉.
The 〈◊〉 of the Land shall bee your Jury.
An honourable and worthy Trial,
And God forbid, so many Noblemen
Should be made 〈◊〉 of 〈◊◊◊〉.
You'll answer to the 〈◊〉, will you 〈◊〉
My Lord I will, I am.
What, are you 〈◊〉 or 〈◊〉?
I say unguilty still, yet I am guilty,
Slander not thy self,
If there be any guilty 〈◊〉 was I,
I was 〈◊〉 Queen, I the 〈◊〉 should wear.
〈◊〉 I was thy Husband I 〈◊◊〉.
Our 〈◊〉 wee 〈◊〉 our 〈◊〉, 〈◊◊〉 our 〈◊〉,
And shall our fathers 〈◊◊〉 lives 〈◊〉?
It was my 〈◊〉 that made thee 〈◊〉,
O but for 〈◊〉, my Guilford 〈◊◊◊〉.
My Iane had 〈◊◊◊〉 as 〈◊〉.
My 〈◊〉 free from this soul 〈◊◊〉.
If wee bee guilty, tic 〈◊〉 fault 〈◊◊〉,
And shall 〈◊◊〉, for 〈◊◊〉 in 〈◊◊〉
We sought no 〈◊〉, we 〈◊〉 no Crown,
It was imposde upon 〈◊〉 by 〈◊〉,
Like golden 〈◊◊〉 on a 〈◊〉 Tree,
And will you 〈◊〉 such 〈◊◊〉?
Then make the 〈◊◊〉,
As black as Sickts, because it was constrained to bear the banks, whose battering ordinance should have bin employed against the hindrers of our Royalty.
You talk of senseless ethings.
Dooe's Trees want sense, that by the power of music? have been drawn to dance a pleasing mea∣sure, w•…come then 〈◊〉 unto living things, say wee usurp the English Royalty, wast not by your
I tel you Lords, I have your hands to show,
Subscribed to the Commission of my father, cons•…?
By which, you did authorise him to wage arms,
If they were Rebellious against your Sou•…aigne
Who cried so loud as you, God save Queen Iane?
And come you now your Sovereign to arraign?
Come down, come down, here at a Prisoners bar
Better doe so, then judge your selves amiss•…
For look what 〈◊〉, on our heads you lay,
Upon your own, may light another day.
The Queen hath pardoned them:
And wee must die, for a less fault,
O partiality!
Patience my Guilford, it was ever known,
They that find least, the punishment have borne.
True, my fair Queen of sorrow truly speak.
Great men like great Flies,
Through laws Cobw•… break,
But the thin'st 〈◊〉 the prison of the weak.
Now trust me Arund ell,
It doth gre•… me much, to sit
In judgment of these harmless — 
I helped to attach the Father, but the son — 
O through my blood, I feel compassion.
Rue•… my Lords, weal be humble suitors to the Queen
to save these innocent creatures from their deaths.
Lets break up Court,
If Norfolk long should stay,
In tears and passion, I should melt away.
Sit still, what will you take compassion upon such? they are Heretics.
We are Christians,
Leave our conscience to our selves:
We stand not here about Religious causes
But are accused of Capital Treason.
Then you confess the indictment.
Even what you will,
Yet save my Iane, although my blood you spill.
If I must die, save Princely Guilfords life.
Who is not moved, to see this loving strife?
Pray pardon me, doe what you will to day,
And isle approve it though it be my death.
Then hear the speedy sentence of your deaths,
You shall be carried to the place from whence you
came, from thence unto the place of Execution,
through London to be drawn on Hurdles,
Where thou Iane Gray shalt suffer death by fire.
Thou GuilforId Dudley hanged and quartered,
So Lord have mercy upon you.
Why this is well, since we must die,
That wee must die together.
Stay and here the mercy of the Queen,
Because you are of noble parentage,
Although the crime of your offence be great,
She is only pleased that you shall — 
Will she pardon vs?
Only I say that you shall loose your heads
Upon the Tower-Hill, so convey them hence Leife∣tenant
strictly look ynto your charge.
Our dooms are known,
Our lives have plaide their part,
Farewell my Iane.
My Dudley, 〈◊〉 own heart.
Fine would I take a serimonious leave,
But thats to die a hundred thousand death•…:
I cannot speak for tears.
My Lord, come:
Great griefs speak louder
When the least are dumbed. 
The sad aspect, this prison doth 〈◊〉,
Iumpes with the measure that my heart doth 〈◊〉
And this enclosure here, of nought but stone,
Yields far mòre comfort then the stony hearts
Of them that wronged their country, and their friend
Here is no peri•… Counsellors to swear
〈◊〉 sacred oath, and th•… forswear the same,
No innovators here, doth harbour keep,
A steadfast silence, doth possess the place,
In this the Tower is noble being base.
Sir Thomas Wyatt.
Thats my name indeed.
You should say Traitor.
Traitor and Wyats name,
Differ as far as Winchester and ho•….
I am a Pillar of the Mother Church.
And what am I?
One that subverts the state.
Insult not too much, oreth' unfortunate,
I have no Bishoppes Rochet to declare my innocen∣cie,
This is my cross, that causeless
I must suffer my heads loss.
When that hour comes, wherein my blood is spilt,
My cross will look as bright as yours twice guilt.
Here's for that purpose.
Is your grace so short?
Belike you come to make my death a sport.
We come to bring you to your execution,
You must be hanged and 〈◊〉 instantly:
At the park Corner, it a gallous set,
Whether make hast to tender 〈◊〉 debt.
Then 〈◊〉 the end of Wy•… rising up,
Ito 〈◊◊◊◊◊◊〉 was 〈◊〉,
Right willingly I yield my self to •…th,
But so•…rye such, should have my place of birth.
Had London kept his word, VVyat had •…ood,
But now King Phillip enters through my blood.
Wheres the Li•… of the Tower?
Here my Lord.
Fetch forth your other Prisoners.
My Lord I will, heerelyes young Guilford, here the Lady Iane.
Conduct them 〈◊〉.
Good morrow once more to my lo•…lye Iane.
The last good morrow my sweet love to thee.
What were you reading?
On a prayer book.
Trust me so was I, wee hade need to pray,
For see, the Ministers of death draw near.
To a prepared mind death is a pleasure,
I long in soul, till I have spent my breath.
My Lord High Chancellor, you are well∣come heather,
What come you to behold our execution?
And my Lord Arundell, thrice welcome,
You helped to attach our Father, come you now,
To see the black conclusion of our Tragedy?
We come to doe our office.
So doe wee.
Our office is to die, yours to look on:
We are beholding unto such beholders,
The time was Lords, when you did flock amain,
To see her crowned, but now to kill my Iane,
The world like to a sickell, bends it self,
Men run their course of lives as in a maze,
Our office is to die, yours but to gaze.
Patience my Guilford.
Patience my lovely Iane:
Patience has blancht thy soul, as white as snow,
But who shall answer for thy death? this know,
An innocent to die, what is it less,
But to 〈◊〉 Angels 〈◊◊◊〉,
The guilty dying, doe applaud the law,
But when the innocent creature stoops his neck
to an unjust doom; upon the Judge they check.
Lives are like souls, required of their neglect∣ors,
Then ours of you, that should bee 〈◊◊〉.
Rail not against the law.
No, God forbid, my Lore•… of Wi•…∣chester,
It's made of law, and should 〈◊◊〉
It were against you, if I forge•…t 〈◊〉,
You rejoice`d to see the fall of 〈◊〉,
Joy you now at me?
Oft dying men are filled with prophesies,
But isle not be a prophet of your il.
Yet know my Lords, they that behold vs now,
May to the axe of Iustic•… one day bow,
And in that plot of ground where 〈◊〉 di•…,
Sprinckle their bloods,
Though I know no cause why.
Speak you to me 〈◊〉 Guilfo•…
Norfolk•… no, I speak to — 
To whom?
Alas I doe not know whi•…h of 〈◊〉 dies first.
The better part.
〈◊◊◊◊◊〉
Tic I sweet love, 〈◊◊〉 kiss the block.
I am a man 〈◊〉 men better brook•…
shock of thr•…tning death,
〈◊〉 sex are euerweake
The thoughts of death, a women's heart will break.
But I am armed to die.
Likelier to live:
Death to the unwilling doth his presence give?
Hee dares not look the bold man in the face,
But on the fearful lays his killing Mace.
It is the pleasure of the Queen, that the
Lady Iane must first suffer death.
I thank her Highness,
That I shall first depart this haplesse world,
〈◊〉 not Survive to see my d•…re love dead.
She dying first, I three times loose my head.
Forgive me Lady I pra'y your death.
Ha? hast thou the heart to kill a face so fair.
It is her Heades-man.
And demands a pardon,
Only of her, for taking off her head?
I g•…ntle Guilford, and I pardon him.
But isle not pardon him, thou art my wife.
And he shall ask me pardon for thy life,
Pard•… 〈◊〉 Lord.
Rise, doe not kneel.
Th•…ugh thou submit'st, thou hast a lowering steel
Whose fatal declination brings our death:
Good man of earth, make haste to make vs ear•….
Pleases the Lady Iane, isle help her off with her night-Gowne.
Thanks gentle •…riend,
But I have other waiting women to attend me.
Good Mistress Ellin lend me a helping hand,
To strip me of this worldly ornamen•…
Off with these robes, O 〈◊〉 the•… from my side,
Such silken cove•… are the guilt of pride•….
Instead of gowns, my 〈◊◊〉,
My worldly death 〈◊〉 new 〈◊◊〉.
What is it off?
Madam almost.
Not yet, O God! how hardly can we
shake off this worlds Pomp,
That cleaves unto vs like our bodies 〈◊〉
Yet thus O God shake of thy servants sin.
Here is a scarf to blind you•… 〈◊〉.
From all the world, but from my Guilford•… sight:
Before•… 〈◊◊◊◊〉
Let me 〈◊〉 with a 〈◊〉 look.
O doe not kill me with that 〈◊〉
Tic my last farewell, take it 〈◊〉:
My dearest Guilford 〈◊◊◊〉
Now blind mine ey•…, 〈◊◊◊〉
〈◊◊◊◊◊〉
Oh!
How fares my Lo•…d
Hoe's fall•… into a 〈◊〉.
〈◊◊◊◊◊〉,
〈◊〉 Guile•…rd if thou 〈◊◊◊〉
〈◊◊◊〉 will be the first in heave•…lie bliss•…
Hear comes the Heads-man, with the head of Iane:
Who spake of Iane? who named my lòuely Iane?
Behold her head.
O I shall faint againel
Yet let me bear this fight unto my 〈◊〉
My sweet Ions head:
Look Norfolk, Arundell, Winches•…
Doe male factors, look:
Thus when they die 〈◊〉 ruddy•… lip,
A clear reflecting eye,
Cheeks purer then the Maiden orient 〈◊〉
That 〈◊〉 bash•…lnes through the 〈◊〉
Her innocence, has given her this look:
The like for me to show so well being dead,
How innocence, would Guilford loose his head.
My Lord, the time run•… on.
So does our death.
Hears one has run so fast shoe's out of breath,
But the time goes on,
And 〈◊〉 fair Ions white soul, will be
In heaven before me
If I doe stay: stay ge•…tle wi•…e,
Thy Guilf•…rd follows thee,
Though on the earth we part, by adverse fate,
Our souls s•…all knock together at heavens gate.
The 〈◊〉 is 〈◊〉 deaths have a 〈◊〉
And we 〈◊◊〉 the smoother on our way.
My Lords farewell, 〈◊〉 farewell to all,
The Fathers pride•… has caused the Childrens fall.
Thus have we seen her Highness will performed,
And now their heads and bodies shall beeioynd
and buried in one grave, as fi•…s their loves.
Thus much isle say in their behalfes now dead,
〈◊〉 Fathers pride their lives have severed.

