I Come but like a Harbinger being sent,
To tell you what these preparations mean:
Look for no glorious state, our muse is bent
Upon a barren subject: a bare scene.
We could afford this twig a Timber tree,
Whose strength might boldly on your favours build,
Our Russet, Tissew: Drone, a Hony-Bee,
Our barren plot, a large and spacious field.
Our course fare, banquets: our thin Water, Wine:
Our Brooke, a Sea: our Bats eyes, Eagles sight:
Our Poets dull and earthy muse, Divine:
Our Ravens, Doves: our Crows black feathers, white.
But gentle thoughts when they may give the foil,
Save them that yield, and spare where they may spoil.
SOme music there, none lead the Bride a dance?
Yes, would she dance the shaking of the sheets?
But thats the dance her Husband means to lead her?
Thats not the dance that every man must dance
According to the Ballad.
Music ho,
By your leave Sister, by your Husbands leave
I should have said, the hand that but this day
Was given you in the Church Isle borrow: Sound,
This marriage music hoists me from the ground.
I, you may caper, you are light and free,
Marriage hath yoked my heals, pray then pardon me.
Isle have you dance to, Brother.
Moister Frankford,
You are a happy man sir, and much joy
Succeed your marriage mirth, you have a wife
So qualified and with such ornaments
Both of the mind and body. First her Birth
Is Noble, and her education such
As might become the Daughter of a Prince,
Her own tongue speaks all tongues, and her own hand
Can teach all strings to speak in their best grace.
From the shrill treble, to the hoarsest base.
To end her many praises in one word,
Shes beauty, and perfections eldest Daughter,
Only found by yours, though many a hart hath sought her.
But that I know your virtues and chaste thoughts,
I should be jealous of your praise sir Charles.
He speaks no more then you approve.
Nor flatters he that gives to her her due.
I would your praise could find a •itter theme,
Then my imperfect beauty to speak on,
Such as they be, if they my Husband please,
They su•fice me now I am married,
His sweet content is like a flattering Glass,
To make my face seem fairer to mine eye:
But the least wrinkle from his stormy brow,
Will blast the Roses in my cheeks that grow.
A perfect wife already, meek and patient:
How strangely the word husband fits your mouth,
Not married three hours since sister, tic good,
You that begin betimes thus, must needs prove
Pliant and duteous in your husbands love,
Godamercies Brother wrought her to it already,
Sweet Husband, and a courtesy the first day,
Mark this, mark this, you that are Bachelors,
And never took the grace of honest man,
Mark this against you marry, this one phrase,
In a good time that man both wins and woes,
That takes his wife down in her wedding shoes.
Your sister takes not after you sir Francis,
All his wilde blood your father spent on you,
He got her in his age when he grew civil,
All his mad tricks were to his land intaild,
And you are heir to al: your sister, she
Hath to her dower, her mothers modesty.
Lord sir, in what a happy state live you,
This morning, which to many seems a burden, too
Heavy to bear, is unto you a pleasure.
This Lady is no clog, as many are,
She doth become you like a well made suite
In which the Taylor hath used all his art:
Not like a thick Coat of vnseasond freeze,
Forced on your back in summer; shees no chain
To tie your neck, and curb you to the yoke,
But shees a chain of gold to adorn your neck,
You both adore each other, and your hands
Methinkes are matches, theres equality,
In this fair combination; you are both Scholars,
Both young, both being descended nobly:
Theres music in this sympathy, it caries
Comfort and expectation of much joy,
Which God bestow on you, from this first day,
Until your dissolution, thats for aye.
We keep you here to long good brother Franckford,
Into the hal. Away, go, cheer your guests?
What, Bride, and Bride-groom both withdrawn at once?
I• you be mist, the guests will doubt their welcome,
And charge you with unkindness?
To prevent it,
Isle leave you here, to see the dance within.
And so will I.
To part you it were sin.
Now gallants while the Town Musicians
Finger their frets within, and the mad lads
And country lasses, every mothers child
With nose-gaies and Bridelaces in their hats,
Dance al their Country measures rounds and Jigs,
What shall we do? Hark, they are all on the hoygh,
They toil like Mil-horsses, and turn as round;
Marry not on the toe, I, and they Caper
But without cutting, you shall see to morrow
The hall flower pecked and dinted like a Millstone,
Made with their high shoes, though their skill be small,
Yet they tread heavy where their Hob-nailes fall.
Well, leave them to their sports, Sir Francis Acton
Isle make a match with you, meet me to morrow
At Cheuy-chafe, Isle fly my Hawk with yours.
For what? for what?
Why for a hundred pound.
Pawn me some gold of that.
Here are ten angels,
Isle make them good a hundred pound to morrow
Upon my Hawks wing.
Tic a match, tic done,
An other hundred pound upon your Dogs,
Dare you Sir Charles?
I dare, were I sure to loose
I durst do more then that: hears my hand,
The first course for a hundred pound.
A match.
Ten Angels on sir Francis Actons Hawk:
As much upon his Dogs.
I am for Sir Charles Mountford, I have seen
His hawk and Dog both tried? What clap you hands?
Or first no bargain?
Yes and stake them down,
Were th•y five hundred they were all my own.
Be stirring early with the Lark to morrow,
Isle rise into my saddle ere the sun
Rise from his bed.
If there you miss me, say
I am no Gentleman: Isle hold my day.
It holds on all sides, come to night lets dance•
Early to morrow lets prepare to ride,
We had need be three hours up before the Bride.
Come Nick. take you Io•no, Mi•i•er to trace withal, Jack slime, traverse you with Sisly Milk•ale, I will take Iane trubkin, &amp; Roger Brikbat shall have Isbell Motley, and now that they are busy in the parlour, come strike up, weal have a crash here in the yard.
My humour is not compendious: dancing I possess not, though I can •oote it, yet since I am fallen into the hands of Sisly Milkepale I assent.
Truly Nick though we were never brought up like ser∣uing Courtiers, yet we have bin brought up with serving cry∣tures,
I and Gods creaturs to, for we have bin brought up to serve Sheep, Oxen, Horses, and Hogs, and such like, and though we be but country fellow, it may be in the way of dancing, we can do the Horse-tricke as well as serving-men.
I, and the crosse-point too.
Oh Slime: Oh Brickbat. Do not you know that comp∣reasons are odious, now we are odious our selves to, therefore there are no comparisons to be made betwixt vs.
I am sudden and not superfluous:
I am quarrelsome, and not seditious:
I am peaceable, and not contentious:
I am brief, and not compendious;
Slime foot it quickly, if the music overcome not my melan∣choly I shall quarrel, and if they suddenly do not strike up, I shall presently strike thee down.
No quarrelling for Gods sake: truly if you do I shall set a knave between you.
Slime. I com to dance, not to quarrel: come what shall it be? Rogero
Rogero: no, we, wi• dance the beginning of the world.
I love no dance so well, as Iohn come kiss me now.
I, that have ere now deserved a Cushion, cal• for the cushion dance.
For my part I like nothing so well as Tom tyler.
No weal have the hunting of the Fox.
The hay, the hay, theres nothing like the hay.
I have said, I do say, and I will say again.
Every man agree to have it as Nick says.
Content.
It hath bin, it now is, and it shall be.
What moister Nichlas: what?
Put on your smock a Monday.
So the dance will come cleanly off, come for Gods sake agree of something, if you like not that put it to the Musicians or Let me speak for al, and weal have Sellengers round.
That: that: that.
No I am resolved thus it shall be,
First take hands, then take you to your heals.
Why would you have vs run a way?
No but I would have you shake your heals,
Music strike up.
Hey lively my lasses, here is a turn for thee.
So: well cast off, alof•, aloft, well flown:
O now she takes her at the sows, and strikes her
down to the earth, like a swift thunderclap,
She hath stroke ten Angels out of my way.
A hundred pound from me.
What Faulkener?
At hand sir.
Now she hath ceased the Foul, and gins to plume his
Rebeck her not, rather stand still and check her,
So: cease her g•ts, her lesses, and his bells.
Away?
My Hawk kilt to.
I, but it was at the querre,
Not at the mount like mine.
Judgment my masters.
yours mist her at the far.
I but our Marlin first hath plumd the foul,
And twice renewed her from the river to,
Her bells Sir Francis had not both one weight,
Nor was one semitune aboue the other,
Methinks these millaine bells do sound too full,
And spoil the mounting of your Hawk.
Tic lost.
I grant it not: mine likewise ceased a foul
Within her talents, and you saw her pause
Full of the feathers, both her petty singles,
And her long singles, gript her more th•n other,
The terri•ls of her legs were stained with blood;
Not of the Foul only, she did discomfit,
Some of her feathers, bu• she brake away,
Come, come, your Hawk is but a rifler.
How?
I, and your Dogs are trindle tails and Curs.
You stir my blood.
you keep not a good hound in all your kennel,
Nor one good Hawk upon your Perch.
How Knight?
So Knight? you will not swagger Sir?
Why, say I did?
Why sir, I say you would gain as much by swaggring
As you have got by wagers on your Dogs,
you will come short in al things.
Not in this, now isle strike home.
Thou shalt to thy long home, or I will want my will.
All they that love Sir Francis follow me.
All that affect Sir Charles draw on my part.
On this side heaves my hand.
Here goes my hart.
My God: what have I done? what have I done?
My rage hath plunged into a Sea of blood,
In which my soul lies drowned poor Innocent,
For whom we are to answer: Well tic done,
And I remain the victor? A great conquest;
When I would give this right hand, nay this head,
To breath in them new life, whom I have slain.
Forgive me God, it was in the heat of blood,
And anger quite removes me from my self:
It was not I, but rage, did this vile murder:
Yet I, and not my rage, must answer it.
Sir Francis Acton he is fled the field,
With him, all those that did partake his quarrel,
And I am left alone, with sorrow dumb,
And in my height of conquest, overcome,
Oh God my Brother wounded among the dead,
Unhappy jest that in such earnest ends,
The rumour of this fear, stretched to my ears,
And I am come to know if you be wounded.
Oh sister, sister, wounded at the hart.
My God forbid.
In doing that thing which he forbad,
I am wounded sister.
I hope not at the hart.
yes, at the hart.
Oh G•d: a surgeon there.
Cal me a surgeon sister for my soul,
The sin of murder it hath pierced my hart,
And made a w•de wound there, but for these scratches,
They are nothing; nothing.
Charles what have you done?
Sir Francis hath great friends, and will pursue you,
Unto the utmost da•ger of the Law.
My conscience is become my enemy,
And will pursue me more then Acton can.
Oh, fly sweet Brother.
Shall I fly from thee?
What Iane art weary of my company?
Fly from your foe,
you sister are my friend,
And flying you, I shall pursue my end.
your company is as my eye-ball dear,
Being far f•om you no comfort can be n•are:
yet fly to save your life, what would I care,
To spend my future age in black despair,
So you were safe, and yet to live one week,
Without my Bro•her Charles• through every cheek
My streaming tears would downwards run so rank,
Till they could set on either side a bank,
And in the midst a Channel; so my face
For two s•lt water• Brookes, shall still find place.
Thou shalt not weep so much, for I will stay
In spite of dangers teeth: isle live with thee:
Or isle not live at al, I will not sell
My Country, and my fathers patrimony,
No, thy sweet sight, for a vain hope of life.
Sir Charles, I am made the unwilling instrument
Of your attach and a•prehension:
I am sorry that the blood of innocent men
should be of you exacted. It was told me
That you were guarded with a trope of friends,
And therefore I come armed.
O moister Shriefe
I came into the field with man friends,
But see they al have left me, only one
Clings to my sad misfortune, my dear sister:
I know you for an honest Gentleman,
I yield my weapons, and submit to you,
Convey me where you please.
To prison then:
To answer for the lives of these dead men.
Oh God? oh God?
Sweet sister, every strain
Of sorrow from your hart augments my pain,
your grief abounds and hits against my breast.
Sir will you go?
Even where it likes you best.
How happy am I amongst other men,
That in my mean estate embrace content:
I am a Gentleman, and by my birth
Comapnion with a King, a Kings no more:
I am possessed of many fair revenues,
Sufficient to maintain a Gentleman:
Touching my mind I am studied in al Arts;
The riches of my thoughts and of my time,
Have bin a good proficient, but the chief,
Of al the sweet felicities on earth,
I have a fair, a chaste, and loving wife,
Perfection al, al truth, al ornament,
If man on earth may truly happy •e,
Of these at once possessed: sure I am he.
Sir, theres a Gent. attends without to speak with you.
On horseback.
I on horseback.
Entreat him to alight, I will attend him:
Know thou him Nick?
I know him: his names Wendoll:
It seems he comes in hast, his horse is booted
Up to the flank in mire, himself al spotted
And stained with plashing: sure he rid in fear
Or for a wager: horse and man both sweat,
I ne'er saw two in such a smoking heat.
Entreat him in: About it instantly:
This Wendoll I have noted, and his carriadge
Hath pleased me much by observation:
I have noted many good deserts in him:
Hes affable and seen in many things,
Discourses w•ll, a good companion;
And though of small means, yet a Gentleman
Of a good house, somewhat pressed by want:
I have preferred him to a second place
In my opinion, and my best regard.
O moister Franckeford; moister Wendoll here,
Brings you the strangest news that ere you h•art.
What news sweet wife? what news good M. Wendol?
you knew the match made twixt Sir Francis Acton and Sir Charles Mountford.
True: with their Hounds and Hawks?
The matches were both plaid.
Ha: and which won?
Sir Francis your wives brother had the worst,
And lost the wager.
Why the worse his chance;
Perhaps the fortune of some other day,
Will change his luck.
Oh, but you hear not all?
Sir Francis lost, and yet was loath to yield:
In brief the two Knights grew to difference,
From words to blows, and so to banding sides,
Where valorous Sir Charles slew in his spleen,
Two of your Brothers men: his Faulkener,
And his good Huntsman, whom he lou`d so well,
More men were wounded, no more slain out right,
Now trust me I am sorry for the knight,
But is my brother safe?
Al whole and sound,
His body not being blemished with one wound:
But poor Sir Charles is to the prison led,
To answer at thassize for them thats dead.
I thank your pains sir; had the news bin better,
your will was to have brought it moister Wendol,
Sir Charles will find hard friends, his case is heinous,
And will be most severely concurred on;
I am sorry for him. Sir a word with you,
I know you sir to be a gentleman
In al things, your possibilities but mean,
Please you to use my table and my purse,
They are yours?
O Lord sir, I shall never deserve it?
Oh sir, disparadge not your worth too much,
you are full of quality and fair desert,
Choose of my men which shall •ttend on you,
And he is yours, I will allow you sir,
your man, your gelding, and your table,
Al at my own charge, be my companion.
M. Frankeford, I have oft bin bound to you
By many favours, this exceeds them all
That I shall never merit your least favour,
But when your last remembrance I forget,
Heaven at my soul exact that weighty debt.
There needs no protestation, for I know you.
Virtuous, and therefore grateful: prethy Nan,
use him with al thy louingst courtesy.
As far as modesty may well extend,
It is my duty to recei•e your friend.
To dinner, come sir, from this present day,
Welcome to me for ever: come away.
I do nor like this fellow by no means,
I never see him but my hart still earns,
Zoun•s I could fight with him, yet know not why,
The Devil and he are alone in my eye.
O Nick, what Gent. is that comes to lie at our house, my moister allows him one to waite on him, and I believe it will fall to thy lot.
I love my Moister, by these hilts I do,
But rather then Isle ever come to serve him,
Isle turn away my moister.
Nichlas, where are you Nicklas, you must come in Nicklas and help the young Gentleman off with his boots.
If I p•ucke off his boots, Isle eat the spurs,
And they shall stick fast in my throat like burs.
Then Ienk•n, come you?
Tic no boot for me to deny it, my Moist. hath given me a coat here, but he takes pains himself to brush it once or twice a day with a holly-wand.
Come, come, make hast, that you may wash your hands again, and help to serve in dinner.
You may see my masters, though it be afternoon with you, tic but early days with vs, for we have not dind yet: stay but a little, Isle but go in, and help to bear up the first course and come to you again presently.
This is the Sessions day, pray can you tell me
How young Sir Charles hath sped: Is he acquit,
O• must he try the Laws strict penalty?
Hes cleared of al, spite of his enemies,
Whose earnest labours was to take his life,
But in this suit of pardon, he hath spent
Al the revenues that his father left him,
And he is now turned a plain Country-man,
Reformd in al things; see sir, here he comes.
Discharge your fees and you are then at freedom?
Here moister keeper, take the pore remainder,
Of al the wealth I have, my heavy foes
Have made my purse light, but alas to me,
Tic wealth enough that you have set me free.
God give you joy of your delivery,
I am glad to see you abroad Sir Charles.
The poorest knight in England M. Malby,
My life hath cost me al the patrimony
My father left his son; well, God forgive them
That are the Authors of my pe•nury.
Sir Charles a hand, a hand, at liberty:
Now by the faith I owe, I am glad to see it:
What want you? wherein may I pleasure you?
Oh me? oh most unhappy Gentleman?
I am not worthy to have friends stirred up,
Whose hands may help me in this plunge of want:
I would I were in heaven to inherit there,
Thimortal birth-right which my saviour keeps,
And by no unthrift can be bought and sold,
For here on earth, what pleasures should we trust?
To rid you from these contemplations,
Three hundred pounds you shall receive of me,
Nay five for fail, come sir, the sight of Gold
Is the most sweet receipt for melancholy,
And will revive your spirits, you shall hold law
With your proud adversaries, T•sh, let Frank Acto•
Wage with Knighthood like expense with me,
And he will sink, he will: nay, good Sir Charles
Applaud your Fortune, and your fair escape,
From al these perils.
Oh Sir, they have undone me:
Two thousand and five hundred pound a year
My father at his death possessed me of,
All which the envious Acton made me spend:
And notwithstanding all this large expense,
I had much ado to gain my liberty:
And I have now only a house of pleasure
With some five hundred pounds, reserved
Both to maintain me and my loving sister.
That must I have: it lies convenient for me,
If I can fasten but one finger on him,
With my full hand Isle gripe him to the hart.
Tic not for love I proffered him this coin,
But for my gain and pleasure: come Sir Charles,
I know you have need of money, take my offer.
Sir I accept it, and remain indebted
Even to the best of my unable power:
Come Gentlemen and see it tendered down.
I am a villan, if I apprehend
But such a thought, then to attempt the deed:
Slave, thou art damned without redemption;
Isle drive away this passion with a song,
A song, ha, ha, a song as if fond man
Thy eyes could swim in laughter, when thy soul
Lies drenched and drowned in red tears of blood.
I•e pray, and see if God within my hart
Plant better thoughts? why prayers are meditations,
And when I meditate• oh God forgive me
It is on her divine perfections.
I will forget his, I will arm my self
Not to entertain a thought of love to her,
And when I come by chance into his presence
Isle ha•e these balls until my eye-strings crack,
From being pulled and drawn to look that way,
O, God? O, God? with what a violence
I am hurried to my own destruction,
There goosed thou the most perfectst man
That ever England bred a Gentleman,
And shall I wrong his bed, thou God of Thunder,
Stay in thy thoughts of vengeance and of wrath,
Thy great Almighty, and all Judging hand,
From speedy execution on a villain,
A villain, and a Traitor to his friend.
Did your worship cal?
He doth maintain me, he allows me largely
Money to spend?
By my faith so do not you me, I cannot get a cross of you
My gelding and my man.
Thats Sorrel and I.
This kindness grows of no alliance twixt vs.
Nor is my service of any great acquaintance.
I never bond him to be by desert,
Of a mere stranger, a poor Gentleman,
A man by whom in no kind he could gain.
He hath placst me in the height of al his thoughts,
Made me companion with the best and chiefest
In Yorkshire: he cannot eat without me,
Nor laugh without me, I am to his body
As necessary as his digestion,
And equally do make him whole or sick,
And shall I wrong this man? base man, ingrate,
Hast thou the power strait with thy •ory hands
To rip thy Image from his bleeding hart?
To scratch thy name from out the holy book
Of his remembrance, and to wound his name,
That holds thy name so dear, or rend his hart
To whom thy hart was joined and knit together.
And yet I must, then Wendol be content,
Thus villains, when they would cannot repent.
What a strange humour is my new moister in, pray God he be not mad, if he should be so, I should never have any mind to serve him in Bedlam: It may bee he is mad for missing of me.
What Ienkin? wheres your Mistress?
Is your worship married?
Why dost thou ask?
Because you are my M. and if I have a mistr•s, I wold be glad like a good servant to do my duty to her.
I mean wheres Mistress Frankeford.
Marry sir her husband is riding out of Town, and she went very lovingly to bring him on his way to horse: doe you see sir here she comes, and here I go.
Vanish.
You are well met sir, now in truth my husband
Before he took horse had a great desire
To speak with you: we sought about the house,
Hallowed into the fields, sent every way
But could not meet you, therefore he enjoined me
To do unto you his most kinds commends:
Nay more, he wills you as you prize his love,
Or hold in estimation his kind friendship,
To make bold in his absence and command
Even as himself were present in the house,
For you must keep his table, use his Servants,
And be a present Frankeford in his absence.
I thank him for his love,
Give me a name you, whose infectious tongues
Are tipped with gall and poison, as you would
Think on a man that had your father slain,
Murdered thy children, made your wives base strumpets,
So cal me, cal me so? print in my face,
The most stigmaticke title of a villain,
For hatching treason to so true a friend.
Sir you are much beholding to my husband,
You are a man most dear in his regard.
I am bound unto your husband and you to,
I will not speak to wrong a Gentleman
Of that good estimation, my kind friend,
I will not (Zound• I will not) I may choose,
And I will chose? Shall I be so mis•ed?
Or shall I purchase to my fathers crest
The Motto of a villain. If I say
I will not do it, what thing can enforce me?
Who can compel me? What sad destiny
Hath such command upon my yielding thoughts?
I will not? Ha: some fury pricks me on,
The swift fates drag me at their chariot wheel,
And hurry me to mischief: speak I must:
Injure my self, wrong his, deceive his trust.
Are you not well sir, that you seem th•s troubled?
There is sedition in your countenance?
And in my hart fair Angel• cha•t, and wise,
I love you; start not, speak not, answer not,
I love you: nay, let we speak the rest,
Bid me to swear, and I will cal to record
the host of Heaven.
The host of heaven forbid,
Wendol should hatch such a disloyal thought.
Such is my fate, to this suit I was borne
To wear rich plesaures Crown, or fortunes scorn•.
My husband loves you.
I know it.
He esteems you
Even as his brain, his eye-bal, or his hart.
I have tried it.
His purse is you exchequer, and his table
Doth freely serve you.
So I have found it.
Oh with what face of brass, what brow of steel,
Can you unblushing speak this to the face
Of the espoused wife of so dear a friend:
It is my husband that maintains your state,
Will you dishonour him? I am his wife,
That in your power hath left his whole affairs,
It is to me you speak?
O speak no more
For more th•n this I know and have recorded
Within the red-leau`d table of my hart;
Fair, and of al belove`d, I was not fearful
Bluntly to give my life into your hand,
And at one hazard al my earthly means.
Go, tel your husband he will turn me off,
And I am then undone, I care not I,
It was for your sake: perchance in rage heel kill me,
I care not, it was for you: say I incur
The general name of villain through the world,
Of traitor to my friend, I care not I,
Beggary, shame, death, scandal, and reproach,
For you Isle hazard all, what care I:
For you isle live, and in your love Isle die.
you move me sir to passion and to pity•
The love I bear my husband is as precious
As my souls health.
I love your husband to,
And for his love I will engage my life,
Mistake me not, the augmentation
Of my sincere affection borne to you,
Doth no whit lessen my regard of him,
I will bee secret Lady, close as night,
And not the light of one small glorious star
Shall shine heer in my forehead, to bewray
That act of night.
What shall I say?
My soul is wandering, and hath lost her way.
Oh moister Wendol: oh,
Sigh not sweet saint.
For every sigh you breath, draws from my hart
A drop of blood.
I ne'er offended yet,
My fault I fear, will in brow be writ;
Women that fall not quite bereft of grace,
Have their offences noted in their face.
I blush and am asham•d, oh moister Wendol
Pray God I be not borne to curse your tongue,
That hath enchanted me. This maze I am in,
I fear will prove the labyrinth of sin.
The path of pleasure, and the gate to bliss,
Which on your lips I knock at with a kiss.
Isle kill the rogue.
your husband is from home, your beds no blab:
Nay look not down and blush.
Zounds Isle stab:
I Nick, was it thy chance to come
Just in the nick, I love my moister, and I hate that slave,
I love my mistress, but these tricks I like not,
My Master shall not pocket up this wrong;
Isle eat my fingers first, what say thou mettle?
Dos not the rascal Wendol go on legs
That thou must cut off, hath he not Hamstrings
That thou must hough? Nay metal thou shalt stand
To al I say, Isle henceforth turn a spy,
And watch them in their close conveyances,
I never looked for better of that Rascal
Since he came meshing first into our house,
It is that Satan hath currupted her,
For she was fair and chaste, Isle have an eye
In al their gestures, thus I think of them,
If they proceed as they have done before,
Wendols a knave, my Mistress is a &amp;c.
Sister, you see we are driven to hard shift
To keep this poor house we have left vnsold,
I am now inforcst to follow husbandry,
And you to milk, and do we not live well?
Well I thank God.
O brother hears a change,
Since old Sir Charles died in our fathers house
Al things on earth thus change, some up, some down,
Contents a kingdom, and I wear that Crown,
God morrow, god morrow sir Charls what with your sister
Plying your husbandry: Sergeant stand off,
You have a pretty house here, and a garden,
And goodly ground about it, since it lies
So near a Lordship that I lately bought,
I would fine buy it of you, I will give you.
O pardon me, this house successively
Hath longed to me and my progenitors
Three hundred year, my great great Grandfather,
He in whom first our gentle stile began,
Dwelt here, and in this ground increased this Molehil
Unto that mountain which my father left me,
Where he the first of all our house begun,
I now the last will end and keep this house,
This Virgin title never yet deflourd
By any unthrift of the Mountfords line;
In brief I will not sell it for more gold
Then you could hide or pave the ground withal.
Ha, ha, a proud mind and a Beggars purse.
Wheres my three hundred pounds beside the use,
I have brought it to an execution
By course of Law, what is my money ready?
An execution sir, and never tell me,
You put my bond in suite, you deal extremely
Sell me the land and Isle acquit you straight.
Alas, alas, Tic all trouble hath left me
To cherish me and my poor sisters life,
If this were sold our means should then be quite
Raced from the Bed roll of gentility:
You see what hard shift we have made to keep it
Allied still to our own name, this palm you see
Labour hath gloud within her silver brow,
That never tasted a rough winters blast
Without a Mask or Fan, doth with a grace
Defy cold winter and his storms outface.
Sir, we feed sparing and we labour hard•
We lie uneasy, to reserve to vs.
And our succession this small plot of ground.
I have so bent my thoughts to husbandry,
That I protest I scarcely can remember
What a new fashion is, how silk or satin
Feels in my hand: why pride is grown to vs
A mere mere stranger: I have quite forgot
The names of all that ever waited on me,
I cannot name ye any of my hounds,
Once from whose echoing mouths I hard al the music
That ere my hart desired: what should I say?
To keep this place I have changed my self away.
Arest him at my suit, actions and actions,
Shall keep thee in perpetual bondage fast,
Nay more Isle sue thee by a laity appeal,
And call thy former life in question,
The keeper is my friend, thou shalt have irons
And usage such as Isle deny to dogs: Away with him.
You are too timorous, but trouble is my moister,
And I will serve him truly my kind sister:
Thy tears are of no force to mollify
This flinty man, go to my fathers Brother,
My kinsmen and allies, entreat them from me
To ransom me from this injurious man
That seeks my ruin.
Come Irons, Irons away,
Isle see thee lodged far from the sight of day.
My harts so hardened with the frost of grief,
Death connote pierce it through, Tyrant too fell,
So lead the Fiends condemned souls to hell.
Again to prison, Malby hast thou seen,
A poor slave better tortured: shall we hear
The music of his voice cry from the grate
Meat for the Lord sake: no, no, yet I am not
Thoroughly revenged: they say he hath a pretty wench
Unto his sister, shall I in mercy sake
To him and to his kindred bribe the fool,
To shame her self by lewd dishonest lust,
Isle profer largely, but the deed being done
Isle smile to see her base confusion.
Methinks Sir Francis you are full revenged,
For greater wrongs then he can profer you,
See where the poor sad Gentlewoman stands.
Ha, ha, now I will flout her poverty,
Deride her fortunes, scoff her base estate,
My very soul the name of Mountford hates.
But stay, my hart, or what a look did fly
To strike my soul through with thy piercing eye,
I am enchanted, al my spirits are fled,
And with one glance my envious spline stroke dead.
Acton that seeks our blood.
O chaste and fair.
Sir Francis, why Sir Francis, zounds in a trance,
Sir Francis, what cheer man? Come, come, how first?
Was she not fair, or else this Judging ei•
Cannot distinguish beauty.
She was fair.
She was an Angel in a mortals shape,
And ne'er descended from old Mountfords line.
But soft, soft, let me cal my wits together,
A poor, poor wench, to my great adversary
Sister, whose very souls denounce sterne war
One against other, how now Frank turned fool,
Or madman, whether, but no moister of
My perfect senses and directest wits,
Then why should I be in this violent humour
Of passion, and of love, and with a person
So different every way, and so opposed
In al contractions and still warring actions:
Fie, fie, how I dispute against my soul,
Come, come, Isle gain her, or in her fair quest
Purchase my soul free and immortal rest.
So, march in order and retire in battle ray, my moister and the guests have supped already, else taken away, here now spread for the serving-men in the hal, Butler it belongs to your office.
I k•ow it Ienkin: what do you cal the Gentleman that supped there tonight?
Who my moister?
No, no, moister Wendol, hee is a daily ghuest, I mean the Gentleman that came but this afternoon.
His name is M. Cranwel: Gods light, hark within there, my M. calls to lay more billets on the fire: Come, come, Lord how wee that are in office here in the house are troubled: one spread the Carpet in the parlour, &amp; stand ready to snuff the lights, the rest be ready to prepare their stomachs. More lights in the hal there: come Nicklas.
I cannot eat, but had I Wendols hart,
I would eat that, the rogue grows impudent:
Oh I have seen such wild notorious tricks
Ready to make my eyes dart from my head,
Isle tel my moister, by this ayre I will,
Fall what may fall, Isle tel him: Here he comes.
Nicklas what make you here? Why are not you
At supper in the hal there with your fellows.
Master I staid your rising from the board,
To speak with you.
Be brief then gentle Nicklas,
My wife and guests attend me in the parlour:
Why dost thou pause? Now Nicklas you want money,
And unthrift like would eat into your wages
Ere you have earnd it: here• sir half a crown,
Play the good husband and away to supper.
By this hand an honourable Gentleman, I will not see him wronged: sir I have served you long, you en•ertaind me seven years before your beard, you knew we sir, before you knew my mistress.
What of this good Nicklas.
I never was a make-bate or a knave
I have no fault but one, I am given to quarrel,
But not with women, I will tel you moister
That which will make your hart leap from your breast,
Your hair to startle from your head, your ears to tingle.
What preparations this to dismal news?
Sblood sir I love you better then your wife,
Isle make it good.
Thou art a knave, and I have much ado
With wonted patience to contain my rage
And not to break thy pate: thou art a knave,
Isle turn you with your base comparisons
Out of my doors.
Do, do,
Theres not room for Wendoll and me to,
Both in one house: oh moister, moister,
That Wendol is a villen.
I, saucy.
Strike, strike, do strike, yet hear me, I am no fool,
I know a villen when I see him act
Deeds of a villen, moister, moister, that base slave
Enjoys my mistress, and dishonours you.
Thou hast kilt me with a weapon whose sharpened point
Hath pricked quite through and through my shivering hart,
Drops o• cold sweat fit dangling on my hairs,
Like mornings dew upon the golden flowers,
And I am plungd into a strange agony,
What did thou say? If any word that touched
His Credit or her reputation,
It is as hard to enter my belief,
As Dives into Heaven.
I can gain nothing, they are two
That never wronged me, I knew before
It was but a thankless office, and perhaps
As much as my service or my life is worth,
A• this I know, but this and more,
More by a thousand dangers could not hire me
To smother such a heinous wrong from you,
I saw, and I have said.
Tic probable, though blunt, yet he is honest,
Though I durst pawn my life, and on their faith
Hazard the dere salvation of my soul,
Yet in my trust I may be too secure:
May this be true: Oh may it: can it be:
Is it by any wonder possible,
Man, woman, what thing mortal may we trust,
When friends and bosom wives prove so unjust•
What instance hast thou of this strange repo•t?
Eyes, eyes.
Thy eyes may be deceive`d I tel thee,
For should an Angel from the heavens drop dow•
And preach this to me that thy self hast told,
He should have ••ch ado to win belief•
In both their loves I am •o confident.
Shall I discourse the same by circumstance?
No more, to supper, and command your •allows
To attend vs and the strangers: not a word,
I charge thee on thy life be secret then,
For I know nothing.
I am dumb, and now that I have eas•d my stomach
I will go fill my stomach
Away, be gone:
She is well borne, descended Nobly,
Virtuous her education, her repute
Is in the general voice of all the country
Honest and fair, her carriage, her demeanour
In al her actions that concern the love
To me her husband, modest, chaste, and godly.
Is al this seeming gold plain Copper.
But he; that Iudas that hath borne my purse,
And sold me for a sin, oh God, oh God;
Shall I put up these wrongs? no, shall I trust
The bare report of this suspicious groom
Before the double guilt, the well hatch ore
Of their two harts? No, I will loose these thoughts,
Distraction I will banish from my brow,
And from my looks exile sad discontent,
Their wonted favours in my tongue shall flow,
Till I know al, Isle nothing seem to know?
Lights and a Table there wife, Master Wendol and gentle
Moister Cranwell.
O you are a stranger moister Cranwel you,
And often balke my house: faith you are a Churl,
Now we have supped, a table and to cards.
A pair of Cards Nicklas, and a carpet to cover the table, wheres Sisly with her Counters and her box, candles and candle sticks there, •ie we have such a household of serving creatures, unless it be Nick and I, theres not one amongst them al can say, bow to a goose: well said Nick.
Come moister Frankeford, who shall take my part.
Marry that will I sweet wife.
No by my faith sir, when you are together I sit out, it must be Mistress Frankeford and I, or else it is no match.
I do not like that match.
You have no reason marry knowing al.
Tic no great matter neither, come M. Cranwel shall you and I take them up?
At your pleasure sir.
I must look to you M. Wendol, for you will be playing false, nay so will my wife to.
I, I will be sworn she will.
Let them that are taken playing self forfet the set.
Content; It shall go hard but Isle take you.
Gentlemen what shall our game be?
moister Frankeford you play best at Noddy,
you shall not find it so: Indeed you shall not?
I can play at nothing so well as double ruff.
If moister wendol and my wife bee together, theres no playing against them at double hand.
I can tel you sir the game that master Wendol is best at?
What game is that Nick.
Marry sir, Knave out of doors.
She and I, will take you at Lodam.
Husband shall we play at Saint.
My Saints turned Devil: no, weal none of Saint, your best at new Cut wife: you'll play at that.
If you play at new cut, I am soonest hitter of any hee•e for a wager.
Tic me they play on: well you may draw out
For al your cunning: twil be to your shame:
Isle teach you at your new Cut, a new game,
Come, come.
If you cannot agree upon the game to post and pair.
We shall be soonest pairs, and my good host,
When he comes late home, he must kiss the post.
Who ever wins, it shall be to thy cost.
Faith let it be Vide-ruffe, and lets make honours.
If you make honours, one thing let me crave,
Honour the King, and Queen: except the knave.
Well as you please for that, lift who shall deal.
The least in sight: what are you moister Wendol,
I am a knave.
Isle swear it.
I a Queen?
A queen thou should say? well the Cards are mine,
They are the grossest pair that ere I felt.
Shuffle, Isle cut, would I had never dealt?
I have lost my dealing.
Sir the faults in me,
This Queen I have more then my own you see,
Give me the stock.
My minds not on my game,
Many a deal I have lost, the mores your shame,
you have served me a bad trick moister Wendol?
Sir you must t•ke your lot: to end this strife,
I know I have dealt better with your wife.
Thou hast dealt falsely then.
Whats Trumps.
Harts, partner I rub.
Thou robst me of my soul, of her chaste love
In thy fall•e dealing, thou hast robbed my hart,
Booty you play, I like a looser stand,
Having no hart, or here, or in my hand:
I will give ore the set, I am not well,
Come who will hold my Cards?
Not well sweet Moister Franckford,
Alas, what aisle you: tic some sudden qualm.
How long have you bin so moister Frankford?
Sir I was lusty, and I had my health,
But I grew ill when you began to deal.
Take hence this table, gentle moister Cranwell
You are welcome, see your chamber at your pleasure,
I am sorry that this Megrim takes me so
I cannot sit and bear you company,
Ienkin some lights, and show him to his chamber.
A night gown for my husband quickly there,
It is some •hewme or cold?
Now in good saith this Illness you have got
By sitting late without your gown.
I know it moister Wendol,
Go, go, to bed, least you complain like me,
Wife, prethy wife into my bed-chamber,
The night is raw, and cold, and rheumatic,
Leave me my gown and light, Isle walk away my fit.
Sweet sir good night.
My self good night.
Shall I attend you husband?
No, gentle wife thou• catch• cold in thy head,
Prethy begone sweet, Isle make hast to bed.
No sleep will fasten on mine eyes you know
Until you come.
Sweet Nan I prethy go,
I have bethought me, get me by degrees
The keys of all my doors which I will mold
In wax, and take their fair impression,
To have by them new keys: This being compassed,
At a set hour a letter shall be brought me,
And when they think they may securely play,
They are nearest to danger: Nick, I must rely
Upon thy trust and faithful secrecy.
Build on my faith.
To bed then, not to rest,
Care lodges in my brain, grief in my breast.
You say my Nephew is in great distress,
Who brought it to him but his own lewd life:
I cannot spare a cross: I must confess
He was me brothers son: why Niece, what then?
This is no world in which to pity men.
I was not borne a beggar, though his extremes
Enforce this language from me, I protest
No fortune of mine could lead my tongue
To this base key. I do beseech you uncle,
For the names sake, for Christianity,
Nay for Gods sake to pity his distress:
He is denied the freedom of the prison,
And in the hole is laid with men condemned,
Plenty he ha•h of nothing but of irons,
And it remains in you to free him thence.
Money I cannot spare: men should take heed,
He lost my kindred when he fell to need.
Gold is but earth: thou earth enough shalt have
When thou hast once took measure of thy grave:
You know me moister Sandy and my suit.
I knew you Lady when the old man liud,
I knew you ere your brother sold his land,
Then you were mistress Sue tricked up in Jewels,
Than you sung well, plaid sweetly on the flute,
But now I neither know you nor your suit.
You moister Rotor was my brothers tenant.
Rent free he ply•st you in that wealthy farm
Of which you are possessed.
True he did,
And have I not there dwelt still for his sake:
I have some busiues now, but without doubt
They that have hurled him in will help him out.
Cold comfort still: what say you chosen Tydy?
I say this comes of roysting, swaggring,
Call me not Cousin: each man for himself,
Some men are borne to mirth and some to sorrow.
I am no Cousin unto them that borrow.
Oh charity why art thou fled to heaven,
And left al things on this earth uneven,
Their scosfing answers I well ne'er return,
But to my self his grief in silence morn.
She is poor, Isle therefore tempt her with this gold.
Go Malby in my name deliver it,
And I will stay thy answer.
Fair mistress as I understand, your grief
Doth grow from want, so I have here in store
A means to furnish you, a bag of gold
Whi•h to your hands I freely tender you.
I thank you Heavens, I thank you gentle sir?
God make me able to requite this favour.
This Gold Sir Francis Acton sends by me,
And prays you &amp;c.
Acton: oh God that name I am borne to curse,
Hence Bawd: hence Broker: see, I spurn his gold,
My honour never shall for gain be sold.
Stay, Lady stay.
From you Isle posting hie,
Even as the Doves from feathered Eagles fly.
She hates my name, my face, how should I wo?
I am disgra•st in every thing I do.
The more she hates me, and disdains my love,
The more I am wrapped in admiration
Of her divine and chaste perfections.
Woo her with gifts, I cannot: for al gifts,
Sent in my name she spurns. With looks I cannot,
For she abhors my sight. Nor yet with letters,
For none she will receive. How then? how then?
Well I will fasten such a kindness on her,
As shall •recome her hate and conquer it.
Sir Charles her Brother lies in execution
For a great sum of money, and besides
The appeal is sued still for my Huntsmans death.
Which only I have power to reverse,
In her Isle bury al my hate of him,
Go seek the keeper Malby, bring me to him:
To save his body I his debts will pay,
To save his life, I his appeal will stay.
Of al on the earths face most miserable,
Breath in the hellish dungeon thy laments,
Thus like a slave, ragd like a felon gived,
That hurls thee headlong to this base estate.
Oh unkind Uncle: oh my friends ingrate:
Vnthankeful kinsmen, Monntfords al too base
To let thy name lie fettered in disgrace.
A thousand deaths here in this grave I die,
Fear, hunger, sorrow, cold, al threat my death,
And join together to deprive my breath,
But that which most torments me, my dere sister
Hath left to visit me, and from my friends
Hath brought no hopeful answer, therefore I
Divine they will not help my misery,
If it be so, shame, scandal, and contempt,
Attend they• covetous thoughts, need make their graves,
Usurers they live, and may they die like slaves.
Knight, be of comfort for I bring thee freedom
From al thy troubles.
Then I am doomed to die,
Death is thend of al calamity.
Live, your appeal is stayed, the execution
Of al your debts discharged, your creditors
Even to the utmost penny satisfied,
In sign whereof, your shackles I knock off,
you are not le•t so much indebted to vs
As for your fees, al is discharged, al paid,
Go freely to your house, or where you p•ease,
After long miseries, embrace your ease.
Thou grumble out the sweetest music to me,
That ever Organ plaid: is this a dream?
Or do my waking senses apprehend
The pleasing •ast of these applausiue news?
Slave that I was, to wrong such honest friends,
My loving kinsmen, and my near allies,
Tongue I will bite thee for the scandal breath,
Against such faithful kinsmen: they are all
Compose•d of pity and compassion,
Of melting charity, and of moving ruth,
That which I spake before was in my rage,
They are my friends, the mirrors of this age:
Bounteous and free, the Noble Mountfords race,
Ne'er bred a covetous thought, or humour base.
I can no longer stay from visiting
My woeful brother, while I could I kept
My hapless tidings •tom his hopeful ear.
Sister how much am I indebted to thee
And to thy travel.
What, at liberty?
Thou see I am thanks to thy industry:
Oh unto which of al my courteous friends
Am I thus bound, my uncle Mountford he,
Eve• of an infant loved me: was it he?
So did my cozen Tydy: was it he?
So moister Rotor, moister Sandy to,
Which of al these did this hie kindness doe.
Charles, can you mock me in your poverty.
Knowing your friends deride your misery,
Now I protest I stand so much amazed
To see your bonds free, and your irons knocked off,
That I am wrapped into a maze of wonder,
The rather for I know not by what means,
This happiness hath champion•st.
Why by my uncle,
My cousins, and my friends, who else I pray,
Would take upon them al my debts to pay.
O brother they are men all of flint,
Pictures of Marble, and as void of pity
As chased Bears: I begged, I •ued, I kneeled,
Laid open al your griefs and miseries,
Which they derided: more then that, denied vs
A part in their alliance, but in pride,
Said that our kindred with our plenty died.
Drudges to much: what did they; oh known evil
Rich fly the poor, as good men shun the Devil:
Whence should my freedom come, of whom alive,
Sau•ng of those; have I deserved so well,
Ge••e sister, cal to mind, remember me,
These I have raised, these follow the worlds guise
Whom rich in honour, they in wo d•spife.
My wits have lost themselves, lets ask the keeper.
Gayler.
At hand sir.
Of courtesy resolve me one demand?
What was he took the burden of my debts
From off my back, staid my appeal to death,
Dischard my fees, and brought me liberty?
A courteous knight, one called sir Francis Acton.
Acton.
Ha: Acton. Oh me, more distressed in this
Then al my troubles: ha•le me back,
Double my irons, and my sparing meals
Put into halues, and lodge me in a dungeon
More deep, more dark, more cold, more comfortless.
By action freed, not all thy manacles
Could fetter so my heals, as this one word
Hath thrald my hart, and it must now lie bond
In more strict prison then thy stony Jail:
I am not free, I go but under bail.
My charge is done sir, now I have my fees,
As we get little, we will nothing leese.
By Acton freed, my dangerous opposite,
Why to what end? or what occasion? ha:
Let me forget the name of enemy,
And with indifference balance this hy favour; ha.
His love to me, upon my soul tic so,
That is the root from whence these strange things grow.
Had this proceeded from my father he
That by the law of nature is most bound
In offices of love, it had deserved
My best employment to requite that grace?
Had it proceeded from my friends, or him,
From them this action had deserved my life,
And from a stranger more, because from such
There is less execution of good deeds:
But he, nor father, nor ally, nor friend,
More then a stranger both remoat in blood,
And in his hart opposed my enemy,
That this hie bounty should proceed from him•
Oh there I loose my self, what should I say?
What think? what do? his bounty to repay.
you wonder I am sure whence this strange kindness
proceeds in Acton, I will tel you Brother,
He dotes on me, and oft ho sent me gifts,
Letters and tokens, I refused them al.
I have enough, though poor, my hart is set
In one rich gift to pay back al my debt.
This is the night, and I must play the tush,
To try two seeming Angels, whirs my keys?
They are made according to your mold in wax,
I bad the Smith be secret, gave him money,
And there they are.
The Letter sir.
True take it, there it is,
And when thou see me in my pleasantst vain
Ready to sit to supper, bring it me.
Isle doote, make no more question but Isle doot.
Sir, tic six a clock already stroke,
Go bid them spread the cloth and serve in supper.
It shall be done forsooth: mistress where is Spigot the but∣ler, to give vs out salt and trenchers.
We that have bin a hunting all the day
Come with prepared stomachs moister Frankeford,
We wished you at our sport.
My hart was with you, and my mind was on you;
Fie moister Cranwel, you are still thus sad:
A stool, a stool, wheres Ienkin, and wheres Nick?
Tic supper time at least an hour ago.
Whats the best news abroad?
I know none good.
But I know too much bad.
Methinkes sir you might ha•e that interest
In your wives brother, to be more remiss
In this hard dealing against poor Sir Charles,
Who as I hear lies in York castle, needy,
And in great want.
Did not more weighty business of my own
Hold me away, I would have labourd peace
Betwixt them, with al care, indeed I would sir.
Isle write unto my brother earnestly
In that behalf.
A charitable deed,
And will be get the good opinion
Of all your friends that love you moister Frankeford.
Thats you for one, I •now you love Sir Charles
And my wife too well.
He deserves the love
Of al true Gentlemen, be your selves judge.
But supper he: now as thou love me Wendol
Which I am sure thou doest, be merry, pleasant,
And f•olicke it to night: sweet m•ster Cranwell,
Do you the like; wife, I protest my hart
was ne'er more bent on sweet alacrity:
Where be those lazy knaves to serve in supper?
Sir here is a lettter.
Whence comes it? and who brought it?
A stripling that below attends your answer,
And as he tells me it is sent from York.
Have him into the seller, let him taste a cup
Of our March beer: go, make him drink.
Isle make him drunk, if he be a Trojan.
My boots and spurs: when•es Ienkin? God forgive me
How I neglect my business, wi•e look here,
I have a matter to be tried to morrow
By eight a clock, and my Attorney writes me
I must be there betimes with evidence,
Or it will go against me: wheres my boots?
I hope your business craves no such dispatch,
That you must ride to night.
I hope it doth.
Gods me: no such dispatch?
Ienkin my boots, wheres Nick, saddle my Roan,
And the gray dapple for himself: Content ye,
It much concerns me gentle master Cranwell:
And moister Wendoll in my absence use
The very ripest pleasure of my house.
Lord, moister Frankeford will you ride to night?
The way• are dangerous.
Therefore will I ride,
Appointed well, and so shall Nick my man.
Isle cal you up by five a clock to mo•row.
No by my faith wi•e, Isle not trust to that,
Tic not such easy rising in a morning
From one I love so dearly: no by my faith,
I shall not leave so sweet a bed-fellow,
But with much pain: you have made me a sluggard
Since I first knew you.
Then if you needs will go
This dangerous evening: moister Wendoll
Let me entreat you bear him company.
With al my hart, sweet mistress: my boots there?
Fie, fie, that for my private business
I should disease my friend, and be a trouble
To the whole house: Nick?
Anon sir.
Bring forth my gelding as you love me sir,
Use no more words, a hand good master Cranwel.
Sir God be your good speed.
Goodnight sweet Nan: nay, nay, a kiss, and part,
Dissembling lips, you su•t not with my hart.
How business, time, and hours, all gracious pro•es
And are the furtherers to my new borne lo•e.
I am husband now in moister Frank fords place,
And must command the house, my pleasure is
We will not sup abroad so publicly
But in your private Chamber mistress Franckford.
O sir, you are too public in your love,
And moister Franckfordes wife.
Might I crave favour,
I would entreat you I might see my Chamber,
I am on the sudden grown exceeding i•l,
And would be spared from supper.
Light their hoe?
See you want nothing sir, for i• you do
You injury that good man, and wrong me to.
I will make bold: godnight.
How al conspire
To make our bosom sue• and full entire,
Come Nan, I prethy let vs sup within.
O what a clog unto the soul i• sin,
We pale offenders, are still full of fear,
Every suspicious eye brings danger near,
When they whose clear hart from offence are free,
Despise report, base scandals to outface,
And stand at mere defiance with disgrace.
Fie, fie, you talk too like a Puritant.
you have tempted me to mischief moister Wendel,
I have done I know not what: well, you plead custom,
That which for want of wit I granted erst,
I now must yield through fear: Come, come, lets in
Once ore shoes, we are strait ore head in sin.
My •ocond soul is joyful aboue measure,
Isle be profuse in Frankefords richest treasure.
My mist•is and M. Wendol my moister, sup in her cham∣ber to night, Sisly you are preferred from being the cooke to bee chamber maid, of all the loves betwixt thee and me, tel me what thou think of this.
Mum, theres an old proverb, when the Cats away, the mouse may play.
Now you ta•ke of a Cat Sisly, I smell a Rat.
Good words Ienkin, least you be called to answer them.
Why God make my mistress an honest woman: are not these good words? pray God my new moister play not the knave with my old moister, is there any hurt in this? God send no vile∣l•ny in•ended, and if they do sup together, pray God they doe not lie together: god keep my mistress chaste, and make vs al his servants, what harm is there in al this? Nay more, here is my hand, thou shalt never have my hart unless thou say, Amen.
Amen I pray God I say.
My mistress sends that you should make less noise, to lock up the doors, and see the household al got to bed: you Ienkin for
his night are made the Porter, to see the gates shut in.
Thus by little and little I creep into office: Come to kennel my masters to kennel, tic eleven a clock already.
When you have locked the gates in, you must send up the keys to my mistress.
Quickly for Gods sake Ienkin; for I must carry them: I am neither pillow nor bolster, but I know more then both.
To bed good Spigot, to bed good honest serving cre∣atures, and let vs sleep as snug as pigs in pease-straw.
Soft, soft, we have tied our geldings to a tree two flight shoot off, least by their thundering hooves they blab our coming back, Hearst thou no noise?
Hear, I hear nothing but the Owl and you.
So: now my watches hand points upon twelve,
And it is dead midnight: where are my keys?
He ere sir.
This is the key that ops my outward gate,
This is the Hal door, this my withdrawing chamber.
But this, that door thats Bawd unto my shame:
Fountain and spring of al my bleeding thoughts,
Where the most hallowed order and true knot
Of nuptial sanctity hath bin prophand,
It leads to my polluted bed-chamber,
Once my terrestrial heaven, now my earths hell,
The place where sins in al their ripens dwell:
But I forget my self, now to my gate.
It must op with far less noise then Cripple-gate, or your plots dashed.
So reach me my da•ke La•••orne to the rest,
Tread softly, softly.
I will walk on Eggs this pace.
A general silence hath surprised the house,
And this is the last door, astonishment,
Fear and amazement, play against my hart,
Even as a madman beats upon a drum:
O keep my eyes you heavens before I enter,
From any sight that may transfix my •whole,
Or if there be so black a spectacle,
Oh strike mine eyes stark blind, or if not so,
Lend me such patience to digest my grief,
That I may keep this white and virgin hand
From any violent outrage, or red murder,
And with that prayer I enter.
Here is a circumstance,
A man may be made Cuckold in the time
That hes about it, and the case were mine
As tic my masters, sblood that he makes me swear,
I would have placst his action entered there,
I would, I would.
Oh• oh.
Master, sblood, master, master.
oh me unhappy, I have found them lying
Close in each others arms, and fast asleep,
But that I would not dam two precious souls
Bought with my Saviours blood, and send them laden
With al their scarlet sins upon their backs
Unto a fearful Judgment, their two li•es
Had met upon my rapier.
Sblood master have you left them sleeping still? let me go wake them.
Stay, let me pause a while:
Oh God, oh God, that it were possible
To undo things done, to cal back yesterday;
That time could turn up his swift sandy glass,
To until the days, and to redeem these hours:
Or that the sun
Could rising from the West, draw his coach backward
Take from the account of time so many m•nuts
Till he had al these seasons called again,
Those minutes and those actions done in them,
Even from her first offence, that I might take her
As spotless as an Angel in my arms,
But oh: I talk of things impossible,
And cast beyond the moon, God give me patience,
For I will in to wake them.
Here is patience perforce,
He needs must trot a foot that tyres his horse.
I thank thee maid, thou like the Angels hand
Hast stayed me from a bloody sacrifice:
Go villen, and my wrongs sit on thy soul
As heavy as this grief doth upon mine:
When thou recordst my many courtesies,
And shalt compare them with thy treacherous hart,
Lay them together, weigh them equally,
Twilbe revenge enough, go, to thy friend
A Iudas, pray, pray, least I live to see
Thee Iudas like, hang`d on an Elder-tree.
O by what word, what title, or what name
Shall I entreat your pardon: pardon: oh,
I am as far from hoping such sweet grace
As Lucifer from heaven: to cal you husband,
Oh me most wretched; I have lost that name
I am no more your wife.
Sblood sir she sounds.
Spare thou thy tears, for I will weep for thee;
And keep thy countenance, for Isle blush for thee;
Now I protest I think tic I am tainted,
For I am most asham`d, and tic more hard
For me to look upon thy guilty face,
Then on the suns clear brow, what would thou speak?
I would I had no tongue, no ears, no eyes,
No apprehension, no capacity,
When do you spurn me like a Dog? when tread me
Under your feet? when drag me by the hair?
Though I deserve a thousand thousand fold.
More then you can inflict: yet once my husband,
For womanhood to which I am ashamed,
Though once an ornament, even for his sake
That hath redeemd our souls, mark not my face
Nor hack me with your sword, but let me go
Perfect and vndeformed to my tomb.
I am not worthy that I should prevail
In the least suit, no not to speak to you,
Nor look on you, nor to be in your presence:
Yet as an abject this one suit I crave,
This granted I am ready for my grave.
My God with patience arm me: rise, nay rise,
And Isle debate with thee: Was it for want
Thou plaiedst the strumpet? Wast thou not supplied
With every pleasure, fashion, and new toy,
Nay even beyond my calling.
I was.
Was it then disability in me,
Or in thine eye seemed he a properer man?
Oh no.
Did I not lodge thee in thy bosom? wear thee
Here in my hart.
You did.
I did indeed, witness my tears I did.
Go bring my infants hither: oh Nan, oh Nan,
If either fear of shame, regard of honour,
The blemish of my house, no• my dear love,
could have withheld thee from so lewd a fact:
Yet for these infants, these young harmless souls,
On whose white brows thy shame is characterd,
And grows in greatness as they wax in years,
Look but on them, and melt away in tears.
Away with them, least as her spotted body
Hath stained their names with stripe of bastardy,
So her adultrous breath may blast their spirits,
With her infectious thoughts: away with them?
In this one life I die ten thousand deaths.
Stand up, stand up, I will do nothing rashly,
I will retire a while into my study,
And thou shalt hear thy sentence presently.
Tic welcome be it death: oh me, base strumpet,
That having such a husband, such sweet children;
Must enjoy neither: oh to redeem my honour
I would have this hand cut off, these my breasts s•art,
Be racked, strappadode, put to any torment,
Nay, to whip but this scandal out, I would hazard
The rich and dear redemption of my soul.
He cannot be so base, as to forgive me?
Nor I so shameless, to accept his pardon:
Oh women, women, you that have yet kept
Your holy matrimonial vow unstained,
Make me your instance, when you tread awry,
Your sins like mine will on your conscience lye.
Oh mistress, mistress, what have you don• mistress?
Sbloud what a Caterwauling keep you here.
O Lord mistress, how comes this to pass, my moister is run away in his shirt, and never so much as called me to bring his clothes after him.
See what guilt is, here stand I in this place,
Ashamed to look my servants in t•e face.
My words are registered in heaven already,
With patience hear me: Isle not martyr thee,
Nor mark thee for a strumpet, but with usage
Of more humility torment thy soul,
And kill thee, even with kindness.
Moister Frankford.
Good moister Cranwell: woman, hear thy judgment:
Go make thee ready in thy best attire,
Take with thee all thy gowns, all thy apparel,
Leave nothing that did ever call thee mistress.
Or by whose sight being left here in the house
I may remember such a woman by,
Choose thee a bed and hangings for a Chamber,
Take with thee every thing that hath thy mark,
And get thee to my Manor seven mile off,
Where live, tic thine, I freely give it thee,
My Tenants by shall furnish thee with waynes
To carry all thy fluff, within two hours,
No longer will I limit thee my sight,
Choose which of all my servants thou likest best,
And they are thine to attend thee.
A mild sentence.
But as thou hopst for heaven, as thou beleeust
thy names recorded in the book of life,
I chardge thee never after this sad day
To see me, or to meet me, or to send
By word, or writing, gift, or otherwise
To move me, by thy self, or by thy friends,
Nor challenge any part in my two children;
So farewell Nan, for we will henceforth be
As we had never seen, ne'er more shall see.
How full my hart is in my eyes appears,
What wants in words, I will supply in tears.
Come take your Coach, your stuff, all must along,
Servants and all make ready, all be gone,
It was thy hand cut two harts out of one.
Brother, why have you trict me like a bride?
Bought me this gay attire, these ornaments?
forget you our estate, our poverty?
Call me not brother, but imagine me
Some barbarous Outlaw, or uncivil Kern,
For if thou shutst thy eye, and only hearst
The words that I shall utter, thou shalt judge me
Some staring Ruffin, not thy brother Charles
Oh Susan.
Oh brother, what doth this strange language mean?
Dost love me sister? Would thou see me live
A bankrupt beggar in the worlds disgrace,
And die indebted to my enemies?
Would thou behold me stand like a huge Beam
In the worlds eye, a by-word and a scorn?
It lies in thee of these to acquit me free,
And all my debt I may outstrip by thee.
By me: why? I have nothing, nothing, left,
I owe even for the clothes upon my back,
I am not worth, &amp;c.
Oh sister say not so,
It lies in you my downe-cast state to raise,
To make me stand on even points with the world:
Come Sister, you are rich? Indeed you are:
And in your power you have, without delay,
Actons five hundred pound back to repa•e.
Till now I had thought you loud me, by mine honour
Which I had kept as spotless as the Moon,
I ne'er was mistress of that single doit,
Which I reserved not to supply your wants:
And do you think that I would hoard from you.
Now by my hopes in heaven, knew I the means
To buy you from the slavery of your debts,
Especially from Acton whom I hate,
I would redeem it with my life or blood.
I challenge it, and kindred set apert
Thus Russian like I lay siege to your •art:
What do I ow to Acton?
Why some five hundred pounds, toward which I swear
In all the world I have not one deneare.
It will not prove so: sister, now resolve me,
What do you think, and speak your conscience?
Would Acton give might he enjoy your bed?
He would not shrink to spend a thousand pound,
To give the Mo•ntfords name so deep a wound
A thousand pound, I but five hundred owe,
Grant him your bed, hee• paid with interest so.
Oh brother:
O sister only this one way,
With that rich Jewel you my debts may pay,
In speaking this my cold hart shakes with shame,
Nor do I woo you in a Brothers name,
But in a strangers: shall I die in debt
To Acton my grand foe, and you still wear
The precious Jewel that he holds so dear?
My honour I esteem as dear and precious,
As my redemption.
I esteem you sister.
As dear, for so dear pricing it.
Will Charles
Have me cut of my hands, and send them Acton:
Rip up my breast, and with my bleeding hart,
Present him as a token.
Neither Iane:
But hear me in my strange assertion,
Thy honour and my soul are equal in my regard,
Nor will thy Brother Charles survive thy shame,
His kindness like a burden hath surcharged me,
And under his good deeds I stooping go,
Not with an upright soul: had I remained
In prison still, there doubles I had dyed:
Then unto him that freed me from that prison,
Still do I owe that life: what mou`d my foe
To infranchife me? It was sister for your love?
With full five hundred pounds he bought your love,
And shall he not enjoy it? Shall the weight
Of all this heavy burden lean on me,
And will not you bear part? you did partake
The joy of my release, will you not stand
In joint bond bound to satisfy the debt,
Shall I be only charged?
But that I know
These arguments come from an honoured mind,
As in your most extremity of need,
Scorning to stand in debt to one you hate,
Nay rather would engage your unstained honour,
Then to be held ingrate, I should condemn you,
I see your resolution, and assent,
So Charles will have me, and I am content.
For this I tricked you up.
But here is a knife,
to save mine honour, shall slice out my life.
I know thou please me a thousand times
More in that resolution then thy grant:
Observe her love to sooth them in my suite,
Her honour she will hazard though not loose,
To bring me out of debt, her rigorous hand
Will pierce her hart: Oh wonder, that will chi••e
Rather then stain her blood, her life to loose.
Come, you sad sister to a woeful brother,
This is the gate: Isle bear him such a present,
Such an acquittance for the knight to seal
As will amaze his senses, and surprise
With admiration all his fantasies.
Before his unchaste thoughts shall seize on me,
Tic here shall my imprisoned soul set free.
How: Mountford with his sister hand in hand,
What Miracles a foot?
It is a sight
Begets in me much admiration.
Stand not amazed to see me thus attended,
Acton I owe thee money, and being unable
To bring thee the full sum •o ready coin,
Lo for thy more assurance here is a pawn.
My sister, my dear Sister, whose chaste hone•
I prise aboue a Million: here, nay take her,
Shees worth your money man, do not fortake her.
I would he were in earnest.
Impute it not to my immodesty,
My Brother being rich in nothing else
But in his interest that he hath in me,
According to his poverty hath brought you
Me, all his store, whom howsoever you prise
As forfeit to your hand, he valewes 〈…〉,
And would not sell, but to acquit your 〈◊〉
For any Emperors ransom.
Sterne hart, relent
Thy former cruelty, at length repent;
Was ever known in any former age,
Such honourable wres••d courtesy,
Lands, honours, lines, and all the world forgo•
Rather then stand ingagde to such a foe.
Acton she is too poor to be thy Bride,
And I to much apposd to be thy brother,
There take her to thee, if thou hast the hart
To ceize her as a Rape or lustful prey,
To blur our house that never yet was stained,
To murder her that never meant thee harm,
To kill me now whom once thou said from death,
Do them at once on her, all these reli•
And perish with her spotted chastity.
You overcome me in your love sir Charles,
I cannot be so cruel to a Lady
I love so de•rely, since you have not spared
To engage your reputation to the world,
Your sister honour which you prise so dear,
Nay, all the comforts which you hold on earth
To grow out of my debt being your foe,
Your honoured thoughts, •o thus I recompense
Your metamorphisd foe, receives your guest
In satisfaction of all former wrongs•
This Jewel I will wear, here in my hart,
And where before I thought her for her wants
Too base to be my Bride, to end all strife,
I seal you my dear brother, her my wife.
You still exceed vs, I will yield to fate,
And learn to love, where I till now did hate.
With that enchantment you have charmed my soul,
And made me rich even in those very words,
I pay no debt but am indebted more
Rich in your love I never can be poor
Alas mine is yours, we are alike in state,
Lets knit in love what was proposd in hate;
Come, for our Nuptials we will strait provide,
Blessed only in our brother and fair bride.
Why do you search each room about your house.
Now that you have dispatcht you• wife away?
O sir to see that nothing may be left
That ever was my wives, I loved her dearly,
And when I do but think of her unkindness,
My thoughts are all in Hell, to avo•d which •orment
I would not have a Bodkin or a Cu•fe,
A bracelet, necklace, or Rebato wier,
Nor any thing that ever was hers,
Left me, by which I might remember her,
Seek round about?
Sbloud master, here is her lute story in a cornet,
Her Lute, oh God upon this instrument,
Her fingers have run quick division,
Sweeter then that which now divides our harts.
These frets have made me pleasant, that have now,
Frets of my hart-strings made, oh moister Cranwell,
Oft hath she made this melancholy wood,
Now mute and dumb for her disastrous chance,
Speak sweedy many a note, sound many a strain,
To her own ravishing voice which being well strung,
What pleasant strange airs have they jointly sung.
Post with it after her, now nothings left,
Of her, and hers, I am at once bereft.
Isle ride and overtake her, do my message,
And come back again.
Mean time sir, if you please,
Isle to sir Francis Acton, and inform him
Of what hath past betwixt you and his sister.
Do as you please how ill am I best•ad
To be a widower ere my wife be dead.
Bid my Coach stay, why should I ride in state?
Being hurled so low down by the hand of fate.
A seat like to my Fortunes let me have,
Earth for my chair, and for my bed a grave.
Comfort good mistress, you have watered your Coach with tears a•ready, you have but two mile now to go to your manor, a Man cannot say by my old Moister Franckford as he may say by me, that he wants manners, for he hath three or four, of which this is one, that we are going to.
Good mistress be of good cheer, sorrow you see hurts you, but helps you not, we all morn to see you so sad.
Mistress I spy one of my Landlords men
Come riding post, tic like he brings some news.
Comes he from moister Franckford, he is welcome,
So are his news, because they come from him.
There.
I know the Lute, oft have I sung to thee,
We both are out of tune, both out of time.
Would that had been the worst instrument that ere you played on: my moister commends him to ye, theirs all hee can find that was ever yours, he hath nothing left that ever you could claim to lay, but 〈◊〉 hart, &amp; he could afford you that: Al that I have to deliver you is this, he prays you to forget him, and so he bids your farewell.
I thank him, he is kind and ever was,
All you that have true feeling of my grief,
That know my loss, and have relenting harts,
Gird me about, and help me with your tea•es,
To wash my spotted sins, my Lute shall grove
It cannot weep, but shall lament my mo•e.
Pursued with horro• of a guilty soul,
And with the sharpe scourge of repentance lashed,
I fly from my own shadow: 〈◊〉 my stars
What have my parents in their lives deserved,
That you should lay this penance on their son?
When I but think of moister Franckfords love,
And lay it to my treason, or compare
My mu•dring him for his relieving me,
It strikes a terror like a lightnings flash,
To se•rch my blood up: thus I like the Owl
Ashamed of day, live in these shadowy woods
Afraid of every leaf or murmuring blast,
Yet longing to receive some perfect knowledge
How he hath dealt with her: Oh my sad fate,
Here, and so far from home, and thus attended:
Oh God, I have divorced the truest Turtles
That ever liud together, and being divided
In several places, make their several moan;
She in the fields laments, and he at home.
So Poets write that Orpheus made the trees,
And stones to dance, to his melodious harp,
meaning the rustic and the barbarous Hinds,
That had no understanding part in them,
So she from these rude Carters tears extracts,
Making their flinty harts with grief to rise,
And draw Rivers from their rocky eyes.
If you return unto your moister say:
Though not from me, for I am all unworthy
To blast his name with a strumpets tongue,
That you have seen me weep, wish my self dead:
nay, you may say to, for my vow is past,
Last night you saw me eat and drink my last.
This to you moister you may say and swear,
For it is writ in heaven and decreed here.
Isle say you wept, Isle swear you made me sad,
Why how now eyes; what now, whats here to do?
I am gone, or I shall strait turn baby to.
I cannot weep, my hart is all on fire,
Cursed be the fruits of my unchaste desire.
Go break this lute my Coaches whele,
As the last music that I ere shall make,
not as my husbands gift, but my farewell,
To all earths joy, and so your moister tell.
If I can for crying.
Grief have done,
Or like a Madman I shall frantic run.
You have beheld the woefullest wretch on earth,
A woman made of tears, would you had words
To express but what you see: my inward grief
No tongue can utter, yet unto your power
You may describe my sorrow, and disclose
To thy sad moister my abundant woes.
Isle do your commendations.
O no:
I dare not so presume, nor to my children,
I am disclaimd in both; alas I am,
Oh never teach them when they come to speak,
To name the name of Mother: chide their tongue
If they by chance light on that hated word:
Tell them tic nought: for when that word they name,
Poor pretty souls they harp on their own shame.
To recompense her wrongs, what can thou do?
Thou hast made her husbandless, and childless to.
I have no more to say: speak not for me
Yet you may tell your moister what you see?
Isle doo•.
Isle speak to her, and comfort her in grief,
Oh but her wound cannot be cur`d with words:
No matter though, Isle do my best good will,
To wroke a cure on her whom I did kill.
So, now unto my Coach, then to my home,
So to my deathbed, for from this sad hour,
I never will, nor eat, nor drink, nor taste
Of any Cates that may preserve my life:
I never will nor smile, nor sleep, nor rest,
But when my tears have washed my black soul white,
Sweet Saviour to thy hands I yield my sprite.
Oh mistress Frankford?
Oh for Gods sake fly,
The Devil doth come to tempt me ere I dye:
My Coach: this sin that with an Angels face,
Courted mine honour till hee sought my wrack,
In my repentant eyes seems ugly black.
What my young moister that fled in his shirt, how come you by your clothes again? you have made our house in a sweet
pickle, have you not think you? What shall I serve you still, or cleave to the old house?
Hence slave, away with thy unseasoned mirth,
Unless thou can shed tears, and sigh, and houle,
Curse thy sad fortunes, and exclaim on fate,
Thou are• not for my turn.
Marry and you will not another will: farewell and be hanged, wold you had never come to have kept this quoile with∣in our doors, we shall ha you run away like a sprite again.
She•s gone to death, I live to want and wo•,
Her life, her sins, and all upon my head,
And I must now go wander like a Cain
In foreign Countries, and remoted climes,
Where the report of my ingratitude
Cannot be heard, Isle over, first to France,
And so to Germany, and Italy,
Where when I have recovered, and by travel.
Gotten those perfect tongues, and that these rumours
May in their height abate, I will return,
And I divine, how ever now dejected
My worth and part• being by some great man praisd,
At my return I may in Court be raised.
Brother, and now my wife, I think these troubles
Fall on my he•d, by Justice of the heaueus,
For being so strict to y•u in your extremity•,
But we are now attonde, I would my sister
Could with like happiness, o `recome her griefs,
As we Have ours.
You tell vs moister Cranwell wondrous things,
Touching the patience of that gentleman,
With what strange ver•ue he deem•nes his grief.
I told you what I was witness of•
It was my fortune to lodge there that night.
O that same villen Wendoll, t'was his tongue
That did corrupt her, she was of her self•.
Chaste and devoted well. Is this the house?
Yes sir, I take it her• your sister lies.
My brother Franckford shout too mild a spirit
In the revenge of such a loathed crime;
Les•e then he did, no man of spirit could do,
I am so far from blaming his revenge
That I commend it: had it bin my case
Their souls at once had from their breasts bin freed,
Death to such deeds of shame is the due mead.
O my mistress, my mistress, my poor mistress.
Alas that ever I was born, what shall I do, for my poor mistress.
Why, what of her?
O Lord sir, she no sooner heard that her brother
And his friends were come to see how she did,
But she for very shame of her guilty conscience, fell
Into a swoon, and we had much ado to
Get life into her.
Alas that she should bear so hard a fate,
Pity it is, repentance comes to late.
Is she so weak in body?
O sir I can assure you theirs no help of life
In her, for she will take no sustenance, she hath plainly
Starved her self, that now she is as lean
As a lath, she ever
Looks for the good hour: many
Gentlemen and gentlewomen of the country are come to,
Comfort her.
How fare you mistress Frankford?
Sick, sick, oh sick, give me some air I pray you.
Tell me, oh tell me, where• moister Frankford?
Will not he deign to see me er• I dye?
Yes mistress Frankford, divers gentlemen,
Your loving neighbours with that just request,
Have moved and told him of your weak estate,
Who though with much ado to get belief.
Examining of the general circumstance,
Seeing your sorrow and your penitence
And hearing there withal the great desire
You have to see him ere you left the world,
He gave to vs his faith to follow vs,
And sure he will be here immediately.
You half reuiude me with those pleasing news,
Raise me a little higher in my bed.
Blush I not moister Frank•ord? blush I not sir Charles?
Can you not read my fault writ in my cheek?
Is not my crime there? tell me gentlemen?
Alas good mistress, sickness hath not left you
Blood in your face enough to make you blush:
Then sickness like a friend my fault would hide,
Is my husband come? My soul but tarries
His arrive and I am fit for heaven.
I came to chide you, but my words of hate,
Are turned to pity and compassionate grief:
I came to rate you, but my brawls you see,
Melt into tears, and I must weep by thee.
Here is moister Frankford now.
Good morrow brother, good morrow gentlemen,
God that hath laid this cross upon our heads,
Might had he pleased have made our cause of meeting
On a more fair and a more contented ground,
But he that made vs, made vs to this woe.
And is he come, methinks that voice I know•
How do you woman?
Well, moister Franckford, well: but shall be better
I hope within this hour? will you vouchsafe
Out of your grace and your humanity,
To take a spotted strumpet by the hand?
That hand once held my hart in faster bonds
Then now tic gripte by me: God pardon them
That made vs first break hold.
Amen, amen,
Out of my zeal to heaven wh•there I am now bound,
I was so impudent to wish you here,
And once more beg your pardon oh Good man.
And father to my children pardon me.
Pardon, oh pardon me, my fault so heinous i•,
That if you in this world forgive it not,
Heaven will not clear it in the world to come.
Faintness hath so usurped upon my knees,
That kneel I cannot • but on my harts knees,
My prostrate soul lies thrown down• at your feet,
To beg your gracious pardon: pardon, O pardon me.
As freely from the low depth of my soul,
As my redeemer hath forgiven his death,
I pardon thee, I will shed tears for thee,
Pray with thee, and in mere pity
Of thy weak state, Isle wish to die with thee.
So do we all•
So will not I,
Isle sigh and sob, but by my faith not die•.
Oh moister Frankford all the near alliance,
I loos• by her, shall be supplied in thee,
you are• my br•there by the nearest way,
Her kindred hath fallen off, but yours doth stay.
Even as I hope for pardon at that day,
When the great judge of Heaven in Scarlet sits,
So be thou pardoned, though thy rash offence,
Diuorsd our body•s, thy ripen•ant tears
Unite our soul•.
The• comfort mistress Frankford,
You see your husband hath forgiven your fall,
Then rouse your spirits, and cheer• your f•inting soul.
How is it with you?
How do you f•el• your self?
Not of this world.
I se• you are• not, and I weep to see it,
My wife the mother to my pretty Babes,
Both those lost names I do restore thee back.
And with this kiss I wed thee once again,
Though thou art wounded in thy honoured name,
And with that grief upon thy death-bed least,
Honest in hart, upon my soul thou die.
Pardond on earth, soul, thou in heaven art free,
Once more thy wife, dyes thus embracing thee.
New married, and new widowed, oh shees dead,
And a cold grave must be our Nuptial bed.
Sir be of good comfort, and your heavy sorrow,
Part equally amongst vs, storms divided
Abate their force, and with less rage are guided.
Do moister Frankford, he that hath least part,
Will find enough to drown one troubled hart.
Peace with thee Nan: Brothers and Gentlemen,
All we that can plead interest in her grief
Bestow upon her body funeral tears;
Brother, had you with threats and usage bad,
Punished her sin, the grief of her offence
Had not with such true sorrow tutcht her hart.
I see it had not, therefore on her grave,
I will bestow this funeral Epitaph,
Which on her Marble Tomb shall be engraved,
In Golden letters shall these words be filled,
Here lies she, whom her husbands kindness kilt.

THough need make many Poets, and some such
As art, and nature have not bettered much;
Yet ours, for want, hath not so loved the stage
As he dare serve the isle customs of the age:
Or purchase your delight at such a rate,
As, for it, he himself must justly hate.
To make a child, now swaddled, to proceed
Man, and then shoot up, in one beard, and weed,
Past threescore years: or, with three rusty swords,
And help of some few foot-and-halfe-foote words,
Fight over York, and Lancasters long jars:
And in the tyring-house bring wounds, to scars.
He rather prays, you will be pleased to see
One such, to day as other plays should be;
Where neither Chorus wafts you ore the seas;
Nor creaking throne comes down, the boys to please;
Nor nimble squibbe is seen, to make afeared
The gentlewomen; nor rolled bullet heard
To say, it thunders; nor tempestuous drum
Rumbles, to tell you when the storm doth come;
But deeds, and language, such as men doe use:
And persons, such as Comoedie would choose,
When she would show an Image of the times,
And sport with humane follies, not with crimes.
Except, we make 'hem such by loving still
Our popular errors, when we know they are ill.
I mean such errors, as you'll all confess
By laughing at them, they deserve no less:
Which when you heartily doe, there's hope left, then,
You, that have so graced monsters, may like men.
A Goodly day toward! and a fresh morning! BRAYNE-WORME,
Call up your young master: bid him rise, sir.
Tell him, I have some business to employ him.
I will sir, presently.
But hear you, sirah,
If he be'at his book, disturb him not.
Well sir.
How happy, yet, should I esteem my self
Could I (by any practise) wean the boy
From one vain course of study, he affects.
He is a scholar, if a man may trust
The liberal voice of fame, in her report
Of good account, in both our universities,
Either of which hath favoured him with graces:
But their indulgence, must not spring in me
A fond opinion, that he cannot err.
My self was once a student; and, indeed,
Fed with the selfsame humour, he is now,
Dreaming on nought but idle poetry,
That fruitless, and unprofitable art,
Good unto none, but least to the professors,
Which, then, I thought the mistress of all knowledge:
But since, time, and the truth have waked my judgment,
And reason taught me better to distinguish,
The vain, from th'vsefull learnings. Cossin STEPHEN!
What news with you, that you are here so early?
Nothing, but even come to see how you doe, uncle.
That's kindly done, you are wel-come, cousse.
I, I know that sir, I would not ha'come else.
How doe my cousin EDWARD, uncle?
O, well cousse, go in and see: I doubt he be scarce stirring yet.
Uncle, before I go in, can you tell me, and he have ere a book of the sciences of hawking, and hunting? I would fine borrow it.
Why, I hope you will not a hawking now, will you?
NO wuss; but I'll practise against next year uncle: I have bought me a hawk, and a hood, and bells, and all; I lack nothing but a book to keep it by.
O, most ridiculous.
Nay, look you now, you are angry, uncle: why you know, an'a man have not skill in the hawking, and hunting-languages now a days, I'll not give a rush for him. They are more studied then the Greek, or the Latin. He is for no gallants company without 'hem. And by gads lid I scorn it, I, so I doe, to be a consort for every hum drum, hang 'hem scroyles, there's nothing in 'hem, in the world. What doe you talk on it? Because I dwell at Hogsden, I shall keep company with none but the archers of Finsburie? or the citizens, that come a ducking to Islington ponds? A fine jest in faith! Slid a gentleman mun show himself like a gentleman. Uncle, I pray you be not angry, I know what I have to doe, I trow, I am no novice.
You are a prodigal absurd cocks-combe: Go to.
Nay never look at me, it's I that speak.
Tak't as you will sir, I'll not flatter you.
Have you not yet found means enough, to wast
That, which your friends have left you, but you must
Go cast away your money on a kite,
And know not how to keep it, when you ha'done?
O it's comely! this will make you a gentleman!
Well cousin, well! I see you are even past hope
Of all reclaim. I, so, now you are told on it,
You look another way.
What would you have me doe?
What would I have you doe? I'll tell you kinsman,
Learn to be wise, and practise how to thrive,
That would I have you doe: and not to spend
Your coin on every babble, that you fancy,
Or every foolish brain, that humours you.
I would not have you to invade each place,
Nor thrust your self on all societies,
Till men's affections, or your own desert,
Should worthily inuit you to your rank.
He, that is so respectless in his courses,
Oft sells his reputation, at cheap market.
Nor would I, you should melt away your self
In flashing bravery, least while you affect
To make a blaze of gentry to the world,
A little puff of scorn extinguish it,
And you be left, like an unsavoury snuff,
Whose property is only to offend.
I'd ha'you sober, and contain your self;
Not, that your sail be bigger then your boat:
But moderate your expenses now (at first)
As you may keep the same proportion still.
Nor, stand so much on your gentility,
Which is an a??rye, and mere borrowed thing,
From dead men's dust, and bones: and none of yours
Except you make, or hold it. Who comes here?
Save you, gentlemen.
Nay, we do' not stand much on our gentility, friend; yet, you are wel-come, and I assure you mine uncle, here, is a man of a thousand a year, Middlesex land: hee has but one son in all the world, I am his next heir (at the common law) master STEPHEN, as simple as I stand here, if my cousin die (as there's hope he will) I have a pretty living of mine own too, beside, hard-by here.
In good time, sir.
In good time, sir? why! and in a very good time, sir. You doe not stout, friend, doe you?
Not I, sir.
Not you sir? you were not best, sir; and you should, here bee them can perceive it, and that quickie to: go to. And they can give it a???gain soundly to, and need be.
Why, sir, let this satisfy you: good faith, I had no such intent.
Sir, and I thought you had, I would talk with you, and that presently.
Good master STEPHEN, so you may, sir, at your pleasure.
And so I would sir, good my fancy companion! and you were out of mine uncles ground, I can tell you; though I doe not stand upon my gentility neither in it.
Cousin! cousin! will this ne'er be left?
Whoreson base fellow! a mechanical serving-man! By this cudgel, and 't were not for shame, I would???
What would you doe, you peremptory gull?
If you cannot be quiet, get you hence.
You see, the honest man demeans himself
Modestly to'ards you, giving no reply
To your unseasoned, quarrelling, rude fashion:
And, still you huff it, with a kind of carriage,
As void of wit, as of humanity.
Go, get you in; fore heaven, I am ashamed
Thou hast a kinsmans interest in me.
I pray you, sir. Is this master KNO'WELL'S house?
Yes, marie, is it sir.
I should enquire for a gentleman, here, one master EDWARD
KNO'WELL: doe you know any such, sir, I pray you?
I should forget my self else, sir.
Are you the gentleman? cry you mercy sir: I was required by a gentleman in the city, as I rode out at this end of the town, to deliver you this letter, sir.
To me, sir! What doe you mean? pray you remember your curtsy.
What might the gentleman's name be, sir, that sent it? nay, pray you be covered.
One master WELL-BRED, sir.
Master WELL-BRED! A young gentleman? is he not?
The same sir, master KITELY married his sister: the rich mer???chant in the old Iewrie.
You say very true. BRAINE-WORME,
Sir.
Make this honest friend drink here: pray you go in.
This letter is directed to my son:
Yet, I am EDWARD KNO'WELL too, and may
With the safe conscience of good manners, use
The fellows error to my satisfaction.
Well, I will break it op (old men are curious)
Be it but for the stiles sake, and the phrase,
To see, if both doe answer my sons praises,
Who is, almost, grown the idolater
Of this young WELL-BRED: what have we here? what's this?
Why, NED, I beseech thee; hast thou forsworn all thy friends in the old Iewrie? or dost thou think vs all Jaws that inhabit there, yet? If thou dost, come over, and but see our frip perie: change an old shirt, for a whole smock, with vs. Doe not conceive that antipa???thy between vs, and Hogs-den; as was between Jaws, and hogs-flesh. Leave thy vigilant father, alone, to number over his greene apricots, evening, and morning, of the north-west wall: And I had been his son, I had saved him the labour, long since; if, taking in all the young wenches, that pass by, at the backdoor, and codd'ling every kernel of the fruit for'hem, would have served. But, pray thee, come over to me, quickly, this morning: I have such a present for thee (our Turkie company never sent the like to the Grand-SIGNIOR.) One is a Rimer sir, of your own batch, your own leuin; but doth think himself Poet-maior, of the town: willing to be shown, and worthy to be seen. The other???I will not venture his description with you, till you come, because I would have you make hither with an appetite. If the worst of 'hem be not worth your journey, draw your bill of charges,
as unconscionable, as any Guild-hall verdict will give it you, and you shall be allowed your viaticum.
From the Burdello, it might come as well;
The Spittle: or Pict-hatch. Is this the man,
My son hath sung so, for the happiest wit,
The choicest brain, the times hath sent vs forth?
I know not what he may be, in the arts;
Nor what in schools: but surely, for his manners,
I judge him a profane, and dissolute wretch:
Worse, by possession of such great good gifts,
Being the master of so loose a spirit.
Why, what unhallowed ruffian would have writ,
In such a scurrilous manner, to a friend!
Why should he think, I tell my Apricots?
Or play the Hesperian Dragon, with my fruit,
To watch it? Well, my son, I'had thought
Y' had had more judgment, to have made election
Of your companions, to have tan on trust,
Such petulant, gearing gamsters, that can spare
No argument, or subject from their jest.
But I perceive, affection makes a fool
Of any man, too much the father. BRAYNE-WORME,
Sir.
Is the fellow gone that brought this letter?
Yes, sir, a pretty while since.
And, whore's your young master?
In his chamber sir.
He spake not with the fellow! did he?
No sir, he saw him not.
Take you this letter, and deliver it my son
But with no notice, that I have opened it, on your life.
O lord, sir, that were a jest, indeed!
I am resolved, I will not stop his journey;
Nor practise any violent mean, to stay
The unbridled course of youth in him: for that,
Restrained, grows more impatient, and, in-kind,
Like to the eager, but the generous grey-hound;
Who ne'er so little from his game with-held,
Turns head, and leaps up at his holders throat.
There is a way of winning, more by love,
And urging of the modesty, then fear:
Force works on servile natures, not the free.
He, that's compelled to goodness, may be good;
But it is but for that fit: where others drawn
By softness, and example, get a habit.
Then, if they stray, but warn 'hem: and, the same
They should for vertu'haue done, they'll doe for shame.
DId he open it, say thou?
Yes, of my word sir, and read the contents.
That scarce contents me. What countenance (pray thee) made he, in the reading of it? was he angry, or pleased?
Nay sir, I saw him not read it, nor open it, I assure your worship.
No? how know thou, then, that he did either?
Marie sir, because he charged me, on my life, to tell nobody, that he opened it: which, unless hee had done, hee would never fear to have it reueal'd.
That's true: well I thank thee, BLAYNE-WORME.
O, BRAYNE-WORME, did thou not see a fellow here in a what-sha'-call-him doublet! he brought mine uncle a letter even now.
Yes, master STEPHEN, what of him?
O, I have such a mind to beat him???Where is hee? can thou tell?
Faith, he is not of that mind: he is gone, master STEPHEN.
Gone? which way? when went he! how long since?
He is rid hence. He took horse, at the street door.
And, I staid in the fields! whoreson scander-bag rogue! ?? that I had but a horse to fetch him back again.
Why, you may have my mrs. gelding, to save your longing, sir.
But, I have no boots, that's the spite on it.
Why, a fine wisp of hay, rolled hard, master STEPHEN.
No faith, it's no boot to follow him, now: let him even go, and hang. 'Pray thee, help to truss me, a little. He dos so vex me???
You'll be worse vexed, when you are trussed, master STEPHEN. Best, keep vn-brac'd; and walk your self, till you be cold: your choler may foundre you else.
By my faith, and so I will, now thou tell me on it: How dost thou like my leg, BRAYNE-WORME?
A very good leg! master STEPHEN! but the woollen stock???ing do's not commend it so well.
Foh, the stockings be good enough, now summer is coming on, for the dust: Isle have a pair of silk, again'winter, that I go to dwell
in the town. I think my leg would show in a silke-hose.
Believe me, master STEPHEN, rarely well,
In sadness, I think it would: I have a reasonable good leg.
You have an excellent good leg, master STEPHEN, but I cannot stay, to praise it longer now, and I am very sorry for it.
Another time will serve, BRAYNE-WORME. Gramercy for this.
Ha, ha, ha!
Slid, I hope, he laughs not at me, and he doe ???
Here was a letter, indeed, to be intercepted by a mans father, and doe him good with him! Hee cannot but think most virtuously, both of me, and the sender, sure; that make the careful Costar'-monger of him in our familiar Epistles. Well, if he read this with patience, Isle be gilt, and troll ballads for Mr. IOHN TRVNDLE, yonder, the rest of my more???talitie. It is true, and likely, my father may have as much patience as an???other man; for he takes much physic: and, oft taking physic makes a man very patient. But would your packet, master WEL-BRED, had are???riu'd at him, in such a minute of his patience; then, we had known the end of it, which now is doubtful, and threatens???What! my wise cos???sen! Nay, then, Il efurnish our feast with one gull more to'ard the mess. He writes to me of a brace, and here's one, that's three: O, for a fourth; Fortune, if ever thou'lt use thine eyes, I entreat thee???
O, now I see, who hee laughed at. Hee laughed at some-body in that letter. By this good light, and he had laughed at me ???
How now, cousin STEPHEN, melancholy'?
Yes, a little. I thought, you had laughed at me, cousin.
Why, what and I had cousse, what would you have done?
By this light, I would have told mine uncle.
Nay, if you wold ha'told your uncle, I did laugh at you, cousse.
Did you, indeed?
Yes, indeed.
Why, then???
What then?
I am satisfied, it is sufficient.
Why, bee so gentle cousse. And, I pray you let me entreat a curtsy of you. I am sent for, this morning, by a friend in the old Iewrie to come to him; It's but crossing over the fields to More-gate: Will you bear me company? I protest, it is not to draw you into bond, or any plot against the state, cousse.
Sir, that's all one, and't were; you shall command me, twice so far as More-gate to doe you good, in such a matter. Doe you think I would leave you? I protest???
No, no, you shall not protest, cousse.
By my fackins, but I will, by your leave; Isle protest more to my friend, then Isle speak off, at this time.
You speak very well, cousse.
Nay, not so neither, you shall pardon me: but I speak, to serve my turn.
Your turn, cos? Doe you know, what you say? A gentle???man of your sort, parts, carriage, and estimation, to talk of your turn in this company, and to me, alone, like a tankard-bearer, at a conduit! Fie. A wight, that (hitherto) his every step hath left the stamp of a great foot behind him, as every word the favour of a strong spirit! and he! this man! so graced, gilded, or (to use a more fit metaphor) so tin-foild by na???ture, as not ten house-wiues pewter (agoing a good time) shew's more bright to the world then he! and he (as I said last, so I say again, and still shall say it) this man! to conceal such real ornaments as these, and shad???dow their glory, as a Milliners wife do's her wrought stomacher, with a smoky lawn, or a black cypress? O cos! It cannot be answered, go not about it. DRAKES old ship, at Detford, may sooner circle the world a???gain. Come, wrong not the quality of your desert, with looking down???ward, cos; but hold up your head, so: and let the Idea of what you are, be portrayed in your face, that men may read in your physiognomy, (Here, within this place, is to be seen the true, rare, and accomplished monster, or miracle of nature, which is all one.) What think you of this, cos?
Why, I doe think of it; and I will be more proud, and melan???choly, and gentleman-like, then I have been: I'll ensure you.
Why, that's resolute master STEPHEN! Now, if I can but hold him up to his height, as it is happily begun, it will doe well for a suburbe-humor: we may hap have a match with the city, and play him for forty pound. Come, cos.
I'll follow you.
Follow me? you must go before.
Nay, and I must, I will. Pray you, show me, good cousin.
I Think, this be the house: what, hough?
Who's there? O, master MATTHEW! give your worship good morrow.
What! COB! how dost thou, good COB? dost thou inhabit here, COB?
I, sir, I and my linage have kept a poor house, here, in our days.
Thy linage, Monsieur COB, what linage? what linage?
Why sir, an ancient linage, and a princely. Mine ance'trie came from a Kings belly, no worse man: and yet no man neither (by your worships leave, I did lie in that) but Herring the King of fish (from his belly, I proceed) one of the Monarchs of the world, I assure you. The first red herring, that was broiled in ADAM, and EVE'S kitchen, doe I fetch my
pedigree from, by the Harrots books. His COB, was my great-great-mighty-great Grand father.
Why mighty? why mighty? I pray thee.
O, it was a mighty while ago, sir, and a mighty great COB.
How know thou that?
How know I? why, I smell his ghost, ever and anon.
Smell a ghost? ?? unsavoury jest! and the ghost of a herring COB!
I sir, with ???auour of your worships nose, Mr. MATTHEW, why not the ghost of a herring-cob, as well as the ghost of rasher-bacon?
ROGER BACON, thou would say?
I say rasher-bacon. They were both broiled of the col???s? and a man may smell broyld-meate, I hope? you are a scholar, vpsolue me that, now.
O raw ignorance! COB, can thou show me of a gentleman, one Captain BOBADILL, where his lodging is?
O, my guest, sir! you mean.
Thy guest! Alas! ha, ha.
Why doe you laugh, sir? Doe you not mean Captain BY???BADILL?
COB, 'pray thee, advise thy self well: doe not wrong the gen???tleman, and thy self too. I dare bee sworn, hee scorns thy house: hee! He lodge in such a base, obscure place, as thy house! Tut, I know his dis???position so well, he would not lye in thy bed, if tho'uldst gi'it him.
I will not give it him, though, sir. Mass, I thought somewhat was in it, we could not get him to bed, all night! Well, sir, though he lye not of my bed, he lies of my bench: an 't please you to go up, sir, you shall find him with two cushions under his head, and his cloak wrapped a???bout him, as though he had neither wun nor lost, and yet (I warrant) he ne'er cast better in his life, then he has done, to night.
Why? was he drunk?
Drunk, sir? you hear not me say so. Perhaps, hee swallowed a tauerne-token, or some such device, sir: I have nothing to doe withal. I deal with water, and not with wine. Gi'me my tankard there, hough. God b'w'you, sir. It's six a clock: I should have carried two turns, by this. What hough? my stopple? come.
Lye in a water-bearers house! A gentleman of his hauings! Well, I'll tell him my mind.
What TIB, show this gentleman up to the Captain. O, and my house were the Brasen-head now! faith, it would even speak, Mo fools yet. You should have some now would take this Mr. MATTHEW to be a gentleman, at the least. His father's an honest man, a worshipful fish???monger, and so forth; and now dos he creep, and wriggle into acquain???tance with all the brave gallants about the town, such as my guest is: (??, my guest is a fine man) and they flout him invincibly. Hee uses
every day to a Merchants house (where I serve water) one master KITE???LY'S, in the old Iewry; and here's the jest, he is in love with my masters si???ster, (mistress BRIDGET) and calls her mistress: and there hee will sit you a whole afternoon some-times, reading of these same abomi???noble, vile, (a pox on 'hem, I cannot abide them) rascally verses, poye???try, poyetrie, and speaking of interludes, twill make a man burst to hear him. And the wenches, they doe so gear, and ti-he at him???well, should they do so much to me, Eld forswear them all, by the foot of PHARAOH. There's an oath! How many water-bearers shall you hear swear such an oath? ??, I have a guest (he teaches me) he dos swear the legiblest, of any man christened: By St. GEORGE, the foot of PHARAOH, the body of me, as I am gentleman, and a soldier: such dainty oaths! and withal, he dos take this same filthy roguish tobacco, the finest, and cleanliest! it would doe a man good to see the fume come forth at 's tonnells! Well, he owes me forty shillings (my wife lent him out of her purse, by sixe-pence a time) besides his lodging: I would I had it. I shall have it, he says, the next A???ction. Halter skelter, hang sorrow, care 'll kill a cat, vp-tailes all, and a louse for the hang-man.
Hostess, hostess.
What say you, sir?
A cup of thy small beer, sweet hostess.
Sir, there's a gentleman, below, would speak with you.
A gentleman! odds so, I am not within.
My husband told him you were, sir.
What a plague???what meant he?
Captain BOBADILL?
Who's there? (take away the basin, good hostess) come up, sir.
He would desire you to come up, sir. You come into a cleanly house, here.
'Saue you, sir. 'Saue you, Captain.
Gentle master MATTHEW! Is it you, sir? Please you sit down.
Thank you, good Captain, you may see, I am some-what audacious.
Not so, sir. I was requested to supper, last night, by a sort of gal???lants, where you were wished for, and drunk to, I assure you.
Vouchsafe me, by whom, good Captain.
Mary, by young WELL-BRED, and others: Why, hostess, a stool here, for this gentleman.
No haste, sir, it is very well.
Body of me! It was so late ere we parted last night, I can scarce open my eyes, yet; I was but new risen, as you came: how passes the day abroad, sir? you can tell.
Faith, some half hour to seven: now trust me, you have an exceeding fine lodging here, very neat, and private!
I, sir: sit down, I pray you. Master MATTHEW (in any case) possess no gentlemen of our acquaintance, with notice of my lodging.
Who? I sir? no.
Not that I need to care who know it, for the Cabin is conue???nient, but in regard I would not be too popular, and generally visited, as some are.
True, Captain, I conceive you.
For, doe you see, sir, by the heart of valour, in me, (except it be ???o some peculiar and choice spirits, to whom I am extraordinarily engaged, as your self, or so) I could not extend thus far.
O Lord, sir, I resolve so.
I confess, I love a cleanly and quiet privacy, aboue all the tu???muled, and roar of fortune. What new book have you there? What! Go by, HIERONYMO!
I, did you ever see it acted? is it not well pend?
Well pend? I would fine see all the Poets, of these times, pen such another play as that was! they'll prate and swagger, and keep a stir of art and devices, when (as I am a gentleman) read 'hem, they are the most shallow, pitiful, barren fellows, that live upon the face of the earth, again!
Indeed, here are a number of fine speeches in this book! O eyes, no eyes, but fountains fraught with tears! There's a conceit! fountains fraught with tears! O life, no life, but lively form of death! Another! O world, no world, but mass of public wrongs! A third! Confused and sil'd with murder, and misdeeds! A fourth! O, the Muses! Is it not excellent? Is it not simply the best that ever you heard, Captain? Ha? How doe you like it?
It is good.
To thee, the purest object to my sense,
The most refined essence heaven covers,
Send I these lines, wherein I doe commence
The happy state of turtle-billing lovers.
If they prone rough, vn-polish't, harsh, and rude,
Hast made the vast. Thus, mildly, I conclude.
Nay, proceed, proceed. Whore's this?
This, sir? a toy of mine own, in my nonage: the infancy of my Muses! But, when will you come and see my study? good faith, I can show you some very good things, I have done of late???That boot be???comes your leg, passing well, Captain, methinkes!
So, so, It's the fashion, gentlemen now use.
Troth, Captain, and now you speak of the fashion, master WELL-???RED'S elder brother, and I, are fallen out exceedingly: this other day, I happened to enter into some discourse of a hanger, which I assure you, both for fashion, and workmanship, was most peremptory-beautifull,
and gentleman-like! Yet, he condemned, and cried it down, for the most pied, and ridiculous that ever he saw.
Squire DOWNRIGHT? the halfe-brother? was it not?
I sir, he.
Hang him, rooke, he! why, he has no more judgment then a malt-horse. By S. GEORGE, I wonder youl'd loose a thought upon such an animal: the most peremptory absurd clown of christendom, this day, he is holden. I protest to you, as I am a gentleman, and a soldier, I ne'er changed words, with his like. By his discourse, he should eat no???thing but hay. He was borne for the manger, pannier, or pack-saddle! He he's not so much as a good phrase in his belly, but all old iron, and rusty proverbs! a good commodity for some smith, to make hob-nailes of.
I, and he thinks to carry it away with his man-hood still, where he comes. He brags he will give me the bastinado, as I hear.
How! He the bastinado! how came he by that word, trow?
Nay, indeed, he said cudgel me; I termed it so, for my more grace.
That may bee: For I was sure, it was none of his word. But, when? when said he so?
Faith, yesterday, they say: a young gallant, a friend of mine told me so.
By the foot of PHARAOH, and 't were my case now, I should send him a chartel, presently. The bastinado! A most proper, and sufficient dependence, warranted by the great CARANZA. Come hither. You shall chartel him. I'll show you a trick, or two, you shall kill him with, at plea???sure: the first stoccata, if you will, by this ayre.
Indeed, you have absolute knowledge in the mystery, I have heard, sir.
Of whom? Of whom have you heard it. I beseech you?
Troth, I have heard it spoken of divers, that you have very rare, and vn-in-one-breath-vtter-able skill, sir.
By heaven, no, not I; no skill in the earth: some small rudi???mints in the science, as to know my time, distance, or so. I have professed it more for noblemen, and gentlemen's use, then mine own practise, I assure you. Hostess, accommodate vs with another bed-staffe here, quickly: Lend vs another bed-staffe. The woman do's not understand the words of Action. Look you, sir. Exalt not your point aboue this state, at any hand, and let your poynard maintain your defence, thus: (give it the gentleman, and leave vs) so, sir. Come on: O twine your body more about, that you may fall to a more sweet comely gentleman-like guard. So, indifferent. Hollow your body more sir, thus. Now, stand fast of your left leg, note your distance, keep your due proportion of time??? Oh, you disorder your point, most irregularly!
How is the bearing of it, now, sir?
O, out of measure ill! A well-experienc'd hand would pass upon you, at pleasure.
How mean you, sir, pass upon me?
Why, thus sir (make a thrust at me) come in, upon the answer, control your point, and make a full career, at the body. The best-pra???ctis'd gallants of the time, name it the passada: a most desperate thrust, believe it!
Well, come, sir.
Why, you doe not manage your weapon with any facility, or grace to inuit me: I have no spirit to play with you. Your dearth of judgment renders you tedious.
But one venue, sir.
Venue! Fie. Most gross denomination, as ever I heard. O, the stoccata, while you live, sir. Note that. Come, put on your cloak, and we'll go to some private place, where you are acquainted, some tavern, or so???and have a bit??? Isle send for one of these Fencers, and hee shall breath you, by my direction; and, then, I will teach you your trick. You shall kill him with it, at the first, if you please. Why, I will learn you, by the true judgment of the eye, hand, and foot, to control any e???nemies point in the world. Should your adversary confront you with a pistol, it were nothing, by this hand, you should, by the same rule, control his bullet, in a line: except it were hayle-shot, and spread. What money have you about you, Mr. MATTHEW?
Faith, I have not past a two shillings, or so.
It is some what with the least: but, come. We will have a bunch of redish, and salt, to taste our wine; and a pipe of t???basso, to close the ore???fice of the stomach: and then, we'll call upon young WEL-BRED. Per???haps wee shall meet the CORIDON, his brother, there: and put him to the question.
THOMAS, Come hither,
There lies a note, within upon my desk,
Here, take my key: It is no matter, neither.
Where is the Boy?
Within, sir, in the ware-house.
Let him tell over, straight, that Spanish gold,
And weigh it, with the pieces of eight. Doe you
See the delivery of those silver stuffs,
To Mr. LVCAR. Tell him, if he will,
He shall have the grogran's, at the rate I told him,
And I will meet him, on the Exchange, anon.
Good, sir.
Doe you see that fellow, brother DOWNRIGHT?
I, what of him?
He is a jewel, brother.
I took him of a child, up, at my door,
And christened him, gave him mine own name, THOMAS,
Since bred him at the Hospital; where proving
A toward imp, I called him home, and taught him
So much, as I have made him my Cashier,
And given him, who had none, a surname, CASH:
And find him, in his place so full of faith,
That, I durst trust my life into his hands.
So, would not I in any bastards, brother,
As, it is like, he is: although I knew
My self his father. But you said yo' had somewhat
To tell me, gentle brother, what is it? what is it?
Faith, I am very loath, to utter it,
As fearing, it may hurt your patience:
But, that I know, your judgment is of strength,
Against the nearness of affection???
What need this circumstance? pray you be direct.
I will not say, how much I doe ascribe
Unto your friendship; nor, in what regard
I hold your love: but, let my past behaviour,
And usage of your sister, but confirm
How well I'aue been affected to your???
You are too tedious, come to the matter, the matter.
Then (without further ceremony) thus.
My brother WELL-BRED, sir, (I know not how)
Of late, is much declined in what he was,
And greatly altered in his disposition.
When he came first to lodge here in my house,
Ne'er trust me, if I were not proud of him:
Me thought he bare himself in such a fashion,
So full of man, and sweetness in his carriage,
And (what was chief) it showed not borrowed in him,
But all he did, became him as his own,
And seemed as perfect, proper, and possessed
As breath, with life, or colour, with the blood.
But, now, his course is so irregular,
So loose, affected, and deprived of grace,
And he himself withal so far fallen off
From that first place, as scarce no note remains,
To tell men's judgements where he lately stood.
Hoe's grown a stranger to all due respect,
Forgetful of his friends, and not content
To stale himself in all societies,
He makes my house here common, as a Mart,
A Theater, a public receptacle
For giddy humour, and diseased riot;
And here (as in a tavern, or a stews)
He, and his wild associates, spend their hours,
In repetition of lascivious jests,
Swear, leap, drink, dance, and revel night by night,
Control my servants: and indeed what not?
'Sdeynes, I know not what I should say to him, in the whole world! He values me, at a cracked three-farthings, for ought I see: It will never out of the flesh that's bred in the bone! I have told him enough, one would think, if that would serve: But, counsel to him, is as good, as a shoulder of mutton to a sick horse. Well! he knows what to trust to, for GEORGE. Let him spend, and spend??? and domineer, till his heart ache; and hee think to bee relieved by me, when he is got into one o'your city pounds, the Counters, he has the wrong sow by the ear, in faith: and claps his dish at the wrong mans door. I'll lay my hand of my halfe-peny, ever I part with 't, to fetch him out, I'll assure him.
Nay, good brother, let it not trouble you, thus.
'S death, he mads me, I could eat my very spur-lethers, for an???ger! But, why are you so tame? Why doe not you speak to him, and tell him how he disquiets your house?
O, there are divers reasons to dissuade, brother.
But, would your self vouchsafe to travail in it,
(Though but with plain, and easy circumstance)
It would, both come much better to his sense,
And savour less of stomach, or of passion.
You are his elder brother, and that title
Both gives, and warrants you authority;
Which (by your presence seconded) must breed
A kind of duty in him, and regard???
Whereas, if I should intimate the least,
It would but add contempt, to his neglect,
Heap worse on ill, make up a pile of hatred
That, in the rearing, would come tottring down,
And, in the ruin, bury all our love.
Nay, more then this, brother, if I should speak
He would be ready from his heate of humour,
And ouer-flowing of the vapour, in him,
To blow the ears of his familiars,
With the false breath, of telling, what disgraces,
And low disparadgments, I had put upon him.
Whilst they, sir, to relieve him, in the fable,
Make their loose comments, upon every word,
Gesture, or look, I use; mock me all over,
From my flat cap, unto my shining shoes:
And, out of their impetuous rioting phant'sies,
Beget some slander, that shall dwell with me.
And what would that be, think you? mary, this.
They would give out (because my wife is fair,
My self but lately married, and my sister
Here sojourning a virgin in my house)
That I were jealous! nay, as sure as death,
That they would say. And how that I had quarrelled
My brother purposely, thereby to find
An apt pretext, to banish them my house.
Mass perhaps so: They' are like enough to doe it.
Brother, they would, believe it: so should I
(Like one of these penurious quack-saluers)
But set the bills up, to mine own disgrace,
And try experiments upon my self:
Lend scorn and envy, opportunity,
To stab my reputation, and good name???
I Will speak to him???
Speak to him? away, by the foot of PHARAOH, you shall not, you shall not doe him that grace. The time of day, to you, Gentleman of the house. Is Mr. WELL-BRED stirring?
How then? what should he doe?
Gentleman of the house, it is to you: is he within, sir?
He came not to his lodging to night sir, I assure you.
Why, doe you hear? you.
The gentleman-citizen hath satisfied me, Isle talk to no sca???vinegar.
How, scauenger? stay sir, stay?
Nay, brother DOWNRIGHT.
'Heart! stand you away, and you love me.
You shall not follow him now, I pray you, brother,
Good faith you shall not: I will ouer-rule you.
Ha? scauenger? well, go to, I say little: but, by this good day (god forgive me I should swear) if I put it up so, say, I am the rankest cow, that ever pissed. 'Sdeynes, and I swallow this, Isle ne'er draw my sword in the sight of Fleet-street again, while I live; Isle sit in a barn, with Madge-howlet, and catch mice first. Scauenger? 'Heart, and Isle go near to fill that huge tumbrell-slop of yours, with somewhat, and I have good luck: your GARAGANTVA breech cannot carry it away so.
Oh doe not fret your self thus, never think??? on it.
These are my brothers consorts, these! these are his Cam'rades, his walking mates! hoe's a gallant, a Cavalier too, right hang-man cut! Let me not live, and I could not find in my heart to swinge the whole ging of 'hem, one after another, and begin with him first. I am grieved, it should be said he is my brother, and take these courses. Well as he brews, so he shall drink, for GEORGE, again. Yet, he shall hear on it, and that tightly too, and I live, In faith.
But, brother, let your reprehension (then)
Run in an easy current, not ore-high
Carried with rashness, or devouring choler;
But rather use the soft persuading way,
Whose powers will work more gently, and compose
Th'imperfect thoughts you labour to reclaim:
More winning, then enforcing the consent.
I, I, let me alone for that, I warrant you.
How now? oh, the bell rings to breakfast.
Brother, I pray you go in, and bear my wife
Company, till I come; Isle but give order
Forsome dispatch of business, to my servants???
WHat, COB? our maids will have you by the back (In faith)
For coming so late this morning.
Perhaps so, sir, take heed some body have not them by the belly, for walking so late in the evening.
Well, yet my troubled spirit's somewhat eased,
Though not reposed in that security,
As I could wish: But, I must be content.
How ever I set a face on it to the world,
Would I had lost this finger, at a venture,
So WELL-BRED had ne'er lodged within my house.
Why't cannot be, where there is such resort
Of wanton gallants, and young revellers,
That any woman should be honest long.
I'st like, that factious beauty will preserve
The public weal of chastity, unshaken,
When such strong motives muster, and make head
Against her single peace? no, no. Beware,
When mutual appetite doth meet to treat,
And spirits of one kind, and quality,
Come once to parley, in the pride of bluod:
It is no slow conspiracy, that follows.
Well (to be plain) if I but thought, the time
Had answered their affections: all the world
Should not persuade me, but I were a cuckold.
Mary, I hope, they have not got that start:
For opportunity hath balkt 'hem yet,
And shall doe still, while I have eyes, and ears
To attend the impositions of my heart.
My presence shall be as an iron bar,
Twixt the conspiring motions of desire:
Yea, every look, or glance, mine eye eiects,
Shall check occasion, as one doth his slave,
When he forgets the limits of prescription.
Sister BRIDGET, pray you fetch down the rose-water aboue in the closet. Sweet heart, will you come in, to breakfast.
And she have ouer-heard me now?
I pray thee (good MVSSE) we stay for you.
By heaven I would not for a thousand angels.
What ail you sweet heart, are you not well, speak good MVSSE.
Troth my head aches extremely, on a sudden.
Oh, the lord!
How now? what?
Alas, how it burns? MVSSE, keep you warm, good truth it is this new disease! there's a number are troubled withal! for loves sake, sweet heart, come in, out of the air.
How simple, and how subtle are her answers?
A new disease, and many troubled with it!
Why, true: she heard me, all the world to nothing.
I pray thee, good sweet heart, come in; the air will doe you harm in, troth.
The air! she has me in the wind! sweet heart!
Isle come to you presently: 't will away, I hope.
Pray heaven it doe.
A new disease? I know not, new, or old,
But it may well be called poor mortals plague:
For, like a pestilence, it doth infect
The houses of the brain. First, it begins
Solely to work upon the fantasy,
Filling her seat with such pestiferous air,
As soon corrupts the judgment; and from thence,
Sends like contagion to the memory:
Still each to other giving the infection.
Which, as a subtle vapor, spreads it self,
Confusedly, through every sensiue part,
Till not a thought, or motion, in the mind,
Be free from the black poison of suspect.
Ah, but what miserie' is it, to know this?
Or, knowing it, to want the minds erection,
In such extremes? Well, I will once more strive,
(In spite of this black cloud) myself to be,
And shake the fever off, that thus shakes me.
S'Lid, I cannot choose but laugh, to see myself translated thus, from a poor creature to a creator; for now must I create an intolerable sort of lies, or my present profession looses the grace: and yet the lye to a man of my coat, is as ominous a fruit, as the Fico. O sir, it holds for good polity ever, to have that outwardly in vilest estimation, that inward???lie is most dear to vs. So much, for my borrowed shape. Well, the troth is, my old master intends to follow my young, dry foot, over More-fields, to London, this morning: now I, knowing, of this hunting-match, or rather conspiracy, and to insinuate with my young master (for so must we that are blew-waiters, and men of hope and service doe, or perhaps wee may wear motley at the years end, and who wears motley, you know) have got me before, in this disguise, determining here to lye in ambuscado, and in???tercept him, in the mid-way. If I can but get his cloak, his purse, his hat, nay, anything, to cut him off, that is, to stay his journey, Veni, vidi, vici, I may say with Captain CAESAR, I am made for ever, in faith. Well, now must I practice to get the true garb of one of these Lance-knights, my arm here, and my???young master! and his cousin, Mr. STEPHEN, as I am true counterfeit man of war, and no soldier!
So sir, and how then, cos?
'Sfoot, I have lost my purse, I think.
How? lost your purse? where? when had you it?
I cannot tell, stay.
'Slid, I am afraid, they will know me, would I could get by them.
What? have you it?
No, I think I was bewitched, I???
Nay, doe not weep the loss, hang it, let it go.
Oh, it's here: no, and it had been lost, I had not cared, but for a jet ring mistress MARY sent me.
A jet ring? oh, the poesy, the poesy?
Fine, in faith! Though fancy sleep, my love is deep. Meaning that though I did not fancy her, yet she loved me dearly.
Most excellent!
And then, I sent her another, and my poesy was: The deeper, the sweeter, Isle be judged by St. PETER.
How, by St. PETER? I doe not conceive that!
Mary, St. PETER, to make up the meeter.
Well, there the Saint was your good patron, hee helped you at your need: thank him, thank him.
I cannot take leave on 'hem, so: I will venture, come what will. Gentlemen, please you change a few crowns, for a very excellent good blade, here? I am a poor gentleman, a soldier, one that (in the better state of my fortunes) scorned so mean a refuge, but now it is the humour of necessity, to have it so. You seem to be gentlemen, well affected to martial men, else I should rather die with silence, then line with shame: how ever, vouchsafe to remember, it is my want speaks, not my self. This condition agrees not with my spirit???
Where hast thou served?
May it please you, sir, in all the late wars of Bohemia, Hung???ria, Dalmatia, Poland, where not, sir? I have been a poor servitor, by sea and land, any time this fourteen years, and followed the fortunes of the best Commanders in christendom. I was twice shot at the taking of Alepo, once at the relief of Vienna; I have been at Marseilles, Naples, and the Adriatique gulf, a gentleman-slaue in the galleys, thrice, where I was most dangerously shot in the head, through both the thighs, and yet, being thus maimed, I am void of maintenance, nothing left me but my scars, the noted marks of my resolution.
How will you sell this rapier, friend?
Generous sir, I refer it to your own judgment; you are a gentleman, give me what you please.
True, I am a gentleman, I know that friend: but what though? I pray you say, what would you ask?
I assure you, the blade may become the side, or thigh of the best prince, in Europe.
I, with a velvet scabbard, I think.
Nay, and 't be mine, it shall have a velvet scabbard, Cos, that's flat: I'd not wear it as it is, and you would give me an angel.
At your worships pleasure, sir; nay, it is a most pure Toledo.
I had rather it were a Spaniard! but tell me, what shall I give you for it? And it had a silver hilt???
Come, come, you shall not buy it; hold, there's a shilling fell???low, take thy rapier.
Why, but I will buy it now, because you say so, and there's an???other shilling, fellow. I scorn to be out-bidden. What, shall I walk with a cudgel, like Higgin-Bottom? and may have a rapier, for money?
You may buy one in the city.
Tut, Isle buy this in the field, so I will, I have a mind to it, be???cause it is a field rapier. Tell me your lowest price.
You shall not buy it, I say.
By this money, but I will, though I give more then it is worth.
Come away, you are a fool.
Friend, I am a fool, that's granted: but Isle have it, for that words sake. Follow me, for your money.
At your service, sir.
I Cannot loose the thought, yet, of this letter,
Sent to my son: nor leave t'admire the change
Of manners, and the breeding of our youth,
Within the kingdom, since my self was one.
When I was young, he lived not in the stews,
Durst have conceived a scorn, and uttered it,
On a grey head; age was authority
Against a buffon: and a man had, then,
A certain reverence paid unto his years,
That had none due unto his life. So much
The sanctity of some prevailed, for others.
But, now, we all are fallen; youth, from their fear:
And age, from that, which bred it, good example.
Nay, would our selves were not the first, even parents,
That did destroy the hopes, in our own children:
Or they not learned our vices, in their cradles,
And sucked in our ill customs, with their milk.
Ere all their teeth be borne, or they can speak,
We make their palats cunning! The first words,
We form their tongues with, are licentious jests!
Can it call, whore? cry, bastard? ??, then, kiss it,
A witty child! Can't swear? The fathers dearling!
Give it two plums. Nay, rather then 't shall learn
No bawdy song, the mother her self will teach it!
But, this is in the infancy; the days
Of the long coat: when it puts on the breeches,
It will put off all this. I, it is like:
When it is gone into the bone already.
No, no: This die goes deeper then the coat,
Or shirt, or skin. It staines, unto the liver,
And heart, in some. And, rather, then it should not,
Note, what we fathers doe! Look, how we live!
What mistresses we keep! at what expense,
In our sons eyes! where they may handle our gifts,
Hear our lascivious courtships, see our dalliance,
Taste of the same provoking meates, with vs,
To ruin of our states! Nay, when our own
Portion is fled, to prey on their remainder,
We call them into fellowship of vice!
Bait 'hem with the young chamber-maid, to seal!
And teach 'hem all bad ways, to buy affection!
This is one path! but there are millions more,
In which we spoil our own, with leading them.
Well, I thank heaven, I never yet was he,
That travailed with my son, before sixteen,
To show him, the Venetian cortezans.
Nor read the grammar of cheating, I had made
To my sharpe boy, at twelve: repeating still
The rule, Get money; still, Get money, Boy;
No matter, by what means; Money will doe
More, Boy, then my Lords letter. Neither have I
Dressed snails, or mushromes curiously before him,
Perfumed my sauces, and taught him to make 'hem;
Preceding still, with my grey gluttony,
At all the ordinaries: and only feared
His palate should degenerate, not his manners.
These are the trade of fathers, now! how ever
My son, I hope, hath met within my threshold,
None of these household precedents; which are strong,
And swift, to rape youth, to their precipice.
But, let the house at home be ne'er so clean
Swept, or kept sweet from filth; nay, dust, and cob-webs:
If he will live, abroad, with his companions,
In dung, and leystalls; it is worth a fear.
Nor is the danger of conversing less,
Then all that I have mentioned of example.
My master? nay, faith have at you: I am fleshed now, I have sped so well. Worshipful sir, I beseech you, respect the estate of a poor soul???dier; I am ashamed of this base course of life (god's my comfort) but ex???tremitie provokes me to it, what remedy?
I have not for you, now.
By the faith I bear unto truth, gentleman, it is no ordinary custom in me, but only to preserve manhood. I protest to you, a man I have been, a man I may be, by your sweet bounty.
'Pray thee, good friend, be satisfied.
Good sir, by that hand, you may doe the part of a kind gentle???man, in lending a poor soldier the price of two cannes of beer (a mat???la of small value) the king of heaven shall pay you, and I shall rest thank???full: sweet worship???
Nay, and you be so importunate???
Oh, tender sir, need will have his course: I was not made to this vile use! well, the edge of the enemy could not have abated me so much: It's hard when a man hath served in his Princes cause, and be thus??? Honourable worship, let me derive a small piece of silver from you, it shall not bee given in the course of time, by this good ground, I was fine to pawn my rapier last night for a poor supper, I had sucked the hilts long before, I am a pagan else: sweet honour.
Believe me, I am taken with some wonder,
To think, a fellow of thy outward presence
Should (in the frame, and fashion of his mind)
Be so degenerate, and sordid-base!
Art thou a man? and sham'st thou not to beg?
To practise such a servile kind of life?
Why, were thy education ne'er so mean,
Having thy limbs, a thousand fairer courses
Offer themselves, to thy election.
Either the wars might still supply thy wants,
Or service of some virtuous gentleman,
Or honest labour: nay, what can I name,
But would become thee better then to beg?
But men of thy condition feed on sloth,
As doth the beetle, on the dung she breeds in,
Not caring how the mettle of your minds
Is eaten with the rust of idleness???
Now, before me, what ever he be, that should
Relieve a person of thy quality,
While thou insist's in this loose desperate course,
I would esteem the sin, not thine, but his.
Faith sir, I would gladly find some other course, if so???
I, you'd gladly ???inde it, but you will not seek it.
Alas sir, where should a man seek? in the wars, there's no ascent by desert in these days, but???and for service, would it were as soon purchased, as wished for (the ayre's my comfort) I know, what I would say???
What's thy name?
Please you, FITZ-SWORD, sir.
FITZ-SWORD?
Say, that a man should entertain thee now,
Would thou be honest, humble, just, and true?
Sir, by the place, and honour of a soldier???
Nay, nay, I like not those affected oaths;
Speak plainly man: what think thou of my words?
Nothing, sir, but wish my fortunes were as happy, as my ser???vice should be honest.
Well, follow me, Isle prove thee, if thy deeds
Will carry a proportion to thy words.
Yes sir, straight, Isle but garter my hose. Oh that my belly were hooped now, for I am ready to burst with laughing! never was bottle, or bag-pipe fuller. S'lid, was there ever seen a fox in years to betray himself thus? now shall I be possessed of all his counsels: and, by that con???duet, my young master. Well, hee is resolved to prove my honesty; faith, and I am resolved to prove his patience: oh I shall abuse him intolerably. This small piece of service, will bring him clean out of love with the soldier, for ever. He will never come within the sign of it, the sight of a cassock, or a musket-rest again. Hee will hate the musters at Mile-end for it, to his dying day. It's no matter, let the world think me a bad coun???terfeit, If I cannot give him the slip, at an instant: why, this is better then to have staid his journey! well, Isle follow him: oh, how I long to bee employed.
YEs faith, sir, we were at your lodging to seek you, too.
Oh, I came not there to night.
Your brother delivered vs as much.
Who? my brother DOWNRIGHT?
He. Mr. WELL-BRED, I know not in what kind you hold me, but let me say to you this: as sure as honour, I esteem it so much out of the sunne-shine of reputation, to through the least beam of reguard, upon such a???
Sir, I must hear no ill words of my brother.
I, protest to you, as I have a thing to be saved about me, I never saw any gentleman-like part???
Good Captain, faces about, to some other discourse.
With your leave, sir, and there were no more men living upon the face of the earth, I should not fancy him, by S. GEORGE.
Troth, nor I, he is of a rustical cut, I know not how: he doth not carry himself like a gentleman of fashion???
Oh, Mr. MATTHEW, that's a grace peculiar but to a few; quos aquus amauit IVPITER.
I understand you sir.
No question, you doe, or you doe not, sir. NED KNO'WELL! by my soul welcome; how doest thou sweet spirit, my Genius? S'lid I shall love APOLLO, and the mad Thespian girls the better, while I live, for this; my dear fury: now, I see there's some love in thee! Sir, these bee the two I writ to thee of (nay, what a drowsy humour is this now? why doest thou not speak?)
Oh, you are a fine gallant, you sent me a rare letter!
Why, was it not rare?
Yes, Isle bee sworn, I was ne'er guilty of reading the like; match it in all PLINIE, or SYMMACHVS epistles, and Isle have my judge???meant burned in the ear for a rogue: make much of thy vain, for it is in???imitable. But I marle what camel it was, that had the carriage of it? for doubtless, he was no ordinary beast, that brought it!
Why?
Why, faiest thou? why doest thou think that any reasonable creature, especially in the morning (the sober time of the day too) could have mis-tane my father for me?
S'lid, you jest, I hope?
Indeed, the best use wee can turn it too, is to make a jest on it, now: but Isle assure you, my father had the full view of your flourishing stile, some hour before I saw it.
What a dull slave was this? But, sirrah, what said hee to it, In faith?
Nay, I know not??? what he said: but I have a shrewd guess what hee thought.
What? what?
Mary, that thou art some strange dissolute young fellow, and I a grain or two better, for keeping thee company.
Tut, that thought is like the moon in her last quarter, twill change shortly: but, sirrha, I pray thee be acquainted with my two hang???by's, here; thou wilt take exceeding pleasure in 'hem if thou hear 'hem once go: my wind-instruments. Isle wind 'hem up??? but what strange piece of silence is this? the sign of the dumb man?
Oh, sir, a kinsman of mine, one that may make your musique the fuller, and he please, he has his humour, sir.
Oh, what first? what first?
Nay, Isle neither doe your judgment, nor his folly that wrong, as to prepare your apprehension: Isle leave him to the mercy of your search, if you can take him, so.
Well, Captain BOBADILL, Mr. MATTHEW, pray you know this gentleman here, he is a friend of mine, and one that will deserve your affection. I know not your name sir, but I shall be glad of any occasion, to render me more familiar to you
My name is Mr. STEPHEN, sir, I am this gentleman's own cousin, sir, his father is mine uncle, sir, I am somewhat melancholy, but you shall command me, sir, in what soever is incident to a gentleman.
Sir, I must tell you this, I am no general man, but for Mr. WEL-BRED'S sake (you may embrace it, at what height of favour you please) I doe communicate with you: and conceive you, to bee a gentleman of some parts, I love few words.
And I fewer, sir. I have scarce enough, to thank you.
But are you indeed. Sir? so given to it?
I, truly, sir, I am mightily given to melancholy.
Oh, it's your only fine humour, sir, your true melancholy, breeds your perfect sine wit, sir: I am melancholy my self divers times, sir, and then doe I no more but take pen, and paper presently, and over???flow you half a score, or a dozen of sonnets, at a sitting.
Sure, he utters them then, by the gross.)
Truly sir, and I love such things, out of measure.
I faith, better then in measure, Isle vnder-take.
Why, I pray you, sir, make use of my study, it's at your service.
I thank you sir, I shall bee bold, I warrant you; have you a stool there, to be melancholy' upon?
That I have, sir, and some papers there of mine own doing, at idle hours, that you'll say there's some sparks of wit in 'hem, when you see them.
Would the sparks would kindle once, and become a fire a??????ongst 'hem, I might see selfe-loue burned for her heresy.
Cousin, is it well? am I melancholy enough?
Oh I, excellent!
Captain BOBADILL: why muse you so?
He is melancholy, too.
Faith, sir, I was thinking of a most honourable piece of service, was performed tomorrow, being St. MARKS day: shall bee some ten years, now?
In what place, Captain?
Why, at the beleag'ring of Strigonium, where, in less then two hours, seven hundred resolute gentlemen, as any were in Europe, lost their lives upon the breach. Isle tell you, gentlemen, it was the first, but the best leaguer, that ever I beheld, with these eyes, except the taking in of???what doe you call it, last year, by the Genowayes, but that (of all other) was the most fatal, and dangerous exploit, that ever I was ranged in, since I first bore arms before the face of the enemy, as I am a gentleman, &amp; soldier.
'So, I had as lief, as an angel, I could swear as well as that gentleman!
Then, you were a servitor, at both it seems! at Strigonium? and what doe you call it?
Oh lord, sir? by S. GEORGE, I was the first man, that entered the breach: and, had I not effected it with resolution, I had been slain, if I had had a million of lives.
It was pity, you had not ten; a cats, and your own, in faith. But, was it possible?
'Pray you, mark this discourse, sir.
So, I doe.)
I assure you (upon my reputation) it is true, and your self shall confess.
You must bring me to the rack, first.
Observe me judicially, sweet sir, they had planted me three demi-culuerings, just in the mouth of the breach; now, sir (as we were to give on) their master gunner (a man of no mean skill, and mark, you must think) confronts me with his linstock, ready to give fire; I spying his intendment, discharged my petrionel in his bosom, and with these single arms, my poor rapier, ran violently, upon the Moors, that guar???ded the ordinance, and put'hem pell-mell to the sword.
To the sword? to the rapier, Captain?
Oh, it was a good figure observed, sir! but did you all this, Cap???taine, without hurting your blade.
Without any impeach, of the earth: you shall perceive sir. It is the most fortunate weapon, that ever rid on poor gentleman's thigh: shall I tell you, sir? you talk of Morglay, Excalibur, Durindana, or so? tut, I lend no credit to that is fabled of 'hem, I know the virtue of mine own, and therefore I dare, the boldlier, maintain it.
I mar'le whether it be a Toledo, or no?
A most perfect Toledo, I assure you, sir.
I have a countryman of his, here.
Pray you, let's see, sir: yes faith, it is!
This a Toledo? pish.
Why doe you pish, Captain?
A Fleming, by heaven, Isle buy them for a guilder, a piece, and I would have a thousand of them.
How say you, cousin? I told you thus much?
Where bought you it, Mr. STEPHEN?
Of a souruie rogue soldier (a hundred of lice go with him) he swore it was a Toledo.
A poor provant rapier, no better.
Mass, I think it be, indeed! now I look on it, better.
Nay, the longer you look on it, the worse. Put it up, put it up.
Well, I will put it up, but by???(I have forgot the Captains oath, I thought to have sworn by it) and ere I meet him???
O, it is past help now, sir, you must have patience.
Whoreson connie-catching rascal! I could eat the very hilts for anger!
A sign of good digestion! you have an ostrich stomach, cousin.
A stomach? would I had him here, you should see, and I had a stomach.
It's better as it is: come, gentlemen, shall we go?
A Miracle, cousin, look here! look here!
Oh, gods lid, by your leave, doe you know me, sir?
I sir, I know you, by sight.
You sold me a rapier, did you not?
Yes, marie, did I sir.
You said, it was a Toledo, ha?
True, I did so.
But, it is none?
No sir, I confess it, it is none.
Doe you confess it? gentlemen, bear witness, he has confessed it. By gods will, and you had not confessed it???
Oh cousin, forbear, forbear.
Nay, I have done, cousin.
Why you have done like a gentleman, he he's confessed it, what would you more?
Yet, by his leave, he is a rascal, under his savour, doe you see?
I, by his leave, he is, and under savour: a pretty piece of ciui???litie! Sir, how doest thou like him?
Oh, it's a most precious fool, make much on him: I can com???pare him to nothing more happily, then a drum; for every one may play upon him.
No, no, a childes whistle were far the fitter.
Sir, shall I entreat a word with you?
With me, sir? you have not another Toledo to sell, have you?
You are conceited, sir, your name is Mr. KNO'WELL, as I take it?
You are, in the right? you mean not to proceed in the cate???chisme, doe you?
No sir, I am none of that coat.
Of as bare a coat, though? well, say sir.
Faith sir, I am but servant to the drum extraordinary, and in???deed (this smoky varnish being washed off, and three or four patches re???moved) I appear your worships in reversion, after the decease of your good father, BRAYNE-WORME.
BRAYNE-WORME! S'light, what breath of a conjurer, hath blown thee hither in this shape.
The breath of your letter, sir, this morning: the same that blew you to the wind-mill, and your father after you.
My father?
Nay, never start, it is true, he has followed you over the field's, by the foot, as you would doe a hare in the snow.
Sir, WEL-BRED, what shall we doe, sir? my father is come over, after me.
Thy father? where is he?
At Justice CLEMENTS house here, in Colman-street, where he but stays my return; and then???
Who's this? BRAYNE-WORME?
The same, sir.
Why how, in the name of wit, come thou transmuted, thus?
Faith, a devise, a devise: nay, for the love of reason, gentlemen, and avoiding the danger, stand not here, withdraw, and Isle tell you all.
But, art thou sure, he will stay thy return?
Doe I live, sir? what a question is that?
We'll prorogue his expectation then, a little: BRAYNE-WORME, thou shalt go with vs. Come on, gentlemen, nay, I pray thee, sweet NED, droop not: 'heart, and our wits be so wretchedly dull, that one old plodding brain can out-strip vs all, would we were even pressed, to make porters of; and serve out the remnant of our days, in Thames-street, or at Custom-house key, in a civil war, against the car-men.
AMEN, AMEN, AMEN, say I.
WHat says he, THOMAS? Did you speak with him?
He will expect you, sir, within this half hour.
Has he the money ready, can you tell?
Yes, sir, the money was brought in, last night.
O, that's well: fetch me my cloak, my cloak.
Stay, let me see, an hour, to go and come;
I, that will be the least: and then twill be
An hour, before I can dispatch with him;
Or very near: well, I will say two hours.
Two hours? ha? things, never dreamt of yet,
May be contrived, I, and effected too,
In two hours absence: well, I will not go.
Two hours; no, flooring opportunity,
I will not give your subtlety that scope.
Who will not judge him worthy to be robed???
That sets his doors wide open to a thief,
And shows the felon, where his treasure lies?
Again, what earthy spirit but will attempt
To the taste fruit of beauties golden tree,
When leaden sleep seals up the Dragons eyes?
I will not go. Business, go by, for once.
No beauty, no; you are of too good care,
To be left so, without a guard, or open!
Your lustre too'll inflame, at any distance,
Draw courtship to you, as a jet doth straws,
Put motion in a stone, strike fire from ice,
Nay, make a porter leap you, with his burden!
You must be then kept up, close, and well-watch'd,
For, give you opportunity, no quick-sand
Devours, or swallows swifter! He that lends
His wife (if she be fair) or time, or place;
Compels her to be false. I will not go.
The dangers are to many. And, then, the dressing
Is a most mayne attractive! Our great heads,
Within the city, never were in safety,
Since our wives wore these little caps: Isle change 'hem,
Isle change 'hem, straight, in mine. Mine shall no more
Wea???e three-pild akornes, to make my horns ache.
Nor, will I go. I am resolved for that.
Carry'in my cloak again. Yet, stay. Yet, doe too.
I will??? defer going, on all occasions.
Sir. SNARE, your scrivener, will be there with th'bonds.
That's true! fool on me! I had clean forgot it,
I must go. What's a clock?
Exchange time, sir.
'Heart, then will WELL-BRED presently be here, too,
With one, or other of his loose consorts.
I am a knave, if I know what to say,
What course to take, or which way to resolve.
My brain (me thinks) is like an houre-glasse,
Wherein, my imaginations run, like sands,
Filling up time; but then are turned, and turned:
So, that I know not what to stay upon,
And less, to put in act. It shall be so.
Nay, I dare build upon his secrecy,
He knows not to deceive me. THOMAS?
Sir.
Yet now, I have bethought me, too, I will not.
THOMAS, is COB within?
I think he be, sir.
But he will prate too, there's no speech of him.
No, there were no man of the earth to THOMAS,
If I durst trust him; there is all the doubt.
But, should he have a chink in him, I were gone,
Lost in my fame for ever: talk for th'Exchange.
The manner he hath stood with, till this present,
Doth promise no such change! what should I fear then?
Well, come what will, Isle tempt my fortune, once.
THOMAS???you may deceive me, but, I hope???
Your love, to me, is more???
Sir, if a servants
Duty, with faith, may be called love, you are
More then in hope, you are possessed of it.
I thank you, heartily, THOMAS; Give me your hand:
With all my heart, good THOMAS. I have, THOMAS,
A secret to impart, unto you???but
When once you have it, I must seal your lips up:
(So far, I tell you, THOMAS.)
Sir, for that???
Nay, hear me, out. Think, I esteem you, THOMAS,
When, I will let you in, thus, to my private.
It is a thing fits, nearer, to my crest,
Then thou art ware of, THOMAS. If thou should
Reveal it, but???
How? I reveal it?
Nay,
I doe not think thou would; but if thou should:
It were a great weakness.
A great treachery.
Give it no other name.
Thou wilt not do it, then?
Sir, if I doe, mankind disclaim me, ever.
He will not swear, he has some reservation,
Some concealed purpose, and close meaning sure:
Else (being urged so much) how should he choose,
But lend an oath to all this protestation?
His no precision, that I am certain of.
Nor rigid Roman-catholike. He will play,
At Fails, and Tick-tack, I have heard him swear.
What should I think of it? urge him again,
And by some other way? I will doe so.
Well, THOMAS; thou hast sworn not to disclose;
Yes, you did swear?
Not yet, sir, but I will,
Please you???
No, THOMAS, I dare take thy word.
But; if thou wilt swear, doe, as thou think good;
I am resolved without it; at thy pleasure.
By my souls safety then, sir, I protest.
My tongue shall ne'er take knowledge of a word,
Delivered me in nature of your trust.
It's too much, these ceremonies need not,
I know thy faith to be as firm as rock.
THOMAS, come hither, near: we cannot be
Too private, in this business. So it is,
(Now, he he's sworn, I dare the safelier venture)
I have of late, by divers observations???
(But, whether his oath can bind him, yea, or no',
Being not taken lawfully? ha? say you?
I will ask counsel, ere I doe proceed:)
THOMAS, it will be now too long to stay,
Isle spy some fitter time soon, or to morrow.
Sir, at your pleasure?
I will think. And, THOMAS,
I pray you search the books against my return,
For the receipts twixt me, and TRAPS.
I will, sir.
And, hear you, if your mistress brother, WEL-BRED,
Chance to bring hither any gentlemen,
Ere I come back; let one straight bring me word.
Very well, sir.
To the Exchange; doe you hear?
Or here in Colman-street, to Justice CLEMENTS.
Forget it not, nor be not out of the way.
I will not, sir.
I pray you have a care on it.
Or whether he come, or no, if any other,
Stranger, or else, fail not to send me word.
I shall not, sir.
Be it your special business
Now, to remember it.
Sir. I warrant you.
But, THOMAS, this is not the secret, THOMAS,
I told you of.
No, sir. I doe suppose it.
Believe me, it is not.
Sir. I doe believe you.
By heaven, it is not, that's enough. But, THOMAS,
I would not, you should utter it, doe you see?
To any creature living, yet, I care not.
Well, I must hence. THOMAS, conceive thus much.
It was a trial of you, when I meant
So deep a secret to you, I mean not this,
But that I have to tell you, this is nothing, this.
But, THOMAS, keep this from my wife, I charge you,
Locked up in silence, mid-night, buried here.
No greater hell, then to be slave to fear.
Locked up in silence, mid-night, buried here.
Whence should this flood of passion (trow) take head? ha?
Best, dream no longer of this running humour,
For fear I sink! the violence of the stream
Already hath transported me so far,
That I can feel no ground at all! but soft,
Oh, it is our water-bearer: somewhat he's crossed him, now.
FAsting days? what tell you me of fasting days? S'lid, would they were all on a light fire for me: They say, the whole world shall bee consumed with fire one day, but would I had these ember-weekes, and villainous fridays burnt, in the mean time, and then???
Why, how now COB, what moves thee to this choler? ha?
Collar, master THOMAS? I scorn your collar, I sir, I am none o'your cart-horse, though I carry, and draw water. And you offer to ride me, with your collar, or halter either, I may hap show you a jades trick, sir.
O, you'll slip your head out of the collar? why, goodman COB, you mistake me.
Nay, I have my room, &amp; I can be angry as well as another, sir.
Thy room, COB? thy humour, thy humour? thou mistake.
Humour? mack, I think it be so, indeed: what is that humour? some rare thing, I warrant.
Mary, Isle tell thee, COB: It is a gentleman-like monster, bred, in the special gallantry of our time, by affectation; and fed by folly.
How? must it be fed?
Oh I, humour is nothing, if it bee not fed. Did thou never hear that? it's a common phrase, Feed my humour.
Isle none on it: Humour, avaunt, I know you not, be gone. Let who will make hungry meals for your monster-ship, it shall not bee I. Feed you, quoth he? S'lid, I ha'much ado, to feed my self; especially, on these lean rascally days, too; and't had been any other day, but a fasting day (a plague on them all for me) by this light, one might have done the common-wealth good service, and have drowned them all in the flood, two or three hundred thousand years ago. O, I doe stomach them hugely! I have a maw now, and't were for Sr BEVIS his horse, against 'hem.
I pray thee, good COB, what makes thee so out of love with fa???sting-dayes?
Mary that, which will make any man out of love with 'hem, I think: their bad conditions, and you will needs know. First, they are of a Flemmish breed, I am sure on it, for they raven up more butter, then all the days of the week, beside; next, they stink of fish, and leeke-por???ridge miserably: thirdly, they'll keep a man devoutly hungry, all day, and at night send him supperless to bed.
Indeed, these are faults, COB.
Nay, and this were all, it were something, but they are the only known enemies, to my generation. A fasting-day, no sooner comes, but my lineage goes to rack, poor cobs they smoke for it, they are made martyrs of the gridiron, they melt in passion: and your maids too know this, and yet would have me turn HANNIBAL, and eat my own fish, and blood: My princely cos, fear nothing; I have not the hart to devour you, &amp; I might be made as rich as King COPHETVA. O, that I had room for my tears, I could weep salt-water enough, now, to preserve the lives of ten thousand of my kin. But, I may curse none but these filthy Alma???nacles, for an't were not for them, these days of persecution would ne'er be known. Isle bee hanged, an'some Fish-mongers son doe not make of hem; and puts in more fasting-dayes then he should doe, because hee would utter his fathers dried stock-fish, and stinking conger.
S'light, peace, thou'lt bee beaten like a stock-fish, else: here is Mr. MATTHEW. Now must I look out for a messenger to my master.
BEshrew me, but it was an absolute good jest, and exceedingly well carried!
I, and our ignorance maintained it as well, did it not?
Yes faith, but was it possible thou should not know him? I forgive Mr. STEPHEN, for he is stupidity it self!
Before god, not I, and I might have been joined patten with one of the seven wise masters, for knowing him. He had so writhen himself, into the habit of one of your poor Infanterie, your decayed, ruinous, worme-eaten gentlemen of the round: such as have vowed to sit on the skirts of the city, let your Provost, and his halfe-dozen of halberdeirs doe what they can; and have translated begging out of the old hackney pace, to a fine easy amble, and made it run as smooth, of the tongue, as a shoue-groat shilling. Into the likeness of one of these Reformado's had he moulded himself so perfectly, observing every trick of their action, as varying the accent, swearing with an emphasis, indeed all, with so spe???ciall, and exquisite a grace, that (had thou seen him) thou would have sworn, he might have been Serieant-Maior, if not Lieutenant-Coronell to the regiment.
Why, BRAYNE-WORME, who would have thought thou had been such an artificer?
An artificer? An architect! except a man had studied begging all his life-time, and been a weaver of language, from his infancy, for the clothing of it! I never saw his rival.
Where got thou this coat, I marl'e?
Of a Hounds-ditch man, sir. One of the deuil's near kinsmen, a broker.
That cannot be, if the proverb hold; for, a crafty knave needs no broker.
True sir, but I did need a broker, Ergo.
(Well put off) no crafty knave, you'll say,
Tut, he he's more of these shifts.
And yet where I have one, the broker he's ten, sir,
FRANCIS, MARTIN, ne'er a one to be found, now? what a spite's this?
How now, THOMAS? is my brother KITELY, within?
No sir, my master went forth even now: but master DOWN???RIGHT is within. COB, what COB? is he gone too?
Whither went your master? THOMAS, can thou tell?
I know not, to Justice CLEMENTS, I think, sir. COB.
Justice CLEMENT, what's he?
Why, doest thou not know him? he is a citie-magistrate, a In???stice here, an excellent good Lawyer, and a great scholar: but the only mad, merry, old fellow in Europe! I showed him you, the other day.
Oh, is that he? I remember him now. Good faith, and he he's a very strange presence, me thinks; it shows as if hee stood out of the rank, from other men: I have heard many of his jests in university. They say, he will commit a man, for taking the wall, of his horse.
I, or wearing his cloak of one shoulder, or serving of god: a???ny thing indeed, if it come in the way of his humour.
GASPER, MARTIN, COB: 'heart, where should they be, trow?
Master KITELY'S man, 'pray thee vouchsafe vs the lighting of this match.
Fire on your match, no time but now to vouchsafe? FRAN???CIS. COB.
Body of me! here's the remainder of seven pound, since ye???sterday was seven-night. It is your right Trinidado! did you never take a???ny, master STEPHEN?
No truly, sir? but I'll learn to take it now, since you com???mend it, so.
Sir, believe me (upon my relation) for what I tell you, the world shall not reprove. I have been in the Indies (where this herb grows) where neither my self, nor a dozen gentlemen more (of my knowledge) have received the taste of any other nutriment, in the world, for the space of one and twenty weeks, but the fume of this simple only. Therefore, it cannot be, but it is most divine! Further, take it in the nature, in the true kind so, it makes an antidote, that (had you taken the most deadly poyso???nous plant in all Italy, it should expel it, and clarify you, with as much ease, as I speak. And, for your greene wound, your Balsamum, and your St. IOHN'S woort are all mere gulleries, and trash to it, especially your Trinidado: your Nicotian is good too. I could say what I know of the ver???tu of it, for the expulsion of rhewmes, raw humours, crudities, obstru???ctions, with a thousand of this kind, but I profess my self no quack-saluer. Only, thus much, by HERCVLES, I doe hold it, and will affirm it (be???fore any Prince in Europe) to be the most sovereign, and precious weed, that ever the earth tendered to the use of man.
This speech would have done dece??tly in a tabacco-traders mouth!
At Justice CLEMENTS, hee is: in the middle of Colman-street.
O, oh?
Whore's the match I gave thee? Master KITELIES man?
Would his match, and he, and pipe, and all were at SANCTO DOMINGO! I had forgot it.
By gods me, I marle, what pleasure, or felicity they have in taking this roguish tobacco! it's good for nothing, but to choke a man, and fill him full of smoke, and embers: there were four dyed out of one
house, last week, with taking of it, and two more the bell went for, ye???ster-night; one of them (they say) will ne'er scope it: he voided a bushel of soot yesterday, upward, and downward. By the stocks, and there were no wiser men then I, I'd have it present whipping, man, or woman, that should but deal with a tabacco-pipe; why, it will stifle them all in the end, as many as use it; it's little better then rats bane, or rosaker.
Oh, good Captain, hold, hold.
You base cullion, you.
Sir, here's your match: come, thou must needs be talking, too, tho'art well enough served.
Nay, he will not meddle with his match, I warrant you: well it shall be a dear beating, and I live.
Doe you prate? Doe you murmur?
Nay, good Captain, will you regard the humour of a fool? away, knave.
THOMAS, get him away.
A whoreson filthy slave, a dung-worme, an excrement! Body of CAESAR, but that I scorn to let forth so mean a spirit, I'd have stabbed him, to the earth.
Mary, the law forbid, sir.
By PHAROAHS foot, I would have done it.
Oh, he swears admirably! (by PHAROAHS foot) (body of CAESAR) I shall never doe it, sure (upon mine honour, and by Saint GEORGE) no, I have not the right grace.
Master STEPHEN, will you any? By this air, the most divine tobacco, that ever I drunk!
None, I thank you, sir. O, this gentleman do's it, rarely too! but nothing like the other. By this air, as I am a gentleman: by???
Master, glance, glance! Master WELL-BRED!
As I have somewhat to be saved, I protest???
You are a fool: It needs no affidauit.
Cousin, will you any tobacco?
I sir! upon my reputation???
How now, cousin!
I protest, as I am a gentleman, but no soldier, indeed???
No, Master STEPHEN? as I remember your name is entered in the artillery garden?
I sir, that's true: Cousin, may I swear, as I am a soldier, by that?
Oh yes, that you may. It's all you have for your money.
Then, as I am a gentleman, and a soldier, it is divine tobacco!
But soft, whore's Mr. MATTHEW? gone?
No, sir, they went in here.
O, let's follow them: master MATTHEW is gone to salute his mistress, in verse. VVee shall have the happiness, to hear some of his poe???try, now. Hee never comes unfurnished. BRAYNE-WORME?
BRAYNE-WORME? Where? Is this BRAYNE-WORME?
I, cousin, no words of it, upon your gentility.
Not I, body of me, by this air, S. GEORGE, and the foot of PHARAOH.
Rare! your cousins discourse is simply drawn out with oaths.
It is larded with 'hem. A kind of french dressing, if you love it.
HA? how many are there, say thou?
Mary sir, your brother, master VVELL-BRED???
Tut, beside him: what strangers are there, man?
Strangers? let me see, one, two; mass I know not well, there are so many.
How? so many?
I, there's some five, or six of them, at the most.
A swarm, a swarm,
Spite of the devil, how they sting my head
With forked stings, thus wide, and large! But, COB,
How long hast thou been coming hither, COB?
A little while, sir.
Did thou come running?
No, sir.
Nay, then I am familiar with thy haste!
Bane to my fortunes: what meant I to marry?
I, that before was ranked in such content,
My mind at rest too, in so soft a peace,
Being free master of mine own free thoughts,
And now become a slave? What? never sigh,
Be of good cheer, man: for thou art a cuckold,
It is done, it is done! nay, when such flowing store,
Plenty it self, falls in my wives lap,
The Cornucopia will be mine, I know. But, COB,
What entertainment had they? I am sure
My sister, and my wife, would bid them welcome! ha?
Like enough, sir, yet, I heard not a word of it.
No: their lips were sealed with kisses, and the voice
Drowned in a flood of joy, at their arrival,
Had lost her motion, state, and faculty.
COB, which of them was it, that first kissed my wife?
(My sister, I should say) my wife, alas,
I fear not her: ha? who was it, say thou?
By my troth, sir, will you have the truth of it?
Oh I, good COB: I pray thee, heartily.
Then, I am a vagabond, and fitter for Bride-well, then your worcester???ships company, if I saw any body to be kissed, unless they would have kissed the post, in the middle of the ware-house; for there I left them all, at their tobacco, with a pox.
How? were they not gone in, then, ever thou came?
Oh no sir.
Spite of the devil??? what doe I stay here, then? COB, follow me.
Nay, soft and fair, I have eggs on the spit; I cannot go yet, sir. Now am I for some five and fifty reasons hammering, hammering re???avenge: oh, for three or four gallons of vinegar, to sharpen my wits. Re???avenge, vinegar revenge: vinegar, and mustard revenge: nay, and hee had not lain in my house, 't would never have grieved me, but being my guest, one, that Isle be sworn, my wife he's lent him her smock off her back, while his one shirt he's been at washing; pawned her neckerchers for clean bands for him; sold almost all my platters, to buy him tobacco; and he to turn monster of ingratitude, and strike his lawful host! well, I hope to raise up an host of fury for it: here comes Justice CLEMENT.
WHat's master KITELY gone? ROGER?
I, sir.
'Hart of me! what made him leave vs so abruptly! How now, sir? what make you here? what would you have, ha?
And't please your worship, I am a poor neighbour of your worships???
A poor neighbour of mine? why, speak poor neighbour.
I dwell, sir, at the sign of the water-tankerd, hard by the greene lattice: I have paid scot, and lot there, any time this eighteen years.
To the greene lattice?
No, sir, to the parish: mary, I have seldom escaped scot-free, at the lattice.
O, well! what business he's my poor neighbour with me?
And't like your worship, I am come, to crave the peace of your worship.
Of me knave? peace of me, knave? did I ever hurt thee? or threaten thee? or wrong thee? ha?
No, sir, but your worships warrant, for one that he's wronged me, sir: his arms are at too much liberty, I would fine have them bound to a treaty of peace, and my credit could compass it, with your worship.
Thou goosed far enough about for it, I am sure.
Why, doest thou go in danger of thy life for him? friend?
No sir; but I go in danger of my death, every hour, by his means: and I die, within a twelvemonth and a day, I may swear, by the law of the land, that he killed me.
How? how knave? swear he killed thee? and by the law? what pretence? what colour hast thou for that?
Mary, and't please your worship, both black, and blew; colour enough, I warrant you. I have it here, to show your worship.
What is he, that gave you this, sir?
A gentleman, and a soldier, he says he is, of the city here.
A soldier of the city? What call you him?
Captain BOBADIL.
BOBADIL? And why did he bob, and beat you, sirrah? How began the quarrel betwixt you? ha: speak truly knave, I advise you.
Mary, indeed, and please your worship, only because I spake against their vagrant tobacco, as I came by 'hem, when they were taking on it, for nothing else.
Ha? you speak against tobacco? FORMAL, his name.
What's your name, sir?
OLIVER, sir, OLIVER COB, sir.
Tell OLIVER COB, he shall go to the jail, FORMAL.
OLIVER COB, my master, Justice CLEMENT, says, you shall go to the jail.
O, I beseech your worship, for gods sake, dear master Justice.
Nay, gods precious: and such drunkards, and tankards, as you are, come to dispute of tobacco once; I have done! away with him.
O, good master Justice, sweet old gentleman.
Sweet OLIVER, would I could doe thee any good: Justice CLEMENT, let me entreat you, sir.
What? a thred-bare rascal! a beggar! a slave that never drunk out of better then pisse-pot mettle in his life! and he to deprave, and abuse the virtue of an herb, so generally received in the courts of princes, the chambers of nobles, the bowers of sweet ladies, the cabins of soldiers! ROGER, away with him, by gods precious???I say, go too.
Dear master Justice; Let me bee beaten again, I have de???served it: but not the prison, I beseech you.
Alas, poor OLIVER!
ROGER, make him a warrant (hee shall not go) I but fear the knave.
Doe not stink, sweet OLIVER, you shall not go, my master will give you a warrant.
O, the Lord maintain his worship, his worthy worship.
Away, dispatch him. How now, master KNO'WEL! In dumps? In dumps? Come, this becomes not.
Sir, would I could not feel my cares???
Your cares are nothing! they are like my cap, soon put on, and as soon put off. What? your son is old enough, to govern himself: let him run his course, it's the only way to make him a stayed man. If he were an unthrift, a ruffian, a drunkard, or a licentious liver, then you had reason; you had reason to take care: but, being none of these, mirth's my witness, and I had twice so many cares, as you have, I'd drown them all in a cup of sack. Come, come, let's try it: I muse, your parcel of a soldier returns not all this while.
WEll sister, I tell you true: and you'll find it so, in the end.
Alas brother, what would you have me to doe? I cannot help it: you see, my brother brings 'hem in, here, they are his friends.
His friends? his fiends. S'lud, they doe nothing but hant him, up and down, like a sort of unlucky sprites, and tempt him to all man???ner of villainy, that can be thought of. Well, by this light, a little thing would make me play the devil with some of 'hem; and it were not more for your husbands sake, then any thing else, I'd make the house too hot for the best on hem: they should say, and swear, hell were broken loose, ever they went hence. But, by gods will, it is no bodies fault, but yours: for, and you had done, as you might have done, they should have been per???boiled, and baked too, every mothers son, ever they should have come in, ever a one of 'hem.
God's my life! did you ever hear the like? what a strange man is this! Could I keep out all them, think you? I should put my self, against half a dozen men? should I? Good faith, you'd mad the patient'st body in the world, to hear you talk so, without any sense, or reason!
Servant (in troth) you are too prodigal
Of your wits treasure, thus to power it forth,
Upon so mean a subject, as my worth?
You say well, mistress; and I mean, as well.
Hoy-day, here is stuff!
O, now stand close: pray heaven, she can get him to read:
He should doe it, of his own natural impudence.
Servant, what is this same, I pray you?
Mary, an Elegy, an Elegy, an odd toy???
To mock an ape withal. O, I could sow up his mouth, now.
Sister, I pray you let's hear it.
Are you rime-giuen, too?
Mistress, Isle read it, if you please.
Pray you doe, servant.
O, here's no foppery! Death, I can endure the stocks, better.
What ails thy brother? can he not hold his water, at reading of a ballad?
O, no: a rime to him, is worse then cheese, or a bag-pipe. But, mark, you loose the protestation.
Faith, I did it in an humour; I know not how it is: but, please you come near, sir. This gentleman he's judgment, hee knows how to censure of a???pray you sir, you can judge.
Not I, sir: upon my reputation, and, by the foot of PHARAOH.
O, chide your cousin, for swearing.
Not I, so long as he do's not for swear himself.
Master MATTHEW, you abuse the expectation of your dear mistress, and her fair sister: Fie, while you live, avoid this prolixity.
I shall, sir: well, In???ipere dulls.
How! Insipere dulls? a sweet thing to be a fool, indeed.
What, doe you take Insipere, in that sense?
You doe not? you? This was your villainy, to gull him with a mo???te.
O, the Benchers phrase: pauca verb, pauca verb.
Rare creature, let me speak without offence,
Would god my rude words had the influence,
To rule thy thoughts, as thy fair looks doe mine,
Then should thou be his prisoner, who is thine.
This is in HERO and LENDER?
O, I! peace, we shall have more of this.
Be not unkind, and fair, misshapen stuff
Is of behaviour boisterous, and rough:
How like you that, sir?
S'light, he shakes his head like a bottle, to feel and there be a???ny brain in it!
But observe the catastrophe, now,
And I in duty will exceed all other,
As you in beauty doe excel loves mother.
Well, Isle have him free of the wit-brokers, for hee utters no???thing, but stolen remnants.
O, forgive it him.
A filching rogue? hang him. And, from the dead? it's worse then sacrilege.
Sister, what have you here? verses? pray you, lets see. Who made these verses? they are excellent good!
O, master WEL-BRED, it is your disposition to say so, sir. They were good in the morning, I made 'hem, extempore, this morning.
How? extempore?
I, would I might bee hanged else: ask Captain BOBADILE. He saw me write them, at the???(pox on it) the star, yonder.
Can he find, in his heart, to curse the stars, so?
Faith, his are even with him: they have cursed him enough already.
Cousin, how doe you like this gentleman's verses?
O, admirable! the best that ever I heard, cousse!
Body of CAESAR! they are admirable!
The best, that ever I heard, as I am a soldier.
I am vexed, I can hold ne'er a bone of me still! Heart, I think, they mean to build, and breed here!
Sister, you have a simple servant here, that crowns your beau???tie, with such encomions, and devises: you may see, what it is to be the mi???stress of a wit! that can make your perfections so transparent, that every blear eye may look through them, and see him drowned over head, and ears, in the deep well of desire. Sister KITELY, I marvel, you get you not a servant, that can rime, and doe tricks, too.
Oh monster! impudence it self! tricks?
Tricks, brother? what tricks?
Nay, speak, I pray you, what tricks?
I, never spare any body here: but say, what tricks?
Passion of my heart! doe tricks?
S'light, here's a trick vied, and reuyed! why, you munkies, you? what a catter-waling doe you keep? he's hee not given you rimes, and verses, and tricks?
O, the fiend!
Nay, you, lamp of virginity, that take it in snuff so! come, and cherish this tame poetical fury, in your servant, you'll be begged else, shortly, for a concealment: go to, reward his muse. You cannot give him less then a shilling, in conscience, for the book, he had it out of, cost him a teston, at least. How now, gallants? Mr. MATTHEW? Captain? What? all sons of silence? no spirit?
Come, you might practise your ruffian-tricks somewhere else, and not here, I wuss: this is no tavern, nor drinking-schole, to vent your exploits in.
How now! whose cow he's calu'd?
Mary, that he's mine, sir. Nay, Boy, never look askance at me, for the matter; Isle tell you of it, I, sir, you, and your companions, mend your selves, when I have done?
My companions?
Yes sir, you companions, so I say, I am not afraid of you, nor them neither: your hang-byes here. You must have your Poets, and your potlings, your soldado's, and foolado's, to follow you up and down the ci???tie, and here they must come to domineer, and swagger. Sirrha, you, ballad-singer, and slops, your fellow there, get you out; get you home: or (by this steel) Isle cut off your ears, and that, presently.
S'light, stay, let's see what he dare doe: cut off his ears? cut a whetstone. You are an ass, doe you see? touch any man here, and by this hand, Isle run my rapier to the hilts in you.
Yea, that would I fine see, boy.
O Iesu! murder. THOMAS, GASPAR!
Help, help, THOMAS.
Gentlemen, forbear, I pray you.
Well, sirrah, you, HOLOFERNES: by my hand, I will pink your flesh, full of holes, with my rapier for this; I will, by this good hey???uen: Nay, let him come, let him come, gentlemen, by the body of Saint GEORGE, Isle not kill him.
Hold, hold, good gentlemen.
You whoreson, bragging coistrel:
WHy, how now? what's the matter? what's the stir here?
Whence springs the quarrel? THOMAS! where is he?
Put up your weapons, and put off this rage.
My wife and sister, they are cause of this,
What, THOMAS? where is this knave?
Here, sir.
Come, let's go: this is one of my brothers ancient hue???morse, this.
I am glad, no body was hurt by his ancient humour.
Why, how now, brother, who en???orst this brawl?
A sort of lewd rake-hells, that care neither for god, nor the de???will! And, they must come here to read ballads, and rogery, and trash! Isle mar the knot of 'hem ere I sleep, perhaps: especially BOB, there: he that's all manner of shapes! and Songs, and sonnets, his fellow.
Brother, indeed, you are too violent,
To sudden, in your humour: and, you know
My brother WEL-BREDS temper will not bear
Any reproof, chiefly in such a presence,
Where every slight disgrace, he should receive,
Might wound him in opinion, and respect.
Respect? what talk you of respect among such,
As have nor spark of manhood, nor good manners?
'Sdeynes I am ashamed, to hear you! respect?
Yes, there was one a civil gentleman,
And very worthily demeaned himself!
O, that was some love of yours, sister!
A love of mine? I would it were no worse, brother!
You'd pay my portion sooner, then you think for.
Indeed, he seemed to be a gentleman of an exceeding fair dis???position, and of very excellent good parts!
Her love, by heaven! my wives minion!
Fair disposition? excellent good parts?
Death, these phrases are intolerable!
Good parts? how should she know his parts?
His parts? Well, well, well, well, well, well!
It is too plain, too clear: THOMAS, come hither.
What, are they gone?
I, sir, they went in.
My mistress, and your sister???
Are any of the gallants within!
No, sir, they are all gone.
Art thou sure of it?
I can assure you, sir.
What gentleman was that they praised so, THOMAS?
One, they call him master KNO'WELL, a handsome young gentleman, sir.
I, I thought so: my mind gave me as much.
Isle die, but they have hid him in the house,
Somewhere; Isle go and search: go with me, THOMAS.
Be true to me, and thou shalt find me a master.
WHat TIB, TIB, I say.
How now, what cuckold is that knocks so hard? O, husband, first you? what's the news?
Nay, you have stoned me, I faith! you have given me a knock of the forehead, will stick by me! cuckold? 'Slid, cuckold?
Away, you fool, did I know it was you, that knocked?
Come, come, you may call me as bad, when you list.
May I? TIB, you are a whore.
You lye in your throat, husband.
How, the lye? and in my throat too? doe you long to bee stabbed, ha?
Why, you are no soldier, I hope?
O, must you be stabbed by a soldier? Mass, that's true! when was BOBADILL here? your Captain? that rogue, that foist, that fencing Burgullian? Isle tickle him, in faith.
Why, what's the matter? trow!
O, he has bast???d me, rarely, sumptiously! but I have it herein black and white; for his black, and blew: shall pay him. O, the Justice! the honestest old brave Trojan in London! I doe honour the very flea of his dog. A plague on him though, he put me once in a villainous filthy fear; mary, it vanished away, like the smoke of tobacco: but I was smok't soundly first. I thank the devil, and his good angel, my guest. Well, wife, or TIB (which you will) get you in, and lock the door, I charge you, let no body in to you; wife, no body in, to you: those are my words. Not Captain BOB himself, nor the fiend, in his likeness; you are a woman; you have flesh and blood enough in you, to be tempted: therefore, keep the door, shut, upon all comers.
I warrant you, there shall no body enter here, without my consent.
Nor, with your consent, sweet TIB, and so I leave you.
It's more, then you know, whether you leave me so.
How?
Why, sweet.
Tut, sweet, or sour, thou art a flower,
Keep close thy door, I ask no more.
WEll BRAYNE-WORME, perform this business, happily,
And thou make a purchase of my love, for-euer,
In faith, now let thy spirits use their best faculties. but, at any hand, remember the message, to my brother: for, there's no other means, to start him.
I warrant you, sir, fear nothing: I have a nimble soul he's waked all forces of my phant'sie, by this time, and put 'hem in true motion. What you have possessed me withal, Isle discharge it amply, sir. Make it no question.
Forth, and prosper, BRAYNE-WORME. Faith, NED, how dost thou approve of my abilities in this devise?
Troth, well, howsoever: but, it will come excellent, if it take.
Take, man? why, it cannot choose but take, if the circum???stances miscarry not: but, tell me, ingenuously, dost thou affect my sister BRIDGET, as thou pretend'st?
Friend, am I worth belief?
Come, doe not protest. In faith, she is a maid of good orna???meant, and much modesty: and, except I conceived very worthily of her, thou shouldest not have her.
Nay, that I am afraid will bee a question yet, whether I shall have her, or no?
Slid, thou shalt have her; by this light, thou shalt.
Nay, doe not swear.
By this hand, thou shalt have her: Isle go fetch her, presently. Point, but where to meet, and as I am an honest man, I'll bring her.
Hold, hold, be temperate.
Why, by???what shall I swear by? thou shalt have her, as I am???
'Pray thee, be at peace, I am satisfied: and doe believe, thou wilt omit no offered occasion, to make my desires complete.
Thou shalt see, and know, I will not.
WAs your man a soldier, sir?
I, a knave, I took him begging of the way,
This morning, as I came over More-fields!
O, here he is! yo' have made fair speed, believe me:
Where, in the name of sloth, could you be thus???
Mary, peace be my comfort, where I thought I should have had little comfort of your worships service.
How so?
O, sir! your coming to the city, your entertainment of me, and your sending me to watch???indeed, all the circumstances either of your charge, or my employment, are as open to your son, as to your self!
How should that be! unless that villain, BRAYNE-WORME,
Have told him of the letter, and discovered
All that I strictly charged him to conceal? it is so!
I am, partly, of the faith, it is so indeed.
But, how should he know thee to be my man?
This is strange, and barbarous! as ever I heard!
Nay, for a more instance of their preposterous natures, but note, sir. They have assaulted me some three, four, five, six of them together, as I have walked alone, in divers skirts in the town, as Turne-bull, White-chappell, Shore-ditch, which were then my quarters, and since upon the Exchange, at my lodging, and at my ordinary: where I have driven them before me, the whole length of a street, in the open view of all our gallants, pitying to hurt them, believe me. Yet, all this lenity will not ore-come their spleen: they will be doing with the pismier, raising a hill, a man may spurn abroad, with his foot, at pleasure. By my self, I could have slain them all, but I delight not in murder. I am loath to bear any other then this bastinado for 'hem: yet, I hold it good polity, not to go disarmed, for though I bee skilful, I may bee oppressed with multitudes.
I, believe me, may you sir: and (in my conceit) our whole nation should sustain the loss by it, if it were so.
Alas, no: what's a peculiar man, to a nation? not seen.
O, but your skill, sir!
Indeed, that might be some loss; but, who respects it? I will tell you, sir, by the way of private, and under seal; I am a gentleman, and live here obscure, and to my self: but, were I known to her Majesty, and the Lords (observe me) I would vnder-take (upon this poor head, and life) for the public benefit of the state, not only to spare the entire lines of her subjects in general, but to save the one half, nay, three parts of her yearly charge, in holding war, and against what enemy soever. And, how would I doe it, think you?
Nay, I know not, nor can I conceive.
Why thus, sir. I would select nineteen, more, to my self, throughout the land; gentlemen they should bee of good spirit, strong, and able constitution, i would choose them by an instinct, a character, that I have: and I would teach these nineteen, the special rules, as your Punto, your Reuerso, your Stoccata, your Imbroccata, your Passada, your Montanto: till they could all play very near, or altogether as well as my self. This done, say the enemy were forty thousand strong, we twenty would come into the field, the tenth of March, or thereabouts; and wee would chal???lenge twenty of the enemy; they could not, in their honour, refuse vs, well, wee would kill them: challenge twenty more, kill them; twenty more, kill them; twenty more, kill them too; and thus, would wee kill, every man, his twenty a day, that's twenty score; twenty score, that's two hundredth; two hundredth a day, five days a thousand; forty thou???sand; forty times five, five times forty, two hundredth days kills them all up, by computation. And this, will I venture my poor gentleman-like carcass, to perform (provided, there bee no treason practised upon vs) by fair, and discreet manhood, that is, civilly by the sword.
Why, are you so sure of your hand, Captain, at all times?
Tut, never miss thrust, upon my reputation with you.
I would not stand in DOWNE-RIGHTS state, then, and you meet him, for the wealth of any one street in London.
Why, sir, you mistake me! if he were here now, by this well???kin, I would not draw my weapon on him! let this gentleman doe his mind: but, I will bastinado him (by the bright sun) where-euer I meet him.
Faith, and Isle have a ???ling at him, at my distance.
Gods so', look, where he is: yonder he goes.
What peevish luck have I, I cannot meet with these bragging raskalls?
It's not he? is it?
Yes faith, it is he?
Isle be hanged, then, if that were he.
Sir, keep your hanging good, for some greater matter, for I assure you, that was he.
Upon my reputation, it was hee.
Had I thought it had been he, he must not have gone so: but I can hardly be induced, to believe, it was he, yet.
That I think, sir. But see, he is come again!
O, PHAROAHS foot, have I found you? Come, draw, to your tools: draw, gypsy, or Isle thresh you.
Gentleman of valour, I doe believe in thee, hear me???
Draw your weapon, then.
Tall man, I never thought on it, till now (body of me) I had a warrant of the peace, served on me, even now, as I came along, by a wa???ter-bearer; this gentleman saw it, Mr. MATTHEW.
'Sdeath, you will not draw, then?
Hold, hold, under thy favour, forbear.
Prate again, as you like this, you whoreson foist, you. You'll control the point, you? Your consort is gone? had he staid, he had shared with you, sir.
Well, gentlemen, bear witness, I was bound to the peace, by this good day.
No faith, it's an ill day, Captain, never reckon it other: but, say you were bound to the peace, the law allows you, to defend your self: that'll prove but a poor excuse.
I cannot tell, sir. I desire good construction, in fair sort. I no???for sustained the like disgrace (by heaven) sure I was struck with a plan???net thence, for I had no power to touch my weapon.
I, like enough, I have heard of many that have been beaten under a planet: go, get you to a surgeon. 'Slid, and these be your tricks, your passada's, and your mountanto's, Isle none of them. O, manners! that
this age should bring forth such creatures! that Nature should bee at lei???sure to make hem! Come, cousse.
Mass, Isle have this cloak.
Gods will, it is DOWNE-RIGHT'S.
Nay, it's mine now, another might have tan up, as well as I: Isle wear it, so I will.
How, and he see it? he will challenge it, assure your self.
I, but he shall not have it; Isle say, I bought it.
Take heed, you buy it not, too dear, cousse.
NOw, trust me brother, you were much to blame,
T'incense his anger, and disturb the peace,
Of my poor house, where there are sentinels,
That every minute watch, to give alarms,
Of civil war, without adiection
Of your assistance, or occasion.
No harm done, brother, I warrant you: since there is no harm done. Anger costs a man nothing: and a tall man is never his own man, till he be angry. To keep his valor in obscurity, is to keep him???self, as it were, in a cloke-bag. What's a musician, unless he play? what's a tall man, unless he fight? For, indeed, all this, my wise brother stands upon, absolutely: and, that made me fall in with him, so resolutely.
I, but what harm might have come of it, brother?
Might, sister? so, might the good warm clothes, your husband wears, be poisoned, for any thing he knows: or the wholesome wine he drunk, even now, at the table???
Now, god forbid: O me. Now, I remember,
My wife drunk to me, last; and changed the cup:
And bade me wear this cursed suit to day.
See, if heaven suffer murder vndiscour'd!
I feel me ill; give me some mithridate,
Some mithridate and oil, good sister, fetch me;
O, I am sick at heart! I burn, I burn.
If you will save my life, go, fetch it me.
O, strange humour! my very breath he's poisoned him.
Good brother, be content, what doe you mean?
The strength of these extreme conceits, will kill you.
Beshrew your heart-bloud, brother WELL-BRED, now;
for putting such a toy into his head.
Is a fit simile, a toy? will he be poisoned with a simile? Brother KITELY, what a strange, and idle imagination is this? For shame, bee wi???ser. Of my soul, there's no such matter.
Am I not sick? how am I, then, not poisoned?
Am I not poisoned? how am I, then, so sick?
If you be sick, your own thoughts make you sick.
His jealousy is the poison, he he's taken.
Mr. KITELY, my master, Justice CLEMENT, salutes you; and desires to speak with you, with all possible speed.
No time, but now? when, I think, I am sick? very sick! well, I will wait upon his worship. THOMAS, COB, I must seek them out, and set 'hem sentinels, till I return. THOMAS, COB, THOMAS.
This is perfectly rare, BRAYNE-WORME! but how got thou this apparel of the Justices man?
Mary sir, my proper fine pen-man, would needs bestow the grist o'me, at the wind-mil, to hear some martial discourse; where so I marshaled him, that I made him drunk, with admiration! &amp;, because, too much hear was the cause of his distemper, I stripped him stark naked, as he lay along a???sleep, and borrowed his suit, to deliver this counterfeit message in, lea???uing a rusty armour, and an old browne bill to watch him, till my return: which shall be, when I have pawned his apparel, and spent the better part of the money, perhaps.
Well, thou art a successful merry knave, BRAYNE-WORME, his absence will be a good subject for more mirth. I pray thee, return to thy young master, and will him to meet me, and my sister BRIDGET, at the tower instantly: for, here, tell him, the house is so stored with jealousy, there is no room for love, to stand upright in. We must get our fortunes committed to some larger prison, say; and, then the tower, I know no better air: nor where the liberty of the house may doe vs more present service. Away.
Come hither, THOMAS. Now, my secret's ripe,
And thou shalt have it; lay to both thine ears.
Hark, what I say to thee. I must go forth, THOMAS.
Be careful of thy promise, keep good watch,
Note every gallant, and observe him well,
That enters in my absence, to thy mistress:
If she would show him rooms, the jest is stale,
Follow'hem, THOMAS, or else hang on him,
And let him not go after; mark their looks;
Note, if she offer but to see his band,
Or any other amorous toy, about him;
But praise his leg; or foot; or if she say,
The day is hot, and bid him feel her hand,
master, you shall bee well considered, I assure you, sir.
Sir, you know my service is my living, such favours as these, gotten of my master, is his only preferment, and therefore, you must con???cider me, as I may make benefit of my place.
How is that? sir.
Faith sir, the thing is extraordinary, and the gentleman may be, of great account: yet, bee what hee will, if you will lay me down a brace of angels, in my hand, you shall have it, otherwise not.
How shall we doe, Captain? he asks a brace of angels, you have no money?
Not a cross, by fortune.
Nor I, as I am a gentleman, but two pence, left of my two shil???lings in the morning for wine, and redish: let's find him some pawn.
Pawn? we have none to the value of his demand.
O, yes. I'll pawn this jewel in my ear, and you may pawn your silk stockings, and pull up your boots, they will ne'er be mist: It must be done, now.
Well, and there be no remedy: Isle step aside, and pull 'hem off.
Doe you hear, sir? wee have no store of money at this time, but you shall have good pawns: look you, sir, this jewel, and that gen???tlemans silk stockings, because we would have it dispatcht, ever we went to our chambers.
I am content, sir; I will get you the warrant presently, what's his name, say you? DOWNRIGHT?
I, I, GEORGE DOWNRIGHT.
What manner of man is he?
A tall big man, sir; hee goes in a cloak, most commonly, of silk russet, laid about with russet lace.
It is very good, sir.
Here sir, here's my jewel?
And, here, are stockings.
Well, gentlemen, Isle procure you this warrant presently, but, who will you have to serve it?
That's true, Captain: that must be considered.
Body of me, I know not! it is service of danger?
Why, you were best get one of the varlets of the city, a sergeant. Isle appoint you one, if you please.
Will you, sir? why, we can wish no better.
We'll leave it to you, sir.
This is rare! now, will I go pawn this cloak of the Iustice's mans, at the brokers, for a varlets suit, and be the varlet my self; and get either more pawns, or more mouie of DOWNRIGHT, for the arrest.
OH, here it is, I am glad: I have found it now.
Ho? who is within, here?
I am within, sir, what's your pleasure?
To know, who is within, besides your self.
Why, sir, you are no constable, I hope?
O! fear you the constable? then, I doubt not.
You have some guests within, deserve that fear,
Isle fetch him straight.
Of gods name, sir.
Go to. Come, tell me, Is not young KNO'WEL, here?
Young KNO-WELL? I know none such, sir, of mine honesty!
Your honesty? dame, it flies too lightly from you:
There is no way, but, fetch the constable.
The constable? the man is mad, I think.
Ho, who keeps house, here?
O, this is the female copes-mate of my son?
Now shall I meet him straight.
Knock, THOMAS, hand.
Ho, good wife?
Why, what's the matter with you?
Why, woman, grieves it you to open your door?
Belike, you get something, to keep it shut.
What mean these questions, 'pray ye?
So strange you make it? is not my husband, here?
Her husband!
My tried husband, master KITELY.
I hope, he needs not to betryed, here.
No, dame: he do's it not for need, but pleasure.
Neither for need, nor pleasure, is he here.
This is but a device, to balke me withal.
Soft, who is this? It is not my son, disguised?
O, sir, have I fore-stald your honest market?
Found your close walks? you stand amazed, now, doe you?
I faith (I am glad) I have smoked you yet at last!
What is your jewel trow? In: come, lets see her;
(Fetch forth your huswife, dame) if she be fairer,
In any honest judgment, then my self,
Isle be content with it: but, she is change,
She feeds you fat, she soothes your appetite,
And you are well? your wife, an honest woman,
Is meat twice sod to you, sir? O, you trecher!
She cannot counterfeit thus palpably.
Out on thy more then strumpets impudence!
Steal thou thus to thy haunts? and, have I taken
Thy bawd, and thee, and thy companion,
This horie-beaded lecher, this old goat,
Close at your villainy, and would thou excuse it,
With this stale harlots jest, accusing me?
O, old incontinent, dost not thou shame,
When all thy powers in chastity is spent,
To have a mind so hot? and to entice,
And feed th'enticements of a lustful woman?
Out, I defy thee, I, dissembling wretch.
Defy me, strumpet? ask thy pander, here,
Can be deny it? or that wicked older?
Why, hear you, sir.
Tut, tut, tut: never speak.
Thy guilty conscience will discover thee.
What lunacy is this, that hints this man?
Well, good-wife BA'D, COBS wife; and you,
That make your husband such a hoddie-doddie;
And you, young apple-squire; and old ouckold-maker;
He ha'you every one before a Justice:
Nay, you shall answer it, I charge you go.
Marie, with all my heart, sir: I go willingly.
Though I doe taste this as a trick, put on me,
To punish my impertinent search; and justly:
And half forgive my son, for the device.
Come, will you go?
Go? to thy shame, believe it.
Why, what's the matter, here? What's here to doe?
O, COB, art thou come? I have been abused,
And in thy house. Never was man so, wronged!
Slid, in my house? my master KITELY? Who wrongs you in my house?
Marie, young lust in old; and old in young, here:
Thy wife's their bawd, here have I taken 'hem.
How? bawd? Is my house come to that? Am I preferred the???there? Did I charge you to keep your doors shut, Is 'BEL? and doe you let 'hem lie open for all comers?
Friend know some cause, before thou beat'st thy wife,
This 's madness, in thee.
Why? is there no cause?
Yes, Isle show cause before the Justice, COB:
Come, let her go with me.
Nay, she shall go.
Nay, I will go. Isle see, and you may bee allowed to make a bundle of hemp, of your right and lawful wife thus, at every cuckoldly knaves pleasure. Why doe you not go?
A bitter queen. Come, we'll have you tamed.
WEll, of all my disguises, yet, now am I most like my self: being in this Sergeants gown. A man of my present profession, never counterfeits, till hee lays hold upon a debtor, and says, he rests him, for then hee brings him to all manner of unrest. A kind of little kings wee are, bearing the diminutive of a mace, made like a young artichocke, that always carries pepper and salt, in it self. Well, I know not what danger I vnder-goe, by this exploit, pray heaven, I come well of.
See, I think, yonder is the varlet, by his gown.
Let's go, in quest of him.
'Saue you, friend, are not you here, by appointment of Justice CLEMENTS man.
Yes, an't please you, sir: he told me two gentlemen had willed him to procure a warrant from his master (which I have about me) to be served on one DOWNRIGHT.
It is honestly done of you both; and see, where the party comes, you must arrest: serve it upon him, quickly, before hee bee aware???
Bear back, master MATTHEW.
Master DOWNRIGHT, I arrest you, in the queens name, and must carry you before a Justice, by virtue of this warrant.
Me, friend? I am no DOWNRIGHT, I. I am master STEPHEN, you doe not well, to arrest me, I tell you, truly: I am in no???bodies bonds, nor books, I, would you should know it. A plague on you heartily, for making me thus afraid before my time.
Why, now are you deceived, gentlemen?
He wears such a cloak, and that deceived vs: But see, here a comes, indeed! this is he, officer.
Why how now, signior gull! are you turned filtcher of late? come, deliver my cloak.
Your cloak, sir? I bought it, even now, in open market.
Master DOVVNE-RIGHT, I have a warrant I must serve upon you, procured by these two gentlemen.
These gentlemen? these rascals?
Keep the peace, I charge you, in her Majesties name.
I obey thee. What must I doe, officer?
Go before, master Justice CLEMENT, to answer what they can object against you, sir. I will use you kindly, sir.
Come, let's before, and make the Justice, Captain???
The varlet's a tall man! before heaven!
Gull, you'll give me my cloak?
Sir, I bought it, and I'll keep it.
You will.
I, that I will.
Officer, there's thy fee, arrest him.
Master STEPHEN, I must arrest you.
Arrest me, I scorn it. There, take your cloak, I'll none ou't.
Nay, that shall not serve your turn, now, sir. Officer, I'll go with thee, to the Justices: bring him along.
Why, is not here your cloak? what would you have?
I'll ha'you answer it, sir.
Sir, I'll take your word; and this gentleman's, too: for his ap???parance.
I'll have no words taken. Bring him along.
Sir, I may choose, to doe that: I may take bail.
It is true, you may take bail, and choose; at another time: but you shall not, now, varlet. Bring him along, or I'll swinge you.
Sir, I pity the gentleman's case. Here's your money again.
'Sdeynes, tell not me of my money, bring him away, I say.
I warrant you he will go with you of himself, sir.
Yet more ado?
I have made a fair mash on it.
Must I go?
I know no remedy, master STEPHEN.
Come along, before me, here. I doe not love your hanging look behind.
Why, sir. I hope you cannot hang me for it. Can hee, fellow?
I think not, sir. It is but a whipping matter, sure!
Why, then, let him doe his worst, I am resolute.
NAy, but stay, stay, give me leave: my chair, sirrha. You, master KNO'WELL, say you went thither to meet your son.
I, sir.
But, who directed you, thither?
That did mine own man, sir.
Where is he?
Nay, I know not, now; I left him with your clarke: And appointed him, to stay here for me.
My dark? about what time, was this?
Mary, between one and two, as I take it.
And, what time came my man with the false message to you, master KITELY?
After two, sir.
Very good: but, mistress KITELY, how that you were at Cons? ha?
And please you, s???r, Isle tell you: my brother, WEL-BRED, told me, that COBS house, was a suspected place???
So it appears, me thinks: but, on.
And that my husband used thither, daily.
No matter, so he used himself well, mistress.
True sir, but you know, what grows, by such hints, of???ten-times.
I see, rank fruits of a jealous brain, mistress KITELY: but, did you find your husband there, in that case, as you suspected?
I found her there, sir.
Did you so? that alters the case. Who gave you knowledge, of your wives being there?
Marie, that did my brother WEL-BRED.
How? WEL-BRED first tell her? then tell you, after? where is WEL-BRED?
Gone with my sister, sir, I know not whither.
Why, this is a mere trick, a device; you are gulled in this most grossly, all! alas, poor wench, were thou beaten for this?
Yes, most pitifully, and 't please you.
And worthily, I hope: if it shall prove so.
I, that's like, and a piece of a sentence. How now, sir? what's the matter?
Sir, there's a gentleman, in the court without, desires to speak with your worship.
A gentleman? what's he?
A soldier, sir, he says.
A soldier? take down my armour, my sword, quickly: a soul???dier speak with me! why, when knaves? come on, come on, hold my cap there, so; give me my gorget, my sword: stand by, I will end your matters, enough???Let the soldier enter, now, sir, what ha'you to say to me?
BY your worships favour???
Nay, keep out, sir, I know not your pretence, you send me word, sir, you are a soldier: why, sir, you shall bee answered, here, here be them have been amongst soldiers. Sir, your pleasure.
Faith, sir, so it is, this gentleman, and my self, have been most uncivilly wronged, and beaten, by one DOWNRIGHT, a course fellow, about the town, here, and for mine own part, I protest, being a man, in no sort, given to this filthy humour of quarrelling, he hath a??????altered me in the way of my peace; dispoiled me of mine honour; dis-arm'd me of my weapons; and rudely, laid me along, in the open streets: when, I not so much as once offered to resist him.
O, gods precious! is this the soldier? here, take my armour of quickly, twill make him swonne, I fear; hee is not ???it to look on it, that will put up a blow.
An't please your worship, he was bound to the peace.
Why, and he were, sir, his hands were not bound, were they?
There's one of the varlets of the city, sir, he's brought two gentlemen, here, one, upon your worships warrant.
My warrant?
Yes, sir. The officer soy's, procured by these two.
Bid him, come in. Set by this picture. What, Mr. DOWNRIGHT! are you brought at Mr. FRESH-WATERS suite, here!
I Faith, sir. And here's another brought at my suite.
What are you, sir?
A gentleman, sir? ??, uncle!
Uncle? who? master KNO'W???LL?
I, sir! this is a wise kinsman of mine.
God's my witness, uncle, I am wronged here monstrously, hee charges me with stealing of his cloak, and would I might never stir, if I did not find it in the street, by chance.
O, did you find it, now? you said, you bought it, ere-while.
And, you said, I stole it; nay, now my uncle is here, I'll doe well enough, with you.
Well, let this breath a while; you, that have cause to com???plain, there, stand forth: had you my warrant for this gentleman's apprehension?
I, an't please your worship.
Nay, doe not speak in passion so: where had you it?
Of your clarke, sir?
That's well! and my clarke can make warrants, and my hand not at 'hem! Where is the warrant? Officer, have you it?
No, sir, your worship's man, master FORMAL, bid me doe it, for these gentlemen, and he would be my discharge.
Why, master DOWNRIGHT, are you such a novice, to bee served, and never see the warrant?
Sir. He did not serve it on me.
No? how then?
Mary, sir, hee came to me, and said, hee must serve it, and hee would use me kindly, and so???
O, gods pity, was it so, sir? he must serve it? give me my long-sword there, and help me of; so. Come on, sir varlet, I must ???ut off your legs, sirrha: nay, stand up, Isle use you kindly; I must ???ut off your legs, I say.
O, good sir, I beseech you; nay, good master Justice.
I must doe it; there is no remedy. I must cut off your legs, sirrha, I must cut off your ears, you rascal, I must doe it; I must cut off your nose, I must cut off your head.
O, good your worship.
Well, rise, how doest thou doe, now? doest thou feel thy self well? hast thou no harm?
No, I thank your good worship, sir.
Why, so! I said, I must cut off thy legs, and I must cut off thy arms, and I must cut off thy head; but, I did not doe it: so, you said, you must serve this gentleman, with my warrant, but, you did not serve him. You knave, you slave, you rogue, doe you say you must? sirrha, a???way with him, to the jail, Isle teach you a trick, for your must, sir.
Good, sir, I beseech you, be good to me.
Tell him he shall to the jail, away with him, I say???
Nay, sir, if you will commit me, it shall bee for committing more then this: I will not loose, by my travail, any grain of my fame certain.
How is this!
My man, BRAYNE-WORME!
O yes, uncle. BRAYNE-WORME he's been with my cousin EDWARD, and I, all this day.
I told you all, there was some device!
Nay, excellent Justice, since I have laid my self thus open to you; now, stand strong for me: both with your sword, and your balance.
Bodieo'me, a merry knave! Give me a bowl of sack: If hee belong to you, master KNO'WELL, I bespeak your patience.
That is it, I have most need of. Sir, if you'll pardon me, only; I'll glory in all the rest, of my exploits.
Sir, you know, I love not to have my favours come hard, from me. You have your pardon: though I suspect you shrewdly for being of counsel with my son, against me.
Yes, faith, I have, sir; though you retained me doubly this more???ning, for your self: first, as BRAYNE-WORME; after, as FITZ-SWORD. I was your reformed soldier, sir. It was I sent you to COBS, upon the errand, without end.
Is it possible! or that thou should disguise thy language so, as I should not know thee?
O, sir, this he's been the day of my metamorphosis! It is not that shape alone that I have run through, to day. I brought this gentle???man, master KITELY, a message too, in the form of master Justices man, here, to draw him out of the way, as well as your worship: while master WELL-BRED might make a conveyance of mistress BRIDGET, to my young master.
How! my sister ??????olne away?
My son is not married, I hope!
Faith, sir, they are both as sure as love, a priest, and three thou???sand pound (which is her portion) can make 'hem: and by this time are ready to bespeak their wedding supper at the wind-mill, except some friend, here, prevent 'hem, and inuit 'hem home.
Marie, that will I (I thank thee, for putting me in mind o???'t.) Sirrah, go you, and fetch 'hem hither, upon my warrant. Neithers friends have cause to be ???orrie, if I know the young couple, aright. Here, I drink to thee, for thy good news. But, I pray thee, what hast thou done with my man FORMAL.
Faith, sir, after some ceremony past, as making him drunk, first with story, and then with wine (but all in kindness) and stripping him to his shirt: I left him in that cool vain, departed, sold your worships warrant to these two, pawned his livery for that varlets gown, to serve it in; and thus have brought my self, by my activity, to your worships consideration.
And I will consider thee, in another cup of sack. Here's to thee, which having drunk of, this is my sentence. Pledge me. Thou hast done,
or assisted to nothing, in my judgment, but deserves to bee pardoned for the wit of the offence. If thy master, or any man, here, be angry with thee, I shall suspect his engine, while I know him for it. How now? what noise is that!
Sir, it is ROGER is come home.
Bring him in, bring him in. What! drunk in arms, against me? Your reason, your reason for this.
I Beseech your worship to pardon me; I happened into ill company by chance, that cast me into a sleep, and stripped me of all my clothes???
Well, tell him, I am Justice CLEMENT, and doe pardon him: but, what is this to your armour! what may that signify?
And 't please you, sir, it hung up 'i the room, where I was stripped; and I borrowed it of one of the drawers, to come home in, because I was loath, to doe penance through the street, in my shirt.
Well, stand by a while. Who be these? O, the young comp???no, welcome, welcome. Give you joy. Nay, mistress BRIDGET, blush not; you are not so fresh a bride, but the news of it is come hither a???ore you. Master Bridegroom, I have made your peace, give me your hand: so will I for all the rest, ere you forsake my roof.
WE are the more bound to your humanity, sir.
Only these two, have so little of man in 'hem, they are no part of my care.
Yes, sir, let me pray you for this gentleman, hee belongs, to my sister, the bride.
In what place, sir?
Of her delight, sir, below the stairs, and in public: her poet, sir.
A poet? I will challenge him my self, presently, at extempore.
Mount up thy Phlegon muse, and testify,
How SATVRNE, sitting in an ???by??? cloud,
Disro???'d his podex white as ivory,
And, through the welkin, thundered all aloud.
Hee is not for extempore, sir. Hee is all for the pocket-muse, please you command a sight of it.
Yes, yes, search him for a taste of his vein.
You must not deny the Queens Justice, Sir, under a writ of rebellion.
What! all this verse? Body of me, he carries a whole realm, a common-wealth of paper, in's hose! let's see some of his subjects!
Unto the boundless Ocean of thy face,
Runs this poor ri???er changed with streams of eyes.
How? this is stolen!
A Parody! a parody! with a kind of miraculous gift, to make it ab???urder then it was.
Is all the rest, of this batch? Being me a torch; lay it together, and give ?????????e. Cleanse the air. He was enough to have infected, the whole city, if it had not been taken in time! See, see, how our Poets glo???rye shines! brighter, and brighter! ???ull it increases! ??, now, it's at the highest: and, now, it declines as fast. You may see. Sic trance??? gloria mundi.
There's an emblem for you, son, and your studies!
Nay, no speech, or act of mine be drawn against such as pro???fesse it worthily. They are not borne eu???rye year, as an Alderman. There goes more to the making of a good Poet, then a Sheriff, Mr. KITELY. You look upon me! though, I live in the city here, amongst you, I will doe more reverence, to him, when I meet him, then I will to the Major, out of his year. But, these paper-pedlers! these inke-dablers! They cannot expect reprehension, or reproach. They have it with the fact.
Sir, you have saved me the labour of a defence.
It shall be discourse for supper; between your father and me, if he dare vnder-take me. But, to dispatch away these, you sign of the Soldier, and picture of the Poet (but, both so false, I will not have you hanged out at my door till midnight) while we are at supper, you two shall penitently fa?????? it out in my court, without; and, if you will, you may pray there, that we may be so merry within, as to forgive, or forget you??? when we come out. Here's a third, because, we tender your safety, shall watch you, he is provided for the purpose. Look to your change, sir.
And what shall I doe?
O! I had lost a sheep, an he had not bleated! Why, sir, you shall give Mr. DOWNRIGHT his cloak: and I will entreat him to take it. A trencher, and a napkin, you shall have, in the buttrie, and keep COB, and his wife company, here; whom, I will entreat first to bee reconciled: and you to endeavour with your wit, to keep 'hem so.
Isle doe my best.
Why, now I see thou art honest, TIB, I receive thee as my dea???e, and mortal wi???e, again.
And, I you, as my loving, and obedient husband.
Good complement! It will bee their bridal night too. They
are married anew. Come, I conjure the rest, to put of all discontent. You, Mr. DOWNRIGHT, your anger; you, master KNO'WELL, your cares; master KITELY, and his wife, their jealousy.
For, I must tell you both, while that is fed,
Horns in the mind are worse then of the head.
Sir, thus they go from me, kiss me, sweet heart.
See, what a drove of horns fly, in the ayre,
Winged with my densed, and my credulous breath!
Watch 'hem, suspicious eyes, watch, where they fall.
See, see! on hends, that think th'haue none at all!
O, what a plenteous world of this, will come!
When ayre raynes horns, all m???y be sure of same.
I have learned so much verse out of a jealous mans part, in a play.
It is well, it is well! This night we'll dedicate to friendship, love, and laughter. Master bridegroom, take your bride, and lead: e???very one, a fellow. Here is my mistress. BRAYME-WORME! to whom all my addresses of courtship shall have their reference. Whose adventures, this day, when our grand-children shall hear to be made a fable, I doubt not, but it shall find both spectators, and applause.

PResented it self in a square and flat
upright, like to the side of a City: the
top thereof, aboue the Vent, and Crest,
adorned with houses, towers, and sty∣ples,
set off in prospective. Upon the Battlements
in a great capital Letters was inscribed,
LONDINIVM:
According to Tacitus: At Suetonius mir• constan∣tia,
medios inter hosteis Londinium perrexit, cognomen∣to
quiàem Coloniae non ensign, sed copy Negotiatorum,
&amp; commeatu maxim celebre. Beneath that, in a
less and different Character, was written
CAMERA REGIA
Which Title immediately after the Norman Con∣quest
it began to have; and by the indulgence
of succeeding Princes, hath been hitherto conti∣nued.
In the Freeze over the gate, it seems to
speak this verse:
PAR DOMVS HAEC COELO,
SED MINOR EST DOMINO.
Taken out of Martial, and implying, that though
this City (for the state, and magnificence) might
(by Hyporbole) be said to touch the stars, and
reach up to heaven, yet was it far Inferior to the
Moister thereof, who was his Majesty; and in that
respect unworthy to receive him. The highest per∣son
aduaunc'd therein, was
MONARCHY BRITANNICA
and fittely: applying to the aboue mentioned
Title of the City, the Kings Chamber, and there∣fore
here placed as in the proper seat of the Em∣per:
for, so the glory and light of our King∣dome
M. Camden, speaking of London, says,
she is, totius Britannia Epitome, Britannicíque im∣perii
sedes, Regúmque Anglia Camera, tantum inter
•mneis eminet, quantum (vt ait ille) inter viburna Cu∣pressus.
She was a woman richly attired in cloth of
gold and tissue; a rich mantle; over her state two
Crowns hanging, with pencil shields thorough
them; the one limed with the particular Coat of
England, the other of Scotland: on either side also a
Crown, with the like Scutchions, and peculiar
Coats of France, &amp; Ireland. In her hand she holds
a Sceptre; on her head a fillet of gold, inter-wouen
with Palm &amp; Laurel; her hair bound into four
several points, descending from her Crowns; &amp;
and in her lap a little Globe, inscribed upon
ORBS BRITANNICVS.
And beneath, the word
DIVISVS AB ORB.
To show, that this Empire is a world divided from
the world, and alluding to that of* Clau.
—Et nostro diducta Britannia mundo.
And Verge.
—Et penitus toto diuisos orb Britannos.
The wreathe denotes Victory and Happiness. The
Sceptre &amp; Crowns sovereignty. The Shields the
precedence of the Countries and their distinct∣once.
At her feet was set
THEOSOPHIA,
or Divine wisdom, al in white, a blew mantle seeded
with Stars, a crown of Stars on his head. His gar∣mints
figured Truth, Innocence and Clearness.
She was always looking up; in her one hand she
sustained a Dove, in the other a Serpent: the last to
show her Subtlety, the first her Simplicity; alluding
to that text of Scripture, Estote ergo prudentes sicut
serpents, &amp; simplices sicut columbia. Her word,
PER ME REGES REGNANT.
Intimating, how by her, all Kings do govern,
and that she is the foundation and strength of king∣domes,
to which end, she was here placed, upon a
Cube, at the foot of the Monarchy, as her Base
and stay. Directly beneath her stood
GENIVS VRBIS.
A person attired rich, reverend, and antique: his
hair long and white, crowned with a wreathe of
Plane tree, which is said to be Arbor genialis; his
mantle of purple, and buskins of that colour: Hee
held in one hand a Goblet, in the other a branch
full of little twigs, to signify Increase and In∣dulgence:
His word
HIS ARMS.
pointing to the two that supported him, whereof
the one on the right hand, was
BOVLEVTES.
Figuring the Council of the City, and was suited
in black and purple; a wreathe of* Oak upon
his head; sustaining for his ensigns, on his left
arm a scarlet robe, and in his right hand the
 Fasces, as tokens of Magistracy, with this inscrip∣tion;
SERVARE CIVES.
The warrelike force of the City, in an antique
Coat, or Armour, with a Target and Sword; his
helm on, and crowned with Laurel, implying
Strength and Conquest: in his hand he bore the
Standard of the City, with this word,
EXTINGVERE ET HOSTEIS.
Expressing by those several Motts, connexed,
that with those Arms of Council and Strength,
the Genius was able to extinguish the Kings en∣mies,
and preserve his Citizens, alluding to those
verses in Seneca,
Extinguere hostem, maxima est virtus Ducis.
Servare Cives, mayor est patriae, patri.
Underneath these, in an Aback thrust out be∣fore
the rest lay
TAMESIS.
The River, as running along the side of the Ci∣tie;
in a skin made like flesh, naked, and blew.
His mantle of sea-greene or water colour, thin,
and bolne out like a sail; Bracelets about his
wrests, of willow and sedge, a crown of sedge
and reed upon his head, mixed with water-lillies;
alluding to Virgills description of Tiber;
—Deus ipse loci, fluvie Tyberinus amoeno,
Populeas inter senior se att•llere frondes
Visus. cum tenuis glauco velabat amictu
Carbasus. &amp; crineis vmbrosa tegebat Arundo.
His beard, and hair long, and overgrown. He
leanes his arm upon an earthen pot, out of which,
water, with live Fishes, are seen to run forth,
and play about him. His word,
FLVMINA SENSERVNT IPSA.
A Hemistich of Ouids: The rest of the verse being,
quid asset amor.
Affirming, that Rivers themselves, and such
inanimate Creatures, have heretofore been
made sensible of Passions, and Affections; and
that hee, now, no less partook the joy of
his Majesties grateful approach to this City, than
any of those persons, to whom he pointed, which
were the daughters of the Genius, and six in number∣ber:
who, in a spreading ascent, upon several gre∣ces,
help to beautify both the sides. The first,
EVPHROSYNE,
or Gladness: was suited in greene, a mantle of divers
colours, embroidered with all variety of flowers: on
her head a Gyrland of Myrtle, in her right hand a
crystal Cruz filled with wine, in the left a Cup of
gold: at her feet a Tymbrell, Harp, and other
Instruments, all ensigns of gladness,
Natis in vsum laetitiae scyphis, &amp;c.
And in another place,
Nuns est bibendum, nuns pede libero
Pulsanda Tellus, &amp;c. Her word.
As if this were the first hour of her life, and the
minute wherein she began to be; beholding so
long coveted, and looked for a presence. The se∣cond.
SEBASIS.
or Veneratio, was varied in an ash coloured suit,
and dark mantle, a veil over her head of ash∣colour:
her hands crossed before her, and her eyes
half closed: Her word:
MIHI SEMPER DEVS.
Implying both her office of reverence, and the
dignity of her object, who being as God on earth,
should never be less in her thought: The third:
PROTHYMIA.
or Promptitude, was attired in a short tuckt garment
of flame-colour, wings at her back; her hair
bright, &amp; bound up with ribands; her breast open,
virago-like; his buskins so ribanded: She was crow∣ned
with a Chaplet of Trifoly, to express readiness,
and openness every way; in her right hand she
held a squirrel, as being the creature most full of
life and quickness: in the left a close round Cen∣sor,
with the perfume suddenly to be vented forth
at the sides. Her word:
QVA DATA PORT.
Taken from an other place in Virgil where Eo∣lus
at the command of Iuno letts forth the wind;
—ac vent valued agmine facto
Qua data p•rte ruunt, &amp; terrace turbine perflant.
And showed that she was no less prepared with
promptitude, and alacrity, then the winds were,
upon the least Gate that shall be opened to his
high command. The fourth
AGRYPNIA.
or Vigilance, in yellow, a sable mantle, seeded with
waking eyes, and silver fringe: her Chaplet of He∣liotropium,
or Turnsole; in her one hand a Lamp,
or Cresset, in her other a Bell. The Lamp signify∣ed
search and sight, the Bell warning. The Heliotro∣pium
care; and respecting her object. Her word
SPECVLAMVR IN OMNEIS.
Alluding to that of Ouid, where he describes the
office of Argus,
—Ipse pr•cul mon•is sublime cacumen
Occupied, vnde sedens parts speculatur in omneis.
and implying the like duty of care and vigilance in
her self. The fifth
AGAPE.
Or loving Affection, in Crimson fringed with
gold, a mantle of flame-colour, her Chaplet of
red and white roses; in her hand a flaming heart:
The flame expressed zeal, the red and white to∣ses,
a mixture of Simplicity with Love: her robes
freshness and fervency. Her word,
NON SIC EXCVBIAE.
Out of Claudian, in following
—Nec circumstantia peila
—Quàm tutatur amor.
Inferring, that though her Sister before had prote∣sted
watchfulness, &amp; circumspection, yet no watch
or guard could be so safe to the estate, or person of
a Prince, as the love and natural affection of his
Subjects: which she in the Cities behalf promi∣sed.
The sixth,
OMOTHYMIA.
Or Unanimity in blew, her robe blew, and bus∣kins.
A Chaplet of blew lilies, showing one truth
and entireness of mind. In her lap lies a sheaf
of arrows bound together, and she her self sits
weaving certain small silver twists. Her word,
FIRM CONSENSVS FACET.
Auxilia humilia firm, &amp;c.
Intimating, that even the smallest and weakest
aids, by consent, are made strong: herself per∣sonating
the unanimity, or consent of Soul, in all
inhabitants of the City to his service.
¶These are all the personages, or live figures,
whereof only two were Speakers (Genius and Ta∣mesis)
the rest were Mutes. Other dumb com∣plements
there were, as the Arms of the King∣dome
on the one side, with this Inscription.
HIS VIREOS.
With these moist thou flourish.
On the other side the Arms of the City, with
HIS VINCAS.
With these moist thou conquer.
In the centre, or midst of the Pygmy, there was
an Aback, or Square, wherein this Elegy was writ∣ten.
Maximus hic Rex est, &amp; lucc serenior ipsa
Principe quae talem cornet in vrbe Ducem;
Cuiu• Fortunam superat sic vnica Virtus,
Vnus vt is reliquos vincit vtrâque viros.
Praeceptis ally populos, multâque fatigant
Leg; sed exemplo nos repeat ille suo.
Cuique frui totâ fas est vxore marito,
Et sua fas simile pignora nosse pa•ri.
Ass vbi pignoribus circumstipata coruscis
It comes, &amp; tanto vex minor ANNA viro.
Haud metus est, Regime posthac no proximus Hares,
Neu Successorem non amet ille suum.
This, and the whole frame, was covered with a
curtain of silk, painted like a thick cloud, and
at the approach of the K. was instantly to bee
drawn. The Allegory being, that those clouds
were gathered upon the face of the City, through
their long want of his most wished fight: but now,
as at the rising of the Sun, all mists were disper∣sed
and fled. When suddenly upon silence made to
the Musikes, a voice was heard to utter this verse;
Totus adest oculis, aderat queen mentibus olim,
Signifying that hee now was really objected to
their eyes, who before had been only, but still,
present in their minds.
¶Thus far the complemental part of the
first; wherein was not only laboured the expression
of State and Magnificence (as proper to a trium∣phil
Arch) but the very Site, Fabric, Strength,
Policy, Dignity and Affections of the City
were all laid down to life: The nature, and pro∣pertie
of these Devises being, to present always
some one entire body, or figure, consisting of
distinct members and each of those expressing it
self, in the own active sphere, yet all, with that
general harmony so connexed, and disposed, as
no one little part can be missing to the illustration
of the whole: where also is to be noted, that the
Symboles used, are not, neither ought to be simply
Hieroglyphics, Emblems, or Imprese, but a mixed
Character, partaking somewhat of all, and peculiar∣lie
opted to these more magnificent Inventions:
wherein the Garments, and Ensigns deliver the
nature of the person, and the Word the present
office. Neither was it becoming, or could it
stand with the dignity of these shows (after the
most miserable &amp; desperate shift of the Puppets) to
require a Truch-man, or (with the ignorant Pain∣la)
one to write. This is a Dog; or, This is a Hare:
but so to be presented, as upon the view they might
without cloud, or obscurity declare themselves to
the sharpe and learned: And for the multitude, no
doubt but their grounded judgements gazed, said
it was fine, and were satisfied.
TIme, Fate, and Fortune have at length conspired,
To give our Age the day so much desired.
What all the minutes, hours, weeks, months, and years,
That hang in file upon these silver hairs,
Could not produce, beneath the Brittane stroke,
The Roman, Saxon, Dane, and Norman yoke,
This point of Time hath done. Now London rear
Thy forehead high, and on it strive to wear
Thy choicest Gems; Teach thy steep Towers to rise
Higher with people: Set with sparkling eyes
Thy spacious windows; and in every street,
Let thronging Joy, Love, and Amazement meet.
Cleave all the ayre with show•es, and let the cry
Strike through as long, and universally
As Thunder; For, thou now art blist to see
That sight, for which thou did begin to bee.
When Brutus plough first gave thee infant boūds,
And I, thy GENIVS walked auspicious rounds
In every furrow; Then did I forelooke,
And saw this day marked white in Clotho's book.
The several Circles, both of change and sway,
Within this Isle, there also figured lay:
Of which the greatest, perfectest, and last
Was this, whose present happiness we taste.
Why keep you silence Daughters? What dull peace
Is this inhabits you? Shall Office cease
Upon th'aspect of him, to whom you owe
More then you are, or can be? Shall TIME know
That Article, wherein your flame stood still,
And not aspired? Now heaven avert an ill
Of that black look. Ere pause possess your breasts
I wish you more of plagues: "Zeal when it rests,
Leaves to be Zeal. Up thou tame RIVER, wake;
And from thy liquid limbs this slumber s•ache:
Thou drown'st thy self in inofficious sleep;
And these thy sluggish waters seem to creep,
Rather than flow. Up, rise, and swell with pride
Aboue thy banks. "Now is not every Tide.
TO what vain end should I contend to show
My weaker powers, when Seas of pomp o'reflow
The Cities face: and cover all the shore
With sands more rich than Tagus wealthy ore?
When in the flood of Joy, that comes with him,
He drowns the world; yet makes it live and swim,
And spring with gladness: Not my fishes here,
Though they be dumb, but doe express the cheer
Of these bright streams. No less may These, and I
Boast our delights, albe't we silent lie.
Indeed, true Gladness doth not always speak:
Joy bred, and borne but in the tongue, is weak.
Yet (lest the fervor of so pure a flame
As this my City bears, might loose the name,
Without the apt euenting of her heate)
Know greatest IAMES (and no less good, than great.)
In the behalf of all my virtuous Sons,
Whereof my eldest there, thy pomp forerunnes,
(A Man without my flattering, or his Pride,
As worthy, as hoe's blessed to be thy guide)
In his grave name, and all his Brethrens right,
(Who thirst to drink the Nectar of thy sight)
The Council, Commoners, and Multitude;
(Glad, that this day so long denied, is viewed)
I tender thee the heartiest welcome, yet
That ever King had to his Empires seat:
Never came man, more longed for, more desired:
And being come, more reverenced, loved, admired:
Hear, and record it: In a Prince it is
No little virtue, to know who are his.
 With like devotions, doe I stoop to embrace
This springing glory of thy Godlike race;
His Countries Wonder, Hope, Love, Joy and Pride:
How well doth he become the royal side
Of this erected, and broad spreading Tree,
Under whose shade, may Brittane ever be.
And from this branch, may thousand branches more
Shoot over the Maine, and knit with every shore
In •onds of Marriage, Kindred, and Increase;
And stile this Land, the Nauill of their peace.
This is your Servants wish, your Cities vow,
Which still shall propagate it self, with you;
And free from spurs of Hope, that slow minds move:
He seeks no hire, that owes his life to Love.
 And here she comes that is no less a part
In this days greatness, then in my glad heart.
Glory of Queens, and Glory of your Name,
Whose Graces doe as far out-speake your Fame,
As Fame doth silence, when her Trumpet rings
You Daughter, Sister, Wife of several Kings:
Besides Alliance, and the stile of Mother,
In which one Title you drown all your other.
Instance, be that fair shoot, is gone before
Your eldest Joy, and top of all your store,
With those, whose sight to vs is yet denied,
But not our zeal to them, or ought beside
This City can to you: For whose estate
She hopes you will be still good Advocate
To her best Lord. So, whilst you mortal are,
No taste of sower mortality once dare
Approach your house; nor Fortune greet your Grace
But coming on, and with a forward face.

GRegory: A my word we'll not carry coals.
No, for then we should be Colliers.
I mean, if we be in choler, we'll draw.
I, While you live, draw your neck out of th Collar.
I strike quickly, being moved.
But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
A dog of the house of Mountague, moves me.
To move, is to stir: and to be valiant, is to stand:
Therefore, if thou art moved, thou runst away.
A dog of that house shall move me to stand.
I will take the wall of any Man or Maid of Mountagues.
That shows thee a weak slave, for the wea∣kissed goes to the wall.
True, and therefore women being the weaker Vessels, are ever thrust to the wall: therefore I will push Mountagues men from the wall, and thrust his Maids to the wall.
The Quarrel is between our Masters, and vs their men.
It is all one, I will show my self a tyrant: when I have fought with the men, I will bee civil with the Maids, and cut off their heads.
The heads of the Maids?
I, the heads of the Maids, or their Maiden-heads,
Take it in what sense thou wilt.
They must take it sense, that feel it▪
Me they shall feel while I am able to stand:
And it is known I am a pretty piece of flesh.
It is well thou art not Fish: If thou had, thou had been poor Iohn. Draw thy Tool, here comes of the House of the Mountagues.
My naked weapon is out: quarrel, I will back thee
How? Turn thy back, and run.
Fear me not.
No marry: I fear thee.
Let vs take the Law of our sides▪ let them begin.
I will frown as I pass by, &amp; let thē take it as they list
Nay, as they dare. I will bite my Thumb at them, which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it.
Do you bite your Thumb at vs sir?
I do bite my Thumb, sir.
Do you bite your Thumb at vs, sir?
Is the Law of our side, if I say I?
No.
No sir, I do not bite my Thumb at you sir: but I bite my Thumb sir.
Do you quarrel sir?
Quarrel sir? no sir.
If you do sir, I am for you, I serve as good a man as you
No better?
Well sir.
Say better: here comes one of my masters kinsmen.
Yes, better.
You Lye.
Draw if you be men. Gregory, remember thy washing blow.
Part Fools, put up your Swords, you know not what you do.
What art thou drawn, among these heartless Hinds? Turn thee Benuolio, look upon thy death.
I do but keep the peace, put up thy Sword,
Or manage it to part these men with me.
What draw, and talk of peace? I hate the word
As I hate hell, all Mountagues, and thee:
Have at thee Coward.
Clubs, Bills, and Partisons, strike, beat them down
Down with the Capulets, down with the Mountagues.
What noise is this? Give me my long Sword ho.
A crutch, a crutch: why call you for a Sword?
My Sword I say: Old Mountague is come,
And flourishes his Blade in spite of me.
Thou villain▪ Capulet. Hold me not, let me go
Thou shalt not stir a foot to seek a Foe.
Rebellious Subjects, Enemies to peace,
Prophaners of this Neighbor-stained Steel,
Will they not hear? What hoe, you Men, you Beasts,
That quench the fire of your pernicious Rage,
With purple Fountains issuing from your Veins:
On pain of Torture, from those bloody hands
Throw your mistemper'd Weapons to the ground,
And hear the Sentence of your moved Prince.
Three civil Broils, bred of an Aerie word,
By thee old Capulet and Mountague,
Have thrice disturbed the quiet of our streets,
And made Verona's ancient Citizens
Cast by their Grave beseeming Ornaments,
To wield old Partisans, in hands as old,
Cankered with peace, to part your Cankered hate,
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For this time all the rest depart away:
You Capulet shall go along with me,
And Mountague come you this afternoon,
To know our Fathers pleasure in this case:
To old Free-towne, our common judgment place:
Once more on pain of death, all men depart.
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Speak Nephew, were you by, when it began:
Here were the servants of your adversary,
And yours close fighting ere I did approach,
I drew to part them, in the instant came
The fiery Tibalt, with his sword prepared,
Which as he breathed defiance to my ears,
He swong about his head, and cut the winds,
Who nothing hurt withal, hist him in scorn.
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
Came more and more, and fought on part and part,
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.
O where is Romeo, saw you him to day?
Right glad am I, he was not at this fray.
Madam, an hour before the worshipped Sun
Peered forth the golden window of the East,
A troubled mind drove me to walk abroad,
Where underneath the grove of Sycamore,
That West-ward roots from this City side:
So early walking did I see your Son:
Towards him I made, but he was ware of me,
And stole into the covert of the wood,
I measuring his affections by my own,
Which then most sought, where most might not be found:
Being one too many by my weary self,
Pursued my Honour, not pursuing his
And gladly shunned, who gladly fled from me.
Many a morning hath he there been seen,
With tears augmenting the fresh mornings dew,
Adding to clouds, more clouds with his deep sighs,
But all so soon as the all-cheering Sun,
Should in the farthest East begin to draw
The shady Curtains from Auroras bed,
Away from light-steales home my heavy Son,
And private in his Chamber pens himself,
Shuts up his windows, lockes fair day-light out,
And makes himself an artificial night:
Black and portentous must this humour prove,
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
My Noble Uncle doe you know the cause?
I neither know it, nor can learn of him.
Have you importuned him by any means?
Both by my self and many others Friends,
But he his own affections counsellor,
Is to himself (I will not say how true)
But to himself so secret and so close,
So far from sounding and discovery,
As is the bud bit with an envious worm,
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the ayre,
Or dedicate his beauty to the same.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
We would as willingly give cure, as know.
See where he comes, so please you step aside,
Isle know his grievance, or be much denied.
I would thou were so happy by thy stay,
To hear true shrift. Come Madam let's away.
Good morrow Cousin.
Is the day so young?
But new struck nine.
Aye me, sad hours seem long:
Was that my Father that went hones so fast?
It was: what sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?
Not having that, which having, makes them short
In love.
Out.
Of love.
Out of her favour where I am in love.
Alas that love so gentle in his view,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof.
Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Should without eyes, see path-wayes to his will:
Where shall we dine? O me: what fray was here?
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all:
Heere's much to do with hate, but more with love:
Why then, O brawling love, O loving hate,
O any thing, of nothing first created:
O heavy lightness, serious vanity,
Misshapen Chaos of welseeing forms,
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health,
Still waking sleep, that is not what it is:
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Doest thou not laugh?
No Cos, I rather weep.
Good heart, at what?
At thy good hearts oppression.
Why such is loves transgression.
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Which thou wilt propagate to have it preast
With more of thine, this love that thou hast shown,
Doth add more grief, to too much of mine own.
Love, is a smoke made with the fume of sighs,
Being purged, a fire sparkling in Lovers eyes,
Being vexed, a Sea nourished with loving tears,
What is it else? a madness, most discreet,
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet:
Farewell my Cos.
Soft I will go along.
And if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
Tut I have lost my self, I am not here,
This is not Romeo, hoe's some other where.
Tell me in sadness, who is that you love?
What shall I groan and tell thee?
Groan, why no: but sadly tell me who.
A sick man in sadness makes his will:
A word ill urged to one that is so ill:
In sadness Cozin, I do love a woman.
I aimed so near, when I supposed you loved.
A right good mark man, and shoe's fair I love
A right fair mark, fair Cos, is soonest hit.
Well in that hit you miss, sheel not be hit
With Cupids arrow, she hath Deans wit:
And in strong proof of chastity well armed:
From loves weak childish Bow, she lives uncharmed.
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
Nor bid the encounter of assailing eyes.
Nor open her lap to Sainct-seducing Gold:
O she is rich in beauty, only poor,
That when she dies, with beauty dies her store.
Then she hath sworn, that she will still live chaste?
She hath, and in that sparing make huge wast?
For beauty starved with her severity,
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
She is too fair, too wisewi: sly too fair,
To merit bliss by making me despair:
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
Do I live dead, that live to tell it now.
Be ruled by me, forget to think of her.
O teach me how I should forget to think.
By giving liberty unto thine eyes,
Examine other beauties,
It is the way to cal hers (exquisite) in question more,
These happy masks that kiss fair Ladies brows,
Being black, puts vs in mind they hide the fair:
He that is struck blind, cannot forget
The precious treasure of his eye-sight lost:
Show me a Mistress that is passing fair,
What doth her beauty serve but as a note,
Where I may read who past that passing fair.
Farewell thou can not teach me to forget,
Isle pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.
Mountague is bound as well as I,
In penalty alike, and it is not hard I think,
For men so old as wee, to keep the peace.
Of Honourable reckoning are you both,
And pity it is you lived at odds so long:
But now my Lord, what say you to my suit?
But saying ore what I have said before,
My Child is yet a stranger in the world,
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years,
Let two more Summers wither in their pride,
Ere we may think her ripe to be a Bride.
Younger then she, are happy mothers made.
And too soon mared are those so early made:
Earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she,
Shoe's the hopeful Lady of my earth:
But woo her gentle Paris, get her heart,
My will to her consent, is but a part,
And she agree, within her scope of choice,
Lies my consent, and fair according voice:
This night I hold an old accustomed Feast,
Whereto I have invited many a Guest,
Such as I love, and you among the store,
One more, most welcome makes my number more:
At my poor house, look to behold this night,
Earth-treading stars, that make dark heaven light,
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel,
When well apparelled April on the heel
Of limping Winter treads, even such delight
Among fresh Fennel buds shall you this night
Inherit at my house: hear all, all see:
And like her most, whose merit most shall be:
Which one more view, of many, mine being one,
May stand in number, though in reckoning none.
Come, go with me: go sirrah trudge about,
Through fair Verona, find those persons out,
Whose names are written there, and to them say,
My house and welcome, on their pleasure stay.
Find them out whose names are written. Here it is written, that the Shoo-maker should meddle with his Yard, and the Tailor with his Last, the Fisher with his Pencil, and the Painter with his Nets. But I am sent to find those persons whose names are writ, &amp; can never find what names the writing person hath here writ (I must to the learned) in good time.
Tut man, one fire burns out another burning,
One pai•e is lesned by another anguish:
Turn giddy, and be help by backward turning:
One desperate grief, cures with another languish:
Take thou some new infection to the eye,
And the rank poison of the old will die.
Your Plantan leaf is excellent for that.
For what I pray thee?
For your broken shin.
Why Romeo art thou mad?
Not mad, but bound more then a mad man is:
Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
Whipped and tormented: and Gotten good fellow,
Godgigoden, I pray sir can you read?
I mine own fortune in my misery.
Perhaps you have learned it without book:
But I pray can you read any thing you see?
I, if I know the Letters and the Language.
Ye say honestly, rest you merry.
Stay fellow, I can read.
A fair assembly, whither should they come?
Up.
Whither? to supper?
To our house.
Whose house?
My Masters.
Indeed I should have asked you that before.
Now Isle tell you without asking. My moister is the great rich Capulet, and if you be not of the house of Mountagues I pray come and crush a cup of wine. Rest you merry.
At this same ancient Feast of Capulets
Sups the fair Rosaline, whom thou so loves:
With all the admired Beauties of Verona,
Go thither and with vnattainted eye,
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
And I will make thee think thy Swan a Crow.
When the devout religion of mine eye
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fire:
And these who often drowned could never die,
Transparent Heretics be burnt for liers.
One fairer then my love: the all-seeing Sun
Ne'er saw her match, since first the world begun.
Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,
Herself poised with herself in either eye:
But in that Crystal scales, let there be waid,
Your Ladies love against some other Maid
That I will show you, shining at this Feast,
And she show scant shell, well, that now shows best.
Isle go along, no such sight to be shown,
But to rejoice in splendour of mine own.
Nurse wher's my daughter? call her forth to me.
Now by my Maidenhead, at twelve year old
I bad her come, what Lamb: what Ladi-bird, God forbid,
Whore's this Girl? what Iuliet?
How now, who calls?
Your Mother.
Madam I am here, what is your will?
This is the matter: Nurse give leave awhile, we
must talk in secret. Nurse come back again, I have re∣membred me, thou'se hear our counsel. Thou know my daughter's of a pretty age.
Faith I can tell her age unto an hour.
Shoe's not fourteen.
Isle lay fourteen of my teeth,
And yet to my teene be it spoken,
I have but four, shoe's not fourteen.
How long is it now to Lemmas tide?
A fortnight and odd days.
Even or odd, of all days in the year come Lemmas Eve at night shall she be fourteen. Susan &amp; she, God rest all Christian souls, were of an age. Well Susan is with God, she was too good for me. But as I said, on La∣mas Eve at night shall she be fourteen, that shall she ma∣rye, I remember it well. It is since the Earth-quake now eleven years, and she was weaned I never shall forget it, of all the days of the year, upon that day: for I had then laid Wormwood to my Dug sitting in the Sun under the Douehouse wall, my Lord and you were then at Mantua, nay I doe bear a brain. But as I said, when it did taste the Wormwood on the nipple of my Dug, and felt it bitter, pretty fool, to see it teach, and fall out with the Dug, Shake quoth the Doue-house, it was no need I trow to bid me trudge: and since that time it is a eleven years, for then she could stand alone, nay bi' the rood she could have run, &amp; waddled all about: for even the day before she broke her brow, &amp; then my Husband God be with his soul, a was a merry man, took up the Child, yea quoth hee, doest thou fall upon thy face? thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit, wilt thou not Iule? And by my holy-dam, the pretty wretch left crying, &amp; said I: to see now how a Jest shall come about. I warrant, &amp; I shall live a thousand years, I never should forget it: wilt thou not Iulet quoth he? and pretty fool it stinted, and said I.
Enough of this, I pray thee hold thy peace.
Yes Madam, yet I cannot choose but laugh, to think it should leave crying, &amp; say I: and yet I warrant it had upon it brow, a bump as big as a young Cockerels stone? A perilous knock, and it cried bitterly. Yea quoth my husband, fall upon thy face, thou wilt fall back∣ward when thou comes to age: wilt thou not Iule? It stinted: and said I.
And stint thou too. I pray thee Nurse, say I.
Peace I have done: God mark thee too his grace thou wast the prettiest Babe that ere I nursed, and I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.
Marry that marry is the very theme
I came to talk of, tell me daughter Iuliet,
How stands your disposition to be Married?
It is an hour that I dream not of.
An hour, were not I thine only Nurse, I would say thou had sucked wisdom from thy teat.
Well think of marriage now, younger then you
Here in Verona, Ladies of esteem,
Are made already Mothers. By my count
I was your Mother, much upon these years
That you are now a Maid, thus then in brief:
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
A man young Lady, Lady, such a man as all the world. Why hoe's a man of wax.
Veronas Summer hath not such a flower.
Nay hoe's a flower, infaith a very flower.
What say you, can you love the Gentleman?
This night you shall behold him at our Feast,
Read ore the volume of young Paris face,
And find delight, writ there with Beauties pen:
Examine every several lineament,
And see how one another lends content:
And what obscured in this fair volume lies,
Find written in the Margent of his eyes▪
This precious Book of Love, this unbound Lover,
To Beautify him, only lacks a Cover.
The fish lives in the Sea, and it is much pride
For fair without, the fair within to hide:
That Book in manies eyes doth share the glory,
That in Gold clasps, Lockes in the Golden story:
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
By having him, making your self no less.
No less, nay bigger: women grow by men.
Speak briefly, can you like of Paris love?
Isle look to like, if looking liking move.
But no more deep will I endart mine eye,
Then your consent gives strength to make fly.
Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you called, my young Lady asked for, the Nurse cur'st in the Pan∣tery, and every thing in extremity: I must hence to wait, I beseech you follow straight.
We follow thee, Iuliet, the County stays.
Go Girl, seek hap•e nights to happy days.
What shall this speeh be spoke for our excuse?
Or shall we on without Apology?
The date is out of such prolixity,
Weal have no Cupped, hood winked with a scarf,
Bearing a Tartars painted Bow of lath,
Skaring the Ladies like a Crow-keeper.
But let them measure vs by what they will,
Weal measure them a Measure, and be gone.
Give me a Torch, I am not for this ambling.
Being but heavy I will bear the light.
Nay gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
Not I believe me, you have dancing shoes
With nimble soles, I have a soale of Lead
So stakes me to the ground, I cannot move.
You are a Lover, borrow Cupids wings,
And soar with them aboue a common bound.
I am too sore enpearced with his shaft,
To soar with his light feathers, and to bound:
I cannot bound a pitch aboue dull woe,
Under loves heavy burden doe I sink.
And to sink in it should you burden love,
Too great oppression for a tender thing.
Is love a tender thing? it is too rough,
Too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorne.
If love be rough with you, be rough with love,
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down,
Give me a Case to put my visage in,
A Visor for a Visor, what care I
What curious eye doth quote deformities:
Here are the Beetle-browes shall blush for me.
Come knock and enter, and no sooner in,
But every man betake him to his legs.
A Torch for me, let wantons light of heart
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heals:
For I am prouerb'd with a Grandsier Phrase,
Isle be a Candle-holder and look on,
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.
Tut, duns the Mouse, the Constables own word,
If thou art dun, weal draw thee from the mire.
Or save your reverence love, wherein thou stick
Up to the ears, come we burn day-light ho.
Nay that's not so.
I mean sir I delay,
We wast our lights in vain, lights, lights, by day;
Take our good meaning, for our Judgment sits
Five times in that, ere once in our fine wits.
And we mean well in going to this Mask,
But it is no wit to go.
Why may one ask?
I dreamt a dream to night.
And so did I.
Well what was yours?
That dreamers often lye.
In bed a sleep while they do dream things true.
O then I see Queen Mob hath been with you: She is the Fairies Midwife, &amp; she comes in shape no big∣ger then Agat-stone, on the fore-finger of an Alderman, drawn with a teem of little Atoms, over men's noses as they lie asleep: her Waggon Spokes made of long Spin∣ners legs: the Cover of the wings of Grasshoppers, her Traces of the smallest Spiders web, her collars of the Moonshines watery Beams, her Whip of Crickets bone, the Lash of Philome, her Waggoner, a small gray-coated Gnat, not half so big as a round little Worm, pricked from the Lazie-finger of a man. Her Chariot is an empty Hazelnut, made by the Joiner Squirrel or old Grub, time out a mind, the Faries Coach-makers: &amp; in this state she gallops night by night, through Lovers brains: and then they dream of Love. On Courtiers knees, that dream on Curses strait: ore Lawyers fingers, who strait dreamt on Fees, ore Ladies lips, who strait on kisses dream, which oft athe angry Mob with blisters plagues, because their breath with Sweet meats tainted are. Sometime she gal∣lops ore a Courtiers nose, &amp; then dreams he of smelling out acute: &amp; sometime comes she with With pigs tale, tick∣ling a Parsons nose as a lies asleep, then he dreams of another Benefice. Sometime she drives ore a Soldiers neck, &amp; then dreams he of cutting Foreign throats, of Breaches, Ambuscados, Spanish Blades: Of Healths five Fathom deep, and then anon drums in his ears, at which he starts and wakes; and being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two &amp; sleeps again: this is that very Mob that plots the manes of Horses in the night: &amp; bakes the Elk-locks in foul sluttish hairs, which once vntangled, much misfortune bodes,
This is the hag, when Maids lie on their backs,
That presses them, and learns them first to bear,
Making them women of good carriage:
This is she.
Peace, peace, Mercutio peace,
Thou talk of nothing.
True, I talk of dreams:
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing, but vain fantasy,
Which is as thin of substance as the ayre,
And more inconstant then the wind, who woos
Even now the frozen bosom of the North:
And being angered, puffs away from thence,
Turning his side to the dew dropping South.
This wind you talk of blows vs from our selves,
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
I fear too early, for my mind misgives,
Some consequence yet hanging in the stars,
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
With this nights revels, and expire the term
Of a despised life closed in my breast:
By some vile forfeit of untimely death▪
But he that hath the stirrage of my course,
Direct my suit: on lusty Gentlemen.
Strike Drum.
Whore's Potpan, that he helps not to take away?
He shift a Trencher? he scrape a Trencher?
When good manners, shall lie in one or two men's hands, and they vnwasht too, it is a foul thing.
Away with the Ioynstooles, remove the Court∣cupboard, look to the Plate: good thou, save me a piece of Marchpane, and as thou love me, let the Porter let in Susan Grindstone, and Nil, Anthony and Potpan.
I Boy ready.
You are looked for, and called for, asked for, &amp; sought for, in the great Chamber.
We cannot be here and there too, cheerly Boys,
Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.
Welcome Gentlemen,
Ladies that have their toes
Vnplagu'd with Corns, will walk about with you:
Ah my Mistresses, which of you all
Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,
She Isle swear hath Corns: am I come near ye now?
Welcome Gentlemen, I have seen the day
That I have worn a Visor, and could tell
A whispering tale in a fair Ladies ear:
Such as would please: it is gone, it is gone, it is gone,
You are welcome Gentlemen, come Musicians play:
A Hall, Hall, give room, and foot it Girls,
More light you knaves, and turn the Tables up:
And quench the fire, the Room is grown too hot.
Ah sirrah, this unlooked for sport comes well:
Nay sit, nay sit, good Cozin Capulet,
For you and I are past our dancing days:
How long 'ist now since last your self and I
Were in a Mask?
Byr'lady thirty years.
What man: it is not so much, it is not so much,
It is since the Nuptial of Lucentio,
Come Pentycost as quickly as it will,
Some five and twenty years, and then we Maskt.
It is more, it is more, his Son is elder sir:
His Son is thirty.
Will you tell me that?
His Son was but a Ward two years ago.
What Lady is that which dothni rich the hand
Of yonder Knight?
I know not sir.
O she doth teach the Torches to burn bright:
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night,
As a rich Jewel in an Aethiops ear:
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear:
So shows a Snowy Dove trooping with Crows,
As yonder Lady ore her fellows shows;
The measure done, Isle watch her place of stand,
And touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
Did my heart love till now, forswear it sight,
For I never saw true Beauty till this night.
This by his voice, should be a Mountague.
Fetch me my Rapier Boy, what dares the slave
Come hither covered with an antique face,
To fleer and scorn at our Solemnity?
Now by the stock and Honour of my kin,
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.
Why how now kinsman,
Wherefore storm you so?
Uncle this is a Mountague, our foe:
A Villain that is hither come in spite,
To scorn at our Solemnity this night.
Young Romeo is it?
It is he, that Villain Romeo.
Content thee gentle Cos, let him alone,
A bears him like a portly Gentleman:
And to say truth, Verona brags of him,
To be a virtuous and well governed youth:
I would not for the wealth of all the town,
Here in my house do him disparagement:
Therefore be patient, take no note of him,
It is my will, the which if thou respect,
Show a fair presence, and put off these frowns,
An ill beseeming semblance for a Feast.
It fits when such a Villain is a guest,
Isle not endure him.
He shall be endu'rd.
What goodman boy, I say he shall, go too,
Am I the Moister here or you? go too,
You'll not endure him, God shall mend my soul,
You'll make a Mutiny among the Guests:
You will set cock a hoop, you'll be the man.
Why Uncle, it is a shame.
Go too, go too,
You are a saucy Boy, 'ist so indeed?
This trick may chance to scath you, I know what,
You must contrary me, marry it is time.
Well said my hearts, you are a Princox, go,
Be quiet, or more light, more light for shame,
Isle make you quiet. What, cheerly my hearts.
Patience perforce, with wilful choler meeting,
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting:
I will withdraw, but this intrusion shall
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitter gall.
If I profane with my unworthiest hand,
This holy shrine, the gentle sin is this,
My lips to blushing Pilgrims did ready stand,
To smooth that rough touch, with a tender kiss.
Good Pilgrim,
You do wrong your hand too much.
Which mannerly devotion shows in this,
For Saints have hands, that Pilgrims hands do tush,
And palm to palm, is holy Palmers kiss.
Have not Saints lips, and holy Palmers too?
I Pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.
O then dear Saint, let lips do what hands do,
They pray (grant thou) least faith turn to despair.
Saints do not move,
Though grant for prayers sake.
Then move not while my prayers effect I take:
Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purged.
Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urged:
Give me my sin again.
You kiss by' the book.
Madam your Mother craves a word with you.
What is her Mother?
Marry Bachelor,
Her Mother is the Lady of the house,
And a good Lady, and a wise, and Virtuous,
I Nur'st her Daughter that you talked withal:
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her,
Shall have the chincks.
Is she a Capulet?
O dear account! My life is my foes debt.
Away, be gone, the sport is at the best.
I so I fear, the more is my unrest.
Nay Gentlemen prepare not to be gone,
We have a trifling foolish Banquet towards:
Is it even so? why then I thank you all.
I thank you honest Gentlemen, good night:
More Torches here: come on, then let's to bed.
Ah sirrah, by my fey it waxes late,
Isle to my rest.
Come hither Nurse,
What is yond Gentleman:
The Son and Heir of old Tyberio.
What's he that now is going out of door?
Marry that I think be young Petruchio.
What's he that follows here that would not dance?
I know not.
Go ask his name: if he be married,
My grave is like to be my wedded bed.
His name is Romeo, and a Mountague,
The only Son of your great Enemy.
My only Love sprung from my only hate,
Too early seen, unknown, and known too late,
Prodigious birth of Love it is to me,
That I must love a loathed Enemy.
What's this? whats this?
A rime, I learn even now
Of one I dan'st withal.
Anon, anon:
Come let's away, the strangers all are gone.
Now old desire doth in his death bed lie,
And young affection gapes to be his Heir,
That fair, for which Love groaned for and would die,
With tender Iuliet matched, is now not fair.
Now Romeo is beloved, and Loves again,
A like bewitched by the charm of looks:
But to his foe supposed he must complain,
And she steal Loves sweet bait from fearful hooks:
Being held a foe, he may not have access
To breath such vows as Lovers use to swear,
And she as much in Love, her means much less,
To meet her new Beloved any where:
But passion lends them Power, time, means to meet,
Temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet.
Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Turn back dull earth, and find thy Center out.
Romeo, my Cozen Romeo, Romeo.
He is wise,
And on my life hath stolen him home to bed.
He ran this way and leapt this Orchard wall.
Call good Mercutio:
Nay, Isle conjure too.
Romeo, Humours, Madman, Passion, Lover,
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh,
Speak but one rime, and I am satisfied:
Cry me but ay me, Provant, but Love and day,
Speak to my goship Venus one fair word,
One Nickname for her purblind Son and her,
Young Abraham Cupped he that shot so true,
When King Cophet•a loved the beggar Maid,
He hears not, he stirs not, he moves not,
The Ape is dead, I must conjure him,
I conjure thee by Rosalines bright eyes,
By her High forehead, and her Scarlet lip,
By her Fine foot, Straight leg, and Quivering thigh,
And the Demeans, that there Adjacent lie,
That in thy likeness thou appear to vs.
And if he hear thee thou wilt anger him.
This cannot anger him, to would anger him
To raise a spirit in his Mistress circle,
Of some strange nature, letting it stand
Till she had laid it, and conjured it down,
That were some spite.
My invocation is fair and honest, &amp; in his Mistress name,
I conjure only but to raise up him.
Come, he hath hid himself among these Trees
To be consorted with the Humorous night:
Blind is his Love, and best befits the dark.
If Love be blind, Love cannot hit the mark,
Now will he sit under a Meddler tree,
And wish his Mistress were that kind of Fruit,
As Maids call Meddlers when they laugh alone,
O Romeo that she were, O that she were
An open, or thou a Poprin Pear,
Romeo goodnight, Isle to my Truckle bed,
This Field-bed is to cold for me to sleep,
Come shall we go?
Go then, for it is in vain to seek him here
That means not to be found.
He jests at Scars that never felt a wound,
But soft, what light through yonder window breaks?
It is the East, and Iuliet is the Sun,
Arise fair Sun and kill the envious Moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief,
That thou her Maid art far more fair then she:
Be not her Maid since she is envious,
Her Vestal livery is but sick and greene,
And none but fools do wear it, cast it off:
It is my Lady, O it is my Love, O that she knew she were,
She speaks, yet she says nothing, what of that?
Her eye discourses, I will answer it:
I am too bold it is not to me she speaks:
Two of the fairest stars in all the Heaven,
Having some business do entreat her eyes,
To twinckle in their Spheres till they return.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head,
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars,
As day-light doth a Lamp, her eye in heaven,
Would through the airy Region stream so bright,
That Birds would sing, and think it were not night:
See how she leanes her cheek upon her hand.
O that I were a Glove upon that hand,
That I might touch that cheek.
Ay me.
She speaks.
Oh speak again bright Angel, for thou art
As glorious to this night being ore my head,
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Unto the white vpturned wondering eyes
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him,
When he bestrides the lazy puffing Clouds,
And sails upon the bosom of the ayre.
O Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy Father and refuse thy name:
Or if thou wilt not, be but sworn my Love,
And Isle no longer be a Capulet.
Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
It is but thy name that is my Enemy:
Thou art thy self, though not a Mountague,
What's Mountague? it is nor hand nor foot,
Nor arm, nor face, O be some other name
Belonging to a man.
What? in a names that which we call a Rose,
By any other word would smell as sweet,
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo called,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes,
Without that title Romeo, doffe thy name,
And for thy name which is no part of thee,
Take all my self.
I take thee at thy word:
Call me but Love, and Isle be new baptised,
Hence forth I never will be Romeo.
What man art thou, that thus bescreen'd in night
So stumble on my counsel?
By a name,
I know not how to tell thee who I am:
My name dear Saint, is hateful to my self,
Because it is an Enemy to thee,
Had I it written, I would tear the word.
My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
Of thy tongues uttering, yet I know the sound.
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
Neither fair Maid, if either thee dislike.
How came thou hither.
Tell me, and wherefore?
The Orchard walls are high, and hard to climb,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
If any of my kinsmen find thee here,
With Loves light wings
Did I ore-perch these Walls,
For stony limits cannot hold Love out,
And what Love can do, that dares Love attempt:
Therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.
If they do see thee, they will murder thee.
Alack there lies more peril in thine eye,
Then twenty of their Swords, look thou but sweet,
And I am proof against their enmity.
I would not for the world they saw thee here.
I have nights cloak to hide me from their eyes
And but thou love me, let them find me here,
My life were better ended by their hate,
Then death prorogued wanting of thy Love.
By whose direction found thou out this place?
By Love that first did promp me to enquire,
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes,
I am no Pilot, yet were thou as far
As that vast-shore-washet with the farthest Sea,
I should adventure for such Merchandise.
Thou know the mask of night is on my face,
Else would a Maiden blush be paint my cheek,
For that which thou hast heard me speak to night,
Fine would I dwell on form, fine, fine, deny
What I have spoke, but farewell Complement,
Doest thou Love? I know thou wilt say I,
And I will take thy word, yet if thou swear,
Thou majesty prove false: at Lovers perjuries
They say Jove laughed, oh gentle Romeo,
If thou dost Love, pronounce it faithfully:
Or if thou think I am too quickly won,
Isle frown and be perverse, and say thee nay,
So thou wilt woo: But else not for the world.
In truth saire Mountague I am too fond:
And therefore thou majesty think my behaviour light,
But trust me Gentleman, Isle prove more true,
Then those that have coying to be strange,
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
But that thou over heard ere I was ware
My true Loves passion, therefore pardon me,
And not impute this yielding to light Love,
Which the dark night hath so discovered.
Lady, by yonder Moon I vow,
That tips with silver all these Fruit •ree tops.
O swear not by the Moon, the inconstant Moon,
That monthly changes in her circled Orb,
Least that thy Love prove likewise variable.
What shall I swear by?
Do not swear at all:
Or if thou wilt swear by thy gracious self,
Which is the God of my Idolatry,
And Isle believe thee.
If my hearts dear love.
Well do not swear, although I joy in thee:
I have no joy of this contract to night,
It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden,
Too like the lightning which doth cease to be
Ere, one can say, it lightens, Sweet good night:
This bud of Love by Summers ripening breath,
May prove a beauteous Flower when next we meet:
Goodnight, goodnight, as sweet repose and rest,
Come to thy heart, as that within my breast.
O wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
What satisfaction can thou have to night?
The exchange of thy Loves faithful vow for mine.
I gave thee mine before thou did request it:
And yet I would it were to give again.
Would thou withdraw it,
For what purpose Love?
But to be frank and give it thee again,
And yet I wish but for the thing I have,
My bounty is as boundless as the Sea,
My Love as deep, the more I give to thee
The more I have, for both are Infinite:
I hear some noise within dear Love adieu:
Anon good Nurse, sweet Mountague be true:
Stay but a little, I will come again.
O blessed blessed night, I am afeared
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Too flattering sweet to be substantial.
Three words dear Romeo,
And goodnight indeed,
If that thy bent of Love be Honourable,
Thy purpose marriage, send me word to morrow,
By one that Isle procure to come to thee,
Where and what time thou wilt perform the right,
And all my Fortunes at thy foot Isle lay,
And follow thee my Lord throughout the world.
I come, anon: but if thou meanest not well,
I do beseech thee
(By and by I come)
To cease thy strife, and leave me to my grief,
To morrow will I send.
So thrive my soul.
A thousand times goodnight.
A thousand times the worse to want thy light,
Love goes toward Love as school-boyes frō their books
But Love frō Love, towards school with heavy looks.
Hist Romeo hist: O for a Falkners voice,
To lure this Tassel gentle back again,
Bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud,
Else would I tear the Cave where Echo lies,
And make her airy tongue more hoarse, then
With repetition of my Romeo.
It is my soul that calls upon my name.
How silver sweet, sound Lovers tongues by night,
Like softest Music to attending ears.
Romeo.
My Niece.
What a clock to morrow
Shall I send to thee?
By the hour of nine.
I will not fail, it is twenty years till then,
I have forgot why I did call thee back.
Let me stand here till thou remember it.
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Remembering how I Love thy company.
And Isle still stay, to have thee still forget,
Forgetting any other home but this.
It is almost morning, I would have thee gone,
And yet no further then a wantons Bird,
That let's it hop a little from his hand,
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted Gyves,
And with a silken thread plucks it back again,
So loving Jealous of his liberty.
I would I were thy Bird.
Sweet so would I,
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing:
Good night, good night.
Parting is such sweet sorrow,
That I shall say goodnight, till it be morrow.
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast.
Would I were sleep and peace so sweet to rest,
The gray eyed morn smiles on the frowning night,
Checkring the Eastern Clouds with streakes of light,
And darkness fleckel'd like a drunkard reels,
From forth days pathway, made by Titans wheels.
Hence will I to my ghostly Fries close Cell,
His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell.
The gray eyed morn smiles on the frowning night,
Checkring the Eastern Clouds with streaks of light.
And fleckled darkness like a drunkard reels,
From forth days path, and Titans burning wheels:
Now ere the Sun advance his burning eye,
The day to cheer, and nights dank dew to dry,
I must vpfill this Osier Cage of ours,
With baleful weeds, and precious Iuiced flowers,
The earth that's Natures mother, is her Tomb,
What is her burying grave that is her womb:
And from her womb children of divers kind
We sucking on her natural bosom find:
Many for many virtues excellent:
None but for some, and yet all different.
Omickle is the powerful grace that lies
In Plants, Herbs, stones, and their true qualities:
For nought so vile, that on the earth doth live,
But to the earth some special good doth give.
Nor ought so good, but strained from that fair use,
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Virtue it self turns vice being misapplied,
And vice sometime by action dignified.
Within the infant rin'd of this weak flower,
Poison hath residence, and medicine power:
For this being smelt, with that part cheers each part,
Being tasted slays all senses with the heart.
Two such opposed Kings encamp them still,
In man as well as Herbs, grace and rude will:
And where the worser is predominant,
Full soon the Canker death eats up that Plant.
Good morrow Father.
Benedecite.
What early tongue so sweet salutes me?
Young Son, it argues a distempered head,
So soon to bid goodmorrow to thy bed;
Care keeps his watch in every old mans eye,
And where Care lodges, sleep will never lye:
But where vnbrused you•h with vnstuft brain
Doth couch his limbs, there, golden sleep doth reign;
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure,
Thou art vprous'd with some diftemprature;
Or if not so, then here I hit it right.
Our Romeo hath not been in bed to night.
That last is true, the sweeter rest was mine.
God pardon sin: wast thou with Rosaline?
With Rosaline, my ghostly Father? No,
I have forgot that name, and that names woe.
That's my good Son, but where hast thou bin then?
Isle tell thee ere thou ask it me again:
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
Where on a s•dden one hath wounded me,
That's by me wounded: both our remedies
Within thy help and holy physic lies:
I bear no hatred, blessed man: for lo
My intercession likewise steads my foe.
Be plain good Son, rest homely in thy drift,
Riddling confession, finds but riddling shrift.
Then plainly know my hearts dear Love is set,
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet:
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine;
And all combined, save what thou must combine
By holy marriage: when and where, and how,
We met, we wooed, and made exchange of vow:
Isle tell thee as we pass, but this I pray,
That thou consent to marry vs to day.
Holy S. Francis, what a change is here?
Is Rosaline that thou did Love so dear
So soon forsaken? young men's Love then lies
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Iesu Maria, what a deal of brine
Hath washed thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline?
How much salt water thrown away in wast,
To season Love that of it doth not taste.
The Sun not yet thy sighs, from heaven clears,
Thy old groans yet ringing in my ancient ears:
Lo here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit,
Of an old tear that is not washed off yet.
If ere thou wast thy self, and these woes thine,
Thou and these woes, were all for Rosaline.
And art thou changed? pronounce this sentence then,
Women may fall, when there's no strength in men.
Thou chide me oft for loving Rosaline.
For doting not for loving pupil mine.
And bad me bury Love.
Not in a grave,
To lay one in, another out to have.
I pray thee chide me not, her I Love now
Doth grace for grace, and Love for Love allow:
The other did not so.
O she knew well,
Thy Love did read by rote, that could not spell:
But come young wauerer, come go with me,
In one respect, Isle thy assistant be:
For this alliance may so happy prove,
To turn your household rancor to pure Love.
O let vs hence, I stand on sudden hast.
Wisely and slow, they stumble that run fast.
Where the deu•le should this Romeo be? came he not home to night?
Not to his Fathers, I spoke with his man.
Why that same pale hard-harted wench, that To∣saline torments him so, that he will sure run mad.
Tibalt, the kinsman to old Capulet, hath sent a Let∣la to his Fathers house.
A challenge on my life.
Romeo will answer it.
Any man that can write, may answer a Letter.
Nay, he will answer the Letters Moister how he dares, being dared.
Alas poor Romeo, he is already dead stabbed with a white wench• black eye, run through the ear with a Love song, the very pin of his heart, cleft with the blind Bowe-boyes but-shaft, and is he a man to encounter Tybalt?
Why what is Tibalt?
More then Prince of Cats. Oh hoe's the Courage∣os Captain of Complements: he fights as you sing pricksong, keeps time, distance, and proportion, he rests his minum, one, two, and the third in your bosom: the ve∣rye butcher of a silk button, a Duelled, a Duelled: a Gentleman of the very first house of the first and second cause: ah the immortal Passado, the Punto reuerso, the Hay.
The what?
The Pox of such antique lisping affecting phone∣tacies, these new tuners of accent: Iesu a very good blade, a very tall man, a very good whore. Why is not this a la∣mentable thing Grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange flies: these fashion Mongers, these par∣don-mee's, who stand so much on the new form, that they cannot sit at ease on the old bench. O their bones, their bones.
Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.
Without his Roe, like a dried Hearing. O flesh, flesh, how art thou fishified? Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed in: Laura to his Lady, was a kitchen wench, marry she had a better Love to be rime her: Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a Gypsy, Helen and Hero, hildinsgs and Harlots: Thisbie a gray eye or so, but not to the purpose. Signior Romeo, Bon jour, there's a French salutation to your
French slop: you gave vs the the counterfeit fairly last night.
Good morrow to you both, what counterfeit did I give you?
The slip sir, the slip, can you not conceive?
Pardon Mercutio, my business was great, and in such a case as mine, a man may strain courtesy.
That's as much as to say, such a case as yours con∣strains a man to bow in the hams.
Meaning to curse.
Thou hast most kindly hit it.
A most courteous exposition.
Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
Pink for flower.
Right.
Why then is my Pump well flowr'd.
Sure wit, follow me this jest, now till thou hast worn out thy Pump, that when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may remain after the wearing, sole-singular.
O single sol'd jest,
Soly singular for the singleness.
Come between vs good Benuolio, my wits faints.
Suits and spurs,
Suits and spurs, or Isle cry a match.
Nay, if our wits run the Wild-Goose chase, I am done: For thou hast more of the Wild-Goose in one of thy wits, then I am sure I have in my whole five. Was I with you there for the Goose?
Thou wast never with me for any thing, when thou wast not there for the Goose.
I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
Nay, good Goose bite not.
Thy wit is a very Bitter-sweeting,
It is a most sharpe sauce.
And is it not well served into a Sweet-Goose?
Oh here's a wit of Cheverel, that stretches from an inch narrow, to an ell broad.
I stretch it out for that word, broad, which added to the Goose, proves thee far and wide, abroad Goose.
Why is not this better now, then groaning for Love, now art thou sociable, now art thou Romeo: now art thou what thou art, by Art as well as by Nature, for this drivelling Love is like a great Natural, that runs lolling up and down to hid his babble in a hole.
Stop there, stop there.
Thou desire me to stop in my tale against the hair.
Thou would else have made thy tale large.
O thou art deceived, I would have made it short, or I was come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to occupy the argument no longer.
Here's goodly gear.
A sail, a sail.
Two, two: a Shirt and a Smock.
Peter?
Anon.
My Fan Peter?
Good Peter to hide her face?
For her Fans the fairer face?
God ye good morrow Gentlemen.
God ye gooden fair Gentlewoman.
Is it gooden?
It is no less I tell you: for the bawdy hand of the Dial is now upon the prick of Noon.
Out upon you: what a man are you?
One Gentlewoman,
That God hath made, himself to mar.
By my troth it is said, for himself to, mar qua∣tha: Gentlemen, can any of you tel me where I may find the young Romeo?
I can tell you: but young Romeo will be older when you have found him, then he was when you sought him: I am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse.
You say well.
Yea is the worst well,
Very well took: I faith, wisely, wisely.
If you be he sir,
I desire some confidence with you?
She will endite him to some Supper.
A baud, a baud, a baud. So no.
What hast thou found?
No Hare sir, unless a Hare sir in a Lenten pie, that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.
An old Hare hoar, and an old Hare hoar is very good meat in Lent.
But a Hare that is hoar is too much for a score▪ when it hoares ere it be spent,
Romeo will you come to your Fathers? Weal to dinner thither.
I will follow you.
Farewell ancient Lady:
Farewell Lady, Lady, Lady.
I pray you sir, what saucy Merchant was this that was so full of his robbery?
A Gentleman Nurse, that loves to hear himself talk, and will speak more in a minute, then he will stand to in a Month.
And a speak any thing against me, Isle take him down, &amp; a were lustier then he is, and twenty such Jacks: and if I cannot, Isle find those that shall: scurvy knave, I am none of his flurt-gils, I am none of his skeins mates, and thou must stand by too and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure.
I saw no man use you at his pleasure: if I had, my weapon should quickly have been out, I warrant you, I dare draw as soon as another man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law on my side.
Now before God, I am so vexed, that every part about me quivers, scurvy knave: pray you sir a word: and as I told you, my young Lady bid me enquire you out, what she bid me say, I will keep to my self: but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her in a fools paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of behaviour, as they say: for the Gentlewoman is young: &amp; therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an ill thing to be of∣feared to any Gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.
Nurse commend me to thy Lady and Mistress, I protest unto thee.
Good heart, and in faith I will tell her as much:
Lord, Lord she will be a joyful woman.
What wilt thou tell her Nurse? thou doest not mark me?
I will tell her sir, that you do protest, which as I take it, is a Gentleman-like offer.
Bid her devise some means to come to shrift this afternoon,
And there she shall at Friar Lawrence Cell
Beshriu'd and married: here is for thy pains.
No truly sir not a penny.
Go too, I say you shall.
This afternoon sir? well she shall be there.
And stay thou good Nurse behind the Abbey wall,
Within this hour my man shall be with thee,
And bring thee Cords made like a tackled stair▪
Which to the high top gallant of my joy,
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Farewell, be trusty and Isle quite thy pains:
Farewell, commend me to thy Mistress.
Now God in heaven bless thee: hark you sir,
What say thou my dear Nurse?
Is your man secret, did you ne'er hear say two may keep counsel putting one away.
Warrant thee my man as true as steel.
Well sir, my Mistress is the sweetest Lady, Lord, Lord, when it was a little pra•ing thing. O there is a No∣ble man in Town one Paris, that would fine lay knife a∣board: but she good soul had as leeue a see Toad, a very Toad as see him: I anger her sometimes, and tell her that Paris is the proper• man, but Isle warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any clout in the versall world. Doth not Rosemary and Romeo begin both with a letter?
I Nurse, what of that? Both with an R
A mocker that's the dogs name, R. is for the no, I know it begins with some other letter, and she hath the prettiest sententious of it, of you and Rosemary, that it would do you good to hear it.
Commend me to thy Lady.
I a thousand times. Peter?
Anon.
Before and apace.
The clock struck nine, when I did send the Nurse,
In half an hour she promised to return,
Perchance she cannot meet him: that's not so:
Oh she is lame, Loves Herald should be thoughts,
Which ten times faster glides then the Suns beams,
Driving back shadows over lowering hills.
Therefore do nimble Pinioned Doves draw Love,
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupped wings:
Now is the Sun upon the highmost hill
Of this days journey, and from nine till twelve,
I three long hours, yet she is not come.
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
She would be as swift in motion as a ball,
My words would bandy her to my sweet Love,
And his to me, but old folks,
Many fine as they were dead,
Unwieldy, slow, heavy, and pale as lead.
O God she comes, O honey Nurse what news?
Hast thou met with him? send thy man away.
Peter stay at the gate.
Now good sweet Nurse:
O Lord, why look thou sad?
Though news, be sad, yet tell them merrily.
If good thou sham'st the music of sweet news,
By playing it to me, with so sower a face.
I am a weary, give me leave awhile,
Fie how my bones ache, what a iaunt have I had?
I would thou had my bones, and I thy news:
Nay come I pray thee speak, good good Nurse speak.
Iesu what hast? can you not stay a while?
Do you not see that I am out of breath?
How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath
To say to me, that thou art out of breath?
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay,
Is longer then the tale thou dost excuse.
Is thy news good or bad? answer to that,
Say either, and Isle stay the circustance:
Let me be satisfied, first good or bad?
Well, you have made a simple choice, you know not how to choose a man: Romeo, no not he though his face be better then any mans, yet his legs excels all men's, and for a hand, and a foot, and a body, though they be not to be talked on, yet they are past compare: he is not the flower of courtesy, but Isle warrant him as gentle a Lamb: go thy ways wench, serve God. What have you dined at home?
No no: but all this this did I know before
What says he of our marriage? what of that?
Lord how my head aches, what a head have I?
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
My back at other side: o my back, my back:
Beshrew your heart for sending me about
To catch my death with iaunting up and down.
In faith: I am sorry that that thou art so well.
Sweet sweet, sweet Nurse, tell me what says my Love?
Your Love says like an honest Gentleman,
And a courteous, and a kind, and a handsome,
And I warrant a virtuous: where is your Mother?
Where is my Mother?
Why she is within, where should she be?
How oddly thou repli'st:
Your Love says like an honest Gentleman
Where is your Mother?
O Gods Lady dear,
Are you so hot? marry come up I trow,
Is this the Poultis for my eking bones?
Henceforward do your messages your self.
Heere's such a coil, come what says Romeo?
Have you got leave to go to shrift to day?
I have.
Then high you hence to Friar Lawrence Cell,
There stays a Husband to make you a wife:
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks,
The•'le be in Scarlet straight at any news:
Hie you to Church, I must an other way,
To fetch a Ladder by the which your Love
Must climbed a birds nest Soon when it is dark:
I am the drudge, and toil in your delight:
But you shall bear the burden soon at night.
Go Isle to dinner, hie you to the Cell.
Hie to high Fortune, honest Nurse, farewell.
So smile the heavens upon this holy act,
That after hours, with sorrow chide vs not.
Amen, amen, but come what sorrow can,
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
That one short minute gives me in her sight:
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Then Loue-deuouring death do what he dare,
It is enough. I may but call her mine.
These violent delights have violent ends,
And in their triumph: die like fire and powder;
Which as they kiss consume. The sweetest honey
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness,
And in the taste confounds the appetite.
Therefore Love moderately, long Love doth so,
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
Here comes the Lady. Oh so light a foot
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint,
A Lover may bestride the Gossamours,
That idles in the wanton Summer ayre,
And yet not fall, so light is vanity.
Good even to my ghostly Confessor.
Romeo shall thank thee Daughter for vs both.
As much to him, else in his thanks too much.
Ah Iuliet, if the measure of thy joy
Be heaped like mine, and that thy skill be more
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
This neighbour ayre, and let rich musickes tongue.
Unfold the imagined happiness that both
Receive in either, by this dear encounter.
Conceit more rich in matter then in words,
Brags of his substance, not of Ornament:
They are but beggars that can count their worth,
But my true Love is grown to such such excess,
I cannot sum up some of half my wealth.
Come, come with me, &amp; we will make short work,
For by your leaves, you shall not stay alone,
Till holy Church incorporate two in one.
I pray thee good Mercutio lets retire,
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad:
And if we meet, we shall not scope a brawl, for now these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
Thou art like one of these fellows, that when he enters the confines of a Tavern, claps me his Sword upon the Table, and says, God send me no need of thee: and by the operation of the second cup, draw• him on the Draw∣er, when indeed there is no need.
Am I like such a Fellow?
Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood, as any in Italy: and as soon moved to be moody, and as∣soon moody to be moved.
And what too?
Nay, and there were two such, we should have none shortly, for one would kill the other: thou, why thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more, or a hair less in his beard, then thou hast: thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking Nuts, having no other reason, but be∣cause thou hast hazel eyes: what eye, but such an eye, would spy out such a quarrel? thy head is as full of quar∣rels, as an egg is full of meat, and yet thy head hath bin beaten as addle as an egg for quarrelling: thou hast quar∣rel'd with a man for coffing in the street, because he hath wakened thy Dog that hath lain asleep in the Sun. Did thou not fall out with a Tailor for wearing his new Doub∣let before Easter? with another, for tying his new shoes with old Rebind, and yet thou wilt Tutor me from quar∣relling?
And I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy the Fee-simple of my life, for an hour and a quarter.
The Fee-simple? O simple.
By my head here comes the Capulets.
By my heel I care not.
Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
Gentlemen, Good den, a word with one of you.
And but one word with one of vs? couple it with something, make it a word and a blow.
You shall find me apt enough to that sir, and you will give me occasion.
Could you not take some occasion without giving?
Mercutio thou consort with Romeo.
Consort? what dost thou make vs Minstrels? &amp; thou make Minstrels of vs, look to hear nothing but dis∣cords: heere's my fiddlestick, heere's that shall make you dance. Come consort.
We talk here in the public haunt of men:
Either withdraw unto some private place,
Or reason coldly of your grievances:
Or else depart, here all eyes gaze on vs.
Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
I will not budge for no mans pleasure I.
Well peace be with you sir, here comes my man.
But Isle be hanged sir if he wear your Livery.
Marry go before to field, heel be your follower,
Your worship in that sense, may call him man.
Romeo, the love I bear thee, can afford
No better term then this: Thou art a Villain.
Tibalt, the reason that I have to love thee,
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
To such a greeting: Villain am I none;
Therefore farewell, I see thou know me not.
Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
That thou hast done me, therefore turn and draw.
I do protest I never injured thee,
But loved thee better then thou can devise:
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love,
And so good Capulet, which name I tender
As dearly as my own, be satisfied.
O calm, dishonourable, vile submission:
Alla stucatho carries it away.
Tybalt, you Rat-catcher, will you walk?
What woulds thou have with me?
Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives, that I mean to make bold withal, and as you shall use me hereafter dry beat the rest of the eight. Will you pluck your Sword out of his Pilcher by the ears? Make hast, least mine be about your ears ere it be out.
I am for you.
Gentle Mercutio, put thy Rapier up.
Come sir, your Passado.
Draw Benuolio, beat down their weapons:
Gentlemen, for shame forbear this outrage,
Tibalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath
Forbidden bandying in Verona streets.
Hold Tybalt, good Mercutio.
I am hurt.
A plague a both the Houses, I am sped:
Is he gone and hath nothing?
What art thou hurt?
I, I, a scratch, a scratch, marry it is enough,
Where is my Page? go Villain fetch a Surgeon.
Courage man, the hurt cannot be much.
No: it is not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a Church door, but it is enough, twill serve: ask for me to morrow, and you shall find me a grave man. I am peppered I warrant, for this world: a plague a both your houses. What, a Dog, a Rat, a Mouse, a Cat to scratch a man to death: a Braggart, a Rogue, a Villain, that fights by the book of Arithmetic, why the deu'le came you be∣tweene vs? I was hurt under your arm.
I thought all for the best.
Help me into some house Benuolio,
Or I shall faint: a plague a both your houses.
They have made worms meat of me,
I have it, and soundly to your Houses.
This Gentleman the Princes near Ally,
My very Friend hath got his mortal hurt
In my behalf, my reputation stained
With Tibalts slander, Tybalt that an hour
Hath been my Cozin: O Sweet Iuliet,
Thy Beauty hath made me Effeminate,
And in my temper softened Valours steel.
O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's is dead,
That Gallant spirit hath aspired the Clouds,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
This days black Fate, on mo days doth depend,
This but begins, the wo others must end.
Here comes the Furious Tybalt back again.
He gon in triumph, and Mercutio slain?
Away to heaven respective Lenity,
And fire and Fury, be my conduct now.
Now Tybalt take the Villain back again
That late thou gau'st me, for Mercutios soul
Is but a little way aboue our heads,
Staying for thine to keep him company:
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.
Thou wretched Boy that did consort him here,
Shalt with him hence.
This shall determine that.
Romeo, away be gone:
The Citizens are up, and Tybalt slain,
Stand not amazed, the Prince will Doom thee death
If thou art taken: hence, be gone, away.
O! I am Fortunes fool.
Why dost thou stay?
Which way ran he that kilt Mercutio?
Tibalt that Murderer, which way ran he?
There lies that Tybalt.
Up sir go with me:
I charge thee in the Princes names obey.
Where are the vile beginners of this Fray?
O Noble Prince, I can discover all
The unlucky Manage of this fatal brawl:
There lies the man slain by young Romeo,
That slew thy kinsman brave Mercutio.
Tybalt, my Cozin? O my Brothers Child,
O Prince, O Cozin, Husband, O the blood is spilled
Of my dear kinsman. Prince as thou art true,
For blood of ours, shed blood of Mountague.
O Cozin, Cozin.
Benuolio, who began this Fray?
Tybalt here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slay,
Romeo that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
How nice the Quarrel was, and urged withal
Your high displeasure: all this uttered,
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bowed
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Of Tybalts deaf to peace, but that he Tilts
With Piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast,
Who all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
And with a Martial scorn, with one hand beats
Cold death aside, and with the other sends
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
Retorts it: Romeo he cries aloud,
Hold Friends, Friends part, and swifter then his tongue,
His aged arm beats down their fatal points,
And twixt them rushes, underneath whose arm,
An envious thrust from Tybalt, hit the life
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled.
But by and by comes back to Romeo,
Who had but newly entertained Revenge,
And too't they go like lightning, for ere I
Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain:
And as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly:
This is the truth, or let Benuolio die.
He is a kinsman to the Mountague,
Affection makes him false, he speaks not true
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
I beg for Justice, which thou Prince must give:
Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.
Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio,
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe.
Not Romeo Prince, he was Mercutios Friend,
His fault concludes, but what the law should end,
The life of Tybalt.
And for that offence,
Immediately we doe exile him hence:
I have an interest in your hearts proceeding:
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a bleeding.
But Isle Amerce you with so strong a fine,
That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
It will be deaf to pleading and excuses,
Nor tears, nor prayers shall purchase our abuses.
Therefore use none, let Romeo hence in hast,
Else when he is found, that hour is his last.
Bear hence this body, and attend our will:
Mercy not Murders, pardoning those that kill.
Gallop apace, you fiery footed fleedes,
Towards Phoebus lodging, such a Wagoner
As Phaeton would whip you to the west,
And bring in Cloudy night immediately.
Spread thy close Curtain Loue-performing night,
That run-awayes eyes may wink and Romeo
Leap to these arms, vntalkt of and unseen,
Lovers can see to doe their Amorous rights,
And by their own Beauties: or if Love be blind,
It best agrees with night: come civil night,
Thou sober suited Matron all in black,
And learn me how to loose a winning match,
Plaid for a pair of stainless Maidenhoods,
Hood my unmanned blood baiting in my Cheeks,
With thy Black mantle, till strange Love grow bold,
Think true Love acted simple modesty:
Come night, come Romeo, come thou day in night,
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
Whiter then new Snow upon a Ravens back:
Come gentle night, come loving blackebrow'd night.
Give me my Romeo, and when I shall die,
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
And he will make the Face of heaven so fine,
That all the world will be in Love with night,
And pay no worship to the Garish Sun.
O I have bought the Mansion of a Love,
But not possessed it, and though I am sold,
Not yet enjoyed, so tedious is this day,
As is the night before some Festival,
To an impatient child that hath new robes
And may not wear them, O here comes my Nurse:
And she brings news and every tongue that speaks
But Romeos, name, speaks heavenly eloquence:
Now Nurse, what news? what hast thou there?
The Cords that Romeo bid thee fetch?
I, I, the Cords.
Ay me, what news?
Why dost thou wring thy hands.
A welady, hoe's dead, hoe's dead,
We are undone Lady, we are undone.
Alack the day, hoe's gone, hoe's killed, he's dead.
Can heaven be so envious?
Romeo can,
Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo.
Who ever would have thought it Romeo.
What devil art thou,
That dost torment me thus?
This torture should be roared in dismal hell,
Hath Romeo slain himself? say thou but I,
And that bare vowel I shall poison more
Then the death-darting eye of Cockatrice,
I am not I, if there be such an I.
Or those eyes shot, that makes thee answer I:
If he be slain say I, or if not, no.
Brief, sounds, determine of my weal or wo.
I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,
God save the mark, here on his manly breast,
A piteous Coarse, a bloody piteous Coarse:
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaubed in blood,
All in gore blood, I sounded at the sight
O break my heart,
Poor Banckrout break at once,
To prison eyes, ne'er look on liberty.
Vile earth to earth resign, end motion here,
And thou and Romeo press on heavy beer.
O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best Friend I had:
O courteous Tybalt honest Gentleman,
That ever I should live to see thee dead.
What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Is Romeo slaughtered? and is Tybalt dead?
My dearest Cozen, and my dearer Lord:
Then dreadful Trumpet sound the general doom,
For who is living, if those two are gone:
Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished,
Romeo that killed him, he is banished.
O God!
Did Rom'os hand shed Tybalts blood
It did, it did, alas the day, it did.
O Serpent heart, hid with a flowering face.
Did ever Dragon keep so fair a Cave?
Beautiful Tyrant, fiend Angelical:
Ravenous Doue-feather'd Raven,
Woluish-rauening Lamb,
Despised substance of Divinest show:
Just opposite to what thou justly seem,
A damn Saint, an Honourable Villain:
O Nature! what had thou to doe in hell,
When thou did bower the spirit of a fiend
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
Was ever book containing such vile matter
So fairly bound? O that deceit should dwell
In such a gorgeous Palace.
There's no trust, no faith, no honesty in men,
All periu'rd, all forsworn, all nought, all dissemblers,
Ah whore's my man? give me some Aqua-vitae?
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old:
Shame come to Romeo.
Blistered be thy tongue
For such a wish, he was not borne to shame:
Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit;
For it is a throne where Honour may be Grown'd
Sole Monarch of the universal earth:
O what a beast was I to chide him?
Will you speak well of him,
That killed your Cozen?
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Ah poor my Lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name,
When I thy three hours wife have mangled it.
But wherefore Villain did thou kill my Cozin?
That Villain Cozin would have killed my husband:
Back foolish tears, back to your native spring,
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Which you mistaking offer up to joy:
My husband lives that Tibalt would have slain,
And Tibalt dead that would have slain my husband:
All this is comfort, wherefore weep I then?
Some words there was worser then Tybalts death
That murdered me, I would forget it feine,
But oh, it presses to my memory,
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners minds,
Tybalt is dead and Romeo banished:
That banished, that one word banished,
Hath slain ten thousand Tibalts: Tibalts death
Was woe enough if it had ended there:
Or if sower woe delights in fellowship,
And neatly will be ranked with other griefs,
Why followed not when she said Tibalts dead,
Thy Father or thy Mother, nay or both,
Which modern lamentation might have moved.
But which a rere-ward following Tybalts death
Romeo is banished to speak that word,
Is Father, Mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Iuliet,
All slain, all dead: Romeo is banished,
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
In that words death, no words can that woe sound.
Where is my Father and my Mother Nurse?
Weeping and wailing over Tybalts Coarse,
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
Wash they his wounds with tears: mine shall be spent
When theirs are dry for Romeo's banishment.
Take up those Cords, poor ropes you are beguiled,
Both you and I for Romeo is exiled:
He made you for a high-way to my bed,
But I a Maid, die Maiden widowed.
Come Cord, come Nurse, Isle to my wedding bed,
And death not Romeo, take my Maiden head.
Hie to your Chamber, Isle find Romeo
To comfort you, I wot well where he is:
Hark ye your Romeo will be here at night,
Isle to him, he is hid at Lawrence Cell.
O find him, give this Ring to my true Knight,
And bid him come, to take his last farewell.
Romeo come forth,
Come forth thou fearful man,
Affliction is enamoured of thy parts:
And thou art wedded to calamity.
Father what news?
What is the Princes Doom?
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand,
That I yet know not?
Too familiar
Is my dear Son with such sour Company:
I bring thee tidings of the Princes Doom.
What less then Doomsday,
Is the Princes Doom?
A gentler judgment vanished from his lips,
Not bodies death, but bodies banishment.
Ha, banishment? be merciful, say death:
For exile hath more terror in his look,
Much more then death: do not say banishment.
Here from Verona art thou banished:
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
There is no world without Ʋerona walls,
But Purgatory, Torture, hell it self:
Hence banished, is banished from the world,
And worlds exile is death. Then banished,
Is death, mistearm'd, calling death banished,
Thou cut my head off with a golden Axe,
And smile upon the stroke that murders me.
O deadly sin, O rude vnthankefulnesse!
Thy fault our Law calls death, but the kind Prince
Taking thy part, hath rushed aside the Law,
And turned that black word death, to banishment.
This is dear mercy, and thou see it not.
It is Torture and not mercy, heaven is here
Where Iuliet lives, and every Cat and Dog,
And little Mouse, every unworthy thing
Live here in Heaven and may look on her,
But Romeo may not. More Validity,
More Honourable state, more Courtship lives
In carrion Flies, then Romeo: they may seize
On the white wonder of dear Iuliets hand.
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Who even in pure and vestal modesty
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin.
This may Flies doe, when I from this must fly,
And say thou yet, that exile is not death?
But Romeo may not, hee is banished.
Had thou no poison mixed, no sharpe ground knife,
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
But banished to kill me? Banished?
O Friar, the damned use that word in hell:
Howlings attends it, how hast thou the hart
Being a Divine, a Ghostly Confessor,
A sin-absolver, and my Friend professed:
To mangle me with that word, banished?
Then fond Mad man, hear me speak.
O thou wilt speak again of banishment.
Isle give thee Armour to keep off that word,
Adversities sweet milk, Philosophy,
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.
Yet banished? hang up Philosophy:
Unless Philosohpie can make a Iuliet,
Displant a Town, reverse a Princes Doom,
It helps not, it prevails not, talk no more.
O then I see, that Mad men have no ears.
How should they,
When wisemen have no eyes?
Let me despair with thee of thy estate,
Thou can not speak of that you dost not feel,
Were thou as young as Iuliet my Love:
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
Doting like me, and like me banished,
Then might thou speak,
Then might thou tear thy hair,
And fall upon the ground as I doe now,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
Arise one knocks,
Good Romeo hide thy self.
Not I,
Unless the breath of Hartsicke groans
Mist-like enfold me from the search of eyes.
Hark how they knock:
(Who's there) Romeo arise,
Thou wilt be taken, stay a while, stand up:
Run to my study: by and by, Gods will
What simpleness is this: I come, I come.
Who knocks so hard?
Whence come you? what's your will?
Let me come in,
And you shall know my errand:
I come from Lady Iuliet.
Welcome then.
O holy Friar, O tell me holy Friar,
Whore's my Ladies Lord? whore's Romeo?
There on the ground,
With his own tears made drunk.
O he is even in my Mistress case,
Just in her case. O woeful sympathy:
Piteous predicament, even so lies she,
Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering,
Stand up, stand up, stand and you be a man,
For Iuliets sake, for her sake rise and stand:
Why should you fall into so deep an O.
Nurse.
Ah sir, ah sir, deaths the end of all.
Speak thou of Iuliet? how is it with her?
Doth not she think me an old Murderer,
Now I have stained the Childhood of our joy,
With blood removed, but little from her own?
Where is she? and how doth she? and what says
My concealed Lady to our concealed Love?
Oh she says nothing sir, but weeps and weeps,
And now false on her bed, and then starts up,
And Tybalt calls, and then on Romeo cries,
And then down falls again.
As if that name shot from the dead level of a Gun,
Did murder her, as that names cursed hand
Murdered her kinsman. Oh tell me Friar, tell me,
In what vile part of this Anatomy
Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack
The hateful Mansion.
Hold thy desperate hand:
Art thou a man? thy form cries out thou art:
Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote
The unreasonable Fury of a beast.
Unseemly woman, in a seeming man,
And ill beseeming beast in seeming both,
Thou hast amazed me. By my holy order,
I thought thy disposition better tempered.
Hast thou slain Tybalt? wilt thou slay thy self?
And slay thy Lady, that in thy life lies,
By doing damned hate upon thy self?
Why rail thou on thy birth? the heaven and earth?
Since birth, and heaven and earth, all three do meet
In thee at once, which thou at once would loose.
Fie, fie, thou sham'st thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
Which like a Usurer abound in all:
And uses none in that true use indeed,
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit:
Thy Noble shape, is but a form of wax,
Digressing from the Valour of a man,
Thy dear Love sworn but hollow perjury,
Killing that Love which thou hast vowed to cherish.
Thy wit, that Ornament, to shape and Love,
Misshapen in the conduct of them both:
Like powder in a skilless Soldiers flask,
Is set a fire by thine own ignorance,
And thou dismembered with thine own defence.
What, rouse thee man, thy Iuliet is alive,
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead.
There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
But thou slew Tybalt, there art thou happy.
The law that threatened death became thy Friend,
And turned it to exile, there art thou happy.
A pack or blessing light upon thy back,
Happiness Courts thee in her best array,
But like a mishapped and sullen wench,
Thou put up thy Fortune and thy Love:
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Go get thee to thy Love as was decreed,
Ascend her Chamber, hence and comfort her:
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
For then thou can not pass to Mantua,
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your Friends,
Beg pardon of thy Prince, and call thee back,
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
Then thou went forth in lamentation.
Go before Nurse, commend me to thy Lady,
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
Romeo is coming.
O Lord, I could have staid here all night,
To hear good counsel: oh what learning is!
My Lord Isle tell my Lady you will come.
Do so, and bid my Sweet prepare to chide.
Here sir, a Ring she bid me give you sir:
Hie you, make hast, for it grows very late.
How well my comfort is revived by this.
Go hence,
Goodnight, and here stands all your state:
Either be gone before the watch be set,
Or by the break of day disguised from hence,
Sojourn in Mantua, Isle find out your man,
And he shall signify from time to time,
Every good hap to you, that chances here:
Give me thy hand, it is late, farewell, goodnight.
But that a joy past joy, calls out on me,
It were a grief, so brief to part with thee:
Farewell.
Things have fallen ou• sir so unluckily,
That we have had no time to move our Daughter:
Look you, she Loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
And so did I. Well, we were borne to die.
It is very late, she'll not come down to night:
I promise you, but for your company,
I would have bin a bed an hour ago.
These times of wo, afford no times to woo:
Madam goodnight, commend me to your Daughter.
I will, and know her mind early to morrow,
To night, she is mewed up to her heaviness.
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Of my Childes love: I think she will be ruled
In all respects by me: nay more, I doubt it not.
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed,
Acquaint her here, of my Son Paris Love,
And bid her, mark you me, on Wendsday next,
But soft, what day is this?
Monday my Lord.
Monday, ha ha: well Wendsday is too soon,
A Thursday let it be: a Thursday tell her,
She shall be married to this Noble Earl:
Will you be ready? do you like this hast?
Weal keep no great ado, a Friend or two,
For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much:
Therefore weal have some half a dozen Friends,
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
My Lord,
I would that Thursday were to morrow.
Well, get you gone, a Thursday, be it then:
Go you to Iuliet ere you go to bed,
Prepare her wife, against this wedding day.
Farewell my Lord, light to my Chamber hoe,
Before me, it is so late, that we may call ir early by and by,
Goodnight.
Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day:
It was the Nightingale, and not the Lark,
That pier'st the fearful hollow of thine ear,
Nightly she sings on yond Pomegranate tree,
Believe me Love, it was the Nightingale.
It was the Lark the Herald of the Morn:
No Nightingale: look Love what envious streakes
Do lace the severing Clouds in yonder East:
Nights Candles are burnt out, and Iocond day
Stands tip to on the misty Mountains tops,
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
Yond light is not daylight, I know it I:
It is some Meteor that the Sun exhales,
To be to thee this night a Torch-bearer,
And light thee on thy way to Mantua.
Therefore stay yet, thou need not to be gone,
Let me be tan, let me be put to death,
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
Isle say you gray is not the mornings eye,
It is but the pale reflex of Cinthias brow.
Nor that is not Lark whose notes do beat
The vaulty heaven so high aboue our heads,
I have more care to stay, then will to go:
Come death and welcome, Iuliet wills it so.
How first my soul, lets talk, it is not day.
It is, it is, hie hence be gone away:
It is the Lark that sings so out of tune,
Straining harsh Discords, and unpleasing Sharpes.
Some say the Lark makes sweet Division;
This doth not so: for she divides vs.
Some say, the Lark and loathed Toad change eyes,
O now I would they had changed voices too:
Since arm from arm that voice doth vs affray,
Hunting thee hence, with Hunts-vp to the day,
O now be gone, more light and it light grows.
More light &amp; light, more dark &amp; dark our woes.
Madam.
Nurse.
Your Lady Mother is coming to your chamber,
The day is broke, be wary, look about.
Then window let day in, and let life out.
Farewell, farewell, one kiss and Isle descend.
Art thou gone so? Love, Lord, ay Husband, Friend,
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
For in a minute there are many days,
O by this count I shall be much in years,
Ere I again behold my Romeo.
Farewell:
I will omit no opportunity,
That may convey my greetings Love, to thee.
O think thou we shall ever meet again?
I doubt it not, and all these woes shall serve
For sweet discourses in our time to come.
O God! I have an ill Divining soul,
Me thinks I see thee now, thou art so lowe,
As one dead in the bottom of a Tomb,
Either my eye-sight fails, or thou look pale.
And trust me Love, in my eye so do you:
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu.
O Fortune, Fortune, all men call thee fickle,
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
That is renowned for faith? be fickle Fortune:
For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long,
But send him back.
Ho Daughter, are you up?
Who first that calls? Is it my Lady Mother.
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
What unaccustomed cause procures her hither?
Why how now Iuliet?
Madam I am not well.
Evermore weeping for your Cozins death?
What wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
And if thou coldest, thou coldest not make him live:
Therefore have done, some grief shows much of Love,
But much of grief, shows still some want of wit.
Yet let me weep, for such a feeling loss.
So shall you feel the loss, but not the Friend
Which you weep for.
Feeling so the loss,
I cannot choose but ever weep the Friend.
Well Girl, thou weep not so much for his death,
As that the Villain lives which slaughtered him.
What Villain, Madam?
That same Villain Romeo.
Villain and he, be many Miles asunder:
God pardon, I doe with all my heart:
And yet no man like he, doth grieve my heart.
That is because the Traitor lives.
I Madam from the reach of these my hands:
Would none but I might avenge my Cozins death.
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
Then weep no more, Isle send to one in Mantua,
Where that same banished Run-ag•te doth live,
Shall give him such an unaccustomed dram,
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company:
And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.
Indeed I never shall be satisfied
With Romeo, till I behold him. Dead
Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vexed:
Madam if you could find out but a man
To bear a poison, I would temper it;
That Romeo should upon receipt thereof,
Soon sleep in quiet. O how my heart abhors
To hear him named, and cannot come to him,
To wreak the Love I bore my Cozin,
Upon his body that hath slaughtered him.
Find thou the means, and Isle find such a man.
But now Isle tell thee joyful tidings Girl.
And joy comes well, in such a needy time,
What are they, beseech your Ladyship?
Well, well, thou hast a careful Father Child?
One who to put thee from thy heaviness,
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy,
That thou expects not, nor I looked not for.
Madam in happy time, what day is this?
Marry my Child, early next Thursday morn,
The gallant, young, and Noble Gentleman,
The County Paris at Saint Peters Church,
Shall happily make thee a joyful Bride.
Now by Saint Peters Church, and Peter too,
He shall not make me there a joyful Bride.
I wonder at this hast, that I must wed
Ere he that should be Husband comes to woe:
I pray you tell my Lord and Father Madam,
I will not marry yet, and when I doe, I swear
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate
Rather then Paris. These are news indeed.
Here comes your Father, tell him so your self,
And see how he will take it at your hands.
When the Sun sets, the earth doth drizzle dew
But for the Sunset of my Brothers Son,
It rains downright.
How now? A Conduit Girl, what still in tears?
Evermore showering in one little body?
Thou counterfeits a Bark, a Sea, a Wind:
For still thy eyes, which I may call the Sea,
Do ebb and flow with tears, the Bark thy body is
Sailing in this fault flood, the winds thy sighs,
Who raging with the tears and they with them,
Without a sudden calm will over set
Thy tempest tossed body. How now wife?
Have you delivered to her our decree?
I sir:
But she will none, she gives you thanks,
I would the fool were married to her grave.
Soft, take me with you, take me with you wife,
How, will she none? doth she not give vs thanks?
Is she not proud? doth she not count her blessed,
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
So worthy a Gentleman, to be her Bridegroom
Not proud you have,
But thankful that you have:
Proud can I never be of what I have,
But thankful even for hate, that is meant Love.
How now?
How now? Chopped Logic? what is this?
Proud, and I thank you: and I thank you not.
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prods,
But fettle your fine joints against Thursday next,
To go with Paris to Saint Peters Church:
Or I will drag thee, on a Hurdle thither.
Out you greene sickness carrion, out you baggage,
You tallow face.
Fie, fie, what are you mad?
Good Father, I beseech you on my knees
Hear me with patience, but to speak a word.
Hang thee young baggage, disobedient wretch,
I tell thee what, get thee to Church a Thursday,
Or never after look me in the face.
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me.
My fingers itch, wife: we scarce thought vs blessed,
That God had lent vs but this only Child,
But now I see this one is one too much,
And that we have a curse in having her:
Out on her Hilding.
God in heaven bless her,
You are too blame my Lord to rate her so.
And why my Lady wisdom? hold your tongue,
Good Prudence, smatter with your gossip, go.
I speak no treason,
Father, O Godigoden,
May not one speak?
Peace you mumbling fool,
Utter your gravity ore a Gossips bowls
For here we need it not.
You are too hot.
Gods bread, it makes me mad:
Day, night, hour, ride, time, work, play,
Alone in company, still my care hath bin
To have her matched, and having now provided
A Gentleman of Noble Parentage,
Of fair Demeans, Youthful, and Nobly Allied,
Stuffed as they say with Honourable parts,
Proportioned as ones thought would wish a man,
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
A whining mammet, in her Fortunes tender,
To answer, Isle no• wed, I cannot Love:
I am too young, I pray you pardon me.
But, and you will not wed, Isle pardon you.
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me:
Look too't, think on it, I do not use to jest.
Thursday is near, lay hand on heart, advise,
And you be mine, Isle give you to my Friend:
And you be not, hang, beg, strove, die in the streets,
For by my soul, Isle ne'er acknowledge thee,
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good:
Trust too't, bethink you, Isle not be forsworn
Is there no pity sitting in the Clouds,
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
O sweet my Mother cast me not away,
Delay this marriage, for a month, a week,
Or if you do not, make the Bridal bed
In that dim• Monument where Tybalt lies.
Talk not to me, for Isle not speak a word,
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.
O God!
O Nurse, how shall this be prevented?
My Husband is on earth, my faith in heaven,
How shall that faith return again to earth,
Unless that Husband send it me from heaven,
By leaving earth? Comfort me, counsel me:
Hlacke, alack▪ that heaven should practise stratagems
Upon so soft a subject as my self.
What say thou? hast thou not a word of joy?
Some comfort Nurse.
Faith here it is,
Romeo is banished, and all the world to nothing,
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you:
Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Then since the case so stands as now it doth,
I think it best you married with the County,
O hoe's a Lovely Gentleman:
Romeos a dish-clout to him: an Eagle Madam
Hath not so greene, so quick, so fair an eye
As Paris hath, beshrow my very heart,
I think you are happy in this second match,
For it excels your first: or if it did not,
Your first is dead, or it were as good he were,
As living here and you no use of him.
Speak thou from thy heart?
And from my soul too,
Or else beshrew them both.
Amen.
What?
Well, thou hast comforted me marue'lous much,
Go in, and tell my Lady I am gone,
Having displeased my Father, to Lawrence Cell,
To make confession, and to be absolved.
Marry I will, and this is wisely done.
Ancient damnation, O most wicked fiend!
It is more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Or to dispraise my Lord with that same tongue
Which she hath praised him with aboue compare,
So many thousand times? Go Counsellor,
Thou and my bosom henchforth shall be twain:
Isle to the Friar to know his remedy,
If all else fail, my self have power to die.
On Thursday sir? the time is very short.
My Father Capulet will have it so,
And I am nothing slow to slack his hast.
You say you do not know the Ladies mind?
Uneven is the course, I like it not.
Immoderately she weeps for Tybalis death,
And therefore have I little talk of Love,
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Now sir, her Father counts it dangerous
That she doth give her sorrow so much sway:
And in his wisdom, hastes our marriage,
To stop the inundation of her tears,
Which too much minded by her self alone,
May be put from her by society.
Now doe you know the reason of this hast?
I would I knew not why it should be slowed.
Look sir, here comes the Lady towards my Cell.
Happily met, my Lady and my wife.
That may be sir, when I may be a wife.
That may be, must be Love, on Thursday next.
What must be shall be.
That's a certain text.
Come you to make confession to this Father?
To answer that, I should confess to you.
Do not deny to him, that you Love me.
I will confess to you that I Love him.
So will ye, I am sure that you Love me.
If I do so, it will be of more price,
Benig spoke behind your back, then to your face.
Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.
The tears have got small victory by that:
For it was bad enough before their spite.
Thou wrong'st it more then tears with that report.
That is no slander sir, which is a truth,
And what I spake, I spake it to thy face.
Thy face is mine, and thou hast slandered it.
It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Are you at leisure, Holy Father now,
Or shall I come to you at evening Mass?
My leisure serves me pensive daughter now.
My Lord you must entreat the time alone.
Godsheild: I should disturb Devotion,
Iuliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye,
Till then adieu, and keep this holy kiss.
O shut the door, and when thou hast done so,
Come weep with me, past hope, past care, past help.
O Iuliet, I already know thy grief,
It streams me past the compass of my wits:
I hear thou must and nothing may prorogue it,
On Thursday next be married to this County.
Tell me not Friar that thou hear of this,
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it:
If in thy wisdom, thou can give no help,
Do thou but call my resolution wise,
And with' his knife, Isle help it presently.
God joined my heart, and Romeos, thou our hands,
And ere this hand by thee to Romeo sealed:
Shall be the Labell to another Deed,
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt,
Turn to another, this shall slay them both:
Therefore out of thy long expetien'st time,
Give me some present counsel, or behold
Twixt my extremes and me, this bloody knife
Shall play the vmpeere, arbitrating that,
Which the commission of thy years and art,
Could to no issue of true honour bring:
Be not so long to speak, I long to die,
If what thou speak, speak not of remedy.
Hold Daughter, I doe spy a kind of hope,
Which craves as desperate an execution,
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
If rather then to marry County Paris
Thou hast the strength of will to stay thy self,
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
A thinglike death to chide away this shame,
That cope with death himself, to scope fro it:
And if thou dare, Isle give thee remedy.
Oh bid me leap, rather then marry Paris,
From of the Battlements of any Tower,
Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
Where Serpents are: chain me with roaring Bears
Or hide me nightly in a Charnel house,
Orecouered quite with dead men's rattling bones,
With reckie shanks and yellow chapels sculls:
Or bid me go into a new made grave,
And hide me with a dead man in his grave,
Things that to hear them told, have made me tremble,
And I will doe it without fear or doubt,
To live an unstained wife to my sweet Love.
Hold then: go home, be merry▪ give consent,
To marry Paris: wensday is to morrow,
To morrow night look that thou lie alone,
Let not thy Nurse lie with thee in thy Chamber:
Take thou this Viol being then in bed,
And this distilling liquor drink thou off,
When presently through all thy veins shall run,
A cold and drowsy humour: for no pulse
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease:
No warmth, no breath shall testify thou lives,
The Roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
To many ashes, the eyes windows fall
Like death when he shut up the day of life:
Each part deprived of supple government,
Shall stiff and stark, and cold appear like death,
And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death
Thou shalt continue two and forty hours,
And then awake, as from a pleasant sleep.
Now when the Bridegroom in the morning comes,
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead:
Then as the manner of our country is,
In thy best Robes uncovered on the Beer,
Be borne to burial in thy kindreds grave:
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault,
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie,
In the mean time against thou shalt awake,
Shall Romeo by my Letters know our drift,
And hither shall he come, and that very night
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
And this shall free thee from this present shame,
If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear,
Abate thy valour in the acting it.
Give me, give me, O tell not me ofcare.
Hold get you gone, be strong and prosperous:
In this resolve, Isle send a Friar with speed
To Mantua with my Letters to thy Lord.
Love give me strength,
And strength shall help afford:
Farewell dear father.
So many guests inuit as here are writ,
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning Cooks.
You shall have none ill sir, for Isle try if they can like their fingers.
How can thou try them so?
Marry sir, it is an ill Cooke that cannot like his own fingers: therefore he that cannot like his fingers goes not with me.
Go be gone, we shall be much vnfurnisht for this time: what is my Daughter gone to Friar Lawrence?
I forsooth.
Well he may chance to do some good on her,
A peevish selfe-wild harlotry it is.
See where she comes from shrift
With merry look.
How now my headstrong,
Where have you bin gadding?
Where I have learnt me to repent the sin
Of disobedient opposition:
To you and your behests, and am enjoined
By holy Lawrence, to fall prostrate here,
To beg your pardon: pardon I beseech you,
Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.
Send for the County, go tell him of this,
Isle have this knot knit up to morrow morning.
I met the youthful Lord at Lawrence Cell,
And gave him what besomed Love I might,
Not stepping ore the bounds of modesty.
Why I am glad on it, this is well, stand up,
This is is it should be, let me see the County:
I marry go I say, and fetch him hither.
Now before God, this reueren'd holy Friar,
All our whole City is much bound to him.
Nurse will you go with me into my Closet,
To help me sort such needful ornaments,
As you think fit to furnish me to morrow?
No not till Thursday, there's time enough.
Go Nurse, go with her,
Weal to Church to morrow.
We shall be short in our provision,
It is now near night.
Tush, I will stir about,
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee wife:
Go thou to Iuliet, help to deckevp her,
Isle not to bed to night, let me alone:
Isle play the huswife for this once. What ho?
They are all forth, well I will walk my self
To County Paris, to prepare him up
Against to morrow, my heart is wondrous light,
Since this same way-ward Girl is so reclaimed.
I those attires are best, but gentle Nurse
I pray thee leave me to my self to night:
For I have need of many Orisons,
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Which well thou know, is cross and full of sin.
What are you busy ho? need you my help?
No Madam, we have cul'd such necessaries
As are behooveful for our state to morrow:
So please you, let me now be left alone;
And let the Nurse this night sit up with you,
For I am sure, you have your hands full all,
In this so sudden business.
Goodnight.
Get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need.
Farewell:
God knows when we shall meet again.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins,
That almost freezes up the heate of fire:
Isle call them back again to comfort me.
Nurse, what should she do here?
My dismal Scene, I needs must act alone:
Come Vial, what if this mixture do not work at all?
Shall I be married then to morrow morning?
No, no, this shall forbid it. Lie thou there,
What if it be a poison which the Friar
Subtly hath ministered to have me dead,
Least in this marriage he should be dishonoured,
Because he married me before to Romeo?
I fear it is, and yet me thinks it should not,
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
How, if when I am laid into the Tomb,
I wake before the time that Romeo
Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point:
Shall I not then be stifled in the Vault?
To whose foul mouth no health some ayre breaths in,
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes.
Or if I live, is it not very like,
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Together with the terror of the place,
As in a Vault, an ancient receptacle,
Where for these many hundred years the bones
Of all my buried Ancestors are packed,
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but greene in earth,
Lies festring in his shrow'd, where as they say,
At some hours in the night, Spirits resort:
Alack, alack, is it not like that I
So early waking, what with loathsome smells,
And shrikes like Mandrakes torn out of the earth,
That living mortals hearing them, run mad.
O if I walk, shall I not be distraught,
Environed with all these hideous fears,
And madly play with my forefathers joints?
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shrow'd?
And in this rage, with some great kinsmans bone,
As (with a club) dash out my desperate brains.
O look, me thinks I see my Cozins Ghost,
Seeking out Romeo that did spit his body
Upon my Rapiers point: stay Tybalt, stay;
Romeo, Romeo, Romeo, here's drink: I drink to thee.
Hold,
Take these keys, and fetch more spices Nurse.
They call for Dates and Quinces in the Pastry.
Come, stir, stir, stir,
The second Cock hath Crowed,
The Curfew Bell hath rung, it is three a clock:
Look to the baked meates, good Angelica,
Spare not for cost.
Go you Cot-queane, go,
Get you to bed, faith you'll be sick to morrow
For this nights watching.
No not a whit: what? I have watched ere now
All night for less cause, and ne'er been sick.
I you have bin a Mouse-hunt in your time,
But I will watch you from such watching now.
A jealous hood, a jealous hood,
Now fellow, what there?
Things for the Cooke sir, but I know not what.
Make hast, make hast, sirrah, fetch drier Logs.
Call Peter, he will show thee where they are.
I have a head sir, that will find out logs,
And never trouble Peter for the matter.
Mass and well said, a merry whoreson, ha,
Thou shalt be loggerhead; good Father, it is day.
The County will be here with Music straight,
For so he said he would, I hear him near,
Nurse, wife, what ho? what Nurse I say?
Go waken Iuliet, go and trim her up,
Isle go and chat with Paris: hie, make hast,
Make hast, the Bridegroom, he is come already:
Make hast I say.
Mistress, what Mistress? Iuliet? Fast I warrant her she.
Why Lamb, why Lady? fie you sluggabed,
Why Love I say? Madam, sweet heart: why Bride?
What not a word? You take your pennyworths now.
Sleep for a week, for the next night I warrant
The County Paris hath set up his rest,
That you shall rest but little, God forgive me:
Marry and Amen: how sound is she a sleep?
I must needs wake her: Madam, Madam, Madam,
I, let the County take you in your bed,
Heel fright you up in faith. Will it not be?
What dressed, and in your clothes, and down again?
I must needs wake you: Lady, Lady, Lady?
Alas, alas, help, help, my Ladies dead,
Oh weladay, that ever I was borne,
Some Aqua-vitae ho, my Lord, my Lady?
What noise is here?
O lamentable day.
What is the matter?
Look, look, oh heavy day.
O me, O me, my Child, my only life:
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee:
Help, help, call help.
For shame bring Iuliet forth, her Lord is come.
Shoe's dead: deceased, shoe's dead: alack the day.
Alack the day, shoe's dead, shoe's dead, shoe's dead.
Ha? Let me see her: out alas shoe's cold,
Her blood is settled and her joints are stiff:
Life and these lips have long been sep orated:
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
O Lamentable day!
O woeful time.
Death that hath tan her hence to make me wail,
Ties up my tongue, and will not let me speak.
Come, is the Bride ready to go to Church?
Ready to go, but never to return.
O Son, the night before thy wedding day,
Hath death lain with thy wife: there she lies,
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Death is my Son in-law, death is my Heir,
My Daughter he hath wedded, I will die,
And leave him all life living, all is deaths.
Have I thought long to see this mornings face,
And doth it give me such a sight as this?
Accurse, unhappy, wretched hateful day,
Most miserable hour, that ere time saw
In lasting labour of his Pilgrimage.
But one poor one, one poor and loving Child,
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
And cruel death hath caught it from my sight.
O wo, O woeful, woeful, woeful day,
Most lamentable day, most woeful day,
That ever, ever, I did yet behold.
O day, O day, O day, O hateful day,
Never was seen so black a day as this:
O woeful day, O woeful day.
Beguiled, divorced, wronged, spited, slain,
Most detestable death by thee beguiled,
By cruel, cruel thee, quite overthrown:
O love▪ O life; not life, but love in death.
Despised, distressed, hated, martyred, killed,
Uncomfortable time, why came thou now
To murder, murder, our solemnity?
O Child, O Child; my soul, and not my Child,
Dead art thou, alack my Child is dead,
And with my Child, my joys are buried.
Peace ho for shame, confusions: Care lives not
In these confusions, heaven and your self
Had part in this fair Maid, now heaven hath all,
And all the better is it for the Maid:
Your part in her, you could not keep from death,
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life:
The most you sought was her promotion,
For it was your heaven, she should be aduan'st,
And weep ye now, seeing she is aduan'st,
Aboue the Clouds, as high as Heaven it self?
O in this love, you love your Child so ill,
That you run mad, seeing that she is well:
Shoe's not well married, that lives married long,
But shoe's best married, that dies married young.
Dry up your tears, and stick your Rosemary
On this fair Coarse, and as the custom is,
And in her best array bear her to Church:
For though some Nature bids all vs lament,
Yet Natures tears are Reasons merriment.
All things that we ordained Festival,
Turn from their office to black Funeral:
Our instruments to melancholy Bells,
Our wedding cheer, to a sad burial Feast:
Our solemn Hymns, to sullen Dirges change:
Our Bridal flowers serve for a buried Coarse:
And all things change them to the contrary.
Sir go you in; and Madam, go with him,
And go sir Paris, every one prepare
To follow this fair Coarse unto her grave:
The heavens do lower upon you, for some ill:
Move them no more, by crossing their high will.
Faith we may put up our Pipes and be gone.
Honest good fellows▪ Ah put up, put up,
For well you know, this is a pitiful case.
I by my troth, the case may be amended.
Musicians, oh Musicians,
Hearts ease, hearts ease,
O, and you will have me live, play hearts ease.
Why hearts ease;
O Musicians,
Because my heart it self plays, my heart is full.
Not a dump we, it is no time to play now.
You will not then?
No.
I will then give it you soundly.
What will you give vs?
No money on my faith, but the gleek.
I will give you the Minstrel.
Then will I give you the Serving creature.
Then will I lay the serving Creatures Dagger on your pate. I will carry no Crochets, Isle Re you, Isle Fa you, do you note me?
And you Re vs, and Fa vs, you Note vs.
Pray you put up your Dagger,
And put out your wit.
Then have at you with my wit.
I will drie-beate you with an iron wit,
And put up my iron Dagger.
Answer me like men:
When griping, griefs the heart doth wound, then Mu∣sick with her silver sound.
Why silver sound? why Music with her silver sound? what say you Simon Catling?
Mary sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
Prate, what say you Hugh Rebicke?
I say silver sound, because Musicians sound for sell∣for
Prate to, what say you Iames Sound-Post?
Faith I know not what to say.
O I cry you mercy, you are the Singer.
I will say for you; it is Music with her silver sound,
Because Musicians have no gold for sounding:
Then Music with her silver sound, with speedy help doth lend redress.
What a pestilent knave is this same?
Hang him Jack, come weal in here, tarry for the Mourners, and stay dinner.
If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep,
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand:
My bosoms L•sits lightly in his throne:
And all thisan day an vccustom'd spirit,
Lifts me aboue the ground with cheerful thoughts.
I dreamt my Lady came and found me dead,
(Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think,)
And breathed such life with kisses in my lips,
That I revived and was an Emperor.
Ah me, how sweet is love it self possessed,
When but loves shadows are so rich in joy.
News from Ʋerona, how now Balthazar?
Dost thou not bring me Letters from the Friar?
How doth my Lady? Is my Father well?
How doth my Lady Iuliet? that I ask again,
For nothing can be ill, if she be well.
Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.
Her body sleeps in Capels Monument,
And her immortal part with Angels live,
I saw her laid low in her kindreds Vault,
And presently took Post to tell it you:
O pardon me for bringing these ill news,
Since you did leave it for my office Sir.
Is it even so?
Then I deny you Star•.
Thou know my lodging, get me ink and paper,
And hire Post-Horses, I will hence to night.
I do beseech you sir, have patience:
Your looks are pale and wild, and do import
Some misadventure.
Tush, thou art deceived,
Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
Hast thou no Letters to me from the Friar?
No my good Lord.
Mo matter: Get thee gone,
And hire those Horses, Isle be with thee straight.
Well Iuliet, I will lie with thee to night:
Lets see for means: O mischief thou art swift,
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men:
I do remember an Apothecary,
And here abouts dwells, which late I noted
In tattred weeds, with overwhelming brows,
Culling of Simples, meager were hi• looks,
Sharpe misery had worn him to the bones:
And in his needy shop a Tortoyrs hung,
An Alligator stuffed, and other skins
Of ill shaped fishes, and about his shelves,
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Greene earthen pots, Bladders, and musty seeds,
Remnants of packthred, and old cakes of Roses
Were thinly scattered, to make up a show.
Noting this penury, to my self I said,
An if a man did need a poison now,
Whose sale is percent death in Mantua,
Here lives a Caitiff wretch would sell it him.
O this same thought did but fore-run my need,
And this same needy man must sell it me.
As I remember, this should be the house,
Being holy day, the beggars shop is shut.
What ho? Apothecary?
Who call's so loud?
Come hither man, I see that thou are poor,
Hold, there is forty Ducats, let me have
A dram of poison, such soon speeding gear,
As will disperse it self through all the veins,
That the life-wearie-taker may fall dead,
And that the Trunk may be discharged of breath,
As violently, as hasty powder fier'd
Doth hurry from the fatal Canons womb.
Such mortal drugs I have, but Mantuas law
Is death to any he, that utters them.
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
And fear to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,
Need and oppression starueth in thy eyes,
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back:
The world is not thy friend, not the worlds law:
The world affords no law to make thee rich.
Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.
My poverty, but not my will consents.
I pray thy poverty, and not thy will.
Put this in any liquid thing you will
And drink it off, and if you had the strength
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
There's thy Gold,
Worse poison to men's souls,
Doing more murder in this loathsome world,
Then these poor compounds that thou majesty not sell.
I sell thee poison, thou hast sold me none,
Farewell, buy food, and get thy self in flesh.
Come Cordial, and not poison, go with me
To Iuliets grave, for there must I use thee.
Holy Franciscan Friar, Brother, ho?
This same should be the voice of Friar Iohn.
Welcome from Mantua, what says Romeo?
Or if his mind be writ, give me his Letter.
Going to find a barefoot Brother out,
One of our order to associate me,
Here in this City visiting the sick,
And finding him, the Searchers of the Town
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Sealed up the doors, and would not let vs forth,
So that my speed to Mantua there was staid.
Who bare my Letter then to Romeo?
I could not send it, here it is again,
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
So fearful were they of infection.
Unhappy Fortune: by my Brotherhood
The Letter was not nice, but full of charge,
Of dear import, and the neglecting it
May do much danger: Friar Iohn go hence,
Get me an Iron Crow, and bring it straight
Unto my Cell.
Brother Isle go and bring it thee.
Now must I to the Monument alone,
Within this three hours will fair Iuliet wake,
She will be shrew me much that Romeo
Hath had no notice of these accidents:
But I will write again to Mantua,
And keep her at my Cell till Romeo come,
Poor living Coarse, closed in a dead mans Tomb,
Give me thy Torch Boy, hence and stand aloft,
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen:
Under yond young Trees lay thee all along,
Holding thy ear close to the hollow ground,
So shall no foot upon the Churchyard tread,
Being loose, vnfirme with digging up of Graves,
But thou shalt hear it: whistle then to me,
As signal that thou hear some thing approach,
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
I am almost afraid to stand alone
Here in the Churchyard, yet I will adventure.
Sweet Flower with flowers thy Bridal bed I strew:
O woe, thy Canopy is dust and stones,
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Or wanting that, with tears distilled by mons;
The obsequies that I for thee will keep,
Nightly shall be, to strew thy grave, and weep.
The Boy gives warning, something doth approach,
What cursed foot wanders this ways to night,
To cross my obsequies, and true loves right?
What with a Torch? Muffle me night a while.
Give me that Mattock, &amp; the wrenching Iron,
Hold take this Letter, early in the morning
See thou deliver it to my Lord and Father,
Give me the light; upon thy life I charge thee,
What ere thou hear or see, stand all aloof,
And do not interrupt me in my course.
Why I descend into this bed of death,
Is partly to behold my Ladies face:
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger,
A precious Ring: a Ring that I must use,
In dear employment, therefore hence be gone:
But if thou jealous dost return to pry
In what I further shall intend to do,
By heaven I will tear thee joint by joint,
And strew this hungry Churchyard with thy limbs:
The time, and my intents are savage wilde:
More fierce and more inexorable far,
Then empty Tigers, or the roaring Sea.
I will be gone sir, and not trouble you
So shalt thou show me friendship: take thou that,
Live and be prosperous, and farewell good fellow.
For all this fine, Isle hide me here about,
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.
Thou detestable maw▪ thou womb of death,
Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth:
Thus I enforce thy rotten Jaws to open,
And in despite, Isle cram thee with more food.
This is that banished haughty Mountague,
That murdered my Loves Cozin; with which grief,
It is supposed the fair Creature died,
And here is come to do some villainous shame
To the dead bodies: I will apprehend him.
Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Mountague:
Can vengeance be pursued further then death?
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.
Obey and go with me, for thou must die,
I must indeed, and therefore came I hither:
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man,
Fly hence and leave me, think upon those gone,
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee Youth,
Put not an other sin upon my head,
By urging me to fury. O be gone,
By heaven I love thee better then my self,
For I come hither armed against my self:
Stay not, be gone, live, and hereafter say,
A mad mans mercy bid thee run away.
I do defy thy commiseration,
And apprehend thee for a Felon here.
Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee Boy.
O Lord they fight, I will go call the Watch.
O I am slain, if thou be merciful,
Open the Tomb, lay me with Iuliet.
In faith I will, let me peruse this face:
Mercutius kinsman, Noble County Paris,
What said my man, when my betossed soul
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
He told me Paris should have married Iuliet.
Said he not so? Or did I dream it so?
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Iuliet,
To think it was so? O give me thy hand,
One, writ with me in sour misfortunes book.
Isle bury thee in a triumphant grave.
A Grave; O no, a Lantern; slaughtered Youth:
For here lies Iuliet, and her beauty makes
This Vault a feasting presence full of light.
Death lie thou there, by a dead man interred.
How oft when men are at the point of death,
Have they been merry? Which their Keepers call
A lightning before death? Oh how may I
Call this a lightning? O my Love, my Wife,
Death that hath sucked the honey of thy breath,
Hath had no power yet upon thy Beauty:
Thou are not conquered: Beauties ensign yet
Is Crimson in thy lips, and in thy cheeks,
And Deaths pale flag is not advanced there.
Tybalt, lie thou there in thy bloody sheet?
O what more favour can I do to thee,
Then with that hand that cut thy youth in twain,
To sunder his that was thy enemy?
Forgive me Cozen. Ah dear Iuliet:
Why art thou yet so fair? I will believe,
Shall I believe, that vnsubstantiall death is amorous?
And that the lean abhorred Monster keeps
Thee here in dark to be his Paramour?
For fear of that, I still will stay with thee,
And never from this Palace of dim night
Depart again: come lie thou in my arms,
Heere's to thy health, where ere thou tumblest in.
O true Apothecary!
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.
Depart again; here, here will I remain,
With Worms that are thy Chambermaids: O here
Will I set up my everlasting rest:
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
From this world wearied flesh: Eyes look your last:
Arms take your last embrace: And lips, O you
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
A dateless bargain to engrossing death:
Come bitter conduct, come unsavoury guide,
Thou desperate Pilot, now at once run on
The dashing Rocks, thy Sea-sicke weary Bark:
Heere's to my Love. O true Apothecary:
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.
St. Francis be my speed, how oft to night
Have my old feet stumbled at graves? Who's there?
Here's one, a Friend, &amp; one that knows you well.
Bliss be upon you. Tell me good my Friend
What Torch is yond that vainly lends his light
To grubs, and eyeless Sculle•? As I discern,
It burns in the Capels Monument.
It doth so holy sir,
And there's my Master, one that you love.
Who is it?
Romeo.
How long hath he bin there?
Full half an hour.
Go with me to the Vault.
I dare not Sir.
My Master knows not but I am gone hence,
And fearfully did menace me with death,
If I did stay to look on his intents.
Stay, then Isle go alone, fears comes upon me.
O much I fear some ill unlucky thing.
As I did sleep under this young tree here,
I dreamt my moister and another fought,
And that my Moister slew him.
Romeo.
Alack, alack, what blood is this which staines
The stony entrance of this Sepulchre?
What mean these Masterless, and gore Swords
To lie discoloured by this place of peace?
Romeo, oh pale: who else? what Paris too?
And steeped in blood? Ah what an vnknd hour
Is guilty of this lamentable chance?
The Lady stirs.
O comfortable Friar, whore's my Lord?
I do remember well where I should be:
And there I am, where is my Romeo?
I hear some noise Lady, come from that nest
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep,
A greater power then we can contradict
Hath thwarted our intents, come, come away,
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead:
And Paris too: come Isle dispose of thee,
Among a Sisterhood of holy Nuns:
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming.
Come, go good Iuliet, I dare no longer stay.
Go get thee hence, for I will notuaway,
What's here? A cup closed in my true lo•es hand?
Poison I see hath bin his timeless end
O churl, drink all? and lest no friendly drop,
To help me after, I will kiss thy lips,
Happily some poison yet doth hang on them,
To make me die with a restorative.
Thy lips are warm.
Lead Boy, which way?
Yea noise?
Then Isle be brief. O happy Dagger.
It is in thy sheath, there rust and let me die.
This is the place,
There where the Torch doth burn
The ground is bloody,
Search about the Churchyard.
Go some of you, who ere you find attach▪
Pitiful sight, here lies the County slain,
And July•t bleeding, warm and newly dead
Who here hath lain these two days buried.
Go tell the Prince, run to the Capulets,
Raise up the Mountagues, some others search,
We see the ground whereon these woes do lye,
But the true ground of all these piteous woes,
We cannot without circumstance descry.
Here's Romeo'r man,
We found him in the Churchyard.
Hold him in safety, till the Prince come hither.
Here is a Friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps
We took this Mattock and this Spade from him,
As he was coming from this Church-yard side.
A great suspicion, stay the Friar too.
What misadventure is so early up,
That calls our person from our mornings rest?
What should it be that they so shrike abroad?
O the people in the street cry Romeo.
Some Iuliet, and some Paris, and all run
With open outcry toward out Monument.
What fear is this which startles in your ears?
Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain,
And Romeo dead, and Iuliet dead before,
Warm and new killed.
Search,
Seek, and know how, this foul murder comes.
Here is a Friar, and Slaughtered Rome•s man,
With Instruments ypon them fit to open
These dead men's Tombs.
O heaven!
O wife look how our Daughter bleeds!
This Dagger hath mistaine, for lo his house
Is empty on the back of Mountague,
And is misheathed in my Daughters bosom.
O me, this sight of death, is as a Bell
That wa•nes my old age to a Sepulchre.
Come Mountague, for thou art early up
To see thy Son and Heir, now early down.
Alas my liege, my wife is dead to night,
Grief of my Sons exile hath stopped her breath:
What further woe conspires against my age?
Look: and thou shalt see.
O thou untaught, what manners in is this,
To press before thy Father to a grave?
Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
Till we can clear these ambiguities,
And know their spring, their head, their true descent,
And then will I be general of your woes,
And lead you even to death? mean time forbear,
And let mischance be slave to patience,
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
I am the greatest, able to doe least,
Yet most suspected as the time and place
Doth make against me of this direful murder:
And here I stand both to impeach and purge
My self condemned, and my self excused.
Then say at once, what thou dost know in this?
I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Romeo there dead, was husband to that Iuliet,
And she there dead, that's Romeos faithful wife:
I married them; and their stolen marriage day
Was Tybalts Doomsday: whose untimely death
Banished the new-made Bridegroom from this City:
For whom (and not for Tybalt) Iuliet pined.
You, to remove that siege of Grief from her,
Betrothed, and would have married her perforce
To County Paris. Then comes she to me,
And (with wilde looks) bid me devise some means
To rid her from this second Marriage,
Or in my Cell there would she kill her self.
Then gave I her (so Tutored by my Art)
A sleeping Potion, which so took effect
As I intended, for it wrought on her
The form of death. Mean time, I writ to Romeo,
That he should hither come, as this dire night,
To help to take her from her borrowed grave,
Being the time the Potions force should cease.
But he which bore my Letter, Friar Iohn,
Was stayed by accident; and yesternight
Returned my Letter back. Then all alone,
At the prefixed hour of her waking,
Came I to take her from her Kindreds vault,
Meaning to keep her closely at my Cell,
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
But when I came (some Minute ere the time
Of her awaking) here untimely lay
The Noble Paris, and true Romeo dead.
She wakes, and I entreated her come forth,
And bear this work of Heaven, with patience:
But then, a noise did scarre me from the Tomb,
And she (too desperate) would not go with me,
But (as it seems) did violence on her self.
All this I know, and to the Marriage her Nurse is privy:
And if ought in this miscarried by my fault,
Let my old life be sacrificed, some hour before the time,
Unto the rigour of severest Law.
We still have known thee for a Holy man.
Whore's Romeo's man? What can he say to this?
I brought my Master news of Iuliets death,
And then in post he came from Mantua
To this same place, to this same Monument.
This Letter he early bid me give his Father,
And threatened me with death, going in the Vault,
If I departed not, and left him there.
Give me the Letter, I will look on it.
Where is the Counties Page that raised the Watch?
Sir, what made your Master in this place?
He came with flowers to strew his Ladies grave,
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did:
Anon comes one with light to op the Tomb,
And by and by my Moister drew on him,
And then I ran away to call the Watch.
This Letter doth make good the Friars words,
Their course of Love, the tidings of her death:
And here he writes, that he did buy a poison
Of a poor Apothecary, and therewithal
Came to this Vault to dye, and lye with Iuliet.
Where be these Enemies? Capulet, Mountague,
See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
That Heaven finds means to kill your joys with Love;
And I, for winking at your discords too,
Have lost a brace of Kinsmen: All are punished.
O Brother Mountague, give me thy hand,
This is my Daughters jointure, for no more
Can I demand.
But I can give thee more:
For I will raise her Statue in pure Gold,
That whiles Ʋerona by that name is known,
There shall no figure at that Rate be set,
As that of True and Faithful Iuliet.
As rich shall Romeo by his Lady lie,
Poor sacrifices of our enmity.
A glooming peace this morning with it brings,
The Sun for sorrow will not show his head;
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things,
Some shall be pardoned, and some punished.
For never was a Story of more Wo,
Then this of Iuliet, and her Romeo.

WHen shall we three meet again?
In Thunder, Lightning, or in Rain?
When the Hurley-burley's done,
When the Battaile's lost, and won.
That will be ere the set of Sun.
Where the place?
Upon the Heath.
There to meet with Macbeth.
I come, Gray-Malkin.
Paddock calls anon: fair is foul, and foul is fair,
Hover through the fog and filthy ayre.
What bloody man is that? he can report,
As seems by his plight, of the Revolt
The newest state.
This is the Sergeant,
Who like a good and hardy Soldier fought
Against my Captivity: Hail brave friend;
Say to the King, the knowledge of the Broil,
As thou did leave it.
Doubtful it stood,
As two spent Swimmers, that doe cling together,
And choke their Art: The merciless Macdonwald
(Worthy to be a Rebel, for to that
The multiplying Villainies of Nature
Doe swarm upon him) from the Western Isles
Of Kernes and Gallowgrosses is supplied,
And Fortune on his damned Quarry smiling,
Showed like a Rebels Whore: but ell's too weak:
For brave Macbeth (well hee deserves that Name)
Disdaining Fortune, with his brandished Steel,
Which smoked with bloody execution
(Like Valours Minion) carved out his passage,
Till hee faced the Slave:
Which neu'r shook hands, nor bad farewell to him,
Till he vnseam'd him from the Naue to the Chops,
And fixed his Head upon our Battlements.
O valiant Cousin, worthy Gentlemen.
As whence the Sun gins his reflection,
Shipwrecking Storms, and direful Thunders:
So from that Spring, whence comfort seemed to come,
Discomfort swells: Mark King of Scotland, mark,
No sooner Justice had, with Valour armed,
Compelled these skipping Kernes to trust their heals,
But the Norweyan Lord, surveying vantage,
With furbusht Arms, and new supplies of men,
Began a fresh assault.
Dismayed not this our Captains, Macbeth and Banquo?
Yes, as Sparrows, Eagles;
Or the Hare, the Lyon:
If I say sooth, I must report they were
As Cannons overcharged with double Cracks,
So they doubly redoubled strokes upon the Foe:
Except they meant to bathe in reeking Wounds,
Or memorise another Golgotha,
I cannot tell: but I am faint,
My Gashes cry for help.
So well thy words become thee, as thy wounds,
They smack of Honour both: Go get him Surgeons.
Who comes here?
The worthy Thane of Rosse.
What a haste looks through his eyes?
So should he look, that seems to speak things strange.
God save the King.
Whence came thou, worthy Thane?
From Fit, great King,
Where the Norweyan Banners flowt the Sky,
And fan our people cold.
Norway himself, with terrible numbers,
Assisted by that most disloyal Traitor,
The Thane of Cawdor, began a dismal Conflict,
Till that Bellona's Bridegroom, lapped in proof,
Confronted him with selfe-comparisons,
Point against Point, rebellious Arm against Arm,
Curbing his lavish spirit: and to conclude,
The Victory fell on vs.
Great happiness.
That now Sweno, the Norwayes King,
Craves composition:
Nor would we deign him burial of his men,
Till he disbursed, at Saint Colmes inch,
Ten thousand Dollars, to our general use.
No more that Thane of Cawdor shall deceive
Our Bosom interest: Go pronounce his present death,
And with his former Title greet Macbeth.
Isle see it done.
What he hath lost, Noble Macbeth hath won.
Where hast thou been, Sister?
Killing Swine.
Sister, where thou?
A Sailors Wife had Chestnuts in her Lap,
And mouncht, &amp; mouncht, and mouncht:
Give me, quoth I.
Aroynt thee, Witch, the rumpe-fed Ronyon cries.
Her Husband's to Aleppo gone, Master of the Tiger:
But in a Sieve Isle thither sail,
And like a Rat without a tail,
Isle doe, Isle doe, and Isle doe.
Isle give thee a Wind.
The art kind.
And I another.
I my self have all the other,
And the very Ports they blow,
All the Quarters that they know,
In the Ship-mans Card.
Isle dreyne him dry as Hay:
Sleep shall neither Night nor Day
Hang upon his Pent-house Lid:
He shall live a man forbid:
Weary Seu'nights, nine times nine,
Shall he dwindle, peak, and pine:
Though his Bark cannot be lost,
Yet it shall be Tempest-tost???
Look what I have.
Show me, show me.
Here I have a Pilots Thumb,
Wrecked, as homeward he did come.
A Drum, a Drum:
Macbeth doth come.
The wayward Sisters, hand in hand,
Posters of the Sea and Land,
Thus doe go, about, about,
Thrice to thine, and thrice to mine,
And thrice again, to make up nine.
Peace, the Charme's wound up.
So foul and fair a day I have not seen.
How far is it called to Soris? What are these,
So withered, and so wilde in their attire,
That look not like the Inhabitants of the Earth,
And yet are on it? Live you, or are you aught
That man may question? you seem to understand me,
By each at once her choppie finger laying
Upon her skinny Lips: you should be Women,
And yet your Beards forbid me to interpret
That you are so.
Speak if you can: what are you?
All hail Macbeth, hail to thee Thane of Glamis.
All hail Macbeth, hail to thee Thane of Cawdor.
All hail Macbeth, that shalt be King hereafter.
Good Sir, why doe you start, and seem to fear
Things that doe sound so fair? in the name of truth
Are ye fantastical, or that indeed
Which outwardly ye show? My Noble Partner
You greet with present Grace, and great prediction
Of Noble having, and of Royal hope,
That he seems wrapped withal: to me you speak not.
If you can look into the Seeds of Time,
And say, which Grain will grow, and which will not,
Speak then to me, who neither beg, nor fear
Your favours, nor your hate.
Hail.
Hail.
Hail.
Lesser then Macbeth, and greater.
Not so happy, yet much happier.
Thou shalt get Kings, though thou be none:
So all hail Macbeth, and Banquo.
Banquo, and Macbeth, all hail.
Stay you imperfect Speakers, tell me more:
By Sinells death, I know I am Thane of Glamis,
But how, of Cawdor? the Thane of Cawdor lives
A prosperous Gentleman: And to be King,
Stands not within the prospect of belief,
No more then to be Cawdor. Say from whence
You owe this strange Intelligence, or why
Upon this blasted Heath you stop our way
With such Prophetic greeting?
Speak, I charge you.
The Earth hath bubbles, as the Water he's,
And these are of them: whither are they vanished?
Into the Ayre: and what seemed corporal,
Melted, as breath into the Wind.
Would they had stayed.
Were such things here, as we doe speak about?
Or have we eaten on the insane Root,
That takes the Reason Prisoner?
Your Children shall be Kings.
You shall be King.
And Thane of Cawdor too: went it not so?
To the selfsame tune??? and words: who's here?
The King hath happily received, Macbeth???
The news of thy success: and when he reads
Thy personal Venture in the Rebels fight,
His Wonders and his Praises doe contend,
Which should be thine, or his: silenced with that,
In viewing o'er the rest of the selfsame day,
He finds thee in the stout Norweyan Ranks???
Nothing afraid of what thy self did make
Strange Images of death, as thick as Tale
Can post with post, and every one did bear
Thy praises in his Kingdoms great defence,
And powered them down before him.
Wee are sent,
To give thee from our Royal Master thanks,
Only to harold thee into his sight,
Not pay thee???
And for an earnest of a greater Honour,
He bad me, from him, call thee Thane of Cawdor:
In which addition, hail most worthy Thane,
For it is thine.
What, can the Devil speak true?
The Thane of Cawdor lives:
Why doe you dress me in borrowed Robes?
Who was the Thane, lives yet,
But under heavy Judgment bears that Life,
Which he deserves to loose.
Whether he was combined with those of Norway,
Or did lyne the Rebel with hidden help,
And vantage; or that with both he laboured
In his Countries wrack, I know not:
But Treasons Capital, confessed, and proved,
Have overthrown him.
Glamys, and Thane of Cawdor:
The greatest is behind. Thanks for your pains.
Doe you not hope your Children shall be Kings,
When those that gave the Thane of Cawdor to me,
Promised no less to them.
That trusted home,
Might yet enkindle you unto the Crown,
Besides the Thane of Cawdor. But it is strange:
And oftentimes, to win vs to our harm,
The Instruments of Darkness tell vs Truths,
Win vs with honest Trifles, to betray's
In deepest consequence.
Cousins, a word, I pray you.
Two Truths are told,
As happy Prologues to the swelling Act
Of the Imperial Theme. I thank you Gentlemen:
This supernatural soliciting
Cannot be ill; cannot be good.
If ill? why hath it given me earnest of success,
Commencing in a Truth? I am Thane of Cawdor.
If good? why doe I yield to that suggestion,
Whose horrid Image doth vnfixe my Heir,
And make my seated Heart knock at my Ribs,
Against the use of Nature? Present Fears
Are less then horrible Imaginings:
My Thought, whose Murder yet is but fantastical,
Shakes so my single state of Man,
That Function is smothered in surmise,
And nothing is, but what is not.
Look how our Partner's rapt.
If Chance will have me King,
Why Chance may Crown me,
Without my stir.
Now Honours come upon him
Like our strange Garments, cleave not to their mould,
But with the aid of use.
Come what come may,
Time, and the Hour, runs through the roughest Day.
Worthy Macbeth, wee stay upon your ley???sure.
Give me your favour:
My dull Brain was wrought with things forgotten.
Kind Gentlemen, your pains are registered,
Where every day I turn the Lease,
To read them.
Let vs toward the King: think upon
What hath chanced: and at more time,
The Interim having weighed it??? let vs speak
Our free Hearts each to other.
Very gladly.
Till then enough:
Come friends.
Is execution done on Cawdor?
Or not those in Commission yet returned?
My Liege, they are not yet come back.
But I have spoke with one that saw him die:
Who did report, that very frankly hee
Confessed his Treasons, implored your Highness Pardon,
And set forth a deep Repentance:
Nothing in his Life became him,
Like the leaving it. Hee dyed,
As one that had been studied in his death,
To throw away the dearest thing he owed,
As it were a careless Trifle.
There's no Art,
To find the Minds construction in the Face:
He was a Gentleman, on whom I built
An absolute Trust.
O worthiest Cousin,
The sin of my Ingratitude even now
Was heavy on me. Thou art so far before,
That swiftest Wing of Recompense is slow,
To overtake thee. Would thou had less deserved,
That the proportion both of thanks, and payment,
Might have been mine: only I have left to say,
More is thy due, then more then all can pay.
The service, and the loyalty I owe,
In doing it, pays it self.
Your Highness part, is to receive our Duties:
And our Duties are to your Throne, and State,
Children, and Servants; which doe but what they should,
By doing every thing safe toward your Love
And Honour.
Welcome hither:
I have begun to plant thee, and will labour
To make thee full of growing. Noble Banquo,
That hast no less deserved, nor must be known
No less to have done so: Let me enfold thee,
And hold thee to my Heart.
There if I grow,
The Harvest is your own.
My plenteous Joys,
Wanton in fullness, seek to hide themselves
In drops of sorrow. Sons, Kinsmen, Thanes,
And you whose places are the nearest, know,
We will establish our Estate upon
Our eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter,
The Prince of Cumberland: which Honour must
Not unaccompanied, invest him only,
But signs of Nobleness, like Stars, shall shine
On all deservers??? From hence to Inverness,
And bind vs further to you.
The Rest is Labour, which is not used for you:
Isle be my self the Herbenger, and make joyful
The hearing of my Wife, with your approach:
So humbly take my leave.
My worthy Cawdor.
The Prince of Cumberland: that is a step,
On which I must fall down, or else o're-leape,
For in my way it lies. Stars hide your fires,
Let not Light see my black and deep desires:
The Eye wink at the Hand; yet let that bee,
Which the Eye fears, when it is done to see.
True, worthy Banquo: he is full so valiant,
And in his commendations, I am fed:
It is a Banquet to me. Let's after him,
Whose care is gone before, to bid vs welcome:
It is a peerless Kinsman.
They met me in the day of success: and I have learned by the perfect'st report, they have more in them, then mortal knowledge. When I burnt in desire to question them further??? they made themselves Ayre, into which they vanished. Whiles I stood rapt in the wonder of it, came Missiues from the King, who all-hail'd me Thane of Cawdor, by which Title before, these wayward Sisters saluted me, and referr???d me to the coming on of time, with hail King that shalt be. This have I thought good to deliver thee (my dearest Partner of Greatness) that thou might not loose the dues of rejoicing by being ignorant of what Greatness is promised thee. Lay it to thy heart, and farewell.
Glamys thou art, and Cawdor, and shalt be
What thou art promised: yet doe I fear thy Nature,
It is too full of the Milk of humane kindness,
To catch the nearest way. Thou would be great,
Art not without Ambition, but without
The illness should attend it. What thou would highly,
That would thou holily: would not play false,
And yet would wrongly win.
Thould'st have, great Glamys that which cries,
Thus thou must doe, if thou have it;
And that which rather thou dost fear to doe,
Then wish should be undone. High thee hither,
That I may power my Spirits in thine Ear,
And chastise with the valour of my Tongue
All that impeides thee from the Golden Round,
Which Fate and Metaphysical aid doth seem
To have thee crowned withal.
What is your tidings?
The King comes here to Night.
You're mad to say it.
Is not thy Master with him? who, were it so,
Would have informed for preparation.
So please you, it is true: our Thane is coming:
One of my fellows had the speed of him;
Who almost dead for breath, had scarcely more
Then would make up his Message.
Give him tending,
He brings great news.
The Raven himself is hoarse,
That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan
Under my Battlements. Come you Spirits,
That tend on mortal thoughts, vnsex me here,
And fill me from the Crown to the Toe, top-full
Of direst Cruelty: make thick my blood,
Stop up the access, and passage to Remorse,
That no compunctious visitings of Nature
Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between
The effect, and hit. Come to my Women's Breasts,
And take my Milk for Gall, you murth'ring Ministers,
Where-euer, in your sightless substances,
You wait on Natures Mischief. Come thick Night,
And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of Hell,
That my keen Knife see not the Wound it makes,
Nor Heaven peep through the Blanket of the dark,
To cry, hold, hold.
Great Glamys, worthy Cawdor,
Greater then both, by the all-ha???le hereafter,
Thy Letters have transported me beyond
This ignorant present, and I feel now
The future in the instant.
My dearest Love,
Duncan comes here to Night.
And when goes hence?
To morrow, as he purposes.
O never,
Shall Sun that Morrow see.
Your Face, my Thane, is as a Book, where men
May read strange matters, to beguile the time.
Look like the time, bear welcome in your Eye,
Your Hand, your Tongue: look like the innocent flower,
But be the Serpent vnder't. He that's coming,
Must be provided for: and you shall put
This Nights great Business into my dispatch,
Which shall to all our Nights, and Days to come,
Give solely sovereign sway, and Masterdom.
We will speak further.
Only look up clear:
To alter favour, ever is to fear:
Leave all the rest to me.
This Castle hath a pleasant seat,
The ayre nimbly and sweetly recommends it self
Unto our gentle senses.
This Guest of Summer,
The Temple-haunting Barlet does approve,
By his loved Mansonry, that the Heavens breath
Smells wooingly here: no Iutty frieze???
Buttrice, nor Coign of Vantage, but this Bird
Hath made his pendant Bed, and procreant Cradle,
Where they must breed, and haunt: I have observed
The ayre is delicate.
See, see, our honoured Hostess:
The Love that follows vs, sometime is our trouble,
Which still we thank as Love. Herein I teach you,
How you shall bid God-eyld vs for your pains,
And thank vs for your trouble.
All our service,
In every point twice done, and then done double,
Were poor, and single Business, to contend
Against those Honours deep, and broad,
Wherewith your Majesty loads our House:
For those of old, and the late Dignities,
Heaped up to them, we rest your Ermites.
Whore's the Thane of Cawdor?
We coursed him at the heals, and had a purpose
To be his Purveyor: But he rides well,
And his great Love (sharpe as his Spur) hath help him
To his home before vs: Fair and Noble Hostess
We are your guest to night.
Your Servants ever,
Have theirs, themselves, and what is theirs in count,
To make their Audit at your Highness pleasure,
Still to return your own.
Give me your hand:
Conduct me to mine Host we love him highly,
And shall continue, our Graces towards him.
By your leave Hostess.
If it were done, when it is done, then it were well,
It were done quickly: If the Assassination
Could trammel up the Consequence, and catch
With his surcease, Success: that but this blow
Might be the be all, and the end all. Here,
But here, upon this Bank and School of time,
Wee'ld jump the life to come. But in these Cases,
We still have judgment here, that we but teach
Bloody Instructions, which being taught, return
To plague the Inuenter, This euen-handed Justice
Commends the Ingredience of our poisoned Chalice
To our own lips. Hoe's here in double trust;
First, as I am his Kinsman, and his Subject,
Strong both against the Deed: Then, as his Host,
Who should against his Murderer shut the door,
Not bear the knife my self. Besides, this Duncan
Hath borne his Faculties so meek; hath bin
So clear in his great Office, that his Virtues
Will plead like Angels, Trumpet-tongu'd against
The deep damnation of his taking off:
And Pity, like a naked New-borne-Babe,
Striding the blast, or Heavens Cherubin, horsed
Upon the sightless Curriors of the Ayre,
Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye,
That tears shall drown the wind. I have no Spur
To prick the sides of my intent, but only
Vaulting Ambition, which ore-leapes it self,
And falls on the other.
How now? What News?
He has almost supped: why have you left the chamber?
Hath he asked for me?
Know you not, he he's?
We will proceed no further in this Business:
He hath Honoured me of late, and I have bought
Golden Opinions from all sorts of people,
Which would be worn now in their newest gloss,
Not cast aside so soon.
Was the hope drunk,
Wherein you dressed your self? Hath it slept since?
And wakes it now to look so greene, and pale,
At what it did so freely? From this time,
Such I account thy love. Art thou afeared
To be the same in thine own Act, and Valour,
As thou art in desire? Would thou have that
Which thou esteem the Ornament of Life,
And live a Coward in thine own Esteem?
Letting I dare not, wait upon I would,
Like the poor Cat in the Addage.
Prithee peace:
I dare do all that may become a man,
Who dares no more, is none.
What Beast was it then
That made you break this enterprise to me?
When you durst do it, then you were a man:
And to be more then what you were, you would
Be so much more the man. Nor time, nor place
Did then adhere, and yet you would make both:
They have made themselves, and that their fitness now
Do's vnmake you. I have given Suck, and know
How tender it is to love the Babe that milkes me,
I would, while it was smiling in my Face,
Have plucked my Nipple from his Boneless Gummes,
And dashed the Brains out, had I so sworn
As you have done to this.
If we should fail?
We fail?
But screw your courage to the sticking place,
And we'll not fail: when Duncan is asleep,
(Whereto the rather shall his days hard Journey
Soundly inuit him) his two Chamberlains
Will I with Wine, and Wassell, so convince,
That Memory, the Warder of the Brain,
Shall be a Fume, and the Receipt of Reason
A Lymbeck only: when in Swinish sleep,
Their drenched Natures lies as in a Death,
What cannot you and I perform upon
The unguarded Duncan? What not put upon
His sponge Officers? who shall bear the guilt
Of our great quell.
Bring forth Men-Children only:
For thy undaunted Mettle should compose
Nothing but Males. Will it not be received,
When we have marked with blood those sleepy two
Of his own Chamber, and used their very Daggers,
That they have don't?
Who dares receive it other,
As we shall make our Griefs and Clamour roar,
Upon his Death?
I am settled, and bend up
Each corporal Agent to this terrible Feat.
Away, and mock the time with fairest show,
False Face must hide what the false Heart doth know.
How goes the Night, Boy?
The Moon is down: I have not heard the Clock.
And she goes down at Twelve.
I take it, it is later, Sir.
Hold, take my Sword:
There's Husbandry in Heaven,
Their Candles are all out: take thee that too.
A heavy Summons lies like Lead upon me,
And yet I would not sleep:
Merciful Powers, restrain in me the cursed thoughts
That Nature gives way to in repose.
Give me my Sword: who's there?
A Friend.
What Sir, not yet at rest? the King's a bed.
He hath been in unusual Pleasure,
And sent forth great Largess to your Offices.
This Diamond he greetes your Wife withal,
By the name of most kind Hostess,
And shut up in measureless content.
Being unprepared,
Our will became the servant to defect,
Which else should free have wrought.
Ell's well.
I dreamt last Night of the three wayward Sisters:
To you they have showed some truth.
I think not of them:
Yet when we can entreat an hour to serve,
We would spend it in some words upon that Business,
If you would grant the time.
At your kind'st leisure.
If you shall cleave to my consent,
When it is, it shall make Honour for you.
So I lose none,
In seeking to augment it, but still keep
My Bosom franchised, and Allegiance clear,
I shall be counselled.
Good repose the while.
Thanks Sir: the like to you.
Go bid thy Mistress, when my drink is ready,
She strike upon the Bell. Get thee to bed.
Is this a Dagger, which I see before me,
The Handle toward my Hand? Come, let me clutch thee:
I have thee not, and yet I see thee still.
Art thou not fatal Vision, sensible
To feeling, as to sight? or art thou but
A Dagger of the Mind, a false Creation,
Proceeding from the heat-oppressed Brain?
I see thee yet, in form as palpable,
As this which now I draw.
Thou marshal me the way that I was going,
And such an Instrument I was to use.
Mine Eyes are made the fools of the other Senses,
Or else worth all the rest: I see thee still;
And on thy Blade, and Dudgeon, Gouts of Blood,
Which was not so before. There's no such thing:
It is the bloody Business, which informs
Thus to mine Eyes. Now o'er the one half World
Nature seems dead, and wicked Dreams abuse
The Curtained sleep: Witchcraft celebrates
Pale Heccats Offerings: and withered Murder,
Alarmed by his Sentinel, the Wolf,
Whose howle's his Watch, thus with his stealthy pace,
With Tarquins ravishing sides, towards his design
Moves like a Ghost. Thou sour and firme-set Earth
Hear not my steps, which they may walk, for fear
Thy very stones prate of my where-about,
And take the present horror from the time,
Which now suits with it. Whiles I threat, he lives:
Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.
I go, and it is done: the Bell invites me.
Hear it not, Duncan, for it is a Knell,
That summons thee to Heaven, or to Hell.
That which hath made the?? drunk, hath made me bold:
What hath quenched them, hath given me fire.
Hark, peace: it was the Owl that shrieked,
The fatal Bell-man, which gives the stern'st good-night.
He is about it, the Doors are open:
And the surfeited Grooms doe mock their charge
With Snores. I have drugged their Posits,
That Death and Nature doe contend about them,
Whether they live, or dye.
Who's there? what hoe?
Alack, I am afraid they have awaked,
And it is not done: the attempt, and not the deed,
Confounds vs: hark: I laid their Daggers ready,
He could not miss 'em. Had he not resembled
My Father as he slept, I had don't.
My Husband?
I have done the deed:
Did thou not hear a noise?
I heard the Owl schreame, and the Crickets cry.
Did not you speak?
When?
Now.
As I descended?
I.
Hark, who lies in the second Chamber?
Donalbaine.
This is a sorry sight.
A foolish thought, to say a sorry sight.
There's one did laugh in's sleep,
And one cried Murder, that they did wake each other:
I stood, and heard them: But they did say their Prayers,
And addressed them again to sleep.
There are two lodged together.
One cried God bless vs, and Amen the other,
As they had seen me with these Hangmans hands:
Listening their fear, I could not say Amen,
When they did say God bless vs.
Consider it not so deeply.
But wherefore could not I pronounce Amen?
I had most need of Blessing, and Amen stuck in my throat.
These deeds must not be thought
After these ways: so, it will make vs mad.
Me thought I heard a voice cry, Sleep no more:
Macbeth does murder Sleep, the innocent Sleep,
Sleep that knits up the rauel'd Sleeve of Care,
The death of each days Life, sore Labours Bath,
Balm of hurt Minds, great Natures second Course,
Chief nourisher in Life's Feast.
What doe you mean?
Still it cried, Sleep no more to all the House:
Glamis hath murdered Sleep, and therefore Cawdor
Shall sleep no more: Macbeth shall sleep no more.
Who was it, that thus cried? why worthy Thane,
You doe vnbend your Noble strength, to think
So brain-sickly of things: Go get some Water,
And wash this filthy Witness from your Hand.
Why did you bring these Daggers from the place?
They must lye there: go carry them, and smear
The sleepy Grooms with blood.
Isle go no more:
I am afraid, to think what I have done:
Look on it again, I dare not.
Infirm of purpose:
Give me the Daggers: the sleeping, and the dead,
Are but as Pictures: it is the Eye of Child-hood,
That fears a painted Devil. If he doe bleed,
Isle guild the Faces of the Grooms withal,
For it must seem their Guilt.
Whence is that knocking?
How is it with me, when every noise appals me?
What Hands are here? ho: they pluck out mine Eyes.
Will all great Neptunes Ocean wash this blood
Clean from my Hand? no: this my Hand will rather
The multitudinous Seas incarnardine,
Making the Greene one, Red.
My Hands are of your colour: but I shame
To wear a Heart so white.
I hear a knocking at the South entry:
Retire we to our Chamber:
A little Water clears vs of this deed.
How easy is it then? your Constancy
Hath left you unattended.
Hark, more knocking.
Get on your Night-Gowne, least occasion call vs,
And show vs to be Watchers: be not lost
So poorly in your thoughts.
To know my deed,
It were best not know my self.
Wake Duncan with thy knocking:
I would thou coldest.
Here's a knocking indeed: if a man were Porter of Hell Gate, hee should have old turning the Key. Knock. Knock, Knock, Knock. Who's there in the name of Beelzebub? Here's a Farmer, that hanged himself on the expectation of Plenty: Come in time, have Napkins enough about you, here you'll sweat for it. Knock. Knock, knock. Who's there in the other Devils Name? Faith here's an Equiuocator, that could swear in both the Scales against either Scale, who committed Treason enough for Gods sake, yet could not equiuocate to Hey???uen: oh come in, Equiuocator. Knock. Knock, Knock, Knock. Who's there? Faith here's an English Taylor come hither, for stealing out of a French Hose: Come in Taylor, here you may roast your Goose. Knock. Knock, Knock. Never at quiet: What are you? but this place is too cold for Hell. Isle Deuill-Porter it no further: I had thought to have let in some of all Professions, that go the Primrose way to the everlasting Bonfire. Knock. Anon, anon, I pray you remember the Porter.
Was it so late, friend, ere you went to Bed,
That you doe lye so late?
Faith Sir, we were carousing till the second Cock:
And Drink, Sir, is a great provoker of three things.
What three things does Drink especially provoke?
Marry, Sir??? Nose-painting, Sleep, and Urine. Lechery, Sir, it provokes, and vnprouokes: it provokes the desire, but it takes away the performance. Therefore much Drink may be said to be an Equiuocator with Le???cherie: it makes him, and it mars him; it sets him on, and it takes him off; it persuades him, and dis-heartens him; makes him stand too, and not stand too: in conclu???zion, equiuocates him in a sleep, and giving him the Lye, leaves him.
I believe, Drink gave thee the Lye last Night.
That it did, Sir, in the very Throat on me: but I requited him for his Lye, and (I think) being too strong for him, though he took up my Legs sometime, yet I made a Shift to cast him.
Is thy Master stirring?
Our knocking he's awaked him: here he comes.
Good morrow, Noble Sir.
Good morrow both.
Is the King stirring, worthy Thane?
Not yet.
He did command me to call timely on him,
I have almost slipped the hour.
Isle bring you to him.
I know this is a joyful trouble to you:
But yet it is one.
The labour we delight in, Physics pain:
This is the Door.
Isle make so bold to call, for it is my limited service.
Goes the King hence to day?
He does: he did appoint so.
The Night he's been unruly:
Where we lay, our Chimneys were blown down,
And (as they say) lamentings heard in the Ayre;
Strange Schreemes of Death,
And Prophesying, with Accents terrible,
Of dire Combustion, and confused Events,
New hatched to the woeful time.
The obscure Bird clamoured the liue-long Night.
Some say, the Earth was feuorous,
And did shake.
It was a rough Night.
My young remembrance cannot parallel
A fellow to it.
O horror, horror, horror,
Tongue nor Heart cannot conceive, nor name thee.
What's the matter?
Confusion now hath made his Master-peece:
Most sacrilegious Murder hath broke op
The Lords anointed Temple, and stole thence
The Life of the Building.
What is it you say, the Life?
Mean you his Majesty?
Approach the Chamber, and destroy your sight
With a new Gorgon. Doe not bid me speak:
See, and then speak your selves: awake, awake,
Ring the Alarm Bell: Murder, and Treason,
Banquo, and Donalbaine: Malcolm awake,
Shake off this Downy sleep, Deaths counterfeit,
And look on Death it self: up, up, and see
The great Dooms Image: Malcolm, Banquo,
As from your Graves rise up, and walk like Sprights,
To countenance this horror. Ring the Bell.
What's the Business?
That such a hideous Trumpet calls to parley
The sleepers of the House? speak, speak.
O gentle Lady,
It is not for you to hear what I can speak:
The repetition in a Women's care,
Would murder as it fell.
O Banquo, Banquo, Our Royal Master's murdered.
Woe, alas:
What, in our House?
Too cruel, any where.
Dear Duff, I prithee contradict thy self,
And say, it is not so.
Had I but died an hour before this chance,
I had lived a blessed time: for from this instant,
There's nothing serious in Mortality:
All is but Toys: Renown and Grace is dead,
The Wine of Life is drawn, and the mere Lees
Is left this Vault, to brag of.
What is amiss?
You are, and doe not know it:
The Spring, the Head, the Fountain of your Blood
Is stopped, the very Source of it is stopped.
Your Royal Father's murdered.
Oh, by whom?
Those of his Chamber, as it seemed, had don't:
Their Hands and Faces were all badg'd with blood,
So were their Daggers, which vnwip'd, we found
Upon their Pillows: they stared, and were distracted,
No mans Life was to be trusted with them.
O, yet I doe repent me of my fury,
That I did kill them.
Wherefore did you so?
Who can be wise, amazed, temperate, &amp; furious,
Loyal, and Neutral, in a moment? No man:
The expedition of my violent Love
Out-run the pawser, Reason. Here lay Duncan,
His Silver skin, laced with his Golden Blood,
And his gashed Stabs, looked like a Breach in Nature,
For Ruins wasteful entrance: there the Murderers,
Steeped in the Colours of their Trade; their Daggers
Unmannerly breached with gore: who could refrain,
That had a heart to love; and in that heart,
Courage, to mike's love known?
Help me hence, hoe.
Look to the Lady.
Why doe we hold our tongues,
That most may claim this argument for ours?
What should be spoken here,
Where our Fate hid in an augur hole,
May rush, and seize vs? Let's away,
Our Tears are not yet brewed.
Nor our strong Sorrow
Upon the foot of Motion.
Look to the Lady:
And when we have our naked Frailties hid,
That suffer in exposure; let vs meet,
And question this most bloody piece of work,
To know it further. Fears and scruples shake vs:
In the great Hand of God I stand, and thence,
Against the vndivulg'd pretence, I fight
Of Treasonous Malice.
And so doe I.
So all.
Let's briefly put on manly readiness,
And meet in the Hall together.
Well contented.
What will you doe?
Let's not consort with them:
To show an unfelt Sorrow, is an Office
Which the false man do's easy.
Isle to England.
To Ireland, I:
Our separated fortune shall keep vs both the safer:
Where we are, there's Daggers in men's Smiles;
The near in blood, the nearer bloody.
This murderous Shaft that's shot,
Hath not yet lighted: and our safest way,
Is to avoid the aim. Therefore to Horse,
And let vs not be dainty of leaue-taking,
But shift away: there's warrant in that Theft,
Which steals it self, when there's no mercy left.
Threescore and ten I can remember well,
Within the Volume of which Time, I have seen
Hours dreadful, and things strange: but this sore Night
Hath trifled former knowings.
Ha, good Father,
Thou see the Heavens, as troubled with mans Act,
Threatens his bloody Stage: by the Clock it is Day,
And yet dark Night strangles the travailing Lamp:
Is it Nights predominance, or the Days shame,
That Darkness does the face of Earth entomb,
When living Light should kiss it?
It is unnatural,
Even like the deed that's done: On Tuesday last,
A Falcon to wring in her pride of place,
Was by a Mowsing Owl hawked at, and killed.
And Duncans Horses,
(A thing most strange, and certain)
Beauteous, and swift, the Minions of their Race,
Turned wilde in nature, broke their s???lls, flong out,
Contending against Obedience, as they would
Make War with Mankind.
It is said, they eat each other.
They did so:
To the amazement of mine eyes that looked upon it.
Here comes the good Macduffe.
How goes the world Sir, now?
Why see you not?
Is it known who did this more then bloody deed?
Those that Macbeth hath slain.
Alas the day,
What good could they pretend?
They were suborned,
Malcolm, and Donalbaine the Kings two Sons
Are stolen away and fled, which puts upon them
Suspicion of the deed.
Against Nature still,
Thriftless Ambition, that will raven up
Thine own lives means: Then it is most like,
The Sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.
He is already named, and gone to Scone
To be invested.
Where is Duncans body?
Carried to Colmekill,
The Sacred Store-house of his Predecessors,
And Guardian of their Bones.
Will you to Scone?
No Cousin, Isle to Fife.
Well, I will thither.
Well may you see things well done there: Adieu
Least our old Robes sit easier then our new.
Farewell, Father.
Gods benyson go with you, and with those
That would make good of bad, and Friends of Foes.
Thou hast it now, King, Cawdor, Glamis, all,
As the weyard Women promised, and I fear
Thou playd'st most foully for it: yet it was said
It should not stand in thy Posterity,
But that my self should be the Root, and Father
Of many Kings. If there come truth from them,
As upon thee Macbeth, their Speeches shine,
Why by the verities on thee made good,
May they not be my Oracles as well,
And set me up in hope. But hush, no more.
Heere's our chief Guest.
If he had been forgotten,
It had been as a gap in our great Feast,
And all-thing vnbecomming.
To night we hold a solemn Supper sir,
And Isle request your presence.
Let your Highness
Command upon me, to the which my duties
Are with a most indissoluble tie
For ever knit.
Ride you this afternoon?
I, my good Lord.
We should have else desired your good advice
(Which still hath been both grave, and prosperous)
In this days Council: but we'll take to morrow.
Is it far you ride?
As far, my Lord, as will fill up the time
Twixt this, and Supper. Go not my Horse the better,
I must become a borrower of the Night,
For a dark hour, or twain.
Fail not our Feast.
My Lord, I will not.
We hear our bloody Cozens are bestowed
In England, and in Ireland, not confessing
Their cruel Parricide, filling their hearers
With strange invention. But of that to morrow,
When therewithal, we shall have cause of State,
Craving vs jointly. Hye you to Horse:
Adieu, till you return at Night.
Goes Fleance with you?
I, my good Lord: our time does call vpon's.
I wish your Horses swift, and sure of foot:
And so I doe commend you to their backs.
Farewell.
Let every man be master of his time,
Till seven at Night, to make society
The sweeter welcome:
We will keep our self till Supper time alone:
While then, God be with you.
Sirrha, a word with you: Attend those men
Our pleasure?
They are, my Lord, without the Palace Gate.
Bring them before vs.
To be thus, is nothing, but to be safely thus:
Our fears in Banquo stick deep,
And in his Royalty of Nature reigns that
Which would be feared. It is much he dares,
And to that dauntless temper of his Mind,
He hath a Wisdom, that doth guide his Valour,
To act in safety. There is none but he,
Whose being I doe fear: and under him,
My Genius is rebuked, as it is said
Mark Anthonies was by Caesar. He chid the Sisters,
When first they put the Name of King upon me,
And bad them speak to him. Then Prophet-like,
They hailed him Father to a Line of Kings.
Upon my Head they placed a fruitless Crown,
And put a barren Sceptre in my Gripe,
Thence to be wrenched with an vnlineall Hand,
No Son of mine succeeding: if 't be so,
For Banquo's Issue have I filed my Mind,
For them, the gracious Duncan have I murdered,
Put Rancours in the Vessel of my Peace
Only for them, and mine eternal Jewel
Given to the common Enemy of Man,
To make them Kings, the Seeds of Banquo Kings.
Rather then so, come Fate into the Lift,
And champion me to the utterance.
Who's there?
Now go to the Door, and stay there till we call.
Was it not yesterday we spoke together?
It was, so please your Highness.
Well then,
Now have you considered of my speeches:
Know, that it was he, in the times past,
Which held you so under fortune,
Which you thought had been our innocent self.
This I made good to you, in our last conference,
Past in probation with you:
How you were borne in hand, how crossed:
The Instruments: who wrought with them:
And all things else, that might
To half a Soul, and to a Notion crazed,
Say, Thus did Banquo.
You made it known to vs.
I did so:
And went further, which is now
Our point of second meeting.
Doe you find your patience so predominant,
In your nature, that you can let this go?
Are you so Gospell'd, to pray for this good man,
And for his Issue, whose heavy hand
Hath bowed you to the Grave, and beggared
Yours for ever?
We are men, my Liege.
I, in the Catalogue ye go for men,
As Hounds, and Greyhounds, Mungrels, Spaniels, Cures,
Showghes, Water-Rugs, and Demy-Wolues are clipped
All by the Name of Dogs: the valued file
Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle,
The House-keeper, the Hunter, every one
According to the gift, which bounteous Nature
Hath in him closed: whereby he does receive
Particular addition??? from the Bill,
That writes them all alike: and so of men.
Now, if you have a station in the file,
Not in the worst rank of Manhood??? say it,
And I will put that Business in your Bosoms,
Whose execution takes your Enemy off,
Grapples you to the heart; and love of vs,
Who wear our Health but sickly in his Life,
Which in his Death were perfect.
I am one, my Liege,
Whom the vile Blows and Buffets of the World
Hath so incensed, that I am reckless what I doe,
To spite the World.
And I another,
So weary with Disasters, tugged with Fortune,
That I would set my Life on any Chance,
To mend it, or be rid on it.
Both of you know Banquo was your Enemy.
True, my Lord.
So is he mine: and in such bloody distance,
That every minute of his being, thrusts
Against my nearest of Life: and though I could
With bare-fac'd power sweep him from my sight,
And bid my will avouch it; yet I must not,
For certain friends that are both his, and mine,
Whose loves I may not drop, but whale his fall,
Who I my self struck down: and thence it is,
That I to your assistance doe make love,
Masking the Business from the common Eye,
For sundry weighty Reasons.
We shall, my Lord,
Perform what you command vs.
Though our Lives???
Your Spirits shine through you.
Within this hour, at most,
I will advise you where to plant your selves,
Acquaint you with the perfect Spy of the time,
The moment on it, for it must be done to Night,
And something from the Palace: always thought,
That I require a clearness; and with him,
To leave no Rubs nor Botches in the Work:
Fleans, his Son, that keeps him company,
Whose absence is no less material to me,
Then is his Fathers, must embrace the fate
Of that dark hour: resolve your selves apart,
Isle come to you anon.
We are resolved, my Lord.
Isle call upon you straight: abide within,
It is concluded: Banquo, thy Souls flight,
If it find Heaven, must find it out to Night.
Is Banquo gone from Court?
I, Madame, but returns again to Night.
Say to the King, I would attend his leisure,
For a few words.
Madame, I will.
Nought's had, ell's spent,
Where our desire is got without content:
It is safer, to be that which we destroy,
Then by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.
How now, my Lord, why doe you keep alone?
Of sorriest Fancies your Companions making,
Using those Thoughts, which should indeed have died
With them they think on: things without all remedy
Should be without regard: what's done, is done.
We have scorched the Snake, not killed it:
She'll close, and be her self, whilst our poor Malice
Remains in danger of her former Tooth.
But let the frame of things disjoined,
Both the Worlds suffer,
Ere we will eat our Meal in fear, and sleep
In the affliction of these terrible Dreams,
That shake vs Nightly: Better be with the dead,
Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace,
Then on the torture of the Mind to lye
In restless ecstasy.
Duncan is in his Grave:
After Lifes fitful Fever, he sleeps well,
Treason he's done his worst: nor Steel, nor Poison,
Malice domestic, foreign Levy, nothing,
Can touch him further.
Come on:
Gentle my Lord, sleek o'er your rugged Looks,
Be bright and Jovial among your Guests to Night.
So shall I Love, and so I pray be you:
Let your remembrance apply to Banquo,
Present him Eminence, both with Eye and Tongue:
Unsafe the while, that wee must lave
Our Honours in these flattering streams,
And make our Faces Vizards to our Hearts,
Disguising what they are.
You must leave this.
O, full of Scorpions is my Mind, dear Wife:
Thou know, that Banquo and his Fleans lives.
But in them, Natures Coppie's not eterne.
There's comfort yet, they are assailable,
Then be thou jocund: ere the Bat hath flown
His Cloistered flight, ere to black Heccats summons
The shard-borne Beetle, with his drowsy hums,
Hath rung Nights yawning Peal,
There shall be done a deed of dreadful note.
What's to be done?
Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest Chuck,
Till thou applaud the deed: Come, feeling Night,
Scarf up the tender Eye of pitiful Day,
And with thy bloody and invisible Hand
Cancel and tear to pieces that great Bond,
Which keeps me pale. Light thickens,
And the Crow makes Wing to the Rookie Wood:
Good things of Day begin to droop, and drowse,
Whiles Nights black Agents to their Prey's doe rouse.
Thou marvel at my words: but hold thee still,
Things bad begun, make strong themselves by ill:
So prithee go with me.
But who did bid thee join with vs?
Macbeth.
He needs not our mistrust, since he delivers
Our Offices, and what we have to doe,
To the direction just.
Then stand with vs:
The West yet glimmers with some streakes of Day.
Now spurs the lated Traveller apace,
To gain the timely Inn, end near approaches
The subject of our Watch.
Hark, I hear Horses.
Give vs a Light there, hoe.
Then it is hee:
The rest, that are within the note of expectation,
Already are in the Court.
His Horses go about.
Almost a mile: but he does usually,
So all men doe, from hence to the Palace Gate
Make it their Walk.
A Light, a Light.
It is hee.
Stand too't.
It will be Rain to Night.
Let it come down.
O, Treachery!
Fly good Fleans, fly, fly, fly,
Thou may revenge. O Slave!
Who did strike out the Light?
Was it not the way?
There's but one down: the Son is fled.
We have lost
Best half of our Affair.
Well, let's away, and say how much is done.
You know your own degrees, sit down:
At first and last, the hearty welcome.
Thanks to your Majesty.
Our self will mingle with Society,
And play the humble Host:
Our Hostess keeps her State, but in best time
We will require her welcome.
Pronounce it for me Sir, to all our Friends,
For my heart speaks, they are welcome.
See they encounter thee with their harts thanks
Both sides are even: here Isle sit in the midst,
Be large in mirth, anon we'll drink a Measure
The Table round. There's blood upon thy face.
It is Banquo's then.
It is better thee without, then he within.
Is he dispatched?
My Lord his throat is cut, that I did for him.
Thou art the best of the Cut-throats,
Yet hoe's good that did the like for Fleans:
If thou did it, thou art the Nonpareil.
Most Royal Sir
Fleans is escaped.
Then comes my Fit again:
I had else been perfect;
Whole as the Marble, founded as the Rock,
As broad, and general, as the casing Ayre:
But now I am cabined, crib'd, confined, bound in
To saucy doubts, and fears. But Banquo's safe?
I, my good Lord: safe in a ditch he bides,
With twenty trenched gashes on his head;
The least a Death to Nature.
Thanks for that:
There the grown Serpent lies, the worm that's fled
Hath Nature that in time will Venom breed,
No teeth for the present. Get thee gone, to morrow
We'll hear our selves again.
My Royal Lord,
You do not give the Cheer, the Feast is sold
That is not often vouched, while it is a making:
It is given, with welcome: to feed were best at home:
From thence, the sauce to meat is Ceremony,
Meeting were bare without it.
Sweet Remembrancer:
Now good digestion waite on Appetite,
And health on both.
May it please your Highness sit.
Here had we now our Countries Honour, roofed,
Were the graced person of our Banquo present:
Who, may I rather challenge for unkindness,
Then pity for Mischance.
His absence (Sir)
Lays blame upon his promise. Pleas't your Highness
To grace vs with your Royal Company?
The Table's full.
Here is a place reserved Sir.
Where?
Here my good Lord.
What is it that moves your Highness?
Which of you have done this?
What, my good Lord?
Thou can not say I did it: never shake
Thy goary lockes at me.
Gentlemen rise, his Highness is not well.
Sit worthy Friends: my Lord is often thus,
And hath been from his youth. Pray you keep Seat,
The fit is momentary, upon a thought
He will again be well. If much you note him
You shall offend him, and extend his Passion,
Feed, and regard him not. Are you a man?
I, and a bold one, that dare look on that
Which might appal the Devil.
O proper stuff:
This is the very painting of your fear:
This is the Ayre-drawne-Dagger which you said
Led you to Duncan. O, these flaws and starts
(Impostors to true fear) would well become
A women's story, at a Winters fire
Authorised by her Grandam: shame it self,
Why do you make such faces? When ell's done
You look but on a stool.
Prithee see there:
Behold, look, lo, how say you:
Why what care I, if thou can nod, speak too.
If Charnel houses, and our Graves must send
Those that we bury, back; our Monuments
Shall be the Mawes of Kites.
What? quite unmanned in folly.
If I stand here, I saw him.
Fie for shame.
Blood hath been shed ere now, in the olden time
Ere humane Statute purged the gentle Weal:
I, and since too, Murders have been performed
Too terrible for the ear. The times has been,
That when the Brains were out, the man would dye,
And there an end: But now they rise again
With twenty mortal murders on their crowns,
And push vs from our stools. This is more strange
Then such a murder is.
My worthy Lord
Your Noble Friends do lack you.
I do forget:
Do not muse at me my most worthy Friends,
I have a strange infirmity, which is nothing
To those that know me. Come, love and health to all,
Then Isle sit down: Give me some Wine, fill full:
I drink to the general joy of the whole Table,
And to our dear Friend Banquo, whom we miss:
Would he were here: to all, and him we thirst,
And all to all.
Our duties, and the pledge.
Avaunt, &amp; quit my sight, let the earth hide thee:
Thy bones are marrowlesse, thy blood is cold:
Thou hast no speculation in those eyes
Which thou dost glare with.
Think of this good Peers???
But as a thing of Custom: It is no other,
Only it spoils the pleasure of the time.
What man dare, I dare:
Approach thou like the rugged Russian Bear,
The armed Rhinoceros, or the Hircan Tiger,
Take any shape but that, and my firm Nerues
Shall never tremble. Or be alive again,
And dare me to the Desert with thy Sword:
If trembling I inhabit then, protest me
The Baby of a Girl. Hence horrible shadow,
Vnreall mock'ry hence. Why so, being gone
I am a man again: pray you sit still.
You have displaced the mirth,
Broke the good meeting, with most admired disorder.
Can such things be,
And overcome vs like a Summers Cloud,
Without our special wonder? You make me strange
Even to the disposition that I owe,
When now I think you can behold such sights,
And keep the natural Ruby of your Cheeks,
When mine is blanched with fear.
What sights, my Lord?
I pray you speak not: he grows worse &amp; worse
Question enrages him: at once, goodnight.
Stand not upon the order of your going,
But go at once.
Good night, and better health
Attend his Majesty.
A kind goodnight to all.
It will have blood they say:
Blood will have Blood:
Stones have been known to move, &amp; Trees to speak:
Augurs, and understood Relations, have
By Maggot Pies, &amp; Choughs &amp; Rooks brought forth
The secret'st man of Blood. What is the night?
Almost at odds with morning, which is which.
How say thou that Macduff denies his person
At our great bidding.
Did you send to him Sir?
I hear it by the way: But I will send:
There's not a one of them but in his house
I keep a Servant Feed. I will to morrow
(And betimes I will) to the weyard Sisters.
More shall they speak: for now I am bent to know
By the worst means, the worst, for mine own good,
All causes shall give way. I am in blood
Stepped in so far, that should I wade no more,
Returning were as tedious as go ore:
Strange things I have in head, that will to hand,
Which must be acted, ere they may be scand.
You lack the season of all Natures, sleep.
Come, we'll to sleep: My strange &amp; self-abuse
Is the initiate fear, that wants hard use:
We are yet but young indeed.
Why how now Hecat, you look angrily?
Have I not reason (Beldams) as you are?
Saucy, and ouer-bold, how did you dare
To Trade, and Traffic with Macbeth,
In Riddles, and Affairs of death;
And I the Mistress of your Charms,
The close contriver of all harms,
Was never called to bear my part,
Or show the glory of our Art?
And which is worse, all you have done
Hath been but for a wayward Son,
Spiteful, and wrathful, who (as others do)
Loves for his own ends, not for you.
But make amends now: Get you gon,
And at the pit of Acheron
Meet me in the Morning: thither he
Will come, to know his Destiny.
Your Vessels, and your Spells provide,
Your Charms, and every thing beside;
I am for the Ayre: This night Isle spend
Unto a dismal, and a Fatal end.
Great business must be wrought ere Noon.
Upon the Corner of the Moon
There hangs a vap'rous drop, profound,
Isle catch it ere it come to ground;
And that distilled by Magic slights,
Shall raise such Artificial Sprights,
As by the strength of their illusion,
Shall draw him on to his Confusion.
He shall spurn Fate, scorn Death, and bear
His hopes above Wisdom, Grace, and Fear:
And you all know, Security
Is Mortals chiefest Enemy.
Hark, I am called??? my little Spirit see
Sits in a Foggy cloud, and stays for me.
Come, let's make hast, she'll soon be
Back again.
My former Speeches,
Have but hit your Thoughts
Which can interpret farther: Only I say
Things have bin strangely borne. The gracious Duncan
Was pitied of Macbeth: marry he was dead:
And the right valiant Banquo walked too late,
Whom you may say (if it please you) Fleans killed,
For Fleans fled: Men must not walk too late.
Who cannot want the thought, how monstrous
It was for Malcolm, and for Donalbane
To kill their gracious Father? Damned Fact,
How it did grieve Macbeth? Did he not straight
In pious rage, the two delinquents tear,
That were the Slaves of drink, and thralls of sleep?
Was not that Nobly done? I, and wisely too:
For it would have angered any heart alive
To hear the men deny it. So that I say,
He he's borne all things well, and I do think,
That had he Duncans Sons under his Key,
(As, and't please Heaven he shall not) they should find
What it were to kill a Father: So should Fleans.
But peace; for from broad words, and cause he failed
His presence at the Tyrants Feast, I hear
Macduffe lives in disgrace. Sir, can you tell
Where he bestows himself?
The Sons of Duncan
(From whom this Tyrant holds the due of Birth)
Lives in the English Court, and is received
Of the most Pious Edward, with such grace,
That the malevolence of Fortune, nothing
Takes from his high respect. Thither Macduffe
Is gone, to pray the Holy King, upon his aid
To wake Northumberland, and warlike Seyward,
That by the help of these (with him aboue)
To ratify the Work) we may again
Give to our Tables meat, sleep to our Nights:
Free from our Feasts, and Banquets bloody knives;
Do faithful Homage, and receive free Honours,
All which we pine for now. And this report
Hath so exasperate their King, that hee
Prepares for some attempt of War.
Sent he to Macduffe?
He did: and with an absolute Sir, not I
The cloudy Messenger turns me his back,
And hums; as who should say, you'll rue the time
That clogs me with this Answer.
And that well might
Advise him to a Caution, t???hold what distance
His wisdom can provide. Some holy Angel
Fly to the Court of England, and unfold
His Message ere he come, that a swift blessing
May soon return to this our suffering Country,
Under a hand accursed.
Isle send my Prayers with him.
Thrice the brinded Cat hath mewed.
Thrice, and once the Hedge-Pigge whined.
Harpier cries, it is time, it is time.
Round about the Cauldron go:
In the poisoned Entrails throw
Toad, that under cold stone,
Days and Nights, he's thirty one:
Sweltred Venom sleeping got,
Boyle thou first in the charmed pot.
Double, double, toil and trouble;
Fire burn, and Cauldron bubble.
Fillet of a Fenny Snake,
In the Cauldron boyle and bake:
Eye of Newt, and Toe of Frog,
Wool of Bat, and Tongue of Dog???
Adders Fork, and Blinde-wormes Sting,
Lizards leg, and Owlets wing:
For a Charm of powerful trouble,
Like a Hell-broth, boyle and bubble.
Double, double, toil and trouble,
Fire burn, and Cauldron bubble.
Scale of Dragon, Tooth of Wolf,
Witches Mummy, Maw, and Gulf
Of the rauin'd salt Sea shark:
Root of Hemlock, dug in the dark:
Liver of Blaspheming Jew,
Gall of Goat, and Slips of Yew,
Sliuer'd in the Moons Eclipse:
???ose of Turk, and Tartars lips:
Finger of Birth-strangled Babe,
D???tch-deliuer'd by a Drab,
Make the Grewell thick, and slab.
Add thereto a Tigers Chawdron,
For the Ingredience of our Cauldron.
Double, double, toil and trouble,
Fire burn, and Cauldron bubble.
Cool it with a Baboons blood,
Then the Charm is firm and good.
O well done: I commend your pains,
And every one shall share in the gains:
And now about the Cauldron sing
Like Elves and Fairies in a Ring,
Enchanting all that you put in.
By the pricking of my Thumbs,
Something wicked this way comes:
Open Lockes, who ever knocks.
How now you secret, black, &amp; midnight Hags?
What is it you do?
A deed without a name.
I conjure you, by that which you Profess,
(How ere you come to know it) answer me:
Though you untie the Winds, and let them fight
Against the Churches: Though the yeasty Waives
Confound and swallow Navigation up:
Though bladed Corn be lodged, &amp; Trees blown down,
Though Castles topple on their Warders heads:
Though Palaces, and Pyramids do slope
Their heads to their Foundations: Though the treasure
Of Natures Germaine, tumble altogether,
Even till destruction sicken: Answer me
To what I ask you.
Speak.
Demand.
We'll answer.
Say, if the had rather hear it from our mouths,
Or from our Masters.
Call 'em: let me see 'em.
Power in Sows blood, that hath eaten
Her nine Farrow: Grease that's sweeten
From the Murderers Gibbet, throw
Into the Flame.
Come high or low:
Thy Self and Office deftly show.
Tell me, thou unknown power.
He knows thy thought:
Hear his speech, but say thou nought.
Macbeth, Macbeth, Macbeth:
Beware Macduffe,
Beware the Thane of Fife: dismiss me. Enough.
What ere thou art, for thy good caution, thanks
Thou hast harped my fear aright. But one word more.
He will not be commanded: heere's another
More potent then the first.
Macbeth, Macbeth, Macbeth.
Had I three ears, Il'd hear thee.
Be bloody, bold, &amp; resolute:
Laugh to scorn
The power of man: For none of woman borne
Shall harm Macbeth.
Then live Macduffe: what need I fear of thee?
But yet Isle make assurance: double sure,
And take a Bond of Fate: thou shalt not live,
That I may tell pale-hearted Fear, it lies;
And sleep in spite of Thunder.
What is this, that rises like the issue of a King,
And wears upon his Baby-brow, the round
And top of Sovereignty?
Listen, but speak not too't.
Be Lyon mottled, proud, and take no care:
Who chases, who frets, or where Conspirers are:
Macbeth shall never vanquished be, until
Great Byrnam Wood, to high Dunsmane Hill
Shall come against him.
That will never bee:
Who can impress the Forest, bid the Tree
Vnfixe his earth-bound Root? Sweet boadments, good:
Rebellious dead, rise never till the Wood
Of Byrnan rise, and our high placed Macbeth
Shall live the Lease of Nature, pay his breath
To time, and mortal Custom. Yet my Hart
Throbs to know one thing: Tell me, if your Art
Can tell so much: Shall Banquo's issue ever
Reign in this Kingdom?
Seek to know no more.
I will be satisfied. Deny me this,
And an eternal Curse fall on you: Let me know.
Why sinks that Cauldron? &amp; what noise is this?
Show.
Show.
Show.
Show his Eyes, and grieve his Hart,
Come like shadows, so depart.
Thou art too like the Spirit of Banquo: Down:
Thy Crown do's sear mine Eye-bals. And thy hair
Thou other Gold-bound-brow, is like the first:
A third, is like the former. Filthy Hags,
Why do you show me this? ???A fourth? Start eyes!
What will the Line stretch out to the crack of Doom?
Another yet? A seventh? Isle see no more:
And yet the eight appears, who bears a glass,
Which shows me many more: and some I see,
That two-fold Balls, and treble Scepters carry.
Horrible sight: Now I see it is true,
For the Blood-bolter'd Banquo smiles upon me,
And points at them for his. What? is this so?
I Sir, all this is so. But why
Stands Macbeth thus amazedly?
Come Sisters, cheer we up his sprights,
And show the best of our delights.
Isle Charm the Ayre to give a sound,
While you perform your Antique round:
That this great King may kindly say,
Our duties, did his welcome pay.
Where are they? Gone?
Let this pernicious hour,
Stand aye accursed in the Calendar.
Come in, without there.
What's your Graces will.
Saw you the Weyard Sisters?
No my Lord.
Came they not by you?
No indeed my Lord.
Infected be the Ayre whereon they ride,
And damned all those that trust them. I did hear
The galloping of Horse. Who was it came by?
It is two or three my Lord, that bring you word:
Macduff is fled to England.
Fled to England?
I, my good Lord.
Time, thou anticipate my dread exploits:
The flighty purpose never is o're-tooke
Unless the deed go with it. From this moment,
The very firstlings of my heart shall be
The firstlings of my hand. And even now
To Crown my thoughts with Acts: be it thought &amp; done:
The Castle of Macduff, I will surprise,
Seize upon Fife; give to the edge of the Sword
His Wife, his Babes, and all unfortunate Souls
That trace him in his Line. No boasting like a Fool,
This deed Isle do, before this purpose cool,
But no more sights. Where are these Gentlemen?
Come bring me where they are.
What had he done, to make him fly the Land?
You must have patience Madam.
He had none:
His flight was madness: when our Actions do not,
Our fears do make vs Traitors.
You know not
Whether it was his wisdom, or his fear.
Wisdom? to leave his wife, to leave his Babes,
His Mansion, and his Titles, in a place
From whence himself do's fly? He loves vs not,
He wants the natural touch. For the poor Wren
(The most diminutive of Birds) will fight,
Her young ones in her Nest, against the Owl:
All is the Fear, and nothing is the Love;
As little is the Wisdom, where the flight
So runs against all reason.
My dearest Cousin,
I pray you school your self. But for your Husband,
He is Noble, Wise, Judicious, and best knows
The fits of the Season. I dare not speak much further,
But cruel are the times, when we are Traitors
And do not know our selves: when we hold Rumour
From what we fear, yet know not what we fear,
But float upon a wilde and violent Sea
Each way, and move. I take my leave of you:
Shall not be long but Isle be here again:
Things at the worst will cease or else climb upward,
To what they were before. My pretty Cosine,
Blessing upon you.
Fathered he is,
And yet hoe's Father-lesse.
I am so much a Fool, should I stay longer
It would be my disgrace, and your discomfort.
I take my leave at once.
Sir, your Fathers dead,
And what will you do now? How will you live?
As Birds do Mother.
What with Worms, and Flies?
With what I get I mean, and so do they.
Poor Bird,
You would never Fear the Net, nor Lime,
The Pitfall, nor the Gin.
Why should I Mother?
Poor Birds they are not set for:
My Father is not dead for all your saying.
Yes, he is dead:
How wilt thou do for a Father?
Nay how will you do for a Husband?
Why I can buy me twenty at any Market.
Then you'll by 'em to sell again.
Thou speak withal thy wit,
And yet In faith with wit enough for thee.
Was my Father a Traitor, Mother?
I, that he was
What is a Traitor?
Why one that swears, and lies.
And be all Traitors, that do so.
Every one that do's so, is a Traitor,
And must be hanged.
And must they all be hanged, that swear and lye?
Every one.
Who must hang them?
Why, the honest men.
Then the Liars and Swearers are Fools: for there are Liars and Swearers enough, to beat the honest men, and hang up them.
Now God help thee, poor Monkey:
But how wilt thou do for a Father?
If he were dead, youl'd weep for him: if you would not, it were a good sign, that I should quickly have a new Father.
Poor prattler, how thou talk?
Bless you fair Dame: I am not to you known,
Though in your state of Honour I am perfect;
I doubt some danger do's approach you nearly.
If you will take a homely mans advice,
Be not found here: Hence with your little ones
To fright you thus. Me thinks I am too savage:
To do worse to you, were fell Cruelty,
Which is too no your person. Heaven preserve you,
I dare abide no longer.
Whether should I fly?
I have done no harm. But I remember now
I am in this earthly world: where to do harm
Is often laudable, to do good sometime
Accounted dangerous folly. Why then (alas)
Do I put up that womanly defence,
To say I have done no harm?
What are these faces?
Where is your Husband?
I hope in no place so vnsanctified,
Where such as thou may find him.
He's a Traitor.
Thou lie thou shagge-ear'd Villain.
What you Egg?
Young fry of Treachery?
He he's killed me Mother,
Run away I pray you.
Let vs seek out some desolate shade, &amp; there
Weep our sad bosoms empty.
Let vs rather
Hold fast the mortal Sword: and like good men,
Bestride our downfall Birthdome: each new Morn,
New Widows howl, new Orphans cry, new sorrows
Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds
As if it felt with Scotland, and yelled out
Like Syllable of Dolor.
What I believe, Isle wail;
What know, believe; and what I can redress,
As I shall find the time to friend: I will.
What you have spoke, it may be so perchance.
This Tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues,
Was once thought honest: you have loved him well,
He hath not touched you yet. I am young, but something
You may discern of him through me, and wisdom
To offer up a weak, poor innocent Lamb
To appease an angry God.
I am not treacherous.
But Macbeth is.
A good and virtuous Nature may recoil
In an Imperial charge. But I shall crave your pardon:
That which you are, my thoughts cannot transpose;
Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell.
Though all things foul, would wear the brows of grace
Yet Grace must still look so.
I have lost my Hopes.
Perchance even there
Where I did find my doubts.
Why in that rawness left you Wife, and Child?
Those precious Motives, those strong knots of Love,
Without leaue-taking. I pray you,
Let not my Jealousies, be your Dishonours,
But mine own Safeties: you may be rightly just,
What ever I shall think.
Bleed, bleed poor Country,
Great Tyranny, lay thou thy basis sure,
For goodness dare not check thee: wear you thy wrongs,
The Title, is afeared. Far thee well Lord,
I would not be the Villain that thou think,
For the whole Space that's in the Tyrants Grasp,
And the rich East to boot.
Be not offended:
I speak not as in absolute fear of you:
I think our Country sinks beneath the yoke,
It weeps, it bleeds, and each new day a gash
Is added to her wounds. I think withal,
There would be hands vplifted in my right:
And here from gracious England have I offer
Of goodly thousands. But for all this,
When I shall tread upon the Tyrants head,
Or wear it on my Sword; yet my poor Country
Shall have more vices then it had before,
More suffer, and more sundry ways then ever,
By him that shall succeed.
What should he be?
It is my self I mean: in whom I know
All the particulars of Vice so grafted,
That when they shall be opened, black Macbeth
Will seem as pure as Snow, and the poor State
Esteem him as a Lamb, being compared
With my confinelesse harms.
Not in the Legions
Of horrid Hell, can come a Devil more damned
In evils, to top Macbeth.
I grant him Bloody,
Luxurious, Avaricious, False, Deceitful,
Sudden, Malicious, smacking of every sin
That he's a name. But there's no bottom, none
In my Voluptuousness: Your Wives, your Daughters,
Your Matrons, and your Maids, could not fill up
The Cistern of my Lust, and my Desire
All continent Impediments would ore-beare
That did oppose my will. Better Macbeth,
Then such an one to reign.
Boundless intemperance
In Nature is a Tyranny: It hath been
The untimely emptying of the happy Throne,
And fall of many Kings. But fear not yet
To take upon you what is yours: you may
Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty,
And yet seem cold. The time you may so hoodwink:
We have willing Dames enough: there cannot be
That Vulture in you, to devour so many
As will to Greatness dedicate themselves,
Finding it so inclined.
With this, there grows
In my most ill-compos'd Affection, such
A stanchless Avarice, that were I King,
I should cut off the Nobles for their Lands,
Desire his Jewels, and this others House,
And my more-hauing, would be as a Sauce
To make me hunger more, that I should forge
Quarrels unjust against the Good and Loyal,
Destroying them for wealth.
This Avarice
sticks deeper: grows with more pernicious root
Then Summer-seeming Lust: and it hath bin
The Sword of our slain Kings: yet do not fear,
Scotland hath Foysons, to fill up your will
Of your mere Own. All these are portable,
With other Graces weighed.
But I have none. The King-becoming Graces,
As Justice, Verity, Temp'rance, Stablenesse,
Bounty, Perseverance, Mercy, Lowliness,
Devotion, Patience, Courage, Fortitude,
I have no relish of them, but abound
In the division of each several Crime,
Acting it many ways. Nay, had I power, I should
Pour the sweet Milk of Concord, into Hell,
Uproar the universal peace, confound
All unity on earth.
O Scotland, Scotland.
If such a one be fit to govern, speak:
I am as I have spoken.
Fit to govern? No not to live. O Natio?? miserable!
With an vntitled Tyrant, bloody Sceptred,
When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again?
Since that the truest Issue of thy Throne
By his own Interdiction stands accused,
And do's blaspheme his breed? Thy Royal Father
Was a most Sainted-King: the Queen that bore thee,
Oftner upon her knees, then on her feet,
Dyed every day she lived. Fare thee well,
These Evils thou repeat upon thy self,
Hath banished me from Scotland. O my Breast,
Thy hope ends here.
Macduff, this Noble passion
Child of integrity, hath from my soul
Wiped the black Scruples, reconciled my thoughts
To thy good Truth, and Honour. Devilish Macbeth,
By many of these trains, hath sought to win me
Into his power: and modest Wisdom plucks me
From ouer-credulous hast: but God aboue
Deal between thee and me; For even now
I put my self to thy Direction, and
Vnspeake mine own detraction. Here abjure
The taints, and blames I laid upon my self,
For strangers to my Nature. I am yet
Unknown to Woman, never was forsworn,
Scarcely have coveted what was mine own:
At no time broke my Faith, would not betray
The Devil to his Fellow, and delight
No less in truth then life. My first false speaking
Was this upon my self. What I am truly
Is thine, and my poor Countries to command:
Whither indeed, before they here approach
Old Seyward with ten thousand warlike men
Already at a point, was setting forth:
Now we'll together, and the chance of goodness
Be like our warranted Quarrel. Why are you silent?
Such welcome, and unwelcome things at once
It is hard to reconcile.
Well, more anon. Comes the King forth
I pray you?
I Sir: there are a crew of wretched Souls
That stay his Cure: their malady convinces
The great assay of Art. But at his touch,
Such sanctity hath Heaven given his hand,
They presently amend.
I thank you Doctor.
What's the Disease he means?
Tic called the Evil.
A most miraculous work in this good King,
Which often since my here remain in England,
I have seen him do: How he solicits heaven
Himself best knows: but strangely visited people
All swollen and Ulcerous, pitiful to the eye,
The mere despair of Surgery, he cures,
Hanging a golden stamp about their necks,
Put on with holy Prayers, and it is spoken
To the succeeding Royalty he leaves
The healing Benediction. With this strange virtue,
He hath a heavenly gift of Prophecy,
And sundry Blessings hang about his Throne,
That speak him full of Grace.
See who comes here.
My Countryman: but yet I know him nor.
My ever gentle Cozen, welcome hither.
I know him now. Good God betimes remove
The means that makes vs Strangers.
Sir, Amen.
Stands Scotland where it did?
Alas poor Country,
Almost afraid to know it self. It cannot
Be called our Mother, but our Grave; where nothing
But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile:
Where sighs, and groans, and shrieks that rent the ayre
Are made, not marked: Where violent sorrow seems
A Modern ecstasy: The Deadmans knell,
Is there scarce asked for who, and good men's lives
Expire before the Flowers in their Caps,
Dying, or ere they sicken.
Oh Relation; too nice, and yet too true.
What's the newest grief?
That of an hours age, doth hiss the speaker,
Each minute teemes a new one.
How do's my Wife?
Why well.
And all my Children?
Well too.
The Tyrant he's not battered at their peace?
No, they were well at peace, when I did leave 'em
Be not a niggard of your speech: How gos't?
When I came hither to transport the Tidings
Which I have heavily borne, there ran a Rumour
Of many worthy Fellows, that were out,
Which was to my belief witnessed the rather,
For that I saw the Tyrants Power afoot.
Now is the time of help: your eye in Scotland
Would create Soldiers, make our women fight,
To doffe their dire distresses.
Be it their comfort
We are coming thither: Gracious England hath
Lent vs good Seyward, and ten thousand men,
An older, and a better Soldier, none
That Christendom gives out.
Would I could answer
This comfort with the like. But I have words
That would be howled out in the desert ayre,
Where hearing should not latch them.
What concern they,
The general cause, or is it a Fee-griefe
Due to some single breast?
No mind that's honest
But in it shares some woe, though the maine part
Pertains to you alone.
If it be mine
Keep it not from me, quickly let me have it.
Let not your ears despise my tongue for ever,
Which shall possess them with the heaviest sound
That ever yet they heard.
Humh: I guess at it.
Your Castle is surprised: your Wife, and Babes
Savagely slaughtered: To relate the manner
Were on the Quarry of these murdered Dear
To add the death of you.
Merciful Heaven:
What man, ne'er pull your hat upon your brows:
Give sorrow words; the grief that do's not speak,
Whispers the o're-fraught heart, and bids it break.
My Children too?
Wife, Children, Servants, all that could be found.
And I must be from thence? My wife killed too?
I have said.
Be comforted.
Let's make vs Med'cines of our great Revenge,
To cure this deadly grief.
He he's no Children. All my pretty ones?
Did you say All? Oh Hell-Kite! All?
What, All my pretty Chickens, and their Damme
At one fell swoop?
Dispute it like a man.
I shall do so:
But I must also feel it as a man;
I cannot but remember such things were
That were most precious to me: Did heaven look on,
And would not take their part? Sinful Macduff,
They were all struck for thee: Nought that I am,
Not for their own demerits, but for mine
Fell slaughter on their souls: Heaven rest them now.
Be this the Whetstone of your sword, let grief
Convert to anger: blunt not the heart, enrage it.
O I could play the woman with mine eyes,
And Braggart with my tongue. But gentle Heavens,
Cut short all intermission: Front to Front,
Bring thou this Fiend of Scotland, and my self
Within my Swords length set him, if he scope
Heaven forgive him too.
This time goes manly:
Come go we to the King, our Power is ready,
Our lack is nothing but our leave. Macbeth
Is ripe for shaking, and the Powers aboue
Put on their Instruments: Receive what cheer you may,
The Night is long, that never finds the Day.
I have too Nights watched with you, but can perceive no truth in your report. When was it she last walked?
Since his Majesty went into the Field, I have seen her rise from her bed, throw her Night-Gown up???pone her, unlock her Closet, take forth paper, fold it, write upon it, read it, afterwards Seal it, and again re???turn to bed; yet all this while in a most fast sleep.
A great perturbation in Nature, to receive at once the benefit of sleep, and do the effects of watching. In this slumbry agitation, besides her walking, and other actual performances, what (at any time) have you heard her say?
That Sir, which I will not report after her.
You may to me, and it is most meet you should.
Neither to you, nor any one, having no witness to confirm my speech.
Lo you, here she comes: This is her very guise, and up???on my life fast asleep: observe her, stand close.
How came she by that light?
Why it stood by her: she he's light by her con???tinually, it is her command.
You see her eyes are open.
I but their sense are shut.
What is it she do's now?
Look how she rubs her hands.
It is an accustomed action with her, to seem thus washing her hands: I have known her continue in this a quarter of an hour.
Yet heere's a spot.
Hark, she speaks, I will set down what comes from her, to satisfy my remembrance the more strongly.
Out damned spot: out I say. One: Two: Why then it is time to do it: Hell is murky. Fie, my Lord, fie, a Soldier, and afeared? what need we fear? who knows it, when none can call our power to account: yet who would have thought the old man to have had so much blood in him.
Do you mark that?
The Thane of Fife, had a wife: where is she now? What will these hands ne'er be clean? No more of that my Lord, no more of that: you mar all with this star???ting.
Go too, go too:
You have known what you should not.
She he's spoke what she should not, I am sure of that: Heaven knows what she he's known.
Heere's the smell of the blood still: all the per???fumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand.
Oh, oh, oh.
What a sigh is there? The hart is sorely charged.
I would not have such a heart in my bosom, for the dignity of the whole body.
Well, well, well.
Pray God it be sir.
This disease is beyond my practise: yet I have known those which have walked in their sleep, who have dyed holily in their beds.
Wash your hands, put on your Night-Gowne, look not so pale: I tell you yet again Banquo's buried; he cannot come out on's grave.
Even so?
To bed, to bed: there's knocking at the gate: Come, come, come, come, give me your hand: What's done, cannot be undone. To bed, to bed, to bed.
Will she go now to bed?
Directly.
Foul whisp'rings are abroad: unnatural deeds
Do breed unnatural troubles: infected minds
To their deaf pillows will discharge their Secrets:
More needs she the Divine, then the Physician:
God, God forgive vs all. Look after her,
Remove from her the means of all annoyance,
And still keep eyes upon her: So goodnight,
My mind she he's mated, and amazed my sight,
I think, but dare not speak.
Good night good Doctor.
The English power is near, led on by Malcolm,
His Uncle Seyward, and the good Macduff.
Revenges burn in them: for their dear causes
Would to the bleeding, and the grim Alarm
Excite the mortified man.
Near Byrnan wood
Shall we well meet them, that way are they coming.
Who knows if Donalbane be with his brother?
For certain Sir, he is not: I have a File
Of all the Gentry; there is Seywards Son,
And many vnruffe youths, that even now
Protest their first of Manhood.
What do's the Tyrant.
Great Dunsinane he strongly Fortifies:
Some say hoe's mad: Others, that lesser hate him,
Do call it valiant Fury, but for certain
He cannot buckle his distempered cause
Within the belt of Rule.
Now do's he feel
His secret Murders sticking on his hands,
Now minutely Revolts upbraid his Faith-breach:
Those he commands, move only in command,
Nothing in love: Now do's he feel his Title
Hang loose about him, like a Giants Robe
Upon a dwarfish Thief.
Who then shall blame
His pestered Senses to recoil, and start,
When all that is within him, do's condemn
It self, for being there.
Well, march we on,
To give Obedience, where it is truly owed:
Meet we the Med'cine of the sickly Weal,
And with him pour we in our Countries purge,
Each drop of vs.
Or so much as it needs,
To dew the Sovereign Flower, and drown the Weeds:
Make we our March towards Birnan.
Bring me no more Reports, let them fly all:
Till Byrnane wood remove to Dunsinane,
I cannot taint with Fear. What's the Boy Malcolm?
Was he not borne of woman? The Spirits that know
All mortal Consequences, have pronounced me thus:
Fear not Macbeth, no man that's borne of woman
Shall ere have power upon thee. Then fly false Thanes,
And mingle with the English Epicures,
The mind I sway by, and the heart I bear,
Shall never sag with doubt, nor shake with fear.
The devil damn thee black, thou cream-fac'd Loon:
Where got thou that Goose-looke.
There is ten thousand.
Geese Villain?
Soldiers Sir.
Go prick thy face, and ouer-red thy fear
Thou Lilly-liuer'd Boy. What Soldiers, Patch?
Death of thy Soul, those Linen cheeks of thine
Are Counsailers to fear. What Soldiers Whay-face?
The English Force, so please you.
Take thy face hence. Seyton, I am sick at hart,
When I behold: Seyton, I say, this push
Will cheer me ever, or dis-eate me now.
I have lived long enough: my way of life
Is fallen into the Sear, the yellow Leaf,
And that which should accompany Old-Age,
As Honour, Love, Obedience, Troops of Friends,
I must not look to have: but in their steed,
Curses, not loud but deep, Mouth-honor, breath
Which the poor heart would fine deny, and dare not.
Seyton?
What's your gracious pleasure?
What News more?
All is confirmed my Lord, which was reported.
Isle fight, till from my bones, my flesh be hacked.
Give me my Armour.
It is not needed yet.
Isle put it on:
Send out more Horses, skirre the Country round,
Hang those that talk of Fear. Give me mine Armour:
How do's your Patient, Doctor?
Not so sick my Lord,
As she is troubled with thicke-comming Fancies
That keep her from her rest.
Cure of that:
Can thou not Minister to a mind diseased,
Pluck from the Memory a rooted Sorrow,
Raze out the written troubles of the Brain,
And with some sweet Oblivious Antidote
Cleanse the stuffed bosom, of that perilous stuff
Which weighs upon the heart?
Therein the Patient
Must minister to himself.
Throw Physic to the Dogs, Isle none of it.
Come, put mine Armour on: give me my Staff:
Seyton, send out: Doctor, the Thanes fly from me:
Come sir, dispatch. If thou coldest Doctor, cast
The Water of my Land, find her Disease,
And purge it to a sound and pristine Health,
I would applaud thee to the very Echo,
That should applaud again. Pull't off I say,
What Rubarb, Cyme, or what Purgatiue drug
Would scour these English hence: hear you of them?
I my good Lord: your Royal Preparation
Makes vs hear something.
Bring it after me:
I will not be afraid of Death and Bane,
Till Birnane Forest come to Dunsinane.
Were I from Dunsinane away, and clear,
Profit again should hardly draw me here.
Cousins, I hope the days are near at hand
That Chambers will be safe.
We doubt it nothing.
What wood is this before vs?
The wood of Birnane.
Let every Soldier hew him down a Bough,
And bear't before him, thereby shall we shadow
The numbers of our Host, and make discovery
Err in report of vs.
It shall be done.
We learn no other, but the confident Tyrant
Keeps still in Dunsinane, and will endure
Our setting down befor't.
It is his maine hope:
For where there is advantage to be given,
Both more and less have given him the Revolt,
And none serve with him, but constrained things,
Whose hearts are absent too.
Let our just Censures
Attend the true event, and put we on
Industrious Souldiership.
The time approaches,
That will with due decision make vs know
What we shall say we have, and what we owe:
Thoughts speculative, their unsure hopes relate,
But certain issue, strokes must arbitrate,
Towards which, advance the war.
Hang out our Banners on the outward walls,
The Cry is still, they come: our Castles strength
Will laugh a Siege to scorn: Here let them lye,
Till Famine and the Ague eat them up:
Were they not forced with those that should be ours,
We might have met them dareful, beard to beard,
And beat them backward home. What is that noise?
It is the cry of women, my good Lord.
I have almost forgot the taste of Fears:
The time he's been, my senses would have cooled
To hear a Night-shricke, and my Fell of hair
Would at a dismal Treatise rowze, and stir
As life were in it. I have supped full with horrors,
Direness familiar to my slaughterous thoughts
Cannot once start me. Wherefore was that cry?
The Queen (my Lord) is dead.
She should have dyed hereafter;
There would have been a time for such a word:
To morrow, and to morrow, and to morrow,
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day,
To the last Syllable of Recorded time:
And all our yesterdays, have lighted Fools
The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief Candle,
Life's but a walking Shadow, a poor Player,
That struts and frets his hour upon the Stage,
And then is heard no more. It is a Tale
Told by an Idiot, full of sound and fury
Signifying nothing.
Thou come to use thy Tongue: thy Story quickly.
Gracious my Lord,
I should report that which I say I saw,
But know not how to do it.
Well, say sir.
As I did stand my watch upon the Hill
I looked toward Byrnane, and anon me thought
The Wood began to move.
Liar, and Slave.
Let me endure your wrath, if it be not so:
Within this three Mile may you see it coming.
I say, a moving Grove.
If thou speak fhlse,
Upon the next Tree shall thou hang alive
Till Famine cling thee: If thy speech be sooth,
I care not if thou dost for me as much.
I pull in Resolution, and begin
To doubt the Equivocation of the Fiend,
That lies like truth. Fear not, till Byrnane Wood
Do come to Dunsinane, and now a Wood
Comes toward Dunsinane. Arm, Arm, and out,
If this which he avouches, do's appear,
There is nor flying hence, nor tarrying here.
In gin to be weary of the Sun,
And wish the estate of the world were now undone.
Ring the Alarm Bell, blow Wind, come wrack,
At least we'll dye with Harness on our back.
Now near enough:
Your levy Screens throw down,
And show like those you are: You (worthy Uncle)
Shall with my Cousin your right Noble Son
Lead our first Battle. Worthy Macduffe, and wee
Shall take vpon's what else remains to do,
According to our order.
Fare you well:
Do we but find the Tyrants power to night,
Let vs be beaten, if we cannot fight.
Make all our Trumpets speak, give the?? all breath
Those clamorous Harbingers of Blood, &amp; Death.
They have tied me to a stake, I cannot fly,
But Bear-like I must fight the course. What's he
That was not borne of Woman? Such a one
Am I to fear, or none.
What is thy name?
Thou'lt be afraid to hear it.
No: though thou call thy self a hotter name
Then any is in hell.
My name's Macbeth.
The devil himself could not pronounce a Title
More hateful to mine ear.
No: nor more fearful.
Thou lie abhorred Tyrant, with my Sword
Isle prove the lye thou speak.
Thou was it borne of woman;
But Swords I smile at, Weapons laugh to scorn,
Brandished by man that's of a Woman borne.
That way the noise is: Tyrant show thy face,
If thou be slain, and with no stroke of mine,
My Wife and Childrens Ghosts will haunt me still:
I cannot strike at wretched Kernes, whose arms
Are hired to bear their Staves; either thou Macbeth,
Or else my Sword with an vnbattered edge
I sheath again vndeeded. There thou should be,
By this great clatter, one of greatest note
Seems bruited. Let me find him Fortune,
And more I beg not.
This way my Lord, the Castles gently rendered:
The Tyrants people, on both sides do fight,
The Noble Thanes do bravely in the War,
The day almost it self professes yours,
And little is to do.
We have met with Foes
That strike beside vs.
Enter Sir, the Castle.
Why should I play the Roman Fool, and dye
On mine own sword? whiles I see lives, the gashes
Do better upon them.
Turn Hell-hound, turn.
Of all men else I have avoided thee:
But get thee back, my soul is too much charged
With blood of thine already.
I have no words,
My voice is in my Sword, thou bloodier Villain
Then terms can give thee out.
Thou loosest labour,
As easy may thou the intrenchant Ayre
With thy keen Sword impress, as make me bleed:
Let fall thy blade on vulnerable Crests,
I bear a charmed Life, which must not yield
To one of woman borne.
Despair thy Charm,
And let the Angel whom thou still hast served
Tell thee, Macduffe was from his Mothers womb
Untimely ripped.
Accursed be that tongue that tells me so;
For it hath Cowed my better part of man:
And be these Juggling Fiends no more believed,
That palter with vs in a double sense,
That keep the word of promise to our ear,
And break it to our hope. Isle not fight with thee.
Then yield thee Coward,
And live to be the show, and gaze of the time.
We'll have thee, as our rarer Monsters are
Painted upon a pole, and vnder-writ,
Here may you see the Tyrant.
I will not yield
To kiss the ground before young Malcolmes feet,
And to be baited with the Rabbles curse.
Though Byrnane wood be come to Dunsinane,
And thou opposed, being of no woman borne,
Yet I will try the last. Before my body,
I throw my warlike Shield: Lay on Macduffe,
And damned be him, that first cries hold, enough.
I would the Friends we miss, were safe arrived.
Some must go off: and yet by these I see,
So great a day as this is cheaply bought.
Macduffe is missing, and your Noble Son.
Your son my Lord, he's paid a soldiers debt,
He only lived but till he was a man,
The which no sooner had his Prowess confirmed
In the vnshrinking station where he fought,
But like a man he dyed.
Then he is dead?
I, and brought off the field: your cause of sorrow
Must not be measured by his worth, for then
It hath no end.
Had he his hurts before?
I, on the Front.
Why then, Gods Soldier be he:
Had I as many Sons, as I have hairs,
I would not wish them to a fairer death:
And so his Knell is knolled.
Hoe's worth more sorrow,
And that Isle spend for him.
He's worth no more,
They say he parted well, and paid his score,
And so God be with him. Here comes newer comfort???
Hail King, for so thou art.
Behold where stands
The Usurpers cursed head: the time is free:
I see thee compassed with thy Kingdoms Pearl,
That speak my salutation in their minds:
Whose voices I desire aloud with mine.
Hail King of Scotland.
Hail King of Scotland.
We shall not spend a large expense of time,
Before we reckon with your several loves,
And make vs even with you. My Thanes and Kinsmen
Henceforth be Earls, the first that ever Scotland
In such an Honour named: What's more to do,
Which would be planted newly with the time,
As calling home our exiled Friends abroad,
That fled the Snares of watchful Tyranny,
Producing forth the cruel Ministers
Of this dead Butcher, and his Fiend-like Queen;
Who (as it is thought) by self and violent hands,
Took off her life. This, and what needful else
That call's upon vs, by the Grace of Grace,
We will perform in measure, time, and place:
So thanks to all at once, and to each one,
Whom we inuit, to see vs Crowned at Scone.

