THese five Triumphal Arches were first taken in hand in the beginning of April 1603. presently after his Majesty was pro∣claimed.
It being expected •hat his passage would have been through his honourable City and Chamber to his Coronation
upon Saint Iames his day •ollowing: But by reason of the sickness, it ple•sed his Majesty to be solemnly Crowned at West∣minster,
without sight of these Triumphs: Notwithstanding the business being set on foot, went on with all expedition; till
Bartholmew-tide and then ceased because of the great mortality, 40. days more was given for the preparing of this Triumphal Arch.
In which time, the str•etes for that purpose were d•l•gently surveyed, heighths, breadts and distances taken, as it were to make For∣tisications
for the •lemnities: Seven pieces of ground like• so many fields for a battle) were plotted forth, upon which these Trium∣phase
should be erected: The gladsome and long •esired Morning at length is come, In which the Streets seem to bee paved with
people, that in heaps flock together, to behold their proud heads that were advanced in this manner.
THE first •agm was erected in Fanchurch-streete, the back of it so learning on the East end of
the Church, that it ouer-spread the whole street. And thus we describe it.
It was a Flat-square, builed upright; the Perpendicular-line of the whole Frame, (that is to
•ay, the distance from the bottom to the top,) as the Ground-line, is (also in this, so in all the
rest) to be found out and tried by the Scale, divided by 1. 2. 3. 4. and 5. and set at the lower end
of the Piece: By which figures feet are represented: So that in all the descriptions, where
mention is to bee made of Heights, Breadths, or any other Commensurable proportions, you
shall find them left thus—with a blank, because we wish you rather to apply them to the
Scale your self, then by setting them down, to call either your skill or judgment in question.
And note withal, that the Ground-plot hath not the same Scale which the upright hath, for of
the two Scales, which you see annexed, the Lesser is of the Ground, and stands in the Ground-plot,
the Greater, for the Edisice or Building it self.
This Gate of Passage, then (into which his Majesty made his first entrance) was derived from the Tuscana (being the prince∣pal
pillar of those 5. upon which the Noble Frame of Architecture doth stand,) for the Tuscane Column is the stro•gest &amp; most worcester∣thy
to su•port so famous a Work, as this Fabric was, considering that upon his Rustic Pillars, the goodliest Houses, Turrets,
Steeples, &amp;c. within this City, were to be borne: And those Models, stood as a Coronet on the forehead or Battlements of
this Great and Magnificent Edisice.
The cheeks or sides of the Gate, were (as it were) doubly guarded with the Pottraitures of Atlas King of Mauritania, who
(according to his own shortness and thickness) from the Symmetry of his foot, caused a pillar to be made, whose height with
Base and Capital was 6. times the thickness in height. And so is this of ours, bearing the name of Tuscana, as we said before, and
reaching to the very point of the Arch, from whence wee did derive Dorica which bore up the Architiue, Frizz, and Coronixe, and
was garnished with Corbels or Croxtels sitting such work, besides the beauty of Pyramids, Beasts, Water, Tables, and many other in∣richments,
which you may find expressed in the Piece it self.
From a Gallery directly over the gate, the sound of loud Music (being the Waits and Hault-boyes of the City) was sent forth.
At the foot of the Battlemēts was in Capital letters inscribed this word Londinium, &amp; beneath that, these words Camera Regia.
In this Pygmy or Arch Triumphal, were placed 12. personages, of which she that had the preeminence to sit highest, was called
Monarchy Britannica.
At her feet sate Divine Wisdom.
Veneration,
Prompt•tude,
Vigilance:
Gladness,
Loving Affection,
Vnanimit•se.
Beneath all these stood the Genius of the City, richly attired, being supported on the right hand by a person figuring The
Council of the City; and on the left by a person figuring the Warlike force of the City.
Directly under these, in an Aback thrust out before the rest, lay Thamesis the River, leaning his Arm upon a •••rde, out of
which, water with live fishes were seen to run forth, and play about him.
The speakers were only Thamesis and Genius, who uttered these speeches following on the other side.
TIme, Fate, and Fortune have at length conspired,
To give our Age the day so much desired.
What all the minutes, hours, weeks, months, and years,
That hang in file upon these silver hairs,
Could not produce, beneath the Briton stroke,
The To•an, Sax•n, Dane, and Norman yoke,
This •oint of Time bath done▪ Now London rear•
Thy forehead high, and on it strive to we•re
Thy 〈◊〉 Gems• Teach thy ste•pe Tow•s to rise
H•gher with people: S•t with sparkling eyes
Thy spacious windows: and in eu•rye street,
Let thronging •oy, Love, and Amazement meet.
Cleave all the air with shouts, and let the cry
Strike through as long, and universally
As thunder; For, thou now art blist to see
That sight, for which thou did begin to be.
When Brutus plough first gave thee infant bounds,
And •, thy GENIVS walk's auspicious rounds
In every furrow; Then did I forelooke,
And saw this day marked white in Clotho's book.
The several Circles, both of change and sway,
Within this Isle, there also figured lay:
Of which the greatest, perfectest, and last
Was this, whose present happiness we taste.
Why keep yo• silence Daughters? What dull peace
Is this inhabits you? Shall office cease
Upon th•aspect of him, to whom you owe
〈…〉 Shall TIME know,
That 〈◊〉, wherein your flame stood still,
An 〈…〉 Now heaven avert an i'd
Of that black l•ok. Ere pause possess your breasts
I w•sh you more of Plagues: "Zeal when it rests,
Leaves to be zeal. Up thou tame RIVER, wake,
And from thy liquid limbs this slumber shake:
Thou drown'st thy self in inofficious s•up;
An• these thy sluggish waters seem to creep,
Rather them flow. Up•rise, and swell with pride
Aboue thy banks. "Now is not every Tide.
TO what vain end should I contend to show
〈…〉 powers, when Seas of pomp o'reflow
The Cit•ies •ace: and cover all the shore
W•th san is more rich than Tagus wealthy ore?
When in the stood of I•y, that comes with him,
He drowns the world; yet makes it live and swim,
And spring with gladness: Not my fishes here,
Though they be dumb, but do express the cheer
o• these bright streams. No less may These, and I
Boast our delights, albe't we silent lie.
INdeed, true Glad•esse doth not always speak:
"Joy bred and borne but in the tongue, is weak.
Ye• (least the fervor of so pure a flame,
As this my City bears, might loose the name,
Without the apt euenting of her heate)
Know greatest IAMES (and no less good, than great.)
In the behalf of a•l my virtuous Sons,
Whereof my eldest there, thy pomp forerunnes,
(A Man without my flattering, or his Pride,
As worthy, as hoe's blessed •o be thy guide)
In his grave name, and all his Brethrens right,
(Who thirst to drink the Nectar of thy sight)
The Council, Commoners, and Multitude;
(Glad, that this day so long denied, is viewed)
I tender thee the heartiest welcome, yet
That ever King had to his Empires seat:
No•er came man, more longed for, more desired
And being come, more reverenced, loved, admired:
Hear, and record it: " In a Pri•ce it is
" No little virtue, to know who are •is.
With like devotions, do I stoopet'embrace
This springing glory of thy Godlike race;
His Countries wonder, Hope, Love, Joy and Pride:
How well doth he become the royal side
Of this erected, and broad spreading Tree,
Under whose shade may Brittane ever be.
And from this branch, may thousand branches more
Shoot over the Maine, and knit with every shore
In bonds of Marriage, Kindred, and Increase;
And stile this Land, the Na•ill of their peace.
This is your Servants wish, your Cities vow,
Which still shall propagate it self, with you;
And free from spurs of Hope, that slow minds 〈◊〉:
" He seeks no hire, that owes his life to Love.
And here she comes that is no less a part
In this days greatness, then in my glad heart.
Glory of Queens, and Glory of your Name,
Whose Graces do as far out-speake your Fame,
As Fame doth silence, when her Trumpet rings
You Daughter, Sister, Wife of several Kings:
Besides Alliance, and the stile of Mother,
In which one title you drown all your other.
Instance, be that fair shoot, is gone before
•our eldest Joy, and top of all your store,
With those, whose sight to vs is yet denied,
But not our zeal to them, or ought beside
This City can to you: For whose estate
She hopes you will be still good Advocate
To her best Lord. So, whilst you mortal are,
No taste of sower mortality once dare
Approach your house; nor Fortune greet your Gre••
But coming on, and with a forward face.
THE second Triumphal Arch was erected by the Italians: the cost theirs: the Invention
their own: It took up the whole breadth of Gracious-streete (on which it stood) being
—foot: the height of it was—foot. The lower part of this Building, was a
large square, garnished with four great Corinthia Columns: In the midst of which
square, was cut out a fair and a Spacious hie gate, Arched, being—foot in the Perpen∣dicular-line,
and—in the Ground-line: directly over the gate were advanced the Arms
of the Kingdom, the Supporters whereof were fairly cut out to the life.
On the top of this first square (being flat) was erected another Square which bare
in the fore side four more lesser Columns, on which were all the garnishments belonging
to those pillars: as namely, the architriue frizz and Cornish, on which Square was placed
a great Canted Pedestal, which with his moldinges did diminish upwards to smaller Cants,
on which top was fixed a Personage carved or molded out to the life, her left hand leaning on
a sword, with the point downward, and her right hand reaching forth a Diadem, which,
she seemed by bowing of her knee and head, to bestow upon his Majesty.
On the four Corners of this upper part, stood four naked Portractures (in great) with artificial trumpets in their
hands.
All which Shapes that were erected in most lively colours, together with Pyramids, long Streamers, Galleries, and all o∣there
inrichments belonging to this Archtriumphant: I refer you to the Model or Piece it self, for the Front of it, as the next
leaf will show you, so likewise proportional was the back side to the fore-Front.
The Italians, were placed within two little Galleries very richly and stately hung, under the Arch of the Passage: In whose
behalf, thus much Latin was delivered.
Salve, Rex magne, salve. Salutem Maiestati tu Itali, foelicissimum Aduentum laity, foelices sub te future, precamur. Eccè hic Omnes,
Exigui Munere, pauculi Numero: sed magni ergo Maiestatem enemy, multi obsequij. At nec Atlas, queen Coelum sustinet, no;
ipsa Coeli Conuexa, altitudinem attingant meritorum Regis optimi, Hoc est, eius quem de Teipso expressists doctissimo (Deus!) &amp;
admirabili, penicillo, Beatissimos populos, vbi &amp; Philosophus regnat, &amp; Rex Philosophatur. Salve; Viue Rex Potentissime, foeliciter.
Regna, Rex sapientissime, foeliciter. Itali optamus Omnes, Itali clamamus Omnes, Omnes, Omnes.
ALL hail mighty Monarch! wee (the Italians) full of Joy to behold thy most happy presence, and full of
hopes to enjoy a felicity under thy Royal wing, doe wish and pray for the health of thy Majesty. Behold,
here wee are all; mean in merit: few in number: but towards thy Sovereign self, in our loves great, in our
duties more. For neither Altos, who bears up heaven, no nor the Arched roof it self of heaven, can by many-many
degrees reach to the top and glorious height of a good and virtuous Kings deservings. And such a one is he, whom
(Good God!) most lively, most wisely, and in wonderful colours, thou did then pencil down in thine own person,
when thou said those people were blessed, where a Philosopher rules, and where the Ruler plays the Philosopher. All hail
thou royalist of Kings; live thou mightiest of Princes: Reign thou wisest of Monarchs in all prosperity: these are the
wishes of vs Italians: the hearty wishes of vs all: All, even All.
THE third welcome that his Majesty received, was from the Belgians, who had builded••
stately Triumphal Arch, to entertain him in, and thus was it contriude.
So wide did the body of it extend it self, that it swallowed up the breadth of the whole
street, near the Royal Exchange in Cornehill. The Passage of state was a gate, comely, and
large, ascending—foot in height, and—foot in the breadth, neatly Arched, and gre∣ced
with two lesser Posternes on the sides, whose dimensions you may behold in the model.
Sundry inscriptions were in golden Letters to bee seen, both over the Gate, and in the
Tables, filled with excellent Pictures; as the King in his Imperial Robes: with other Portractu•es
of Princes, and Poetical Emblems of Peace, &amp;c. On the back part also were pieces, wherein
were drawn the people of the Seventeen Provinces at their Husbandry; their Exchange: their
Mart: Also seventeen children on the fore side, representing the seventeen Provinces, sate
in degrees, each of them having a Scutcheon in his hand, figuring his Province.
On the shoulders of this Belgic body, stood rows of Balysters with Pedestals, that supported Lyons rampant, bearing up
Banners: And aboue them in the midst of another square about with Balysters likewise, was advanced a woman (figuring
Divine Providence, her feet fastened to a great Pedestal, whose top was curiously connexed and knit together with the
tails of two D•lphins.
Other Garnishments there were that gave illustration and beauty to this building, as Columns, Pyramids, &amp;c. whose pro∣portions
your eye may measure on the other side. The speech, wherein the love of these Strangers was testified, was deliue∣red
by a boy in Latin, and is thus much in English.
GREAT King, those so many Scepters, which even fill thy right hand, are all thine own, only by the Providence of heaven. Behold,
heaven it self laughs to see thy Subjects smile, and thunder out l••a Plaudities, to hear their Aves. This honour of Sovereignty bee∣ing
at the beginning of the world bestowed but upon few; upon the heads of few were the cares of a Crown set, for to sway only but
one Empire (happily) as it is a labour hard: So none can undergo the weight but such as are mighty: But (with a beck as it were)
to control many Nations (and those of different dispositions too) O! the Arm of man can never do that, but the finger of God. God therefore
(that guides the Chariot of the world) holds the Raynes of thy Kingdom in his own hand: It is he whose beams lend a light to thine. It is hee
that teaches thee the Art of Ruling, because none but hee made thee a King. And therefore as thou growest in years, thou waxest old in
Virtues: of all thy Virtues, Religion sitting highest. And most worthy; for by Religion, the hearts of barbarous Nations are made soft:
By Religion, Rebellion hath a yoke cast about her neck, and is brought to believe, that those Laws to which thou submittest even thy royal
self, are most easy. With Religion Justice keeps company, who once fled from this profane world, but hearing the name of King Iames
she is again returned. By her side sits her sister Fortitude, whose life is ready (in Heroike actions) to bee spent for the safety of
thy people. Besides to make these Virtues full, Apollo and the Muses, resign, the one his Golden lyre, the other their Laurel, to thy royal
hands, whilst Plenty (daughter to Industry) lays the blessings both of Country and City in heaps at thy feet. These are the gifts of
heaven: the fame then spreading it self so far, that (to wonder at them) both the Poles seem to come together. We (the Belgians) likewise
come, to that intent: a Nation banished from our own Cra•l•s, yet nursed and brought up in the tender bosom of a Princely mother, Eliza.
The love which we once dedicated to her (as a Mother) doubly do We vow it to thee, our Sovereign, and Father: Entreating wee may bee
sheltered under thy wings now, as under hers: Our Prayers being, that he who through the loins of so many Kingdoms, may likewise mule∣tiply
thy years, and le•gthen them out to the age of a Phoenix: And that thy Queen (who is one part of thy self) with thy Progeny
(who are the second hopes of thy people,) may both give too, and receive from, thy Kingdom Immortal glory.
THIS Pygmy presented it self aboue the great Conduit in Cheap: and carried the name of the New Arabia,
under which title the whole Island of Britannia was figured.
This was beautified with a large Gate in the midst: On each side was cut out a Postern, either of which
was—foot wide, and—foot high: before which Posternes two Portals were built from the same, having
their sides open four several ways, and serving as Pedestals (of Rustic) to support two great Pyramids,
whose bases were held up with four great Balls, and four Lyons.
This Mechanic body had other dead limbs, (which you may behold cut out on the other side.) The
lively and stirring parts were these. viz.
In the most eminent place was advanced a person, representing Arabia Britannica, and within a Nesete (beneath her) stood
Fame.
Directly under her, in a wide hollow square, were exalted five greene Mounts, the one swelling aboue the other; upon
which the five Senses, (Hearing, Seeing, Feeling, Smelling and Taste,) sate heavily drooping: before which Mounts, an Artifi∣ciall
Lauer was erected, called the Fount of Virtue; out of which (from sundry pipes) upon his Majesties approach, ran
wine very plenteously.
At the foot of this Fount lay Detraction and Oblivion, Sleeping till his Majesties approach; but being arrived at the place,
and the Tromp of Fame, starting up the Senses, they two likewise awaked, doing their best, with clubs to beat down the Fount,
but were hindered by the Senses, and a person representing Circumspection.
Upon several Ascensions, (and close adjoining to the Pyramids,) were seated at one side, the three Graces, and on the other
side the three Hours.
The speakers were Fame, Hours, Euphrosine (one of the Graces) and Circumspection, who was mounted on a Stage, raild
round about with Pilastres, being drawn forth some thirty foot in length from the other Building. And thus sounded
their voices.
TVrne into ice mine eye-bals whilst the sound,
Flying through this brazen tromp, may back rebound,
To stop Fems hundred tongues, leaning them mute,
As is an untouched bell, or stringlesse Lute,
For Virtues Fount, which late ran deep and clear,
Dries: and melts all her body to a tear:
You Graces: and you Hours that each day run,
On the quick errands of the Golden Sun,
Great• Monarch of the West, whose glorious Stem,
Does new support a triple Diadem,
〈◊〉 more then that of thy grand Grandsire, Brute.)
Thou that may make a King thy Substitute,
And doest besides the Red-rose and the white,
With the rich flower of France, thy garland dight,
Wearing about kings now, or those of old,
A double Crown, of Laurel and of Gold,
O let my voice pass through thy Royal care,
And whisper thus much, that we figure here.
A new Arabia, in whose spiced Nest,
A Phoenix lived, and did in the Suns breast,
Her loss made Sight, in Tears to drown her eyes,
O say? to Virtues Fount what has befell,
That thus her Veins shrink up.
We cannot tell.
Behold the fiue-fold guard of Sense, which keeps
the sacred stream, sits drooping: near them sleep,
Two horrid monsters: Fame, summon each sense,
To tell the cause of this strange Accidence.
The Ear grew deaffe, Taste like a Sick-man lies,
Finding no relish: Every other Sense
Forgot his office, Worth and excellence,
Whereby this Fount of Virtue began to freeze,
Threatened to be drunk up by two enemies,
Snaky Detraction, and Oblivion,
But at thy glorious presence both are gone.
Thou being that sacred Phoenix, that doth rise,
From th'ashes of the first; Beams from thine eyes
So virtually shining, that they bring
To Englands new Arabia, a new spring:
For Joy whereof, Nymphs, Senses, Hours and Fame,
Eccho-loud Hymns to his Imperial name.
At the end of this speech, a song (to an excellent Music) was delivered, which being finished, his Majesty went on.
THE fifth Pygmy was a summer Arbor, and seemed to grow close to the little Condu•t in Cheap, which •oy∣ning
to the back of it, served (or might bee supposed to have been) as a Fountain to water the fruits of
this Garden of Plenty.
This greene bower spread it self likewise (as all the rest did) over the whole breadth of the street•;
having two Gates arched and grated Arbor-wise, to the height of—feet, and breadth of—: the
sides of which gates were borne up with four great French terms, standing upon Pedestals, which con∣teined
in their full height—foot. Between these open Passages were a pair of st•ires mounted, at
the bottom of which (on two pillars) were fixed two Satyrs, carved out in wood. Both the roo•e and
sides of these Gates, were Artificially hung with Pompions, Cowcumbers, Grapes, Cherries, Pears, Apples, and all other
fruits, which the land brings forth. The upper part also (which was closed with three round tops, Fortune standing on
the midst of the three) was garnished with lesser fruits, and with all sorts of Flowers, made by Art.
The whole Frame of this summer house, stood (at the Ground-line) upon—•oote, the Perpendicular, stretching it self
to—.
Peace and Plenty had the highest places in this Bower, and sate to gether: directly under them, sate two other persons, re∣presenting
Gold and Silver, supporting the Globe of the world between them: On each side of them sate two other persons,
the one Pomona, Goddess of Fruits, the other Ceres, Goddess of Corn.
Upon two large Descents (a little below these) were placed at one end the nine Muses, at the other end the seven liberal
Sciences.
Syluanus, and his followers, (who upon sight of his Majesty, played upon Cornets) gave entertainment to his Majesty•, in
these speeches following.
MOST happy Prince, pardon me, that being mean in habit, and wild in appearance (for my richest livery is but leaves, and my
stateliest dwelling but in the woods) thus rudely with piping Syluancs, I presume to intercept your Royal passage. These are my walks,
yet stand I not here to cut off your way, but to give it a full and a bounteous welcome, being a messenger sent from the La•y
Eirene my mistress; those that sleep under the warmth of her wings adore her by the Sacred and Celestial name of P•ace; her daughter
Euporia (well known by the name of Plenty) is at this present with her, (being indeed never from her side:) Under yonder Arbor they •it▪
which after the daughters name is called Hortus Euporiae (Plenties Bower.) Chaste are they both, and both maidens, in memory of a Virgin
to whom they were Nu•se-children, for whose sake (because they were bound to her for their life) me have they charged to lay at your Imp∣real
•eete, (being your hereditary due) the tribute of their love. And with it thus to say. That they have languished many heavy months for
your presence, which to them would have been, (and proud they are that it shall be now so) of the same operation and influence, that the Sun
is to the Spring, and the Spring to the Earth; hearing therefore what treble preferment you have bestowed upon this day, wherein besides the
beams of a glorious Sun, two other clear and gracious Stars shine cheerfully on these her homely buildings; Into which (because no du••
should be wanting) she hath given leave even to Strangers, to be sharers in her happiness, by suffering them to bid you likewise welcome: By
me (once hers, now your vassal) she entreats, and with a knee sinking lower then the ground on which you tread, do I humbly execute her
pleasure, that •re you pass further, you would deign to walk into yonder Garden. The Hesperides live not there, but the Muses, and the Mu∣ses
no longer than under your protection. Thus far am I sent to conduct you thither, prostrately begging this grace (since I •are not, as
being unworthy, Lackey by your Royal side) that yet these my greene Followers and my self may be •oyfull fore••unners of your expected ap∣proch.
Away Syluans.
THE sixth Triumphal Arch, was (in the shape which you see it caries on the other side) erected
aboue the Conduit in Fleetestreete; extending it self over the whole street, to the length of
—foot, and in height—foot: The Gate of it was—foot wide, and—foot hie. The
two Posternes were answerable to those of others set down before: and were cut out of the two
round Towers which rise up in proportionable measures, from the ground on the foreside
with battlements and Ballisters round enclosing the tops, containing in all their heights—
foot: over the Gate, and just in the midst of the Building, (which was spacious and left open)
a Globe was seen to move being filled with all the estates that are in the land; And this Engine
was turned about by four persons, representing the four Elements, (Earth, Water, Air, and Fire)
who were placed so quaintly, that the Globe seemed to have his motion even on the Crowns
of their heads.
The lively garnishments to this Building were 23 persons, of which the principal and worthiest was Astray (Justice) who was
advanced to the highest Seat: Beneath her in a Cant by her self, Arete (Virtue) was placed: and at her feet Fortune, who
trod upon the Globe.
In a dark and obscure place (near Virtue) sate Envy: beneath whom, on several Ascensions were placed the Cardinal Ver∣tues,
Justice, Fortitude, Temperance and Prudence; and in an opposite seat, the four kingdoms, England, Scotland, France and
Ireland.
Zeal was the Presenter of this Device, who spake thus.
THe populous Globe of this our English Isle.
Seemed to move backward at the funeral pile
Of her dead female Majesty: All states
From Nobles down to Spirits of meaner Fates,
Moved opposite to Nature and to Peace,
As if these men had been Th'antipodes.
But see, the virtue of a regal eye,
Th'attractiue wonder of mans Majesty,
Our Globe as drawn in a right line again,
And now appear new faces and new men:
The Elements, Earth, Water, Ayre and Fire,
(Which ever c'ipt a natural desire,
To combat each with other) being at first
Created enemies, to fight their worst,
See: as the peaceful presence of their King,
How quietly they move without their Sting.
Earth not devouring: Fire not defacing,
Water not drowning: and the Ayre not chasing:
But propping the quaint Fabric that here stands,
Without the violence of their wrathful hands.
Mirror of times, lo, where they Fortune sits
Aboue the world, and all our human wits,
But thy hie Virtue aboue that: what pen
Or Art, or Brain, can reach thy Virtues then?
At whose Immortal brightness and true light,
Envies infectious eyes have lost their sight:
Her Snakes (not daring to shoot forth their stings,
Against such a glorious Object) down she flings
Their forks of Venom into her own maw,
Whilst her rank teeth the glittering poisons chawe,
For tic the property of Envies blood,
To dry away at every Kingdoms good,
Especially when she had eyes to view
These four Maine Virtues which here figure you,
Justice in causes: Fortitude against foes,
Temp'rance in spleen; and Prudence in all those:
And then so rich an Empire, whose fair breast
Contains four Kingdoms by your entrance blessed,
By Brute divided, but by you alone,
All are again united, and made One:
Whose fruitful glories shine so far and even,
They touch not only earth, but they kiss heaven,
From whence Astray is descended hither,
Who with our last Queens Spirit fled up thither,
Fore-knowing on the earth she could not rest,
Till you had locked her in your rightful breast,
And therefore all estates, whose proper Arts
Live by the breath of Majesty, had harts,
Burning in holy Zeals Immaculate sires,
With quenchless Ardors and unstained desires.
To see what they now see, your powerful Grace,
Reflecting Joys on every Subjects face.
These painted flames and yellow-burning stripes,
Upon this robe being but as shows and types,
Of that great Zeal; And therefore in the name,
Of this glad City, whither no Prince ever came,
More loved, more longed for, lowly I entreat
You'd be to her as gracious as you're great:
So with reuerberate shouts our Globe shall ring,
The Musics close being thus, God save our King.
THE seventh and last Pygmy (within the City) was erected at Temple-barre, being adjoined close to the
Gate: The Building was in all points like a Temple, and • dedicated to Ianus Quadrifrons.
Beneath that Foure-fac'd head of Ianus was advanced the Arms of the Kingdom, with the Supporters
cut out to the life: from whence being remote they now are placed in the Guild Hall.
The walls and gates of this Temple were brass; the Pillars silver, their Capitals and Bases gold: All the
Frontispiece (downward from those Arms) was beautified and supported by twelve rich Columns, of
which the four lowermost, being great Corinthian pillars, stood upon two large Pedestals, with a fair
V••x over them in stead of Architriue, Frieze and Cornice: Aboue them, eight Columns more, were likewise set, two and two
upon a large Pedestal; for as our work began (for his Majesties entrance) with Rustic, so did wee think it fit, that this out
Temple, should end with the most famous Column, whose beauty and goodlinesse is derived both from the Tuscane, Doric,
Ionic and Corinthian, and received his full perfection from Titus Vespasi•n, who advanced it to the highest place of dignity 〈◊〉
his Arch Triumphal, and (by reason that the beauties of it were a mixture taken from the rest) he gave it the name of Com∣posita
or Italica: within the Temple stood an Altar, with burning Ince•se upon it, before which a Flamen appears, and to the Flamen
comes the Genius of the City. The principal person in this Temple, was Peace. At her feet lay War grovelling. At her right hand
stood Wealth. On the same hand likewise, but somewhat remote, and in a Cant by her self, Quiet was seated, the first hand maid
of Peace, whose feet stood upon Tumult. On the left hand (at the former distance) Liberty the second hand-maide of Peace
had her place, at whose feet Servitude lay subjected. Beneath these (on distinct degrees) sate two other hand maids of Peace,
Safe•y and Felicity, Safety trampling upon Danger and Fell•city upon Unhappiness. Genius and Flamen spake thus much.
STay, what art thou, that in this strange attire,
Dare kindle stranger, and unhallowed fire
Upon this Altar?
Rather what art thou
That dare so r•deli interrupt my vow?
My habit speaks my name.
A Flamen?
Yes,
And Martialis called.
I so did guess
By my short view, but whence did thou ascend
Hither? or how? or to what mystic end?
The noise, and present tumult of this Day,
Roused me from sleep, and silence, where I lay
Obscured from light; which when I wak• to see,
I wondering thought what this •reat pomp might be.
When (looking in my Calendar) I found
The •des of Marche were entered, and I bound
With these, to celebrate the Genial feast
Of Anna styled Perenna, Mars his guest;
Who, in this Month of his, is yearly called
To banquet at his Altar•; and instald,
A Goddess with him, since she files the Year,
And knits the oblique scarce that girts the sphere.
Whilst four faced •anus turns his vernal look
Upon their meeting hours, as if he took
High pride and pleasure.
Sure thou still dost dream.
And both thy tongue, and thought rides on the strea•e
Of Fantasy: Behold here Hee nor She,
Have any Altar▪ Fane, or Deity.
Stoop; read but this Inscription: and then view
To whom the place is consecrate. Tic true
That this is Ianus Temple, and that now
He turns upon the Year his freshest brow;
That this is Mars his month; and these the Ides,
Wherein his Anne was honoured; Both the Tides,
Titles, and Place, we know: But these dead rites
Are long since buried, and new power excites
More high and hearty flames. Lo, there is he,
Who brings with him a greater Anne then she:
Whose strong and potent virtues have de•ac'd
Sterne Mars his statues, and upon them placed
His, and the worlds blessed blessings: This hath brought
Sweet Peace to sit in that bright state she ought
Vnbloudy, or untroubled; hath forced hence
All tumults, •ears, or other dark portents,
That might in•ade weak minds; hath made men see
Once more the face of welcome Liberty:
And doth (in all his present acts) restore
That first pure world, made of the better Ore.
Now Innocence shall cease to be the spoil
Of ravenous Greatness, or to sleep the soil
Of raised Peasantry with tears, and blood;
No more shall rich men (for their little good)
Sul••• to be made guilty; or vile Sp•es
Emoy the lust of their so murdering eyes:
Men shall put off their Iron minds, and hearts;
The I•me forget his old malicious arts
〈◊〉 this new menu•e; and no print remain
Of what was thought the former ages stain.
Back Flamen, with thy superstitious fumes,
And s•nse not here; Thy ignorance presumes
Too much, in acting any Ethnic rite
In this translated Temple: Here no wight,
To sacrifice save my devotion comes,
That brings in steed of those thy Masculine gummes.
My Cities heart, which shall for ever burn
Upon this Altar, and no Time shall turn
The same to ashes: Here I fix it fast,
Flame bright, flame high, and may it ever last.
Whilst I, before the figure of thy Peace,
Still tend the fire; and give it quick increase
With prayers, wishes, vows; whereof be these
The least, and weakest: that no Age may leese
The memory of this so rich a day;
But rather, that it henceforth yearly may
Begin our spring, and with our spring the prime,
And first account of Years, of Months, of Time:
And may these Ides as fortunate appear
To thee, as they to Caesar fatal were.
Be all thy Thoughts borne perfect, and thy Hopes
In their events still crowned beyond their scopes.
Let not wide Heaven that secret blessing know
To give, which she on thee will not bestow:
Blind Fortune be thy slave; and may her store
(The less thou see it) follow thee the more.
Much more I would: but see, these brazen Gates
Make hast to close, as urged by thy Fates;
Here ends my Cities office, here it breaks:
Yet with my tongue, and this pure heart, she speaks
A short farewell; and lower then thy feet,
With fervent thanks, thy royal pains doth greet.
Pardon, if my abruptness breed disease;
He merits not t'offend, that hastes to please.
READER, The limbs of these great Triumphal bodies (lately disioynted
and taken in sunder) I have thou see (for thy sake) set in their apt and
right places again: so that now they are to stand as perpetual monuments,
not to be shaken in pieces, or to be broken down, by the malice of that en∣uious
destroyer of all things, Time. Which labours of mine, if they yield thee
either profit or pleasure, thou art (in requital thereof) to pay many thanks
to this honourable City, whose bounty towards me, not only in making
choice of me, to give directions for the entire workmanship of the five Trium∣phil
Arch's builded by the same, but also (in publishing these Pieces,) I do here
gladly acknowledge to have been exceeding liberal.
Nor shall it be amiss in this place to give thee intelligence of some matters (by way of notes) which
were not fully observed, nor freely enough set down in the Printed Book of these Triumphs: amongst
which these that follow are chiefest.
His Majesty departed from the Tower between the hours of 11. and 12 and before 5. had made his
royal passage through the City, having a Canopy borne over him by 8. Knights.
The first Object that his Majesties eye encountered (after his entrance into London) was part of the i will∣drone
of Christs Church Hospital, to the number of 300. who were placed on a Scaffold, erected for that
purpose in Barking Church-yard by the Tower.
The way from the Tower to Temple-Barre was not only sufficiently gravelled, but all the streets (lie∣ing
between those two places) were on both sides (where the breadth would permit) raild in at the
charges of the City, Paules Church-yard excepted.
The Liveries of the Companies (having their Streamers, Ensigns, and Banerets spread on the tops of their
rails before them) reached from the middle of Mark Lane, to the Pygmy at Temple Bar.
Two Marshals were chosen for the day, to clear the passage both of them being well mounted, and
attended on by six men (suteably attired) to each Marshall.
The Conduits of Cornehill, of Cheap, and of Fleetestreete, that day ran Claret wine very plenteously:
which (by reason of so much excellent Music, that sounded forth not only from each several Pygmy,
but also from diverse other places) ran the faster and more merrily down into some bodies bellies.
As touching the Oration uttered by Sir Henry Mountague (Recorder of the City) with the gifts besto∣wed
on the King, the Queen, and the Prince (being three Cups of gold) as also, all such songs, as were
that day sung in the several Arch's, I refer you to the Book in print, where they are set down at large.
And thus much you shall understand, that no manner of person whatsoever, did disburse any part to∣wards
the charge of these five Triumphs, but only the mere Citizens being all free-men; heretofore the
charge being borne by fifteens and the Chamber of London (as may appear by ancient presidents) but
now it was levied amongst the Companies. The other two Arch's erected by Merchant-Strangers (viz
the Italians and Dutchman) were only their own particular charge.
The City elected 16. Committees to whom the managing of the whole business was absolutely re∣ferred:
of which number 4. were Aldermen, the other 12. Commoners, viz. one out of each of the 12.
Companies. Other Committees were also appointed as ouer-seers and surveyors of the work. Farewell.

GOod morrow my good Lord Chamberlain.
Many good morrows to my good Lord of Sussex.
Whose with the Queen my Lord.
The Cardinal of Winchester: The Lord of Tame: the good Lord Shandoyse: and besides, Lo: Howard, Sir Henry Beningfeild, and divers others.
A word my Lord in private.
Tushing the Queen my Lord who now sitts hye,
What thinks the realm of Phillip th'Emperours son,
A marriage by the Council treated of?
Pray god 't prove well.
Good morrow Lords.
Good morrow my good Lord of Sussex.
I cry your Honours mercy.
Good morrow to the Lords of Tame and Shandoyse.
The like to you my Lord: As you were speaking
Concerning Went and the Kentish rebels,
Their ouer-throw is past: the rebel Dukes that sought
By all means to proclaim queen Iane chiefly Northumberland
For Gilfords sake, he for'st his brother Duke unto that war,
But each one had his merit.
Oh my Lord,
The Law proceeded against their great offence,
And it is not well, since they have suffered Judgment,
That we should raise their scandal being dead,
Tic impious, not by true Judgment bread.
Good morrow my Lord, good morrow good Sir Henry.
Pardon my Lord I saw you not till now.
Good morrow good Lord Howard.
Your honours; The like to you my Lords.
With all my hart Lord Howard.
Forward I pray.
The suffolk men my Lord, was to the Queen
The very stayres, by which she did ascend:
Shoe's greatly bound unto them for their loves.
Good morrow Lords, attend the Queen into the pre∣sense.
Your duties Lords.
By gods assistance and the power of heaven,
We are instated in our brothers throne,
And all those powers, that warred against our right,
By help of heaven and your friendly aid,
Disper'stand fled, here may we sit secure,
Our hearts is joyful Lords, our peace is pure.
I doe beseech your majesty peruse this poor petition.
O master Dodds we are indebted to you for your love,
You stood vs in great stead even in our ebb
Of fortune, when our hopes were near declined,
And when our state did bear the lowest sail,
Which we have reason to requite wee know;
Read his petition my good Lord Cardinal.
Oh gracious sovereign, let my Lord the Duke have the
Perusing of it, or any other that is near your grace,
He will be to our suit an opposite.
And reason fellow.
 Madam, here is a large recital &amp; upbraiding of your highness Sovereignty, the Suffolk men that lifted you to the throne, and here possessed you, claim your promise you made them about re∣legion.
True gracious Sovereign;
But that we doe upbraid your majesty,
Or make recital of our deeds forepast,
Other then conscience, honesty and zeal,
By love, by faith, and by our duty bound,
To you the next and true successive heir,
If you contrary this; I needs must say,
Your skilless tongue doth make our well tuned words,
Iarr in the Princes ears, and of our text,
You make a wrong construction: Gracious Queen,
Your humble subjects prostrate in my mouth,
A general suit when we first flocked to you,
And made first head with you at Framagham,
It was thus concluded that we your liegemen:
Should still enjoy our consciences, and use that faith
Which in king Edwards days was held Canonical.
May it please your highness note the Commons insolence
They tie you to conditions, and set limits to your liking.
They shall know,
To whom their faithful duties they doe owe,
Since they the limbs, the head would seek to sway,
Before they govern, they shall learn t'obays
See it severely ordered Winchester.
Away with him, it shall be thoroughly scand,
And you upon the pillory, three days to stand.
Has not your sister (gracious Queen) a hand
In these petitions; well your highness knows
She is a favourite of these heretics.
And well remembered, is it not probable,
That she in Wiats expedition,
And other insurrection lately queald
Was a confederate; if your highness will your own estate preserve,
You must foresee fore-danger, and cut off all such
As would your safety prejudice.
Such is your sister,
A mere opposite to vs in our opinion, and besides
Shees next Successive, should your majesty
Dye yssules, which heaven defend.
Which heaven defend.
The state of our religion would decline.
My Lord of Tame and Shandoyse,
You two shall have a firm Commission sealed,
To fetch our sister young Elizabeth
From Ashbridge where she lies, and with a band
Of armed soldiers to conduct her up to London,
Where we will hear her.
Gracious Queen, she only craves but to behold your face,
That she might clear her self of all supposed treasons,
Still protesting, she is as true a subject to your grace,
As lives this day.
Doe not you hear, with what a sawcye impudence,
This Sentlo here presumes.
Away with him, isle teach him know his place,
To frown when we frown, smile on whom we grace.
Twilbe a means to keep the rest in awe,
Making their sovereigns brow, to them a law.
All those that seek our sisters cause to favour,
Let them be lodged.
Young Courtney Earl of Devonshire,
Seems chiefly to affect her faction.
Commit him to the Tower,
Till time affords vs and our Counsel breathing space.
Whence is that Post?
My Sovereign, It is from Southampton.
Our Secretary, vnseale them and return
Vs present answer of the contents,
Whats the mayne business.
That Phillip Prince of Spain,
Son to the Emperor, is safely arrived,
And landed at Southampton.
Prepare to meet him Lords with all our Pomp.
Prepare you Lords with our fair Queen to ride,
And his high princely state let no man hide.
Set forwad Lords, this sudden news is sweet,
Two royal lovers on the mid way mere.
Good morrow Mistress, came you from the Princess?
Master Gage, I did.
How fares her Grace.
O wondrous crazy gentle master Gage,
Her sleeps are all unquiet, and her head
Bears and grows giddy with continual grief.
God grant her comfort, and release her pain,
So good a Lady few on earth remain.
O Arm, arm, arm.
How now what's the matter.
O Lord the house is beset, shouldiers are as hot as fire,
Are reddy to enter every hole about the hows,
For as I was a'th top of the stack, the sound of the Drum,
Hot me such a box a'th Ear, that I came tumbling down,
The stack with a thousand billets a'th top on me, look about,
And help for gods sake.
Heaven guard the Princess grant that all be well,
This Drum I fear, will prove her passing-bell.
Wher's the Princess.
O my honoured Lords,
(May I with reverence presume to ask)
What means these arms, why doe you thus begirt,
A poor weak Lady, near at point of death.
Resolve the Princess we must speak with her.
My Lords, know there is no admittance to her presence,
Without the leave, first granted from her self.
Go tell her we must and will.
Isle certify so much.
My Lords, as you are honourably borne,
As you did love her father, or her brother,
As you do owe alegeance to the Queen,
In pity of her weakness, and lowe state,
With best of favour, her commiserate.
Her grace entreats you but to stay till morn?
And then your message shall be heard at full.
Tic from the Queen and wee will speak with her.
Isle certify so much.
It shall not need, press after her my Lord.
We are not pleased with your intrusions Lords.
Is your hast such, of your affairs so urgent,
That suddenly, and at this time of night,
You press on one, and will not stay till morn?
Sorry we are sweet Lady, to behold you in this sad plight.
And I my Lords not glad,
My hart, oh how it beats.
Madam, our message and our duty from our Queen,
Wee come to tender you, It is her pleasure,
That you the 7. day of this month appear at Westminster.
At Westminster? my Lords no soul more glad then I,
To doe my duty to her Majesty,
But I am sorry at the hart, my hart, oh good Doctor raise me:
Oh my hart, I hope my Lords, considering my excremity and
Weakness, you will dispense a little with your hast.
Doctor Owen and Doctor Wendith,
You are the Queens Physicians truly sworn,
On your alegeance, as before her highness you will answer it,
Speak, may the Princess be removed with life.
Not without danger Lords, yet without death,
Her fever is not mortal; yet you see into what danger,
It hath brought the Princess.
Is your opinion so?
My Judgment is, not deadly, but yet dangerous,
No sooner shall she come to take the ayre,
But she will faint, and if not well prepared and attended,
Her life is in much danger.
Madam, we take no pleasure to deliver
so strict a message.
Nor I my Lords to hear a message delivered
with such strictness; well must I go.
So says the Queen.
Why then it must be so.
To morrow early then you must prepare.
Tic many a more 〈◊〉 my feeble legs,
Felt this my bodies weight: O I shall faint,
And if I taste the rawness of the ayre,
I am but dead, indeed I am but dead.
Tic late, conduct these Lords unto their chambers,
And cheer them well for they have iorneyd hard,
whilst we prepare vs for our morrows Journey.
Madam, the Queen hath sent her letter for you.
The Queen is 〈◊〉, and we will strive with death
To tender her our life,
We are her subject, and obey her hest,
Good night, we wish you what wee want,
Good rest.
Thus in the face of heauē, &amp; broad eye of all the multitude,
We give a welcome to the Spanish Prince,
Those plausiue shouts which give you entertain,
Echoes as much to the almighties cares,
And there they sound with pleasure, and excels
The claymorous trumpets, and loud ringing bells.
Thrice excellent and ever gracious Princess,
Doubly famous for virtue and for beauty,
We embrace your large stretched Honours with the arms of love,
Our Royal marriage, treated first in Heaven
To be solemnised here, both by Gods voice,
And by our loves consent, we thus embrace:
Now Spain and England two populous Kingdoms,
That have a long time been opposed
In Hostile-emulation, shall be at one:
This shall be Spanish England, ours English Spain.
Hark the redoubling echoes of the people,
How it proclaims their loves; and welcome to this Union.
Then here before the 〈◊〉 of the Land,
We doe embrace and make a public contract.
Our souls are joyful, then bright Heavens smile,
Whilst we proclaim our new united Stile.
Read Sussex.
Phillip and Mary, by the grace of God, King and Queen of England, Spain, France and Ireland, King and Queen of Naples, Scifcillia, Leon and Are gone, Arch. Duke and Duchess of Assria, Burgon∣die, of Brabant Zealand, of Holand: Prince and Prin∣cesse of Sweaue, Count and Countess Hasburdge, Maliorca, Sardinia, of the firm Land, and the maine Ocean Sea, Palatins of Jerusalem, of Henolt; Lord and Lady of Freeseland, and of the Isles: And Governor and Governess of all Africa, and Asia.
Long live the King and Queen.
We thank you all.
When please your Highness to solemnise this your Nup∣teals?
The 25. day of this month July.
It likes vs well, but royal Queen we want
One Lady at this hye solemnity:
We have a Sister called Elixaebeth,
Whose virtues and endowments of the mind
Hath filed the ears of Spain.
Great are the causes, now too long to say,
Why she my Sovereign should be kept away.
The Lord of Tame and Shandoyse are returned.
How fares our Sister? Is she come along?
We found the Princess, sick and in great danger;
Yet did we urge our strict Commission,
She much entreated that she might be spared,
Until her health and strength might be restored.
Two of your Highness Doctors we then called,
And charged them as they would answer it,
To tell the truth, if that our journeys toil
Might be no prejudice unto her life;
Or if we might with safety bring her thence:
They answered, that we might; we did so,
Here she is to doe her duty to your Majesty.
Let her attend, we will find time to hear her.
But royal Queen, yet for her virtues sake,
Deem her offences, if she have offended,
With all the lenity a Sister can.
My Lord of VVinchester, my Lord of Sussex.
Lord Howard, Tame, and Shandoyse,
Take you Commission to examine her
Of all supposed Crimes; so to our Nuptials.
What Festival more Royal hath been seen,
Than twixt Spaines Prince, and Englands Royal Queen.
Is not my gentleman usher yet returned.
Madam, not yet.
O God, my fear hath been good physic,
But the Queens displeasure, that hath cured my bodies Imperfectiō,
Hath made me hart sick, brain sick, and sick even to death.
What are you?
Your household Officers and humble servants,
Who now your house fair Princess, is desolu'd
And quite broke up, come to attend your grace.
We thank you, and am more indebted for your loves
Than we have power: or virtue to requite,
Alas I am all the Queens, yet nothing of my self,
But God and Inocence, be you my Patrons and defend my cause
Why weep you gentlemen?
Not for our selves, men are not made to weep
At there own fortunes, our eyes are made of fire,
And to extract water from fire is hard,
Nothing but such a Princess grief as yours,
So good a Lady &amp; so beautiful, so absolute a mistress,
And perfect as you have delivered been,
Have power to do it, your sorrow makes vs sad.
My Inocence yet makes my hart as light,
As my front's heavy: all that heaven sends is welcome
Gentlemen divide these few crowns amongst you,
I am now a prisoner; and shall want nothing,
I have some friends about her majesty,
That are providing for me all things; all things;
I, even my grave; and being possessed of that,
I shall need nothing: weep not I pray,
Rather you should rejoice:
If I miscarry in this enterprise, and ask you why,
A Virgin and a Martyr both I die.
He that first gave you life, protect that life,
From those that wish your death.
VVhats my of offence? who be my accusers.
Madam, that the Queen &amp; VVinchester best knows.
What says the Queen unto my late petition.
You are denied that grace:
Her Majesty will not admit you conference,
Sir William Sentlo urging that motion,
Was first committed, since sent to the Tower,
Madam, in brief your foes are the Queens friends,
Your friends her foes,
Six of the Counsel are this day appointed,
To examine you of certain articles,
They shall be welcome; my god in whom I trust,
Will help, deliver, save, defend the just.
All forbear this place unless the Princess.
Madam, we from the Queen are joined
in full commission.
By your Favour good my Lord ere you proceed,
Madam, although this place doth tie you to this reverence,
It becomes not you being a Princess to deject your knee,
A chair there.
My duty with my fortunes do agree,
And to the Queen in you I bend my knee.
You shall not kneel where Sussex sits in place,
The Chamber keeper, a chair there for her grace.
Madam, perhaps you censure hardly.
That was enforced in this commission.
Know you your own guilt my good Lord Chancellor,
That you accuse your self, I think not so,
I am of this mind, no man is my foe.
Madam I would you would submit, unto her highness.
Submit my Lord of Winchester, tic fit
That none but base offenders should submit,
No no my Lord, I easily spy your drift,
Having nothing whereon you can accuse me,
Do seek to have my self, my self betray,
So by my self my own blood should be spilt,
Confess submission I confess a guilt.
What answer you to Wiats late rebellion,
Madam, tic thought that you did set them on.
Who is it will say so? men may much suspect,
But yet my Lord, none can my life detect,
I a confederate with those kentish rebels?
If I ere saw or sent to them, let the Queen take my head,
Hath not proud Wyatt suffered for his offence,
And in the purging both of soul and body for heaven,
Did Wyatt then accuse Elizabeth?
Madam he did not.
My reverent Lord I know it.
Madam he would not.
Oh my good Lord he could not.
The same day Frogmorton was arrain'd in the Guild-hall,
It was imposed on him, whether this Princess had a hand
With him or no; he did deny it,
Cleared her sore his death, yet accused others.
My god be praised, this is news but of a minute old.
What answer you to Sir Peter Carew in the west,
The western Rebels.
Ask the unborn Infant, see what that will answer,
For that and I, are both alike in guilt,
Let not by rigour Innocent blood be spilt.
Come Madam, answer briefly to these treasons.
Treason Lords, if it be treason to be the daughter
To th'Eight Henry; Sister to Edward, and the next of blood unto
My gracious sovereign now the Queen I am a traitor: if not, I
Spit at treason. In Henryes reign this Law could not have stood,
O god that we should suffer for our blood.
Madam, the Queen must here you sing another song,
Before you part with vs.
My god doth know, I can no note but truth,
That with heavens King,
One day in queers of Angels I shall singe.
Then Madam you'll not submit.
My life I will, but not as guilty,
My Lords, let pale offenders pardon crave,
If we offend, Laws rigour let vs have.
You are stubborn, come letts certify the Queen.
Room for the Lords there.
Thou power eternal, Inocents just guide,
That sways the Sceptre of all Monarchyes,
Protect the guiltless from these ravening Jaws,
That hideous death presents, by Tyrants Laws,
And as my hart is known to thee most pure,
Grant me release, or patience to endure.
Madam, we your poor humble servants,
Made bold to press into your graces presence,
To know how your cause goes.
Well, well, I thank my god, well,
How can a cause go ill with Innocents,
They that to whom wrongs in this world are done,
Shall be rewarded in the world to come.
It is the pleasure of her majesty,
That you be straight committed to the Tower.
The Tower, for what?
Moreover all your household servants we have dis∣charged,
Except this gentleman your usher &amp; this gentlewoman
Thus did the Queen command,
And for your guard, a hundred Northern whitecotes,
Are appointed to conduct you thither,
To night unto your chamber, to morrow early prepare
You for the Tower, your bardge stands ready,
To conduct you thither.
Oh god my hart: A prisoner in the Tower,
Speak to the Queen my Lords, that some other place
May lodge her sister, that's too wild, too base.
Come my lords, let's all join in one petition
To the Queen, that she may not be lodged within the Tower.
My Lord, you know it is in vain,
For the Queens sentence is definitive,
And we must see it performed.
Then to our chamber comfortless and sad,
To morrow to the tower that fatal place,
Where I shall never behold the suns bright face.
Now god forbid, a better hap heaven send:
Thus men may morn, for what they cannot mend.
Come my masters you know your chardge, tic now about
Alcauin, here we must watch till morning,
And then carry the Princess to the tower.
How shall we spend the time till morning.
Maze weal drink and talk of our friends.
I but my frnd, do not talk of state matters.
Not I, Isle not meddle with the state,
I hope this a man may say without offence,
Prithee drink to me.
Withal my harry faith, this a man might
Lawfully speak, but now, faith what wast about to say.
Mass I say this: That the Lady Elizabeth is both a lady,
And Elizabeth, and if I should say she were a virtuous Princess,
Were there any harm in that?
No by my troth, ther's no harm in that,
But beware of talking of the Princess,
Let's meddle with our kindred there, we may be bold.
Well sirs I have two sisters, and the one loves the other,
And would not send her to prison for a million, is there any harm
In this? isle keep my self within compass I warrant you,
For I doe not talk of the Queen, I talk of my sisters,
Isle keep my self within my compass I warrant you.
I but Sir, that word sister goes hardly down.
Why Sir, I hope a man may be bold with his own,
I learned that of the Queen, Isle keep my self within compass
Isle warrant you.
I but Sir, why is the Princess committed?
It may be she doth not know her self,
It may be the Queen knows not the cause,
It may be my Lord of Winchester does not know,
It may be so, nothing's unpossible to god,
It may be ther's knavery in Munckery,
Ther's nothing unpossible, is there any harm in that?
Shoemaker, you go a little beyond your last.
Why, in saying nothing's unpossible to God,
Isle stand to it; for saying a truth's a truth, isle prove it;
For saying there may be knavery in Monckery, Isle justify it,
I do not say there is, but may be, I know what I know,
You know what you know, he knows what he knows,
Marry we know not what every man knows.
My masters, we have talked so long that I think tic day.
I think so too, is there any harm in all this?
No harm ith world.
And I think by this time the Princess is ready
To take her barge.
Come then let's go, would all were well,
Is there any harm in all this? but alas wishes and tears
Have both one property, they show their love that
want the remedy.
Did you not mark what a piteous eye she cast
To the Queens window as she past a long,
Fain she would have stayed, but that I cause
The bargmen to make hast and row away.
The bargmen were too desperate my Lord,
In staying till the water was so lowe,
For then you know, being underneath the bridge,
The barges sterne did strike upon the ground,
And was in danger to have dround vs all.
Well she hath escaped that danger,
Would she but conform her self in her opinion,
She only might rely upon my love,
To win her to the favour of the Queen.
But that will never be, this is my censure,
If she be guilty in the least degree,
May all her wrongs survive and light on her:
If other ways that she be cleared,
Thus both ways I wish her down,
Or else her state to raise.
Why doth the Princess keep her barge so lunge,
Why lands she not? Some one go see the cause.
That shall be my charge my Lord.
Oh me my Lord, her state is wondrous hard,
I have seen the day, my hand Id not have lent
To bring my Sovereigns Sister to the Tower:
Good my Lords, stretch your Commission
To doe this Princess but some little favour.
My Lord, my Lord, let not the love we bear the Prin∣cesse, incur the Queens displeasure, tic no dallying with mat∣ters of Estate, who dares gainsay the Queen?
Marry a God not I, no, no, not I;
Yet who shall hinder these my eyes to sorrow
For her sorrow: By Gods marry dear,
That the Queen could not, though her self were here:
My Lords, my Lords, if it were held foul treason,
To grieve for her hard usage, by my Soul
My eyes would hardly prove me a true Subject:
But tic the Queens pleasure, and we must obey:
But I shall morn, should the King and Queen say nay.
My grieved Mistress humbly thus entreats,
For to remove back to the Common stayres,
And not to land where Traitors put to shore,
Some difference she entreats your Honours make
Twixt Crystal Fountains, and foul muddy Springs,
Twixt those that are condemned by the law,
And those whom Treasons stain did never blemish:
Thus she attends your answer, and sits still
Whilst her wet eyes, full many a tear did spill.
Marry a God, tic true and tic no reason: Launch Bargeman.
Good Lady land, where Traitors use to land,
And fore her guilt be proved, Gods marry no,
And the Queen wills it, that it should be so.
My Lord, you must look into our Commission,
No favours granted, she of force must land,
Tic a decree which we can not with stand,
So tell her master Gage,
As good a Lady as ere England bread,
Would he that cause this woe, had lost his head.
Madam, you have stepped too short into the water.
No matter where I tread,
Would where I set my foot, there lay my head,
Land Traitor like; my foot's wet in the flood,
So shall my hart ere long be drenched in blood.
Here comes the Constable of the tower,
This is your charge.
And I receive my prisoner, come will you go?
Whither my Lord, unto a grate of Iron,
Where grief and care my poor hart shall environ,
I am not well.
A chair for the Princess.
Here's no chair for prisoners,
Come will you see your chamber.
Then on this stone, this cold stone I will sit,
I needs must say you hardly me entreat,
When for a chair, this hard stone is my seat.
My Lord, you deal too cruelly with the Princess,
You knew her father, shoe's no stranger to you.
Madam it raynes.
Good Lady take my cloak.
No let it a lone: See gentle men,
The piteous heavens weeps tears into my bosom,
On this cold stone I sit, rain in my face,
But better here, than in a worser place
Where this bad man will lead me.
Clarentia, reach my book, now lead me where you please
From sight of day; or in a dungeon; I shall see to pray.
Nay, nay, you need not bolt &amp; locke so fast,
She is no starter; honourable Lords,
Speak to the Queen she may have some release.
So so, let me alone, let me alone to coop her,
Isle use her so, the Queen shall muth commend
My diligent care.
Where have you left the Princess?
Where she is safe enough I warrant you,
I have not granted her the privilege
Of any walk, or garden, or to op
Her windows, casements to receive the ayre.
My lord, my lord, you deal without respect,
And worse than your Commission can maintain.
My Lord, I hope I know mine office well,
And better than your self within this place,
Then teach not me my duty, she shall be used so still,
The Queen commands, and Isle obey her will,
But if this time should alter, mark me well,
Could this be answered, could it fellow Peers?
I think not so.
Tush tush the Queen is young likely to bear,
Of her own body a more royal heir.
My Lords the Princess humbly entreats,
That her own servants may bear up her diet,
A company of base vntutord slaves,
Whose hands did never serve a Princess board,
Do take that privilege.
It was my appointment, and it shall be so.
Gods marry dear, but it shall not be,
Lord Howard join with me, weal to the King.
Stay good my Lords for instance, see they come,
If this be seemly, let your honours Judge.
Come come my Lords, why do you staye so long,
The Queens high favour shall amend this wrong.
Now sir, what have you got by your
complaining, you common find-fault; what, is
your Mistress stomach so queasy? our honest
soldiers must not touch her meat, then let her fast,
I know her stomach will come down at last.
Vntutor'd slave, Isle ease thee of this burden,
Her highness scorns to touch the dish
Her servants brings not up.
Presume to touch a dish Isle lodge thee there,
Where thou shalt see no sun for one hole year.
I would to god you would, in any place
Where I might live from thought of her disgrace,
O thou all-seeing heavens, with piteous eyes,
Look on th'oppresions of their cruelty!
Let not thy truth, by falsehood be oppressed,
But let her virtues shyne and give her rest,
Confound the sleights, and practise of those men,
Whose pride do kick against thy seat of heaven.
Oh draw the courtaines from their filthy sin,
And make them loath the hell which they live in.
Prosper the Princess, and her life defend,
A glorious comfort to her troubles send.
If ever thou had pity, hear my prayer,
And give releasement to a Princes care.
The Princess thus entreats you honoured Lord,
She may but walk in the Lieftenants garden,
Or else repose her self in the Queens lodgings:
My honoured Lord, grant this as you did love
The famous Henry her deceased father.
Come talk not to me for I am resolved,
Nor lodging, garden, nor lieftenants walks
Shall here be granted, shoe's a prisoner.
My Lord, they shall.
How, shall they knave?
If the Queen please, they shall.
A noble and right reverent Counsellor,
Promised to beg it of her Majesty:
And if she say the word, my Lord she shall.
I, if she say the word, it shall be so:
My lord of Winchester speaks the contrary,
So doe the Clergy, they are honest men.
My honoured Lord, why should you take delight
To torture a poor Lady innocent?
The Queen I know when she shall hear of this,
Will greatly discommend your cruelty.
You served her father, and he loved you well,
You served her brother, and he held you dear,
And can you hate the sister he best loved?
You serve her sister, she esteems you hye,
And you may live to serve her ere you dye:
And therefore good my Lord, let this prevail,
Only the casements of her window op,
Whereby she may receive fresh gladsome ayre.
O you preach well to deaf men, no, not I,
So letters may fly in, Isle none of that,
She is my prisoner, and if I durst,
But that my warrant is not yet so strict,
Id lay her in a dungeon where her eyes,
Should not have light to read her prayer book,
So would I danger both her soul and body,
Cause she an alien is to vs catholiques,
Her bed should be all snakes, her rest despair,
Torture should make her curse, her faithless prayer.
My Lord, it is the pleasure of the Queen,
The prisoner Princess should have all the use
Of the lieftenants garden, the Queens lodgings,
And all the liberty this place affords.
What means her grace by that?
You may go ask her and you will my Lord,
Moreover tic her highness further pleasure,
That her sworn servants shall attend on her,
Two gentlemen of her Ewry, two of her Pantry,
Two of her Kitchen, and two of her wardrobe,
Besides this gentleman here master Gage.
The next will be her freedom, oh this mitts me.
Which way lies the Princess.
This way my Lord.
This will be glad tidings: come let's tell her grace.
Wilt please your honour, let my Lady
Walk in the leiftenants garden,
Or may but see the lodgings of the Queen,
Or op the casements to receive fresh ayre,
Shall she my Lord: shall she this freedom use,
She shall: for you can neither will nor choose,
Or shall she have some servants of her own,
To attend on her: I pray let it be so,
And let your look no more poor prisoners daunt,
I pray deny not what you needs must grant.
This base groom flouts me, oh this frets my hart,
These knaves will let upon their privilege,
But yet isle vex her, I have found the means,
Isle have my cooks to dress my meat with hers,
And every officer my men shall match,
Oh that I could but drain her harts dear blood,
Oh it would feed me, do my soul much good.
How now, what means the fellow.
Audacious slave presuming in my place.
Sir it was my pleasure and I did command it.
The proudest he that keeps within the tower,
Shall have no eye into my private office.
No Sir, why say it is I.
Be it your self or any other here,
Isle make him sup the hottest broth I have.
You will not.
Zounds I will,
I have been true to her, and will be still.
Well, Isle have this amended er't be long,
And avenge my self on her for all their wrong.
I have got another Nosegay for my young Lady,
My Lord said I should be soundly whipped
If I were seen to bring her any more,
But yet Isle venture once again, shoe's so good,
Oh heir's her chamber, Isle call and see if she be stirring,
Where are you Lady?
Welcome sweet boy, what hast thou brought me there.
Madam, I have brought you another nose gay,
But you must not let it be seen, for if it be,
I shall be soundly whipped, indeedla, indeed I shall.
God a mercy boy, hears to requite thy love.
Stay him stay him, oh have I caught you Sir,
Where have you been.
To carry my young Lady some more flowers,
Alas my Lord a child, pray let him go.
A crafty knave my Lords, search him for letters.
Letters my Lord, it is impossible.
Come tell me what letters thou carryedst her,
Isle give thee figgs and sugar plummes.
Will you indeed, well isle take your word,
For you look like an honest man.
Now tell me what letters thou deliuerest.
Faith gaffer I know no letters but great A,
B and C: I am not come to K yet,
Now gaffer will you give me my sugar plummes.
Yes marry will I, take him away,
Let him be soundly whipped I charge you sir.
They keep even infants from vs, they do well,
My sight they have too long bard, and now my smell,
This tower hath made me fall to huswiffry,
I spend my labours to relieve the poor,
Go Gage distribute these to those that need.
Madam the Queen out of her royal bounty,
Hath freed you from the thraldom of the tower,
And now this gentleman must be your gardyan.
I thank her: she hath rid me of a Tyrant,
Is he appointed now to be my keeper?
What is he Lords?
A gentleman in favour with the Queen.
Yt seems so by his charge, but tell me Gage,
Is yet the scaffold standing on tower hill,
Whereon young Gilford and the Lady Iane did suffer death.
Upon my life it stands not.
Lord Howard what is he.
A gentleman, tho of a sterne aspect,
Yet mild enough I hope your Grace will find.
Hath he not think you a stretch conscience,
And if my secret murder should be put into his hands,
Hath he not hart think you to execute.
Defend it heaven, and Gods almighty hand,
Betwixt your Grace, and such intendments stand.
Come madam will you go.
With all my hart, fare-well, far-well,
I am freed from Limbo to be sent to hell.
What storm comes next: this hath dispersed vs quite
And shattered vs to nothing; though we be denied the presence
Of our mistress, yet we will walk a aloof, and none control vs.
Here will she cross the river, stand in her eye,
That she may take some notice of our neglected duties,
Come this way they say, the sweet Princess comes,
Let vs present her with such tokens of good will,
As we have.
They say shoe's such a virtuous Princess, that sheele
except of a cup of cold water, and I have even
a nosegay for her Grace, here she comes.
The Lord preserve thy sweet Grace.
What are these?
The townsmen of the country gathered here,
To greet your Grace, hearing you past this way.
Give them this Gold, and thank them for their loves.
what traitor knaves are gathered here to make a tumult?
Now the Lord bless thy sweet Grace.
If they persist, I charge you soldiers stop their mouths.
Yt shall not need the poor are loving, but the rich despise,
And though you curb their tongue, spare them their eyes,
Your love my smart always not but prolonges,
Pray for me in your harts, not with your tongues,
See see my Lord, look I have stilt them all,
Not one amongst them, but debates my fall.
Alas Sir Harry these are honest country men,
That much rejoice to see the Princess well.
My lord my Lord, my charge is great.
And mine as great as yours.
Hark hark my Lord, what Bells are these?
The townsmen of this village,
Hearing your highness pass this way,
Salutes your coming with this peal of Bells.
Traitors and knaves ring Bells,
When the Queens enemy passes through the town,
Go set he knaves by the heales, make their pates ring noon,
I charge thee Berwick.
Alas poor men, help them thou God aboue,
Thus men are forced to suffer for my love,
What said my servants, those that stood aloof?
They deeply conjured me out of their loves,
To know how your case goes, which these poor people second.
Say to them tanquam Ouis.
Come come away, this lingering will benight vs.
Madam this night your lodging's at my house,
No prisoner are you Madame for this night.
How? no prisoner.
No, no prisoner, what I intend to do isle answer,
Madame, will it please you go.
Now gentle master usher, what says my Lady.
Thus did she bid me say tanquam Ouis,
Farewell I must away.
Tanqus Ovrus pray whats tanqus Ovrus neighbor.
If the priest were here he would smell it out straight.
My self have been a scholar, and I understand
What tanquam Ouis means.
We sent to know how her Grace did fare,
She, tanquam Ouis said, even like a sheep,
That's to the slaughter led.
Tanqus Ovrus, that I should live to see, tanqus Ovris.
I shall ne'er love tanquam Ovris again for this trick.
Berwick, is this the chair of state.
I sir, this is it.
Take it down, and pull of my boots.
Come on Sir.
O monstrous, what a sawey companion's this?
To pull of his boots in the chair of state,
Isle fit you a pennyworth for it.
Well said Berwick, pull knave.
A ha Sir.
Well said, now comes.
Gods pity I think you are down, cry you mercy.
What saucy arrant knave art thou, how?
Not so saucy an arrant knave as your worship takes me to be.
Villain thou hast broken my crupper.
I am sorry it is no worse for your worship.
Knave, doest flout me?
The wall, the wall.
Sblood Spaniard you get no wall here, unless you would
Have your head and the wall knocked together.
Seignior Caualero Danglatero,
I must have the wall.
I do protest, had not thou enforced it,
I had not regarded it, but since you will needs
Have the wall, Isle take the pains to thrust
You into the kennel.
O base Caualero, my sword and poniard well
Tried in Tolledo, shall give thee the Imbrocado.
Marry, and welcome Sir, come on.
Holo holo, thou hast given me
The Canuissado.
Come Sir will you any more.
Seignior Caualero look behint thee,
A blade of Tolledo is drawn against thee.
Hand that Ignoble groom,
Had we not beheld thy cowardice,
We should have sworn,
Such baseness had not followed vs.
Oh vostro mandado grand Emperato.
Pardon him my Lord.
Are you respectless of our honour Lords,
That you would have vs bosom cowardice,
I do protest the great turks Empire,
Shall not redeem thee from a felons death,
What place is this my Lords?
Charing cross my Liege.
Then by this cross, where thou hast done this murder,
Thou shalt be hanged, so Lords away with him.
Your Grace may purchase glory from aboue,
And entire love from all your peoples hearts,
To make atonement twixt the woeful Princess,
And our dread sovereign, your most virtuous Queen.
It were a deed worthy of memory.
My Lord she's factious, rather could I wish
She were married to some private gentleman,
And with her dower conveyed out of the land,
Then here to stay and be a mutiner,
So may your highness state be more secure.
For whilst she lives wars, and commotions,
Foul insurrections will be set abroch,
I think it were not amiss to take her head:
This land would be in quiet, were she dead.
O my Lord, you speak not charitably.
Nor will we Lords embrace his heedles counsel,
I doe protest as I am King of Spain,
My utmost power isle stretch to make them friends,
Come Lords let's in, my love and wit isle try
To end this Jar; the Queen shall not deny.
What fearful terror doth assail my hart?
Good Gage come hither and resolve me true
In thy opinion; shall I out live this night,
I pre thee speak.
Out live this night, I pray Madam why.
Then to be plain this night I look to die.
O Madam, you were borne to better fortunes,
That God that made you, will protect you still
From all your enemies that wish you ill.
My hart is fearful.
O my honoured Lord,
As ever you were noble in your thoughts,
Speak, shall my Lady out live this night, or no?
You much amaze me sir, else heaven forefend.
For if we should imagine any plot,
Pretending to the hurt of our dear mistress,
I and my fellows though far unable are
To stand against your power, will die together.
And I with you would spend my dearest blood,
To do that virtuous Lady any good.
Sir Harry, now my charge I must resign,
The Ladye's wholly in your custody,
Yet use her kindly as she well deserves,
And so I take my leave, Madame adieu.
My honoured Lord farewell, unwilling I
With grief and woe must continue,
Help me to some ink and paper good Sir Harry.
What to do Madam.
To write a letter to the Queen my sister.
I find not that in my Commission.
Good Jailer urge not thy Commission.
No Jailer, but your guardian Madam.
Then reach me pen and ink.
Madam I dare not, my Commission serves not.
Thus you have driven me of from time to time,
Still urging me with your Commission.
Good Jailer be not so severe.
Good madam I entreat you loose that name
Of Jailer, twilbe a by-word to me and my posterity.
As often as you name your Commission,
So often will I call you Jailer.
Say I should reach you pen, ink and paper,
Who first dare bear a letter sent from you.
I do not keep a servant so dishonest,
That would deny me that.
Who ever dares, none shall.
Madame, impose the letter to my trust,
Were I to bear it through a field of pikes,
And in my way ten thousand armed men ambushed,
Id make my passage through the midst of them,
And perforce bear it to the Queen your sister.
Baddy of me, what a bold knaue's this?
Gage leave me to my self,
Thou ever living power, that gives all harts,
Give to my pen, a true persuasive stile,
That it may move my impatient sisters ears,
And urge her to compassionate my woe.
What has she written here?
Much suspected by me, nothing proved can be,
Finis quoth Elizabeth the prisoner,
Pray god it prove so, soft what book's this,
Marry a God, whats here an English bible?
Sanctum Maria pardon this profanation of my hart,
Water Berwick, water, Isle meddle with it no more.
My hart is heavy and my hart doth close,
I am weary of writing, sleepy on the sudden,
Clarentia, leave me, and command some music
In the with-drawing chamber.
Your letter shall be forth-comming Lady,
I will peruse it ere it scope me now.
O God, how pleasant was this sleep to me?
Clarentia, saw thou nothing?
Madame, not I,
I near slept soundlyer for the time.
Nor heard thou nothing?
Neither Madame.
Did not thou put this book into my hand?
Madame not I.
Then it was by inspiration, heaven I trust
With his eternal hand, will guide the just.
What chapter's this? Who so puts his trust in the Lord,
Shall not be confounded:
My saviour thanks, on thee my hope I build,
Thou love poor Innocents, and art their shield.
Here have you writ a long excuse it seems,
But no submission to the Queen your sister.
Should they submit that never wrought offence,
The Law will always quit wronged Innocence:
Gage, take my letter, to the Lords commend my humble duty.
Madame I fly,
To give this letter to her majesty:
Hoping when I return,
To give you comfort that now sadly morn.
I doe write and send, Isle cross you still;
She shall not speak to any man alive,
But isle ore-heare her, no letter nor no token
Shall ever have access unto her hands,
But first isle see it;
So like a subject to my sovereigns state,
I will pursue her with my deadly hate.
O Sir Harry, you look well to your office,
Yonders one in the garden with the Princess.
how knave, with the Princess? she parted even now.
I sir thats all one, but she no sooner came into the
Garden, but he leapt ore the wall, and there
They are together busy in talk Sir.
Heir's for thy pains, thou art an honest fellow:
Go take a Guard and apprehend them straight.
Bring them before me,
O this was well found out,
Now will the Queen commend my diligent care,
And praise me for my service to her grace.
Ha, traitors swarm so near about my house,
Tic time to look into it:
O well said Berwick,
Wher's the prisoner.
Here he is in a string my Lord.
Lord bless vs, knave what hast thou there?
This is he I told you was busy in talk with the Princess;
What a did there, you must get out of him by examination.
Why knave, this is a beast.
So may your worship be for any thing that I know.
What art thou knave?
If you worship does not remember me,
I hope your worships crupper doth:
But if you have any thing to say to this honest fellow,
Who for his gray head and reverent beard is so like,
He may be a kin to you.
A kin to me, knave isle have thee whipped.
Then your worship will cry quittance with my
Posteriors for misusing of yours.
Nay, but doest thou flout me still.
I pray your honour to regard my hast,
I know your business, and your hast shall stay,
As you were speaking my Lord Constable.
When as the King shall come to seal these writes.
My Lord you know his highness treasure stays,
And cannot be transported this three months,
Unless that now your honour seal my warrant.
Fellow what then: This warrant that concerns
The Princess death, shuffle amongst the rest,
He will ne'er peru'st.
How, the Princess death? thanks heaven,
By whom I am made a willing instrument her life to save,
That may live crowned when thou art in thy grave.
Stand ready pursuivant,
That when tic signed,
Thou may be gone, and gallop with the wind.
Our Chancellor Lords, this is our sealing day,
This our states business; is our signet there?
Stay your Imperial hand, let not your seal imprint
Deaths impress in your sisters hart.
Our sisters hart, Lo: Howard what means this?
The Chancellor and that injurious Lord,
Can well expound the meaning.
Oh chance accursed, how came he by this notice?
Her life is guarded by the hand of heaven,
And we in vain pursue it.
Lord Chancellor, your dealing is not fair,
See Lords, what writs affords it self
To the impress of our scale.
See my Lord, a warrant for the Princess death
Before she be convicted, what juggling call you this?
See, see for Gods sake.
And a pursuiuant ready to post away with it,
To see it done with speed,
What flinty breast could brooke to see her bleed?
Lord Chancellor, out of our prerogative
We will make bold to enterlyne your warrant.
Whose plot was this?
The Chancelors and my Lord Constables.
How was it reueald?
By this gentleman Master Gresham the Kings Agent here.
He hath showed his love to the King &amp; Queens majesties,
His service to his Country, and care of the Princess.
My duty to them all.
In stead of charging of the Sheriffs with her,
We here discharge her keeper Beningfeild:
And where we should have brought her to the block,
We now will have her brought to Hampton court,
There to attend the pleasure of the Queen,
The Pursuiuant that should have posted down
With tidings of her death,
Bear her the message of her reprieved life,
You master Gage assist his speed, a good days work we ha made,
To rescue Innocence so soon betrayed.
Whether go you so fast mistress Clarentia.
A milking.
A milking, that's a poor office for a Madame.
Better be a Milk-maid free, then a Madame in bondage.
Oh had thou heard the Princess yesternight,
Sitting within an arbor all alone to hear a Milkmaid sing,
It would have moved a flinty hart to melt,
Weeping and wishing, wishing and weeping,
A thousand times she with her self debates,
With the poor Milk-maid to exchange estates,
She was a Sempster in the tower being a Princess,
And shall I her poor gentlewoman, disdain
To be a Milk-maid in the country.
Troth you say true, every one to his fortune,
As men go to hanging, the time hath been,
When I would ha scorned to carry coals, but now the case is altered,
Every man as far as his talent will stretch.
Wher's mistress Clarential to horse to horse,
The Princess is sent for to the Court
Shoe's gone already, come let's after.
The Princess gone, and I left here behind,
Come, come our horses shall out-strip the wind.
And Isle not be long after you, for I am sure
My curtal will cary me as fast as your double Gelding.
I wonder Gage that we have stayed so long,
So near the Court, and yet have heard no news
From our displeased sister, this more affrites me
Then my former troubles, I fear this Hampton court
Will be my grave.
Good madam, blot such thoughts out of your mind,
The Lords I know, are still about your suit,
And make no doubt, but they will so prevail
Both with the King and Queen, that you shall see
Their haynos anger will be turned to love.
Where is the Princess.
Welcome my good Lo: Howard what says the Queen,
Will she admit my sight?
Madam she will, this night she hath appointed,
That she her self in person means to hear you,
Protract no time, then come let's hast away.
Where is the Princess.
She weights your pleasure at the common stairs.
Usher her in by torch light.
Gentlemen ushers, &amp; gentlemen Pensioners, lights
For the Princess, attendance gentlemen.
For her supposed virtues, Royal Queen
Look on your sister with a smiling brow,
And if her fault merit not too much hate,
Let her be censured with all lenity,
Let your deep hatred end where it began,
She hath bin too long banished from the sun.
Our favour shall be far above her desert,
And she that hath been banished from the light,
Shall once again behold our cheerful sight.
You my Lord shall step behind the arras,
And hear our conference, weal show her Grace,
For there shines too much mercy in your face.
We bear this mind, we errors would not feed,
Nor cherish wrongs, nor yet see Innocents bleed.
Call the Princess.
All forbear this place, except our sister now?
That God that raised you, staye you, and protect
You from your foes, and clear me from suspect.
Wherefore do you cry?
To see your self so low, or vs so hye.
Neither dread Queen, mine is a womanish tear,
In part compelled by joy, and part by fear:
Joy of your sight, these brinish tears have bread,
For fear of my Queens frown, to strike me dead.
Sister, I rather think they're tears of spleen.
You were my sister, now you are my Queen.
I, that's your grief.
Madame, he was my foe, and not your friend
That hath possessed you so, I am as true a
Subject to your Grace, as any lives this day,
Did you but see,
My heart it bends, far lower than my knee.
Wee know you can speak well: will you submit?
My life madam I will, but not as guilty,
Should I confess
Fault done by her, that never did transgress.
Iioy to have a sister Queen so royal,
I would it as much pleased your majesty,
That you enjoy a sister that's so true:
If I were guilty of the least offence,
Madame, it would taint the blood even in your face,
The treasons of the father being noble,
Vnnobles all your children, let your grace
Exact all torture and imprisonment,
What ere my greatest enemies can devise,
And they all have done their worst, yet I
Will your true subject and true sister dye.
Mirror of virtue and bright natures pride,
Pity it had been, such beauty should have died
You'll not submit but end as you begin.
Madame to death I will, but not to sin.
You are not guilty then?
I think I am not.
I am not of your mind.
I would your highness were.
How mean you that.
To think as I think that my soul is clear.
You have been wrong imprisoned then.
Isle not say so.
What ere we think arise and kiss our hand,
Say God hath raised you friends.
Then God hath kept his promise.
Promise, why?
To raise them friends that on his word rely.
And may the heavens applaud this unity,
Accursed be they that first procured this wrong,
Now by my crown, you ha been kept down too long.
Sister this night your self shall feast with me,
To morrow for the country you are free,
Lights for the Princess conduct her to her chamber.
My soul is joyful that this peace is made,
A peace that pleases heaven and earth, and all,
Redeeming captive thoughts from captive thrall,
Fair Queen, the serious business of my father,
Is now at hand to be accomplished,
Of your fair sight needs must take my leave,
Return I shall, tho parting cause vs grieve.
Why should two harts be for'st to separate,
I know your business but believe me sweet,
My soul divines we never more shall meet.
Yet fair Queen hope the best I shall return,
Who met with joy, tho now sadly morn.
What, droopes your honour?
Oh, I am sick.
Where lies your grief?
Where yours and all good subjects else should lye,
Near at the hart, this confirmation I doe greatly dread,
For now our true religion will decay,
I do divine who ever lives seven year,
Shall see no Religion here but heresy.
Come come my Lord, this is but for a show,
Our Queen I warrant wishes in her hart,
Her sister Princess were without her head.
No, no my Lords, this peace is natural,
This combination is without deceit,
But I will once more write to incense the Queen,
The plot is laid, thus it shall be performed:
Sir Harry, you shall go attach her seuant
Upon suspicion, of some treachery,
Wherein the Princess shall be accessory,
If this do fail, my policy is down,
But I grow faint, the fever steals on me,
Death like a vulture tyres upon my hart,
Isle leave you two to prosecute this drift,
My bones to earth I give, to heaven my soul lift.
Madam Clarentia, is my Lady stirring?
Yes master Gage, but heavy at the hart,
For she was fretted with a dream this night.
She said, she dreamed her sister was new married,
And sat upon a high Imperial throne,
That she her self was cast into a dungeon,
Where enemies environed her about,
Offering their weapons to her naked breast;
Nay they would scarcely give her leave to pray,
They made such hast to hurry her away.
Heaven shield my Mistress, and make her friends increase,
Convert her foes, estate her in true peace.
Then did I dream of weddings, and of flowers,
Me thought I was within the finest garden,
That ever mortal eye did yet behold,
Then straight me thought some of the chief were picked
To dress the bride, O it was the rarest show,
To see the bride go smiling longst the streets,
As if she went to happiness eternal.
Oh most unhappy dream, my fear is now
As great as yours, before it was but small,
Come let's go comfort her, that joys vs all.
Winchester's dead, O God upon even at his death,
He showed his malice to the sweet young Princess,
God pardon him, his soul must answer all,
She's still preserved, and still her foes do fall,
The Queen is much besotted on these Prelates,
For ther's another raised more base then he,
Poole that Arch, for truth and honesty.
My Lord of Sussex I can tell ill news,
The Cardinal Poole that now was firmly well,
Is suddenly fallen sick and like to die.
Let him go, why, then ther's a fall of Prelates.
This realm will never stand in perfect state,
Till all their faction be clear ruinate.
Sir, Harry do you hear the whispring in the Court,
They say the Queen is craysy very ill.
How hard you that?
Tic common through the house.
Tic a sad Court my Lord.
What's the matter say: how fairs the Queen?
Whether in sorrow for the Kings departure,
Or else for grief at Winchesters decease,
Or else that Cardinal Poole is suddenly dead,
I cannot tell, but shoe's exceeding sick.
The state begins to alter.
Nay more my Lord, I came now from the presence,
I heard the Doctors whisper it in secret,
There is no way but one.
Gods will be done; whose with the Queen, my Lord?
The Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Oxford,
The Earl of Arundell, and divers others,
They are withdrawn into the inward chamber,
There to take counsel, and entreat your presence.
VVee'le weight upon their Honours.
O God, my last nights dream I greatly fear,
It doth presage my death, good master Gage
Look to the path-way that doth come from the court,
I look each minute for deaths messenger.
Would he were here now, so my soul were pure,
That I with patience might the stroke endure.
Madame I see from far a horse-man coming,
This way he bends his speed he comes so fast,
That he is covered in a cloud of dust,
And now I have lost his sight, he appear's again,
Making his way over Hill, Hedge, Ditch and Plain:
One after him, they two strive
As on the race they had wagerd both their lives,
Another after him.
O God, what means this hast?
Pray for my soul, my life cannot long last.
Strange and miraculous, the first being at the gate,
His horse hath broke his neck, and cast his rider.
This same is but as prologue to my death,
My heart is guiltless though they take my breath.
God save the Queen, God save Elizabeth.
God save the Queen, so all good subjects say:
I am her subject, and for her still pray.
My horse did you allegiance at the gate,
For there he broke his neck, and there he lies,
For I my self had much a do to rise,
The fall hath bruised me, yet I live to cry,
God bless your Grace, God bless your majesty.
Long live the Queen, long live your majesty,
This news is sweet, my hart was sore afraid:
Rise thou first Baron that we ever made.
Thanks to your majesty, happy be my tongue,
That first breathed right, to one that had such wrong.
Am I prevented in my hast, O chance accursed!
My hopes did sooth me, that I was the first;
Let not my duty be ore swayed by spleen,
Long live my Sovereign, and God save the Queen.
Thanks good Sir Iohn, we will deserve your love.
Though third in order, yet the first in love,
I tender my allegiance to your Grace,
Live long fair Queen, thrice happy be your reign,
He that instates you, your high state maintain.
Lord Howard thanks you ever were our friend,
I see your love continues to the end,
But chiefly, thanks to you my Lord of Hunsdon.
Meaning this Gentleman?
The very same;
His tongue was first proclaymer of our name:
And trusly Gage in token of our Grace,
We give to you a captain Pensioners place.
Madame the Counsel are here hard at hand.
We will descend &amp; meet them.
Let's guard our Sovereign praising that power:
That can throw down and raise within an hour.
Come neighbor, come away, every man his faggot,
And his double pot, for joy of the old Queens death,
Let bells ring, and children sing.
For we may have cause to remember,
The seventeenth day of November.
How now my masters what's here to do.
Faith making Bone-fires for joy of the new Queen,
Come sir your penny, and you be a true subject,
You'll battle with vs your faggot, we'lbe merry in faith.
And you do well: and yet me think it were fit,
To spend some funeral tears upon her hearce.
Who while she lived was dear unto you all.
I, but do not you know the old proverb,
We must live by the quick, and not by the dead.
Did you not love her father when he lived,
As dearly as you ere did love any,
And yet rejoiced at his funeral:
Likewise her brother 〈…〉em'd him dear,
Yet once departed, joyfully you sung,
Run to make Bone-fiers, to proclaim your love
Unto the new, forgetting still the old:
Now she is gone, how you moan for her,
Were it not fit a while to moan her hearse,
And dutifully there rejoice the tother;
Had you the wisest and the louingst Prince,
That ever swayed a Sceptre in the world,
This is the love he shall have after life:
Let Princes while they live have love or fear it is fit,
For after death, ther's none continues it.
By my faith my masters, he speaks wisely,
Come weal to the end of the lane, and there weal
Make a bonfire and be merry,
Faith agreed isle spend my halfepenny towards
Another faggot, rather then the new Queen shall
Want a Bone-fire.
I blame you not, nor do I you commend,
For you will still the strongest side defend.
Long live, long reign our Sovereign.
We thank you all.
The imperial Crown, I here present your Grace,
With it my staff of Office and my place.
Whilst we this Crown so long your place enjoy.
Th'mperiall Sceptre here I offer up.
Keep it my Lord, and with it be you hye admiral.
This Cap of maintenance, I present my state
of Office, and my utmost service.
Your love we know.
Pardon me gracious Madame it was not spleen,
But that elegance that I owed my Queen,
Madame I served her truly at that day,
And I as truly will your Grace obey,
We do as freely pardon as you truly serve,
Only your staff of Office weal displace,
In stead of that weal owe you greater Grace,
Long live the Queen, long live your Majesty,
I have bid hard to be the first reporter,
Of these glad tidings first; and all these here.
You are in your love as free as in your care,
You're come even just a day after the fair.
What's he, my Jailer?
God preserve your Grace.
Be not ashamed man, look me in the face,
Who have you now to patronise your strictness on?
For your kindness this I will bestow,
When we have one we would have hardly used
And cruelly dealt with, you shall be the man,
This is a day for peace, not for vengeance fit,
All your good deeds we'll quit, all wrongs remit.
Where we left off, proceed.
The Sword of Justice on my bended knee,
I to your Grace present, heaven bless your reign.
This Sword is ours, this staff is yours again.
This Garter with the order of the George,
Two Ornaments unto the Crown of England,
I here present.
Possess them still my Lord, what Offices bear you?
I Captain of your highness Pensioners.
I of your Guard.
I Sergeant Trumpetor present my Mace.
Some we intend to raise, none to displace;
Lord Hunsdon, we will one day find a staff
To poise your hand: you are our Cousin,
And deserve to be employed nearer our person:
But now to you from whom we take this staff,
Since Cardinal Poole is now decea'st and dead,
To show all malice from our breast is worn,
Before you let that Purse and Mace be borne,
And now to London Lords lead on the way,
Praising that King, that all Kings else obey.
I from this City London do present,
This Purse and Bible to your Majesty,
A thousand of your faithful Citizens,
In Velvet Coats and Chains well mounted, stay
To greet their royal Sovereign on the way.
We thank you all: but first this book I kiss.
Thou art the way to honour; thou to bliss,
An English Bible, thanks my good Lord Mayor,
You of our body and our soul have care,
This is the Jewel that we still love best,
This was our solace when we were distressed,
This book that hath so long concealed it self,
So long shut up, so long hid; now Lords see,
We here vnclaspe, for ever it is free:
Who looks for joy, let him this book adore,
This is true food for rich men and for poor,
Who drinks of this, is certain ne'er to perish,
This will the soul with heavenly virtue cherish,
Lay hand upon this Anchor every soul,
Your names shall be in an eternal scroll;
Who builds on this, duel's in a happy state,
This is the fountain clear imaculate,
That happy issue that shall vs succeed,
And in our populous Kingdom this book read:
For them as for our own selves we humbly pray,
They may live long and blessed; so lead the way.

PRice of my life: now if the Devil have bones, these Dice are made of his. Was ever such a cast seen in this Age? Could any Gull in Eu∣rope (saving my self) fling such a cast?
Eye.
No.
Yes.
But I say no: I have lost an hundred pound,
And I will have my saying.
I have lost an other hundred, Isle have mine.
Ey, yes, I flung a worse: a worse by 〈◊〉.
I cry you mercy 〈◊〉, losers may speak,
Isle not except against you: but let me see
Which of these two that pocket 〈◊〉 our 〈◊〉
Dares contradict me?
Sir, not I:
I say you have had bad casting.
So •…ay I.
I say this Hat's not made of 〈◊〉
Which of you all dares say the contrary?
It may bee 〈◊◊〉.
Very likely 〈…〉 Beaver.
〈…〉 would fine 〈◊〉 a 〈◊〉 with 〈◊〉, to get 〈◊〉 of 〈◊〉 money again; but the 〈◊◊〉 they have 〈◊◊◊〉 wise to part with it.
I say it is not black.
So say wee too.
〈◊〉 false: his Cap's of Wool, ▪tic black, and Wool, and Wool and black.
I have nought to say to losers.
Have I nothing left to set at a Cast? Ey finger,
Must you be 〈◊〉 in gold, and not a 〈◊〉 of silver in my 〈◊〉?
A Bale of fresh Dice. Hoe, come at this Ring.
Fie M. 〈◊〉, it is time to 〈◊〉 over.
That's the Winners phrase: Hold me play; Or hee that hath uncrown'd me, 〈◊〉 take a 〈◊〉 order with him.
Fresh dice: this •…ewell I 〈◊◊〉
Take this and all. Isle play in spite of 〈◊〉.
Since you will needs; trip for the 〈◊〉.
I see it is hard to go a winner from this company.
The Dice are mine:
This Diamond I value at twenty marks:
Isle venture it at a throw.
It is 〈◊〉 you.
Then at all. Ell's mine. Nay M. Boyster,
I bar you: let us work upon the winners.
Gramercy Sinks: Nay, though I owe you no quarrel, yet you must give me leave to draw.
I had rather you should draw your sword,
Then draw my money thus.
Again sweet Dice: nay I bar swearing, Gentlemen, let's play patiently. Well, this At the Candlestick, so—
Now Dic•… at all. To tho, quoth the 〈◊〉.
〈◊〉 precious luck.
〈◊◊〉. I think 〈◊◊〉;
〈◊◊〉 and 〈◊〉 so 〈◊〉: there's 〈◊◊〉.
Hee 〈◊〉 all with 〈◊〉.
With Trayes, how say by 〈◊〉
Oh hoe's old dog at Bowls and Trayes.
Lend me some money: be my half one 〈◊〉.
Isle once out-brave this 〈◊〉 with a throw
So now the Dice are mine, wilt be my half?
I will.
Then once Isle play the Frank 〈◊〉.
Let me but see how much you both can make,
And Isle cast at all, all, every Cross.
Now bless us all, what will you every Cross 〈◊〉
I will not leave my self one Cross to bless me.
I set.
And so doe I.
Why then at all. How▪
Nay, swear not, lets play patiently.
Damned Dice: did ever Gamester see the like?
Never, never.
Was ever known such 〈◊〉?
Drunk nor sober, I ne'er saw a man cast worse.
Isle prove this Hat of mine an 〈◊〉.
Which of you 〈◊〉 dares say the contrary?
As fair an Helmet as any man in 〈◊〉 Needs to wear.
〈◊〉, thy Hat is black.
Upon better recollection, it is so indeed.
I say it is made of Wool.
True, my losing had took away my Senses,
Both of Seeing and Feeling: but better luck
Hath brought them to their right temper.
But come, a pox of Dice; it is time to give over.
All times are times for winners to give over,
But not for them that lose. Isle play till midnight,
But I will change my luck.
Come, come, you shall not.
Give over: 〈◊〉 give over: doe I pray,
And choose the Fortune of some other hour:
Let's not like debauched 〈◊〉, play our Clothes,
Belts, Rapiers, 〈◊〉 our needful ornaments:
It is childish, not becoming G•…ntlemen.
Play was at first ordained to pass the time;
And sir, you but abuse the use of Play,
To employ it other wise.
You may persuade me—
For once Isle leave a loose•….
Then 〈◊〉 put on your Helmet; let's leave this abominable Game, and find out some better Exercise. I can∣not endure this 〈◊〉 when men loose.
And there's not a more testy waspish Companion then thy self when thou art a looser, and yet thou must bee vexing others with, Play patiently Gentlemen, and lets have no swearing.
A sign that I can give•… good counsel better than take it: but say, Where be the prettiest wenches, my hearts?
Well remembered, this puts me in mind of an ap∣pointment I had with a Gentlewoman of some respect.
I have you sir, I have you; but I think you will no∣ver have her: it is 〈◊〉 the Knights daughter in Graci∣os Street. Have I touched you?
You have come somewhat near me, but touched me not. Master Haringfield, will you bear me company thither? Have you seen the Gentlewoman, M. 〈◊〉?
Never sir.
How have you heard of her?
That 〈◊〉 hath, as other women have,
That she goes for a Maid, as others doe, &amp;c.
I can assure you, she is a proper G•…ntlewoman.
Then i•… she have you, she is like to have a proper Gentleman.
You should tell them so that know it not. Adjew Gentlemen.
I am glad yet they go so lightly away.
What will you doe M. Boyster?
Somewhat.
You will not acquaint me with your business.
No: I am in love, my head is full of Proclaim∣tions. There is a thing called a Virgin. Nature hath showed her Art in making her. Court her I cannot, but Isle doe as I may.
Doe you go, or stay sir?
Go.
You before, Isle follow. He thinks with his blunt humour, to enter as far as I with my sharpe: No, my true Trojan, no: There is a fair sweet modest rogue, her name is Luce: with this Dandiprat, this pretty little Apes face, is yon blunt fellow in love; and no marvel, for she hath a Brow bewitching, Eyes ravishing, and a Tongue en∣chanting: And indeed she hath no fault in the world but one, and that is, she is honest: and were it not for that, she were the only sweet Rogue in Christendom. As I live, I love her extremely, and to enjoy her would give any thing: But the fool stands in her own light, and will doe nothing without Marriage: but what should I doe marrying? I can better endure Gives, than Bands of Matrimony. But in this Meditation, I am glad I have won my Money again. Nay, and she may be glad of it too: for the Girl is but poor, and in my pocket I have laid up a Stock for her, it is put to use already. And if I meet not with a Dyce-house, or an Ordinary by the way, no question but I may increase it to a sum. Well, Isle unto the Exchange to buy her some pretty Novelty: That done, Isle visit my little Rascal, and solicit instantly.
Where is my Father? Ioseph.
Mistress, above,
And prays you to attend below a little.
I doe not love to sit thus publicly:
And yet upon the traffic of our Wares,
Our provident Eyes and presence must still wait.
Doe you attend the shop, Isle ply my work.
I see my father is not jelousof me,
That trusts me to the open view of all.
The reason is, hee knows my thoughts are chaste,
And my care such, as that it needs the awe
Of no strict Overseer.
Yonders Luce. Save thee.
And you too, sir, y' are welcome; want you ought,
I pray, in which our Trade may furnish you?
Yes.
Ioseph, show the Gentleman.
Tic here that I would buy.
What doe you mean sir, speak, what first you lack?
I pray you wherefore doe you fix your eyes
So firmly in my face? what would you have?
Thee.
Me?
Yes, thee.
Your pleasure is to jest, and so I take it.
Pray give me leave sir, to intend my work.
You are fair.
You flout me.
You are, go too, you are,
Id vex him that should say the contrary.
Well, you may say your pleasure.
I love thee.
Oh Sir!
As I live, I doe.
Now as I am a true Maid,
The most religious oath that I dare swear,
I hold my self indebted to your love:
And I am sorry there remains in me,
No power how to requite it.
Love me, prithee now, doe if thou can▪
I cannot.
〈◊〉, if thou can.
Indeed I cannot.
Y•…t ask thine heart, an•… see what may be done.
In troth I am sorry you should spend a •…igh
For my sake unrequited, or a tear;
Ey, or a word▪
It is no matter for my words, they are not many,
And those not very wise one's neither.
Yet I beseech you spend no more in vain.
I scorn you not; 〈◊〉 as far from me,
As are the two Poles distant: therefore Sir,
Because I would not hold you in suspense,
But tell you what at first to trust unto,
Thus in a word, I must not fancy you.
Must-not?
I cannot, nor I may not.
I am gone:
Thou hast given me, Luc•…, a Bone to gnaw upon▪
Alas, that Beauty should be sought of more
Then can enjoy it: might I have my wish,
I would seem fair but only in his eye,
That should 〈◊〉 me in a Nuptial tie.
Morrow 〈◊〉; In exchange of this 〈◊〉, see
what I have brought thee from the Exchange.
What mean you Sir, by this?
Guess that by the circumstance, here's a Ring▪ were it for my sake; twenty Angels, pocket them you fool; come, come, I know thou art a Maid, say nay, and take them.
Sweet Master Chartley, doe not fasten on me,
More then with ease I can shake off: your Gift
I reverence, yet refuse; and I pray tell me,
Why doe you make so many Errands hither?
Send me so many Letters? fasten on me
So many favours? what's your meaning in it?
Hark in thine ear, Isle tell thee; nay hear me out, is it possible so soft a body should have so hard a soul? Nay now I know my penance, you will be angry, and school me for tempting your modesty: a fig for this modesty, it hen∣ders many a g•…od man from many a good turn, &amp; that's all the good it doth. If thou but knew, Luce, how I love thee, thou would be far more tractable. Nay, I bar chiding when you speak▪ Isle stop thy lips if thou dost but offer an angry word, by this hand Isle di'•…, and with this hand too. Go to now, what say you?
Sir, if you love me, as you say you doe,
Show me the fruits thereof.
The stock I can, thou moist see the fruits here∣after.
Can I believe you love me, when you seek
The ship wrack of mine Honour?
Honour! there's another word to flap in a mans mouth: Honour! what should thou and I stand upon our Honour, that were neither of us yet, Right Worship∣full?
I am sorry Sir, I have lent so large an ear
To such a bad discourse; and I protest
After this 〈◊〉, never to doe the like.
I must confess, of all the Gentlemen
That ever courted me, you have possessed
The best part in my thoughts: but this course language
Exiles you quite from thence. Sir, had you come,
In stead of changing this mine honest name
Into a Strumpets, to have honoured me
With the chaste Title of a Modest Wife;
I had reserved an ear for all your suits:
But since I see your rudeness finds no limit,
I leave you to your lust.
You shall not, Luce.
Then keep your tongue within more moderate bounds.
I will, as I am virtuous, I will: I told you, the second word would be Marriage. It makes a man forfeit his Freedom, and makes him walk ever after with a Chain at his heals, or a Iack-an-Apes hanging at his el∣bow: Marriage is like 〈◊〉 his labyrinth, and being once in, there's no finding the way out. Well, I love this little property most intolerably, and I must set her on the Last, though it cost me all the shoes in my shop. Well Luce, thou see my stomach is come down; thou hast my heart already, there's my hand.
But in what way?
Nay, I know not the way yet, but I hope to find it hereafter, by your good direction.
I mean, in what manner? in what way?
In the way of marriage, in the way of honesty, in the way that was never gone yet: I hop•… thou art a Maid, Luce.
Yes Sir, and I accept it; in exchange
Of this your hand, you shall receive my heart.
A bargain, and there's earnest on thy lips▪
Isle call my Father, Sir, to witness it:
See, here hee comes.
Father, save you, you have happened of an •…∣ward Son-in-Law; here I am, how doe you like me?
Sir, I was nearer then you were aware,
And over-heard both sum and 〈◊〉.
Then I perceive you are an old Eves-dropper:
But what doe you think of it, Father?
I entertain the motion with all love,
And I rejoice my Daughter is preferred,
And raised to such a match; I heard the contract,
And will confirm it gladly: but pray Sir,
When shall the merry day be?
Marry, even to morrow by that we can see; 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 lose no more time, •…le •…ache order for that.
Stay but a month.
A 〈◊〉 I thou can not hire me too't. Why L•…ce, if thou be hungry, 〈◊〉 thou stay a month from meat? Nay, if I see my diet before me, I love to fall too when I have a stomach. Here, buy thee a new Smock; let's have a new Bed too, and look it be strong: there's a box of Rings and Jewels, lay the•… up. Ha 〈◊〉; me thinks the very name of Wedlock h•…th brought me to a Night-cap already, and I am grown civil on the 〈◊〉. There's more money for Dishes, Platters, Ladles, Candlesticks, &amp;c. as I shall 〈◊〉 them 〈◊〉 down in the Inventory.
But whom shall wee invite unto the Wed∣ding?
Ey, thereby hangs a Tale, we will have no more at our marriage, but my self, to say, I take thee Luce; thou to say, I Luce take thee Robin: the Vicar to put us together, and you Father, to play the Clerk, and cry Amen.
Your reason for that.
I would not for a world it should bee known to my Friends, or come to my Fathers care. It may bee ten thousand pounds out of my way for the pre∣sent: therefore this is my conceit, Let us bee married privately, and L•…ce shall live like a Maid still, and bear the Name. Tic nothing L•…ce: it is a common thing in this age to go for a Maid, and bee none. Isle frequent the house secretly: •…ear not Girl, though I revel abroad a days, Isle bee with thee to bring a nights, my little Whi∣ting Mopp.
But so I may incur a public scandal,
By your so oft frequenting to my Chamber.
Scandal? what scandal? Why to stop the mouth of all scandal, after some few days do•… I ap∣pear in my likeness, marri•…d man and honest hous-keeper, and then what becomes of your scandal? Come, send for Mr. Vicar, and what we doe, lets doe suddenly.
Cold comfort for me.
If you purpose to be so privately married, I know one excellent at such an exploit: are you not acquainted with the 〈◊〉 of Hogsdon?
O the Witch, the Beldam, the Hag of Hog•…don.
The same, but I hold her to bee of no such con∣dition. I will anon make a steppe thither▪ and pun∣ctually acquaint her with all our proceedings: she is never without a Sir Iohn at her elbow, ready for such a stratagem.
Well, be it so then.
Heigh ho•…: have I disguised my self, and stolen out of the Country thus far, and can light of no better news to entertain me? Oh this wild-headed wicked Chartley, whom nothing will tame. To this Gallant was I poor Gentle-woman betrothed, and the Marriage day appointed: But hee out of a fantastic and
giddy humour, before the time prefixed, posts up to Lone∣don. After him come I thus habitat, and you see my welcome, to bee an •…are-witnesse of his second Country∣cting. Modesty would not suffer me to discover my self, otherwise, I should have gone near to have marred the match. I heard them talk of Hogsdon, and a Wise-wo∣man, where these Aims shall bee brought to Action. Isle see if I can insinuate my self into her service: that's my next project: and now good luck of my side.
Fie, fie, what a toil, and a moil it is,
For a woman to bee wiser then all her neighbours?
I pray good people, press not too fast upon me;
Though I have two •…ares, I can hear but one at once.
You with the Vri•…e.
Here forsooth Mistress.
And who distilled this water?
My wives Limbeck, if it pl•…as you.
And where doth the pain hold her most?
Marry at her heart forsooth.
Ey, at whore heart, 〈◊〉 hath a griping at her heart.
You have hit it right.
Nay, I can see so much in the Urine.
Just so much as is told her.
She hath no pain in her head, hath she?
No indeed, I never heard her complain of her head.
I told you so, her pain lies all at her heart:
Alas good heart! but how feels she her stomach?
O queasy, and sick at stomach.
Ey, I warrant you, I think I can see as far into a Mill-stone as another: you have heard of Mother Nottingham, who for her time, was prettily well skilled in casting of Waters: and after her, Mother Bombye; and then there is one Hatfield in Pepper-Alley, hee doth pretty well for a thing that's lost. There's another in Coleharbour, that's skilled in the Planets. Mother Sturton in Goulden-lane, is for Forespeaking: Mother Phillips of the Banke-side, for the weakness of the back: and then there's a very reverent Matron on Clarkenwell-Green, good at many things: Mistress Mary on the 〈◊〉-side, is for recting a Figure: and one (what doe you cal•… her) in Westminster, that practises the Book and the Key, and the Sive and the Shears: and all doe well, according to their talent. For my self, let the world speak: hark you my friend, you shall take—
It is strange the Ignorant should be thus fooled.
What can this Witeh, this Wizard, or old Trot,
Doe by Enchantment, or by Magic spell?
Such as profess that Art should be deep Scholars.
What reading can this simple Woman have?
Tic palpable gross foolery.
Now friend, your business?
I have stolen out of my Masters house, forsooth,
with the Kitchin-Mayd, and I am come to know of you,
whether it be my fortune to have her, or no.
And what's your suit, Lady?
Forsooth, I come to know whether I be a Maid or no.
Why, art thou in doubt of that?
It may bee I have more reason then all the world knows.
Nay, if thou come to know whether thou be a Maid or no, I had best ask to know whether I be with c•…eld or no.
Withdraw into the Parlour there, Isle but talk with this other Gentlewoman, and He resolve you pre∣sently.
Come Si•…y, if she cannot resolve thee, I can, and in the Case of a Mayden-head doe more then she, I warrant thee.
Forsooth I am bold, as they say.
You are welcome Gentlewoman.—
I would not have it known to my Neighbours, that I come to a Wise-woman for any thing, by my truly.
For should your Husband come and find you here.
My Husband woman, I am a Widow.
Where are my brains? it is true, you are a Widow; and you dwell, let me see, I can never remember that place.
In K•…ntstreet.
Kentstreet, Kentstreet! and I can tell you where∣fore you come.
Why, and say true?
You are a Wag, you are a Wag: why, what doe you think now I would say?
Perhaps, to know how many Husbands I should have.
And if I should say so, sh•…uld I say amiss?
I think you are a Witch.
In, in, Isle but read a little of Ptolomie, and Erra Pater; and when I have cast a Figure, Isle come to you presently.
Now Wag, what would thou have?
If this were a Wisewoman, she could tell that without asking. Now me thinks I should come to know whether I were a Boy or a Girl; forsooth I lack a service.
By my Fidelity, and I want a good t•…sty Lad.
Now could I sigh, and say, Alas, 〈◊〉 is some Bawd trade-falne, and out of her wicked experience, is come to bee reputed wise. Isle serve her, be it but to pry m∣to the mystery of her Science.
A proper strip•…ing, and a wise, I warrant him; here's a penny for thee, Isle hire thee for a year by the Statute of Winchester: prove true and honest, and thou shalt want nothing that a good Boy—
Here Wise-woman you are o•…t again, I shall want what a good Boy should have▪ whilst I live: well, here I shall live both unknown, and my Sex unsuspected. But whom have wee here?
Come Harin•…lt, now wee have been drink∣ing of Mother Red-caps Ale, let us now go make some sport with the Wise-woman.
Wee shall be thought very wise men, of all such as shall see us go in to the Wise-womans.
See, here she is; how now Witch? How now Hag? How now Beldam? You are the Wise∣woman, are you? and have wit to keep your selte warm enough, I warrant you.
Out thou knave.
And will these wild oats never 〈◊〉 sown•…?
You Enchantress, 〈◊〉, Shee-devill▪ you Madam 〈◊〉, Lady 〈◊〉, you are too old, you Hag, now, for con•…uring up Spirits your self; but you keep pretty young Witches 〈◊〉 your roof, that can do•… that.
I, or my Family conjure up any Spirits! I defy thee, thou young Hare-brain'd—
Forbear him till he have his Senses about him, and I shall then hold thee for a Wise-woman indeed.: otherwise, I shall doubt thou hast thy name for nothing. Come friend, away, if thou love me.
Away you old Dromedary, Isle come one of these nights, and make a racket amongst your She∣Catterwaullers.
I prithee let's be civil.
Out of my sight, thou Shee-mastiffe.
Patience, •…weet Mistress.
Now bless me, hee hath put me into such a fear, as makes all my bones to dance, and rattle in my skin: Isle be revenged on that swaggering companion.
Mistress, I wish you would, hoe's a mere Mad∣cap, and all his delight is in mis-using such reverent Ma∣trons as your self.
Well, what's thy name, Boy?
I am even little better th•…n a Turn-broach, for my name is Jack.
Honest Jack, if thou could but devise how I might cry quittance with this 〈◊〉 Dicke, I will go near to adopt thee my So•…e and heir.
Mistress, there is a way, and this it is;
To morrow morning doth this Gentleman
Intend to marry with one M•…ris Luce,
A Gold-smiths Daug•…; 〈◊〉 you know the Maid?
My Daughter, and a 〈◊〉 smug face•…t Girl.
I had a note but late from her, and she means
To be with me in th'evening; for I ha•…e bespoke
Sir Boniface to marry her in th•… morning.
Doe but prevent this Gallant of his Wife,
And then your wrongs shall bereveng'd at full.
Isle 〈◊〉, as I am Matron; Ey, and show him a new trick for his learning.
Morrow.
You're welcome Sir.
Art wise?
Hee should be wise, because hee speaks few words.
I am as I am, and there's an end.
Can conjure?
Oh that's a foul word! but I can tell you your Fortune, as they say; I have some little skill in Palmistry, but never had to doe with the devil.
And had the devil never any thing to doe with thee? thou look somewhat like his damme. Look on me ca•…st tell what I aisle?
Can you tell your self? I should guess, you be mad, or not well in your wits.
T•…▪art wise, I am so; men being in love, are mad,
And I being in love▪ am so.
Nay, if I see your complexion once, I think I can guess as near as another.
One Mistress Luce I love, know thou her, Gran∣name?
As well as the Beggar knows his Dish. Why she is one of my Daughters.
Make her my wife, Isle give thee forty pieces.
Take them Mistress, to be revenged on Chartley.
A bargain, strike me luck, cease all your sorrow,
Fair Luce shall be your Bride betimes to morrow.
Th▪art a good Grannam; and, but that thy teeth stand like hedge-stakes in thy head, I'd kiss thee.
Pray will you in; come hither lack, I have
A new trick come into my head, wilt thou
Assist me in it?
If it concern the crossing of the marriage with
Mistress Luce, Isle do it what ever it be.
Thou shalt be tyred like a woman; can you make a courtesy, take small strides, simper, and s•…me modest? me thinks thou hast a women's voice already.
Doubt not of me, th•… act them naturally.
I have conceited, to have Luc•… married to this blunt Gentleman; she mistaking him for Chartley, and Ch•…tley shall 〈◊〉 thee, being a Boy, and take thee for Luce. Wilt not be excellent?
Oh super, super-excellent!
Play but thy part, as Isle act mine, Isle fit him with a Wife, I warrant him.
And a Wife Isle warrant him.
Ha, then tho•… saw them whispering with my Daughter.
I saw them, if it shall please you, not whisper, but—
How then, thou knave?
Marry Sir Knight, I saw them in sad talk; but to say they were directly whispering, I am not able.
Why Taber, that sad talk was whispering.
Nay, they did not greatly whisper, for I heard what was said, and what was said, I have the wit to keep to my self.
What said the unthrift, Taber, tell me knave? Tell me, good knave, what did the unthrift say?
I am loath to be called in question about men and women•…s matters, but as soon as ever he saw your Daugh∣la, I heard what was spoke.
Here sir, take thy Quarters wages afore-hand, and tell me all their words, and what their greeting was at their first encounter; hold thine hand.
Thanks, Noble Sir, and now Isle tell you. Your daughter being wall•…ing to take the air of the fields, and I before her; whom should wee meet just in the nick?
Just in the nick, man?
In the high-way I meant, Sir.
Ha, and what conference past betwixt them, Taber?
As well as my Pipe can utter, you shall know Sir.
This Gentleman meeting with my young Mistress full butt; imagine you were she, and I young Master Sencer; now there you come, and here I meet you; he comes in this manner, and put off his hat in this fashion.
I, but what said hee?
Be with you, fair Gentlewoman; and so goes quite away, and scarce so much as once look•… back: and if this were lang•…age to o•…r to a young Lady, judge you.
But spake hee nothing else?
Nothing as I am true.
Why man, all this was nothing.
Yes Sir, it was as much as my Quarters wages afore-hand.
Here are two Gentlemen with great desire,
Crave conference with my Father: here he is,
Now Gallants, you may freely speak your minds.
Save you Sir, my name is Sencer; I am a Northamp∣ton-shire Gentleman, borne to a thousand pound Land by the year: I love your Daughter, and I am come to crave your good-will.
Have you my Daughters, that you covet mine?
No Sir, but I hope in time I shall have.
So hope not I. Sir, Sir, my Daughters young, and you a Gentleman unknown, Sencer? ha, Sencer? O Sir, your name I now remember well, it is rank't 'mo•…st •…∣thrifts, decors, swaggerers, and drunkards: were no•… •…ou brought before me, some month since, for beating of the Watch, by the same token, I sent you to the Counter?
I confess my self to have been•… in that act•…on, bu•… note the cause, Sir: you could not have pleasured me so much, in giving me a piece of gold, as at the same time to help me to that Counter.
Why Sir, what cause had you to beat the Watch, and raise a midnight tumult in the streets?
Nay, but hear me, sweet Sir Harry: Being somewhat late at Supper at the Meter, the doors were shut at my Lodging, I knocked at three or four places more, all were a-bed, and fast: Innes, Taverns, none would give me entertainment. Now, would you have had me despaired, and lain in the streets? No, I bethought me of a trick worth two of that, and presently devised, ha∣avenge at that time a charge of money about me, to be lodged, and safely too.
As how, I pray you?
Marry thus: I had knocked my heals against the ground a good while, knew not where to have a Bed for love nor money. Now what did I? but spying the Watch, went and hit the Constable a good sows on the Ear, who provided me of a lodging presently; and the next day, being brought before your Worship, I was then sent thither back again, where I lay three or four days without control.
O, you're a Gallant! is that Gentleman
A Suitor too?
I am a Suitor in my friends bah•…lfe,
No otherwise•…: I can assure you, Sir,
He is a Gentleman descend well,
Derived from a good house•…, well qualified,
And well possessed; but that which most should move you,
Hee loves your Daughter.
But were I to choose,
Which of th•…se two should please my fancy best,
I sooner should aff•…ct this Gentleman,
For his m•…d carriage, and his fair discourse,
Then my hot Suitor; Ruffians I detest:
A s•…ooth and square b•…haviour likes me best.
What say you to me, Lady.
You had best ask my Father what I should say.
Are you angry, sweet Lady, that I asked your Fa∣theirs consent?
No, if you can get his consent to marry him, shall it 〈◊〉 me?
Indeed you therein much forget your self,
To sound her Father ever you tasted her.
You should have first sought means for her good-will,
And after compassed his.
He can prevail with neither: Gentlemen,
If you will come to revel, you are welcome;
If to my Table, welcome; if to use me
In any grateful Office, welcome too:
But if you come as Suitors, there's the door.
The door!
I say the door.
Why Sir? tell not me of your door, nor going out of it, your company is fair and good, and so is your Daughters; Isle stay here this twelve-moneth, ever Isle offer to trouble your door.
Sir, but you shall not. Taber! whore's that knave?
Why Sir, I hope you doe not mean to make us dance, that you call for a Taber.
Nay Master Sencer, doe not urge the Knight,
Hee is incensed now, choose a fitter hour,
And tempt his love in that: old men are testy,
Their rage, if stood against, grows violent;
But suffered and forborne, confounds it self.
Whore's Taber?
At hand, noble Master.
Show them the door.
That I will, and take money too, if it please them.
Is thy name Taber?
I am so eclip't Sir.
And Taber, are you appointed to give us Jack Drum's entertainment?
Why sir, you doe not play upon me.
Though I cannot, yet I have known an Hare
that could. But Knight, thou doest not forbid us th•… House.
Yes, and forewarn it too.
But by thy favour, wee may choose whether we will take any warning or no. Well, farewell old Knight, though thou forbidst me thine house, Isle honour 〈◊〉, and extol thee; and though thou keepst me from thy Daughter, thou shalt not hinder me to love her, and ad∣mire her: and by thy favour, sometimes to see her: A Catt may look at a King, and so may I at her. Give me thine hand, Knight, the next time I come into thy company, thou shalt not only bid me welcome, but hire me to stay with thee, and thy daughter.
When I doe that, enjoy my full consent,
To marry Graciana.
Tic a match, strike me luck:
Wife that may bee, farewell: Father in law that
Mu•…t bee, adieu. Taber, play before, my friend
And I will dance after.
When•… I receive thee gladly to mine ho•…se,
And wage thy stay, thou shalt have 〈◊〉,
Doubt not, thou shalt. Here's a strange Humorist,
To come a wooing. Taber, are they gone?
I have plaid them away, if it please your Worship▪ and yonder at the door attends a Schoolmaster, you sent for him, if you remember, to teach my little young Master and Mistress.
A proper Scholar, pray him to come 〈◊〉.
Aquas 〈◊〉: 〈◊◊〉: non 〈◊〉 quid est in Tergo, sed salve bone virgo.
Sir, you may call me nick-names: if you love me, speak in your Mother-tongue; or at the 〈◊〉, if Lear∣ning be so much allied unto you, that Latin unawares sloes from your lips: to make your mind 〈◊〉 with my knowledge, pray utter it in English: what's your name?
Sit 〈◊◊◊〉.
Isle tell you my 〈◊〉.
Will you tell it to no men.
Isle entertain none ever I know their names:
Nay, if you be so dainty of your name,
You are not for my service.
Intende 〈◊◊〉.
Not for twenty Nobles:
Trust me, I will not buy your name so dear.
O Ignorantia! what it is to deal with stupidity?
Sir 〈◊〉, Sir 〈◊〉, hear me one word,
I see, 〈◊◊〉, 〈◊〉 vero negligitis.
I think he saith we are a company of fools, and Nigits, but I hope you shall not find us such, Mast•…r School∣master.
Friend, friend, to cut off all vain circumstance,
Tell me your name, and answer me directly,
Plainly, and to my understanding too,
Or I shall leave you: here's a deal of gibberish.
Fire bone.
Nay, nay, make me no bones, but do it.
Then in plain vulgar English I am called, Sir Boniface Absee.
Why this is somewhat like, Sir Boniface,
Give me thine hand, thou art a proper man,
And in my judgement, a great Scholar too:
What shall I give thee by the year?
Isle trust, Sir, to your generosity;
I will not bargain, but account my self
Mill &amp; mill modis, bound to you.
I cannot leave my Mils, they are farmed already,
The stipend that I give, shall be in money.
Sure Sir, this is some Miller that comes to under∣mine you, in the shape of a Schoolmaster.
You both mistake the Scholar.
I understand my English, that I know;
What's more then Modern, doth surpass my reach.
Sir Bonifa•…, come to me two days hence,
You shall receive an answer; I have now,
Matters of some import that trouble me,
Thou should be else dispatch't.
Sir Boniface, if you come to live in our house, and be a Familist amongst us, I shall desire you better acquain∣tance, your Name and my Physiognomy should have some con∣sanguinitie, good Sir Boniface.
〈◊〉 vales, 〈◊〉 vales.
Go with you to the Ale-house? I like the mo∣tion well; Isle make an excuse out of doors and follow you. I am glad yet, we shall have a Good-fellow come into the house amongst us.
〈◊〉 fire 〈◊〉.
You shall not have me at Saint Magnes, my house is here in 〈◊〉.
I know it, sweet Knight, I know it.
Then virgo formosa, &amp; Domino 〈◊〉 valet.
Ey, in 〈◊〉 you shall hear of me,
Sir Bonif. He shall instruct my children; and to thee,
Fair 〈◊〉, read the Latin tongue,
Who, shall Sir Bawdy-face?
Sir Boniface, you fool.
His name is so hard to hit on.
Come Daughter, if things fall out as I intend,
My thoughts shall peace have, and these troubles end.
Jack, thou art my Boy.
Mistress!
Isle be a Mother to thee, no Mistress: come Lad, I must have thee sworn to the orders of my house, and the secrets thereof.
As I am an honest Lad, I am yours to com∣mand. But Mistress, what mean all these women's pictures, hanged here in your withdrawing room?
Isle tell thee, Boy; marry thou must be secret. When any Citizens, or young Gentlemen come hither, under a colour to know their Fortunes, they look upon these pi∣ctures, and which of them they best like, she is ready with a wet finger: here they have all the furniture belonging to a privat-chamber, bed, bed-fellow and all; but mum, thou know my meaning, Jack.
But I see coming and going, Maids, or such as go 〈◊〉 Maids, some of them, as if they were ready to lie down, sometimes two or three delivered in one night; then suddenly leave their Brats behind them, and convey themselves into the City again: what becomes of their Children?
Those be Kitchin-maids, and Chamber-maids, and sometimes good men's Daughters; who having caught a clap, and growing near their time, get leave to see their friends in the Country, for a week or so: then 〈◊〉 they come, and for a matter of money, here they are delivered. I have a Mid wife or two belonging to the house, and one Sir Boniface a Deacon, that makes a shift to christ•… the In∣fonts: we have poor, honest, and secret Neighbours, that stand for common Gossips. But dost not thou know this?
Yes, now I doe: but what after becomes of the poor Infants?
Why, in the night we send them abroad, and lay one at this mans door, and another at that, such as are able to keep them; and what after becomes of them, we inquire not. And this is another string to my Bow.
Most strange, that women's brain should apprehend
Such law less, indirect, and horrid means
For 〈◊〉 gain! How many unknown Trades
Women and men are free of, which they never
Had Charter for? but Mistress, are you so
Cunning as you make your self: you can
Neither write nor read, what doe you with hose
Books you so often turn over?
Why tell the leaves; for to be ignorant, and seem ignorant, what greater folly?
Believe me, this is a cunning Woman; neither hath she her name for nothing, who out of her ignorance, can fool so many that think themselves wise. But where∣fore have you built this little 〈◊◊〉 to the door, where sitting, you may hear every 〈◊〉 spoken, by all such as ask for you.
True, and therefore I built it: if any knock, you must to the door and question them, to find what th•…y come about, if to this purpose, or to that. Now they ignorantly telling thee their errand, which I sitting in my Closet, 〈◊〉 hear, presently come forth, and tell them the cause of their coming, with every word that hath past betwixt you in private: which they admiring, and thinking it to 〈◊〉 mira∣culous, by their report I become thus famous.
This is no Trade, but a Mystery; and were I a Wise-woman, as indeed I am but a foolish Boy, I need not live by your service. But Mistress, we lose our selves in this discourse, is not this the morning in which I should be married?
Now, how had I forgot my self? Mistress Luce promised to be with me half an hour 〈◊〉, but 〈◊〉 and disguised, and so shalt thou be too: here's a black Veil to hide thy face against the rest come.
Sit tibi bone dies: salus &amp; quies.
Into the withdrawing room, Sir 〈◊〉.
Without any compunction, I will make the Conjunction.
Now keep thy countenance, Boy.
Fear not me, I have as good a face in a Mask, as any Lady in the Land could wish to have: but to my heart, hee comes, or he comes not; now am I in a pitiful •…rlexity, until I see the event of all.
No more Jack now, but Mistress Luce.
I warrant you Mistress: that it happens so luckily, that my name should be Luce too, to make the marriage more firm!
My honey sweet Hag, vvhere's Luce?
〈◊〉 sweet heart, but disguised and veiled, as you are visarded.
〈◊〉 vvhat's the reason vvee are thus Hood∣winked?
No discovery of your selves for a million, there's Sir Boniface within, shall hee blab who you are? Besides, there's a young Heir that hath stolen a Lords Daughter from the Court, and would not have their faces seen for a World: cannot you be content to fare well, and keep your own counsel, and see, yonder they come.
Gramercy my Sugar-candie sweet Trot.
Mum, no more words.
If the great Heir and the young Lady be so dainty of their Complexions, they shall see (my sweet Luce) vvee can vizard it with the best of them.
That Gentleman, by the Wisevvomans description, should be Master Chartley. (Meaning Boyster.)
That gallant Wench, if my Grannam fable not,
Should be Luce: but what be those other?
You wrong me, but to ask, who but a young
Heir, and a Lady of the Court: that's Luce, take her, and keep your promise.
Pose•… palabras.
That's Chartley, take him Luce.
But who be they?
A Lord and Lady shall Sir Boniface stay,
Rather then so, strive who should lead the way.
Now Jack my Boy, keep thine own counsel, and counten•…nce, and I shall cry quittance with my young Gallant. Well, by this time Sir Boniface is at his Book. But because there is a mistake, known only to my Boy and my self; the Marriage shall be no sooner ended, but Isle disturb them by some sudden out-cry, and that too, before they have leisure to unmask, and make known themselves one to another; for if the deceit were known, I should fall into the danger of that young mad Rascal. And now this double apprehension of the Lord and the Lady shall fetch me off from all; I know it is Sir Boniface his custom, to make short work, and hath dispatcht by this: And now Wise-vvoman, try if thou can b•…stir thy self like to a Mad-vvoman—shift for your selves, Warrants and Pursuivants! Away, Warrants and Pursuivants! shift for your selves.
Isle take this way.
I this.
〈◊〉 Cures 〈◊〉: My cheeks are all Murry,
And I am gone in an hurry.
O Heaven! what shall become of me?
I know what shall become of me already.
O sweet Daughter, shift clothes with this
Lady! Nay, as thou love thy credit and mine, change Habits—So, if thou be taken in her Garments, finding the mistake, will let thee pass; and should they meet her in thine, not knowing her, would no way 〈◊〉 her: and this prove to both your securities and my 〈◊〉.
As fast as I can, good Mother: So Madam fare∣well.
All happy joys betide you.
Ha, ha, let me hold my sides, and laugh: Here were even a Plot to make a play on, but that Chartley is so fooled by my Boy 〈◊〉: Well, heel make a note∣ble Wag, Isle warrant him. All the Jest will bee, if Boyster should meet with him in Luce's habitt, which hee hath now on, hee would think himself merely gulled and cheated; and should Chartley meet with Luce as she is now Roab'd, hee would bee confident hee had married her. Let me see how many Trades have I to live by: First, I am a VVise-vvoman, and a Fortune∣teller, and under that I deal in Physic and Fore-spea∣king, in Palmistry, and recovering of things lost. Next, I undertake to cure Mad folks. Then I keep Gentle∣women Lodgers, to furnish such Chambers as I let out by the night: Then I am provided for bringing young Wenches to bed; and for a need, you see I can play the Match-maker. She that is but one, and professes so ma∣ny, may well bee termed a Wise-woman, if there bee any.
Why, run away, and leave my Wench behind? Isle back: what have Warrants and Pursuivants to doe with me? with me? why should I budge? why should I wear Mask or Vizard? If Lords or Ladies offend, let Lords and Ladies answer; let me better bethink me. Why should I play at Hob-man blind? Hum; why marry in Tenebris, ha! is there no trick in it? If my
Grannam should make me a younger Brother now, and instead of Luce, pop me off with some broken com∣moditie, I were finely served: most sure I am, to be in for better and worse, but with whom, Heaven and my Grannam knows.
I am stolen out of doors, to see if I can meet my Husband; with whom I purpose to make some sport, ere I suddenly disclose my self: vvhat's hee?
Heyday, what have vvee here, an Hoberdehoy? come hither you.
It is Mistress Lucas Husband,
Isle not leave him thus.
What art thou?
Doe you not know me?
That Mask and Robe I know?
I hope so, or else I were in a woe•… case.
That Mask, that Gown I married.
Then you have no reason, but to enjoy both them and me too, and so you are like; I should be loath to divorce Man and Wife.
I am fooled, but what cracked ware are you, forsooth?
I belong to the old Gentlewoman of the house.
Isle set her house on fire: I am finely bobbed.
But I hope you will not bob me.
No E's warrant thee: what art thou? Girl or Boy?
Both, and neither; I was a Lad last night, but in the morning I was conjured into a Lass: And being a Girl now, I shall be translated to a Boy anon. Her•…'s all I can at this time say for my self: Fare∣well.
Yes, and be hanged withal. O for some Gun
powder to blow up this Witch, this 〈◊〉, this damned 〈◊〉! O I could tear her to fitters with my teeth! Yet I must be patient, and put up all, lest I bee made a jeer to such as know me: fooled by a Boy! Go too, of all the rest, the Girl Luce must not know it.
So, now am I the same man I was yesterday; who can say I was disguised? or who can distinguish my condition now? or read in my face, whether I be a mar∣ried man, or a Bachelor?
Who's that?
Luce.
Sweet Husband, is it you?
The news?
Never so frighted in my days.
What's become of the Lord and the Lady?
The Lord fled after you, the Lady staid; who maskt, and half unready, ran fast after her poor affrighted Husband: now ell's quiet.
This storm is then well past, and now convey your self home as privately as you can: and see you make this known to none but your Father.
I am your Wife and Servant.
This name of Luce hath been ominous to me; one 〈◊〉 I should have married in the Country, and just the night before, a toy took me in the head, and mounting my H•…se, I left Capons, Ducks, Geese, Poultry, Wild∣foul, Father, and Bride and all, and posted up to Lone∣don, where I have ever since continued Bachelor, till▪ now. And now—
Nay on, I Pretkee fellow on, my Father will won∣der where I have been visiting. Now, what had I forgot? Taber, there's money, go to the Gold-smiths, bid him send me my Fan; and make a quick return: on, fell∣low on.
Her Fan at the Gold-smiths! now had I for∣got to ask her his name, or his sign: but I will after to know.
Sirrah, go call me back that Serving-man,
And ask him vvhat's the Gentle-vvomans name.
I shall; ho, you: Friend, you.
Who's that calls?
It was I.
Your business? you should be one, though not of my cognisance, yet of my condition: a Serving-creature, as I take it: pray vvhat's your will with me?
Pray Sir, what might I call that Gentle∣woman, on whom you were attendant?
You may call her what you please, but if you call her otherwise then in the way of honesty, you may perchance hear on it.
Nay, be not offended: I say, what do•… you call her?
Why Sir, I call her as it shall best please me, sometimes young Lady, sometimes young Mistress; and what hath any man to doe with that?
Are you so captious, sirrah, vvhat's her name? Speak, and be brief.
Ey marry Sir, you speak to purpose, and I can resolve you: her name is Gratiana. But all this while I have forgot my Mistress Fan.
Gratiana! oft have I heard of her, but saw her
not till now: it is a 〈◊〉 wench, a very pretty wench, nay, a very, very, very pretty wench. But what a Rogue am I, of a married man? nay, that have not been mar∣ried this six hours, and to have my shittle-wits run a Wooll-gathering already? What would poor Luce say if she should hear of this? I may very well call her poor Luce, for I cannot presume of five pounds to her portion: what a Coxcomb was I, being a Gentle∣man, and well derived, to match into so beggarly a kin∣dred? What needed I to have grafted in the stock of such a Choke Pear, and such a goodly Popering as this to escape•… me? Escape m•…e (said I?) if she doe, she shall doe it narrowly: but I am married already, and therefore it is not possible, unless I should make away my wife, to compass her. Married! why who knows it? Isle out-face tho Priest, and then there is none but she and her Father, and their evidence is not good in Law: and if they put me in suite, the best is, they are poor, and cannot follow it. I marry Sir, a man may have some credit by such a Wife as this; I could like this marriage well, if a man might change away his Wife, still as hee is a weary of her, and cope her away like a bad commodity: if every new Moon a man might have a new Wife, that's every year a do∣zen. But this, Till Death us depart, is tedious: I will go a wooing to her, I will; but how shall I doe for jewels and tokens? Luce hath mine in her custody, mo∣ney and all; tush, Isle juggle them from her well enough: see, here she comes.
Here is my Husband, I pray move him in it.
It touches both our reputations nearly;
For by his oft repair, now whilst the Marriage
Is kept from public knowledge, your good name
May be by Neighbours hardly 〈◊〉 of.
〈◊◊〉, 〈◊◊〉 〈◊〉 what, melancholy already▪ •…re thou hast had good cause to be m•…rry, and 〈◊〉 what 〈◊〉 was.
I have great reason, when my name is tossed
In every Gossips mouth, and 〈◊〉 a by-word
Unto such people as it least concerns.
Nay, in my hearing, as they pass along,
Some have not spared to brand my modesty,
Saying, There 〈◊〉 she whom young Chartley keeps.
There hath •…ee •…ntred late, betimes gone forth.
Where I with pride was wont to sit before,
I'm now with shame sent blushing from the door.
Alas poor fool, I am sorry for thee, but yet can∣not help thee, as I am a Gentleman. Why say 〈◊〉, thou lose now 〈◊〉 shillings worth of Credit, stay but a time, and it shall bring thee in a thousand pounds worth of com∣moditie.
Son, Son, •…ad I esteemed my profit more
Then I have done my credit, I had now
Been many thousands richer: but you see,
Truth and good dealing bear an humble sail;
That little I enjoy, it is with q•…jet,
Got with good conscience, kept with good report:
And that I still shall labour to preserve.
But doe you hear me?
Nothing Isle hear, that tends unto the ruin
Of mine, or of my Daughters honesty.
Shall I be held a Broker to lewd Lust,
Now in my wane of years?
Will you but hear 〈◊〉?
Not in this case. I that have lived thus long,
Reported well, esteemed a welcome Guest
At every 〈◊〉 Table, there respected;
Now to be held a 〈◊〉 to my Daughter?
That I should live to this 〈◊〉
But hark you Father?
A Bawd to mine own child▪
Father?
To my sweet L•…ce!
Father?
Deal with me like a Son, then call me Father;
I that have had the tongues of every man
Ready to crown my Reputation:
The hands of all my Neighbours to subscribe
To my good like; and such as could not write,
Ready with Palsy and 〈◊〉 fingers,
To set their •…cribling marks.
Why Father in Law?
Thou had a Mother Luce; it is 〈◊〉 with me
To say thou had, but hast not; a kind Wife,
And a good Nurse she was: she, had she lived
To hear my name thus canvast, and thus tossed,
Seven years before she died, I had been a Widower
Seven years before I was: Heaven rest her soul,
She is in Heaven I hope.
Why so now, these be good words, I knew these storms would have a shower, and then they would 〈◊〉. Now if your anger be over, hear me.
Well, say on Son.
Stay but a Month, it is but four Weekee; nay, it is February, the shortest Month of the year, and in that time I shall be at full age; and the Land being in∣tailed, my Father can dis-inherit me of nothing. Is your 〈◊◊◊◊◊〉 I satisfied you? Well, I see you choleric hasty men, are the kindest when all is done. Here's such 〈◊〉 of 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 weeps to think of his Wife, she weeps to see her Fa∣there cry ▪ Peace 〈◊〉, wee shall else have thee 〈◊〉 •…∣dred of the Woman killed with kindness.
Well Son, my anger's past; yet I must tell you,
It grieves me that you should thus 〈◊〉 it off,
Concerning us, no such a dear degree.
In private be it spoke, my Daughter tells me,
Shoe's both a Wife and Maid.
That may be helped.
Now Luce, your Fathers pacified, will you be pleased? I would endure a Quarters punishment for thee, and wilt not thou suffer a poor Months penance for me? It is but eight and twenty days, Wench; thou shalt fare well all the time, drink well, eat well, lie well: come, one word of comfort at the later end of the day.
Yours is my fame, mine honour, and my heart
Linked to your pleasure, and shall never part.
Gramercy Wench, thou shalt wear this chain no longer for that word, Isle multiply the links in such order, that it shall have light to shine about thy neck, oftener then it doth: this jewel, a plain Bristowe stone, a counterfeit. How base was I, that coming to thee in the way of Marriage, courted thee with counter∣feit stones? Thou shalt wear right, or none: thou hast no money about 〈◊〉, Luce?
Yes Sir, I have the hundred pounds that you gave me to lay up last.
Fetch it; let me see, how much branched Sat∣tin goes to a Petticoat? and how much wrought Velvet to a Gown? then for a Beaver for the Citle, and a Black∣bag for the Country: Isle promise her nothing, but if any such 〈◊〉 bee brought home, let her not thank me for them.
Gramercy Luce, Nay, go in, Gravity and Modesty, ten to one but you shall hear of me, 〈◊〉 you see me again.
I know you kind, 〈◊〉 my hasty Lan∣gauge
unto my rage, not me.
Why, doe not I know you, and doe not I know her? I doubt you'll wish 〈◊〉 that I had no∣ver known either of you: now, what say thou, my sweet Luce?
My words are yours. so is my life: I am now part of your self, so made by Nuptial vows.
What a Pagan am I, to practise such villainy a∣against this honest Christian! If Gratiana did come into my thoughts, I should fall into a vain to pity •…er: but now that I talk of her, I have a tongue to▪ woo her, Tokens to win her; and that done, if I doe not find a trick, both to wear her, and weary her, it may prove a piece of a Wonder. Thou see, Luce, I have some store of Crowns about me, there are brave things to be bought in the Ci∣tie; Cheapside, and the Exchange, afford variety and ra∣rite. This is all I will say now, but thou may hear more of me hereafter.
Heaven speed you where you go Sir; shall we 〈◊〉?
Though not from scandal, wee live free from 〈◊〉.
Isle in before.
I am still in love with Luce, and I would know
An answer more directly: fie, fie, this Love
Hangs on me like an Ague, makes me 〈◊〉 fool▪
Coxcomb and Ass: why should I love her, why?
A Rattle-Baby, Puppit, a slight toy,
And now I could go to buffets with my self,
And 〈◊〉 this Love away: but see, that's Luce.
I cannot shun him, but Isle shake him off.
Morrow.
As much to you.
I'll use few words, Can love me?
Deed Sir no.
Why th• farewell, the way I came, Isle go.
This is no tedious Courtship, hoe's soon answered,
So should all Suitors else bee, were they wise;
For being repulsed, they doe but waste their days
In thankless suites, and superficial praise.
Swear that thou wilt not love me.
Not Sir, for any hate I ever bare you,
Or any foolish pride, or vain conceit:
Or that your feature doth not please mine eye,
Or that you are not a brave Gentleman:
But for concealed reasons I am forced
To give you this cold answer; and to swear
I must not, then with patience pray forbear.
Even farewell then.
The like to you, and save your hopes in me.
Heaven grant you your best wishes; all this strife
Will end it self, when I am known a Wife.
I am satisfied good M. Harringsfield touch∣ing your friend, and since I see you have left his dangerous company, I limit you to bee a welcome guest unto my Table.
You have bin always noble.
Taber: the news with thee?
May it please the right worshipful to understand that there are some at the Gate who dance a turn or two without, and desire to bee admitted to speak with you within.
The Scholar is it not.
Nay sir, there are two Scholars, and they are spow∣ting Latin one against the other; And in my simple Judge∣meant the stranger is the better Scholar, and is somewhat too hard for sir Boniface: For he speaks louder, and that you know is ever the sign of the most learning, and hee also hath a great desire to serve your Worship.
Two scholars; My house hath not place for two, thus it shall bee. Taber admit them both, wee though unlearned will hear them two dispute, and hee that of the two seems the best read, shall bee received, the other quite cashiered.
In that you show but Justice, in all persons merit should bee regarded.
Venerabilis magistri: Absent vobis capistri.
Et tu domini calve, iterum atque, iterum salve,
Amo amas amavi, sweet Lady Heaven save ye.
This approves him to be excellent, but I thank my breeding I understand not a word, you tong-men you whose wealth lies in your brains; Not in your bud∣gets here me: Be it known, my house affords room for one Schoolmaster but not for more. And I am thus resolved, take you that side gentle sir Boniface, and sir pos∣sesse you that.
Hee of you two in arguing proves the best. To him will I subscribe are you agreed.
Nec animo, nec corde, nec vtroque.
No more of that nec corde, noble Knight, he wishes you nec corde, think of that.
A Cord about my neck, sir Boniface.
Speak doe you use me well.
Domino currogas:
Is this to bee endured, to call a Knight.
Cur, Rogue and Ass.
I find my self abused.
Yet patience good sir Harry, and hear more pray sir Boniface: of what University? Were you of.
I was student in Brazen nose.
A man might guess so much by your pimples, and of what place were you:
Petrus dormit securus; I was Sir of Peeter house Sir Boniface. Natus eram, in Woxford, and I proceeded in Oxford.
Est mihi been nostrum, thou would say, in Gotam; For my part sir Harry, I can read Service and Marry, Que genus et flexum, though I go in genes Fus∣tion, scalpellum et charta I was not brought up at Plow &amp; cart, I can teach Queen mihi, and neither laugh nor tee-hee, sed as in present, if your worship at this present, Iste, Ista Istud, will doe me any good, to give me legem pone in
Gold or in money. Piper atque papauer, I'll deserve it with my labour.
But when go you to dispute.
Nomnativo hic prediculus, his words are most ridiculous: But tu thou, queen the which, deride those that bee rich, con•…torus hanc sententiam, constrne me this sentence. Est modus in rebus sunt certi denique fines:
Est modus in rebus: There is mud in the rivers.
Sunt certi denique fines, and certain little Fishes.
I warrant you he hath his answer ready.
Dij bone bone.
Heel give you more bones then those to kn•…w on Sir Boniface.
Kartere Moosotropos Poluphiltate phil poetatis Tes Logikes retoon, onch elashiste sophoon.
That is as much as to say, in our m•…torn lingna I will make you sir Boniface, confess your self an Ass in English, speak open and broad words, for want of Latin, and Denique instruct me to resolve such questions as I shall ask you in our modern tongue.
Confess him an Ass, speak obscene words after entreat thee to resolve thy questions. Doe that, possese the place.
Di do and dum: No more words but mum:
Noble sir Harry; Nunquam sic posit?
Sir Boniface is sick already and calls 〈◊〉 posit, no marvel, being so threatened.
You Boniface, decline me I am a no after the first coniugation, amo 〈◊〉, vocito vocitavi. Titubo titubavi?
I am not the preceptor to a pupil.
But can decline it, mark sir Timothy:
I am a no,
Been been.
I am an as?
Most treue most treue, vos estis, ut egojum 〈◊〉,
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
that what he confessed is, as true as the pestis.
This Scholar works by magic hee hath made him confess himself an Ass.
Per has meas manus fire, tues insanus,
Isle make him fret worse yet; Sir Bouiface: quid est grammatica.
Grammatica est ars,
Fie, fie, no more of these words good sir Boniface.
Attend again, proceed me with this verse
of reverent Cato: Si deus est animus
Nobis ut carmine dicunt.
Di quoth ha, out on him for a beastly man.
I would not h•…ue him teach my children so for more then I am worth.
O! but reverend sir Harry you must subaudi.
Isle never bee so bawdy whilst I live, nor any of mine I hope.
O! Propria quae maribus:
•…y Boniface, it is those maribo•…, that makes you talk so broadly?
Venerabilis fire home•… ille est ebrius.
What doth hee mean by that.
H•… saith, I can speak Hebrew
I Believe:
But if sir Boniface still co•… these lessons,
He'll, speak the French ton•…ue perfect.
Now to the last, isle task sir Boniface, but with an 〈◊〉 question. Tell me sir: Whats Latin for this Earth?
Facile and easy more fit for the pupil then the preceptor: whats Latin for this Earth? Tellus.
Tell you; no sir, it belongs to you to tell me.
I say Tellus is Latin for the Earth.
And I say, I will not tell you what is Latin for the Earth; unless you yield me victor▪
You have no reason: good sir Timothy,
The place is yours.
Hee hath deserved it well.
But isle deserve it better, why this fellow
•…s Frantic, you shall here me make him speak
Idly and without sense. I'll make him say,
His Nose was Husband to a Queen,
Sir Timothy not possible.
Hee will not speak it for shame.
That you shall here; Magister Boniface.
Quid ais domino Timothy.
Who was Pasiphas husband Queen of Create.
Who knows not that, why Minos was her Husband.
That his nose was; did I not tell you so.
I say that Min•…s was:
That his Nose was ha has.
Isle not believe it.
there are a brace of Augels.
You are not for my turn sir Timothy.
You are the man shall read unto my daughter
The Latin tongue, in which I am ignorant:
Confess your self an Ass; speak bawdy words;
And after to talk idly. Hence away:
You s•…all have my good word, but not my pay?
Opus est vsus; 〈◊〉 Timothy you abuse us.
Is wear by a noun, had I thy hose down,
Queen que quote, I would so smoke thee with the rod:
Ille Isle Illud, until I fetch blood.
But Nobiles valet, remain in quiet.
Sir Timothy, there is some Gold in earnest,
I like you well take into your tuition,
My daughter Gratiana; the news Taber.
Of another gallant noble sir that p•…attends to have business, both with you and my mistress,
Admit him.
Lusty Iuventus; will it please you to draw near.
Noble Knight, whilst you peruse that sweet Lady, tell me how you like this:
You press so suddenly upon me sir
I know not what to answer.
Mad Chartly; what makes desperation here.
To the word wooer let me add the name speeder my father hath written to your father, and the cause of his writing at this present, is to let you understand, that hee fears you have lived a maid too long: and therefore to prevent all diseases incident to the same; as the greene sickness and others. Hee sent me like a skilful Physician, to take order with you against all such maladies. If you will not credit me, list but how fervently my father writes in my behalf.
Hee is my only son, and she I take as your only daughter, what should hinder then,
To make a match between them, (well tic well tic good I like it) I will make her Jointer three hundred pounds a year.
How say you by that sweet Lady three hundred pounds a year and a proper man to boot.
Ell's good, I like it, welcome M. Chartly.
Thou 〈◊〉 art no child of •…in
Unless thou bid him welcome. This I presume
To bee your fathers hand.
But Isle bee sworn he never writ it.
And this his seal at Arms.
Or else I understand it very poorly, but L•…die▪
In earnest of further acquaintance, receive this Chain,
These Jewels, hand and heart.
Refase no Chain nor Jewels, heart nor ha•…d, but in exchange of these bestow thy self thine own dear self upon him.
My self on him, whom I tell now I near saw? Well since I must, your will's to me a law.
Nay then tic time to speak, shall I stand here wavting like a Coxcomb, •…nd see her given away before my face? stay your hand sir Harry; and let me claim my promise.
My promise isle perform sir Timothy, you shall have all your wages duly paid.
I claim fair Gratiana by your promise.
No more sir Timothy, but Sencer now,
You promised me when you received my service,
And with your liberal hand did wage my stay:
To endow me freely with your daughters Love,
That promise now I claim.
Mere•… cosnidge, knavery,
I tide my self to no conditions.
In which such guile is practised, come son Chartly,
To cut of all disasters incident.
To these proceedings wee will solemnise
These Nuptial rites with all speed possible.
Farewell good sir Timothy; farewell learned sir Timothy.
Why: and farewell learned sir Timothy.
For now sir Timothy and I a•… two:
Boast on, brag on, exalt exalt thy self,
Swim in a Sea of pleasure and content
Whilst my Bark suffers wrack isle bee revenged,
Chartly; isle cry vindicta for this Horn,
Next time thou gorest, it must bee with thy horn,
I am mad, and know not at what.
I could swagger but know not with whom,
I am at odds with my self; and know not why:
I shall bee pacified, and cannot tell when,
I would fine have a wife but cannot tell where,
I would fasten on Luce but cannot tell how.
How; where; when; why; whom; what.
Feeding sure makes me lean, and fasting fat.
Not all this while once see me.
His occasions, perhaps enforce his absence.
His occasions:
Unless hee find occasion of new Love.
What could enforce such absence from his spouse:
A•… I grown foul and black, since my espousals.
It should not seem so; For the shop is daily,
Customed with store of Chap-men, such as come
To cheapen Love. O no, I am my self•…?
But Chartly hee is changed.
You know that Gentleman.
Escape him if thou can.
Hee cannot, I arrest you;
At whose suite.
Not at mine own, thats dashed, I love thee not.
Thou art a Spaniard, Gypsy, a mere Blackamoor:
Again, I say I love thee not.
A Blackamoor, a Gypsy?
Sure I am changed indeed, and thats th•… cause
My Husband left me so, this Gentleman
Once termed me beautiful, how look I Ioseph.
As well as ere you did, fat, fre•…h, and fair▪
You lye boy, pocket that, and now be gon.
And what shall then become of my Mistress▪
Isle waite upon your Mistress.
I know you will not waite on such a Gypsy.
Yes Luce on such a Gipfie: Boy, abi abi.
Abide fir, you need not fear that I have no purpose to leave her.
Now you are going to the wedding-house.
You are bid to be a Bride maid, are you not.
What wedding sir, or whose?
Why Chartleyes; Luce hath hee bin thy friend so long, and would not bid thee to w•…ite on his Bride. Why look thou red and pale, and both, and neither.
To Mr. Chartleyes Bridals, why, to whom, Should hee be married.
To Grace of Gracious street.
To Gratiana?
Be•…hrow you sir you doe not use me well,
To buzz into mine •…res these strange untruths:
I tell you sir, it is as impossible
That they two should ma•…ch: as Earth and Heaven to meet.
You'll not believe it, pray then hark within,
The Nuptial music echoing to their joys.
But you give credit to no certainties:
I told you but a tale, a lye, a fable?
A monstrous, a notorious idle untruth,
That you were black, and that I loved you not.
And you could credit that.
Who's tell-troth now.
Know yo•… that •…an, or know you that fin•… Virgin:
Whom by the arm hee leads.
I'll not indure't: Heaven give you joy sir:
I thank you: Luce?
Look to the Maid she faints.
Grace, come not near her Grace.
Father keep off, on Gentlemen apace.
She•…s troubled with the falling sickness, for
Oft hath she fallen before me.
Nay if it bee no otherwise, on gentlemen.
Let those with her strive to recover her.
Keep off, the disease is infectious:
If it were in a man, it were nothing, but the falling sickness in a woman is dangerous.
My tother father in Law, now shall I bee utterly shamed, If hee assure to know me, I'll out face him.
Son your well met.
How fellow.
I cry you mercy sir.
No harm done friend, no harm done.
If hee? hee could not but have known me there, Yet he was wondrous like him.
How cheer you Luce, whence grew this passion.
Pardon me sir, I doe not know my self:
I am apt to swooned, and now the fit is past me.
I thank you for your help; is master Chartly
Vanished so soon:
Yes: and to supply his place, see where thy fa∣there comes.
Hee hath not such a suit, besides this gallant
Led by the arm a Bride, a lusty Bride?
How much might I have wronged the Gentleman.
By craving his acquaintance, this it is,
To have dim Eyes. Why looks my daughter sad.
I cry you mercy. Sir I saw not you.
I would I had not seen you at this time neither, farewell.
If hee be gone? then call me vent my grief, ▪ Father I am undone,
Forbid it Heaven.
Disgrac't, despised, discarded, and cast off.
How, mine own child:
My Husband, O my husband?
What of him.
Shall I the shower of all my grief at once
Power out before you: Chartly, once my husband
Hath left me to my shame. Him and his Bride,
I met within few minutes.
Sure t'was they.
I met them two, t'was hee; base villain Iewe.
I'll to the Wedding board, and tell him so:
Isle do it as I am a man?
Bee not so rash.
Isle live and dye upon him;
Hoe's a base fellow, so I'll prove him too.
Ioseph my Sword.
This rashness will undo us.
Isle have my Sword.
It hath bin twice in France, and once in Spain,
With Iohn a Gaunt, when I was young like him
I had my wards, and foins, and quarter-blowes:
And knew the way into St. Georges fields.
Twice in a morning, Tuttle, Finsbury?
I knew them all, isle too him, wher's my sword,
Or leave this spleen, or you will o•…erthrow
Our fortunes quite, let us consult together,
What wee were best to doe.
I'll make him play at Leap-frog, well I hear thee
I cannot pr•…ue our marriage, it was secret,
And hee may find some cavell in the Law.
I'll too him with no Law, but Staffood Law.
I'll ferret the false boy, nay on good Luce.
Part of your spleen, if you would change to counsel,
Wee might revenge us better.
Well I hear thee.
To claim a public marriage at his hands:
Wee want sufficient proof, and then the world
Will but deride our folly, and so add
Double disgrace unto my former wrong.
To Law with him hee hath a greater purse,
And nobler friends, how then to make it known?
Is this his dam•…sk'd kirtl•… frendge with Gold,
His black bag, and his Beaner, tic well yet
I have a Sword:
And I have a project in my Brain begot,
To make his own mouth witness to the World
My innocence, and his incontinence?
Leave it to me, isle clear my self from blame,
Though I the wrong, yet hee shall reap the shame.
Now or never, look about thee Sencer, tomorrow is the Marriage day which to prevent, lie•… not within the compass of my appr•…hension, therefore I have thus disgui∣sed my self, to go to the, Looming women's, the Fortune tellers. The a•…y thing, the nothing, this over against mo∣there Red-caps is her house, isle knock.
Whose there? What would you have.
I would speak with the wise gentlewoman of the house.
O belike you 〈◊〉 lost somewhat.
You are in the wrong 〈◊〉 youth.
I am somewhat thick of 〈◊〉, pray speak out.
I say I have not lost any thing, but wit and time,
And neither of those sh•… can help me too:
The•… you belike are cro•… in Love, and come to know what success you shall have.
Thou hast hit it sweet lad; thou hast hit it.
What is it, you say sir:
Thou hast •…it it?
I pray 〈◊〉 in, isle bring you to my Mistress▪
This is the house, knock Ioseph, my business craves dispatch.
Now am I as angry, as thou art timorous, and now to vent the next thing I meet, O tic the door.
Who's there, what are you.
A maid and a wife.
And that would grieve any wench to bee so,
I know that by my self, not Luce.
Boy, whore's your Mistress.
In some private talk with a Gentleman?
Isle fetch her to you presently.
If she and you see me not, I am but dead,
I shall be made, a by-word to the World:
The scorn of women; and my Fathers shame:
You tell me your name is Sencer, I knew it before, and that Chartly is to bee married, I could have told it you.
Married to morrow, O me!
Ey but you tell me, that Chartly before to morrow shall bee disappointed of his, make that good, Thou shalt have twenty Angels.
Isle do it, stand aside, isle have but a word or two with this Gentlewoman; and I am for you presently.
O! Mother, mother.
My husband marry another wife tomorrow? O changeable destiny, no sooner married to him, bu•… in∣stantly to loose him. Nor death it grieves me so much that I am a wife, but that I am a maid too, to carry one of them
well is as much as any is bound to doe, but to be tid•…e to both, is more then flesh and blood can endure.
Well trust to me, and I will sell all things straight.
Wher's this Witch, this hag, this beldan, this wizard, and have I found thee, thus then will I tear, mu•…∣ble and maule thee.
Help, help•…, and if you be a gentleman.
Forbear this rudeness, hee that touches her, Draws against me.
Against you sir, apply thou, that shall be tried.
Help, help, part them help.
With patience hear her speak.
Now Trot, now Granam, what can thou say for thy self: what Luce hear be patient and put up them, she must not see the end.
Than trince of all sides, if wee come for counsel,
Let us with patience hear it:
Then first to me.
You would prevent young Chartlyes marriage, you shall: hark in your ear.
It pleases me.
You-forestall Gratiane•… wedding, it is but thus.
Isle do it,
You would enjoy Luce as your wife, and lye with her to morrow night. Hark in your care.
Fiat.
Away, you shall enjoy him, you are married,
Luce away, you shall see Chartly discarded from Gratiana,
Sencer bee gon, and if I fail in any of these or the rest,
I lay my self open to all your displeasures.
Farewell till soon:
You know your meeting place.
Wee doe?
You shall report me wiser and cunning too.
Isle add one night more to the time, I have said.
I have not many I hope to live a maid.
Fie, fie, what a time of trouble is this to morrow to morrow is my mistress to be married, and wee serving∣men are so puzzled.
The dinner's half done, and before I say
Grace, and bid the old Knight and his guest proface.
A medicine from your trencher, good M. Taber.
As good a man as ere was sir Sober:
Well think it no shame, men of learning and wit, say stu∣die gets a stomach, friend Taber a bit.
Lick clean good sir Boniface, and save the scra∣per a labour.
But soft let me ponder:
Know you him that comes yonder?
Most heartily welcome, would you speak with any here.
Pray is the young gentleman of the house at leisure▪
Mean you the Bridegroom M. Chartly.
I have a Letter for him. You seem to be a gen∣tleman your self, acquaint him with my attendance, and I shall rest yours in all good offices.
Sir Boniface, pray keep the gentleman company I will first acquaint your lips with the virtue of the Seller.
Adesdem come near, and taste of your beer. Welcome, sine dole, for puntis te vole,
When I taste of your liqour.
Gramercy master Vicar.
Most heartily welcome: your courtesy I beseech you, ply it off 〈◊〉 entreat you, pray sir Boniface keep the Gentleman company; till I acquaint my young master with his business.
Taber, I shall besolas manus.
A vostre servitor.
Hee what art thou,
A hanger on, if it please you:
And I a shaker off, isle not bear your gallows,
You shall not hang on me.
O. Mr Bridegroom.
Gentlemen, the Ladies call upon you to dance, they will be out of measure displeased, if dinner being done, you bee not ready to lead them a me•…sure:
Indeed women love not to bee scanted of their measure.
Fie sir Boniface: have you forgot your self, Whilst you are in the Hall, there's never a whetstone for their wits in the Parlour?
I will enter and set an edge upon their I ngenies.
To me sir, from whom? a letter to her most dear, most loving, most kind friend Mr. Chartly these bee delivered: sure from some wench or other I long to know the contents.
Now to cry quittance with you for my farewell learned sir Timothy.
Good news, as I live, there's for thy pains my good sir Pandarus: Had thou brought me word my fa∣there had turned up his heals. Thou could scarcely have pleased me better: (Hee reads) though I disclaim the name of wife, of which I account my self altogether un∣worthy, yet let me claim some small interest in your love, this night I lye at the house where wee were married, (the Wisewomans I mean) where my maiden-head is to bee rifled, bid fair for it, and enjoy it, see me this night or no∣ver, so may you marrying Gratiana, and loving me, have a sweet wife and a true friend: This night or never, your quo•…dam wife: Hereafter your poor sweet-heart no other: Luce. So when I am tired with Gratiana, that is when I am past grace. With her I can make my rendezvous, isle not slip this occasion, nor sleep till I see her, thou art an honest lad, and moist prove a good Pimp in time. Can thou advise me what colour, I may have to compass this com∣modity.
Sir, she this night expo•…ts you, and prepares a costly banquet for you.
Isle go, although the Devil and mischance look big,
Feyne some news that such a piece of Land is fallen to you, and you must instantly ride to take possession of it, or which is more probable, cannot you persuade them you have received a letter that your Father lies a dying.
You rogue, I would hee did but the name of that news is called, too good to be true.
And that if ever you will see him alive, you must ride post into the Country.
Enough: if ever I prove Knight errant thou shalt bee mine own proper squire, for this thou hast fitted me with a plot, doe but waite here note how I will man∣age it,
Tabor my horse, for I must ride to night▪
To night sir.
So tell my Bride and Father, I have news that quite confounds my •…nces.
How ride to night, the marriage day to morrow
And all things well provided for the feast.
O tell me sweet, why doe you look so pale.
My Father, O my Father:
What of him.
What of your father, Son?
If ever I will here his aged tongue.
Preach to me counsel, or his palsy hand,
Stroke my wild head, and bless me, or his eyes:
Drop tear by tear which they have often done,
At my misgoverned rioting youth.
What should I more, if ever I would see;
The good old man alive. Oh, Oh?
Go thy ways for thou shalt have it.
But doe you mean to ride.
Ey Grace, all this night.
Not all the night without alighting sure:
You'll find more in it then to get up and ride,
The Gentleman's riding, boots and spurs.
Why Taber?
Nay Grace, now's no time.
To stand on scrupulous parting. Knew thou my business.
As she shall know it:
And how I mean this night to toil my self.
Marry hang you broke.
Thou would be moan my travel.
I know t'would grieve her:
You father, Grace, good Mr Harringsfield.
You sir, and all pray for 〈◊〉 Gentle•…men, that in this dark
nights journey I may find smooth way, sweet speed and
all things to my mind.
We'll see my son take horse.
But I will s•…ay.
I want the heart to see him post away?
Save you gentlewoman, I have a message to de∣liver to one Mistre•… Gratiana, this should bee the Knights house her father.
It is: The message that you have to her.
You may acquaint me with, for I am one
That knows the inside of her thoughts.
Are you the Lady,
Sir I am the poor gentlewoman▪
There is a conning woman dwells not 〈◊〉.
At Hogsden Lady, famous for her skill.
Be•…des some private talk that much concerns your for∣tunes in your love. She hath to show you this night if it shall please you walk so far as to her house, an admirable suite.
Of costly needle work, which if you please.
You may by vnder-rate for half the value
It cost the making, about six a clock.
You may have view thereof, but otherwise.
A Lady that hath craved the sight thereof:
Must have the first refusal.
Isle not fail her.
My husband being this day rid •…rome home.
My leisure fitly serves 〈◊〉, thank you Mistress?
At six à clock.
I will not fail the hour.
Now to sir Harry, his is the next place.
To meet at Hogsden his fair daughter Grace.
Good heaven; This London is a stranger grown, and out of my acquaintance, this seven years I have not seen Pals steeple, or Cheap, cross.
Sir.
Hast thou not made inquiry for my Son.
Yes sir, I have asked about every where for him,
But cannot hear of him.
Disperse your selves▪ •…quire about the Ta∣vernes, O•…dinaryes, Bowle-allyes, Te•…courts, Gaming-hou∣ses. For there (I fear) hee will be found.
But where shall wee hear of your wo•…ship again.
At Grace Church by the Conduit, 〈◊〉 •…ir Harry, but stay, leave off a while 〈◊〉 bootless search, had ever man such a wild brain to hi•… •…row, of such small hope, who when 〈◊〉 should have married a fair, a modest, and a virtuous maid, rich and revenewed well, and even the night before the marriage day, took horse, road thence whether Heaven knows, since the distracted virgin hath left her Fathers house, but nether feumd, yet in their search wee have measured out much Ground.
Your •…orship will bee there.
Yes, not to f•…le.
At half an hour past six, or before seven.
You shall not find us at six and at seven, isle
Warrant you: good health to your worship.
Farewell good fellow,
At the Wisewomans house I know it well:
Perhaps sh•… knows some danger touching me.
I'll keep mine hour.
Sir Harry, a hand a hand to balk you it were siun.
I shall be bold to make your house mine Inn:
Brother Chartly; I am glad to see you.
Me thinks sir Harry you look strangely on me.
And doe not bid me welcome with an heart.
And blame me not to look amazedly,
To see you hear.
Why me?
Come come, you're welcome.
And now isle turn my strangeness to true joy,
I am glad to see you well, and safe recovered▪
O•… your late grievous sickness.
The strange amazed looks that you c•…st off
You put on me, and blame me not to wonder,
That you should talk of sickness to sound men,
I thank my stars, I did not taste the grief
Of inward pain or outward malady,
This seven years day.
But by your favour brother,
Then let me have my wonder back again.
Before I quite part with it, let me know,
Why you the name of brother put upon me.
In every clause, a name as strange to me:
As my recovered sickness,
You are pleasant,
And it becomes you well, w•…lcome again,
The rather you are come just to the wedding.
What wedding sir.
That you should ask that question:
Why of my daughter Grace.
Is Grace bestowed? Of whom I pray,
Of whom, but of your 〈◊〉.
I wonder brother Chartly, and my friend,
You should thus play on 〈◊〉.
But by your favour,
Were you ten Knights Sir Harry, (take me with you)
My son match with your daughter, my cons•…ned,
Not worthy to bee craved.
Nay, then I see:
You'll stir my patience, know this forward match took its first birth from you.
From me?
From you.
Peruse this letter, know you your own hand.
T'was well that I reserved, your hand a witness
Against your tongue, you had best deny the Jointer,
Of the three hundred pounds made to my daughter,
Tic that I know you aim at, but your seal.
Shall not make me approve it, I deny
This Seal for mine, nor doe I vouch that hand,
Your daughter and the dower, letter and all
I quite disclaim, sir Harry you much wrong me.
I can bear more then this, heap wrong on
wrong, and isle support it all, I for this time
Will cast my spleen behind me, and yet hear me,
This letter your son Chartly as from you,
Delivered me. I like the motion well.
My spleen is further thrown aside then yours.
And I am full as patient, and yet hear me;
My sonne's contracted to another maid,
Nay I am patient still, yet that I writ
This letter sealed, this impress I deny.
Why then the jack your hand did counterfeit.
Why then hee did so, whore's that unthrift speak?
Some hour ago, hee mounted and rid post.
To give you visit whom hee said lay sick
Upon your death-bed.
You amaze me sir.
It is an ill presage, hereon I see.
Your former salutation took its ground:
To see me safe recovered of my sickness.
Indeed it did, your welcome is a subject.
I cannot use too oft, welcome again,
I am sorry you this night must sup alone:
For I am else-where called about some business,
Concerning what I know not, hours run on.
I must to Hogsden, high time I were gon.
Perhaps to the Wisewomans, she may tell me.
The fortunes of my son, this accident,
Hath bred in me suspicion, and strange fears.
I will not sup alone, but I protest,
amongst some this night. I'll play the intruding guest.
But will sir Harry come.
Presume 〈◊〉 will, and Chartly too.
Isle have the kna•…e by the ears.
Nay patience sir, leave your revenge to me.
Granam I am come according to promise.
And welcome to the best hole that I have in Hogsden.
Good even.
Thanks sir, a good even may it pro•…e,
That each may reap the fruits of their own Love:
That shall bee my prayer too.
Come what shall's doo.
Withdraw, Isle place you all in several rooms.
Where sit, see, but say nothing.
Here sweet Mistress, I know the place well e ver
Since I was here to know my fortune.
Call me some half an hour hence.
Your Ladyship is most lovingly welcome. A low stool for the Gentlewoman boy: I made bold to send to you to take view of such a piece of work, as I presume you have seldom seen the like.
of whose doing, I pray.
A friend of yours and mine. Please you withdraw Isle bring you too't.
Mistress.
One calls sweet Lady, I shall doe you wrong,
But pray you think my little stay not long:
Here sir in this retiring Chamber.
Gramercy friend, how now; whats here to do
A pretty wench and a close chamber too.
That you have so much graced my Mothers house,
With your desired presence worthy Knight.
Receive a poor Maids thanks, who's there? a chair
And cushin for fir Harry.
Thanks most fair.
Please you but a few minutes here to stay:
Till my return, isle not bee long away.
The gentlewoman will waite on you by and by 〈◊〉.
And isle attend her friend,
Of all those doubts I long to know the end::
The Knight you seek was here, or will bee •…reight, and if you bee the man you name your self. You are most welcome, and you shall not back, sill you have scene si•… Harry.
〈◊〉 youth.
I saw him 〈◊〉 here, and under privilege of 〈◊〉 •…∣tance made I 〈◊〉 to stay.
And you are welcome sir, 〈◊◊〉 I pray.
Now they 〈◊◊〉 in 〈◊◊〉, that look
Into 〈◊〉 one. Were 〈◊〉 come we had all our company.
Hark, theres on•… knocks it is 〈◊〉 on my life▪
One of you let him in 〈◊〉 I 〈◊〉 me
To entertain his coming.
What? old acquaintance 〈◊〉. Not a word?
Yet some lip labour if thou love me.
My Husband?
What young Chartly?
How? My 〈◊〉.
Come, come away with this wailing in woe, if thou putst finger in the eye a little longer, I shall plunge in pain too presently.
O husband, husband.
Husband?
What 〈◊〉 thou my sweet wife,
Wife? O my hart.
In that name 〈◊〉 I 〈◊〉 a poor child's part.
O husband; How have you 〈◊◊〉?
Nay how doe I mean to 〈◊〉 the: 〈◊〉 as a 〈◊〉
Should use his wife.
I hope hee doth not 〈◊〉 to 〈◊〉 her so.
I hope so too,
My 〈◊〉 is a Witch.
Nay 〈◊〉, sweet wife 〈◊〉 weeping if 〈◊◊〉 me,
O can you blame me, knowing that the 〈◊〉 of all these Springs took their 〈◊◊〉, from you, you know, you 〈◊〉 will know, not 〈◊◊〉 since are past, since wee were married.
Married, I can 〈◊〉 no longer.
It cannot bee.
It is not possible.
Isle bee even with thee, for this old granam.
And though wee wanted wit•…e upon •…arth,
Yet Heaven bears record of our Nuptial 〈◊〉,
Tush, when wee, meet in heaven let•… talk of that.
Nay come you ass, you fool, whats past is past,
Though man and wife, yet I must marry now.
Another gallant, heere's thy letter Luce.
And this night I intend to lodge with thee.
I'll sc•…tch her eyes out first, although I love her.
Prethe bee merry?
I have made a gull of Grace, and old 〈◊〉 Harry thinks me
a great way off, I told the Knight,
My father lay a dying, took post horse,
Rid out of Holbur•…, turned by Islington,
So, hither wench to lodge all night with thee.
Hears one saith nay to that,
Was that your journey:
Why I 〈◊〉 too much of Grace already▪
Thou hast no grace at all.
Nay lets to bed, if thou could but imagine how
I love thee Luce.
How i•… it possible you can love 〈◊〉, and go•… about to marry another.
Dost thou not know 〈◊〉 rich? Why you fool as soon as I have got her dower, it is but giving her a dram, or a pill to purge m•…choly to make her turn up her heals, and then withal that wealth, come I•…o li•… with thee my sweet rascal.
She thanks you, and is much beholding to you.
I am betrayed.
Art thou my suitor? would thou marry mo•…▪
And thy first wife alive, then poison me,
To purchase my poor dowre.
What shall I say, or think, or doe, I am at •… Nonplus.
Hast thou the face, thou brazen impudence,
To look upon me past grace.
Thou can not properly call me p•…st grac•…, for
I never enjoyed thee yet: I cannot tell, whether
I blush or no, but I have now at this time,
More Grace, then I can tell what to doe with.
Who drew thee to this folly?
Who but the old dotard thy Father, who when I was honestly married to a civil maid, 〈◊〉 pursue•…ed me to leave her, I was loath at first but after entreating, ur∣ging, and off•…ring me large proffers, I must confess I was seduced to come a wooing to thee.
My father, villain.
Ey thy father Grace. And were he here I would In•…ifie it to the old dota•… face.
Vil'd boy thou dare not bee so impudent.
When did I meet thee, seek or sue to thee:
When? Name the day, the month, the hour, the year.
Plots, plots. I can but cry you •…rcy both, Say that I have done you wrong, I can bee but sorry for it, but indeed to clear you, and lay the fault where it ought to bee. All this comes from mine own father in the coun∣trey, who hearin•… I had married with Luce. Sends me word of. his blessing to bee divorced from her, and to come a suitor to your daughter, I think you have his hand and 〈◊〉 to show.
My hand and seal, when was that letter wri•….
Heyda, if you get one word more of me to night, but scurvy looks, isle give you leave to hang me▪
Wild boy,
Ungracious villain.
Treacherous youth?
No 〈◊〉 at all?
No 〈◊〉.
This is bad company who hath reduced thee?
Speak on my blessing, who hath thus misled thee?
But no more lies I charge thee.
Bad company hath bin the shame of me, I was as virtuously given as any youth in Europe, till I fell into one Boysters company, it is hee that hath done all the harm up∣on me.
I.
And if hee should deny it?
What then you'd cry him mercy.
I had best bite out my tongue, and speak no more what shall I doe, or what shall I say, there is no out•acing them all •••ntlemen, Fathers, wives, or what else. I have wronged 〈◊〉 all. I confess it that I have, what would you more, will any of you rail of me? Ill bear it, will any of you beat me? So they strike not too har•• Isle suffer it, will any of you challenge me? Isle answer it. What would you have me say, or doo? One of these I have married, the other I have betrothed, yet both maids for me; Will you have me take one, and leave the tother? I will, will you have me keep them both? I will.
Perjured not mine.
What you here too? Nay then I see all my good friends are met together, wilt thou have me Luce? I am thy Husband, and had I not loved thee better then Grace. I had not disappointed the marriage day to morrow.
Lascivious no,
Wilt thou have me Grace, for had I not loved thee better then Luce. I would never after I had married her bin contracted to thee.
Inconstant no,
Then neither married man, widow nor bachelor, whats to bee done? Hears even the proverb verified, be∣tweene too stools, the tail goes to ground.
Now I bethink me this our meeting here is wondrous strange, call in the Gentlewoman that owns this house.
Old trot, isle trounce thee.
Here is the marriage proved twixt Luc•… and Chartly, witch this was not your promise.
Have patience, and in the end we'll pay you all. Your worships are most heartily welcome, I made bold to send for you, and you may see to what end, which was to discover unto you, the wilde 〈◊〉 of this, of this wan∣ton wag pasty, a wil-doates I warrant him, 〈◊◊〉 Harry that your daughter hath escaped thy•… 〈◊〉, t•…nke this gentleman, and then make of him as 〈◊〉 deserves.
O, I remember him.
Hee never pleased mine eye so well as now.
I know his Love, and hee in Chartlyes place
My favour shall possess.
Thanks my sweet Grace.
Ey and the more the inconstant youth to spite.
I gave her thee in Chartlyes sight.
There's one gone already, but thy•… is my wife and her isle keep in spite 〈◊〉 of the Devil and his dam.
Not from her law•…ull Husband.
That am I.
That is the Gentleman, ass•…▪ him Luce.
And you then like of her, nay 〈◊〉 make it good,
This gentleman married you visarded, you him 〈◊〉 mistaking him for Chartly, which none but my boy Jack was privy too: after she changed her habit with him, as you with Jack.
And you in mistress Lucas habit.
May I believe you mother.
This bee your token.
Her that I married, I wrong twice by the finger.
Of that token, my hand was sensible.
And ere the clamorous and lo•…d noise bee g•…no,
I whispered to her thus.
You are the man,
Thanks granam, what thou promised thou hast done.
And leaving him, I take you for my son.
Two gone, then wheres the third, this make•… me mad, where is my wife then, for a wife I had.
Not see thy wife. Come hither jack my boy.
Nay take him to thee, and with him all joy.
Well art thou served to bee a general scorn,
To all thy blood: and if not for our sakes,
For thy souls health and credit of the world,
Have some regarded to me, to me thy father.
Enough sir: if I should say I would become
A new man; You would not take my word.
If I should swear. I would amend my life,
You would not take mine oath, if I should bind my self, to become an honest man you would scarce take my bond.
I should doe none of these.
Then 〈◊〉 sir, when to all your judgements I see me past grace, do•… lay hold of Grace, and here begin to retire my self, this woman hath lent me a glass, in which I see all my imperfections, at which my conscience doth more blush inwardly, then my face outwardly, and now I dare confidently undertake for my self I am honest.
Then I dare confidently undertake to help you to a wife who desires to have an honest man or none, look on me well, simple though I stand here I am your wife, blush not at your folly man, perhaps I have more in me, then you expect from me.
Knavery and riot both which, are now to me mean foe•…ige.
You and I have bin better acq•…intent and yet search me not too far least you shame me, look on me well, nay better, better yet, isle assure you I left of a petti∣coat when I put on these breeches,
What say you now, she skatters her hair.
First love, and best beloved?
Let me bee both or neither.
My boy turned girl I hope she'll keep my counsel from henceforth, isle never entertain any servant but isle have her searched.
Her love hath drawn her hither after him.
My loving daughter welcome thou hast run,
A happy course to see my son thus changed.
Father, call me once again your son, •…nd sir Harry me your friend: 〈◊〉 an hand, and mistress Grace an hart, in honourable love. Where I hane wronged you Luce forgive. Impute my errors to my youth not 〈◊〉, with Grace I interchange, an embrace with you Luce, a parting bus I wish you all joy, divide my •…art amongst you, thou my soul.
Nay mother midnight theres some love for you.
Out of thy folly, being reputed wise,
Wee, self conceited ha•… our follies found:
Bear thou the name of all these comic acts.
Luce and Grace, (O covetous man) I see,
I sought to engross what now su•…ceth three.
Yet each one wife, enough, one Nuptial Feast:
Shall serve three Bridals 〈◊〉, bee thou chief guest.

THe invention was, to have a Satire lod∣general in a little Spinet, by which her Ma∣jest, and the Prince were to come, who (at the report of certain Corn•s that were divided in several places of the Park, to signify her approach) advanced his head aboue the top of the wood, won∣dring, and (with his pipe in his hand) be∣began as follows.
HEre? there? and every where?
Some solemnities are near,
That these changes strike mine ear.
My pipe and I a part shall bear.
Look, see; (beshrew this tree,)
What may all this wonder bee?
Pipe it, who that list for me:
I'll fly out abroad, and see.
That is CYPARISSVS face!
And the dame hath SYRINX grace!
O that PAN were now in place,
Sure, they are of heavenly race.
Hail, and welcome worthiest Queen,
Joy had never perfect been,
To the Nymphs that haunt this greene,
Had they not this evening seen.
Now they print it on the ground
With their feet in figures round,
Marks that will be ever found,
To remember this glad stoned.
Trust her not, you bonny-bell,
She will forty losings tell,
I doe know her pranks right well.
Satire, we must have a spell,
For your tongue, it runs too fleet.
Not so nimbly as your feet,
When about the creame-bowles sweet,
You, and all your Elves doe meet.
This is MOB the mistris-Faerie,
That doth nightly rob the dairy,
And can hurt, or help the charming,
(As she please) without discerning.
PVG, you will anon take warning?
She, that pinches country wenches,
If they rub not clean their benches,
And with sharper nails remembers,
When they rake not up their embers:
But if so they chance to feast her,
In a shoe she drops a tester.
Shall we strip the skipping easter?
This is she, that empties cradles,
Takes out children, puts in ladles:
Trains forth mid-wiues in their slumber,
With a sieve the holes to number.
And then leads them, from her boroughs
Home through ponds, and water furrows.
Shall not all this mocking stir vs?
She can start our FRANKLINS daughters,
In their sleep, with shrikes, and laughters,
And on sweet Saint ANNE'S night,
Feed them with a promised sight,
Some of husbands, some of lovers,
Which an empty dream discovers.
Satire, vengeance near you hovers,
And in hope that you would come here
Yester-eue the lady  Summer,
She invited to a banquet:
But (in sooth) I con you thank yet,
That you could so well deceive her
Of the pride which began vp-heaue her:
And (by this) would so have blown her,
As no wood-god should have known her.
Mistress, this is only spite:
For you would not yesternight
Kiss him in the cock-shout light.
By PAN, and thou hast hit it right.
Fairies, pinch him black and blue,
Now you have him, make him rue.
O, hold, MOB: I sue.
Nay, the devil shall have his due.
Pardon lady this wild strain,
Common with the SYLVAN train,
That doe skip about this plain:
Elves, apply your gyro again.
And whilst some doe hop the ring,
Some shall play, and some shall sing,
Weal express in every thing,
 ORANAS welcoming.
THis is she,
This is she,
In whose world of grace
Every season, person, place,
That receive her, happy be,
For with no less,
Then  a kingdoms happiness,
Doth she private  Lares bless,
And ours aboue the rest:
By how much we deserve it least.
Long live ORIANA
To exceed (whom she succeeds) our late DIANA.
Madame, now an end to make,
Deign a simple gift to take:
Only for the Fairies sake,
Who about you still shall wake.
It is done only to supply,
His suspected curtsy,
Who (since THAMYRA did dye)
Hath not brooked a ladies eye,
Nor allowed about his place,
Any of the female race.
Only we are free to trace
All his grounds, as he to chase.
For which bounty to vs lent,
Of him vnknowledgde, or unsent,
We prepared this  complement,
And as far from cheap intent,
In particular to feed,
Any hope that should succeed.
Or our glory by the deed,
As your self are from the need.
Utter not; we you implore,
Who did give it, nor wherefore.
And when ever you restore
Your self to vs, you shall have more.
Highest, happiest Queen farewell,
But beware you doe not tell.
Not tell? Ha, ha, I could smile,
At this old, and toothless wile.
Lady, I have been no sleeper,
She belyes the noble keeper.
Say, that here he like the groves:
And pursue no foreign loves,
Is he therefore to be deemed,
Rude, or savage? or esteemed,
But a sorry entertainer,
Because he is no common strainer:
After painted Nymphs for favours,
Or that in his garb he savours
Little of the nicety,
In the sprucer courtiery;
As the rosary of kisses,
With the oath that never misses,
This, believe me on the breast,
And then telling some mans jest,
Thinking to prefer his wit,
Equal with his suite by it,
I mean his clothes: No, no, no,
Here doth no such humour flow.
He can neither bribe a grace,
Nor encounter my lords face
With a pliant smile, and flatter,
Though this lately were some matter
To the making of a courtier.
Now he hopes he shall resort there,
Safer, and with more allowance;
Since a hand hath governance,
That hath given those customs chase,
And hath brought his own in place.
O that now a wish could bring,
The god-like person of a king,
Then should even Envy find,
Cause of wonder at the mind
Of our wood-man: but lo, where
His kingly image doth appear,
And is all this while neglected.
Pardon (lord) you are respected
Deep as is the Keepers hart,
And as dear in every part.
See, for instance where he sends
His son, his heir; who humbly bends
Low, as is his fathers earth,
To the womb that gave you birth
So he was directed first,
Next to you, of whom the thirst
Of seeing takes away the use
Of that part, should plead excuse
For his boldness, which is less
By his comely shamefac'tnesse.
Rise up, sir, I will betray,
All I think you have to say;
That your father gives you here,
(Freely as to him you were)
To the service of this Prince:
And with you these instruments
Of his wild and Sylvan trade,
Better not ACTION had.
The bow was PHoeBES, and the horn,
By ORION often worn:
The dog of Sparta breed, and good,
As can ring within a wood;
Thence his name is: you shall try
How he hunts instantly.
But perhaps the Queen your mother,
Rather doth affect some other
Sport, as coursing: we will prove
Which her highness most doth love.
Satyrs let the woods resound,
They shall have their welcome crowned,
With a brace of bucks to ground.
IF my outside move your laughter,
Pray JOVE, my inside be thereafter.
Queen, Prince, Duke, Earls,
Countesses; you courtly Pearls:
(And, I hope no mortal sin,
If I put less Ladies in)
Fair saluted be you all.
At this time it doth befall,
We are the Huisher to a Morris,
(A kind of Masque) whereof good store is
In the country hereabout,
But this, the choice of all the rout.
Who, because that no man sent them,
Have got NO-BODIE to present them.
These are things have no suspicion
Of their ill doing; nor ambition
Of their well: but as the Pipe
Shall inspire them, mean to skip.
They come to see, and to be seen,
And though they dance before the Queen,
Ther's none of these doth hope to come by
Wealth, to build another Holmby:
All those dancing days are done,
Men must now have more then one
Grace, to build their fortunes on,
Else our soles would sure have gone,
All by this time to our feet.
I not deny, where Graces meet
In a man, that quality
Is a graceful property:
But when dancing is his best,
(Beshrew me) I suspect the rest.
But I am NO-BODIE, and my breath
(Soon as it is borne) hath death.
Come on clowns, forsake your dumps,
And bestir your hobnailed stumps,
Doe your worst, Isle undertake,
Not a jerk you have shall make
Any Lady here in love.
Perhaps your Fool, or so, may move
Some Ladies woman with a trick,
And upon it she may pick
A pair of revelling legs, or two,
Out of you, with much ado.
But see, the Hobby-horse is forgot.
Fool, it must be your lot,
To supply his want with faces,
And some other Buffon graces,
You know how; Piper play,
And let no body hence away.
ANd will you then, Mirror of Queens, depart?
Shall nothing stay you? not my Masters heart?
That pants to leese the comfort of your light,
And see his Day ere it be old grow Night?
You are a Goddess, and your will be done:
Yet this our last hope is, that as the Sun
Cheers objects far removed, as well as near;
So, where so'ere you shine, you'll sparkle here.
And you dear Lord, on whom my covetous eye
Doth feed it self, but cannot satisfy,
O shoot up fast in spirit, as in years;
That when upon her head proud Europe wears
Her stateliest tire, you may appear thereon
The richest gem, without a paragon.
Shine bright and fixed as the Arctic star:
And when slow Time hath made you fit for war,
Look over the strict Ocean, and think where
You may but lead vs forth, that grow up here
Against a day, when our officious swords
Shall speak our action better then our words.
Till then, all good event conspire to crown
Your parents hopes, our zeal, and your renown.
Peace usher now your steps, and where you come,
Be Envy still struck blind, and Flattery dumb.
Leap light hearts in every breast,
Joy is now the fittest passion;
Double majesty hath blessed
All the place, with that high grace,
Exceeds admiration!
Welcome, monarch of this Isle,
Europes envy, and her mirror;
Great in each part of thy stile:
Englands wish, and Scotlands bliss,
Both France, and Irelands terror.
Welcome, are you; and no less,
Your admired queen: the glory
Both of state, and comeliness.
Every line of her divine
Form, is a beauteous story.
High in fortune, as in blood,
So are both; and blood renowned
By oft falls, that make a flood
In your veins: yet, all these strains
Are in your virtues drowned.
House, be proud; For of earth's store
These two, only, are the wonder:
In them shoe's rich, and in no more.
Zeal is bound their praise to sound
As loud as fame, or thunder.
Note, but how the ayre, the spring
Concur in their devotions;
Pairs of Turtles sit, and sing
On each tree, ore-ioy'd to see
In them like love, like motions.
Enter sir, this longing door,
Whose glad lord nought could have blessed
Equally; (I'am sure not more)
Then this sight: saue' of your right,
When you were first possessed.
That, indeed, transcended this.
Since which hour, wherein you gained it.
For this grace, both he and his,
Every day, have learned to pray,
And, now, they have obtained it.
Retire, you houshold-gods, and leave these excellent creatures to be entertained by a more eminent deity. Hail King, and Queen of the Islands, called truly fortunate, and by you made so; To tell you, who I am, and wear all these notable, and speaking ensigns about me, were to challenge you of most impossible ignorance, and accuse my self of as palpable glory: It is enough that you know me here, and come with the licence of my father JOVE, who is the bounty of heaven, to give you early welcome to the bower of my mother MAY, no less the goodness of earth. And may it please you to walk, I will tell you no wonderful story. This place, whereon you are now advanced (by the mighty power of Poetry, and the help of a faith, that can remove mountains) is the Arcadian hill CYLLENE, the place, where my self was both begot, and borne; and of which I am frequently called CYLLENIVS: Under yond' purslane tree stood sometime my cradle. Where, now, behold my mo∣there MAY, sitting in the pride of her plenty, gladding the air with her breath, and cheering the spring with her smiles. At her feet, the blushing AVRORA, who, with her rosie hand, casts her honey dews on those sweeter herbs, accompanied with that gentle wind, FAVONIVS, whose subtle spirit, in the breathing forth, FLORA makes into flowers, and sticks them in the grass, as if she contended to have the embroidery of the
earth, richer then the cope of the sky. Here, for her month, the year∣lie delicate May keeps state; and from this Mount, takes pleasure to dis∣play these valleys, yon'd lesser hills, those statelier edifices, and towers, that seem enamoured so far off, and are reared on end, to behold her, as if their utmost object were her beauties. Hither the Dryads of the valley, and Nymphs of the great river come every morning, to taste of her favours; and depart away with laps filled with her bounties. But, see! upon your approach their pleasures are instantly remitted. The birds are hushed, ZE∣PHYRE is still, the MORN forbears her office, FLORA is dumb, and herself amazed, to behold two such marvels, that doe more adorn place, then she can time; Pardon, your Majesty, the fault, for it is that hath cause it; and till they can collect their spirits, think silence, and wonder the best adoration.
SEe, see, Ô see, who here is come a Maying!
The master of the Ocean;
And his beauteous ORION:
Why left we off our playing?
To gaze, to gaze,
On them, that gods no less then men amaze.
Up Nightingale, and sing
Jug, jug, jug, jug, &amp;c.
Raise Lark thy note, and wing,
All birds their musique bring,
Sweet Robin, Linnet, Thrush,
Record, from every bush,
The welcome of the King;
And Queen:
Whose like were never seen,
For good, for fair.
Nor can be; though fresh May,
Should every day
Inuit a several pair,
No, though she should inuit a several pair.
If all the pleasures were distilled
Of every flower, in every field,
And all that HIBLA hives do yield
Were into one broad mazor filled;
If, thereto, added all the gummes,
And spice, that from PANCHAIA comes,
The odour, that HYDASPES lends
Or PHoeNIX proves, before she ends;
If all the Ayre, my FLORA drew,
Or spirit, that ZEPHYR ever blew;
Were put therein; and and all the dew
That ever rosy Morning knew;
Yet, all diffused upon this bower,
To make one sweet detaining hour,
Were much too little for the grace,
And honour, you vouchsafe the place.
But, if you please to come again,
We vow, we will not then, with vain,
And empty passe-times entertain,
Your so desired, though grieved payne.
For, we will have the wanton fawns,
That frisking skip, about the lawns,
The Paniskes, and the Siluanes rude,
Satyrs, and all that multitude,
To dance their wilder rounds about,
And cleave the ayre, with many a shout,
As they would hunt poor Echo out
Of yonder valley, who doth flout
Their rustic noise. To visit whom
You shall behold whole beuies come
Of gaudy Nymphs, who tender calls
Well tuned (unto the many falls
Of sweet, and several sliding rills,
That stream from tops of those less hills)
Sound like so many silver quills
When ZEPHYR them with musique fills.
For these, FAVONIVS here shall blow
New flowers, which you shall see to grow,
Of which, each hand a part shall take,
And, for your heads, fresh garlands make.
Wherewith, whilst they your temples round,
An ayre of several birds shall sound
An Iö paean, that shall drown
The acclamations, at your crown.
All this, and more then I have gift of saying,
MAY vows, so you will oft come here a Masing.
And MERCVRY, her son, shall venture the displeasure of his father, with the whole bench of Heaven, that day, but he will doe his mothers intents all serviceable assistance. Till then, and ever, live high and happy, you, and your other you; both envied for your fortunes, loved for your graces, and admired for your virtues.
Again, great pair, I salute you; and with leave of all the gods: whose high pleasure it is, that MERCVRY make this your holy-day. May all the blessings both of earth, and heaven, concur to thank you: For till this days sun, I have faintly enjoyed a minutes rest to my cry∣tion. Now, I do, and acknowledge it you sole, and no less the divine been∣fit. If my desire to delight you, might not divert to your trouble, I would entreat your eyes to a new, and strange spectacle; a certain son of mine, whom the Arcadians call a god, howsoever the rest of the world receive him: It is the horned PAN, whom in the translated figure of a goat I be∣got on the fair Spartan PENELOPE; MAY, let both your ears, and looks forgive it: These are but the lightest escapes of our Deities. And, it is better in me, to prevent his rustic impudence, by my blushing ac∣knowledgement, then, anon, by his rude, and not insolent claim, be en∣forced to confess him. Yonder hee keeps, and with him the wood Nymphs, whose leader he is in rounds, and dances, to this Sylvan mu∣sique. The place, about which they skip, is the fount of laughter, or BACCHVS spring; whose statue is advanced on the top; and from whose pipes, at an observed hour of the day, there flows a lusty liquor, that hath the present virtue to expel sadness; and within certain minutes after it is tasted, force all the mirth of the spleen into the face. Of this is PAN the Guardian. Lo! the fountain begins to run, but the Nymphs at your sight are fled. PAN, and his Satyrs wildly stand at gaze. I will approach, and question him: vouchsafe your ear, and forgive his beha∣uiour, which (even to me, that am his parent) will no doubt be rude enough, though otherwise full of salt, which, except my presence did temper, might turn to be gall, and bitterness; but that shall charm him.
O, it is MERCVRY! Hollow 'hem, again,
What be all these, father? gods, or men?
All humane. Only, these two are deities on earth, but such, as the greatest powers of heaven may resign to.
Why did our Nymphs run away? can you tell?
Here be sweet beauties love MERCVRY well?
I see by their looks. How say you? great master?
Will you please to here? Shall I be your taster?
PAN, you are too rude.
It is but a glass,
By my beard, and my horns, tic a health, and shall pass.
Were he a king, and his mistress a queen
This draught shall make him a petulant spleen.
But, trow, is he loose, or costive of laughter?
I'd know, to fill him his glass, thereafter,
Sure, either my skill, or my sight doth mock,
Or this lordings look should not care for the smock;
And yet he should love both a horse and a hound,
And not rest till he saw his game on the ground:
Well, look to him, Dame; beshrow me were I
Amongst these bonny-bells, you should need a good eye.
Here mistress; all out. Since a god is your skinker:
By my hand, I believe you were borne a good drinker.
They are things of no spirit, their blood is asleep,
That, when it is offred 'hem do not drink deep.
Come, who is next? Our liquor here cools.
Ladies, I'am sure, you all have not fools
At home to laugh at. A little of this,
Tan down here in private, were not amiss.
Believe it, she drinks like a wench, that had store
Of lord for her laughter, will you have more?
What answer you, lordings? will you any, or none?
Laugh, and be fat, sir, your penance is known.
They that love mirth, let 'hem heartily drink,
It is the only receipt, to make sorrow sink.
The young Nymph, that's troubled with an old man,
Let her laugh him away, as fast as he can.
Nay drink, and not pause, as who would say must you?
But laugh at the wench, that next doth trust you.
To you, sweet beauty; nay, 'pray you come hither:
Ever you sit out, you'll laugh at a feather.
Isle never fear you, for being too witty,
You sip, so like a forsooth of the city,
Lords, for your selves, your own cups crown,
The ladies, in faith, else will laugh you down.
Go to, little blushet, for this, anon,
You'll steal forth a laugh in the shade of your fan.
This, and another thing, I can tell you,
Will breed a laughter, as low as your belly
Of such sullen pieces, JOVE send vs not many,
They must be tickled, before they will any.
What have we done? They that want, let'hem call,
Gallants, of both sides, you see here is all.
PAN'S entertainment: Look for no more.
Only, good faces, I reed you, make store
Of your amorous Knights, and Squires hereafter,
They are excellent sponges, to drink up your laughter.
Farewell, I must seek out my Nymphs, that you frighted;
Thank HARMS, my father, if ought' have delighted.
I am sure, thy last rudeness cannot; for it makes me seriously ashamed. I will not labour his excuse, since I know you more ready to par∣don, then he to trespass: but, for your singular patience, tender you all abundance of thanks; and, mixing with the Master of the place, in his wishes, make them my divinations: That your loves be ever flourishing as May, and your house as fruitful: That your acts exceed the best, and your years the longest of your predecessors: That no bad fortune touch you, nor good change you. But still, that you triumph, in this facility, over the ridiculous pride of other Princes; and for ever live safe in the love, ra∣there, then the fear of your subjects.
And thus it ended.
THe Kings being entered the inner Court; aboue, over the porch, sate the three Hours, upon clouds, as at the ports of Heaven; crowned with several flowers: of which, one bore a Sunne-diall; the other, a Clock; the third, an Hower-glasse; signifying as by their names, Law, Justice, and Peace. And for those faculties chosen to gratulate their coming with this speech.
ENter, Ô longed for Princes, bless these bowers,
And vs, the three, by you made happy, Hours:
We that include all Time, yet never knew
Minute like this, or object like to you.
Two Kings, the worlds prime honours, whose access
Shows eiders greatness, yet makes neither less:
Vouchsafe your thousand welcomes in this shower;
The Master vows, not SYBILL'S leaves were truer.
Expressed to the King of DENMARK thus.
Queen colit has aedeis, ingentia gaudia adumbrans,
Cernendo Reges pace coïre pares,
Nos tempestiuas, ad limina, collocate Horace,
Quòd bone sub nobis omnia proueniant.
Vnum ad laetitiae cumulum tristatur abesse,
Quòd nequeat signs laetitiam exprimere.
Sed, queen res solùm ingentes hâc part laborant
Vtcun{que} expressam credidit esse satis.
At, quote non potuit Dominus, suppleuit abunde
Frondoso tellus munere facta loquax.
Eccos quàm grati veniant quos terra salutat!
Verior his folijs nulla SYBILLA fuit.
The Inscriptions on the walls were,
DATE VENIAM SVBITIS.
DEBENTVR QVAE SVNT QVAE{que} FVTVRA.
SAEpè THEOBALDAE (sorts bonitate beatae)
Excepêre la sub pia tecta deos;
Haud simul at geminos: sed enim potuisse negabant:
Nec fas est tales posse putare duos.
Fortunate antehâc, sed nuns domus vndique faelix,
At Dominus quantò (si licit vsque) magic!
Et licit, ô MAGNI, folijs si siditis istis,
Quêis WHORE summam contribuere fidem.
Miraris, cur hospitio te accepimus WHORE,
Cuius ad obsequium non satis annus erat?
Nempè quòd adueniant ingentia gaudia raro,
Et quando adueniant vex datur whore frui.
Miraris, cur hospitio te accepimus WHORE,
Quas Solis famulas Graecia dost la?
Talis ab aduentu vestro lux fulsit in aedeis,
Vt Dominus solemn crederet esse nouum.
HOspitio queen te caepit, famulantibus Horis,
Cedere abhinc, nullâ concomitant sinit;
Nempe omneis horace veniendi duxit amicas
Sed discedendi nulla minute probate.
Te veniente, no domus haec frondebat amictu;
Te discessuro, non proved ante viret:
Nempe, sub accessu solis, nous incipit Annus,
Et, sub discessu, squalida saeuit Hymns.
LEt not your glories darken, to behold
The place, and me, her GENIVS here, so sad;
Who, by bold Rumour, have been lately told,
That I must change the loved Lord, I had.
And he, now, in the twilight of sere age,
Begin to seek a habitation new;
And all his fortunes, and himself engage
Unto a seat, his fathers never knew.
And I, uncertain what I must endure,
Since all the ends of dest'ny' are obscure.
Despair not, GENIVS, thou shalt know thy fate.
WHat sight is this, so strange! and full of state!
The son of MAY, making his descent
Unto the fates, and met with good Event.
Daughters of night, and secrecy, attend;
You, that draw out the chain of Destiny,
Upon whose threads, both lives and times depend,
And all the periods of mortality.
The will of JOVE is, that you straight doe look
The change, and fate unto this house decreed,
And speaking from your Adamantine book,
Unto the GENIVS of the place it read;
That he may know, and knowing, bless his lot,
That such a grace, beyond his hopes, hath got.
When, underneath thy roof, is seen
The greatest King, and fairest Queen,
With Princes an unmatched pair,
One, hope of all the earth, their heir;
The other styled of Lorraine,
Their blood; and sprung from CHARLEMAIN:
When all these Glories jointly shine,
And fill thee with a heat divine,
And these reflected, doe beget
And splendent Sun, shall never set,
But here shine fixed, to affright
All after-hopes of following night,
Then, GENIVS, is thy period come,
To change thy Lord: Thus, Fates doe doom.
But is my Patron with this lot content,
So to forsake his fathers moniment?
Or, is it gain, or else necessity,
Or will to raise a house of better frame,
That makes him shut forth his posterity
Out of his patrimony, with his name?
Nor gain, nor need; much less a vain desire,
To frame new roofs, or build his dwelling higher;
He hath, with mortar, busied been too much,
That his affections should continue such.
Doe men take joy in labours, not t'enioy?
Or doth their business all their likings spend?
Have they more pleasure in a tedious way,
Then to repose them at their journeys end?
GENIVS, obey, and not expostulate;
It is your virtue: and such powers as you,
Should make religion of offending fate,
Whose dooms are just, and whose designs are true.
The person, for whose royal sake,
Thou must a change so happy make,
Is he, that governs with his smile,
This lesser world, this greatest Isle.
His Ladies servant thou must be;
Whose second would great NATURE see,
Or FORTUNE, after all their pain,
They might despair to make again.
She is the grace of all, that are:
And as ELISA, now a star,


THe Invention was, to have a Satire
lodged in a little Spinet, by which her
Majesty, and the Prince were to
come, who (at the report of certain
Cornets that were divided in several
places of the Park, to signify her ap∣proach)
advanced his head aboue the top of the wood,
wondering, and (with his Pipe in his hand) began as foal∣loweth.
HEre? there? and every where?
Some solemnities are near,
That these changes strike mine ear.
My Pipe and I a part shall bear.
And after a short strain with his Pipe; again.
Look, see; (beshrew this Tree,)
What may all this wonder be?
Pipe it, who that list for me:
I'll fly out abroad, and see.
There hee leaped down, and gazing the Queen and
Prince in the face, went forward.
That is Cyparissus face!
And the Dame hath Syrinx grace!
O that Pan were now in Place,
Sure they are of heavenly race.
Here he ran into the wood again, and hid himself
whilst to the sound of excellent soft Musique that was
there concealed in the thicket; there came tripping up
the lawn, a Bevy of Fairies attending on Mob their
Queen, who falling into an artificial ring, that was
there cut in the path, began to dance a round, whilst
their Mistress spake as follows.
Hail, and welcome worthiest Queen,
Joy had never perfect been,
To the Nymphs that haunt this Greene,
Had they not this evening seen.
Now they Print it on the Ground
With their feet in figures round,
Marks that will be ever found,
To remember this glad stoned.
The Satire peeping out of the bush, said.
Trust her not you bonny-bell,
She will forty leasinges tell,
I doe know her pranks right well,
Satire, wee must have a spell,
For your tongue, it runs to fleet.
Not so nimbly as your feet,
When about the creame-boules sweet.
You, and all your Elves do meet.
Here hee came hopping forth, and mixing himself with
the Fairies skipped in, out, and about their Circle,
while the Elves made many offers to catch at him.
This is Mob the mistresse-Faerie,
That doth nightly rob the Dairy,
And can hurt, or help the charming,
(As she please) without discerning.
Pug, you will anon take warning?
She, that pinches country wenches,
If they rub not clean their benches,
And with sharper Nails remembers,
When they rake not up their Embers:
But if so they chance to feast her
In a shoe she drops a tester.
Shall we strip the skipping Easter?
This is she, that empties Cradles,
Takes out Children, puts in Ladles:
Trains forth Midwives in their slumber,
With a sieve the holes to number.
And then leads them, from her Boroughs
Home through Ponds, and water furrows.
Shall not all this mocking stir vs?
She can start our Franklins daughters,
In their sleep, with shrikes, and laughters,
And on sweet Saint Anne's Night,
Feed them with a promised sight,
Some of husbands, some of Lovers,
Which an empty dream discovers.
Satire, vengeance near you hovers,
And in hope that you would come here
Yester-eue the Lady Summer,
She invited to a Banpuet:
But (in sooth) I con you thank yet,
That you could so well deceive her
Of the pride which began vp-heaue her:
And (by this) would so have blown her,
As no wood-god should have known her.
Here he skipped into the Wood.
Mistress, this is only spite:
For you would not yesternight
Kiss him in the Cock-shoutlight:
And came again,
By Pan, and thou hast hit it right.
There they laid hold on him, and nipped him,
Fai•ies, pinch him black and blew,
Now you have him 〈◊〉 him rue:
O, hold, Mob: I sue.
Nay, the Devil shall have his due.
There hee ran quite away and left them in a confusion
while the Fairy began again,
Pardon Lady this wild strain,
Common with the Sylvan train.
That do skip about this plain:
Elves, apply your Gyro again.
And whilst some do hop the ring,
Some shall play, and some shall sing,
Weal express in every thing,
 Oranas welcoming.
THis is she,
This is she,
In whose world of Grace
Every Season, Person, Place,
That receive her, happy be,
For with no less,
Then a Kingdoms happiness,
Doth she private Lares bless,
And ours aboue the rest:
By how m•ch we deserve it least.
Long line 〈◊〉
To exceed (whom she succeeds) our late Diana.
Madame, now an end to make,
Deign a simple gift to take:
Only for the Fairies sake,
Who about you still shall wake.
Tic done only to supply,
His suspected courtesy,
Who (since Thamyra did dye)
Hath not brooked a Ladies eye,
Nor allowed about his place,
Any of the female race.
Only we are free to trace
All his grounds, as he to chase.
For which Bounty to vs lent,
Of him vnknowledgde, or unsent,
We prepared this Complement,
And as far from cheap intent,
In particular to feed,
Any hope that should succeed.
Or our glory by the deed,
As your self are from the need.
Utter not; we you implore,
Who did give it, nor wherefore,
And when ever you restore
Your self to vs, you shall have more.
Highest, happiest Queen farewell,
But beware you do not tell.
Here the Fairies hopt away in a fantastic dance,
when on a sudden the Satire discovered himself
again and came •oorth.
Not tell? Ha, ha, I could smile,
At this old, and toothless wile.
••die, I have been no sleeper,
She belies the noble Keeper.
Say, that here he like the Groves:
And pursue no •••rain Loves,
Is he therefore to be deemed,
Rude, or sau•dge? or esteemed,
But a sorry Entertainer,
Cause he is no common strainer:
After painted Nymphs for savours,
Or that in his Garb he savours
Little of the nice•y,
In the sprucer Courtiery;
As the Ros••y of kisses,
With the oath that never misses,
This, Believe me on the breast,
And then telling some mans jest,
Thinking to prefer his wit,
Equal with his suite by it,
I mean his Clothes: No, no, no,
Here doth no such humour flow.
He can neither bribe a grace,
Nor encounter my Lords face
With a pliant smile, and flatter,
Though this lately were some matter
To the making of a Courtier.
Now he hopes he shall resort there,
Safer, and with more allowance▪
Since a hand hath governance,
That hath given those Customs chase,
And hath brought his own in place.
O that now a wish could bring,
The God-like person of a King,
Then should even Enuiefinde,
Cause of wonder at the mind
Of our Wood-man: But lo where
His Kingly Image doth appear,
And is all this while neglected:
Pardon (Lord) you are respected
Deep as is the Keepers hart,
And as dear in every part.
See, for instance where he sends
His Son, his Heir; who humbly bends
Lowe, as is his Fathers earth,
To the womb that gave you birth:
So he was directed first.
Next to you, of whom the thirst
Of seeing takes away the use
Of that part, should plead excuse
For his boldness, which is less
By his comely shamfastnesse.
Rise up Sir, I will betray,
All I think you have to say;
That your Father gives you here,
(Freely as to him you were)
To the service of this Prince:
And with you these Instruments
Of his wilde and Sy••an trade,
Better not 〈◊〉 had.
The Bow was Ph•ebas, and the horn,
By Orion often worn:
The Dog of Sparta breed, and good,
As can ring within a Wood:
Thence his name is: you shall try
How he hunts instantly.
But perhaps the Queen your mother,
Rather doth affect some other
Sport, as coursing: we will prove
Which her Highness most doth love.
Satyrs let the Woods refund,
They shall have their welcome crowned,
With abrace of 〈◊〉 to ground.
At that, the whole Wood and place re•ounded with the
noise of Cornets, Horns, and other Hunting Mu∣sique,
and a brace of 〈◊◊〉 p•t out; and as for∣tunately
killed, as they were meant to be; even in the
sight of her Majesty•.
This was the first Nights show. Where the next day
being Sunday, she rested, and on Monday, till after din∣for;
where there was a speech suddenly thought on, to in∣duce
a Morris of the Clowns there about, who most off∣ciouslie
presented themselves, but by reason of the throng
of the Country that came in, their Speaker could not be
hard, who was in the person of No-body, to deliver
this following speech and attired in a pair of Breeches
which were made to come up to his neck, with his arms
out at his pockets, and a Cap drowning his face.
If my outside move your Laughter,
Pray Jove, my inside be thereafter.
Queen, Prince, Duke, Earls,
Countesses; you courtly Pearls:
(And, I hope no mortal sin,
If I put less Ladies in)
Fair saluted bee you all.
At this time it doth befall,
We are the Huisher to a Morris,
(A kind of Masque) whereof good store is
In the Country here about,
But this, the choice of all the rout.
Who because that no man sent them,
Have got No-body to present them.
These are Things have no suspicion
Of their ill doing: nor Ambition,
Of their well: but as the Pipe
Shall inspire them, mean to skip.
They come to see, and to bee seen,
And though they dance before the Queen,
Ther's none of these doth hope to come by
Wealth, to build another Holmby:
All those dancing days are done,
Men must now have more then one
Grace, to build their fortunes on,
Else our souls would sure have gone,
All by this time to our feet.
I not deny where Graces meet
In a man, that quality
Is a graceful Property?
But when dancing is his best,
(Beshrew me) I suspect the rest.
But I am No-body, and my Breath
(Soon as it is borne) hath death.
Come on Clowns forsake your dumps,
And bestir your Ho•naild stumps,
Do your worst, Isle undertake,
Not a Jerk you have shall make
Any Lady here in Love.
Perhaps your Fool, or so, may move
Some Ladies woman with a Trick,
And upon it she may pick
A pair of revelling legs or two,
Out of you with much a doe.
But see the Hobby-horse is forgot.
Fool it must bee your lot,
To supply his want with faces
And some other Busson graces
You know how; Piper play,
And let no body hence away.
There was also another parting speech, which was to
have been presented in the person of a youth, and accom∣pained
with diverse Gentlemen's younger sons of the
Country, but by reason of the Multitudinous press,
was also hindered. And which wee have here adjoined.
ANd will you then Mirror of Queens depart?
Shall nothing stay you? not my Masters heart
That pants to leese the comfort of your light,
And see his Day e•e it be old grow Night?
You are a Goddess, and your will be done;
Yet this our last hope is, that as the Sun
Cheers objects far removed, as well as near,
So where so ever you shine, you'll sparkle here.
And you dear Lord, on whom my covetous eye
Doth feed it self but cannot satisfy,
O shoot up fast in spirit, as in years;
That when upon her head proud Europe wears
Her stateliest tire, you may appear thereon
The richest Gem without a paragon.
Shine bright and fixed as the Arts•• star:
And when flow Time hath made you fit for war,
Look over the strict Ocean, and think where
You may but lead vs forth, that grow up here
Against a day, when our officious swords
Shall speak our action better then our words.
Till then, all good event conspire to crown
Your Parents hopes, our zeal, and your renown.
Peace, usher now your steps, and where you come,
Be Envy still stroke blind, and Flattery dumb.
Thus much (which was the least of the Entert•i•amened
in respect of the reality, abondance, delicacy, and order of
all things else) to doe that serviceable right, to his noble
Friend, which his affection owes, and his Lordships merit
may challenge, the Author hath suffered to come out, and
encounter Censure: and not here unnecessarily adjoined,
being performed to the same Queen &amp; Prince; who
were no little part of these more labord and •riumphall
shows. And to whose greatest part, he knows the Ho. L.
(had he been so blessed as to have seen him at his Lodge)
would have stretched in observance, though he could not in
Love or zeal.

Frolic Ieronimo, thou art now confirmed,
Marshall of Spain, by all the dews
And customary rights unto thy office.
My knee sings thanks unto your highness boun∣tie,
Come hither boy Horatio; fouled thy joints;
Kneel by thy fathers loins, and thank my leedge,
by honouring me, thy Mother, and thy self,
with this high staff of office.
O my léedge I have a hart thrice stronger then my years▪
and that shall answer gratefully for me.
Let not my youthful blush empire my valour,
If ever you have foes, or red field scars,
Isle empty all my veins to serve your wars:
Isle bleed for you: and more, what speech afords,
isle speak in drops when I do fail in words.
UUell spoke my boy, and on thy fathers side.
My leedge how like you Don Horatios spirit,
what, doth it not promise fair,
I, and no doubt his merit will purchase more,
Knight Marshall rise, and still rise
Higher, and greater in thy Soueraines eyes.
O fortunate hour, blessed mynuit, happy day,
Able to ravish even my sense away;
Now I remember too: O swéet remembrance,
This day my years strike fifty, and in Rome,
They call the fifty year the year of Iubily,
The merry year, the peaceful yéere, Iocond year,
A yéere of joy, of pleasure and delight,
This shall be my year of Iubily, for tic my fifty.
Age ushers honour, tic no shame, confess;
Beard, thou art fifty full, not a hair less.
How now, what news from spain, tribute returned.
Tribute in words my leedge, but not in coin.
Ha: dare he still procrastinate with Spain,
Not tribute paid, not thrée years payed,
Tic not at his coin
But his slack homage, that we most rapine.
My léedge, if my opinion might stand firm
Within your highness thoughts:
Marshall, our kingdom calls thée father:
Therefore speak free▪
Thy counsel isle embrace, as I do thée.
I thank your highness: then my Gracious léedge,
I hold it méete by way of Embassage,
To demand his mind, and the nectlect of tribute:
But my léedge here must be kind words,
Which doth oft besiege the ears of rough
Hewn tyrants more then blows.
Oh, a politic speech beguiles the ears of foes,
Mary my léedge mistake me not I pray,
If friendly phraises, honied spéech, bewitching accent,
Well tuned melody, and all swéet gifts of nature,
Cannot avail or win him to it,
Then let him raise his gall up to his tongue,
And be as bitter as physicians drugs,
Stretch his mouth wider, with big swollen phrases:
Oh héeres a Lad of mettle, stout Don Andrea,
Mettle to the crown
Would shake the kings hie court thrée handfuls down.
And well picked out knight Marshall,
Spéech well strung,
Id rather choose Horatio▪ were he not so young.
I humbly thank your highness,
In placing me next unto his royal bosom.
How stand ye Lords to this election.
Right pleasing our dread Sovereign,
Only with pardon mighty Sovereign.
I should have chose Don Lorenzo.
I Don Rogero,
O no, not me my Lords;
I am wars Champion, and my fées are swords,
Pray king, pray peers, let it be Don Andrea,
Hes a worthy limb,
Loves wars and Soldiers therefore I love him.
And I love him, and thee valiant Rogero,
Noble spirits, gallant bloods,
Your no wise insinnating Lords,
You ha no tricks, you ha none of all their slights.
So, so, Andrea must be sent ambassador,
Lorenzo is not thought upon: good.
Isle wake the Court, or startle out some blood.
How stand you Lords to this election?
Right pleasing our dread Sovereign.
then Don Andrea.
My approved leedge.
UUe make thee our Lord hie ambassador.
Your highness cirkels me with honours bounds,
I still discharge the weight of your command,
with best respect, i friendly tempered phrase,
Cannot affect the virtue of your charge,
I will be hard like thunder, and as rough,
as Northern tempests, or the vexed bowels,
Of too insulting waives, who at one blow,
Five merchants welds into the deep doth throw,
isle threaten crumson wars.
I, I, thats good;
Let them keep coin, pay tribute with their blood.
Farewell then don Andrea, to thy chardge:
Lords letes in, joy shall be now our guest,
Lets in to celebrate our second feast.
Andrea's gone ambassador;
Lorenza is not dreamed on in this age,
Hard fate,
when villains sit not in the highest state
Ambitions plumes that flourished in our court,
Severe authority has dashed with justice;
And policy, and pride, walk like two exiles
Giving attendance, that were once attended;
and we rejected that were once high honoured,
I hate andrea, cause he aims at honour,
when my purest thoughts, work in a pitchy vale,
which are as different as heaven and hell,
One peers for day, the other gappes for night.
That yawning Beldam with her Jest skin,
Tic she I hug as mine effeminate bride,
For such complexions best appease my pride:
I have a lad in pikell of this stamp,
A melancholy discontented courtier
Whose famished jaws look like the chap of death
Upon whose eye brows hang damnation,
Whose hands are washed in rape, and murders bold,
Him with a golden bait will I allure,
For Courtiers will doe any thing for gould,
To be Andrea's death at his return:
Hée loves my Sister; that shall cost his life,
So shée a husband, he shall lose a wife,
O swéete, swéete policy, I hug thée, good:
Andreas himens draught, shall be in blood.
Whether in such hast my second self.
I'faith my dear bosom, to take solemn leave,
Of a most wéeping creature.
Thats a woman.
Thats Bellimperia.
Sée sée, she méetes you héere:
And what it is to love? And be loved déere,
I have hard of your honour, gentle breast,
I do not like it now so well me thinks.
What, not to have honour bestoued on me.
O yes: But not a wandering honour dear,
I could afford well did thou stay here,
Could honour melt it self into thy veins,
And thou the fountain, I could wish it so,
If thou would remain héere with me: and not go.
Tic but to portugal.
But to demand the tribute Lady.
Tribute, alas that Spain, cannot of peace
Forbear, a little coin, the Indies being so néere,
And yet this is not all: I know you are to hot,
to ull of spléene or an ambassador,
And will lean much to honour.
Push.
Nay hear me dear I know you will be rough
And violent, and portugal hath a tempestus son,
Stamped with the mark of fury, and you too.
Swéet Bellimperia.
Wéele méete like thunder, etch imperious over
 Others spléen, you have both proud spirits, and both will
 strive to aspire, when two vexed Clouds jostle they strike
 Out fire, and you I fear me war, which peace forsend,
O déere andrea pray, lets have no wars,
First let them pay the soldiers, that were mind
In the last battle, ere more wretches fall,
Or walk on stilts to timeless Funeral.
Respective déere, O my lives happiness,
the joy of all my being, do not shape
Frightful conceit beyond the intent of act,
I know thy love is vigilant ore my blood,
And fears ill fate which heaven hath yet withstood,
But be of comfort, swéet Horatio knows,
I go to knit friends, not to kindle foes.
true Madam Belimperia, thats his task
the phrase he uses must be gently stylde,
the king hath warned him to be smooth and mild.
But will you indéed andrea.
By this.
By this lip blushing kiss.
O you swear swéetly.
Isle kéepe your oath for you tell you return.
Then isle be sure you shall not be forsworn.
Ho Pedringano.
Signioro.
Are all things aboard.
They are my good Lord.
Then Bellimperia. I take leave: Horatio
Be in my absence my dear self, chaste self,
What playing the woman Bellimperia:
Nay then you love me not, or at the least,
You drown my honours in those flowing waters,
Beléeue it Bellimperia, tic as common,
To wéepe at parting, as to be a woman,
Love me more valiant, play not this moist prize,
Be woman in all parts, save in thy eyes:
And so I leave thée.
Farewell my Lord:
Be mindful of my love, and of your word.
Tic fixed upon my hart, adieu souls friend.
All honour, one Andreas steps attend.
Yet he is in sight, &amp; yet but now hées vanished.
Nay Lady if you stoop so much to passion, isle call him back again.
O good Horatio, no: it is for honour prethée let him go.
Then Madam be composed as you wear wont,
to music and delight, the time being Commick, will
Séeme short and pleasant, till his return
From Portugal: and madam in this circle,
Let your hart move,
Honoured promotion is the sap of love.
Come my souls spaniel, my lifes jetty substance,
Whats thy name?
My names an honest name, a Courtiers
Name: tic lazarotto.
What lazarotto.
Or rather rotting in this lazy age, that
Yéelds me no employments, I have mischief
Within my breast more then my bulk can hold,
I want a midwife to deliver it.
Isle be the hée one then, and rid thée soon
Of this dull, leaden, and tormenting elf:
Thou know the love betwixt Bellimperia and
Andreas bosom?
I, I do.
How might I cross, it, my swéet mischief:
Honey damnation how?
Well: as many ways as there are paths to hell
And thats enough in faith: from usurers door
There goes one path, from friars that nurse
Whores, there goes another path: from brokers
Stals, from rich that die and build no hospitals,
Two other paths: from farmers that crack barns,
With stuffing corn, yet starve the néedy swarms,
Another path: from drinking schools one, from
Dicing houses, but from the court, none, none.
Héere is a slave just a the stamp, I with:
Whose •uck-soules, blacker then his name,
Though it stand printed with a Ravens quill.
But lazarotto cross, my Sisters love, and isle
Rain showers of Ducats in thy palm.
Oh Ducats, dainty ducks forgive me,
Ducats, isle fetch you duck enough or gold,
And think males, the punk wanton and the
Bawd to wink.
Discharge, discharge, good lazaratto, how we
May cro•e my Sisters loving hopes.
Nay? now isle tell you.
Thou know Address gone ambassador.
The better theirs opportunity now list to me.
Alcario the duke Medinas son,
Dotes on your Sister Bellimperia,
Him in her private gallery you shall place,
To court her, let his protestations be,
Fashoned with rich Jewels, for in love, great,
Gifts and gold have the best tongue to move,
Let him not spare an oath, without a jewel,
To bind it fast: Oh I know women's harts
What stuff they are made of, my Lord:
Gifts and giving, will melt the cha•est
Séeming female living.
Indéede andrea is but poor, though honourable,
His bounty amongst soldiers •oaks him dry,
And there ore great gifts may bewitch her eye.
Héeres no fine villainy, no damned brother?
But say she should deny his gifts, be all
Compo•d of hate, as my mind gives me,
that she wool▪ what then?
Then thus: At his return to spain, Isle
Murder don Andrea.
Dare thou spirit.
What dares not hée do, that near hopes
To Inherit.
Hée dares bée damned like thée.
Dare I▪ Ha, ha, I have no hope of everlasting
Height, my souls a Moore you know saluations
White, what dare not I enact then, tush, hée dies;
I will make way to Bellimperias eyes.
To wéepe I fear but not to tender love.
Why is she not a woman, she must wéepe
A while as widows use till their first sléepe▪
Who in the morrow folloing will be sold to new,
Before the first are thoroughly cold: So
Bellimperia; For this is common, the more
She wéepes, the More shée plays the woman.
Come then, how ere it hap Andrea shall be crossed.
Let mée alone, Isle turn him to a ghost.
Farewell true brace of villains,
Come hither boy Horatio, did thou here them.
O my true breasted father, my ears have sukt
In poison, deadly Poison, murder Andrea:
O Inhumain practis, had not your reverend
Years béene present héere, I should have
Ponyarded the villains bowels, and shoved his
Soul out to Damnation, Murder Andrea:
Honest lord: Impions villayns.
I like thy true hart boy, thou love thy friend,
It is the greatest argument and sign that I begot thée,
For it shows thou art mine.
O father: Tic a charitable déed,
To prevent those that would make virtue bléed.
Isle dispatch letters to don andrea,
Unfold their hellish Practise, damned intent,
Against the virtuous rivers of his life?
Murder andrea.
Peace: Who comes héere: news, news Isabella.
What news Ieronimo?
Strange news, Lorenzo is become an honest man
Is this your wondrous news.
I i• not wondrous to have honesty in hell, go, tell
It Abroad now, but sée you put no new aditions
To it: as thus, shall I tell you gossip: Lorenzo,
Is become an honest man: Beware, hewer,
For honesty spoken in derision points out knavery.
O then take héed, that Jest would not be trim,
Hées a great man, therefore we must not knave him.
In gentle soul, Isle not bée long away,
As short my body, Short shall be my stay.
Murder andrea: What blood sucking slave
Could choke bright honour in a skabard grave,
What harping still upon anadreas death,
Have courage boy: I shall prevent their plots,
And make them both stand like too politic sots.
Lorenzo has a reach as far as hell,
To hook the devil from his flaming cell▪
Oh sprightly father heel out rech you then,
Knaves, longer reaches have thē honest men.
But boy fear not, Isle out stretch them al
My minds a giant, though my bulk bée full.
What is the meaning of this loud report
An emba•. my Lord is new arrived •rome spain.
Son Balthazar we pray do you go méet him,
And do him all the honour that belonges him.
Father my best endeavour shall obey you,
Welcome worthy lord, spaines choice ambassador,
Brave stout, andrea, for so I guess thee.
Portuguese eire I thank thee,
Thou seems no les then what thou art, a prince:
And an heroic spirit, Portingalles king,
I kiss my hand, and tender on thy throne,
My masters love, peace, and affection.
And we receive them, and thee worthy andrea;
Thy masters hy pri•ed love unto our hart,
Is welcome to his friend thou to our court.
Thanks Portugal: My lords I had in charge
At my depart from spain this embassage,
To put your breast in mind of tribute due
Unto our masters kingdom, these three years
Detained and kept back: and I sent to know,
Whether neglect, or will detains it so.
Thus much return unto thy king andrea,
We have with best advise thought of our state,
And find it much dishonord by base homage,
I not deny but tribute hath bin due to Spain,
By our forfathers base captivity,
Yet cannot rase out there successors merit:
Tic said we shall not answer at next birth
Our fathers faults, in heaven, why then one earth:
Which proves and shows that which they lost by base Captivity,
We may redéeme with honoured valiancy,
We borrow nought, our kingdom is our own,
Hee is a base king that pays rent for his throne.
Is this thy answer Portugal:
I spain, a royal answer to, which Isle maintain.
And all the péeres of Portugal the like.
Then thus all spain which but thrée minites, ago was thy full friend, is now returned thy foe.
An excellent foe, we shall have scuflling good.
Thou shalt pay tribute, Portugal with blood.
Tribute for tribute then: And foes, for foes.
I bid you sudden wars.
I sudden blows, and thats as good as wars.
Don, Isle not bate,
An inch of courage nor a hair of sate,
Pay tribute I with strockes.
I with strockes you shall
Allas that spain should correct Portugal.
Correct: O in that one word, such torments doo,
I féele that I could lash thy ribs with valiant stéele.
Prince Balthazar, shalles méete?
Méete don Andrea, yes in the battles Bowels:
Here is my gage aneuer failing pawn.
twill kéepe his day his hour, nay minute: Twill.
Then thine, and this posses one quality.
O let them kiss, did I not understand thée noble
Valiant, and worthy my swords society with thée,
For all Spaines wealth, Id not grasp hands,
Meet Don andrea. I tell thee noble spirit▪
Id wade up to the knees in blood,
Id make a bridge of spanish carcasses
to single thee, out of the gasping army.
Wooed thou prince: why even for that I love.
Tut, love me man when we have drunk,
Hot blood together▪ wounds will tie
an everlasting settled amity.
And so shall thine.
And thine.
What give no place?
to whom.
to me.
To thee: why should my face,
thats placed aboue my mind,
Fall under it.
Isle make thee yield,
I when yon get me down,
But I stand even yet, jump crown to crown.
Dare thou?
I dare.
I am all vexed.
I care not.
I shall forget the Law.
Do, do.
Shall I?
Spare not?
But thou wilt yield first.
No.
O, I hug thee sort,
the valianst spirit ere trod the Spanish court,
Here let the rising of our hot blood set.
My leedge two nobler spirits never met.
Until we meet in purple, when our swords,
Agreed, right valiant prince:
Then Portugal this is thy resolute answer.
So return: its so, we have bethought vs what
Tribute is, how poor that Monarch shoes,
Who for his throne a yearly penshion owes:
And what our predecessors lost to spain,
We have fresh spirits that can renew it again.
Then I vnclaspe the purple leaves of war,
Many a new wound must gasp, through an old scar:
So Portugal I leave thee.
Our self in person will see thee safe aboard:
Come son, come Lords,
In stead of tribute we must pay our swords.
Remember Don andrea that we meet.
Up hither sailing in a crimson fleet.
Do you affect my Sister.
Affect, aboue affection: for her breast,
Is my lives treasure, O entire
Is the condition of my hot desire.
Then this must be your plot,
You know andreas gone ambassador,
On whom my Sister Bellimperia,
Casts his affection: you are in stature like him,
Speech alike, and had you but his vestment
On your back, theirs no one living but would
Swear it were he: therefore, sly policy must
Be your guide, I have a suite just
Of andreas, colours, proportiond in all parts,
Nay it was his own: this suit within my clo•et,
Shall you wear, and so disgui•d woe, sue, and
Then at last.
What.
Obtain my love.
This false out rare,
In this disguise I may both wed, bed, and board her.
You may you may? besides, within these few days
Héele return.
Till this be acted I in passion burn.
All false out for the purpose, all hits jump,
The date of his embassage nigh expired,
Gives strength unto our plot.
True, true, all to the purpose.
Moreover, I will buzz Andreas Landing;
which once but crept into the vulgar mouths,
Is hurried héer, and there, and sworn for troth,
Think tic your love makes me create this guise,
And willing hope to see your virtue rise.
Lorenzoes bounty I do more enfold,
Then the greatest mind of indians brightest gold.
Come let vs in, the next time you shall show,
All Don andrea, not alcario.
Come pull the table this way, so tic well:
Come write horatio write,
This speedy letter must away to night.
What fold paper that way, to a noble man,
to Don andrea Spaines ambassador?
Fie I am a shamed to see it,
Hast thou worn gowns in the University,
Lost logic, sucked Philosophy,
Eat Cues, drunk Cées, and cannot
give A letter the right Courtiers crest:
O theirs a kind of state,
In every thing save in a Cuckolds pate,
Fie, fie, horatio, what is your pen foul.
No Father cleaner then lorenzoes soul,
Thats dipped in inck made of an envious gall,
Else had my pen no cause to write at all.
Signeor andrea say.
Signeor andrea.
tic a villainus age this.
tic a villainus age this.
That a nobleman should be a knave, as
Well as an Ostler.
That a nobleman should be a knave, as
Well as an Ostler.
Or a seriant.
Or a seriant.
Or a Broker.
Or a Broker.
Yet I speak not this of lorenzo,
For hes an honest Lord.
S•oot, Father de not write him honest Lord.
take up thy pen, or isle take up thee.
What right him honest Lord isle not agree.
You'll take it up Sir.
well, well.
what went before, thou hast put me out; beshrow
thy impudence or insolence.
Lorenzoes an honest Lord.
well Sir, and has hired one to murder you.
O, I cry you mercy Father, meant you so.
Art thou a scholar Don horatio?
And can not aim at Figurative speech.
I pray you pardon me, it was but youths
Hasty error.
Come read then?
And has hired one to murder you.
He means to send you to heaven, when
You return from Portugal.
From portugal.
Yet hes an honest dukes son.
Yet hes an
But not the honest son of a Duke.
But not the honest.
O that villainy should be found in the great Chamber.
O that villainy.
And honesty in the bottom of the a seller.
And honesty.
If you'll be murdered you may?
If you'll be
If you be not, thank God, and Ieronimo.
I you be not.
If you be, thank the devil and lorenzo.
If you be thank.
Thus hoping you will not be murdered and you Can choose.
Thus hoping you will.
Especially being warned before hand.
Especially
I take my leave boy, Horatio, write leave,
Bending in the hams like an old Courtier,
Thy assured friend say, against lorenza and
The devil, little Ieronimo Marshall.
Ieronimo Marshall.
So now read it ore.
Signeor andrea tic a villainus age this,
That a Nobleman should be a knave, as well
As an Ostler: or a Seriant, or a broker, yet
I speak not this of Lorenzo: hées an
Honest Lord, and has hired one to murder you,
When you return from Portugal, yet
Hées an honest Dukes son, but not the
Honest son of a Duke? O that villainy
Should be found in the great chamber, and honesty
In the bottom of a seller.
True boy: theirs a moral in that, as much
To say knavery in the Court and honesty in a Chéese house.
If you'll be murdered you may: if you be
Not thank God and Ieronimo: if you be,
Thank the devil &amp; Lorenzo. Thus hoping
You will not be murdered, and you can choose,
Especially being warned before hand, I take my leave.
Horatio hast thou wr•tten leave bending in the
Hams: enough like a Gentleman usher, Sfoote
No Horatio, thou hast made him straddle too much,
Like a Frenchman, for shame put his legs closer
Though it be painful.
So: tic done, tic done.
Thy assured friend against Lorenza, and the devil,
Little Ieronimo, Marshall.
Yonder he is my Lord pray you speak to him.
Wax, wax Horatio: I had néede wax two,
Our •os will stride else over me and you?
Hées writing a love letter to some Spanish Lady,
And now he calls for wax to •eale it.
God save you good knight Marshall.
Whose this, my Lord lorenzo: welcome, welcome,
Your the last man I thought on, save the devil.
Much doth your presence grace our homely roof.
O Ieronimo, your wife condemns you of a unsure∣tesie
And over passing wrong, and more she names
Love letters which you send to spanish Dames.
Do you accuse me so kind Isabella.
Unkind Ieronimo.
And for my instance this in your hand is one.
In sooth my Lord there is no written name
Of any Lady, then no spanish dame.
If it were not so, you would not be afraid
To read or show the waxed letter:
Pray you let me behold it.
I pray you pardon me▪
I must confess my Lord, it treats of love,
Love to andrea, I even to his very bosom.
What news my Lord hear you from portugal.
Who I, before your grace it must not be,
The Badger feeds not till the Lyons served,
Nor fits it news so soon kiss subjects,
As the fair cheek of high authrority:
Ieronimo lives much absent from the Court,
And being absent, there lives from report.
Farewell Ieronimo.
welcome my Lord Lorenzo.
Boy thy mothers jealous of my love to her,
O she plaid vs a wi•e part, now ten to one
He had not over heard the letter read, just as he entered.
Though it had happened evil,
He should have hard his name yoked with the devil,
Héere seal the letter with a loving knot,
Send it with speed, Horatio linger not:
That Don andrea, may prevent his death,
And know his enemy by his envious breath.
Now by the honour of Castéels true house,
You are as like andrea, part for part,
as he is like himself: did I know you,
By my cross I swear: I could not think you
But Andreas self, so legedd, so fa•st, so
Spéecht, so all in all: methinks, I should salute
Your quick return and spéedy hast from portugal,
Welcome fair Lord, worthy ambassador,
Brave Don andrea, Oh I laugh to sée
How we shall jest at her mistaking thée.
What have you given it out andrea is returned?
Tic all about the court in every ear,
And my invention, brought to me for news,
Last night at supper, and which the more to cover,
I took a boule and quaft a health to him,
When it would scarce go down for exstreame laughter,
to think how soon report had scattered it.
But is the villain Lazarotto acquainted with Our drift.
Not for Spains wealth,
though he be secret, yet suspects the worst,
For confidence confounds the stratagem,
the fewer in a plot of jealousy,
Build a foundation surest, when multitudes
Makes it confused ere it come to head,
Be secret then, trust not the open air,
For air is breath, and breath blown words raise care:
this is the gallery where she most frequents,
Within this walk have I beheld her dally,
With my shapes substance, O immortal powers.
Lend your assistance, clap a silver tongue within
This palate, that when I approach,
Within the presence of this demi Goddess,
I may posses an adimanticke power,
And so bewitch her with my honied spéech,
Have every syllable a music stop,
that when I pause the melody may move,
And hem persuasion twéene her snowy paps
that her hart hearing may relent and yéeld.
Break of my Lord, sée where she makes approach.
then fall into your former veins of terms:
Welcome my Lord, welcome brave Don
Andrea, Spaines best of spirit: what news,
From Portugal tribute or war,
But see my Sister Bellimperia comes,
I will defer it till some other time,
For company hinders louds conference.
Welcome my lifes self form, dear Don Andrea,
My words iterated gives thee as much,
Welcome my self, of self.
What news Andrea? treats it peace or war?
At first they cried all war, as men resolved
to loose both life and honour at one cast:
At which I thunderd words all clad in proof,
Which struck amazement to their pauled speech,
And tribute presently was yielded up.
But madam Bellimperia leave we this,
And talk of former suites and quests of love.
tic all about the Court Andreas come;
Would I might greet him and I wonder much
My Lord lorenzo is so slack in murder,
Not to afford me notice all this while.
Gold I am true I had my hier,
And thou shalt have thy due:
Wast possible to miss him so, soft, soft,
this gallery leads to Bellimperias lodging,
there he is sure, or will be sure Isle stay,
the evening to begins to slub•er day,
Sweet oportunefull season here isle lean,
Like a court hound that liks fat trenchers clean.
But has the king partook your embassy.
that till to morrow shall be now deferd.
Nay then you love me not,
Let that be first dispatch,
till when receive this token.
I to the king with this unfaithful hart,
It must not be, I play to false a part.
Up lazarotto, yonder comes thy prize,
Now lives Andrea, now Andrea dies.
that villain lazarotto has kilt me
In stead of andrea.
Welcome home Lord ambassador.
Oh, oh, oh.
Whose groan was that, what frightful villains this,
His sword unsheathed, whom hast thou murdered slave?
Why Don, Don andrea?
No conterfetting villain,
He ses my Lord that he hath murdered me.
I Don Andrea, or else Don the devil.
Lay hands one hun, some rear up the bléeding
Body to the light.
My Lord I think tic you, were you not héere
A man might swear it were you.
His garments ha like mine, his face made like:
An ominous horror, all my veins doth strike,
Sure this pretends my death, this misery
Aims at some fatal pointed tragedy.
Son Horatio see Andrea slain.
andrea slain, then weapon clyng my breast.
Live truest friend for ever loved and blessed.
Lives Don andrea.
I but slain in thought,
To sée so strange a likeness forged and wrought,
Lords cannot you yet descry
Who is the owner, of this red melting body.
My Lord it is alcario Duke Medinas son,
I know him by this mould upon his breast.
alcario slain, hast thou beguiled me sword?
Arm hast thou slain thy bountiful kind lord,
Why then rot off, and drop upon the ground,
Strew all the galleries with gobbits round.
Who names Alcario slain, it is Alcario,
O cursed déed, could thou not sée,
But make the wrong man bléed.
Sfoot it was your fault my lord, you brought no word.
Peace, no words, isle get thy pardon.
Why mum then.
Who names Andrea slain, O tic andrea,
O I sound I die.
Look to my Sister Bellimperia.
Raise up my déere love, Bellimperia,
O be of comfort swéet, call in thy spirits,
Andrea lives O let not death beguile thée.
Are you Andrea.
Doe not forget, that was alcario
My shapes counterset.
Why speaks not this accursed damned villain.
O good words my Lords, for those are courtiers veils,
The king must hear why should I make
Two tails, for to be •and in two,
Before the king, I will resolve you all,
This strange strange thing, I hot, yet mist,
It was I mistook my part.
I villain: for thou aymst at this true hart.
Horatio▪ it was well as fortune stands,
This letter came not to Andreas hands.
It was happiness indéed.
Was it not you Andrea questioned me bout love?
No Bellimperia, belike it was false Andrea,
For the first object mine eyes met,
Was that most accursed
witch, I much fear me by all signs pretend
Most doubtful wars and dangerous pointed ends▪
To light upon my blood.
Angels of heaven foresend it.
Some take up the body, others take charge
Of that accursed villain.
My Lord leave that to me; isle look to him.
Mark, mark, Horatio: a villain guard a villain.
The king may think my news is a bad guest,
When the first object is a bléeding breast.
My Lords, what heavy sounds are these?
Néerer, and néerer, ha andrea the foore-runner
Of these news, nay then I fear spaines
Inevitable ill
Ha andrea speak, what news from Portugal?
What is tribute paid: peace, or wars.
Wars my dread léedge.
Why then that bléeding object
doth presage what shall hereafter follow:
Whats he that lies there slain, or hurt,
Or both: speak?
My léedge, alcario Duke medinas son,
And by that slave this purple act was done.
Who names Alcario slain: ay me tic he?
Art thou that villain.
How did know my name.
I see an excellent villain hath his fame
As well as a great courtier.
Speak villain, wherefore did thou this accur∣sed deed.
Because I was an ass, a villainus ass,
For had I hot it right, Andrea had line there:
He walked upright, this omens mistake,
This damned error breeds in my soul
An everlasting terror.
Say slave, how came this accursed evil?
Faith by my self, my short sword, and the devil,
To tell you all without a tedious tongue,
Isle cut them down, my words shall not hang,
That hapless bléeding Lord alcario▪
Which this hand slew, pexont, was a huge dotar
On Bellimperias beauty who replied in scorn
And his hot suite denied:
For her affections were all firmly planted,
In Don andreas bosom, yet unwise,
He still pursued it with blind lovers eyes:
Then hired he me with gold: O fate thou elf,
To kill Andrea which hex kilt himself.
For not content to stay the time of murder,
He took andreas shape unknown to me,
And in all parts disguise• as there you sée,
Intending as it séemed by that sly shift,
To steal away her troth: short tale to tell,
I took him for Andrea, down he fell.
Olmpious déede, to make the heir of honour
Melt and bléede, bear him away to execution.
Nay Lord Lorenzo, whirs the pardon?
Sfoot isle peach else.
Peace Lazarotto, isle get it of the king.
Doot quickly then or isle spread villainy.
My Lord he is the most notorious rogue
That ever breathed.
Away with him.
Your highness may doe well to bar his spéech,
Tic able to infect a virtuous ear.
Away with him I will not hear him speak
My Lord Lorenzo is a
Is not this a monstrous courtier.
He is the court foot father,
Tribute denied vs, ha.
It is my léedge, and that with no mean words;
He will redéeme his honour lost with swords.
So daring? Ha, so Peremptory,
Can you remember the words he spake?
Word for word my gracious sovereign,
And these they were: Thus much return to Spain,
Say: That our settled Judgment hath advised vs,
What tribute is, how poor that Monarch shows,
Who for his throne a yearly pension owes,
And what our predecessors lost to Spain,
We have fresh spirits that can renew it again.
Ha so peremptory, daring, stout.
Then my léedge, acording your gracious dread, Command,
I bad defiance with, a vengfull hand.
He entertained it.
I and returned it with menacing brows,
Prince Balthazar his son,
Grow Uiolent and wished the fight begun.
So, so, I have sent my slave to hell:
Tho he blab there, the devils will not tell.
How now, what means this trumpets sound?
My léedge, the Portuguese.
Are up in arms glittering in stéel.
Wheres our lord general, lorenzo stout andrea,
With whom I rank sprightly Horatio.
what for shame, shall the Portuguese
Trample the fields before you.
No my léedge, theirs time enough
To let out blood enough, tribute shall flow,
Out of their bowels, and be tendered so.
Farewell brave Lords, my wishes are bequeathd
A nobler rank of spirits never breathed.
O my swéet boy, heaven shield thée still from care,
O be as fortunate as thée art fair.
And heaven bless you my father in this fight,
that I may sée your Gray head crowned in white.
You came but now, must you part again.
You told me that you spirit
Should put on peace but sée war follows war.
Nay swéet love cease,
to be denied our honour why it were base,
to breath and live, and wars in such a case,
Is even as necessary as our blood,
Swords are in season then, when rights with stood,
Deny vs tribute, that so many yéeres,
We have in peace told out,
Why it would raise spléene in the host
Of Angels: it were enough
to make tranquil saints of angry stuff.
You have ore wrought the chiding of my breast,
And by that argument, you firmly prove
Honour to sore aboue the pitch of love.
Lend me thy loving and thy warlike arm,
On which I knit this soft and silken charm,
Tied with an amorous knot, O may it prove
Enchanted armour, being charmed by love,
That when it mounts up to thy warlike crest,
It may put by the sword, and so be blessed.
O what divinity procéeds from love?
What happier fortune then my self can move,
Hark, the drum beckons me; sweet dear farewell,
This scarf shall be my charm, against foes and hell.
O let me kiss thée first.
The drum again.
Hath that more power then I?
Doot quickly then: farewell.
Farewell O cruel part,
andreas bosom bears away my hart.
Come valiant spirits you Péeres of Portugal,
That owe your lives, your faiths, and services,
To set you frée from base captivity:
O let our fathers scandal ne'er be séene,
As a base blush upon our frée borne chéeks,
Let all the tribute that proud Spain received,
Of those all captive Portuguese deceased,
Turn into chafe, and choke their insolence:
Methinks no, moiety not one little thought,
Of them whole servile acts live in their graves,
But should raise spléens big as a cannon bullet,
Within your bosoms: O for honour,
Your countries reputation, your lives fréedome,
Indéed your all, that may be termed revenge,
Now let your bloods be liberal as the sea:
And all those wounds that you receive of Spain,
Let theirs be equal to quit yours again▪
Speak portuguese: are you resolved as I,
to live like captives, or as free borne die?
Prince Balthazar as you say, so say we,
to die with honour, scorn captivity.
Why spoke like true Portuguese indéed,
I am assured of your forwardness:
Now Spain sit firm, isle make thy towers shake,
And all that gold thou had from Portugal,
which makes thy court melt in Luxuriousness,
I vow to have it treble at thy hands,
Hark Portuguese: I hear their spanish drum;
March on and meet them▪ this must be the day,
that all they have received, they back must pay.
What are you braving vs before we come,
wéele be as shrill as you: strike a larum drum.
Thou inch of Spain,
Thou man from thy hose down ward,
Scarce so much: thou very little longer then
Thy beard: speak not such big words,
Thaile throw thee down little Ieronimo,
words greater then thy self, it must not.
And thou long thing of Portugal, why not
Thou, that art full as tall
As an English gallows: upper beam and all:
Devourer of apparel, thou huge swallower,
My hose will scarce make thée a standing collar,
What? Have I almost quited you?
Have done impatient Marshall.
Spanish combatants, what doo you set a little
Pygnire Marshall to question with a Prince?
No prince Balthazar, I have desired him peace,
That we might war: What is the tribute,
Money tendered yet?
Tribute ha, ha! what else wherefore méete our
Drums but to tender and receive the somes,
Of many a bléeding hart which ear Sun fall,
Shall pay dear tribute, even there lives and all.
Prince balthazar, I know your valiant spirit▪
I know your curage to be trid and good,
Yet, O prince, be not confirmed in blud;
Not that I taste of fear or cowerdyse,
But of religion piety, and love,
To many bosoms, that yet firmly move,
With out disturbed spleens: O, in thy hart▪
Weigh the déere dropes of many a purple part,
That must be acted on the féeldes gréene stage,
Before the evening dews quentch the sons rage,
Let tribute be appeased, and so stayed,
And let not wonted fealty be denied,
To our desert full kingdom: portuguese,
Kéepe your forfathers Oaths; that virtue craves;
Let them not lie forsworn now in their graves,
To make their ashes periorde, and unjust,
For heaven can be revenged on their dust,
They swore to Spain both for themselves and you,
And will prosterity prove their sires untrue,
This should not be mong men of virtuous spirit▪
Pay tribute thou, and receive peace and writ.
O virtuous coward▪
O ignoble spirit?
To term him coward for his virtuous merit
Coward, nay then: relentles-rib of stéele,
What virtue cannot, thou shalt make him feel.
Proud Alexandro thou art mine?
Agréed.
And thou Vullupo mine?
Isle make thée bléed.
And thou Don Pedro mine?
I care not whose, or thine, or thine, or all at once.
I bind thée Don Andrea, by thy honour, thy valian∣sie,
And all that thou holdst great,
To méete me single in the battles heat;
Where isle set down, in Caractors upon thy flesh,
Four precious lines, spoke by our fathers mouth
When first thou came ambassador: these they are:
Tic said we shall not answer at next birth
Our Fathers faults in heaven, why then on earth,
Which proves and shows, that what they
Lost by base Captivity,
We may redéeme with wonted Ualliansie.
And to this crimson end our Collars spread
Our courage are new borne our valours bred,
Therefore Andrea as thou tenderst fame,
Wars reputation, and a Soldiers name. méete me▪
A will.
Single me out.
I shall.
Do you the like▪
And you.
All and we.
Can we be foes, and all so well agréed.
Why man in war theirs bléeding amity,
And he this day gives me the déepest wound,
Isle call him brother.
The prince call me so;
To gain that name isle give the déepest blow.
Nay then if brother-hood by strokes come dew,
I hope boy thou wilt gain a brother too.
Father I doubt it not.
Lord General, breath like your name,
A General defiance against portugal.
Defiance to the Portuguese.
the like breath our Lord General against the spani∣arts
Defiance to the Spaniards.
Now cease words,
I long to hear the music of clashed swords,
why thou shalt hear it presently.
Quickly then.
Why now.
O stay my Lords,
This will but bréede a mutiny in the camp.
I am all fire, andrea.
Art thou, good:
Why then isle quench thée prince, with thyn own blood.
Adieu.
Adieu.
Lets méete.
Tic méete we did.
Alexandro.
lorenzo.
Vollupo.
Rogero.
Don Pedro.
Horatio.
I, I, Don Pedro my boy shall méete thée,
Come valiant spirits of Spain,
Valiant Andrea, fortunate lorenzo, worthy Rogero,
Sprightly Horatio, O let me dwell a little on that name,
Be all as fortunate as heavens blessed host;
But blame me not, id have Horatio most,
Ride all Conquerors when the fight is done,
Especially ride thée home so my son:
So, now kiss and embrace, come, come,
I am wars tuter, strike a larum drum.
O valiant boy, struck with a Giants arm,
His sword so false upon the Portuguese,
As if he would slice them out like Oranges,
And squéese their bloods out: O abundant joy,
Never had father a more happier boy.
Can you not find Don andrea forth,
O for a voice shriller then all the trumpets,
To prince Andreas ears! through the hot army,
Go search again, bring him or near return.
Valiant Andrea, by thy worthy blood▪
Thy honoured •aith, which thou pawnst to mine,
By all that thou holdst déere upon this earth,
Sweat now to find me in the hight of blood,
Now death doth heap his goods up all at once,
And crams his store house to the top with blood,
Might I now and andrea in one fight,
Make up thy wardroope Richer by a knight.
Whose that andrea?
Ha, Vullupo.
No, but a better,
Pox ont.
Pies ont, what luck is this, but Sir
You part not, so, what ere you be, isle have
About with you?
Content: this is joy mixed with spite,
To miss a Lord and méete a prince in fight.
Come méete me Sir.
Just halse way, isle méete it with my sword.
Where might I find this vallorus balthazar,
This fierce, courageous Prince, a noble, worthy,
Made of the ribs of mars and fortitude,
He promise•ed to méete fair, and single me
Out a the misty battle: did you search
The least wing for him? speak:
We did my Lord.
And could he not be found.
Not in that wing my Lord.
Why this would vex the resolution
Of a suffering spleen: Prince Balthazar,
Portuguese valiant heir,
The glory of our foe, the hart of courage,
The very soul of true nobility:
I call thee by thy right name, answer me,
Go Captain pass the least wing squadron; hie,
Mingle your self again amidst the army;
Pray sweat to find him out.
This place isle keep,
Now wounds are wide, and blood is very deep,
Tic now about the heavy dread of battle,
Soldiers drop down as thick as if death mowed them,
As sithmen trim the long haird Ruffian fields,
So fast they fall: so fast to fate life yields.
I have sweat much, yet cannot find him andrea.
Prince Balthazar: O lucky minute?
O long wished for hour,
Are you remembered Don, of a daring message
And a proud attempt, you braved me Don
Within my Fathers court.
I think I did.
this sword shall lash you for it.
Alas, war knows I am to proud a scholar grown,
Now to be lashed with stéele had I not known
My strength, and courage it had bin easy then,
to have me borne upon the backs of men;
But now I am sorry Prince you come to late,
that wear proud stéele in faith that should do that.
I can hold no longer:
Come, come lets sée which of our strengths is stronger.
Mine for a wager.
thine: what wager, say.
I hold thrée wounds to one.
Content, a lay; but you shall kéepe stakes then.
Nay isle trust you.
For your a prince, I know you'll pay your dew.
Isle pay it you soundly.
Prince you might have paid
Tribute as well, then battles had bin staid.
Héers tribute for you.
Isle receive it of you,
And give you acquittance with a wound or two▪
Thou art a wondrous friend, a happy spirit,
I owe thée now my life could thou inherit,
Within my bosom, all I have is thine,
For by this act I hold thy arm divine.
Are you not wounded: let me search and sée?
No my dear self, for I was blessed by thée,
Else his vnpiting sword had cleft my hart,
Had not Horatio plaid some Angels part.
Come happy mortal, let me rank by thée,
Then am I sure no star will threaten me.
Lets to the battle once more, we may meet.
This haughty prince, and wound him at our feet.
art thou true valiant? hast thou no
Cote of proof girt to thy loins?
art thou true loyal?
Why look: witness the naked truth,
Upon my breast, come lets meet
Lets meet and break our haughty skulls
Down to our feet.
O me, ill stead, valiant rogero slain.
O my sad fates, Don Pedro weltering in his gore.
O could I meet andrea, now my bloods a tiptoe.
This hand and sword should melt him:
Valiant Don Pedro.
Worthy rogero, sure it was multitudes
That made thee stoop to death,
One Portugal could near orewhelmne thee
In such crime on streams,
And no mean blood shall quit it,
balthazar prince balthazar.
andrea, we meet in blood now.
I in valiant blood, of Don rogeroes sheding
And each drop is worth a thousand Portuguese.
Isle top thy head for that ambitious word.
You cannot prince, see a revenge•ull sword
Waives ore my head.
Another over mine
Let them both meet in crimson tinctures shine.
O I am slain, help me Horatio,
My foes are base, and slay me cowardly,
Farewell dear, dearest Bellimperia,
Yet herein joy is mingled with sad death,
I keep her favour longer then my breath.
My other soul, my bosom, my harts friend.
My O Andrea slain, isle have the price
Of him in princely blood; Prince Balthazar
My sword shall strike true strains,
And •etch Andreas ransom fourth thy veins,
Lord General drive them hence while I make war?
Hath war made thee so impndent and young,
My sword shall gin correction to thy tongue.
Correct thy rascals Prince, thou correct him,
Lug with him boy, honours in blood best swim.
So young and vallerus this arm near met,
So strong a courage of so gréene a set.
I• thou béest valiant cease these idle words,
And let revenge hang on our glittering swords,
With this proud prince the haughty Balthazar.
Hand of lorenzo touch not my prisoner.
Hées my prisoner,
I seizd his weapons first.
O base renown tic easy to seize those,
Were •orst laid down.
My lance first threw him from his Warlike stéede▪
Thy Lance lorenzo? now by my beard you lie?
Well my Lord to you a while I tender my Whole pri•oner.
Horatio, you tender me part of mine own you know.
Well peace, with my blood dispense
Until my leedge shall end the difference.
lorenzo, thou dost boast of base renown,
Why I could whip al these, were there hose down.
Speak prince to whether dost thou yield?
The vanquished yields to both, to you first
O abject prince, what dost thou yield to two?
Content thee boy, thou shalt instaine no wrong,
Isle to the king before, and let him know,
The sum of victory, and his overthrow.
Andrea slain, thanks to the stars aboue,
Isle choose my Sister out her second love.
Come noble rib of honour, valiant carcass,
I loved thee so entirely when thou breathe,
That I could die were but to bleed with thee,
And wish me wounds, even for society.
Heaven and this arm, once saved thée from thy foe,
When his all wrathful sword did basely point
At the rich circle of thy labouring hart,
Thou grovelling under indignation,
Of sword and ruth, O then stepped heaven and I,
Betwéene the stroke, but now alack must die:
Since so the powers aboue have writ it down,
In marble leaves that death is mortal crowned,
Come then my friend in purple I will bear,
Thee to my private tent, and then prepare,
For honoured Funeral for thy melting course.
This scarce isle wear in memory of our souls,
And of our muteall loves, héere, héere, isle wind it,
And full as often as I think one thée,
Isle kiss this little ensign this soft banner,
Smeard with foes blood, all for the masters honour,
Alas I pity Bellimperias eyes,
Just at this instant her hart sincks and dies.
My boy ads treble comfort to my age,
His share is greatest in this victory,
The Portuguese are slain and put to flight,
By Spaniards •orce, most by Horatioes might:
Isle to the Spanish tents to sée my son,
Give him my blessing, and then all is done.
O my Lords?
Sée Don Andreas ghost salutes me, sée embraces me.
It is your love that shapes this apprehention.
Do you not sée him plainly Lords,
Now he would kiss my chéeke, O my pale friend,
Were thou any thing but a ghost I could love theée,
Sée he points at his own hearse, mark all,
As i• he did rejoice at funeral.
Revenge give my tongue fréedom, to paint her part,
To thank Horatio, and commend his hart.
No you'll blab secrets then?
By Charons boat I will not.
Nay you shall not: therefore pass,
Secrets in hell are locked with doors o• brass:
Use action if you will, but not in voice,
Your friend conceives in signs how you rejoice.
Sée, sée, he points to have his go forward on,
I prithee rest, it shall be done sweet Don,
O now hes vanished.
I am a happy Ghost,
Revenge, my passage now cannot be crossed,
Come charon: come hells Sculler, waft me ore,
You •able streams which look like molten pitch,
My Funeral rights are made, my hearse hung rich.
Charon: a boat, Charon, charon?
Who calls so loud on charon.
Indeed tic such a time the truth to tell,
I never want a fare, to pass to hell.
These honoured rights and worthy duties spent
Upon the Funeral of Andreas dust,
Tho•e once his valiant ashes, march we now
Homeward with victory to crown Spaines brow.
The day is ours and joy yields happy treasure,
Set on to Spain, in most triumphant measure.
Foregod I have just mist them: ha?
Soft Ieronimo: thou hast more friends
To take thy leave of: Look well about thee,
Embrace them, and take friendly leave,
My arms are of the shortest,
Let your loves péece them out,
Your welcome all, as I am a Gentleman,
For my sons sa•e, grant me a man at least,
At least I am: 〈◊〉 good night kind gentles,
For I hope the•• never a Jew among you all,
And so I leave •ou.

WHy how now? are ye mad? or drunk? or both? or what?
Are ye building Babilon there?
Heir's a noise in Court▪ you think you are in a Tavern, do you not?
You think you are in a bro•…hell house doe you not? This room is ill scented.
So; perfume; perfume; some upon me I pray thee: The Duke is upon instant entrance; so, make place there.
Where breath's that Musique?
The discord rather then the Musique is heard from the Malcontent Maleuoles 〈◊〉 •…
Maleuole.
 Yaugh, godaman what dost thou there: Dukes Ganimed Iunces jealous of thy long stockings: shadow of a woman, what would Weasel? thou lamb a Court: what dost thou bleat for? a you smooth chind Ca•…amite.
Come down thou rugged Cur, and snarl here, I give thy dogged sullenness free liberty: trot about and be-spurtle whom thou please.
Isle come among you, you Gotish blotted Toderers, as Gum into Taffeta, to fret, to fret: Isle fall like a sponge into water to suck up; to suck up. Howl again. Isle pray, and come to you.
This Maleuole is one of the most prodigious af∣fections that ever conversed with nature; A man or rather a monster; more discontent then Lucifer when he was thrust out of the presence, his appetite is unsatiable as the Grave; as far from any content as from heaven, his highest de∣light is to procure others vexation, and therein hee thinks he truly se•…ues heaven; for tic his position, whosoever in this •…arth can be contented is a slave and damned; therefore do's he afflict all in that to which they are most affected; the Elements struggle within him; his own soul is at vari∣ence; his speech is halter-worthy at all hours; I like him faith, he gives good intelligence to my spirit, makes me un∣derstand those weaknesses which others flattery palliate: hark they sing.
See he comes; now shall you hear the extremity of a Malecontent: he is as free as ayre; he blows over every man. And sir whence come you now?
From the public place of much dissimulation;
What did there?
Talk with a Usurer; take up at Intetest.
I wonder what religion thou art?
Of a Soldiers religion.
And what dost thou think makes most Infidels now?
Sects, sects, I have seen seeming Piety change her robe so oft, that sure none but some arch-diuell can shape her a new Petticoat.
Of a religious policy.
But damnation on a politic religion.
But whats the common news abroad Maleuole, thou dogst rumour still.
Common news? why common words are, God save ye, Fare ye well: common actions, Flattery and Co∣senage: common things, Women and Cuckolds: and how do's my little Ferrard: a ye lecherous Animal, my little Ferret, he goes sucking up &amp; down the Palace into every Hens nest like a Weasel: &amp; to what dost thou addict thy time to now, more then to those Antique painted drabs that are still affected of young Courtiers, Flattery, Pride &amp; Ven•…rye.
I study languages: who dost think to be the best linguist of our age?
Phew, the Devil let him possess thee, heel teach thee to speak all languages, most readily and strangely, and great reason mary, hes travelled greatly ithe world; and is every where.
Save ith Court.
I save ith Court: and how do's my old Muckill overspread with fresh snow▪ thou half a mā half a Goat, all a Beast: how do's thy young wife old huddle?
Out you improvident rascal.
Doe, kick thou hugely hornd old Dukes Ox, good Moister Make-pleece.
How dost thou live now a days Maleuole?
Why like the Knight S. Patrik Penlobrans, with killing a Spiders for my Ladies Munckey.
How dost spend the night, I here thou never sleepst?
O no, but dream the most fantastical: O heaven: O fubbery, fubbery.
Dream, what dreamst?
Why me thinks I see that Signior pound his foot∣cloth, that Metreza her Plate, this madam takes physic, that tother Monsieur may minister to her: here is a Pander Jew∣old: there a fellow in shift of Satin this day, that could not shift a shirt tother night, here a Paris supports that Helen,
theres a Lady Guineuer bears up that sir Lancelot. Dreams, dreams, visions, fantasies, Chimeras, imaginations, tricks, conceits,  Sir Tristram Trimtram come a loft lack a napes with a whim wham, here is a Knight of the land of Catito shall play at trap with any Page in Europe; Doe the sword dance, with any Morris▪dancer in Christendom; ride at the Ring till the finn of his eyes look as blew as the welkin, and run the wilde-goose chase even with Pompey the huge.
You run.
To the devil: now Signor Guerchino; that thou from a most pitied prisoner should grow a most loathd flatterer: Alas poor Celso, thy stars oppressed, thou art an ho∣nest Lord, tic pity.
First pity?
I marry first Philosophical Equato, and tic pity that thou being so excellent a Scholar by Art, should be so ri∣culous a fool by Nature: I have a thing to tell you Duke; bid um avaunt, bid um avaunt.
Leave vs, leave vs, now sir what first?
Duke thou art a Beco, a Corn•…to.
How?
Thou art a Cuckold.
Speak; vnshale him quick.
With most tumbler-like nimbleness.
Who? by whom? I burst with desire.
Mendozo is the man makes thee a horned beast; Duke it is Mendozo cornutes thee.
What conformance, relate, short, short.
As a Lawyers beard,
There is an old Crone in the Court, her name is Maquerelle,
She is my Mistress sooth to say, and she doth ever tell me,
Blirt a rime; blirt a rime; Maquerelle is a cunning Bawd, I am an honest villain, thy wife is a close Drab, and thou art a notorious Cuckold, farewell Duke.
Stay▪ stay.
Dull, dull Duke, can lazy patience make lame re∣avenge; O God for a woman to make a man that which God never created, never made.
What did God never make?
A Cockold: To be made a thing thats hud-winkt with kindness whilst every rascal philips his brows; to have a Cox-combe with egregious horns pind to a Lords back, every page sporting himself with delightful laugh∣la, whilst he must be the last must know it; Pistols and Po∣niards, Pistols and Poinards.
Death and damnation.
Lightning and thunder.
Vengeance and torture.
Catzo.
O revenge.
I would dam him and all his generation, my own hands should do it; ha I would not trust heaven with my vengeance any thing.
Any thing, any thing Maleuole thou shalt see in∣stantly what temper my spirit holds; farewell, remember, I forget thee not, farewell.
My honoured Lord.
Peace, speak low; peace, O Celso, constant Lord,
Thou to whose faith I only rest discovered,
Thou one of full ten millions of men
That love virtue only for it self,
Thou in whose hands old OPS may put her soul;
Behold for ever banished Altofront
This Genoas last years Duke. O truly noble,
I wanted those old instruments of state,
Dissemblance, and suspect: I could not time it Celso,
My throne stood like a point in midst of a circle,
To all of equal nearness, bore with none:
Raind all alike, so slept in fearless virtue,
Suspectles, too suspectles, till the crowd:
(Still liquerous of untried novelties)
Impatient with severer government:
Made strong with Florence: banished Altofront.
Strong with Florence, I thence your mischief rose,
For when the danghrer of the Florentine:
Was matched once with this Pietro now Duke,
No stratagem of state vnt•…id was left, till you of all
Of all was quite bereft,
Alas Maria too close prisoned:
My true sayth'd duchess in the Citadel.
Isle still adhere, lets mutiny and die.
O clime not▪a falling tower Celso,
Tic well held desperation, no Zeal:
Hopeless to strive with fate (peace) Temporise.
Hope, hope, that never forsak'st the wretchedest man,
Yet bid me live, and lurk in this disguise,
What play I well the •…ree breathed discontent,
Why man we are all philosophical monarchs or natural fools, Celso the Courts a •…are, the duchess sheets will smoke forth ere it be long: Impure Mendozo that sharpe nosed Lord, that made the cursed match linked Genoa with Florence now broad horns, the Duke which he now knows: Dis∣cord to malcontents is very Manna, when the ranks are burst▪ then scuffle Altophant.
I but dared.
Tic gone, tic swallowed like a mineral, some way twill work, phewt isle not shrink, 
Hes resolute who can no lower sink.
Yonder's Mendoza.
True, the privy key.
I take my leave sweet Lord.
Tic fit, away.
Leave your suites with me, I can and will: attend my secretary, leave me.
Mendoza hark ye, hark ye, You are a treache∣rous villain, God buy ye.
Out you base borne rascal.
We are all the sons of heaven though a Tripe wife were our mother; a you whore-sonne hot rainde hee Marmoset, Egistus did ever here of one Egistus?
Gistus?
I Egistus, he was a filthy incontinent Fleshmonger, such a one as thou art.
Out grumbling roage.
Orestes, beware Orestes.
Out beggar.
I once shall rise,
Thou rise?
I at the resurrection.
No vulgar seed but once may rise and shall,
No King so huge, but fore he die may fall.
Now good Elizium, what a delicious heaven is it for a mā to be in a Princes favour? ô sweet God, ô pleasure! ô Fottune! ô all thou best of life? what should I think? what say? what do? to be a favourite? a minion? to have a general timorous respect▪ observe a man, a statefull sci∣lence in his presence: solitariness in his absence, a con∣fused ham and busy murmur of obsequious suitors trai∣ning him; the cloth held up, and way proclaimed before him; Petitionarie vassailes licking the pavement with their slavish knees, whilst some odd palace Lampree∣les that engender with Snakes, and are full of eyes on both sides with a kind of insinuating humbleness fix all their lights upon his brow: O blessed state what a
ravishing prospect doth the Olympus of favour yield; Death, I cornute the Duke: sweet women, most sweet Ladies, nay Angels; by heaven he is more accursed then a Devil that hates you, or is hated by you, and happier then a God that loves you, or is beloved by you; you preservers of mankind, life blood of society, who would live, nay who can live without you? O Paradise, how majestic is your austerer presence? how imperiously chaste is your more modest face? but O! how full of ravishing attraction is your pretty, petulant, languishing, laciuiously-composed countenance: these amorous smiles, those soule-warming sparkling glen∣ces; ardent as those flames that singed the world by heedless Phaeton; in body how delicate, in soul how witty, in dis∣course how pregnant, in life how wary, in favours how in∣d•…ious, in day how sociable, and in night how? O pleasure un•…tterable, indeed it is most certain, one man cannot de∣serve only to enjoy a beauteous woman: but a Duchess? in despite of Phoebus Isle write a Sonnet instantly in praise of her.
And first possible? Mendozo slight me, possible?
Possible? what can be strange in him thats drunk with favour,
Groes insolent with grace, speak Maquerelle, speak.
To speak feelingly, more, more richly in solid sense then worthless words, give me those Jewels of your ears to receive my enforced duty, as for my part tic well known I can put up any thing; can bear patiently with any man: But when I heard hee wronged your precious sweetness, I was enforced to take deep offence; Tic most certain he loves Emillia with high appetite; and as she told
me (as you know we women impart our secrets one to a∣another) when she repulsed his suite, in that he was possessed with your endeared grace: Mendozo most ingratfully re∣nounced all faith to you.
Nay, called you, speak Maquerelle, speak.
By heaven witch? dried bisquet, and contested blushlesly hee loved you but for a spurt or so.
For maintenance.
Advancement and regard.
O villain? O impudent Mendozo.
Nay he is the rustiest iawde, the foulest mouthed knave in railing against our sex: he will rail again women.
How? how?
I am ashamed to speakt, I.
I love to hate him, speak.
Why when Emillia scorned his base vnsteddines the black throated rascal scolded, and sedd.
What?
Troth tic too shameless,
What said he?
Why that at four women were fools, at four∣teene Drabs, at forty Bawds, at fourscore witches, and a hundredth Cats.
O vnlimitable impudence!
But as for poor Fernezes fixed hart,
Was never shadelesse meadow drier parcht,
Under the scorching heate of heavens dog,
Then is my hart with your enforcing eyes.
A hot simile.
Your smiles have bin my heauē, your frowns my hell,
O pity then; Grace should with beauty d well.
Reasonable perfect byr'lady.
I will love thee, be it but in despite,
Of that Mendozo, witch! Farneze, witch!
Ferneze thou art the Duchess favourite,
Be faithful, private, but tic dangerous,
His love is lifeless, that for love fears breath,
The worst thats due to sin, O would it were death.
Enjoy my favour, I will be sick instantly &amp; take physic,
Therefore in depth of night, visit
Visit her chamber, but conditionally you shall not offend her bed: by this Diamond.
By this Diamond.
Nortary longer then you please: by this Ruby.
By this Ruby.
And that the door shall not creak.
And that the door shall not creak.
Nay but swear.
By this purse.
Go to, Isle keep your oaths for you: remem∣ber, visit.
Dried bisquet? look where the base wretch comes.
Beauties life, Heavens model, Loves Queen.
Thats his Aemilia.
Natures triumph, best of Earth.
Meaning Emillia.
Thou only wonder that the world hath seen.
Thats Emilia.
Must I then here her praisd? Mendozo.
Madam, your excellence is graciously encountered; I have bin writing passionate flashes in honour of—
Out villain, villain, O judgment where have bin my eyes? what bewitched election made me dote on thee? what sorcery made me love thee? but be gone, bury thy head; O that I could doe more then loath thee: Hence worst of ill, No reason else, my reason is my will.
Women? nay furies, nay worse, for they torment Only the bad, but women good and bad.
Damnation of mankind, breath hast thou praisd them for this: And first you Ferneze are wrigled into smock grace; fit
sure, O that I could rail against these monsters in nature, models of hell, curse of the earth, women that dare attempt any thing, and what they attempt they care not how they accomplish, without all premeditation or prevention; rash in asking, desperate in working, impatient in suffering, ex∣treame in desiring, slaves unto appetite, mistresses in dissem∣bling, only constant in inconstancy, only perfect in coū∣terfetting: their words are fained, their eyes forged, their sights dissembled, their looks counterfeit, their hair false, their given hopes deceitful, their very breath artificial:
Their blood is their only God: Bad clothes, and old age are only the Devils they tremble at:
That I could rail now.
A mischief fill thy throat, thou foul iaw'd slave•… Say thy prayers.
I ha forgot um.
Thou shalt dye.
So shalt thou; I am hart mad.
I am horn mad.
Extreme mad.
Monstrously mad.
Why?
Why? thou thou hast dishonoured my bed.
I? come, come, sit, hears my bare heart to thee as steady as is this center to this glorious world,
And yet hark thou art a Cornuto; but by me?
Yes slave by thee.
Do not, do not with tart and spleenful breath,
Loose him can loose thee; I offend my Duke?
Bare record O ye dumb and raw aird nights,
How vigilant my sleepless eyes have bin,
To watch the Traitor; record thou spirit of truth,
With what debasement I ha throne my self,
To under offices, only to learn
The truth, the party, time, the means, the place,
By whom, and when▪ and where thou were disgraced:
And am I paid with slave? hath my intrusion
To places private, and prohibited,
Only to observe the closer passages:
Heaven knows with vows of revelation,
Made me suspected, made me deemed a villain?
What roage hath wronged vs?
Mendozo, I may err.
Err? tic too mild a name, but err and err,
Run giddy with suspect, fore through me thou know,
That which most creatures save thy self doe know,
Nay since my service hath so loathed reject,
Fore Isle reveal, shalt find them clipped together.
Mendozo thou know I am a most plain breasted mā.
The fitter to make a Cornuto, would your brows were most plane to.
Tell me, indeed I heard thee rail?
At womē, true, why what cold fleam could chose,
Knowing a Lord so honest, virtuous,
So boundless loving, bounteous, fair shaped, sweet,
To be contemned, abused, defamed, made Cuckold,
Hart, I hate all women for it: sweet sheets, wax lights, Antique bed-posts, Cambric smocks, villainous curtains, Arras pictures, oylde hinges, and all ye tong-tide lascivious witnesses of great creatures wantonness: what salvation can you expect?
Wilt thou tell me?
Why you may find it your self, observe, observe.
I ha not the patience, wilt thou deserve me; tell, give it.
Tak't, why Farneze is the man, Ferneze, Isle proou't, this night you shall take him, in your sheets, wilt serve.
It will, my bosoms in some peace, till night.
What?
Farewell.
God how weak a Lord are you,
Why doe you think there is no more but so?
Why?
Nay then will I presume to council you,
It should be thus; you with some guard upon the sudden
Break into the Princes chamber, I stay behind
Without the door, through which he needs must pass,
Ferneze flies, let him, to me he comes, hoe's kilt
By me, observe by me, you follow, I rail,
And seem to save the body: Duchess comes
On whom (respecting her advanced birth,
And your fair nature) I know, nay I doe know
No violence must be used. She comes, I storm,
I praise, excuse Ferneze, and still maintain
The Duchess honour, she for this loves me,
I honour you, shall know her soul, you mine,
Then nought shall she contrive in vengeance,
(As women are most thoughtful in revenge)
Of her Ferneze, but you shall sooner know it
Then she can think it, thus shall his death come sure,
Your Duchess braine-caught; so your life secure.
It is too well, my bosom, and my hart,
When nothing helps, cut of the rotten part.
Who cannot fine friendship, can ne'er produce the effects of hatred: Honest fool Duke, subtle lascivious Duchess, silly novice ferneze; I doe laugh at ye, my brain is in labour till it produce mischief, &amp; I feel sudden thro's, proofs sensible, the issue is at hand.
As Bears shape young, so Isle form my device,
Which grown proves horrid: Vengeance makes men wise.
Hoe's caught, the Woodcocks head is in the noose,
Now treads Ferneze in dangerous path of lust,
Swearing his sense is merely deified.
The fool grasps clouds, and shall beget Centaurs.
And now in strength of panting faint delight,
The Goat bids heaven envy him; good Goose,
I can afford thee nothing but the poor cōfort of calamity, Pity.
Lusts like the plummets hanging on clock lines,
Will ne'er a done till all is quite is undone.
Such is the course salt sallow lust doth run.
Which thou shalt try; Isle be revenged. Duke thy suspect,
Duchess thy disgrace, Ferneze thy riuall-ship,
Shall have swift vengeance, nothing so holy,
No band of nature so strong,
No law of friendship so sacred,
But isle profane, burst, violate
Fore isle endure disgrace: contempt and poverty:
Shall I whose very humm, struck all heads bare,
Whose face made silence: creaking of whose shoe,
Forced the most private passages fly op,
Scrape like a servile dog at some latched door?
Learn now to make a leg? and cry beseech ye,
Pray ye is such a Lord within? be awed
At some odd ushers scoft formality?
First sear my brains: Unde cadis non quo referred.
My hart cries perish all, how? how? what fate?
Can once avoid revenge, thats desperate,
Isle to the Duke, if all should op, if? tush
Fortune still dotes on those who cannot blush.
Bless ye cast a Ladies; ha Dipsas, how dost thou old Cole.
Old Cole?
I old Cole, me thinks thou least like a brand under these billets of greene wood.
He that will inflame a young wenches hart, let him lay close to her, an old Cole that hath first bin feared a pandresse, my half burnt lynt, who though thou can not flame thy self yet art able to set a 1000. virgins tapers a fiar: and how do's Ianiuere thy husband, my little periwincle: is a troubled with the cough a the Lunges still, does he hawk anights still, he will not bite.
No by my troth, I took him with his mouth emp∣tie of old teeth.
And hē took thee with thy belly full of young bones, marry he took his maim by the stroke of his enemy.
And I mine by the stroke of my friend:
The close stock, ô mortal wench: Lady ha ye now no restoratives for your decayed Iason, look ye, Crabs guts baked, distilled Oxe-pith, the puluerized hairs of a Lyons up∣per lip, gelly of Cock-sparrowes, Hee Monkeys marrow, or powder of Foxe-stones; and whither are all you ambling now?
Why to bed, to bed.
Doe your husbands lye with ye?
That were country fashion in faith.
Ha ye no foregoers about you; come, whither in good deed law now?
In good indeed law now, to eat the most mira∣culously, admirably, astonishable composed Posit with three Curds, without any drink: will ye help me with a Hee Fox: heir's the Duke.
The night grows deep and foul, what hour first?
Upon the stroke of twelve.
Save ye Duke.
From thee, begone I do not love thee, let me see thee no more, we are displeased.
Why God buy thee, heaven hear my curse,
May thy wife and thee live long together.
Be gone sir.
When Arthur first in Court began,—Agamennon, Menelaus,—was ever any Duke a Cornuto,
Begone hence.
What religion wilt thou be of next?
Out with him.
With most servile patience, time will come,
When wonder of thy error will strike dumb,
Thy basalt sense, slaves I favour, I marry shall he rise,
Good God how subtle Hell doth flatter vice,
Mount him aloft, and makes him seem to fly,
As foul the Tortoise mocked: who to the sky,
Th'ambitious shell fish raised, th'end of all,
Is only that from height he might dead fall.
It shall be so.
It must be so, for where great States revenge,
Tic requisite, the parts with piety
And soft respect forbears, be closely dogd,
Lay one into his breast shall sleep with him,
Feed in the same dish, run in self faction,
Who may dissever any shape of danger,
For once disgraced, discovered in offence,
It makes man blushless, and man is (all confess)
More prone to vengeance then to gratefulness.
Favours are writ in dust, but stripes we feel,
Depraved nature stamps in lasting steel.
You shall be leauged with the Duchess.
The plot is very good.
You shall both kill, and seem the course to save.
A most fine brain trick.
Of a most cunning knave.
My Lords: The heavy action we intend
Is death and shame, two of the ugliest shapes
That can confound a soul, think, think of it;
I strike but yet like him that against stone walls,
Directs his shaftes, rebounds in his own face,
My Ladies shame is mine, O God, tic mine.
Therefore I do conjure all secrecy,
Let it be as very little as may be; pray ye, as may be;
Make frightlesse entrance, salute her with soft eyes,
Stain nought with blood, only Ferneze dyes,
But not before her brows: O Gentlemen
God knows I love her, nothing else, but this
I am not well; if grief that sucks veins dry,
Riuels the skin, casts ashes in men's faces,
Be-duls the eye, vnstrengthens all the blood,
Chance to remove me to an other world,
As sure I once must dye: let him succeed:
I have no child, all that my youth begot,
Hath bin your loves, which shall inherit me,
Which as it ever shall, I doe conjure it
Mendozo may succeed, hes nobly borne;
With me of much desert.
Much.
Your silence answers I,
I thank you, come on now, ô that I might dye,
Before her shames displayed, would I were forced
To burn my fathers Tomb; vnhill his bones,
And dash them in the dirt, rather then this:
This both the living and the dead offends,
Sharpe surgery where nought but death amends.
Even here it is, three curds in three regions indiui∣duly distinct,
Most methodically according to art compose•…d, without a∣ny drink.
Without any drink.
Upon my honour, will ye sit and eat.
Good the composure the recei•…e, how first:
Tic a pretty pearl, by this pearl, (how dost with me) thus it is, seven and thirty vo•…lks of Barbary hens eggs, eighteen spoonfuls and a half of the Ioice of cock∣sparrow bon s, one ounce, three drams, •…our scruples, and one quart•… of the Syrup of Ethiopian Dates, sweetened with three quarters of a pound of pure Candid Indian 〈◊〉, strewn over with the powder of Pearl of America, Amber of Cataia, and Lamb stones of 〈◊〉.
Trust me the ingredients are very Cordial, and no question go•…d, and most powerful in operation.
I know not what you mean by restauracion, but this it doth, it purifieth the blood, smooths the skin, i•…∣lifeneth the eye, strengthens the veins▪ modified the teeth, comfort the stomach, fortifies the back, and quickneth the wi•…, thats all.
By my troth I have eaten but two spoonefuls, and me thinks I could discourse most swiftly, and wittily al∣ready.
Have you the art to seem honest.
I thank advise and practise.
Why then eat me a this posit, quicken your blood, and preserve your beauty, doe you know Doctor Plaster-face, by this curd he is the most exquisite in forging of veins, sprightning of eyes, dying of hair, sleeking of skins, blushing of cheeks, surpheling of breasts, blanching and bleaching of teeth, that ever made an old lady grati∣os by torch-light: by this curd law.
Well we are resolved, what God has given vs weell cherish.
Cherish any thing saving your husband, keep him not too high least he leap the pale: but for your beauty, let it be your Saint, bequeath two hours to it every morning in your closet, I ha bin young, and yet in my conscience I am not aboue five and twenty, but believe me, preserve and use your beauty, for youth and beauty once gone, we are like Beehiues without honey: out a fashion, apparel that no man will wear, therefore use me your beauty.
I but men say.
Men say, let men say what the will, life a woman, they are ignorant of our wants, the more in years the more in perfection the grow: if they loose youth and beauty, they gain wisdom and discretion: But when our beauty fades, godnight with vs, there cannot be an vglier thing to see then an old woman, from which, ô pruning, pinching, and painting, deliver all sweet beauties.
Hark musique.
Peace tic ithe Duchess bed-chamber, good rest most prosperously graced ladies.
God night sentinel.
Night dear Maquerelle.
May my posits operation send you my wit and honesty,
And me your youth and beauty, the pleasingest rest.
Strike, strike.
Save my Ferneze, ô save my Ferneze.
Follow, pershew.
O save Ferneze.
Pierce, pierce, thou shallow fool drop there,
He that attempts a Princes lawless love,
Must have broad hands, close hart with Argos eyes,
And back of Hercules, or else he dyes.
Follow, follow,
Stand off, forbear, ye most uncivil Lords.
Strike.
Do not; tempt not a man resolved;
Would you inhumane murderers more then death?
O poor Ferneze.
Alas now all defence too late.
Hoe's dead.
I am sorry for our shame, go to your bed,
Weep not too much, but leave some tears to shed
When I am dead?
What weep for thee? my soul no tears shall find.
Alas, alas, that women's souls are blind.
Betraye such beauty? murder such youth? con∣temne civility,
He loves him not that rails not at him.
Thou can not move vs, we have blood enough;
And please you Lady we have quite forgot
All your defects: if not, why then
Not.
Not: the best of rest, good night.
Despite go with thee.
Madam, you ha done me soul disgrace,
You have wronged him much, loves you too much.
Go to; your soul knows you have.
I think I have.
Do you but think so?
Nay sure I have, my eyes have witnessed thy love,
Thou hast stood too firm for me.
Why tell me fair checked Lady, who even in tears
Art powerfully beauteous, what unadvised passion
Struck ye into such a violent heate against me,
Speak, what mischief wronged vs? what devil injured vs?
Speak?
That thing ne'er worthy of the name of mā; Ferneze,
Ferneze swore thou love Emillia,
Which to advance, with most reproachful breath,
Thou both did blemish and denounce my love.
Ignoble Villain, did I for this bestride
Thy wounded limbs; for this? rank opposite
Even to my Sovereign: for this? O God for this?
Sunk all my hopes, and with my hopes my life,
Ripped bare my throat unto the hangmans Axe,
Thou most dishonoured trunk—Emillia?
By life I know her not—Emillia?
Did you believe him?
Pardon me, I did.
Did you, and thereupon you graced him?
I did.
Took him to favour, nay even clasped with him?
Alas I did.
This night?
This night.
And in your lustful twines the Duke took you?
A most sad truth.
O God, O God, how we dull honest souls,
Heavy brained men, are swallowed in the bogs
Of a deceitful ground, whilst nimble bloods,
Light iointed spirits pent, cut good men's throats,
And scope alas, I am too honest for this age,
Too full of fleam▪ and heavy steadiness:
Stood still whilst this slave cast a noose about me;
Nay then to stand in honour of him, and her,
Who had even sliced my hart.
Come I did err, and am most sorry, I did err.
Why we are both but dead, the Duke hates vs,
''And those whom Princes doe once groundly hate,
''Let them provide to dye; as sure as fate,
''Preuention is the hart of policy.
Shall we murder him.
Instantly?
Instantly, before he casts a plot,
Or further blaze my honours much known blot,
Lets murder him?
I would do much for you, will ye marry me?
Isle make thee Duke, we are of Medices,
Florence our friend, in court my faction
Not meanly strength▪ full; the Duke then dead,
We well prepared for change, the multitude
Irresolutely reeling, we in force,
Our party seconded, the kingdom mazed,
No doubt of swift success all shall be graced.
You do confirm me, we are resolute,
To morrow look for change, rest confident,
Tic now about the immodest waste of night,
The mother of moist dew with pall•…d light,
Spreds gloomy shades about the numbed earth,
Sleep, sleep, whilst we contrive our michiefes birth,
This man isle get inhum'de, farewell, to bed,
I kiss thy pillow▪ dream, the duke is dead. 
So, so, good night, how fortune dotes on impudence,
I am in private the adopted son of yon good Prince,
I must be Duke, why if I must, I must,
Most silly Lord, name me? O heaven
I see God made honest fools, to maintain crafty knaves:
The duchess is wholly mine too; must kill her husband
To quit her shame, much: then marry her: I,
O •… grow proud in prosperous treachery,
As wrestlers clip, so isle embrace•… you all,
Not to support, but to procure your fall.
God arrest thee.
At whose suite?
At the devils, ha you treacherous damnable monster,
How dost▪ how dost thou treacherous roage,
Ha ye•… rascal, I am banish the Court, Sir.
P•…other lets be acquainted, I do love thee faith.
At your service, by the Lord law, shells go to supper, Lets be once drunk together▪ and so unite a most virtue∣ously stringed•…ned friendship, shells H•…gonot, shells?
Wilt •…ll upon my chamber to morrow morn.
As a Raven to a dunghill, they say ther's one dead here p•…ickt for the pride of the flesh.
Fernez: there he is, prey thee bury him.
O most willingly, I mean to turn pure Rochell Churchman, I.
Thou Churchman, why? why?
Because isle live lazely, fail upon authority, deny Kings supremacy in things indifferent, and bee a Pope in mine own parish.
Wherefore dost thou think Churches were made?
To scour Plough shar•… 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 plough up Altars:
Strange.
Nay monstrous, I ha seen a sumptuous steeple tur∣ned to a stinking privy: more beastly, the secretest place made a Dogs kenill: nay most inhumane, the stoned cof∣fins of long dead Christians burst up, and made Hogs∣troughs.
Shall I ha some sack, and cheese at thy chamber, Good night, good mischievous incarnate devil, godnight Mendozo, ha, ye Inhumain villain godnight, night fub:
God night: to morrow morn.
I, I will come friendly Damnation, I will come, I doe descry crosse-poynts, honesty, and court-ship, straddle as far a sunder, as a true Frenchmans legs.
O!
Proclamations, more proclamations.
O a Surgeon.
Hark lust cries for a surgeon, what news from Limb How does the grand cuckold Lucifer.
O help, help, conceal &amp; save me.
Thy shame more then thy wounds do grieve me far,
''Thy wounds but leave upon thy flesh some scar:
''But fame near heales still ranckl's worse and worse,
''Such is of uncontrolled Lust the curse.
''Thinke what it is in lawless sheets to lye,
''But ô Ferneze what in lust to die:
''Then thou that shame respects ô fly converse,
''With women's eyes and lisping wantonness:
''Stick candells against a virgin walls white back,
''If they not burn, yet at the least theile black,
Come Isle convey thee to a private port,
Where thou shalt live (O happy man) from court.
The beauty of the day begins to rise,
From whose bright form Nights heavy shadow flies.
Now gins 〈◊〉 plots to work, the Scene grows full,
And craves 〈◊〉 eyes who hath a solid Skull.
Tic grown to youth of day, how shall we wast this light?
My hart's more heavy then a tyrants crown.
Shall we go hunt? Prepare for field.
Would ye could be merry.
Would God I could: Mendoza bid am hast. 
I would fine shift place, O vain relief.
''Sad souls may well change place, but not change grief:
As Dear being struck fly thorough many soils,
Yet still the shaft stick fast, so, A good old simile my honest Lord,
I am not much unlike to some sickman,
That long desired hurtful drink; at last
Swilles in and drinks his last, ending at once
Both life and thirst: O would I ne'er had known
My own dishonour: good God, that men should
Desire to search out that, which being found kills all
Their joy of life: to taste the tree of Knowledge,
And then be driven from out Paradise.
Can give me some comfort?
My Lord, I have some books which have been dedicated to my honour, and I near read am, and yet they had very fine names: Physic for Fortune: Lozenges of sancti∣fied sincerity; very pretty works of Curats, Scriveners and Schoolemaisters. Mary I remember one Seneca, Lucius A∣nous Seneca.
Out upon him, he writ of Temperance and Forti∣tude, yet lived like a voluptuous Epicure, and died like an effeminate coward. Hast thee to Florence: here take our Letters, see um sealed, away: report in private to the ho∣nourd duke his daughters forced disgrace, tell him at length we know too much, due complaints advance.
Theres nought thats safe and sweet but Ignorance.
I cannot sleep my eyes ill neighbouring lids
Will hold no fellowship: O thou pale sober night,
Thou that in sluggish fumes all sense dost steep:
Thou that gives all the world full leave to play,
Vnbendst the feebled veins of sweaty labour;
The Gally-slaue, that all the toilsome day,
Tugs at his oar against the stubborn wave,
Straining his rugged veins; snores fast:
The stooping S•…heman that doth barb the field,
Thou▪ makst wink sure: in night all creatures sleep,
Only the Malecontent, that against his fate,
Ripens and quarrels, alas hes goodman tell-clock,
His sallow •…aw-bones sink with wasting moan,
Whilst other•… beds are down, his pillows stone.
Mal uole.
Elder of Israel, thou honest defect of wicked na∣ture and obstinate ignorance, when did thy wife let thee lie with her?
I am going Ambassador to Florence.
Ambassador, now for thy countries honour, prithee doe not put up Mutton and Porridge i'thy clock bag: thy young lady wife goes to Florence with thee too do's she not?
No, I leave her at the Palace.
At the Palace? now discretion shield man, for Gods love lets ha no more cuckolds, Hymen begins to put of his Saffron robe, keep thy wife in the state of grace, hart a truth, I would sooner leave my lady singled in a Bordello, then in the Genoa palace, sin there appearing in her sluttish shape Would soon grow loath some, even to blushes sense,
Surfeit would cloak intemperare appetite,
Make the soul sent the rotten breath of lust.
When in an Italian lascivious Palace, a Lady gardianlesse.
Left to the push of all allurement,
The strongest incitements to immodesty,
To have her bound, incensed with wanton sweets,
Her veins filled hie with heating delicates,
Soft rest, sweet Music, amorous Masquerers, lascivious banquets, sin it self gilt ore, strong fantasy tricking up strange delights, presenting it dressed pleasingly to sense, sense leading it unto the soul, confirmed with potent ex∣ample, impudent custom enticed by that great bawd op∣portunitie, thus being prepared, clap to her easy ear, youth in good clothes, well shaped, rich, fair spoken, promi∣sing noble, ardent bloud-full, witty, flattering, Vlisses absent, O Ith•… can chastest Penelope hold out.
Mass isle think on it farewell.
Farewell, take thy wife with the, farewell,
To Florence, um? it may prove good, it may,
And we may once unmask our brows.
My honoured Lord.
Celso peace, how first? speak lo, pale fears suspect that hedges, walls &amp; trees have ears, speak how runs all?
I faith my Lord, that beast with many heads,
The staggering multitude recoils apace,
Though thorough great men's envy, most men's malice,
Their much intemperate heate hath banished you.
Yet now they faind envy and malice near,
Produce faint reformation.
The Duke, the too soft Duke lies as a block,
For which two tugging factions seem to saw,
But still the Iron through the ribs they draw.
I tell thee Celzo, I have ever found
Thy breast most far from shifting cowardice
And fearful baseness: therefore isle tell thee Celzo,
I find the wind begins to come above•…,
Isle shift my suit of fortune, I know the Florentine whose on∣lie force,
By marrying his proud daughter to this Prince,
Both banished me, and made this weak Lord Duke,
Will now forsake them all, besure he will:
Isle lye in ambush for convenience,
Upon their severance to confirm my self.
Is Ferneze interred?
Of that at leisure: he lives.
But how stands Mendoza, how first with him?
Faith like a pair of Snuffers, s•…ibbes filth in other men, and retains it in himself.
He do's fly frō public notice me thinks, as a Hair do's from hounds, the feet whereon he flies betrays him.
I can track him Celzo:
O my disguise fools him most powerfully:
For that I seem a desperate malecontent
He fine would clasp with me: he is the true slave,
That will put on the most affected grace, 
For some wild second cause.
Hes here.
Give place.
Illo, ho ho ho, art there old true penny,
Where hast thou spent thy self this morning? I see flattery in thine eyes, &amp; damnation i'thy soul. Ha ye huge Rascal.
Thou art very merry.
As a scholar futuens gratis: How doz the devil go with thee now.
Maleuole, thou art an arrant knave.
Who I? I have been a Sergeant man.
Thou art very poor.
As Iob, an Alcumist, or a Poet.
The Duke hates thee.
As Irishmen do bum-cracks.
Thou hast lost his amity.
As pleasing as Maids loose their virginity.
Would thou were of a lusty spirit, would thou were noble.
Why sure my blood gives me I am noble, sure I am of noble kind, for I find my self possessed with all their qualities: love Dogs, Dice and Drabs▪ scorn wit in stuff clothes, have beat my Shoemaker, knocked my Sempstres, cuckold my Apothecary, and undone my Taylor.
Noble, why not? since the Stoic said; Neminem ser•…m non
ex regibus, neminem regime non ex seruis esse oriundum, only bu∣sie fortune towses, and the provident chances blends them together; Isle give you a simile: did you ere see a Well with 2. buckets, whilst one comes up full to be emptied, another goes down empty to be filled; such is the state of all hue∣manitie: why look you, I may be the son of some Duke, for believe me intemperate lascivious bastardy makes no∣bility doubtful, I have a lusty daring hart Mendoza.
Lets grasp? I doe like thee infinitely, wilt enact one thing for me?
Shall I get by it?
Command me, I am thy slave, beyond death and hell.
Murder the Duke?
My harts wish, my souls desire, my fantasies dream, My bloods longing, the only height of my hopes, how? O God how? O how my united spirits throng together, So strengthen my resolve.
The Duke is now a hunting.
Excellent, admirable, as the devil would have it, lend me, lend me, Rapier Pistol, Crosebow: so, so, isle do it.
Then we agree.
As Lent and Fishmongers, come a cape ape, how in form?
Know that this weak brained duke, who only stands on Florence stilts, hath out of witless zeal made me his heir, and secretly confirmed the wreathe to me after his lifes full point.
Upon what merit?
Merit? by heaven I horn him, only Fernezies death gave me states life: tut we are politic, he must not live now.
No reason marry: but how must he dye now.
My utmost project is to murder the Duke, that I might have his state, because he makes me his heir: to ba∣nish the Duchess, that I might be rid of a cūning Lacedemo∣neon, because I know Florence will forsake her, &amp; then to ma∣rye Maria the banished duke Altofronts wife, that her friends might strengthen me and my faction, this is all law.
Doe you love Maria.
Faith no great affection, but as wise men do love great women to in•…oble their blood and augment their re∣uenew: to accomplish this now, thus now. The Duke is in the forest next the Sea, single him▪ kill him, hurl him in the maine, and proclaim thou saw Wolves eat him.
Um, not so good, me thinks when he is slain to get some Ipocrite, some dangerous wretch thats muffled, or with feigned holiness to swear he hard the Duke on some steep cliff lament his wives dishonour, and in an agony of his hearts torture hurled his groaning sides into the swollen sea, this circumstance well made, sounds probable, and hereupon the Duchess.
May well be banished: ô vnpeerable invention, rare, Thou God of policy! it hunnies me.
Then fear not for the wife of Altofront, isle close to her.
Thou shalt, thou shalt, our excellence is pleased: why were not thou an Emperor, when wee are Duke isle make thee some great man sure?
Nay make me some rich knave, and Isle make my self some great man.
In thee be all my spirit, retain ten souls, unite thy virtual powers, resolve, ha, remember greatness, hart farewell.
The fate of all my hopes in thee doth dwell.
Celzo did hear? ô heaven did hear?
Such devilish mischief, suffer thou the world
Carouse damnation even with greedy swallow,
And still dost wink, still duz thy vengeance slumber,
If now thy brows are clear; when will they thunder.
The Dogs are at a fault.
Would God nothing but the dogs were at it? let the Dear pursue safely, the Dogs follow the game, and do
you follow the dogs, as for me, tic unfit one beast should hunt another; I ha one chase me: and please you I would be rid of ye a little.
Would your grief would as soon as wee, leave you to quietness.
I thank you: Boy; what dost thou dream of now?
Of a dry summer my Lord for heir's a h•…e world towards: but my Lord I had a strange dream last •…ight.
What strange dream?
Why me thought I pleased you with singing, and then I dreamt you gave me that short sword.
Prettily begged: hold thee, isle prove thy dream true, tak't.
My duty: But steel I dreamt on my Lord, and me thought and shall please your excellence, you would needs out of your royal bounty give me that jewel in your Hat.
O thou did but dream boy, doe not believe it, dreams prove not always true, they may hold in a short sword, but not in a Jewel. But now sir you dream•… you had pleased me with singing, make that true as I ha made the other.
Faith my Lord I did but dream, and dreams you say prove not always true: they may hold in a good sword, but not in a good song: the truth is, I ha lost my voice.
Lost thy voice, how?
With dreaming faith but here's a couple of Sire∣nicall rascal•… shall enchant ye: What shall they singe my good Lord?
Sing of the nature of women, and then the song shall be su•…ely full of variety, old crochets and most sweet closes; it shall be humorous, grave, fantastic, amorous, me∣lancholy, sprightly, one in all, and all in one.
All in on?
Bear Lady too many sing, my speech grows culpa∣ble of unthrifty idleness, sing.
A, so. so, sing, I am heavy, walk of, I shall talk in my sleep walk of.
Brief, brief, who? the Duke? good heaven that fools should stumble upon greatness? do not sleep duke, give ye good morrow: must be brief Duke. I am feed to murder thee, start not; Mendozo, Mendozo hired me, h•…r's his gold, his Pistol, Crossbow, Sword, tic all as firm as earth: O fool, fool, choked with the common maze of easy Idiots, credulity make him thine heir, what thy sworn murderer?
O can it be?
Can?
Discovered he not Ferneze?
Yes, but why? but why? for love to thee, much, much, to be revenged upon his rival, who had thrust his jaws awry, who being slain supposed by thine own hands; defended by his sword, made thee most loathsome, him most gracious, with thy loose Princes, thou closely yielding egress and regress to his, made him heir, whose hot unquiet lust straight towzd thy sheets, and now would seize thy state, politician, wise man, death to be led to the stake, like a Bull by the horns to make even kindness cut a gentle throat, life, why art thou numbed: Thou fog∣gie dullness speak? lives not more faith in a home thrust∣ing tongue, then in these fencing tip tap Courtiers.
Lord Maleuole, if this be true
If? come shade thee with this disguise, if? thou shalt handle it, he shall thank thee for killing thy self, come follow my directions, and thou shalt see strange sleights.
World whether wilt thou?
Why to the Devil: come, the morn grows late.
A steady quickness is the soul of state.
Medam, Medam, are you stirring Medame, if you be stirring Medam, if I thought I should disturb ye.
My Lady is up forsooth.
A, pretty boy, faith how old art thou?
I think fourteen.
Nay, and ye be in the teens, are ye a gentleman borne, do you know me, my name is Medam Maquerelle, I lye in the old Cunny Court.
See here the Ladies.
A fair day to ye Maquerelle.
Is the Duchess up yet Sentinel?
O Ladies, the most abominable mischance, O dear Ladies the most piteous disaster, Farneze was taken last night in the Duchess Chamber: Alas the Duke caught him and kilt him.
Was he found in bed?
O no, but the villainous certenty is, the door was not bolted, the tongue-tied hatch held his peace, so the naked troth is, he was found in his shirt, whilst I like an arrand beast lay in the outward Chamber, heard nothing, and yet they came by me in the dark, and yet I felt thē not, like a senseless creature as I was. O beauties, look to your buske-poynts, if not chastely, yet charily: be sure the door be bolted: is your Lord gone to Florence?
Yes Maquarelle.
I hope you'll find the discretion to purchase a fresh gown fore his return: Now by my troth beauties,
I would ha ye once wise: he loves ye, pish: he is witty, bub∣ble: fair proportioned, mew: nobly borne, wind; let this be still your fixed position, esteem me every man according to his good gifts, and so ye shall ever remain most dear, and most worthy to be most dear Ladies.
Is the Duke returned from hunting yet?
They say, not yet.
Tic now in midst of day.
How bears the Duchess with this blemish now?
Faith boldly, strongly defies defame, as one that haz a Duke to her father. And theres a note to you, be sure of a stout friend in a corner, that may always awe your husband. Mark the hauiour of the Duchess now, she dares defame, cries, Duke do what thou can, isle quite mine honour: nay, as one confirmed in her own virtue a∣against ten thousand mouths that mutter her disgrace, shees presently for dances.
For dances?
Most true.
Most strange, see, hears my servant young Fer∣rard: How many servants think thou I have, Maqua∣relle?
The more the merrier: it was well said, use your servants as you doe your smocks, have many, use one, and change often, for that's most sweet and courtlike.
Save y•…e fair Ladies, is the Duke returned?
Sweet Sir, no voice of him as yet in Court.
Tic very strange.
And how like you my servant, Maquarelle?
I think hee could hardly draw Ulisses bow, but by my fidelity, were his nose narrower, his eyes broa∣der, his hands thinner, his lips thicker, his legs big∣ger, his feet lesser, his hair blacker, and his teeth whiter, hee were a tolerable sweet youth in faith. And hee will come to my Chamber, I will read him the fortune of his beard.
Not yet returned I fear, but
The Duchess approaches.
We will dance, musique, we will dance.
Lesquanto (Lady) pence bien, passa regis, or Benches brawl.
We have forgot the brawl.
So soon? tic wonder.
Why tic but two singles on the left, two on the right, three double forward, a traverse of six round: do this twice, three singles side, galliard trick of twenty, curranto pace; a figure of eight, three singles broken down, come up, meet two doubles, fall back, and then honour.
O Dedalus! thy maze, I have quite forgot it.
Trust me so have I, saving the falling back, and then honour.
Music, music.
Who saw the duke? the duke.
Music.
The duke, is the duke returned?
Music:
The duke is either quite invisible, or else is not.
We are not pleased with your intrusion upon our private retirement: we are not pleased: you have for∣got your selves.
Boy, thy Moister, whore's the Duke?
Alas, I left him burying the earth with his spread ioylesse limbs: he told me he was heavy, would sleep, bade
me walk off, for that the strength of fantasy oft made him talking in his dreams: I strait obeide, nor never saw him since: but, where so ere he is, hoe's sad.
Music sound high, as is our heart, sound high.
The Duke, peace, the Duke is dead.
Music.
First Music?
Give proof.
How?
Where.
When?
Rest in peace, as the Duke duz, quietly sit: for my own part, I beheld him but dead, thats all: marry heers one can give you a more particular account of him.
Speak holy father, nor let any brow within this presence fright thee from the truth: speak confidently and freely.
We attend.
Now had the mounting Suns all-ripening wings
Swept the cold sweat of night from earths dank breast,
When I (whom men call Hermit of the Rock)
Forsook my Ceil, and clamberd up a cliff,
Against whose base, the heady Neptune dashed
His high curled brows, there t'was I eased my limbs,
When lo, my entrails melted with the moan,
Some one, who far above me was climbed, did make:
I shall offend.
Not.
On.
Me thinks I hear him yet, O female faith!
Coo sow the ungrateful sand, and love a woman:
And do I live to be the scoff of men,
To be their withal cuckold, even to hug my poison?
Thou know ô Truth!
Sooner hard steel will melt with Southern wind;
A Seamans whistle calm the Ocean;
A town on fire be extinct with tears,
Then women vowed to blushless impudence,
With sweet behaviour and soft minioning,
Will turn from that where appetite is fixed.
O powerful blood! how thou dost slave their soul?
I washed an Ethiop, who for recompense
Sullied my name. And must I then be for'cd.
To walk, to live thus black: must, must, fie,
He that can bear with must, he cannot die.
With that he sighed so passionately deep,
That the dull ayre even groaned, at last he cries:
Sink shame in seas, sink deep enough, so dies.
For then I viewed his body fall and sows
Into the fomy maine, O then I saw
That which me thinks I see, it was the Duke,
Whom straight the nicer stomached sea
Belched up: but then,
Then came I in, but las all was too late,
For even straight he sunk.
Such was the Dukes sad fate.
A better fortune to our Duke Mendozo.
Cry all, Mendozo: Cornets flourish.
A guard, a guard, we full of hearty tears,
For our good fathers loss,
For so we well may call him:
Who did beseech your loves, for our succession,
Cannot so lightly ouer-iumpe his death.
As leave his woes reuenglesse:  woman of shame,
We banish thee for ever to the place,
From whence this good man comes,
Nor permit on death unto the body any ornament:
But base as was thy life, depart away.
Ungrateful.
Away.
Villain hear me.
Be gone my Lords, address to public counsel,
Tic most fit,
The train of Fortune is borne up by wit.
Away, our presence shall be sudden, haste.
Now you egregious devil, ha ye murdering po∣lititian, how dost duke? how dost look now? brave duke in faith.
How did you kill him?
Slatted his brains out, then soused him in the bri∣no sea.
Brained him and drowned him too?
O it was best, sure work:
For he that strikes a great man, let him strike home, or else ware, heel prove no man: shoulder not a huge fellow, unless you may be sure to lay him in the kennel.
A most sound brain pan,
Isle make you both Emperors
Make vs christians, make vs christians.
Isle hoist ye, ye shall mount.
To the gallows, say ye? O ô me, Pra•…ium incer∣tum petit certum scelus. How stands the Progress?
Here, take my ring unto the Citadel,
Have entrance to Maria the grave Duchess
Of banished Altofront. Tell her wee love her:
Omit no circumstance to grace our Person (do it)
Iste make an excellent pander: Duke farewell, due adieu Duke.
Take Maquerelle with thee; for it is found,
None cuts a Diamon but a Diamond.
Hermit, thou art a man for me, my Confessor,
O thou selected spirit, borne for my good,
Sure thou would make an excellent elder in a deformed
church:
Come, we must be inward, thou and I all one.
I am glad I was ordained for ye.
Go to then, thou must know that Malenole is a strange villain: dangerous, very dangerous, you see howe broad a speaks, a grose-jawde rogue, I would have thee poison him: hes like a korne upon my great •…o, I cannot go for him: hee must be kored out: he must, wilt do it, h•…?
Anything, any thing.
Heart of my life, thus then to the Citadel,
Thou shalt consort with this Maleuole,
There being at supper, poison him,
It shall be laid upon Maria, who yields love, or dies,
Skud quick.
Like lightning good deeds crawl, but mischief flies.
Your diuelships ring haze no virtue, the buff∣captain, the sallo-westfalian gamon-faced zaza cries stand out, must have a stiffer wareant, or no pass into the castle of Comfort.
Command our sudden Letter: not enter? sha•…, what place is there in Genoa, but thou shalt into my heart, into my very heart: come, lets love, we must love, we two, soul and body.
How did like the Hermit? A strange Her∣mite sirrah.
A dangerous fellow, very perilous: he must die.
I, he must die.
Thoust kill him: we are wise, we must be wise.
And provident.
Yea provident; beware an hypocrite.
A Church man once corrupted, oh avoid▪
A fellow that makes Religion his stawking horse,
He breeds a plague: thou shalt poison him.
Ho, tic wondrous necessary: how?
You both go jointly to the Citadel,
There sup, there poison him: and Maria,
Because she is our opposite, shall bear
The sad suspect, on which she dies, or loves vs.
I run.
We that are great, our sole self good still moves vs:
They shall die both, for their deserts craves more
Than we can recompense, their presence still
Imbraides our fortunes with beholdingness,
Which we abhor, like deed, not door: then conclude,
They live not to cry out Ingratitude.
One stick burns tother, steel cuts steel alone:
Tic good trust few: but O, tic best trust none.
How doe you? how dost Duke?
O let the last day fall, drop, drop in our cursed heads!
Let heaven vnclasp itself, vomit forth flames:
O doe not rave, do not turn Player, theres more of them, than can well live one by an other already. What, art an Infidel still?
I am mazed, struck in a swoon with wonder, I am commanded to poison thee.
I am commanded to poison thee, at supper.
At supper?
In the Citadel.
In the Citadel.
Cross capers, tricks? truth a heaven would dis∣charge vs as boys do elder guns, one pellet to strike out another: of what faith art now?
Al is damnation, wickedness extreme, there is no faith in man.
In none but usurers and brokers, they deceive no man, men take um for blood-suckers, and so they are: now God deliver me from my friends.
Thy friends?
Yes, from my friends, for from mine enemies Isle deliver my self. O, cut-thr•…ate friendship is the renc∣kissed villainy, mark this Mendozo, mark him for a villain: but heaven will send a plague upon him for a rogue.
O world!
World? Tic the only region of Death, the gre∣test shop of the Devil, the cruellest prison of men, out of the which none pass without paying their dearest breath for a fee, theres nothing perfect in it, but extreme extreme ca∣lamitie, such as comes yonder.
To banishment, led on to banishment▪
Lady, the blessedness of repentance to you.
Why, why, I can desire nothing but death, nor de∣serve any thing but hell.
If heaven should give sufficiency of grace
To dear my soul, it would make heaven graceless:
My sins would make the stock of mercy poor,
Oh they would try heavens goodness to •…eclaime them:
Judgment is just yet from that vast villain:
But sure he shall not miss sad punishment,
For he shall rule on to my Cell of shame.
My Cell tic Lady, where instead of Masks,
Musique, Tilts, Turns, and such Courtlike shows,
The hollow murmur of the checklesse winds
Shall groan again, whilst the unquiet sea
Shakes the whole rock with foamy battery:
There Vsherlesse the ayre comes in and out,
The reumy vault will force your eyes to weep,
Whilst you behold true desolation:
A rocky barrenness shall pain your eyes,
Where all at once one reaches, where he stands,
With brows the roof, both walls with both his hands.
It is to good, blessed spirit of my Lord:
O in what or before thy soul is throand,
Behold me worthily most miserable:
O let the anguish of my contrite spirit,
Entreat some reconciliation:
If not, O joy! triumph in my just grief,
Death is the end of woes, and tears relief.
Belike your Lord not loved you, was unkind.
O heaven,
As the soul loved the body, so loved hee,
It was death to him to part my presence,
Heaven to see me pleased:
Yet I like to a wretch given ore to hell,
Brake all the sacred rites of marriage,
To clip a base ungentle faithless villain:
O God, a very Pagan reprobate!
What should I say, ungrateful throws me out,
For whom I lost soul, body, fame, and honour:
But tic most fit: why should a better fate
Attend on any, who forsake chaste sheets,
Fly the embrace of a devoted hart,
Joined by a solemn vow sore God and man,
To taste the brackish blood of beastly lust
In an adulterous touch? Oh ravenous immodesty,
Insatiate impudence of appetite:
Look, heere'•… your end, for mark what sap in dust,
What sin in good, even so much love in lust:
Joy to thy ghost, sweet Lord, pardon to me.
It is the Dukes pleasure this night you rest in court.
Soul lurk in shades, run shame from brightsome skies,
In night, the blind man misses not his eyes.
Do not weep kind cuckold, take comfort man, thy betters have been Bassos: Agamemnon Emperor of all the merry Greeks; that tickled all the true Troyans, was a
Cornuto: Prince Arthur that cut off twelve Kings beards was a Cornuto: Hercules, whose back, bore up heaven, and got forty wenches with child in one night.
Nay it was fifty.
Faith fortie's enough a conscience, yet was a Cor∣nuto: patience, mischief grows proud, be wise.
Thou pinchest too deep, art too keen upon me.
Tut, a pitiful surgeon makes a dangerous sore. Isle tent thee to the ground. Think Isle sustain my self by •…ttering thee, because thou art a Prince? I had rather follow a drunkard, and live by licking up his vomit, than by servile flattery.
Yet great men ha don't.
Great slaves fear better than love, borne natu∣rally for a coale-basket, though the common ysher of prin∣ces presence fortune ha blindly given them better place, I am vowed to be thy affliction.
Prithee be, I love much misery, and be thou son to me.
Because you are an usurping Duke,
Your Lordship's well returned for Florence.
Well returned, I praise my horse.
What news from the Florentines?
I will conceal the great Dukes pleasure, only this was his charge, his pleasure is, that his daughter die, Duke Pietro be banished for banishing his bloods dishonour, and that Duke Altofront be reaccepted: this is all, but I hear Duke Pietro is dead.
I, and Mendozo is Duke, what will you doe?
Is Mendozo strongest?
Yet he is.
Then yet Isle hold with him.
But if that Altofront should turn strait again?
Why then I would turn strait again:
Tic good run still with him that haz most might:
I had rather stand with wrong, then fall with right▪
Your Lordship sweats, your young Lady will get you a cloth for your old worships brows,
hears a fellow to be damned, this is his muiolable Maxim•…. (flatter the greatest, and oppress the least:) a whoreson flesh fly, that still gnaws upon the lean gauld backs.
Why dust then salute him?
Faith as ba•…des go to Church, for fashion sake: come, be not confounded, you are but in danger to 〈◊〉 a Dukedom, think this: this earth is the only grave a•… •…whole∣god wherein all things that live must rot: tic but the draught wherein the heavenly bodies discharge their cor∣ruption, the very muckhill on which the sublunary orbs cast their excrements: man is the slime of this dongue-pit, and Princes are the governors of these men: for, for our souls, they are as free as Emperors, all of one piece, there goes but a pair of shears betwixt an Emperor and the son of a bagpiper: only the dying, dressing, pressing, gloss∣sing makes the difference: now what art thou like to lose?
A jailers office to keep men in bonds,
Whilst toil and treason, all lifes good confounds.
I here renounce for ever Regency,
O Altofront, I wrong thee to supplant thy right:
To trip thy heals up with a devilish slight.
For which I now from Throne am thrown, world tricks abjure,
For vengeance that comes s•…ow, yet it comes sure.
O I am changed, for heerefore the dread power▪
In true contrition I doe dedicate,
My breath to solitary holiness,
My lips to prayer, and my breasts •…are shall be,
Restoring Altofront to regency.
Thy vows are heard, and we accept thy faith.
Altofront, Ferneze, Celso, Pietr•….
Banish amazement: come, we four must stand full shock of Fortune, be not so w•…nder st•….
Doth Ferneze live?
For your pardon.
Pardon and love, give leave to recollect
My thoughts dispersed in wilde astonishment:
My vows stand fixed in heaven, and from hence
I crave all love and pardon.
Who doubts of providence,
T•… 〈◊〉 this change, a hearty faith to all:
H•… 〈◊〉 •…used rise, who can no lower fall,
〈…〉 petuous Vicissitude
Loses the world, then let no maze intrude
Upon your spirits: wonder not I rise,
For who can sink that close can temporise?
The time grows ripe for action, Isle detect
My priuatst plot, •…est ignorance fear suspect:
Lets close to counsel, leave the rest to fate,
Mature discretion is the life of state.
The Dutchman for a drunkard,
The Dane for golden lockes:
The Irishman for vsquebath,
The Frenchman for the ( )
O thou art a blessed creature, had I a modest wo∣man to conceal, I would put her to thy custody, for no reasonable creature would ever suspect her to be in thy company: ha, thou art a melodious Maquarelle, thou picture of a woman and substance of a beast, and how dost thou think a this transformation of state now?
Very very well, for we women always note, the falling of the one, is the rising of the other: some must be fat, some must be lean, some must be fools, and some must be Lords: some must be knaves, and some must bee
officers, some must be beggars, some must be Knee•…▪ some must be cock olds, and some must be citizens: as for example, I have two court dogs, most fawning cures▪ •…he one called Watch, tother Ca•…h: now I, like Lady Fortune, sometimes love this dog▪ sometimes rouse that dog, sometimes favour Watch, most commonly fancy Catch: Now that dog which I favour I feed▪ and h•…es so ravenous, that what I give he never chawes it, gulps it dow•… 〈◊〉 without any relish of what he haz, but with a 〈◊〉 •…∣pectation of what he shall have: the other dog▪ 〈◊〉
No more dog, soot Maquarelle no more dog•… and what hope hast thou of the Duchess Maria, will she stoop to the Dukes luer, will she come, think?
Let me see wheres •…he sign now? ha ye e•…e a cal∣lender, wheres the sign trow•… you?
Sign? why, is there any moment in that?
O believe me a most secret power, look ye a Caldean, or an Assyrian, I am sure t'was a most sweet Jew •…old me, court any woman in the right sign, you shall not miss, but you must take he•… in the right vein then: As when the sign is in Pisces, a fishmo•…gers wife is very so∣tiable: in Cancer, a pr•…cisians wife is very flexible: in Ca∣pricorne, a Merchants wife hardly holds out: in Libra, a Lawyers wife is very tractable, especially, if her husband be at the term: only, in Scorpio •…s ve•…ie dangerous meddling, haz the Duke sent any jewel, any rich stones?
I, I think those are the best signs, to take a Lady in: by your favour signeur: I must discourse with the Lady Maria, Altofronts Duchess: I must enter for the Duke.
She here shall guy you interview, I received the guardshippe of this Ci•…adell from the good Al•…front, and for his use Isle keep't, till I am of •…o use.
Will•… thou, O heaven that a christian should be found in a buffeierkin, Captain conscience? I love thee
Capt•…e.  wee attend, and what hope hast thou of this Duchess 〈◊〉?
Twill go hard, she was a could creature ever, she hated munkies, fools, jesters, and gentlemen ushers extremely: she had the wild trick on it, not only to bee truly modestly honourable in her own consci∣enc•… 〈◊〉 she would avoid the least wanton carri∣a•… 〈◊〉 might incur suspect, as God bless me, she 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 brought bed pressing out of fashion: I could •…arce get a fine, for the lease of a Ladies favour once in a fortnight.
Now in the name of immodesty, how many my∣den-heads hast thou brought to the block?
Let me see: heaven forgive vs our misdeeds, hears the Duchess.
God bless thee Lady,
out of thy company:
We have brought thee tender of a husband,
I hope I have one already.
Nay, by mine honour madam, as good hee ne'er a husband, as a banished husband, hes in an other world now, Isle tell y•… Lady, I have heard of a sect that maintained, when the husband was asleep, the wife might lawfully entertain another man: for then her husband was as dead, much more when he is banished.
Dishonest creature:
Pish, honesty is but an art to seem so: pray ye whats honesty? whats constancy? but fables fained, odd old fools chat devised by jealous fools, to wrong our liberty.
Mully, he that loves thee is a Duke, Mendozo, he will maintain thee royally, love the ardently, defend thee powerfully, marry thee sumptuously, and keep thee in
despite of Rosciclere, or Donzell dell Phebe•… theres •…wels, if thou wilt, so, if not, so.
Captain, for Gods love save poor wretchedness,
From tyranny of lustful insolence:
Enforce me in the deepest dungeon dwell
Rather then here, here round about is hell.
O my dearest Altofront where ere thou breath,
Let my soul sink into the shades beneath:
Before I stain thine honour, tic thou hast,
And long as I can die▪ I will live chaste.
Against him that can enforce how vain is strife?
She that can be enforced haz ne'er a knife.
She that through force her limbs with lust enrols,
Wants Cleopatraes aspes and Portiaes coals.
God amend you.
Now the fear of the Devil for ever go with thee. Maquerelle, I tell thee I have found an honest woman, faith I perceive when all is done, there is of women as of all o∣there things: some good, most bad, some saints, some sin∣ners: for as now adays no Courtier but haz his mistress, no Captain but haz his cockatrice, no Cuckold but haz his horns, and no fool but haz his f•…there: even so no woman but haz her weakness and feather too, no sex but haz his: I can hunt the letter no further: O God how loathsome this toying is to me, that a Duke should be for•…d to fool it: well, Stultorūplena sunt omnia, better play the fool Lord, then be the fool Lord: now, wheres your slights Madam Maquarelle?
Why, are ye ignorant that tic sed, a squeamish affected niceness is natural to women, and that the excuse of their yielding, is only forsooth the difficult obtaining, you must put her too•…, women are flax, and will fire in a moment.
Why was the flax put into thy mouth, and yet thou? thou set fire? thou inflame her.
Mary, but Isle tell ye now, you were too ho•…▪
The fitter to have 〈◊〉 the flaxwoman.
You were too boisterous 〈◊〉▪ for indeed.
〈◊〉, thou art a weak pandres, now I se•….
•…ner earths fire heaven it self shall waste,
Then all with he•… c•…n mel•… a mind that's chaste.
Go thou the Dukes lime-twigge, Isle make the Duke turn thee out of thine office, what not get one touch of hope, and 〈◊〉 at such advantage.
Now a my con•…, now I think in my descry∣•… 〈◊〉 did not take her 〈◊〉 •…e •…light sign, the blood was not in the true vein, sure.
On on, leave vs, leave vs 〈◊〉 where is the hermit▪
With Duke Pietro, with 〈◊〉 Pietro.
Is he dead? is he poisoned▪
Dead as the Duke is.
Good, excellent, he will not 〈◊〉▪ se•…renes lives in secrecy▪ cōme leather▪ come leather.
Thou hast a certain strong villa•… sent about thee, my nature cannot endue•…e.
Sent man? what returns Maria? what answer to our suit?
Cold▪ frosty, she is obstinate.
Then shees but dead •…is resolute, she dies:
Black deed only through black deeds safely flies▪
Pew, per sc•…ra semper sceleribus tutum est •…la.
What are•… a scholar? art a politician? sure thou a•…te an arrand knave.
Wh•… I? I h•… been 〈◊〉 an under sheriff, man.
Can •…thou impoys•…▪ can thou empoison?
Excellently▪ no Jew▪ Apothecary, or 〈◊〉 better: look ye, here's a box, whom would thou impoison, here's a box, which opened, and the 〈◊〉 •…no up in condites, tho∣row which the brain purge•… it self, doth instantly for 12. hours space, bind up al show of life in a deep senseless sleep:
here is another, which being opened under the sleeper•… nose, ch•…oks all the pores of life, 〈◊〉 him suddenly.
Isle try experiments, tic good not to be decoued▪ 〈◊〉 so, Catzo:
Who would fear that ma destroy, death hath no teeth, nor t•…ng,
And he thats great▪ to him one slaves sham•…,
Murder, fame and wrong▪ Celzo•…
My honoured Lord.
The good Maleuole, that plain-tongued 〈◊〉, is dead on sudden wondrou•… strangely, he held in o•…r e∣steam good place,
Celso, see him buried, see him buried.
I shall observe y•…e.
And Celso, 〈◊〉 let it be thy care to night
To have some pretty show▪ •…o solemnise
Our high instalment, some music, mockery:
Weal give f•…re ent•…taine unto Maria
The Duchess to the banished Altofront:
Thou shalt conduct her from the Citadel
Unto the Palace, think on some mockery.
Of what shape, sweet Lord,
Why shape? why any quick done fiction,
As some brave•… spirits of the Gen•… Dukes,
To come out of Elizium forsooth,
Led in by Mercury to gratulate
Our happy fortune, some such any thing, some far •…et trick, good for Ladies, some stale toy or other, no matter so't be of our devising.
Do thou prepar't, tic but for fashion sake,
Fear not, it shall be graced man, it shall take.
All service.
All thanks, our hand shall not be •…lose to thee: farewell
Now is my treachery secure, nor can we fall:
Mischief that pr•…spers men do virtue call,
Isle trust no man, he that by tricks▪go•…s wreathes,
Keeps them with •…le, no man se•…ely breathes,
Out of 〈◊〉 ranks the Crowd will m•…tter fool:
Who cannot bear with spy•…e he cannot rule:
The chi•…st 〈◊〉 for a man of flat•…,
Is to live senseless of a strengthless hate.
Death of the damned thief, Isle make one in the mask, thou shalt ha some
Br•…ue spirits of the antique Dukes.
My Lord, what strange di•…zion?
Most happy, dear 〈◊〉, poi•… with an empty box▪ Isle give thee all anon: my Lady comes to court, there is •… •…rle of fate comes tumbling on▪ the Castles captain stands for me, the people pray for me, and the great leader of the just stands for me: then courage Celso.
For n•… disastrous chance can ever m•…e him,
That leaves nothing but a God aboue him.
Make room there, room for the ladies: why gen∣tlemen, will not ye suffer the ladies to be entr•…d in the great chamber? why gallants? and you sir, to drop your Torch where the beauties must sit too.
And theres a great fellow plays the knave, why dost not strike him?
Let him play the knave a Gods name, think thou I have no more wit then to strike a great fellow, the music, more lights, revelling, scaffolds: do you hear? let there be oaths enough ready at the door, swear out the devil himself. Lets leave the Ladies, and go see if the Lords be ready for them.
And by my troth Beauties, why do you not put you into the fashion, this is a stale cu•…▪ you must come in fa∣shion: look ye, you must be all felt, fealt and feather, a fealt upon your head: look ye, these •…ing things are justly out of request now: and doe ye hear? you must wear falling bands, you must come into the falling fashion: there is such a deal a pinning these ruffs, when the sine clean fall is worth all: and again▪ if you should chance to take a nap in the afternoon, your falling ba•… requires no potting stick to recover his form: beheue 〈◊〉, no fashion to the falling band I say.
And is not 〈◊〉 S. Andrew Iaqu•… •… gallant fellow now?
By my maiden-head la, honour and hee agrees as well together, as a satin suit and woollen stockings.
But, is not Marshall Make-roome my servant in reversion, a proper gentleman?
Yes in 〈◊〉 as he had his office, as in truth he hath all things in reversion: hee haz his Mistress in reverse∣on, his clothes in reversion, his wit in reversion, &amp; indeed•…, is a suitor to me for my dog in reversion: but in good ve∣rite la, hee is as proper a gentleman in reversion as: and indeed, as fine a man as may be, having a red beard and a pair of warped legs,
But I faith I am most monstrously in love with count Quidlibet in Quodlibet, is he not a pretty dapper windle gallant?
He is even one of the most busy •…ingerd lords, he will put the beauties to the squeak most hiddeously.
Room, make a lane there, the Duke is entering: stand handsomely for beauties sake, take up the Ladies there. So, cornets, cornets.
Madam, with gentle ear receive my suite,
A kingdoms safety should o'er pa•…ze slight rites,
Marriage is merely Natures policy:
Then since unless our royal beds be joined,
Danger and civil tumul•… frights the sty•…e,
Be wise as you are fair, give way to fa•….
What would thou, thou affliction to our house? Thou ever devil, it was th•… that banishedst my truly noble Lord.
I?
I, by th•… plo•…e •…hy •…hy blac•… •…agems,
Twelve Moons have suffered change since I be held
The lou•…d presence of my de•…st Lord.
O thou fair worse than death, he parts but soul
From a weak body, but thou soul from soul
Disseuerst, that which Gods own hand did knee•….
Thou scant of honour, full of di•…elish wi•….
Weal check your too intemperate Iauishnes, I I can, and will.
What can?
Go to, in banishment thy husband dies.
He ever is at home thats ever wise.
Youst never meet more •…eason should Love control,
Not meet?
She that de•…re loves, her loue's still in her soul.
You are but a woman Lady, you must yield.
O save me thou innated bashfulness,
Thou only ornament of women's modesty.
Modesty? Death Isle torment thee,
Do, urge all torments, all afflictions try,
Isle die, my Lords, as long as I can die.
Thou obstinate, thou shalt die: captain, that La∣dies life is forfeited to Justice, we have examined her,
And we do find, she hath empoisoned
The re•…errand Hermit, therefore we command
Se•…rest custody. Nay, if you'll dooes no good,
Youst dooes no harm, a tyrants peace is blood.
O thou art merciful, O gracious devil,
Rather by much let me condemned be,
For seeming murder than be •…amn'd for thee.
Isle morn no more, come girt my brows with flowers,
Revel and dance, soul, now thy wish thou hast,
Die like a Bride, poor heart thou shalt die chaste. 
Life is a frost of could felicity,
And death the thaw of all our vanity.
Wast not an honest Priest that wrote so?
Who? let her in.
Forbear.
Forbear•….
Alas 〈◊〉 is 〈◊〉 where.
Sad misery, despite your 〈◊〉 doors▪
Will enter even in court.
Peace.
I ha done; one word, take heed, I ha done.
Cilleman Merc•…, the God of ghosts,
From glomie shades that spread the lower coasts,
Calls four high famed Genoa Dukes to come,
And make this presence their 〈◊〉:
To pass away this high triumphal night,
With song and dances, courts more soft delight.
Are you God of ghosts, I have a suit depending in hell betwixt me and my conscience, I would •…aine have thee help me to an advocate.
Mercury shall be your lawyer Lady,
Nay faith, Mercury haz too good a face to be a right lawyer.
Peace, forbear: Mercury presents the ma•…ke.
Celso, Celso, court Maria for our love Lady, be gracious, yet grace.
With me Sir?
Yes more loved then my breath:
With you Isle dance.
Why then you dance with death,
But come Sir, I was ne'er more apt for mirth.
Death gives eternity a glorious breath•…
O, to die honoured, who would fear to die.
They die in fear who live in villainy.
Yes, believe him Lady, and be ruled by him.
Madam with me?
Would then be miserable?
I need not wish.
O, yet forbear my hand, away, fly, fly,
O seek not her that only 〈◊〉 to •…y.
Poor loved soul.
What, would court misery?
Yes.
Sheele come too soon O my gre•…'d heart.
Lady ha done, ha, done.
Come down lets dance, be once from sorrow free.
Art a sad man?
Yes sweet.
Then weal agree.
Believe it Lady, shall I swear, let me enjoy you in private, and Isle marry you by my soul.
I had rather you would swear by your body: I think that would prove the more regarded other with you.
Isle swear by them both, to please you.
O▪ dam them not both, to please me, for Gods sake.
Faith sweet creature let me enjoy you to night, and Isle marry you to morrow fortnight, by my troth lo.
On his •…roth lo, believe him not, that kind of cunnicatching is as stale as fir Oliuer Anchoues perfumde jerkin: promise of matrimony by a young Gallant, to bring a virgin Lady into a fools paradise: make her a great woman, and then cast her off: tic as common as natural to a Courtier, as jelosie to a Citizen, gluttony to a Puritan, wisdom to an Alderman, pride to a Tailor, or an empty to one of these sixepenny damnations: of his troth lo, be∣leeue him not, traps to catch polecats.
Keep your face constant, let no sudden passion speak in your eyes.
O my Altofront.
A tyrants jelosies are very nimble, you receive it all.
My heart though not my knees doth v•…bly fall, Lo as the earth to thee.
Peace, next change, no words.
〈1 line〉
Maleuole▪
No.
Altofront, Duke Lorenzo Fer•…, ho?
Duke 〈◊〉, Duke Altofront.
Are we surprised? what strange delusions •…cke
Our senses, do I dream? or have I dream•…
This two days space? where am I?
Where an arch villain i•….
O lend me breath to live till I am fit to die.
For peace with heaven, for your own souls sake
Vouchsafe me life.
Ignoble villain, whom neither h•…en nor hell, goodness of God or man could once make good.
Base trecherour wretch, what grace •…anst thou expect,
That hast grown impudent in gracelessness.
O life!
Slave, take thy life.
Were thou defenced through blood and wounds,
The sternest horror of a civil fight,
Would I achieve thee, but prostrate at my feet,
I scorn to hurt thee, tic the heart of slaves
That deigns to triumph ou•…r peasants 〈◊〉.
For such thou art since 〈◊〉 d•… 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
A man mong •…ouarkes, but a glorious so•…le▪
You are joyed spirits, wi•…e your long •…et 〈◊〉. 
Hence with this man: an Eagle takes not flies.
You to your vows to Pietro &amp; Aureli•…, and thou unto the 〈◊〉.
You to my worst friend I would 〈◊〉 give:
Thou art a perfect old knave•… all pleased live▪
You two unto my breast, thou to my heart▪
And as for me I here assume my right,
To which I hope ell's pleased: to all god night.

WHy how now? are ye mad? or drunk? or both?
or what?
Are ye building Babilon there?
Heere's a noise in Court, you think you
are in a Tavern, do you not?
You think you are in a brothel house,
do you not? This room is ill scented.
So, perfume, perfume; some upon me I pray thee: The Duke is
upon instant entrance; so, make place there.
Where breath's that musique?
The discord rather then the Musique is heard from the
Malecontent Male•oles chamber.
Male•whole.
 Yaugh, godaman what dost thou there: Dukes Gani∣med
Iunoes jealous of thy long stockings: shadow of a woman,
what would Weasel? thou lamb a Court: what dost thou
bleat for? a you smooth chind Catamite!
Come down thou ragged cur, and s•earl here, I give
thy dogged sullenness free liberty: trot about and be-spurtle
whom thou please.
Isle come among you, you gotish blooded Tod∣rears,
as Gum into Taffeta, to fret, to fret: Isle fall like a sponge in∣to
water to suck up; to suck up. Howl again. Isle go to church
and come to you.
This Maleuole is one of the most prodigious affections
that ever conversed with nature; A man, or rather a monster; more
discontent then Lucifer when he was thrust out of the presence,
his appetite is unsatiable as the Grave; as far from any content,
as from heaven: his highest delight is to procure others vexati∣on,
and therein he thinks he truly serves heaven; for it is his posi∣tion,
whosoever in this earth can bee contented, is a flaue and
damned; therefore do's he afflict al in that to which they are most
affected; the Elements struggle within him; his own soul is at va∣riance
within her self: his speech is halter-worthy at all hours:
I like him; faith, he gives good intelligence to my spirit, makes
me understand those weaknesses which others flattery palli∣ates:
hark, they sing;
Ss: he comes: now shall you hear the extremity of a Male∣content:
he is as free as ayre: he blows os every man. And 〈◊〉,
whence come you now?
From the public place of much dissimulation,
What did there▪
Talk with a Usurer: take up at interest.
I wonder what religion thou art of.
Of a soldiers religion.
And what dost think makes most infidels 〈◊〉▪
Sects, sects, I have seen seeming Piety change her
roabeso oft, that sure none but some arch-diuell can * shape her
a Pe••icote.
O• a religious policy.
But damnation on a politic religion: I am weary,
would I were one of the Dukes hounds now.
But what's the common news abroad Male•whole, thou
dogst rumour still?
Common news? why common words are, God save
ye, Fare ye well: common actions, Flattery and Cosenage:
common things, Women and Cuckolds: and how do's my little
Ferra•d• a ye lecherous Animal, my little Ferret, he goes suck∣ing
up and down the palace into every hens nest like a Weasel:
and to what dost thou addict thy time to now, more then to
those Antique painted drabs that are still affected of young Cour∣tiers,
Flatt•rye, Pride, and Venery.
I study languages: who dost think to be the best
linguist of our age?
Phew, the Devil, let him possess thee, he will teach
thee to speak all languages, most readily and strangely, and great
reason mary, hes travelled greatly in the world; &amp; is every where.
Save ith Court.
I, save ith Court: and how do's my old muckhill over∣spread
with fresh snow: thou half a man, half a goat, al a beast:
how do's thy young wife, old huddle?
Out you improvident rascal.
Doe, kick thou hugely hornd old Dukes Ox, good
Master make-pleece.
How dost thou live now a days Maleuol•?
Why like the Knight S. Patrik Penlolians, with killing a
spiders for my Ladies Munkey.
How dost spend the night, I hear thou never sleep?
O no, but dream the most fantastical: O heaven: O
fubbery, fubbery▪
Dream, what dreamst?
Why me thinks I see that Signior pawn his foot-cloth:
that Metreza her Plate: this madam takes physic: that tother
Me••si•ur may minister to her: here is a Pander jeweld: there is
a fellow in shift of Satin this day, that could not shift a shirt to∣there
night: here a Paris supports that Helen: there's a Lady
Guineuer bears up that sir Lancel•t. Dreams, dreams, visions,
fantasies, Chimeras, imaginations, tricks, conceits, Sir Tristram
Trimtram come a loft In•ke a napes with a whim wham, heere's
a Knight of the land of Catit• shall play at trap with any page in
Europe; Do the sword-dance, with any Morris dancer in Chri∣stendome;
ride at the Ring till the •inn of his eyes look as
blew as the welkin, and run the wilde-goose chase •uen with
Pompey the huge.
You run.
To the devil: now Signor Guerchin•; that thou from a
most pitied prisoner should grow a most loathd flatterer: Alas
poor Celso, thy starr's oppressed, thou art an honest Lord, tic pity.
First pity?
I marry first philosophical Equato, &amp; it is pity that thou be∣ing
so excellent a scholar by art, should be so ridiculous a fool
by nature: I have a thing to tell you Duke; bi• v• avaunt, bid um
avaunt.
Leave vs, leave vs, now sir what first?
Duke thou art a Beco, a Cornut•.
How?
Thou art a Cuckold.
Speak; vnshale him quick.
With most tumbler-like nimbleness.
Who? by whom? I burst with desire.
Mendoza is the man makes thee a hornd beast•
Duke it is Mendoza cornutes thee.
What conformance▪ relate, short, short.
As a Lawyers beard,
There is an old Crone in the Court, her name is Maquerelle,
She is my mistress sooth to say, and she doth ever tell me,
Blirt a rime; blirt a rime; Maquerelle is a cunning bawd, I am an
honest villain, thy wife is a close drab, and thou at 〈…〉
cuckold, farewell Duke.
Stay, stay.
Dull, dull Duke, can lazy patience make lame revenge•?
O God for a woman to make a man that which God never
created, never made!
What did God never make?
A cuckold: To bee made a thing that's hud-wink• with
kindness, whilst every rascal philips his brows; to have a cox∣comb
with egregious horns, pind to a Lords back, every page
sporting himself with delightful laughter, whilst hee must
be the last must know it; Pistols and Poniards, Pistols and
Poniards.
Death and damnation!
Lightning and thunder!
Vengeance and torture!
Catz•!
O revenge!
Nay, to select among ten thousand fairs,
A Lady far inferior to the most,
In fair proportion both of limb and soul:
To take her from austerer check of parents,
To make her his by most deuoutfull rights,
Make her commandress of a better essence
Then is the gorgeous world even of a man.
To hug her with as raised an appetite,
As usurers do their delved up treasury,
(Thinking none tells it but his private self▪)
To meet her spirit in a nimble kiss,
Distilling panting ardor to her hart.
True to her sheets, nay diets strong his blood,
To give her height of Hymeneal sweets.
O God!
Whilst she lisps, &amp; gives him some court quelqu••hose
Made only to provoke, not satiate:
And yet even then, the thaw of her delight
Flows from lewd heate of apprehension,
Only from strange imaginations rankenes,
That forms the adulterers pre•ence in her soul,
And makes her think she clips the •whole kna•es loins.
Affliction to my bloods root.
Nay think, but think what may proceed of this,
Adultery is often the mother of i•cest.
Incest.
Yes incest: mark, Mendoz• of his wife begets per∣chance
a daughter. Mendo•• die•. His son marries this daughter.
Say you? Nay tic frequent, not only probable, but no question
often acted, whilst ignorance, fearless ignorance clasps his
own seed.
Hideous imagination!
Adultery? why next to the sin of Symony, it is the most
horrid transgression under the cope of salvation.
Next to Simony?
I, next to Symony, in which our men in next age shall
not sin.
Not sin? Why?
Because (thanks to some church-men) our age will
leave them nothing to sin with. But adultery! O dullness! shu,
should exemplary punishment, that intemperate bloods may
freeze, but to think it. I would dam him and all his generation
my own hands should do it; ha, I would not trust heaven with
my vengeance any thing.
Any thing, any thing Male•eel thou shalt see instantly
what temper my spirit holds; farewell, remember I forget thee
not, farewell.
Farewell.
Lean thoughtfulness, a sallow meditation,
Suck thy veins dry, distemperance rob thy sleep,
The hearts disquiet is revenge most deep.
He that gets blood, the life of flesh but spills,
But he that breaks hearts peace, the dear soul kills.
Well, this disguise doth yet afford me that
Which kings do seldom hear, or great men use,
Free speech: and though my stat's usurped,
Yet this affected strain gives me a tongue,
As fetterlesse as is an Emperors.
I may speak foolishly, I knavishly,
Always carelessly, yet no one thinks it fashion
To poise my breath, "for he that laughs and strikes,
"Is lightly felt, or seldom struck again.
Duke, Isle torment thee: now my just revenge,
From thee than crown a richer gem shall part.
Beneath God nought's so dear as a calm heart.
My honoured Lord.
Peace, speak low; peace, O Celso, constant Lord,
(Thou to whose faith I only rest disconered,
Thou, one of full ten millions of men,
That love virtue only for it self,
Thou in whose hands old OPS may put her soul:)
Behold for ever banished Alt•fron•
This Genoas last years Duke, O truly noble,
I wanted those old instruments of state,
Dissemblance, and Suspect: I could not time it Celso,
My throne stood like a point in midst of a circle,
To all of equal nearness, bore with none:
Raignd all alike, so slept in fearless virtue,
Suspectlesse, too suspectlesse: till the crowd:
(Still liquorous of untried novelties,)
Impatient with severer government:
Made strong with Florence: banished Altofron•.
Strong with Florence, I, thence your mischief rose,
For when the daughter of the Florentine
Was matched once with his Pietr• now Duke,
No stratagem of state vntride was left, till you of all▪
Of all was quite bereft,
Alas Maria, too close prisoned:
My true faithed Duchess in the Citadel.
Isle still adhere, lets mutiny and die.
O no, clime not a falling tower Celso,
Tic well held, desperation, no zeal:
Hopeless to strive with fate (peace) Temporise.
Hope, hope, that never for •ak'st the wretchedest man,
Yet bid me live, and lurk in this disguise.
What? play I well the free breathed discontent?
Why man we are all Philosophical Monarchs or natural •ooles,
Celso, the Courts after, the Duchess sheets will smoke for it ere it
be long: Impure Mendoza that sharpe nosed Lord, that made
the cursed match linked Gen•a with Florence now broad horns
the Duke, which he now knows: Discord to Malcontents is
very Manna, when the ranks are burst, then scuffle Altofront.
I but durst.
Tic gone, tic swallowed like a mineral, some way t'will
work, phewt Isle not shrink, "Hes resolute who can no lower
sink.
O the father of May-poles, did you never see a fellow
whose strength consisted in his breath, respect in his office, reli∣gion
on his Lord, and love in himself? why then behold.
Senior.
My right worshipful Lerd,
Your court night-cap makes you have a passing high fore-head.
I can tell you strange news, but I am sure you know
them already. The Duke speaks much good of you.
Go to then, and shall you and I now enter into a strict
friendship?
Second one another.
Yes.
Do one another good offices.
Just, what though I called thee old Ox, egregious Wit∣tall,
Broken-bellied Coward, Rotten Mummy,
Yet since I am in favour:
Words of course, terms of disport.
His grace presents you by me a chain, as his grateful remem∣bronco
for—I am ignorant for what, marry ye may impart:
Yet howsoever—come—dear friend:
Dost know my son?
Your son?
He shall eat wood-cocks, dance jigges, make posits,
and play at shuttle-cocke with any young Lord about the Court:
he haz as sweet a Lady too: dost know her little bitch?
Tic a dog man.
Believe me, a she bitch? O tic a good creature, thou
shalt be her servant, Isle make thee acquainted with my young
wife too: what, I keep her not at Court for nothing: Tic grown
to supper time, come to my table, that any thing I have stands
open to thee.
How smooth to him that is in state of grace, 
How servile is the ruggedst Courtiers face.
What Profit, nay what Nature would keep down,
Are heaved to them, are minions to a crown.
Envious ambition never sates his thirst,
Till sucking all, he swells, and swells, and bursts.
I shall now leave you with my always best wishes, only
let's hold betwixt vs a firm correspondence, a mutuall-frendly-reciprocall-kinde
of steddie-vnanimous-hartily leagued.—
Did your sinniorship ne'er see a pigeon house that was
smooth, round, and white without, and full of holes and stink
within, ha ye not old Courtier?
O yes, tic the form the fashion of them all.
Adieu my true Court-friend, farewell my dear Castilio.
Yonders Mendoza.
True, the privy key.
I take my leave, sweet Lord.
Tic fit, away.
Leave your suites with me, I can and will: attend my
Secretary, leave me.
Mendoza, hark ye, hark ye. You are a treacherous
villain, God buy ye.
Out you base borne rascal.
We are all the sons of heaven, though a Tripe wife
were our mother; a you whore-sonne hot rainde he Marmoset,
Egistus did ever hear of one Egistus?
Gistus?
I Egistus, he was a filthy incontinent Flesh-monger, such
a one as thou art.
Out grumbling rogue.
Orestes, beware Orestes.
Out beggar.
I once shall rise.
Thou rise?
I at the resurrection.
"No vulgar seed, but once may rise, and shall,
"No King so huge, but fore he die, may fall.
Now good Elizium, what a delicious heaven is it for a
man to be in a Princes favour: O sweet God! O pleasure! O
fortune! O all thou best of life! what should I think: what say?
what do? to be a favourite? a minion? to have a general timorous
respect, observe a man, a statefull silence in his presence, solita∣rinesse
in his absence, a confused hum, and busy murmur of obe∣sequious
suitors training him; the cloth held up, and way pro∣claimed
before him: Petitionary vassalls licking the pavement
with their slavish knees, whilst some odd palace Lampreel•s
that engender with snakes, and are full of eyes on both sides,
with a kind of insinuated humbleness, fix all their delights
upon his brow: O blessed state, what a ravishing prospect doth
the Olympus of favour yield▪ Death, I cornute the Duke: sweet
women, most sweet Ladies, nay Angels; by heaven he is more
accursed then a devil that hates you, or is hated by you, and
happier then a God that loves you, or is beloved by you; you
preservers of mankind, life blood of society, who would live,
nay who can live without you? O Paradise, how majestic is
your austerer presence? how imperiously chaste is your more
modest face? but O! how full of ravishing attraction is your pret∣tie,
petulant, langushing, laciuiously-composed countenance:
these amorous smiles, those soule-warming sparkling glances, are∣dent
as those flames that singed the world by heedless Phaeton;
in body how delicate, in soul how witty, in discourse how prig∣nant,
in life how wary, in favours how iuditious, in day how soci∣able,
and in night how? O pleasure vnutterable, indeed it is most
certain, one man cannot deserve only to enjoy a beauteous wo∣man:
but a Duchess? in despite of Phoebus Isle write a sonnet
instantly in praise of her.
And first possible? Mendoza slight me, possible?
Possible? what can be strange in him that's drunk with favour,
Grows insolent with grace? speak Maq•erelle, speak.
To speak feelingly, more, more richly in •whole•id sense
then worthless words, give me those jewels of your ears to
receive my enforced duty, as for my part tic well known I can
put any thing; can bea•e patiently with any man: But when I
heard he wronged your precious sweetness, I was enforced to
take deep offence; Tic most certain he loves Emilia with high
appetite; and as she told me (as you know we women impart our
secrets one to another,) when she repulsed his suite, in that hee
was possessed with your endeared grace: Mendoza most ingrate∣fully
renounced all faith to you.
Nay, called you, speak Maquerelle, speak.
By heaven witch: dried bisquet, and contested blush∣leslie
he loved you but for a spurt, or so.
For maintenance.
Advancement and regard.
O villain! O impudent Mendoza.
Nay he is the rustiest jade, the foulest mouthed knave
in railing against our sex: he will rail against women.
How? how?
I am ashamed to speak't, I.
I love to hate him▪ speak.
Why when Emillia scorned his base vnsteddines the
black throated rascal scolded, and said.
What?
Troth it is too shameless.
What said hee?
Why that at four women were fools, at fouret•••e
drabs, at forty bawds, at fourscore witches, and a hundred cattes.
O vnlimitable impudence!
But as for poor Fernezes fixed heart,
Was never shadelesse meadow drier parcht,
Under the scorching heate of heavens dog,
Then is my heart with your enforcing eyes.
A hot simile.
Your smiles have been my heaven, your frowns my hell,
O pity then; G•ace should with beauty dwell.
Reasonable perfect byr'lady.
I will love thee, be it but in despite
Of that Mendoza: witch! Ferneze: witch!
Ferneze thou art the Duchess favourite,
Be faithful, private, but tic dangerous.
"His love is lifeless, that for love fears breath,
"The worst that's due to sin, O would it were death.
Enjoy my favour, I will be sick instantly &amp; take physic,
Therefore in depth of night visit.
Visit her chamber, but conditionally, you shall not
offend her bed: By this diamond.
By this diamond—
Nor tarry longer than you please: By this ruby.
By this ruby.—
And that the door shall not creak.
And that the door shall not creak.
Nay but swear.
By this purse.—
Go to, Isle keep your oaths for you: remember, visit.
Dri'd bisquet! look where the base wretch comes.
Beauties life, heavens model, loves Queen.
That's his Aemilia.
Natures triumph, best on earth.
Meaning Aemilia.
Thou only wonder that the world hath seen.
That's Aemilia.
Must I then hear her praised Mendoza?
Madam, your excellence is graciously encountered;
I have been writing passionate flashes in honour of.—
Out villain, villain: O judgment, where have been
my eyes? what bewitched election made me dote on thee? what
sorcery made me love thee? but be gone, bury thy head: O that I
could do more then loathe thee: hence worst of ill: No reason ask,
our reason is our will.
Women? nay furies, nay worse, for they torment only
the bad, but women good and bad.
Damnation of mankind: breath, hast thou praised them for
this? And first you Ferneze are wrigled into smock grace? sit sure,
O that I could rail against these monsters in nature, modells of
hell, curse of the earth, women that dare attempt any thing, and
what they attempt, they care not how they accomplish, without
all premeditation or prevention, rash in asking, desperate in worcester∣king,
impatient in suffering, extreme in desiring, slaves unto ap∣petite,
mistresses in dissembling, only constant in inconstancy,
only perfect in counterfeiting: their words are fained, their eyes
forged, their sights dissembled, their looks counterfeit, their
hair false, their given hopes deceitful, their very breath artificial▪
Their blood is their only God: Bad clothes, and old age, are only the
devils they tremble at.
That I could rail now!
A mischief fill thy throat, thou foul iaw'd slave•
Say thy prayers.
I ha forgot um.
Thou shalt die.
So shalt thou; I am heart mad.
I am horn mad.
Extreme mad.
Monstrously mad.
Why?
Why? thou, thou hast dishonoured my bed.
I? come, come, sit, hears my bare heart to thee,
As steady as is this centre to the glorious world.
And yet hark, thou art a Cornuto; but by me?
Yes slave by thee.
Do not, do not with tart and spleenful breath,
Loose him can loose thee; I offend my Duke.
Bear record O ye dumb and raw-ayrde nights,
How vigilant my sleepelesse eyes have been,
To watch the traitor; record thou spirit of truth,
With what debasement I ha thrown my self,
To under offices, only to learn
The truth, the party, time, the means, the place,
By whom, and when, and where thou were disgraced.
And am I paid with slave? hath my intrusion
To places private, and prohibited,
Only to observe the closer passages,
Heaven knows with vows of revelation,
Made me suspected, made me deemed a villain?
What rogue hath wronged vs?
Mendoza, I may err.
Err? tic too mild a name, but err and err,
Run giddy with suspect, for through me thou know
That which most creatures save thy self do know:
Nay since my service hath so loathed reject,
Fore Isle reveal, shalt find them clipped together.
Mendoza, Thou know I am a most plain breasted man.
The fitter to make a cuckold: would your brows
were most plain too.
Tell me, indeed I heard thee rail.
At women, true, why what cold fleam could choose,
Knowing a Lord so honest, virtuous,
So boundless loving, bounteous, faire-shapt, sweet,
To be contemned, abused, defamde, made cuckolo:
Hart, I hate all women for it, sweet sheets, wax lights, antique
bed•posts, cambric smocks, villainous curtai•es, arras pictures,
oy•de hinges, and all the tongue-tide lascivious witnesses of great
creatures wantonness: what salvation can you expect?
Wilt thou tell me?
Why you may find it your self, observe, observe.
I ha not the patience, wilt thou deserve me; tell, give it.
Tak't, why Ferneze is the man, Ferneze, Isle proou't, this
night you shall take him in your sheets, wilt serve?
It will, my bosom's in some peace, till night.
What?
Farewell.
God! how weak a Lord are you,
Why do you think there is no more but so?
Why?
Nay then will I presume to counsel you,
It should be thus; you with some guard upon the sudden
Break into the Princes chamber, I stay behind
Without the door, through which he needs must pass,
Ferneze flies, let him, to me he comes, hoe's kilt
By me, observe by me, you follow, I rail,
And seem to save the body: Duchess comes
On whom (respecting her advanced birth,
And your fair nature,) I know, nay I do know
No violence must be used. She comes, I storm,
I praise, excuse Ferneze, and still maintain
The Duchess honour, she for this loves me,
I honour you, shall know her soul, you mine,
Then nought shall she contrive in vengeance,
(As women are most thoughtful in revenge)
Of her Ferneze, but you shall sooner know it
Then she can think it.
—Thus shall his death come sure,
Your Duchess braine-caught; so your life secure.
It is too well, my bosom, and my heart,
"When nothing helps, cut off the rotten part.
"Who cannot fine friendship, can ne'er produce the of∣fects
of hatred: Honest fool Duke, subtle lascivious Duchess,
seely novice Ferneze; I do laugh at ye, my brain is in labour till
it produce mischief, and I feel sudden throws, proofs sensible,
the issue is at hand.
"As Bears shape young, so Isle form my devise,
"Which grown proves horrid: vengeance makes men wise.
Fool, most happily encountered, can sing fool?
Yes I can sing fool, if you'll bear the burden, and I
can play upon instruments, scurvily. as gentlemen do; O that I
had been gelded, I should then have been a fat fool for a
chamber, a squeaking fool for a tavern, and a private fool for
all the Ladies.
You are in good case since you came to court fool;
what guarded, guarded!
Yes faith, even as footmen and bawds wear velvet,
not •or an ornament of Honour, but for a badge of drudgery:
for now the Duke is discontented I am fine to fool him asleep
every night.
What are his griefs?
He hath sore eyes.
I never observed so much.
Horrible sore eyes; and so hath every Cuckold, for the
roots of the horns spring in the eye-balles, and thats the reason
the horn of a cuckold is as tender as his eye; or as that growing
in the women's forehead twelve years since, that could not en∣dure
to be touched. The Duke hangs down his head like a co∣lumbine.
Passarell•, why doe great men beg fools?
As the Welshman stole rushes, when there was no∣thing
else to filch; only to keep begging in fashion.
Pue, thou gives no good reason,
Thou speak like a fool.
Faith I utter small fragments as your knight courts
your City 〈◊〉 with jingling of his guilt spurs, advancing
his bush coloured beard, and taking Tobacco. This is all the mir∣roar
of their knightly complements: Nay I shall talk when my
tongue is a going once; tic like a Citizen on horseback, evermore
in a false gallop.
And how doth Maquerelle fare nowadays?
Faith I was wont to salute her as our English women
are at their first landing in Flushing; I would call her whore; but
now that antiquity leaves her as an old piece of plastic t'work
by, I only ask his how her rotten teeth fare every morning, and
so leave her: she was the first that ever invented perfumd smocks
for the gentlewomen, and woollen shoes for fear of creaking:
for the visitant, she were an excellent Lady, but that his face pee∣leth
like Muscouie glass.
And how doth thy old Lord that hath wit enough
to be a flatterer, and conscience enough to be a knave?
O excellent, he keeps beside me fifteen jesters, to
instruct him in the Art of fooling, and viters their jests in pri∣uate
to the Duke and Duchess; heel lie like to your Switzer,
or Lawyer; heel be of any side for most money.
I am in haste, be brief.
As your Fiddler when he is paid,
Heel thrive I warrant you, while your young courtier stands like
Good-friday in Lent, men long to see it, because more fatting
days come after it, else hes the leanest and pittifulst actor in the
whole Pageant; Adieu Maleuole.
O world most wild, when thy loose vanities
Taught by this fool, do make the fool seem wise!
You'll know me again Maleuole.
O I, by that velvet.
I, as a pettifogger by his buckram bag,
I am as common in the Court as an hostesses lips in the coun∣trey;
knights, and clowns, and knaves, and all share me: the
Court cannot possibly be without me. Adieu Maleuole.
Hes caught, the woodcockes head is ith noose,
Now treads Ferneze in dangerous path of lust,
Swearing his sense is merely deified.
The fool grasps clouds, and shall beget Centaurs;
And now in strength of panting faint delight,
The Goat bids heaven envy him; good Goose,
I can afford thee nothing but the poor comfort of calamity, Pity
"Lust's like the plummets hanging on clock lines,
"Will ne'er ha done till all is quite undone.
Such is the course salt sallow lust doth run,
Which thou shalt try; Isle be revenged. Duke thy suspect,
Durchesse thy disgrace, Ferneze thy rival ship
Shall have swift vengeance; nothing so holy,
No band of nature so strong,
No law of friendship so sacred,
But Isle profane burst, violate,
Fore Isle endure disgrace, contempt and poverty:
Shall I, whose very humm struck all heads bare;
Whose face made silence, creaking of whose shoe
Forcde the most private passages fly op,
Scrape like a servile dog at some latched door?
Learn now to make a leg? and cry, beseech ye,
Pray ye, is such a Lord within? be awde
At some odd Ushers scoffed formality?
First seat my brains; Vnde cadis non quo referred;
My heart cries, perish all: how! how! What fate
"Can once a•oyde revenge, thats desperate,
Isle to the Duke; if all should op, if! tush;
"Fortune still dotes on those who cannot blush.
Bless ye cast a Ladies: ha dip-sawce, how dost thou old Cole?
Old Cole?
I old Cole; me thinks thou least like a brand under
billets of greene wood. Hee that will inflame a young wenches
heart, let him lay close to her: an old Cole that hath first been
fired, a pandre••• my half burnt lint, who though thou can
flame thy self, yet art able to set a thousand virgins tapers afire:
and how doth Ianiuere thy husband, my little periwincle, is hee
troubled with the cough of the lungs still? doos he hawk a nights
still, he will not bite.
No by my troth, I took him with his mouth empty
of old teeth.
And hee took thee with thy belly full of young bones:
Marie he took his maim by the stroke of his enemy.
And I mine by the stroke of my friend.
The close stock! ô mortal wench: Lady, ha ye now no
restoratives for your decayed Iasons? Look ye, crabs guts baked,
distild oxe-pith, the puluerized hairs of a lions upper lip, gellie
of cock•sparrows, he monkeys marrow, or powlder of foxe-stones.
And whither are you ambling now?
To bed, to bed.
Doe your husbands lie with ye?
That were country fashion in faith.
Ha ye no foregoers about you: come, whither in good
deed law now?
In good indeed law now, to eat the most miracu∣lously,
admirably, astonishable composed posit with three curds,
without any drink: will ye help me with a hee fox? hears
the Duke.
Fride frogs are very good &amp; French like too:—
The night grows deep and foul, what hour first?
Upon the stroke of twelve.
Save ye Duke.
From thee; be gone, I doe not love thee, let me see
thee no more, we are displeased.
Why God be with thee, heaven hear my curse,
May thy wife and thee live long together.
Be gone sir.
When Arthur first in Court began,—Agamemnon:
Menelnm—was ever any Duke a Cornuto?
Be gone hence.
What religion wilt thou be of next?
Out with him.
With most servile patience time will come,
When wonder of thy error will strike dumb,
Thy bezeld sense, slaves I favour, I mary shall he, rise,
"Good God! how subtle hell doth flatter vice,
"Mount• him aloft, and makes him seem to fly,
"As Foul the Tortoise mocked, who to the sky,
"Th'ambitious shell-fish raised; th'end of all,
"Is only, that from height he might dead fall.
Why when? out ye rogue, be gone ye rascal.
I shall now leave ye with all my best wishes.
Out ye cur.
Only lets hold together a firm correspondence.
Out.
A mutual friendly reciprocal perpetual kind of sted∣die
unanimous heartily leagued.
Hence ye gross jawed pesantly, out, go.
Adieu pigeon house: thou Bur th•t only stick to
nappy fortunes, the Sarpego, the Strangury, an eternal vneffec∣tuall
Priapisme seize thee.
Out rogue.
Majesty thou be a notorious wittily pander to thine
own wife, and yet get no office but live to be the utmost mise∣rye
of mankind, a beggarly cuckold.
It shall be so.
It must be so, for where great states revenge,
"This requisite the parts with piety,
"And lo•t respect forbears, be closely dogd,
"Lay one into his breast shall sleep with him,
"Feed in the same dish, run in self faction,
"Who may discover any shape of danger;
"For once disgraced, displayed in offence,
"It makes man blushless, and man is (all confess)
"More prone to vengeance than to gratefulness.
"Favours are writ in dust, but stripes we feel,
"Depraved nature stamps in lasting steel.
You shall be leagued with the Duchess.
The plot is very good.
You shall both kill, and seem the course to save.
A most •in brain trick.
Of a most cunning knave.
My Lords, the heavy action we intend,
Is death and shame, two of the ugliest shapes
That can confound a soul; think, think of it:
I stri•e, but yet like him that against stone walls
Directs his shafts, rebounds in his own face,
My Ladies shame is mine; ô God tic mine.
Therefore I doe conjure all secrecy,
Let it be as very little as may be; pray ye, as may be.
Make frightlesse entrance, salute her with soft eyes,
Strain nought with blood, only Ferneze dies,
But not before her brows: O Gentlemen,
God knows I love her; nothing else, but this,
I am not well. If grief that sucks veins dry,
Riuels the skin, casts ashes in men's faces▪
Be-dulls the eye, vnstrengthens all the blood:
Chance to remove me to another world,
As sure I once must die: let him succeed:
I have no child; all that my youth begot,
Hath bin your loves, which shall inherit me:
Which as it ever shall, I doe conjure it.
Mendoza may succeed, hoe's noble borne,
With me of much desert.
Much.
Your silence answers I,
I thank you, come on now: ô that I might die
Before her shame's displayed! would I were forcde
To burn my fathers Tomb, vnheale his bones,
And dash them in the dirt, rather than this:
This both the living and the dead offends:
"Sharpe s••gery where nought but death amends.
Even here it is, three curdes in three regions indiuidu∣ally
distinct.
Most methodical according to art composed without any drink.
Without any drink?
Upon my honour, will you sit and eat?
Good, the composure, the receipt, how first?
Tic a pretty pearl, by this pearl, (how dost with
me,) thus it is, seven and thirty yolks of Barbary hens eggs,
eighteen spoonefulles and a half of the i•ice of cockesparrow
bones, one ounce, three drammes, four scruples, and one quarter
of the syrup of Ethiopian dates, sweetened with three quarters of
a poond of pure candid Indian Eringos, strewed over with the
powder of pearl of America, amber of Cataia, and lamb stones
of Muscouia.
Trust me the ingredients are very cordial, and no que∣stion
good, and most powerful in restoration.
I know not what you me•no by restoration, but this
it doth, it purifieth the blood, Imootheth the skin, in••feneth
the eye, strengthens the vemes, modified the teeth, comfor∣teeth
the stomach, fortifies the back, and quickneth the wit;
thats all.
By my troth I have eaten but two spoonefulls, and me
thinks I could discourse most swiftly and wittily already.
Have you the art to seem honest?
I thank advise and practise.
Why then eat me of this posit, quicken your blood,
and preserve your beauty. Do you know doctor Plaster-face, by
this curd, hee is the most exq•isite in forging of veins, spright∣ning
of eyes, dying of hair, sleeking of skins, blushing of
cheeks, surpheleing of breasts blanching and bleaching of teeth
that 〈◊〉 made an old Lady gracious by torch• light: by this curd
law.
We we are resolved what god haz given vs weel ch•rich.
Cherish any thing saving your husband, keep him not
too high, lest he leap the pale• but for your beauty, let it be your
saint, b•queen•h two hours to it every morning in your closet: I
ha been young, and yet in my conseience I am not aboue five and
twenty, but believe me, preserve and use your beauty; for youth
and beauty once gone, we are like bee-hiues without honey: out a
fashion, apparel that no man will wear, therefore use me your
beauty.
I but men say.
Men say? let men say when• they will, life a woman, they
are ignorant of your wants, the more in years, the more in per∣fection
they grow: if they loose youth &amp; beauty, they gain wise∣dome
&amp; discretion: But when our beauty fades, goodnight with
vs: there cannot be an vglier thing to see, then an old woman,
from which, O pruning, pinching, &amp; painting, deliver all sweet
beauties.
Hark, music.
Peace, tic in the Duchess bed-chamber, good rest most
prosperously graced Ladies.
Good-night sentinel.
Night dear Maquerelle.
May my posits operation send you my wit &amp; honesty▪
And me your youth &amp; beauty: the pleasingest rest.
Strike, strike.
Save my Ferneze, O save my Ferneze.
Follow, pursue.
O save Ferneze.
Pierce, pierce, thou shallow fool drop there.
"He that attempts a Princes lawless love,
"Must have broad hands, close heart, with Argos eyes,
"And back of Hercules, or else he dies.
Follow, follow.
Stand off, forbear, ye most uncivil Lords.
Strike.
Do not; tempt not a man resolved,
Would you inhumane murderers more then death?
O poor Ferneze.
Alas, now all defence too late.
Hoe's dead.
I am sorry for our shame: go to your bed:
Weep not too much, but leave some tears to shed
When I am dead.
What weep for thee? my soul no tears shall find.
Alas, alas, that women's souls are blind.
Betray such beauty, murder such youth, contemn
civility.
He loves him not that rails not at him.
Thou can not move vs: we have blood enough.
And please you Lady we have quite forgot
All your defects: if not, why then.
Not.
Not: the best of rest, good night.
Despite go with thee.
Madam, you ha done me foul disgrace.
You have wronged him much, loves you too much.
Go to; your soul knows you have.
I think I have.
Do you but think so?
Nay, sure I have, my eyes have witnessed thy love•
Thou hast stood too firm for me.
Why tell me fair cheeked Lady, who even in tears,
Art powerfully beauteous, what unadvised passion
Struck ye into such a violent heate against me?
Speak, what mischief wronged vs? what devil injured vs?
Speak.
That thing ne'er worthy of the name of man; Ferneze,
Ferneze swore thou love Emilia,
Which to advance with most reproachful breath,
Thou both did blemish and denounce my love.
Ignoble villain, did I for this bestride
Thy wounded limbs; for this? O God! for this?
Sunk all my hopes, and with my hopes my life,
Ripped bare my throat unto the hangmans axe.
Thou most dishonoured trunk—Emillia.
By life I know her not—Emillia.
Did you believe him?
Pardon me, I did.
Did you? and thereupon you graced him.
I did.
Took him to favour, nay even clasped with him.
Alas I did.
This night?
This night.
And in your lustful twines the Duke took you▪
A most sad truth.
O God! O God! how we dull honest souls,
Heavy brained men are swallowed in the bogs
Of a deceitful ground, whilst nimble bloods,
Light jointed spirits spent, cut good men's throats,
And scope; alas, I am too honest for this age,
Too full of fleam, and heavy steadiness•e:
Stood still whilst this slave cast a noose about me;
Nay then to stand in honour of him and her,
Who had even sliced my heart.
Come, I did err, and am most sorry, I did err.
Why we are both but dead, the Duke hates vs.
"And those whom Princes do once groundly hate,
"Let them provide to die, as sure as fate,
"Prevention is the heart of policy.
Shall we murder him?
Instantly.
Instantly? before he castes a plot?
Or further blaze my honours much known blot.
Lets murder him.
I would do much for you, will ye marry me?
Isle make thee duke: we are of Medices.
Florence our friend, in court my faction
Not meanly strengthfull; the Duke then dead,
We well prepared for change: the multitude
Irresolutely reeling, we enforce:
Our party seconded, the kingdom mazed,
No doubt of swift success, all shall be graced.
You do con•irme me, we are resolute,
To morrow look for change rest confident.
Tic now about the immodest waste of night,
The mother of moist dew with pallide light,
Spreads gloomy shades about the numbed earth.
Sleep, sleep, whilst we contrive our mischiefs birth;
This man Isle get inhumde; farewell, to bed;
I 〈◊〉 the pillow, dream, the Duke is dead.
So, so, good night, how fortune dotes on impudence,
I am in private the adopted son of yon good Prince.
I must be Duke; why if I must, I must,
Most •eely Lord, name me? O heaven!
I see God made honest fools, to maintain crafty knaves:
The Duchess is wholly mine too; must kill her husband
To quit her shame; much; then marry her: I,
O I grow proud in prosperous treachery!
As wrestlers clip, so isle embrace you all,
Not to support, but to procure your fall.
God arrest thee.
At whose suite?
At the devils; ah you treacherous damnable monster!
How dost? how dost, thou treacherous rogue?
Ah ye rascal, I am banished the Court sir.
Prithee lets be acquainted, I doe love thee faith.
At your service, by the Lord law, shall's go to supper,
let's be once drunk together, and so unite a most virtuously
strengthened friendship, shall's Huguenot, shall's?
Wilt fall upon my chamber to morrow morn?
As a raven to a dunghill; they say theres one dead here,
pricked for the pride of the flesh.
there he is, prithee bury him.
O most willingly, I mean to turn pure Rochel church∣man,
I.
Thou church man! why? why?
Because Isle live lazily, rail upon authority, deny kings
supremacy in things indifferent, and be a Pope in mine own pa∣rich.
Wherefore dost thou think churches were made?
To scour ploughshares, I have seen oxen plow up
Altares: Et nuns sedges vbi Zion fuit.
Strange.
Nay monstrous, I ha seen a sumptuous steeple turned to
a stinking privy; more beastly, the secretest place made a dogs
kennel: nay most inhumane, the stoned coffins of long dead
christians burst up, and made hogs-troughs—Hic sinis Pri•no.
Shall I ha some sack and cheese at thy chamber?
Good night good mischievous incarnate devil, good night Men∣doza,
ah you inhumane villain, goodnight, night fub.
Good night: to morrow morn.
I, I will come •riendly Damnation, I will come:
I doe descry crosse-poynts, honesty and court-ship, straddle as
far as•nder, as a true Frenchmans legs.
O!
Proclamations, more proclamations.
O a Surgeon.
Hark, lust cries for a Surgeon, what news from Limbo?
How doth the grand cuckold Lucifer?
O help, help, conceal and save me.
Thy shame more than thy wounds do gre•e me far,
"Thy wounds but leave upon thy flesh some scar;
"But fame ne'er heales, still ranckles worse and worse,
"Such is of uncontrolled lust the curse.
"Think what it is in lawless sheets to lie:
"But O Ferneze, what in lust to die.
"Then thou that shame respects, ô fly converse
"With women's eyes, and lisping wantonness:
"Stick candles against a virgin walls white back,
"If they not burn, yet at the least thei'le black.
Come, isle convey thee to a private port.
Where thou shalt live (ô happy man) from court.
The beauty of the day begins to rise,
From whose bright form Nights heavy shadow flies,
Now gins close plots to work, the Scene grows full,
And craves his eyes who hath a solide skull.
Tic grown to youth of day, how shall wee waste this light?
My heart's more heavy than a tyrants crown.
Shall we go hunt? Prepare for field.
Would ye could be merry.
Would God I could: Mendoza bid um haste:
I would fine shift place; O vain relief!
"Sad souls may well change place, but not change grief:
As Dear being struck fly thorough many soll•s,
Yet still the shaft sticks fast, so;
A good old simile, my honest Lord.
I am not much unlike to some sick man,
That long desired hurtful drink; at last
Swilles in and drinks his last, ending at on••
Both life and thirst: O would I ne'er had known•
My own dishonour! good God that men should
Desire to search out that, which being found, kills all
Their joy of life, to taste the tree of knowledge,
And then be driven from out Paradise.
Can give me some comfort?
My Lord, I have some books which have been de∣dicated
to my honour, and I ne'er read um, and yet they had very
fine names: Physic for Fortune: Lozenges of sanctified sincerity,
very pretty works of Curates, Scriveners and Schoolemaisters
Mary I remember one Seneca, Lucius Anneus Seneca.
Out upon him, he writ of Temperance and fortitude,
yet lived like a voluptuous epicure, and died like an effeminate
coward. Haste thee to Florence: here, take our Letters, see um
sealed; away; report in private to the ho•ored Duke, his daugh∣ters
forced disgrace, tell him at length,
We know, too much due complements advance,
"Theres nought thats safe and sweet but ignorance.
Madam, I am going Ambassador for Florence, twill
be great charges to me.
No matter my Lord, you have the lease of two man∣nors
come out next Christmas; you may lay your tenants on
the greater rack for it: and when you come home again, Isle
teach you how you shall get two hundred pounds a year by
your teeth.
How Madam?
Cut off so much from house-keeping, that which is
saved by the teeth, you know is got by the teeth.
Fore God, and so I may, I am in wondrous credit
Lady.
See the use of flattery, I did ever counsel you to flat∣la
greatness, and you have profited well: any man that will doe
so shall be sure to be like your Sco•ch Barnacle, now a block, in∣stantly
a worm, and presently a great goose: this it is to rot and
putrefy in the bosom of greatness.
Thouia rte ever my politician, O how happy is that
old• ord that hath a politician to his young Lady! Isle have fifty
gentlemen shall attend upon me; mary the most of them shall be
Farmers sons, because they shall bear their own charges, and
they shall go appear•lt thus, in sea-water greene suits, ash-color
〈◊〉, wetchet stockings, and popinj•y greene feathers, will
not the colours doe excellent?
Out vpont, theile look like Citizens riding to their
friends at Whitsontide, their apparel just so many several pa∣•ishes.
Isle have it so, and Passarello my fool shall go along
with me, mary he shall be in velvet?
A fool in velvet.
I, tic common for your fool to wear satin, isle have
mine in velvet.
What will you wear then my Lord?
Velvet too, mary it shall be embroidered, because isle
d•ffer from the •oole somewhat. I am horribly troubled with the
gout, nothing grieves me but that my doctor hath forbidden
me wine, and you know your Ambassador must drink. Did
thou ask thy doctor what was good for the gout?
Yes, hee said, e•s•, wine and women, were good for
it.
Nay, thou hast such a wit, what was good to cure i•,
said he?
Why the rack•al your Empericks could never do the
like cure upon the gout the rack did in England: or your Scotch
boot. The French Herlakeene will instruct you.
Surely I doe wonder, how thou having, for the most
part of thy life time been a country body, shouldest have so
good a wit.
Who I? why I have been a Courtier thrice two mo∣nods.
So have I this twenty year, and yet there was a gen∣tleman
usher called me cocks-coombe tother day, and to my face
too: wast not a backe-biting rascal? I would I were better tra∣uaild,
that I might have been better acquainted with the fashi∣once
of several country-men: but my Secretary, I think he hath
sufficiently instructed me.
How my Lord?
Mary my good Lord quoth hee, your Lordship shall
ever find amongst a hundred French-men, forty hot shots:
amongst a hundred Spaniards, threescore bragarts: amongst a
hundred Dutch-men, fourscore drunkards: amongst a hun∣dred
English-men, fourscore and ten mad-men: and amongst
an hundred Welch-men.
What my Lord?
Fourscore and nineteen gentlemen.
But since you go about a sad embassy, I would have you
go in black my Lord.
Why dost think I cannot morn, unless I wear my
hat in cipers like an Aldermans heir, that's vile, very old, in
faith.
Isle learn of you shortly; O wee should have a fine gal∣lant
of you, should not I instruct you: how will you bear your
self when you come into the Duke of Florence Court?
Proud enough, and to will do well enough; as I walk
up and down the chamber, Isle spit f•owns about me, have a
strong perfume in my jerkin, let my beard grow to make me
look terrible, salute no man beneath the fourth button, and t'will
do excellent.
But there is a very beautiful Lady there, how will you
entertain her?
Isle tell you that when the Lady hath entertained me:
but to satisfy thee, here comes the fool: fool thou shalt stand
for the fair Lady.
Your fool will stand for your Lady most willingly and
most uprightly.
Isle salute her in Latin.
O your fool can understand no Latin.
I but your Lady can.
Why then if your Lady take down your fool, your fool will stand no longer for your Lady.
A pestilent fool: fore God I think the world be turned
up•side down too.
O no sir, for then your Lady, and all the Ladies in the
palace should go with their heals upward, and that were a
strange sight you know.
There be many will rapine at my preferment.
O I, like the envy of an elder sister that hath her younger
made a Lady before her.
The Duke is wondrous discontented.
I, and more melancholic, then a usurer having all his
money out at the death of a Prince.
Did thou see Madam Floria to day?
Yes, I found her repairing her face to day, the red upon•
the white showed as if her cheeks should have been served in
for two dishes of Barberries in stewed broth, and the flesh to them
a wood-cocke.
A bitter foul: Come Madam, this night thou shalt in∣joy
me freely, and to morrow for Florence.
What a natural fool is hee that would be a pair of by∣dies
to a women's petti-cote, to bee trusst and pointed to them.
Well, Isle dog my Lord, and the word is proper: for when I
fawn upon him hee feeds me; when I snap him by the fingers,
hee spittes in my mouth. If a dogs death were not strangling, I
had rather bee one then a feruing-man: for the corruption of
coin, is either the generation of a usurer, or a lousy beggar.
I cannot sleep, my eyes ill neighbouring lids
Will hold no fellowship: O thou pale sober night,
Thou that in sluggish fumes all sense dost sleep:
Thou that gives all the world full leave to play,
Vnbendst the feebled veins of sweaty l•bore;
The gally-slaue, that all the to•lissome day,
Tugs at his oar, against the stubburne wa•e,
Straining his rugged veins, s•ores fast:
The stooping sithe-man that doth barb the field
Thou make wink sure: in night all creatures sleep,
Only the Malecontent, that against his fate
Ripens and quarrels, alas hoe's goodman tell-clocke.
His sallow iaw-bones sink with wasting moan,
Whilst others beds are down, his pillows stone.
Maleuole.
Elder of Israel, thou honest defect of wicked nature
and obstinate ignorance, when did thy wife let thee lie with
her?
I am going Ambassador to Florence.
Ambassador? now for thy countries honour: prithee
do not put up mutton &amp; porridge in thy cloke-bagge: thy young
Lady wife goes to Florence with thee too, dooes she not?
No, I leave her at the palace.
At the palace? now discretion shield man, for Gods
love lets ha no more cuckolds: Hymen begins to put off his saf∣fron
robe, keep thy wife in the state of grace, hart a truth, I would
sooner leave my Lady singled in a Bordello, then in the Genoa
Palace, sin there appearing in her •luttish shape,
Would soon grow loathsome, even to blushessence,
Surfeit would cloak intemperate appetite,
Make the soul scent the rotten breath of lust.
When in an Italian lascivious palace, a Lady gardianlesse,
Left to the push of all allurement,
The strongest incitements to immodesty,
To have her bound, incensed with wantor sweets,
Her veins filled hie with heating delicates:
Soft rest, sweet music, amorous Masquerers, lascivious ban∣quits,
sin it self gilt o'er, strong phantafie tricking up strange
delights, presenting it dressed pleasingly to sense, sense leading
it unto the soul, confirmed with potent example, impudent cu∣stome,
enticed by that great bawd Opportunity, thus being pre∣pard,
clap to her easy ear, youth in good clothes, well shaped,
rich, faire-spoken, promising-noble, ardent blood-full, witty,
flattering: V•isses absent, O Ithacan, chastest Penelope hold out.
Mass Isle think on it, farewell.
Farewell, take thy wife with thee, farewell.
To Florence, um? it may prove good, it may,
And we may once unmask our brows.
My honoured Lord.
Celso peace, how first? speak low, pale fears suspect that
hedges, walls and trees have ears: speak, how runs all?
I faith my Lord, that beast with many heads
The staggering multitude recoils apace,
Though thorough great men's envy, most men's malice,
Their much intemperate heate hath banished you.
Yet now they find envy and malice near,
Produce faint reformation.
The Duke, the too soft Duke lies as a block,
For which two tugging factions seem to saw,
But still• the iron through the ribs they draw.
I tell thee Celzo, I have ever found
Thy breast most far from shifting cowardice
And fearful baseness: therefore Isle tell thee Celzo,
I find the wind begins to come about,
Isle shift my suite of fortune, I know the Florentine whose only force,
By marrying his proud daughter to this Prince,
Both banished me, and made this weak Lord Duke,
Will now forsake them all, be sure hee will:
Isle lie in ambush for convenience,
Upon their severance to confirm my self.
Is Ferneze interred?
Of that at leisure: he lives.
But how stands Mendoza, how first with him?
Faith like a pair of snuffers, snibbes filth in other men,
and retains it in it self.
He doo's fly from public notice me thinks, as a hare
do's from hounds, the feet whereon he flies betrays him.
I can track him Celso.
O my disguise fools him most powerfully:
For that I seem a desperate Malecontent,
He fine would clasp with me; he is the true slave
That will put on the most affected grace,
For some wild second cause.
Hoe's here.
Give place.
Illo, ho, ho, ho, art there old true penny?
Where hast thou spent thy self this morning? I see flattery in
thine eyes, and damnation in thy soul. Ha thou huge rascal▪
Thou art very merry.
As a scholar futuens gratis: How doth the devil go with thee now?
Maleuole, thou art an arrant knave.
Who I, I have been a Sergeant man.
Thou art very poor.
As Iob, an Alcumist, or a Poet.
The Duke hates thee.
As Irishmen doe bum-crackes.
Thou hast lost his amity.
As pleasing as maids loose their virginity.
Would thou were of a lusty spirit, wold thou were noble.
Why sure my blood gives me I am noble, sure I am of
noble kind; for I find my self possessed with all their qualities;
love Dogs, Dice▪ and Drabs, scorn wit in stuff clothes, have
•eat my Shoemaker, knocked my Semsters, cuckold my Poteca∣rye▪
and undone my Tailor. Noble, why not? since the Sto•cke
said, Neminem seruum non ex regibus, neminem regime non ex seruis
esse •ri•ndum, only busy fortune towses, and the provident champion∣ces
blends them together; isle give you a simile••; Did you ere see a
well with two buckets, whilst one comes up full to be emptied, an∣other
goes down empty to be filled; such is the state of all hume∣night:
why look you, I may be the son of some Duke; for believe
me, intemperate lascivious bastardy makes Nobel•tie doubtful:
I have a lusty daring heart Mendoza.
Let's grasp, I doe like thee infinitely, wilt enact one
thing for me?
Shall I get by it?
Command me, I am thy slave, beyond death and hell.
Murder the Duke.
My hearts wish, my souls desire, my fantasies dream,
My bloods longing, the only height of my hopes, how
O God how? ô how my united spirits throng together▪
So strengthen my resolve.
The Duke is now a hunting.
Excellent, admirable, as the devil would have it, lend
me, lend me, Rapier, Pistol, Crossebow; so, so, isle doe it.
Then we agree.
As Lent &amp; fishmongers, come a cape a pe, how in form
Know that this weak brained duke, who only stands on
Florence stilts, hath out of witless zeal made me his heir, and
secretly confirmed the wreathe to me after his lifes full point.
Upon what merit?
Merit! by heaven I horn him, only Fern• ae•
death gave me states life: tut we are politic, hee must not live
now.
No reason mary: but how must he die now?
My utmost project is to murder the Duke, that I might
have his state, because he makes me his heir; to banish the du∣chess,
that I might be rid of a cunning Lacedemonian, because
I know Florence will forsake her, and then to marry Maria the
banished duke Altofr•nts wife, that her friends might strengthen
me and my faction; this is all law.
Do you love Maria?
Faith no great affection, but as wise men do love great
women, to ennoble their blood, and augment their revenue • to
accomplish this now, thus now. The Duke is in the forest next
the Sea, single him, kill him, hurl him in the maine, and pro∣claim
thou saw wolves eat him.
Um, not so good: me thinks when he is slain, to get
some hipocrite, some dangerous wretch thats muffled, or with
fained holiness, to swear he heard the duke on some steep cliff
lament his wives dishonour, and in an agony of his hearts tor∣ture
hurled his groaning sides into the •wolne sea: This circum∣stance
well made, sounds probable: and hereupon the Duchess.
May well be banished: O vnpeerable invention •tare,
Thou god of policy, it hones, me.
Then fear not for the wife of Al•ofront, isle close to her.
Thou shalt, thou shalt, our excellence is pleased: why
were not thou an Emperor? when we are Duke, isle make thee
some great man sure.
Nay, make me some rich knave, and •le make my self
some great man.
In thee be all my spirit, retain ten souls, unite thy
virtual powers; resolve, ha, remember greatness: heart, farewell
"Th• fate of all my hopes in thee doth dwell.
Celzo, did hear? O heaven, did hear?
Such devilish mischief, suffer thou the world
Carouse damnation even with greedy swallow,
And still dost wink, still duz thy vengeance slumber▪
"If now thy brows are clear, when will they th•nder▪
The dogs are at a fault.
Would God nothing but the dogs were at it? let the
Dear pursue safely, the dogs follow the game, and doe you foal∣low
the dogs; as for me, tic unfit one beast should hunt an o∣there;
I ha one chase me: and 't please you, I would be rid of
you a little.
Would your grief would as soon leave you as we to
quietness.
I thank you; boy, what dost thou dream of now?
Of a dry summer my Lord, for heere's a hot world to∣wards:
but my Lord, I had a strange dream last night.
What strange dream?
Why me thought I pleased you with singing, and then I
dreamt you gave me that short sword.
Prettily begged: hold thee, isle prove thy dream true,
tak't.
My duty: but still I dreamt on my Lord, and me
thought, and 't shall please your excellence, you would needs out
of your royal bounty give me that jewel in your hat.
O thou did but dream boy, do not believe it, dreams
prove not always true, they may hold in a short sword, but not
in a jewel. But now sir, you dreamt you had pleased me with
singing, make that true as I have made the other.
Faith my Lord, I did but dream, and dreams you
say prove not always true: they may hold in a good sword, but
not in a good song: the truth is, I ha lost my voice.
Lost thy voice, how?
With dreaming faith, but heere's a couple of Syrenicall
rascals shall enchant ye: what shall they sing my good Lord?
Sing of the nature of women, and then the song shall
be surely full of variety; old crochets and most sweet closes, it
shall be humorous, grave, fantastike, amorous, melancholy, spright∣lie,
one in all, and all in one.
All in one?
Byr'lady too many; sing, my speech grows culpable
of unthrifty idleness, sing.
A, so, so, sing, I am heavy, walk off, I shall talk in my sleep;
walk off.
Brief, brief, who? the Duke? good heaven that fools
should stumble upon greatness! do not sleep Duke, give ye
good morrow: you must be bri•fe Duke; I am feed to mur∣there
thee, start not: Mendoza, Mendoza hired me, heere's his
gold, his pistol, crossebow, and sword, tic all as firm as earth: O
fool, fool, choked with the common maze of easy idiots, Cre∣dulitie,
ma•e him thine heir: what thy sworn murderer?
O can it be?
Can?
Discovered he not Ferneze?
Yes; but why, but why, for love to thee; much, much,
to be revenged upon his rival, who had thrust his jaws awry,
who being slain, supposed by thine own hands; defended by
his sword, made thee most loathsome, him most gracious with
thy loose Princess, thou closely yielding egr•sse and regress
to her, made him heir, whose hot unquiet lust strait towzde
thy sheets, and now would seize thy state, politician, wise man,
death to be led to the stake like a bull by the horns, to make e∣uen
kindness cut a gentle throat; l•fe, why art thou numbed?
thou foggy dullness, speak: lives not more faith in a home∣•hiusting
tongue, than in th•se fencing tip tap Courtiers?
Lord Maleuole, if this be true.
If? come shade thee with this disguise, if? thou shalt han∣dl
it, he shall thank thee for killing thy self, come follow my
directions, and thou shalt see strange sleights.
World whither wilt thou?
Why to the devil: come, the morn grows late,
Astedi• quickens is the soul of state.
Medam, Medam, are you stirring Medam? if you bee
stirring Medam, if I thought I should disturb ye.
My Lady is up forsooth.
A pretty boy, faith how old art thou?
I think foe•eteene.
Nay, and ye bee in the teens: are ye a gentleman
borne? do you know me? my name is Medam Maquerelle, I lie in
the old cunny court.
See here the Ladies.
A fair day to ye Maquarelle.
Is the Duchess up yet Sentinel?
O Ladies, the most abhomin•ble mischance, O dear
Ladies, the most piteous disaster, Ferneze was taken last night in
the Duchess chamber: alas the Duke caught him and kilt him.
Was he found in bed?
O no, but the villainous certainty is, the door was not
bolted, the tongue•tied hatch held his peace: so the naked troth
is, he was found in his shirt, whilst I like an arrand beast, lay in the
outward chamber, heard nothing, and yet they came by me in
the dark, and yet I felt them not, like a senseless creature as I was.
O beauties, look to your buske-pointes, if not chastely, yet cha∣rely:
be sure the door bee bolted: is your Lord gone to Florences?
Yes Maquarelle.
I hope you'll find the discretion to purchase a fresh
gown for his return: Now by my troth beauties I would ha ye
once wi•e: he loves ye, pish: he is witty; bubble: fair proportio∣ned,
meaw: nobly borne, wind: let this be still your fixed position,
esteem me every man according to his good gifts, and so ye shall
ever remain most dear, and most worthy to bee most dear
Ladies.
Is the Duke returned from hunting yet?
They say not yet.
Tic now in midst of day.
How bears the Duchess with this blemish now?
Faith boldly, strongly defies defame, as one that haz a
Duke to her father. And theres a note to you: be sure of a stowt
friend in a corner, that may always awe your husband. Mark
the hauior of the Dut•hes now: she dares defame, cries Duke, do
what thou can, Isle quite mine honour: nay, as one confirmed
in her own virtue against ten thousand mouths that mutter
her disgrace, shoe's presently for dances.
For dances?
Most true.
Most strange: see, heere's my servant young Ferrard:
how many servants think thou I have Maquerelle?
The more, the merrier: t'was well said; use your servants
as you do your smocks, have many, use one, and change often,
for thats most sweet and courtlike.
Save ye fair Ladies, is the Duke returned?
Sweet sir no voice of him as yet in Court.
T is very strange.
And how like you my servant Maquorelle?
I think he could hardly draw Vlisses bow, but by my
fidelity, were his nose narrower, his eyes broader, his hands thin∣ner,
his lips thicker, his legs bigger, his feet lesser, his hair
blacker, and his teeth whiter, he were a tolerable sweet youth
in faith. And he will come to my chamber, I will read him the
fortune of his beard.
Not yet returned I fear, but
The Duchess approaches.
We will dance, music, we will dance.
Les quanto (Lady) pens•s bien, passaregis, or Bench•es
brawl.
We have forgot the brawl.
So soon? it is wonder.
Why? it is but two singles on the left, two on the right,
three doubles forward, a traverse of six round: do this twice, three
singles side, galliard trick of twenty, curranto pace; a figure of
eight, three singles broken down, come up, meet two doubles,
fall back, and then honour.
O Dedalus! thy maze, I have quite forgot it.
Trust me so have I, saving the falling back, and then
honour.
Music, music.
Who saw the Duke? the Duke?
Music.
The Duke, is the Duke returned?
Music.
The Duke is either quite invisible, or else is not.
Wee are not pleased with yo•r intrusion upon our
private retirement: wee are not pleased: you have forgot your
selves.
Boy, thy master: whore's the Duke?
Alas, I left him burying the earth with his spread joy∣less
limbs: he told me, he was heavy, would sleep, bid me
walk off, for that the strength of fantasy, oft made him talk in
his dreams: I straight obeyed, not ever saw him since: but where
so ever he is, hoe's sad.
Music, sound high, as is our heart, sound high.
The Duke, peace, the Duke is dead.
Music.
Is it music?
Give proof.
How?
Where?
When?
Rest in peace as the Duke duz, quietly sit: for my own
part I beheld him but dead; thats all: mary heere's one can give
you a more particular account of him.
Speak holy father, nor let any brow within this
\presence fright thee from the truth: speak confidently &amp; freely.
We attend.
Now had the mounting suns al-ripening wings
Swept the cold sweat of night from earths dank breast,
When I (whom men call ••ermite of the Rock,)
Forsook my Cell, and clamberd up a cliff,
Against whose Base, the heady Neptune dashed
His high cu•lt brows: there t'was I eased my limbs,
When lo, my entrails melted with the moan
Some one, who far above me was climbed, did make:
I shall offend.
Not.
On.
Me thinks I hear him yet, O female faith!
Go sow the ungrateful sand, and love a woman:
And do I li•e to be the scoff of men?
To be the withal cuckold, even to hug my poison?
Thou know O truth!
Sooner hard steel• will melt with Southern wind;
A Sea-mans whistle calm the Ocean;
A town on fire be extinct with tears,
Then women vowed to blushless impudence,
With sweet behaviour and soft minioning,
Will turn from that where appetite is fixed.
O powerful blood! how thou dost slave their soul,
I washed an Ethiope, who for recompense,
Sullied my name. And must I then be forced
To walk, to live thus black: must, must, fie,
He that can bear with must, he cannot die.
With that he sighed too passionately deep,
That the Dull ayre even groaned: at last he cries,
Smke shame in seas, sink deep enough: so dies.
For then I viewed his body fall and sows
Into the some maine, O then I s•w
That which me thinks I see; it was the Duke,
Whom straight the nicer stomached sea
Belched up: but then.
Then came I in, but las all was too late,
For even straight he sunk.
Such was the Dukes sad fate.
A better fortune to our Duke Mendoza.
A guard, a guard, we full of hearty tears,
For our good fathers loss,
For so we well may call him:
Who did beseech your loves for our succession,
Cannot so lightly ouer-iumpe his death,
As leave his woes reuengelesse: * woman of shame,
We banish thee for ever to the ply•e,
From whence this good man comes,
Nor permit on death unto the body any ornament▪
But base as was thy life, depart away.
Ungrateful.
Away.
Villain hear me.
Prepas•o and Guerino lead away the Duchess.
Be gone, my Lords address•e to public counsel▪
It is most 〈◊〉,
The train of Fortune is borne up by wit.
Away, our presence shall be sudden, haste.
Now you egregious devil, ha ye murdering Politician,
how dost Duke? how dost look now? brave Duke in faith.
How did you kill him?
Slatted his brains o•t, then sowft him in the briny sea.
Brained him and drowned him too▪
O t'was best, sure work:
For he that strikes a great man, let him srtike home, or elseware,
he will prove no man: shoulder not a huge fellow, unless you may be sure
to lay him in the kennel.
A most sound braine-pan.
Isle make you both Emperors.
Make vs christians, ma•e vs christians.
Isle hoist ye, ye shall mount.
To the gallows say ye? Come: Praemium incertum petit
certum scelus. How stands the Prog•esse?
Here, take my ring unto the Citadel,
Have entrance to Maria the grave Duchess
Of banished Altofront. Tell her we love her:
Omit no circumstance to grace our person, (do it.)
Isle make an excellent pander: Duke farewell, due, adieu
Duke.
Take Maquarelle with thee; for it is found,
None cuts a diamon, but a diamond.
Hermit, thou art a man for me, my confessor:
O thou selected spirit, borne for my good,
Sure thou would make an excellēt Elder in a deformed church.
Come, we must be inward, thou and I all one▪
I am glad I was o•deigned for ye.
Go to then, thou must know that Maleuole is a strange
villain: dangerous, very dangerous: you see how broad a speaks,
a gross jawde rogue, I would have thee poison him: hee•s like a
corn upon my great toe, I cannot go for him: he must be kored
out▪ he must: wilt do it, ha?
Any thing, any thing.
Men. Heart of my life, thus then to the Citadel,
Thou shalt consort with this Mal•uole,
There being at supper, poison him:
It shall be l•id upon Maria, who yields love, or dies:
Sk•d quick like lightning.
"Good deeds crawl, but mischief flies.
Your diuelships •ing haz no virtue, the buffe-captaine,
the sallo-westfalian gamon-faced zaza cries,
stand out must have a stiffer warrant, or no pass into the Castle
of Comfort.
Command our sudden Letter: not enter? shat, what
place is there in Genoa, but thou shalt, into my heart, into my very
heart: come, lets love, we must love, we two▪ so•le and body.
How did like the Hermit? a strange Hermit sirrah.
A dangerous fellow, very perilcus: he must die.
I, he must die.
Thoust kil' him: we are wise, we must be wise.
And provident.
Yea p•ouident; beware an hypocrite.
A Church man once corrupted▪ oh avoid
A fellow that makes Religion his stawking horse,
He breeds a plague: thou shalt poison him.
Ho, t•is wondrous necessary: how?
You both go jointly to the Citadel,
There sup there poision him: and Maria,
Because she is our opposite, shall bear
The sad suspect, on which she dies, or loves vs.
I run.
We that are great, our sole self good still moves vs.
They shall die both, for their deserts craves more
Than we can recompense, their presence still
Imbraides our fortunes with beholdingness,
Which weabhorre like deed, not doer: then conclude,
They live not to cry out ingratitude.
One stick burns tother steel cuts steel alone:
It is good trust few, but O, it is best trust none.
How do you? how dost Duke?
O let the last day fall, drop, drop on our cursed heads;
Let heaven uncle•pe it self, vomit forth flames.
O do no• rand, do not turn plaier, there's more of them
than can well live one by another already.
Wh•t, art an infidel still?
I am amazed, struck in a swoon with wonder: I am
commanded to poison thee.
I am commanded to poison thee at supper.
At supper?
In the Citadel.
In the Citadel?
Cross capers, tricks, truth a heaven, hee would dis∣charge
vs as boys do elderne guns, one pellet to struck out
another: of what faith art now?
All is damnation, wickedness extreme, there is no faith in man.
In none but usurers and brokers, they deceive no man,
men take um for blood-suckers, and so they are: now God deli∣for
me from my friends.
Thy friends?
Yes, from my friends, for from mine enemies isle de∣liver
my self. O, cutte-throate friendship is the ranckest vila∣no:
Mark this Mendoza, mark him for a villain; but heaven
will send a plague upon him for a rogue.
O world!
World! Tic the only region of death, the greatest shop
of the Devil, the cruellest prison of men, out of the which none
pass without paying their dearest breath for a fee, theres nothing
perfect in it, but extreme extreme calamity, such as comes yon∣der.
To banishment, led on to banishment.
Lady, the blessedness of repentance to you.
Why? why? I can desire nothing but death, nor de∣serve
any thing but hell.
If heaven should give sufficiency of grace
To clear my soul, it would make heaven graceless:
My sins would make the stock of mercy poor;
O they would tire heavens goodness to reclaim• theme
Judgment is just yet from that vast villainy:
But sure he shall not miss sad punishment
Fore he shall rule▪ On to my cell of shame.
My cell tic Lady, where instead of masks,
Music, tilts, turns, and such court like shows,
The hollow murmur of the checklesse winds
Shall groan again, whilst the unquiet sea
Shakes the whole rock with foamy battery:
There Vsherlesse the ayre comes in and out:
The rheumy vault will force your eyes to weep,
Whilst you behold true desolation:
A rocky barrenness shall pierce your eyes,
Where all at once one reaches where he stands,
With brows the roof, both walls with both his hands.
It is too good, blessed spirit of my Lord,
O in what orb so ere thy soul is throand,
Behold me worthily most miserable:
O let the anguish of my contrite spirit
Entreat some reconciliation:
If not, ô joy, triumph in my just grief,
Death is the end of woes, and tears relief.
Belike your Lord not loved you, was unkind.
O heaven!
As the soul loved the body, so loved he,
It was death to him to part my presence,
Heaven to see me pleased:
Yet I, like to a wretch given over to hell,
Brake all the sacred rites of marriage,
To clip a base ungentle faithless villain.
O God, a very Pagan reprobate:
What should I say? ungrateful, throws me out,
For whom I lost soul, body, fame and honour:
But tic most fit; why should a better fate
Attend on any, who forsake chaste sheets,
Fly the embrace of a devoted heart,
Joined by a solemn vow fore God and man,
To taste the brackish blood of beastly lust,
In an adulterous touch? ô ravenous immodesty,
Insatiate impudence of appetite;
Look, hears your end, for mark what sap in dust,
What sin in good, even so much lou• in lust:
Joy to thy ghost, sweet Lord, pardon to me.
Tic the dukes pleasure this night you rest in court.
Soul lurk in shades, run shame from brightsome skies,
In night the blind man misses not his eyes.
Doe not weep▪ kind cuckold, take comfort man, thy
betters have been Beccoes: Agamemnon Emperor of all the
merry Greeks that tickeled all the true Troyans, was a Cornuto:
Prince Arthur that cut off twelve Kings beards, was a Cornuto:
Hercules, whose back bore up heaven, and got forty wenches
with child in one night.
Nay it was fifty.
Faith fortie's enough a conscience, yet was a Corn•to:
patience, mischief grows proud, be wise.
Thou pinchest too deep, art too keen upon me.
Tut, a pitiful Surgeon makes a dangerous sore. Isle
tent thee to the ground. Think Isle sustain my self by flatter∣ing
thee, because thou art a Prince? I had rather follow a drun∣kard,
and hue by licking up his vomit, than by servile flattery.
Yet great men ha doon't.
Gr•at slaves fear better than love, borne naturally for
a coale-basket, though the common usher of Princes presence
fortune hath blindly given them better place, I am vowed to be
thy affliction.
Prithee be, I love much misery, and be thou son to
me.
Because you are an usurping Duke.
 Your Lordship's well returned from Florence.
Well returned, I praise my horse.
What news from the Florentines?
I will conceal the great Dukes pleasure, only this was
his charge, his pleasure is, that his daughter die, Duke Pietro
be banished, for ban•shing his bloods dishonour, and that Duke
Altofront be re-accepted: this is all, but I hear Duke Pietro is
dead.
I, and Mendoza is Duke, what will you do?
Is Mendeza strongest?
Yet he is.
Then yet Isle hold with him.
But if that A•tofrom should turn strait again?
Why then I would turn strait again.
Tic good run still with him that haz most might:
I had rather stand with wrong, than fall with right.
What religion will you be of now?
Of the Dukes religion, when I know what it is▪
O Hercules!
Hercules? Hercules was the son of Iupiter and Alk∣mena.
Your lordship is a very withal.
Withal?
I, all-wit.
Amphitrio was a cuckold.
Your lordship sweats, your young Lady will get you a
cloth for your old worships brows.
Hears a fellow to be damned, this is his inviolable maxim, (flat∣la
the greatest, and oppress the least:) a whoreson flesh-fly, ••at
still gnaws upon the lean gawld backs.
Why dost then salute him?
In faith as bawds go to church, for fashion sake: come,
be not confounded, thou art but in danger to loose a dukedom:
think this: This earth is the only grave and Golgotha wherein
all things that live must rot: tic but the draught wherein the hey∣uenly
bodies discharge their corruption, the very muckhill on
which the sublunary orbs cast their excrements: man is the
slime of this dongue•pit, and Princes are the governors of these
men: for, for our souls, they are as free as Emperors, all of one
piece, there goes but a pair of shears betwixt an Emperor and
the son of a bag piper, only the dying, dressing, pressing,
glossing makes the difference: now what art thou like to loose?
A Jailers office to keep men in bonds,
Whilst toil and trea••on, all lifes good confounds.
I here renounce for ever regency:
O Altofront, I wrong thee to supplant thy right:
To trip thy heel• up with a devilish slight.
For which I now from throne am thrown, world tricks abjure:
For vengeance though't comes slow, yet it comes sure.
O I am changed; for heerefore the dread power,
In true contrition! doe dedicate,
My breath to solitary holiness,
My lips to prayer, and my breasts care shall be,
Restoring Altofront to regency.
Thy vows are heard, and we accept thy faith.
Banish amazeme•t; co•e, we four must stand full shock of
Fortune, be not so wonder-st•icken.
Doth Ferneze live?
For your pardon.
Pa•don and love, give leave to recollect
My thoughts dispersed in wilde aston•shment:
My vow• stand fi••t in heaven, and from hence
I crave all love and p•rdon.
Who doubts of providence,
That sees this change, a hearty faith to all:
He needs must rise, can no lower fall:
For still impetuous vicissitude
Towzeth the world, then let no maze intrude
Upon your spirits: wonder not I rise;
For who can sink, that close can temporise?
The time grows ripe for action, Isle detect
My priuatst plot; left ignorance fear suspect:
Lets close to counsel, leave the rest to fate,
Mature discretion is the life of state.
Fool, how dost thou like my calfe in a long stocking?
An •xcellent calfe my Lord.
This calfe hath been a reveller this twenty year, when
monsieur Gundi lay here Ambassador, I could have carried a
Lady up and down at arms end in a platter; and I can tell you
there were those at that time, who to try the str•ngth of a mans
back, and his arm, would be coisterd: I have measured calves
with most of the palace, and they come nothing near m•e; be∣sides,
I think there be not many armours in the Arsenal will fit
me, especially for the head-pe•ce. Isle tell thee.
What my Lord?
I can eat stewed broth as it comes seething off the fire;
or a custard, as it comes reeking out of the oven; and I think
there are not many Lords can doe it: a good pomander a little
decayed in the scent, but six grains of musk ground with rose∣water,
and tempered with a little ciuit, shall fetch her again pre∣sently.
O I, as a bawd with aqua vitae.
And what dost thou rail upon the Ladies as thou
were wont?
I were better roast a live •at, and might doe it with
more safety. I am as secret to thieves as their painting: theres
Maquarelle oldest bawd, and a perpetual beggar. Did you no∣ver
hear of her tick to be known in the City?
Never.
Why she gets all the Picter-makers to draw her pic∣ture,
when they have done, she most courtly finds fault with
them one after another, and never fetches them: they in re∣avenge
of this, execute her in Pictures as they doe in Germanie,
and hang her in their shops: by this means is she better
known to the stinkards, then if she had been five times
carted.
Fore God and excellent policy.
Are there any Revels to night my Lord.
Yes.
Good my Lord give me leave to break a fellows pate
that hath abused me.
Whose pate.
Young Ferrard my Lord.
Take heed hoe's very valiant, I have known him
fight eight quarrels in five days, believe it.
O is he so great a quarrel? why then hes an are∣rant
coward.
How prove you that?
Why thus, He that quarrels seeks to fight; and he
that 〈◊〉 to fight, seeks to dye; and he that seek•• to dye,
seeks never to fight more; and he that will quarrel and seeks
means never to answer a man more, I think hes a •oward.
Thou can prove any thing.
Any thing but a rich knave, for I can flatter no man.
Well be not drunk good fool, I shall see you anon
in the presence.
The Dutchm•n for a drunkard.
The Daue for golden lockes:
The Irishman for Vsquebath.
The Frenchman for the ()
O thou art a blessed creature, had I a modest woman
to conceal, I would put her to thy custody, for no reasonable
creature would ever suspect her to be in thy company: ha,
thou art a melodious Maquerelle, thou picture of a woman,
and substance of a beast.
O fool will ye be ready anon to go with me to the
revels; the hal will be so pestered anon.
I as the country is with Attorneys.
What hast thou there fool.
Wine, I have learnt to drink since I went with my
Lord Ambassador, Isle drink to the health of madam maque∣relle.
why thou wast wont to rail upon her.
I but since I borrowed money of her.
Isle drink to her health now as gentlemen visit brokers.
Or as knights send venison to the City.
Eather to take up more money, or to procure longer forbea∣rance.
Give me the boule I drink a health to Altofront out deposed duke.
Isle take it so•now isle begin a health to madam Ma∣quarrel.
Pew I will not pledge her.
Why I pledged your Lord.
I care not.
Not pledge madam Maquerelle, why then will I
spew up your Lord again with this fools finger.
Hold Isle take it.
Now thou hast drunk my health; fool I am
friends with thee.
Art? art?
When Griffon saw the reconciled que an,
offering about his neck her arms to cast:
He threw of sword and hearts malignant stream,
and lovely her below the loins embraced.
adieu madam Maqueaelle.
And how dost thou think a this transformation of
state now.
Verily very well, for we women always note, the
falling of the one, is the rising of the other: some must be
fat, some must be lean, some must be fools, and some must
be Lords, some must be knaves, and some must be officers:
some must be beggars, some must be Knights: some must
be cuckolds, and some must be citizens: as for example,
I have two court dogs the most fawning cures, the
one called Watch, the other Catch: now I, like lady For∣tune,
sometimes love this dog, sometimes raise that dog,
sometimes favour Watch, most commonly fancic Catch:
now that dog which I favour I feed, and hoe's so ra∣uenous,
that what I give he never chawes it, gulps it
down whole, without any relish of what he haz, but with a
greedy expectation of what he shall have: the other dog,
now:
No more dog, sweet Maquarelle, no more dog:
and what hope hast thou of the duchess Maria, will she
stoop to the Dukes lewre, will she cow think•t?
Let me see, whore's the sign now? ha ye ere a ca∣lender,
whore's the sign trow you.
Sign! why is there any moment in that?
O! believe me a most secret power, look ye a
Chaldean or an Assyrian, I am sure t'was a most sweet lieu
told me, court any woman in the right sign, you shall not
miss: but you must take her in the right vain then: as
when the sign is in Pisces, a Fishmongers wife is very so∣ciable:
in Cancer, a Precisians wife is very flexible: in Ca∣pricorne,
a Merchants wife hardly holds out: in Libra, a
Lawyers wife is very tractable, especially, if her husband bee
at the term: only in Scorpio it is very dangerous meddling:
haz the Duke sent any jewel, any rich stones?
I, I think those are the best signs to take a lady
in. By your favour signeor, I must discourse with the Lady
Maria, Altofronts duchess: I must enter for the Duke.
She here shall give you interview: I received the
guardship of this Citadel from the good Altofront, and for
his use Isle keep't till I am of no use.
Wilt thou? O heavens, that a christian should be
found in a Buff jerkin! captain Conscience: I love thee
Captain.
We attend,&amp; what hope hast thou of this Duchess easiness?
T'will go hard, she was a cold creature ever, she
hated monkeys, fools, jesters, &amp; gentlemen-vshers extreme∣lie:
she had the wild trick on it, not only to be truly modest∣lie
honourable in her own co•science, but she would avoid
the least wanton carriage that might-incurre suspect, as God
bless me, she had almost brought bed pressing out of fashion:
I could scarce get a fine for the lease of a Ladies favour once
in a fortnight.
Now in the name of immodesty, how many my∣den-heads
hast thou brought to the block?
Let me see: heaven forgive vs our misdeeds:
Heere's the Duchess.
God bless thee Lady.
Out of thy company.
We have brought thee tender of a husband.
I hope I have one already.
Nay, by mine honour Madam, as good ha ne'er a
husband, as a banished husband, hoe's in an other world now.
Isle tell ye Lady, I have heard of a sect that maintained, when
the husband was a sleep, the wife might lawfully entertain
another man: for then her husband was as dead, much more
when he is banished.
Dishonest creature!
Pish, honesty is but an art to seem so: pray ye
whats honesty? whats constancy? but fables fained, odd old
fools chat, devised by jealous fools, to wrong our liberty.
Mully, he that loves thee, is a Duke, Mendoza, he will
maintain thee royally, love thee ardently, defend thee power∣fully,
marry thee sumptuously, &amp; keep thee in despite of Rosci∣clear
or Dōzel del Phoebo: theirs jewels, if thou wilt, so; if not, so.
Captain, for Gods sake save poor wretchedness
From tyranny of lustful insolence:
Enforce me in the deepest dungeon dwell
Rather then here, here round about is hell.
O my dearest Altofront, where ere thou breath,
Let my soul sink into the shades beneath,
Before I stain thine honour, this thou hast;
And long as I can die, I will live chaste,
Against him that can enforce, how vain is strife?
She that can be enforced haz ne'er a knife?
She that through force her limbs with lust enrols,
Wants Cleopatres aspes and Portiaes coals.
God amend you.
Now the fear of the devil for ever go with thee.
Marquerelle I tell thee, I have found an honest woman faith
I perceive when all is done, there is of women, as of all other
things: some good, most bad: some saints, some-sinners: for as
now adays, no Courtier but haz his mis•ris, no Captain but
haz his cockatrice, no Cuckold but haz his horns, &amp; no fool
but haz his feather: even so, no womā but haz her weakness &amp;
feather too, no sex but haz his: I can hunt the letter no farther:
ô God, how loathsome this toying is to me, that a duke should
be forced to fool it: well, Stultorum plane sunt omnia, better
play the fool Lord, then be the fool Lord: now, whore's your
slights Madam Maquarelle?
Why, are ye ignorant that tic sed, a squeamish office∣ted
nicences is natural to women, and that the excuse of their
yielding, is only (forsooth) the difficult obtaining. You must
put her too't: women are flax, and will fire in a moment.
Why, was the flax put into thy mouth, &amp; yet thou?
thou set fire? thou inflame her?
Marry, but Isle tell ye now, you were too hot.
The fitter to have inflamed the flaxwoman.
You were to boisterous, spleeny, for indeed.
Go, go, thou art a weak pandresse, now I see.
Sooner earths fire heaven it self shall waste,
Then all with heate can melt a mind that's chaste.
Go thou the Dukes lime-twig, Isle make the Duke turn thee
out of thine office. what, not get one touch of hope, &amp; had
her at such advantage.
Now a my conscience, now I think in my descry∣tion,
we did not take her in the right sign, the blood was not
in the true vein, sure.
Make way there the Duke returns from the inthronmēt Maleuole.
Out roage.
Maleuole.
Hence ye gross iawd pessantly, out go.
Nay sweet Maleuole, since my return, I hear you are
become the thing I always prophesied would be, an ad∣vanced
virtue, a worthily employed faithfulness a man a
grace, dear friend.
Come; what? Si quotes peccant homines. If as often as cour∣tiers
play the knaves honest men should be angry. Why look
ye, we must collouge sometimes, forswear sometimes.
Be damned sometimes.
Right Nemo omnibus horis sapit. No man can be honest
at all hours. Necessity often depraves virtue.
I will commend thee to the Duke.
Do let vs be friends man.
And knaves man.
Right, let vs prosper and purchase, our lordships shall
live and our knavery be forgotten.
He that by any ways gets riches his means never shames him.
True.
For impudence and faithlessness are the maine stays
to greatness.
By the Lord thou art a profound lad.
By the Lord thou art a perfect knave. out ye ancient damnatiō.
Peace, peace, and thou wilt not be a friend to me as I
am a knave, be not a knave to me as I am thy friend and dis¦close
me, peace Cornets.
On on, leave vs leave vs: stay, where is the Hermit?
With Duke Pietro, with Duke Pietro.
Is he dead? is he poisoned?
Dead as the Duke is,
Good, excellent: he will not blab, securenes lives
in secrecy, come hither, come hither.
Thou hast a certain strong villainous sent about thee,
my nature cannot endure.
Sent man? what returns Maria? what answer to our suit?
Cold frosty, she is obstinate,
Then shees but dead, tic resolute, she dies,
Black deed only through black deed, safely fles.
Pew, per scelera semper sceleribus tutum est iter.
What art a scholar? art a politician? sure thou art an
arrand knave.
Who I? I have been twice an under sheriff, man.
Hast bin with Maria.
As your scrivener to your usurer I have dealt about ta∣king
of this commodity, but shes could-frosty.
well I will go rail upon some great man, that I may purchase
the bastinado, or else go marry some rich Genoan lady and in∣stantly
go travail.
Travail when thou art married.
I tic your young Lords fashion to do so, though he
was so lafy being a bachelor, that he would never travail so
far as the University yet when he married her tales of, and
Catsoe for England.
And why for England.
Because there is no Prothelhouses there.
Nor Courtesans.
Nether; your whore went down with the stews
and your punk came up with your Puritan.
Can thou empoison? can thou empoison?
Excellently, no lieu, Apothecary, or Politician better▪ look
ye, her's a box, whō would thou impoison? her's a box which
opened, &amp; the fume taken up in condites, thorough which the
brain purges it self, doth instantly for 12. hours space, bind up
all show of li•e in a deep cesles sleep: here is another which being
opened under the sleepers nose, chokes al the power of life, kills
him suddenly.
Isle try experiments, tic good not to be deceived: so,
so, Catzo.
Who would fear that may destroy, death hath no teeth, or tong,
And he thats great, to him are slaves
Shame, Murder, fame and wrong.
My honoured Lord.
The good Maleuole, that plain-tongued man, alas,
is dead on sudden wondrous strangely, he held in our esteem
good place. Celso see him buried, see him buried.
I shall observe ye.
And Celso, prithee let it be thy care to night
To have some pretty show, to solemnise
Our high instalement, some music, mockery:
Weal give fair entertain unto Maria
The Duchess to the banished Altofront:
Thou shalt conduct her from the Citadel
Unto the Palace, think on some Mockery,
Of what shape, •weet Lord?
Why shape? why any quick done fiction,
As some brave spirits of the Genoan Dukes,
To come out of Elizium forsooth,
Led in by Mercury, to gratulate
Our happy fortune, •ome such any thing, some far •et trick,
good for Ladies, some stale toy or other, no matter so't bee of
our devising.
Do thou prep•r't, tic but for a fashion sake,
Fear not, it shall be graced man, it shall take.
All service.
All thanks, our hand shall not be 〈◊〉 to thee fare∣well.
Now is my treachery secure, nor can we fall:
Mischief that prospers men do virtue call,
Isle trust no man, he that by tricks gets wreathes,
Keeps them with steel, no man securely breathes,
Out of deserved ranks the crowd will mutter, fool:
Who cannot bear with spite, he cannot rule,
The chiefest secret for a man of state,
Is, to live senseless of a strenghles hate.
Death of the damned thief: Isle make one in the
mask, thou shalt ha some
Brave spirits of the antique Dukes.
My Lord, what strange delusion?
Most happy, dear Celso, poisond with an empty
box? Isle give thee all anon: my •eddy comes to court, there
is a whurle of fate comes tumbling on, the Castles captain
stands for me, the people pray for me, and the great leader of
the just stands for me: then courage Celso.
For no disastrous chance can ever move him,
That leaves nothing but a God aboue him.
Make room there room for the Ladies: why gen∣tlemen,
will not ye suffer the Ladies to be entered in the great
chamber? why gallants? and you sir, to drop your Torch
where the beauties must sit too,
And there's a great fellow plays the knave, why
dost not str•ke him?
Let him play the knave a Gods name, think thou
I have no more wit then to strike a great fellow: the music.
more lights, revelling, scaffolds: do you hear? let there bee
oaths enough ready at the door, swear out the devil himself,
Lets leave the Ladies, and go see if the Lords bee ready for
them.
And by my troth Beauties, why do you not put
you into the fashion, this is a stale cut, you must come in fa∣shion:
look ye, you must be all felt, fealt and feather, a fealt
upon your bare hair: look ye, these tiring things are justly
out of request now: and do ye hear? you must wear falling
bands, you must come into the falling fashion: there is such
a deal a pinning these ruffs, when the fine clean fall is
worth all: and a gen, if you should chance to take a nap in the
afternoon, your falling band requires no potting stick to re∣cover
his form believe me, no fashion to the falling I say.
And is not senior S. Andrew a gallant fellow now.
By my maiden-head la, honour and he agrees as∣well
together as a satin suit and woollen stockings.
But is not Marshall Make-rome my servant in reuer∣zion,
a proper gentleman.
Yes in reversion as he had his office, as in truth he
hath all things in reversion: hee haz his Mistress in reversion,
his clothes in reversion, his wit in reversion: and indeed is a
suitor to me, for my dog in reversion: but in good verity la,
he is as proper a gentleman in reversion as: and indeed, as
fine a man as may be, having a red beard and a pair of wrapped
legs.
But I saith I am most monstrously in love with
count Quidlibet in Quodlibet, is he not a pretty dapper un∣idle
gallant?
He is even one of the most busy fingered Lords, he
will put the beauties to the squeak most hiddeously.
Room, make a lane there, the Duke is entering•stand
handsomely for beauties sake, take up the Ladies
there. So, cornets, cornets.
Madam, with gentle ear receive my suit,
A kingdoms safety should o'er poise flight rites,
Marriage is merely Natures policy:
Then, since unless our royal beds be joined,
Danger and civil tumult frights the state.
Be wise as you are fair, give way to fate.
What would thou, thou affection to our house?
Thou ever devil, it was thou that banishedst
my truly nobleLord.
I?
I, by thy plots, by thy black stratagems,
Twelve Moons have suffered change since I beheld
The loved presence of my dearest Lord.
O thou far worse than death, he parts but soul
From a weak body: but thou, soul from soul
Disseuerest, that which Gods own hand did knit.
Thou scant of honour, full of devilish wit.
Weal check your too intemperate lavishness
I can will.
What Can?
Go to, in banishment thy husband dies.
He ever is at home that's ever wise,
Youst never meet more, reason should love con∣trouble,
Not meet?
She that dear loves, her loue's still in her soul.
You are but a woman Lady, you must yield,
O save me thou innated bashfulness,
Thou only ornament of women's modesty.
Modesty, Death Isle torment thee,
Do, urge all torments, all afflictions try,
Isle die my Lords, as long as I can die,
Thou obstinate, thou shalt die. Captain, that Ladies
life is forteified to Justice, we have examined her,
And we do find, she hath empoisoned
The reverend Harm•: therefore we command
Severest custody. Nay, if you'll dooes no good,
Youst dooes no harm, a Tyrants peace is blood.
O thou art merciful, O gracious devil,
Rather by much let me condemned be
For seeming murder, than be damned for thee.
Isle morn no more, come girt my brows with flowers,
Reu•l and dance; soul, now thy wish thou hast,
Die like a Bride, poor heart thou shalt die chaste.
Life is a frost of could felicity,
And death the thaw of all our vanity,
Wast not an honest Priest that wrote so?
Who let her in?
Forbear.
Forbear•
Alas calamity, is every where.
Sad misery despite your double doors,
Will enter even in court.
Peace.
I ha done? one word, take heed, I ha done.
Cillenian Mercury, the God of ghosts,
From gloomy shades that spread the lower coasts,
Calls sour high seemed Genoan Dukes to come
And make this presence their Elizium:
To pass away this high triumphal night,
With song and dances, courts more soft delight.
Are you God of ghosts, I have a suit depending in
hell betwixt me and my conscience, I would fine have thee
help me to an advocate.
Mercury shall be your lawyer, Lady.
Nay faith, Mercury haz too good a face, to be a
right lawyer.
Peace, forbear: Mercury presents the mask.
Celso, Celso, count Maria for our love; Lady, be gre∣tious,
yet grace.
With me Sir?
Yes, more loved then my breath:
With you Isle dance.
Why then you dance with death,
But come Sir, I was ne'er more apt to mirth.
Death gives eternity a glorious breath:
O, to die honoured, who would fear to die.
They die in fear, who live in villainy.
Yes believe him Lady, and be ruled by him.
Madam, with me?
Would then be miserable?
I need not wish.
O yet forbear my hand, away, fly, fly,
O seek not her, that only seeks to die.
Poor loved soul.
What, would court misery?
Yes.
Sheele come too soon, O my grieved heart!
Lady, ha done, ha done.
Come, lets dance, be once from sorrow free.
Art a sad man.
Yes sweet.
Then weal agree.
Believe it Lady, shall I swear, let me enjoy you in
private, and Isle mary you by my soul.
I had rather you would swear by your body: I
think that would prove the more regarded other with you.
Isle swear by them both, to please you.
O, dam them not both to please me, for Gods sake.
•a•th, sweet creature, let me enjoy you to night, and Isle
mary you to morrow fortnight, by my troth la.
On his troth la, believe him not, that kind of cun∣nica•ching
is as stale as sir Oliuer Anchoues persumde jerkin:
promise of matrimony by a young gallant, to bring a virgin La∣die
into a fools paradise: make her a great woman, and then
cast her off: tic as common as natural to a Courtier, as jealousy to
a Citizen, gluttony ot a Puritan, wisdom to an Alderman, pride
to a Tailor, or an empty handbasket to one of these sixpeny
damnations: of his troth la, believe him not, traps to catch
polecats.
Keep your face constant, let no sudden passion speak
in your eyes.
O my Altofront.
A tyrants jelosies
are very nimble, you receive it all.
My heart, though not my knees, doth vmbly fall,
Lowe as the earth to thee.
Peace, next change, no words.
Speech to such, ay, O what will affords?
Maleuole?
No.
Altofront, Duke Pietro, Ferneze. ho?
Duke Altofront, Duke Altofront.
Are we surprised? what strange delusions mo•ke
Our senses, do I dream? or have I dreamt.
This two days space? where am I?
Where an arch-vilaine is.
O lend me breath, till I am fit to die.
For peace with heaven, for your own souls sake,
Vouchsafe me life.
Ignoble villain, whom neither heaven nor hell,
goodness of God or man, could once make good.
Base treacherous wretch, what grace can thou ex∣pect
That 〈◊〉 grown impudent in gracel•snesse.
O life!
Slave, take thy life.
were thou defenced through blood and wounds,
the sternest horror of a civil fight
Would I achieve thee: but prostrate at my feet
Iscorne to hurt thee: itis the heart of slaves
That deigns to triumph over peasants graves.
For such thou art, since birth doth near enrol
A man mong monarchs, but a glorious soul.
O I have seen strange accidents of state,
The flatterer like the Ivy clip the Ok,
And wast it to the hart: lust so confirmed
That the black act of sin it self not shamd
To be termed Courtship.
O they that are as great as be their sins,
Let them remember that th'inconstant people,
Love many men merely for their faces,
And outward shows: and they do covet more
To have a sight of these then of their virtues,
Yet thus much let the great ones still conceal,
When they observe not Heavens imposd conditions,
They are no men, but forfeit their commissions.
O good my Lord, I have lived in the Court this
twenty year, they that have been old Courtiers and come
to live in the City, they are spited at and thrust to the walls
like Apricokes, good my Lord.
My Lord, I did know your Lordship in this disguise, you
heard me ever say if Altofront did return I would stand for
him: besides it was your Lordships pleasure to call me Wittol
and Cuckold; you must not think but that I knew you I
would have put it up so patiently.
§ You ore-ioy'd spirits wipe your long wet eyes,
Hence with this man: an Eagle takes not flies.
You to your vows: And thou unto the suburbs.
You to my worst friend I would hardly give:
Thou art a perfect old knave, all pleased live.
 You two unto my breast: thou to my hart.
The rest of idle actors idly part,
And as for me I here as•um my right,
To which I hope ell's pleased: to all goodnight.

LEt those once know that herewith malice lurk,
Tic base to be too wise, in others work.
The rest, sit thus saluted:
Spectators know, you may with freest faces
Behold this Scene, for here no rude disgraces
Shall taint a public, or a private name,
This pen at viler rate doth value fame,
Than at the price of others infamy,
To purchase it: Let others dare the rope,
Your modest pleasure is our authors scope.
The hurdle and the rack to them he leaves,
That have nought left to be accounted any,
But by not being: Nor doth he hope to wyn
Your louder hand, with that most common sin
Of vulgar pens, rank bawdry, that smells
Even thorough your masks, vsque ad nauseam:
The venus of this Scene doth loath to wear
So vile, so common, so immodest cloathings,
But if the nimble form of commody,
Mere spectacle of life, and public manners
May, gracefully arrive to your pleased ears,
We boldly dare the utmost death of fears
For we do know that this most fair filed room
Is Laden with most Attic judgements, ablest spirits,
Then whom, there are none more exact, full, strong,
Yet none more soft, benign in censuring,
I know ther's not one Ass in all this presence,
Not one Callumnious rascal, or base villain
Of emptiest merit, that would tax and slander
If Innocence her self should write, not one we know it.
O you are all the very breath of Phebus
In your pleased gracings all the true life blood
Of our poor author lives, you are his very graces.
Now if that any wonder why he's drawn
To such base soothings, know his ploy's; The Fawn.
SEe yonder's Vrbin those far appearing Spires, rise from the City, you shall conduct me no further, re∣turn to Ferrari, my Dukedom by your care in my absence shall rest constantly united, and most religi∣ously loyal.
My Prince and brother, let my blood and love chal∣lenge the freedom of one question.
You have it.
Why? in your steadier age in strength of life,
And firmest wit of time, will you break forth
Those stricter Limits of regardful state
(Which with severe distinction you still kept)
And now to unknown dangers you'll give up
Your self Ferraras Duke, and in your self
The state; and vs. Oh my loved brother,
"Honour avoids not only just defame:
"But flies all means that may ill voice his name.
Busy your self with no fears, for I shall rest most wary of our safety, only some glimses I will give you for your satisfacti∣on why I leave Ferrari, I have vowed to visit the Court of Vrbin in some disguise, as thus: my son as you can well witness with me, could I never persuade to marriage, although my self was then, an ever resolved Widower, and tho I proposed to him this very Lady, to whom hee is gone in my right to negotiate: now how cooler blood will behave it self in this business, would I have an on∣lie testimony, other contents shall I give my self; as not to take love by attorney, or make my election out of tongues, other suffisings there are which my regard would fine make sound to me: some∣thing of much you know, that and what else you must not know, bids you excuse this kind of my departure.
I commend all to your wisdom, and yours to the wisest.
Think not but I shall approve that more than folly which even now appears in a most ridiculous expectation: be in this as∣sured. "The bottom of gravity is nothing like the top, once more fare you well. 
And now thou Ceremonious sovereignty
Ye proud severer statefull Complements
The secret arts of Rule, I put you off;
Nor ever shall those manacles of form
Once more lock up the appetite of blood.
Tic now an age of man, whilst we all strict
Have lived in awe of carriage regular
Opted unto my place, not hath my life
Once tasted of exorbitant affects
Wilde Longings, or the Least of disranct shapes.
But we must once be wild, tic ancient truth
O fortunate, whose madness falls in youth!
Well, this is text, who ever keeps his place
In servile station, is all low and base.
Shall I because some few may cry, Light, vain,
Beat down affection from desired rule,
He that doth strive to please the world's a fool
To have that fellow cry. O mark him, grave,
See how austerely he doth give example,
Of repressed heate and steady life
Whilst my forced life against the stream of blood
Is tugged along, and all to keep the God
Of fools and women: Nice opinion:
Whose strict preserving makes oft great men fools
And fools oft great men: no thou world know thus
"Ther's nothing free but it is generous.
How now my little more then nothing, what news is stirring?
All the Citi's afire.
On fire?
With joy of the Prince Dulcimels birth day, there's show upon show, sport upon sport.
What sport, what sport?
Marry sir to solemnise the Princes birth-day, there's first Crackers which run into the ayre, and when they are at the top, like some ambitious strange heretic, keep a cracking, &amp; a crac∣king, and then break, and down they come.
A pretty crab, he would yield tart juice and he were squeezed.
What sport else?
Other fireworks.
Spirit of wine, I cannot tell how these fire-works should be good at the solemnising the birth of men or women, I am sure they are dangerous at their begetting, what more fire-works sir?
There be squibs sir, which squibs running upon lines like some of our gaudy Gallants sir, keep a smother sir, with fleshing and flashing, and in the end sir, they do sir
What sir?
Stink sir.
Fore heaven, a most sweet youth.
News, news, news, news.
What, in the name of prophecy?
Art thou grown wise?
Doth the Duke want no money?
Is there a maid found at 24?
Speak, thou three legedd Tripos, is thy ship of Fools a flote yet?
I ha many things in my head to tell you.
I, thy head is always working, it roles, and it roles Don∣dolo,
but it gathers no most Dondolo.
Tiberio the Duke of Ferraraes son excellently horsed, all upon Flaunders Mares, is arrived at the Court this very day, somewhat late in the night time.
An excellent nuntius.
Why my Gallants, I have had a good wit.
Yes troth, but now tic grown like an Almanake for the last year, past date, the mark's out of thy mouth Dondolo.
And whats the Princes Embassage? thou art private with the Duke, thou belongest to his close stool.
Why? every fool knows that, I know it my self man as well as the best man, hee is come to solicit a marriage betwixt his Father the Duke of Feraraes, and our Duke of Vrbins daughter Dulcimel.
Pity of my passions, Nymphadoro shall loose one of his mistresses.
Nay, if thou hast more than one, the loss can ne'er bee grievous since tic certain he that loves many formally, never loves any violently.
Most trusted Frappatore, is my hand the weaker because it is divided into many fingers? no, tic the more strongly nimble. I doe now love threescore and nine Ladies al of them most extreme∣lie well, but I doe love the Princes most extremely best: but in ve∣rye sighing sadness, I ha lost all hope, and with that hope a Lady, that is most rare, most fair, most wise, most sweet, most
Any thing true but remember still this fair, this wise, this sweet, this all of excellence has in the tail of all, a Woman.
Peace, the presence fills against the Prince approaches: Mark who enters?
My Brother, sir Amoroso-debilidosso.
Not he.
No, not he?
How is he changed?
Why, grown the very dregs of the drabs cup.
O Babylon thy walls are fallen; Is he married?
Yes, yet still the Ladies common, or the common Ladies servant.
How do's his own Lady bear with him?
Faith like the Romaine Milo, bore with him when hee was a Calfe, and now caries him when he's grown an Ox.
Peace the Duk's at hand.
Daughter, for that our last speech leaves the firmest print, be thus advised; when young Tiberio negotiates his fathers love, hold heedie guard over thy passions &amp; still keep this full thought firm in thy reason, tic his old Fathers love the young man moos,
(is it not well thought my Lord, we must bear brain,) and when thou shalt behold, Tiberios life-full eyes and well filled veins, com∣plection firm, and hairs that curls with strength of lusty moi∣stur, (I think wee yet can speak, wee ha been eloquent) thou must shape thy thoughts to apprehend his father well in years,
A grave wise Prince, whose beauty is his honour,
And well past life, and doe not give thy thoughts
Least liberty to shape a divers scope,
(My Lord Granuffo: pray ye note my phrase.)
So shalt thou not abuse thy younger hope.
Nor afflict vs, who only joy in life,
To see thee his.
Gracious my father fear not, I rest most duteous to your dispose.
Set on then, for the Music gives vs notice the Prince is hard at hand.
You are most welcome to our long desiring Father, to vs you are come.—
From our long desiring Father.
Is this your fathers true proportion? 
No Lady, but the perfect counterfeit.
And the best graced.
The Painters Art could yield.
I wonder he would send a counterfeit to move our love,
Hear, thats my wit, when I was 18. old such a pretty joy∣ing wit had I, but age hath made vs wise (hast not my Lord?)
Why fairest Princes, if your eye dislike that deader piece, behold me his true form and livelier image, such my Father hath been.
My Lord, please you to scent this flower.
Tic withered Lady, the flowers scent is gone.
This hath been such as you are, hath been sir; they say in England, that a far famed Friar had guirt the Island round with a brass wall, if that they could have catched, Time is, but Time is past, left it hill clipped with aged Neptunes arm.
Aurora yet keeps chaste old Titheus bed.
Yet blushes at it when she rises.
Pretty, pretty, just like my younger wit: you know it my Lord.
But is your Fathers age thus fresh, hath yet his head so ma∣ny hairs?
More, more, by many a one.
More say you?
More.
Right sir, for this hath none, is his eye so quick as this same piece makes him show?
The courtesy of Art hath given more life to that part, than the sad cares of state would grant my father.
This model speaks aboue forty.
Then doth it somewhat flatter, for our father hath seen more years, and is a little shrunk from the full strength of time.
Somewhat coldly praised.
Your father hath a fair Solicitor,
And be it spoke with virgin modesty,
I would he were no elder, not that I doe fly
His side for years, or other hopes of youth,
But in regard the malice of lewd tongues
Quick to deprave on possibilities,
(Almost impossibilities) will spread
Rumours, to honour dangerous.
What? whisper? I, my Lord Granuffo it were fit
To part their lips: men of discerning wit
That have read Plinie can discourse, or so,
But give me practise: well experienc't age
Is the true Delphos. I am no Oracle
But yet Isle prophecy: well my Lord Granuffo,
Tic fit to interrupt their privacy,
Is it not my Lord? now sure thou art a man
Of a most learned silence, and one whose words
Have bin most precious to me, right, I know thy heart,
Tic true, thy legs discourse with right and grace,
And thy tongue is constant. Fair my Lord,
Forbear all all pruat closer conference,
What from your father comes, comes openly,
And so must speak: for you must know my age
Hath seen the beings and the quide of things,
I know Dimensions and the termini
Of all existence: Sir I know what shapes
Appetite forms; but pollice and states
Have more elected ends: your fathers suit
Is with all public grace received, and private love
Embraced, as for our daughters bent of mind
She must seem somewhat nice, tic virgins kind
To hold long Out, if yet she chance deny,
Ascribe it to her decent modesty:
Wee have been a philosopher and spoke
With much applause; but now age makes vs wise,
And draws our eyes to search the heart of things,
And leave vain seemings, therefore you must know,
I would be loath the gaudie shape of youth
Should one provoke, and not allowed of heate
Or hinder, or — for sir I know, and so,
Therefore before vs time and place affords
Free speech, else not: wise heads use but few words
In short breath, know the Court of Vrbin holds
Your presence and your embassage so dear,
That wee want means once to oppress our heart
But with our heart: plain meaning shuns art,
You are most welcome (Lord Granuff a trick,
A figure, note) we use no Rhetoric.
Did not Tiberio call his father fool?
No, he said years had weakened his youthful quickness.
He swore he was bald.
No; but not thick haired.
By this light, Isle swear he said his father had the hipgout, the strangury, the fistula in ano, and a most vnabydable breath, no teeth, less eyes, great fingers, little legs, an eternal flux, and an everlasting cough of the longues.
Fie, fie, by this light he did not.
By this light he should ha done then: home on him, three score ann five, to have and to hold, a Lady of fifteen. O 〈◊〉 a tyranny equal if not aboue thy torturing; thou did bind the
living and the dead bodies together, and forced them so to pine and rot, but this cruelty, binds breast to breast, not only different bodies, but if it were possible most unequal minds together, with an enforcement even scandalous to Nature. Now the lilac deliver me, an intelligencer, be good to me ye Cloisters of bondage, of whence art thou?
Of Ferrari.
A Ferrares what to me, came thou in with the Prince Tiberio?
With the Prince Tiberio, what to that, you will not rail at me will you?
Who I? I rail at one of Ferrari, a Ferazes, no? did thou ride?
No.
Hast thou worn socks?
No.
Then blessed be the most happy gravel betwixt thy toes I doe prophecy thy tirannising ytch shall be honourable, and thy right worshipful, Love shall appear in full presence; art thou an officer to the Prince?
I am, what a that?
My cap, what officer?
Yeoman of his bottles, what to that?
My lip, thy name good yeoman of the bottles?
Fawnus.
Fawnus? an old Courtier, I wonder thou art in no better clothes and place Fawnus?
I may be in better place sir, and with you of more regard if this match of our Dukes intermarriage with the heir of Vrbin proceed, the Duke of Vrbin dying, and our Lord coming in his Ladies right of title to your dukedom.
Why then shalt thou oh yeoman of the bottels become a maker of Magnificees, thou shalt beg some od suit, and change thy old shirt, pare thy beard, cleanse thy teeth, and eat Apri∣cocks, marry a rich widow, or a cracked Lady, whose case thou shalt make good. Then my Pythagoras shall thou and I make a transmigration of souls, thou shalt marry my daughter, or my wife shall be thy gracious mistress. Seventeen puncks shall be thy proporcion. Thou shalt beg to thy comfort of clean linen, eat no more fresh beef at supper, or save the broth for next days porridge, but the flesh pots of Egypt shall fatten thee, and the
Grasehopper shall flourish in thy summer.
And what dost thou think of the Dukes overture of mar∣riage?
What doe you think?
May I speak boldly as at Alleppo?
Speak till thy lungs ache, talk out thy teeth, here are none of those cankers, these mischiefs of society, intelligencers, or informers, that will cast rumour into the teeth of some Lalius Bal∣dus, a man cruelly eloquent and bluddily learned, no, what say thou Fawnus?
With an undoubted breast thus, I may speak boldly,
By this night isle speak broadly first and thou wilt man, our Duke of Vrbin is a man very happily mad, for he thinks him∣self right perfectly wise, and most demonstratively learned; nay more.
No more, Isle on, me thinks the young Lord our Prince of Ferrari so bounteously adorned with all, of grace, feature and best shaped proportion, fair use of speech, full opportunity, &amp; that which makes the sympothie of all equality, of heate, of years, of blood, me thinks these Loadstones should attract the mettle of the young Princes rather to the son than to the noisome, cold, and most weak side of his half rotten father.
Tha'rt ours, tha'rt ours now dare we speak as boldly as if Adam had not fallen, and made vs all slaves, hark ye, the Duke is an arrant doting Ass, an Ass, and in the knowledge of my very sense, will turn a foolish animal, for his son will prove like one of Balls priests, have all the flesh presented to the Idol his father, but he in the night will feed on it, will devour it, he will yeoman of the bottels, he will.
Now gentlemen, I am sure the lust of speech hath equally drenched vs all, know I am no servant to this Prince Tiberio.
Not?
Not, but one to him out of some private urging most vow∣ed, one that pursues him but for opportunity of safe satisfaction, now if ye can prefer my service to him, I shall rest yours wholly.
Just in the devils mouth, thou shalt have place, Fawns thou shalt, behold this generous Nymphadoro a gallant of a clean boot, straight back, and beard of a most hopeful expectation, he is a ser∣uant of fair Dulcimels her very creature borne to the Princes sole
adoration, a man so spent in time to her, that piety (if no more of grace) must follow him when we have gained the room, second his suite Hercules. Isle be your intelligencer.
Our very heart, and if need be work to most desperate ends.
Well urged.
Words fit acquaintance, but full actions friends.
Thou shalt not want Fawnus.
You promise well.
Be thou but firm, that old doting iniquity of age, that on∣lie eyed lecherous Duke thy Lord shall be baffuld to extremest de∣rision, his son prove his fool fathers own issue.
And wee, and thou with vs blessed and enriched past all misery of possible contempt, and aboue the hopes of greatest con∣gestures.
Nay as for wealth vilely miretur vulgus. I know by his physiognomy, for wealth he is of my addiction, &amp; bid's a fico for it.
Why thou art but a younger brother, but poor Baldazozo.
Faith to speak truth, my means are written in the book of fare, as yet unknown, and yet I am at my fool, and my hunting gelding, come, Viah, to this feastfull entertainment.
I never knew till now, how old I was,
By him by whom we are, I think a Prince
Whose tender sufferance never felt a gust
Of boulder breathings, but still lived gently fanned
With the soft gales of his own flatterers lips
Shall never know his own complexion.
Dear sleep and lust I thank you, but for you,
Mortal till now, I scarce had known my self
Thou gratefvll poison, sleek mischief Flattery
Thou dreamefull slumber (that doth fall on kings
As soft and soon as their first holy oil,)
Be thou for ever damned, I now repent
Severe indictions to some sharpe stiles,
Freeness, so't grow not to licentiousness
Is grateful to just states. Most spotless kingdom,
And men o happy borne under good stars.
Where what is honest, you may freely think,
Speak what you think, and write what you doe speak,
Not bound to servile soothings. But since our rank
Hath ever been afflicted with these flies
(That blow corruption on the sweetest virtues)
I will revenge vs all upon you all
With the same stratagem, we still are caught,
Flattery it self, and sure all knows the sharpness
Of reprehensiue language is even blunted
To full contempt, since vice is now termed fashion
And most are grown to ill even with defence,
I vow to wast this most prodigious heat
That false into my age, like scorching flames
In depth of numbed December, in flattering all
In all of their extremest vitiousnesse,
Till in their own loved race they fall most lame,
And meet full butte, the close of Vices shame.
Come Sir, a stool boy, these Court Feasts are to vs Serve∣tors Court Fasts, such scambling, such shift for to eat, and where to eat, here a Squire of lowe degree hath got the carcass of a Plouer, there Pages of the Chamber divide the spoils of a tattered Pheasant, here the Sewer has friended a Country Gentleman with a sweet green goose, and there a young fellow that late has bought his office, has caught a Woodcock by the nose, with cups full e∣for flowing.
But is not Faunus preferred with a right hand?
Did you ever see a fellow so spurted up in a moment, he has got the right ear of the Duke, the Prince, Princess, most of the Lords, but all the Ladies, why hee is become their only Minion, Usher, and Supporter.
He hath gotten more loved reputation of virtue, of lear∣ning, of all graces, in one hour, than all your snarling reformers have in —
Nay, thats vnquestionable, and indeed what a fruitless la∣bore, what a filling of Danes tubbe, is it become to inveigh a∣against folly, community takes away the sense, and example the shame: no, praise me these fellows, hang on their chariot wheel,
And mount with them whom fortune heaves, nay drives:
A stoical sower virtue seldom thrives.
Oppose such fortune, and then burst with those are pitied.
The hill of Chance is paved with poor men's bones,
And bulks of luckless souls, over whose eyes,
Their chariot wheels must ruthless grate, that rise.
Behold that thing of most fortunate, most prosperous, impudence, Don Fanus himself.
Blessed and long lasting bee thy carnation ribbon; O man of more than wit, much more than virtue, of fortune! Fawnus wilt eat any of a young spring sallet?
where did the herbs grow my gallant, where did they grow?
Hard by in the City here.
No, Isle none, Isle eat no City herbs, no City roots, for here in the City a man shall have his excrements in his teeth a∣gain within four and twenty hours, I love no City fillets: has't any Canary?
How the poor snake wriggles with this sudden warmth.
Here Fawnus a health as deep as a female.
Fore Jove, we must be more endeared.
How dost thou feel thy self now Fawn?
Very womanly with my fingers, I protest I think I shall love you, are you married? I am truly taken with your virtues, are you married?
Yes.
Why I like you well for it.
No troth Fawn, I am not married.
Why I like you better for it; fore heaven I must love you;
Why Fawn, why?
Fore-heauen you are blessed with three rare graces, fine lin∣nen, clean linings, a sanguine complexion, and I am sure, an ex∣cellent wit, for you are a gentleman borne.
Thank thee sweet Fawn, but why is clean linen such a grace, I prithee.
Oh my excellent, and inward dearly approved friend,— What's your name sir? clean linen is the first our life craves, and the last our death enjoys.
But what hope rests for Nymphadora, thou art now with∣in the buttons of the Prince: shall the Duke his Father marry she
Lady?
Tic to be hoped, not.
That's some relief as long as ther's hope.
But sure sir tic almost undoubted the Lady will carry him.
O pestilent ayre, is there no plot so cunning, no surmise so false, no way of avoidance?
Hast thou any pity, either of his passion, or the Ladies years, a Gentleman in the summer &amp; hunting season of his youth, the Lady met in the same warmth, were it not to bee wept that such a sapless chafing-dish using old dotard as the Duke of Ferra∣ra with his withered hand, should pluck such a bud, such a: Oh the life of sense!
Thou art now a perfect Courtier of just fashion, good grace, can not relieve vs?
Ha ye any money?
Pish Fawn, we are young Gallants.
The liker to have no money. But my young Gallants to speak like my self, I must hug your humour. Why look you there is fate, destiny, constellations, and Planets, (which though they are under nature, yet they are aboue women,) who hath read the book of chance? no, cherish your hope, sweeten your ima∣ginations, with thoughts of, ah why women are the most giddy, uncertain motions under heaven, tic neither proportion of body, virtue of mind, amplitude of fortune, greatness of blood, but only mere chancefull appetie sways them: which makes some one like a man, be it but for the paring of his nils, viah, as for in∣equality, art not a gentleman?
That I am, and my beneficence shall show it.
I know you are, by the only word beneficence, which only speaks of the future tence (shall know it,) but may I breath in your bosoms; I only fear Tiberio will abuse your fathers trust, and so make your hopes desperate.
How? the Prince? would hee only stood cross to my wishes, he should find me an Italian.
How, an Italian:
By thy aid an Italian, dear Fawnus, thou art now wrig∣led into the Princes bosom, and thy sweet hand should Minister that Nectar to him, should make him immortal; Nymphadoro in direct phrase, thou should murder the Prince, so revenge thine own wrongs, and be rewarded for that revenge.
Before the light of my eyes, I think I shall admire, won∣der
at you. What? ha ye plots, proiects, correspondences, and stratagems: why are not you in better place?
Who's this Herod my eldest Brother sir Amoroso Debilidoso?
Oh I know him, God bless thine eyes sweet sir Amo∣roso, a rous, a vine de monte, to the health of thy Chyne my dear sweet Seignior.
Oh no sir, hee takes the diet this spring always, boy my brothers bottle.
Faith Fawn, an odd unwholesome cold, makes me still hoarse and rhumatique.
Yes in troth a paltry murre, last morning hee blew nine bones out of his nose with an odd unwholesome murre: how do's my sister your Lady, what do's she breed?
I perceive Knight you have children, oh tic a blessed as∣surance of heavens favour, and long lasting name to have many children.
But I ha none, Fawn, now;
O that's most excellent, a right special happiness, hee shall not bee a Drudge to his cradle, a slave to his child, hee shall be sure not to cherish another blood, nor toil to advance parad∣venture some Rascals lust; without children a man is vnclog'd, his wife almost a Maid: Mescaline, thou cried out, O blessed bar∣rennesse, why once with child the very Venus of a Ladies entertain∣meant hath lost all pleasure.
By this ring Fawnus I doe hug thee with most pas∣sionate affection, and shall make my wife thank thee.
Nay my Brother grudges not at my probable inhere∣tance, he means once to give a younger brother hope to see fortune.
And yet I hear sir Amorosus, you cherish your loins with high art, the only ingrosser of Eringoes, prepared Condo∣rides, Cullesses made of dissolved Pearl, and bruised Amber, the pith of Parkets and canded Lamstones are his perpetual meats, Beds made of the down under pigeons wings and Goose-necks, fomentations, bathes, electuaries, frictions, and all the nurses of most forcible excited concupiscence hee uses with most nice and tender industry.
Pish Zuccoli, no Nymphadoro, if sir Amorous would ha children, let him lie on a mattres, plow or thresh, eat onions, garlic, and leek porridge, Pharaoh and his council were mi∣staken, and their devise to hinder the increase of procreation in the Israelites, with enforcing them to much labour of body, and to feed hard, with beetes, garlic, and onions, (meat that make the original of man most sharpe, and taking) was absurd. No hee should have given barley bread, lattice, melons, cucumers, huge store of veale, and fresh beef, blown up their flesh, held them from exercise, rolled them in feathers, &amp; most suerely seen them drunk once a day, then would they at their best have begotten but wenches, and in short time their generation enfeebled to nothing.
Oh divine Fawnus, where might a man take up forty pound in a commodity of garlic, and onions? Nymphadoro thine ear.
Come what are you flooring at? ther's some weakness in your brother you wrinkle at thus, come prithee impart, what we are mutually incorporated, turned one into another, biued togae∣there, come I believe you are familiar with your sister, and it were known.
Witch, Fawnus witch, why how dost dream I live? first four score a year think thou maintains my geldings, my pa∣ges, foote-clothes, my best feeding, high play, and excellent com∣pany? no tic from hence, from hence, I mynt some four hundred pound a year.
Dost thou live like a porter by the back boy?
As for my weak raind brother hang him, hee has sore shins▪ dam him Hetoroclite, his braine's perished, his youth spent his fodder so fast on others Cattle, that hee now wants for his own winter, I am fine to supply Fawn, for which I am supplied.
Dost thou branch him boy?
What else Fawn.
What else? nay tic enough, why many men corrupt other men's wives, some their maids, others their neighbours daugh∣ters, but to lie with ones brothers wedlock, O my dear Herod his vile and vncommon lust.
Fore heaven I love thee to the heart, well I may praise God for my brothers weakness, for I assure thee, the land shall dis∣cend to me my little Fawn.
To thee my little Herod? oh my rare Rascal, I do find more and more in thee to wonder at, for thou art indeed; if I prosper thou shalt know what. Whose this?
What? know you not Don Zuccone the only desperately railing Lord it's Lady that ever was confidently melancholy, that egregious idiot, that husband of the most witty, fair (and be it spoken with many men's true grief) most chaste Lady Zoya, but we have entered into a confederacy of afflicting him.
Plots ha you laid? Inductions, dangerous?
A quiet bosom to my sweet Don, are you going to visit your Lady.
What a clock first, is it past three?
Past four I assure you sweet Don.
Oh then I may be admitted, her afternoons private nap is taken, I shall take her napping. I hear ther's one jealous that I lie with my own wife, and begins to withdraw his hand: I protest I vow, and you will, on my knees, Isle take my sacrament on it, I lay not with her this four year, this four year; lee her not be turned upon me I beseech you.
My dear Don?
Oh Faunus dost know our Lady?
Your Lady?
No our Lady, for the love of charity incorporate with her, I would have all nations and degrees, all ages know our Lady for I covet only to be undoubtedly notorious.
For in deed sir, a repressed fame mounts like Camomyll, the more trod down, the more it grows, things known common and undoubted, lose rumour.
Sir I hope yet your conjectures may err; your Lady keeps full-face, vnbated roundness, cheerful aspect, were she so infamou∣sly prostitute, her cheek would fall, her colour fade, the spirit of her eye would die.
Oh young man, such women are like Danaus tubbe, and in deed all women are like Achillous, with whom Hercules wrast∣ling, he was no sooner hurled to the earth, but hee rose up with double vigour, their fall strengthened them. 
News, news, news, news, oh my dear Don be raised, be Iouiald, be triumphant, ah my dear Don.
To me first in private, thy news I pree thee.
Will you be secret?
A my life:
As you are generous?
As I am generous:
Don Zuccones Laddie's with child.
Nymph: Nymph: what i'st? what's the news?
You will be secret.
Silence it self,
Don Zuccones Laddie's with child apparently.
Herod, Herod, whats the matter pree thee, the news?
You must tell no body:
As I am generous —
Don Zuccones Laddie's with child apparently.
Fane whats the whisper, whats the fools secret news?
Truth my Lord, a thing, that, that, well, I faith it is not fit you know it?
Not fit I know it, as thou art baptised tell me, tell me.
Will you plight your patience to it.
Speak, I am a very block, I will not be moved, I am a very block.
But if you should grow disquiet (as I protest, it would make a Saint blaspheme) I should be unwilling to procure your impatience.
Yes doe, burst me, burst me, burst me with longing:
Nay faith tic no great matter, hark ye, you'll tell no body.
Not.
As you are noble.
As I am honest.
Your Lady wife apparently with child.
With child?
With child.
Fool.
My Don.
With child? by the pleasure of generation, I proclaim I lay not with her this — give vs patience, give vs patience.
Why? my Lord tic nothing to wear a forker.
Heaven and earth.
All things under the Moon are subject to their mistress grace; horns, lend me your ring my Don, Isle put it on my finger,
now tic on yours again, why is the gold now ere the worse in lustre or fitness?
Am I used thus?
I my Lord true, nay to be (look ye mark ye) to bee used like a dead ox, to have your own hide plucked on, to bee drawn on, with your own horn, to have the Lordship of your father, the honour of your ancestors, maugre your beard, to descend to the base lust of some groom of your stable, or the page of your chamber.
Oh Phalaris thy Bull.
Good Don. ha patience, you are not the only Cuckold, I would now be separated.
Alas that's but the least drop of the storm of my revenge, I will vnlegittimate the issue, what I will doe, shall be horrible but to think.
But Sir.
But Sir? I will doe what a man of my form may do, and-laugh on, laugh on, doe Sir Amorous, you have a Lady too.
But my sweet Lord.
Doe not anger me, least I most dreadfully curse thee, and wish thee married, oh Zuccone, spit white, spit thy gall out, the only boon I crave of heaven is—but to have my honours inherited by a bastard, I will be most tyrannous, blooddily tyrannous in my revenge, and most terrible in my curses: live to grow blind with lust, senseless with use, loathed after, flattered before, hated al∣ways, trusted never, abhorred ever, and last may she live to wear a foul smock seven weeks together; heaven I beseech thee.
Is he gone: is he blown of? now out upon him vnsuffe∣rably jealous fool.
Lady:
Did thou give him the famed report? do's he believe I am with child? do's he give faith?
In most sincerity, most sincerely.
Nay tic a pure fool, I can tell ye he was bred up in Ger∣many.
But the laughter rises, that hee vows hee lay not in your
bed this four year with such exquisite protestations.
That's most full truth, he hath most unjustly severed his sheets ever since the old Duke Pietro (heaven rest his soul.)
Fie, you may not pray for the dead, tic indifferent to them what you say.
Well said fool.
Ever since the old Duke Pietro, the great Devil of hell torture his soul.
O Lady yet charity.
Why? tic indifferent to them what you say fool, but do's my Lord rauell out, do's he fret? for pity of an aflicted Lady load him soundly, let him not go clear from vexation, hee has the most dishonourably, with the most sinful, most vicious obstinacy, persevered to wrong me that were I not of a male constitution, it were impossible for me to survive it, but in madness name, let him on, I ha not the weak fence of some of your soft-eyed whim∣pering Ladies, who, if they were used like me, would gall their fin∣gers with wringing their hands, look like bleeding Lucresses, and shed salt water enough to powder all the beef in the Dukes lar∣der. No, I am resolute Donna Zoya; ha; that wives were of my mettle, I would make these ridiculously jealous fools, howl like a starved dog, before he got a bit, I was created to be the affli∣ction of such an vnsanctified member, and will boyle him in his own sirupe.
Peace the woolfes ear takes the wind of vs.
The enemy is in ambush.
If any man ha the wit, now let him talk wantonly, but not baudily; come Gallants who'le be my servants: I am now ve∣rye open hearted, and full of entertainment.
Grace me too call you mistress.
Or me.
Or me.
Or me.
Or all, I am taken with you all, with you all.
As indeed, why should any woman only love any one man, since it is reasonable, women should affect al perfection, but al perfection never rests in one man; many men have many virtues, but Ladies should love many virtues, therefore Ladies should love many men; for as in womē, so in mē, some womā hath only a good
eye, one can discourse beautifully, if she doe not laugh, one's well favoured to her nose, another hath only a good brow, tother a plump lip, a third only holds beauty to the teeth, and there the soil alters, some peradventure hold good to the breast, and then downward turn like the dreamed of Image, whose head was gold, breast silver, thighs iron, and all beneath clay and earth, one only winks eloquently, another only kisses well, tother only talks well, a fourth only lies well: So in men, one Gal∣lant has only a good face, another has only a grave metho∣decal beard, and is a notable wise fellow, until he speaks, a third only makes water well, and thats a good provoking quality, one only swears well, another only speaks well, a third only do's well, all in their kind good, goodness is to bee affected, there∣fore they, it is a base thing and indeed an impossible for a worthy mind to bee contented with the whole world, but most vile and abject to be satisfied with one point of the world.
Excellent Faunus I kiss thee for this, by this hand.
I thought as well, kiss me to dear mistress.
No, good sir Amorous, your teeth hath taken rust, your breath wants airing, and indeed I love sound kissing. Come Gal∣lants, who'le run a Caranto, or leap a Leualto.
Take heed Lady frō offēding or bruising the hope of your wōb.
No matter, now I ha the slight, or rather the fashion of it, I fear no barrenness.
O, but you know not your husbands aptness.
Husband? husband? as if women could have no i will∣drone without husbands.
I, but then they will not be so like your husband.
No matter, thei'le be like their father, tic honour enough to my husband, that they vouchsafe to call him father, and that his land shall descend to them (do's hee not gnash his very teeth in anguish) like our husband? I had rather they were vngroand for, like our husband? prove such a melancholy jealous ass as he is: Do's he not stamp?
But troth, your husband has a good face.
Faith good enough face for a husband, come gallants Isle dance to mine own whistle, I am as light now as: ah, 
a kiss to you, to my sweet free servants dream on me, and adieu.
I shall loose my wits.
Be comforted dear Don, you ha none to leeze:
My wife is grown like a Dutch-crest always rampant, rampant, fore I will endure this affliction, I will live by raking cos∣kles out of kennels, nay, I will run my Country, forsake my reli∣gion, go weave Fustians, or roll the wheele-barrow at Rotor∣dam.
I would be divorced despite her friends, or the oath of her Chamber-maide.
Nay, I will be divorced in despite of em all, Isle go to law with her.
Thats excellent, nay, I would go to law.
Nay, I will go to law.
Why thats sport alone, what though it be most exacting, wherefore is money?
True, wherefore is money?
What though you shall pay for every quill, each drop of Ink, each minim, letter, tittle, comma, prick, each breath, nay, not only for thine own Orators prating, but for some other Orators silence, though thou must buy silence with a full hand, tic well known Demosthenes took aboue 2000. pound once on∣lie to hold his peace, though thou a man of noble gentry, yet you must weight, and besiege his study door, which will prove more hard to be entered, than old Troy, for that was gotten into by a woo∣den horse, but the entrance of this may chance cost thee a whole stock of Cattle, Os &amp; boues &amp; caetera pecoracampi, though then thou must sit there thrust and contemned bare-headed to a gro∣grain scribe ready to start up at the door creaking, pressed to get in, with your leave Sir, to some surly groom, the third son of a Rope-maker; what of all this?
To a resolute mind these torments are not felt.
A very arrant Ass, when hee is hungry will feed on though hee bee whipped to the bones, and shall a very arrant Ass Zuccone, be more virtuously patient, than a noble.
No Fawn, the world shall know I have more virtue, than so.
Doe so and be wise.
I will I warrant thee, so I may be revenged, what care I what I doe?
Call a dog worshipful,
Nay, I will embrace, nay I will embrace a Iakes-farmer after eleven a clock at night, I will stand bare, and give wall to a Bellows mender, pawn my Lordship, sell my foot-cloth, but I
will be revenged, do's she think she has married an Ass?
A Fool?
A Coxcomb?
A Ninny-hammer?
A Woodcock?
A Calfe?
No, she shall find that I ha eyes.
And brain.
And nose.
And Fore-head.
She shall in faith Fawn, she shall, she shall, sweet Fawn, she shall in faith old boy, it joys my blood to think on it, she shall in faith; farewell loved Fawn, sweet Fawn farewell, she shall in faith boy.
We would be private only Faunus stay,
He is a wise fellow Daughter, a very wise fellow, for he is still just of my opinion: my Lord Granuffo, you may likewise stay for, I know you'll say nothing, say on Daughter.
And as I told you sir, Tiberio being sent,
Graced in high trust as to negotiate
His royal fathers love, if he neglect
The honour of this faith, just care of state,
And every fortune that gives likelihood
To his best hopes, to draw our weaker heart
To his own love (as I protest he do's)
Isle rate the Prince with such a heat of breath
His ears shall glow, nay, I discovered him
I read his eyes, as I can read an eye,
Tho it speak in darkest Characters I can,
Can we not Fawn, can we not my Lord?
Why I conceive you now, I understand you both:
You both admire, yes, say is it not hit?
Though we are old, or so, yet we ha wit.
And you may say, (if so your wisdom please
As you are truly wise) how weak a creature
Soft woman is to beat the siege and strength,
Of so prevailing feature, and fair language,
As that of his is ever: you may add,
(If so your wisdom please, as you are wise)
As mortal man may be
I am of years, apt for his love, &amp; if he should proceed
in private urgent suit, how easy it were,
To win my love, for you may say (if so
Your wisdom please) you find in me
A very forward passion to enjoy him,
And therefore you beseech him seriously
Straight to forbear, with such close cunning art,
To urge his too well graced suite: for you
(If so your Lordship please) may say I told you all.
Go to go to, what I will say or so,
Until I say none but my self shall know.
But I will say go to, do's not my colour rise?
It shall rise for I can force my blood
To come and go, as men of wit and state,
Must sometimes fine their love, sometimes their hate.
That's policy now, but come with this free heate,
Or this same Estro or Enthusiasm,
(For these are phrases both poetical)
Will we go rate the Prince, and make him see
Himself in vs; that is our grace and wits,
Shall show his shapeles folly, vice kneels whiles virtue fits.
But see we are prevented daughter, in
It is not fit thy self should hear what I
Must speak of thy most modest wise, wise mind
For Tha'rt careful, sober, in all most wise.
And in deed our daughter. My Lord Tiberio
A horse but yet a Colt may leave his trot
A man, but yet a boy may well be broke,
From vain addictions, the head of Rivers stopped,
The Channel dries, he that doth dread a fire,
Must put out sparks, and he who fears a bull,
Must cut his horns off when he is a Calfe,
Principiis obsta; saith a learned man
Who, tho he was no Duke yet he was wise,
And had some sense or so.
What means my Lord?
Lah sir, thus men of brain can speak in clouds
Which weak eyes cannot pearce; but my fair Lord
In direct phrase thus, my daughter tells me plain
You go about with most direct entreats
To gain her love, and to abuse her father,
O my fair Lord, will you a youth so blessed
With rarest gifts of fortune, and sweet graces
Offer to love a young and tender Lady,
Will you I say abuse your most wise father?
Who tho he freeze in August, and his calves
Are sunk into his toes, yet may well wed our daughter
As old as he in wit: will you I say
(For by my troth my Lord I must be plain)
My daughter is but young, and apt to love
So fit a person as your proper self,
And so she prayed me tell you, will you now
Entice her easy breast to abuse your trust,
Her proper honour, and your fathers hopes?
I speak no figures, but I charge you check
Your appetite, and passions to our daughter
Before it head, nor offer conference
Or seek access, but by, and before vs;
What judge you vs as weak, or as unwise?
No you shall find that Venice Duke has eyes; &amp; so think on it.
Astonishment and wonder, what means this?
Is the Duke sober?
Why ha not you endeavoured
Courses that only seconded appetite?
And not your honour, or your trust of place,
Doe you not court the Lady for your self?
Fane thou dost love me: if I ha done so
Tic past my knowledge, and I prithee Fane
If thou obseru'st, I doe I know not what
Make me to know it, for by the dear light
I ha not found a thought that way; I apt for love?
Let lazy idleness filled full of wine,
Heated with meates, high fed with lustful ease
Go dote on culler, as for me: why death a sense
I court the Lady? I was not borne in Cyprus,
I love, when? how? whom? think, let vs yet keep
Our reason sound; Isle think, &amp; think, &amp; sleep.
Amazed, even lost in wondering, I restful
Of covetous expectation: I am left
As on a rock, from whence I may discern
The giddy sea of humour slow beneath,
Upon whose back the vainer bubles float
And forthwith break, o mighty flattery
Thou easiest, commonst, and most grateful venom
That poisons Courts, and all societies,
How grateful dost thou make me? should one rail
And come to fear a vice, beware legge-ringes
And the turned key on thee, when if softer hand
Suppling a sore that itches (which should smart)
Free speech gains foes, base fawnings steal the heart,
Swell you impostumbd members till you burst
Since tic in vain to hinder, on isle thrust
And when in shame you fall, Isle laugh from hence,
And cry, so end all desperate impudence.
An others court shall show me where and how
Vice may be cured, for now beside my self
Possessed with almost frenzy, from strong fervor
I know I shall produce things mere divine,
Without immoderate heate, no virtues shine
For I speak strong, tho strange, the dews that steep
Our souls in deepest thoughts, are Fury and Sleep.
Faith Fane tic my humour, the natural sin of my san∣guinea complexion, I am most inforcedly in love with all women, almost affeicting them all with an equal flame.
An excellent justice of an upright virtue, you love all Gods creatures with an unpartial affection.
Right, neither am I inconstant to any one in particular.
Tho you love all in general, true, for when you vow a most devoted love to one you swear not to tender a most devoted love to another, and indeed why should any man ouer-loue any thing, tic judgment for a man to love every thing proportionably to his virtue. I love a dog with a hunting plea∣sure, as he is pleasurable in hunting, my horse after a iourneing ea∣sins as he is easy in iournying, my hawk, to the goodness of his wing, and my wench—
How sweet Fawn, how?
Why according to her creation, nature made them pret∣tie, toying, idle phantastique imperfect creatures, even so I would in justice affect them, with a pretty toying idle phantastique im∣perfect affection, and as indeed they are only created for show and pleasure, so would I only love them for show and pleasure.
Why that's my humour to the very thread, thou dost speak my proper thoughts.
But Sir with what possibility can your constitution be so boundlesly amorous as to affect all women of what degree, form or complexion soever?
Isle tell thee, for mine own part, I am a perfect Ouidian, and can with him affect all, if she bee a virgin of a modest eye, shame faced, temperate aspect, her very modesty inflames me, her sober blushes fires me, if I behold a wanton, pretty, courtly petu∣lant Ape, I am extremely in love with her, because she is not clow∣nishly rude, &amp; that she assures her lover of no ignorant, dull, vnmo∣uing venus, be she sourly severe: I think she wittily counterfeits, &amp; I love her for her wit, if she be learned and sensures poets, I love her soul, and for her soul her body, bee she a Lady of professed igno∣rance, oh I am infinitely taken with her simplicity, as one assured to find no sophistication about her, bee she slender and lean, shoe's the Greeks delight, bee she thick and plump, shoe's the Italians pleasure, if she bee tall, shoe's of a goodly form, and will print a fair proportion in a large bed, if she bee short and low, shoe's nimbly delightful, and ordinarily quick wetted, bee she young shoe's for mine eye, bee she old shoe's for my discourse as one well knowing, ther's much amiablenes in a grave matron, but bee she young or old, lean, fat, short, tall, white, red, browne, nay even black, my discourse shall find reason to love her, if my means may procure opportunity to enjoy her.
Excellent Sir, nay if a man were of competent means, were not a notable delight for a man to have for every month in the year?
Nay for every week of the month?
Nay for every day of the week?
Nay for every hour of that day?
Nay for every humour of a man in that hour, to have a several Mistress to entertain him, as if he were Saturnine, or melancholy to have a black haired, pall-fac'de, sallowe thinking Mistress to clip him: If Jovial and merry, a sanguine, light tripping singing, indeed a mistress that would dance a caranto as she goes to embrace him, if choleric, impatient or ireful, to have a Mistress withered hair, little Ferreteyes, a lean cheek, and a sharpe nose to entertain him. And so of the rest.
O sir this were too great ambition: well I love and am beloved of a great many, for I court all in the way of honour, in the trade of marriage Fawn, but aboue all I affect the Prin∣ces, shees my utmost end. O I love a Lady whose beauty is joined with Fortune, beyond all, yet one of beauty, without fortune for some uses, nay one of fortune without beauty for some ends, but never any that has neither fortune nor beauty but for necessity such a one as this is Dona Donetta. Here is one has loved all the Court just once over.
O this is the fair Lady with the foul teeth, Natures hand shook when she was in making, for the red that should have spread her cheeks, nature let fall upon her nose, the white of his chin slipped into her eyes, and the gray of her eyes leapt before his time into her hayer, and the yellowness of her haier fell without providence into her teeth.
By the vow of my hart, you are my most only elected and I speak by way of protestation, I shall no longer wish to be, then that your only affection shall rest in me, and mine only in you.
But if you shall love any other.
Any other? can any man, love any other that knows you, the only perfection of your sex, and astonishment of mankind?
Fie ye flatter me, go wear and understand my favour, this snail slow, but sure.
This kiss.
Farewell.
The integrity and only vow of my faith to you, ever urge your well deserved requital to me.
Excellent.
See here is an other of—
Of your most only elected,
Right, Donna Garbetza.
O, I will acknowledge this is the Lady made of cutwork and all her body like a sand box, full of holes, and contains nothing but dust, she chooses her servants, as men choose dogs, by the mouth, if they open well and full, their cry is plea∣sing, she may be chaste, for she haz a bad face, and yet que∣stionles, she may bee made a strumpet, for she is cove∣tous.
By the vow of my hart, you are my most only eel∣cted, (and I speak it by way of protestation) I shall no lone∣ger wish to be, then all your affections shall only rest in me, and all mine only in you.
Excellent, this piece of stuff is good on both sides, he is so constant, he will not change his phrase.
But shall I give faith, may you not love another?
An other, can any man love another, that knows you, the only perfection of your sex, and admiration of mankind?
Your speech flies too high, for your meaning to follow, yet my mistrust shall not proceed my experience, I wrought this favour for you.
The integrity and only vow of my faith to you ever urged, your well deserved requital to me.
Why this is pure wit, nay judgment.
Why look the Fawn observe me.
I doe sir.
I doe love at this instant some nineteen Ladies all in the trade of marriage, now sir, whose father dies first, or whose portion appears most, or whose fortunes betters soonest, her with quiet liberty at my leisure will I elect, for that's my humour.
You profess a most excellent mystery sir.
Fore heaven, see the Princes she that is.
Your most only elected too.
Oh I, oh I, but my hopes faint yet, by the vow of my heart you are my most only elected and—
Ther's a ship of fools going out, shall I prefer thee Nymphodoro, thou moist be masters mate, my father hath made Dondilo Captain, else thou should have his place.
By Jove Fawn, she speaks as sharply and looks as sourly, as if she had been new squeezed out of a crab orange
How term you that Lady, with whom she holds discourse?
O Fawn it is a Lady even aboue ambition, and like the vertical sun, that neither forces others to cast shadows, nor can others force or shade her, her stile is Dona Philocalia.
Philocalia, what that renowned Lady whose ample re∣port hath stroke wonder into remotest strangers? and yet her worth aboue that wonder, she whose noble industries hath made her breast rich in true glories, and vndying habilities, she that whilst other ladies spend the life of earth, Time, in reading their glass, their Jewels, and (the shame of Poesy) lustful so∣nets gives her soul meditations, those meditations wings, that cleave the Jeer, fan bright celestial fierce, whose true re∣flections makes her see her self and them: She whose pity is ever aboue her envy, loving nothing less then insolent prosperity, and pitittying nothing more then virtue destitute of fortune.
There were a Lady for Ferraraes Duke, one of great blood, firm age, undoubted honour, aboue her sex, most mo∣destly artful, tho naturally modest, too excellent, to be left unmatched, tho few worthy to much with her.
I cannot tell my thoughts grow busy,
The Princes would be private, void the presence.
May I rest sure thou wilt conceal a secret?
Yes Nadam.
How may I rest truly assured?
Truly thus, Doe not tell it me.
Why, can thou not conceal a secret?
Yes, as long as it is a secret. but when tow know it.
how can it be a secret? and indeed with what justice can you expect secrecy in me that cannot bee private to your self?
Faith Philocalia, I must of force trust thy silence, for my breast breaks, if I confer not my thoughts upon thee.
You may trust my silence, I can command that, but if I chance to he questioned I must speak truth, I can conceal but not deny my knowledge, that must command me.
Fie on these Philosophical discoursing womē, prithee confer with me like a creature made of flesh and blood, and tell me, if it be not a scandal to the soul of all being propor∣tion, that I a female of 15. of a lightsome and civil discretion, healthy, lusty, vigorus, full and idle, should for ever be shack∣led to the cramp shins of a wayward, dull, sower, austere, rough, rheumy, threescore and four.
Nay, threescore and ten at the least,
Now heaven bless me, as it is pity that every knave is not a fool, so it is shame, that every old man is not, and re∣stead not a widower. They say in China, when women are past child-bearing, they are all burnt to make gun-powder. I wonder what men should bee done withal, when they are past child-getting, yet upon my love Philocalia (which with Ladies is often aboue their honour) I do even dote upon the best part of the Duke.
VVhats that?
His son, yes sooth, and so love him, that I must ma∣rye him.
And wherefore love him, so to marry him.
Because I love him, and because he his virtuous, I love to marry.
His virtues.
I, with him his virtues.
I with him, alas sweet Princes, love or virtue are not of the essence of marriage.
A jest upon your understanding, isle maintain that wisdom in a woman is most foolish quality: A Lady of a good complexion, naturally well wetted, perfectly bred and well exercised, in discourse of the best men, shall make fools of a thousand of these book thinking creatures, I speak it by way of justification, I tell thee, (look that no body eaues∣drop vs.) I tell thee I am truly learned, for I proteig∣rance
and wise, for I love my self▪ and virtuous enough for a Lady of fifteen.
How virtuous?
Shall I speak like a creature of a good healthful blood and not like one of these weak greene sickness, leave tisicke, staruelinges: First for the virtue of magnanimity, I am very valiant, for there is no heroic action so particularly noble &amp; glorious to our sex, as not to fall to action, the greatest deed wee can do is not to doe▪ (look that no body listen) Then am I full of patience, and can bear more then a Sumpter horse, for (to speak sensibly) what burden is there so heavy to a Porters back, as Virginity to a well complectioned young Ladies thoughts? (look no body hearken) By this hand the noblest vow is that of Virginity, because the hardest, I will have the Prince.
But by what means sweet Madam?
Oh Philocalia, in heavy sadness &amp; vnwanton phrase there lies all the brain work, by what means I could fall into a miserable blank verse presently.
But dear madam your reason of loving him.
Faith only a women's reason, because I was expressly forbidden to love him, at the first view I likte him, and no so∣ner had my fathers wisdom mistrusted my liking, but I grew loath his judgment should err. I pitied hee should prove a fool in his old age, and without cause mistrust me?
But when you saw no means of manifesting your af∣fection to him, why did not your hopes perish?
O Philocalia that difficulty only inflames me, when the enterprise is easy, the victory is inglorious, no let my wise aged, learned, intelligent Father, that can interpret eyes un∣derstand the language of birds, interpret the grumbling of dogs &amp; the cōference of cats, that can read even silence, let him forbid all interviews, all speeches, all tokens, all messages, all (as he thinks) human means, I will speak to the Prince, court the Prince, that he shall understand me, nay I will so stalk on the blind side of my all knowing fathers wit, that do what his wisdom can, he shall be my only mediator, my only messenger, my only honourable spokesman, hee shall carry my favours, he shall amplify my affection nay hee shall direct the Prince the means the very way to my bed, hee and
only he, when hee only can doe this, and only would not doe this, hee only shall doe this.
Only you shall then deserve such a husband, O love how violent are thy passages!
Pish Philocalia, tic against the nature of love, not to bee violent.
And against the condition of violence to be constant.
Constancy? constancy and patience are virtues in no living creatures but Sentinels and Anglers: here is our father.
What did he think to walk invisibly before our eyes, and he had Giges ring I would find him.
Fore Jove you rated him with Emphasis.
Did wee not shake the Prince with energy?
With Ciceronian Elocution?
And most pathetic piercing Oratory?
If hee have any wit in him, hee will make sweet use of it.
Nay he shall make sweet use of it ere I have done, Lord what overweening fools these young men be, that think vs old men sottes.
Arrant Asses.
Doting idiots, when wee God wot, ha, ha, las silly souls.
Poor weak creatures to men af approved reach.
Full years.
Of wise experience.
And approved wit.
Nay as for your wit—
Count Granuffo, as I live this Faunus is a rare under∣stander of men, is a not Faunus? this Granuffo is a right wise good Lord, a man of excellent discourse, and never speaks his signs to me, &amp; men of profound reach instruct aboundāt∣lie, hee begs suites with signs, gives thanks with signs puts off his hat ley surely, maintains his beard learnedly, keeps his lust privately, makes a nodding leg courtly, and lives happily.
Silence is an excellent modest grace, but especially be∣fore so instructing a wisdom, as that of your excellencies, as for his advancement, you gave it most royally, because hee
deserves it least duly, since to give to virtuous desert, is rather a due requital, then a Princely magnificence, when to vndeseruingnesse, it is merely all bounty and free grace.
Well spoke, it is enough, Don Granuffo this Fawnus is a very worthy fellow, and an excellent Courtier, and beloved of most of the princes of Christendom I can tell you, for how∣soever some severer dissembler, grace him not whē he affronts him in the full face, yet if he comes behind, or on the one side heel leer and put back his head upon him be sure, be you two precious to each other.
Sir my self, my family, my fortunes, are all devoted I protest most religiously to your service. I vow my whole self only proud, in being acknowledged by you, but as your creature, and my only utmost ambition is by my sword or soul to testify, how sincerely I am consecrated to your a∣doration.
Tic enough, art a Gentleman Fawn?
Not oneminently discēded, for were the pedigrees of some fortunately mounted, searched, they would be secretly found to be of the blood of the poor Fawn.
Tic enough, you two I love heartily, for thy silence never displeases me, nor thy speech ever offend me: See our daughter attends vs, my fair, my wise, my chaste, my duty∣os, and indeed, in all my daughter, (for such a pretty soul for all the world have I been) what I think wee have made the Prince to feel his error, what did hee think hee had weak fools in hand? no hee shall find, as wisely said Lucullus, Young men are fools, that go about to gull vs.
But sooth my wisest father, the young Prince is yet forgetful, and rests resolute, in his much unadvised love.
First possible?
Nay I protest what ere he fine to you (as he can fine most deeply)
Right we know it, for if you marked he would not once take sense of any such intent from him, O impudence, what mercy can thou look for?
And as I said, royally wise, and wisely royal Father—
I think that eloquence is hereditary.
Tho he can fine, yet I presume your sense is quick e∣nough to find him.
Quick, first not?
First not Fawn, why I did know you fained, nay I doe know (by the just sequence of such impudence) that hee hath laid some second siege unto thy bosom, with most miracu∣lous conveyances of some rich present on thee.
O bounteous heaven, how liberal are your graces to my Nestor-like Father.
First not so, say?
Tic so oraculous Father, he hath now more then cour∣ted with bare Phrases.
See Father see, the very bane of honour,
Corruption of justice and Virginity,
Gifts hath he left with me, O view this scarf,
This as he called it most envied silk,
That should embrace an arm, or wast, or side,
Which he much feared should never, this hee left,
Despite my much resistance.
Did he so gived me, Isle gived him, Isle regiue his token with so sharpe advantage▪
Nay my worthy Father, read but these cunning letters
Letters? where, prove you but justly loving &amp; cōceiu me
Till justice leave the Gods, Isle never leave thee.
For tho the Duke seem wise, heel find this strain,
Where two hearts yield consent, all thwartings vain,
And dare thou then aver this wicked write,
O world of winching wiles, where is thy wit?
But other talk for vs were far more fit,
For see here comes the prince Tiberio.
Daughter upon thy obediēce instantly take thy chāber
Dear father in all duty, let me beseech your leave, that I may but—
Go to, go to, you are a simple fool, a very simple animal
Yet let me, (the loyal servant of simplicity.)
What would you do? what are you wiser then your fa∣there, will you direct me?
Heavens forbid such insolence, yet let me denounce my
hearty hatred.
To what end?
Tho't be but in the Princes ear, (since fit's not maidēs blush to rail aloud.
Go to, go to.
Let me but check his heate.
Well, well.
And take him down dear father, from his full pride of hopes.
So, so, I say once more go in.
I will not loose the glory of reproof;
Is this th'office of Ambassadors my Lord Tyberio?
Nay duty of a son, nay pity of a man.
(A figure called in art Gradatio.
With some learned Climax) to court a royal Lady,
For's moister, father, or perchance his friend,
And yet intend the purchase of his beauty,
To his own use.
Your grace doth much amaze me.
I, fine, dissembe, Las we are now grown old, weak sighted, alas any one fools vs.
I deeply vow my Lord.
Peace, bee not damned, have pity on your soul,
I confess sweet Prince for you to love my daughter,
Young and witty, of equal mixture both of mind and body,
Is neither wondrous nor unnatural,
Yet to forswear and vow against ones heart,
Is full of base, ignoble cowardice,
Since ti's most plain, such speeches, do contemn
Heaven, and fear men (that's sentious now)
My gracious Lord if I vnknowingly have er'de,
Vnknowingly, can you blush my Lord:
Vnknowingly, why can you write these lines?
Present this scarf, vnknowingly my Lord,
To my dear daughter? um, vnknowingly?
Can you urge your suite, prefer your gentlest love,
In your own right, to her too easy breast:
That God knows takes too much compassion on ye,
(And so she praide me say) vnknowingly my Lord?
If you can act these things vnknowingly,
Know wee can know your actions so unknown,
For wee are old? I will not say in wit,
(For even just worth must not approve it self)
But take your scarf, for she vows sheele not wear it.
Nay but my Lord—
Nay but my Lord, my Lord.
You must take it, wear it, keep it,
For by the honour of our house and blood;
I will deal wisely, and be provident,
Your father shall not say I pandarizde,
Or fondly winked at your affection,
No weal be wise, this night our daughter yields
Your fathers answer, this night we inuit
Your presence therefore to a feastfull waking,
To morrow to Ferrari you return,
With wished answer to your royal father,
Mean time as you respect our best relation
Of your fair bearing, (Granuffo first not good?)
Of your fair bearing, rest more anxious,
(No anxious is not a good word) rest more vigilant
Over your passion, both forbear and bear,
Anexou è ampexou, (thats Greek to you now.)
Else your youth shall find,
Our nose not stuffed, but we can take the wind,
And smell you out, I say no more but thus,
And smell you out, what, ha not wee our eyes,
Our nose and ears, what, are these hairs unwise?
Look too't. quos ego, a figure called Aposiopesis or Increpatio.
Prove you but justly, loving and conceive me,
Justice shall leave the gods before I leave thee:
Imagination prove as true, as thou art sweet
And tho the Duke seem wise, heel find this strain
When two harts yield consent, all thwartinges vain.
O quick deuisefull strong brained Dulcimel
Thou art too full of wit to be a wife,
Why dost thou love? or what strong heat gave life
To such faint hopes? O woman thou art made
Most only of, and for deceit, thy form
Is nothing but delusion of our eyes,
Our ears, our hearts, and sometimes of our hands,
Hypocrisy and vanity brought forth,
Without male heat, thy most most monstrous being
Shall I abuse my royal fathers trust,
And make my self a scorn, the very food
Of rumour infamous? shall I that ever loathede,
A thought of woman, now begin to love,
My worthy fathers right, break faith to him that got me
To get a faithless woman?
True my worthy Lord, your grace is verè pius.
To take from my good father the pleasure of his eyes,
And of his hands, imaginary solace of his fading life.
His life that only lives to your sole good,
And my self good, his lifes most only end.
Which O may never end.
Yes Fawn in time, we must not prescribe to nature, every thing: ther's some end in every thing.
But in a woman, yet as she is a wife, she is
Oftentimes the end of her husband
Shall I, I say?—
Shall you I say confound your own fair hopes,
Cross all your course of life, make your self vain,
To your once steady grains, and all to second
The ambitious quickness of a monstrous love,
Thats only out of difficulty borne,
And followed only for the miracle,
In the obtaining? I would ha ye now,
Tell her father all.
Vncompassionate wild man, shall I not pity, if I cannot love?
Or rather shall I not for pity love,
So wondrous wit in so most wondrous beauty,
That with such rarest art and cunning means
Entreats? what (I thing valules) am not,
Worthy but to grant, my admiration,
Are fathers to be thought on in our loves?
True right sir, fathers or friends, a crown,
And love hath none, but are allied to themselves alone,
Your father I may boldly say, hoe's an Ass,
To hope that you'll forbear to swallow,
What he cannot chew, nay e't is injustice truly,
For him to judge it fit, that you should starve.
For that which only hee can feast his eye withal,
And not digest.
O Fawn what man of so cold earth
But must love such a wit in such a body,
Thou last and only rareness of heavens works,
From best of man made model of the Gods:
Divinest woman, thou perfection
Of all proportions Beauty, made when, Jove was blithe,
Well filed with Nectar, and full friends with man,
Thou dear as air, necessary as sleep,
To careful man: woman, O who can sin so deeply,
As to be cursed from knowing of the pleasures,
Thy soft society, modest amorousness,
Yields to our tedious life. Fawn, the Duke shall not know this
Unless you tell him, but what hope can live in you,
When your short stay, and your most shortened conference.
Not only actions, but even looks abstrude,
Cut off all possibilities of obtaining.
Tush Fawn, to violence of women's love and wit
Nothing but not obtaining is impossible,
Notumque furens quid foemina posit.
But then how rest you to your father true?
To him that only can give dues, she rests most due. 
Even so? he that with safety would well lurk in courts,
To best elected ends, of force is wrung,
To keep broad eyes, soft feet, long ears, &amp; most short tongue.
For ti's of knowing creatures the maine art,
To use quick hams, wide arms and most close heart.
Why ti's a most well in fashion affection Dona Garbet∣za your Knight S. Amaros is a man of a most unfortunate back, spits white, has an ill breath, at three after dinner goes to the Bath, takes the diet, nay which is more, takes Tobacco, therefore with great authority you may cuckold him.
I hope so, but would that friend my brother discover
me, would he wrong himself, to prejudice me?
No prejudice dear Garbetza, his brother your husband right, he cuckold his eldest brother, true, hee gets her with child, just.
Sure theirs no wrong in, right, true, and just.
And indeed since the virtue of procreation growed hopeless in your husband, to whom should you rather commit your love and honour to, then him that is most like and near your husband, his brother, but are you assured your friend and brother rests entirely constant solely to you?
To me? O Fawn, let me sigh it with joy into thy by∣some, my brother has been wood by this &amp; that and tother Lady to entertain thē (for I ha seen their letters) but his vow to me O Few, is most immutable, vnfaining, peculiar, &amp; indeed deserved.
Never entreat me, never beseech me, to have pity for∣sooth on your Master, M. Herod: Let him never be so daring∣lie ambitious, as to hope withal his vows and protestations to gain my affectiō, gods my discretiō? has my my sutlery, tapstry, laundry, made me be tan up at the Court, preferde me to a husband, and have I adaunc't my husband with the labour of mine own body, from the black guard, to bee one of the Dukes drūmers, to make him one of the court forkers? shall I that purify many Lords &amp; some Ladies cā tel who wears perfumes who plasters, and for why, know whose a gallant, of a chaste shirt and who not; shall I become, or dares your master think I will become, or if I would become, presumes your Master to hope I would become one of his common feminines? no let M. Herod brag of his brothers wife, I scorn his letters, and her leavings at my heel, in faith and so tell him.
Nay costly, dear Puttotta, Mistress Puttotta, madam Puttotta
O be merciful to my languishing master, hee may in time grow great and well graced Courtier, for hee wears yellow already, mix therefore your loves, as for madam Garbetza his brothers wife, you see what he writes there.
I must confess he says she is a spinie, greene creature, of an unwholesome barren blood and cold embrace, a bony thing of most unequal hyppes, uneven eyes, ill ranked teeth, and in∣deed one, but that she hires him, he endures not, yet, for al this
does hee hope to dishonest me: I am for his betters, I would he should well know it, for more by many then my husband, know I am a woman of a known, sound and upright carriage and so he shall find if he deal with me, and so tel him I pray you, what does he hope to make me one of his gels, his pūcks, pole cats, flirrs and feminines?
Alas my miserable moister, what suds art thou washed into? thou art borne to be scorned of every carted commune∣tie, and yet heel out crack a Germaine when hee is drunk, or a Spaniard after he hath eaten a Fumatho, that he haz lain with that and that, and tother Lady, that hee lay last night in such a madonnas chamber, tother night he lay in such a Coun¦tesses couch, to night he lies in such a Ladies closet, when poor I know all this while he only lied in his throat.
Madam let me sigh it in your bosom, how immutable and vnfainting and indeed—
Fawn I will undo that rascal, he shall starve for any fur∣there maintenance.
You may make him come to the covering and reason¦uering of his old dublets.
He was in fair hope of proving heir to his elder bro∣there, but he has gotten me with child.
So, you withdrawing your favour, his present means fail him, and by getting you with child, his future means for ever rest despairful to him.
O heaven that I could curse him beneath damnation, impudent varlet: by my reputation Fawn, I only loved him, because I thought I only did not love him, he vowed infinite beauties doted on him, alas I was a simple country Lady, wore gold buttons, trunk sleeves, and flagon bracelets, in this state of innocence was I brought up to the Court.
And now in stead of country innocence, have you got court honesty: well Madam leave your brother to my placing, he shall have a special cabin in the ship of fools.
Right, remember hee got his elder brothers wife with child, and so deprived himself of th'inheritance.
That will stow him under hatches I warrant you.
And so deprived himself of inheritance, dear Fawn
be my champion.
The very scourge of your most basely offēding brother
Ignoble villain, that I might but see thee wretched without pity, and recovery, well. 
Stand Herod, you are full met sir.
But not met, full sir, I am as gaunt as a hunting gel∣ding after 3. trained scents, fore Venus fan I have been sha∣ling of peascods, upon four great Madonnas have I this after noon grafted the forked tree,
I'st possible?
Possible? fie on this satiety, tic a dull, blunt▪ weary, &amp; drowsy passion; who would be a proper fellow to be thus gre¦deli devoured &amp; swallowed among Ladies? faith tic my tor¦meant, my very rack.
Right Herod, true, for imagine all a man possessed with a perpetual pleasure, like that of generation, even in the high∣est lushiousnes, he straight sinks as unable to bear so conti¦nuall, so pure, so universal a sensuality.
By even truth ti's very right, &amp; for my part would I were eunuch't rather then thus sucked away with kisses, infee¦bling dalliance, &amp; O the falling sickness on them all, why did reasonable nature give so strange, so rbellious, so tyrannous, so insatiate parts of appetite to so weak a governs a womā.
Or why O custom did thou oblige them to mode∣sty, such cold temperāce, that they must bee wooed by men, courted by men? why all know, they are more full of strong de∣sires, those desires most impatient of delay, or hinderāce, they have more unruly passiōs then men, and weaker reason to tem¦per those passions then men.
Why then hath not the discretion of nature thought it just, that customary coins, old fashions, terms of honour &amp; of modesty for sooth, all laid aside, they court not vs, beseech not vs, rather for sweets of love, then we them, why? by Ianus women are but men turned the wrong side outward.
O sir nature is a wise workman, she knows right well that if women should woo vs to the art of love, wee should all be utterly shamd, how often should they take vs unprovided whē
they are always ready.
I sir, right sir, to some few such unfortunate handsome fellows as my self am to my grief I know it.
Why here are two perfect creatures, the one Nymph∣doro, loves all, and my Herod here eioyes all.
Faith some score or two of Ladies or so, ravish me a∣mong them, divide my presents, and wold indeed engross me were I indeed such an ass as to be made a Monopoly of: look sirrah what a wild hand one of them writes, who would ever take this for a. d. dearest, or read this, for only, only dearest.
Here is a lye indeed.
True, but here is another much more legible, a good secretary my most affected Herod, the utmost ambition of my hopes and only.
There is one lye better shaped by odds.
Right, but here is a Ladies roman hand to me is be∣yond all, look ye, to her most elected servant, and worthy friend, Herod Baldonzozo Esquier, I believe thou know what Countesses hand this is, Isle show thee another.
No good Herod, Isle show thee one now: To his most elected Mistress and worthy laundress, divine mistress Puttot∣ta
at her tent in the wood-yeard, or else where give these.
Prithee ha silence whats that?
If my tears or vows, my faithfulst protestations on my knees.
Good hold.
Fair and only loved laundress.
Forbear I beseech thee.
Might move thy stony heart to take pity on my sighs.
Do not shame me to the day of judgment.
Alas I write it in passion, alas thou know besides my loathed sister thou art.
For the Lords sake.
The only hope of my pleasure, the only pleasure of my hopes, be pleased therefore to
Cease I beseech thee.
Pish, near blush man, it is an vncourtly quality, as for thy lying as long as theres policy int, it is very passable, where∣fore haz heaven given man tong but to speak to a mans own glory? hee that cannot swell bigger then his natural skin
nor seem to bee in more grace then hee is, has not learned the very rudiments or A.B.C. of courtship.
Upon my heart Fawn thou please me to the soul, why look you for mine own part I must confess.
See hears the Dukes fool.
A board, a board, a board, al manner of fools of Courtey∣tie or country of what degree sex or nature.
fool.
Herod.
What, are ye full fraughted, is your ship well foold?
O'twas excellently thronged full, a Justice of peace, tho he had been one of the most illiterate asses in a Country could hardly ha got a hanging cabin. O we had first some lōg fortunate great Politicians that were so sottishlie paradized as to think when popular hate seconded Princes displea∣sure to them, any unmerited violence could seem to the world injustice, some purple fellows whom chance rea∣red, and their own deficiences of spirit hurled down, wee had some courtiers that ore bought their offices &amp; yet durst fall in love, Priests that for-sooke their functions to avoid a thawart stroke with a wet finger. But now alas Fawn, now theirs space and place.
Why / how gat al these forth, was not the warrant strōg?
Yes, yes, but they got a supersedes, al of them proved them selves either knaves or mad men, and so were all let go, theirs none left now in our ship, but a few Citizens, that let their wives keep their shop books, some philosophers, and a few Critiques; one of which Crete∣ques has lost his flesh with fishing at the measure of Plautus verses, another has vowed to get the consumption of the lungues, or to leave to posterity the true orthography and pronunciation of laughing, a third hath melted a great deal a suet, worn out his thumbs with turning, read out his eyes and studied his face out of a sanguine into a meagre spew∣ling fleamy lothsomenes, &amp; al to find but why mentula should be the feminine gender since the rule is Propria quae maribut tribuuntur mascilla dices. These Philosophers, Critiques and all the maids we could find at 16. are all our fraught now.
O then, your ship of fools is full.
True the maids at 17. fill it.
Fill it quoth you alas we have very few and these wee were fine to take up in the country too.
But what Philosophers ha ye.
O very strange fellows one knows nothing, dares not aver, he lives, goes, sees, feels.
A most insensible Philosopher.
An oher that there is no present time, and that one man to day, and to morrow is not the same man, so that he that yes∣terday owed money to day owes none, because he is not the same man.
Would that Philosopher would hold good in law.
But why has the Duke thus labord to have all the fools shipped out of his dominions.
Marry because he would play the fool himself alone without any rival.
Ware your breech fool.
I warrant thee old lad tic the privilege of poor fools to talk before an intelligencer, mary if I could fool my self into a Lordship as I know some ha fool them selves out of a Lordeship were I grown some huge fellow &amp; got the leer of the people upon me if the fates had so decreed it, I should talk treason tho I near opend my lips.
In fatis agimur, cedite fatis, but how runs rumour what breath's strongest in the Palace, now I think you know all.
Yes wee fools think wee know all the Prince hath audience to night, is feasted and after supper is entertained with no comedy mask or barriers but with.
What I prethe?
What I prethe?
With a most new and special shape of delight.
What for Ioues sake?
Marie gallants, a session, a general council of love sum∣monte in the name of Don Cupped to which upon pain of their mistress displeasure shall appear all favour wearers, sonnet mongers, health drinkers, &amp; neat in riches of barbers, &amp; perfu∣mers, &amp; to conclude al that can wy hee or wag the tail, are vpō grievous pains of their back sūmond to be assistant in that Session of love.
Hold, hold, do not paule the delight before it come to
our palate, &amp; what other rumour keeps air on men's lungs.
Other egregiousnes of folly ha you not heard of Don. Zucone.
What of him good fool.
Hee is separated.
Diuorcd.
That salt that criticism, that very all epigram of a woman, that Analysis, that compendium of witness.
Now Iesu what words the fool has.
We ha still such words but I will not vnshake the jest be∣fore it be ripe and therefore kissing your worships fingers in most sweet terms without any sense and with most fair looks without any good meaning I most courtlike take my leave ba suus manus devostro Signiory.
Stay fool weal follow thee, for fore heaven we must prepare our selves for this session.
I will have no mercy, I will not relent, justice beard is sha∣uen, and it shall give thee no hold, I am separated and I will be se∣pirated.
Dear my Lord husband.
Hence creature, I am none of thy husband or father of thy bastard, no I will be tyrannous and a most deep revenger the or∣der shall stand ha, thou Queen I ha no wife now.
sweet my Lord.
Hence avaunt I will marie a woman with no womb, a creature with two noses, a wench with no hair rather then remarry thee, nay I will first marry, mark me I will first marry, observe me, I will rather marie a woman that with thirst drinks the blood of man: nay, heed me a womā that will thrust in crowds, a lady that being with child ventures the hope of her womb, nay gives two crowns for a rome to behold a goodly man three parts a live quar∣tered, his privities hacled off, his belly launched up. Nay Isle ra∣there marry a woman to whom this smoking, hideous, bloudful, horrid, tho most just spectacles, are very lust, rather, then rees∣cept thee, was I not a handsome fellow from my foot to my feather, had I not wit, nay, which is more, was I not a Don. and did thou Action me, did I not make thee a Lady.
And did she not make you a more worshipful thing, a Cuckold.
I married thee in hope of children.
And has not she showed herself fruitful that was got with child without help of her husband?
Ha thou vngratful, immodest, unwise, &amp; one that gods my witness I ha loved, but go thy ways twist with whom thou wilt, for my part tha'st spun a fair thread, whole kiss the now whole court the now, whole ha the now?
Pity the frailty of my sex sweet Lord.
No, pity is a fool, and I will not wear his coxcomb, I have vowed to loath thee, the Irish man shall hate aquauity, the welsh man cheese, the dutch man shall loath salt butter before I reloue thee, do's the babe pull? thou should ha cried bee∣fore, it is to late now, no, the trees in autumn shall sooner call back the spring with sheding of their leaves; then thou re∣uerse my just irrevocable hatred with thy tears, away go vaunt.
Nay but most of this is your fault that for many years only upon mere mistrust severed your body from your Lady and in that time gave opportunity turned a jealous ass hired and some to try and tempt your Ladies honour whilst she with all possible industry of apparent merit diver∣ting your unfortunate suspicion.
I know it I confess, all this I did and I doe glory in it, why? cannot a young Lady for many months keep honest? no, I misthought it, my wife had wit, beauty, health, good birth, fair clothes and a passing body, a Lady of rare dis∣course, quick eye, sweet language, alluring behaviour, and exquisite entertainment. I misthought it, I feared, I doubted, and at the last I found it out, I praise my wit I knew I was a Cuckold.
An excellent wit.
True Fawn, you shall read of some Lords that have had such a wit I can tell you, &amp; I found it out, that I was a Cuckold
Which now you have found you will not be such an ass as Caesar, great Pompey, Lucullus, Anthony, or Cato &amp; diverse other Romans, cuckolds, who all knew it, &amp; yet were ne'er di∣uorc'd upon it, or like that smith-God Vulcan who having takē his wifetaking, yet was presently appeased, and entreated to make an Armour for a bastard of hers Ones.
No the Romans were asses▪ &amp; thought that a womā might mix her thigh with a strnager wantonly, &amp; yet still love her hus¦band
band matrimonially.
As indeed they say many married men, lye sometime with strange women, whom, but for the instant use, they abhor.
And as for Vulcan t'was humanity more then humane; such excess of goodness for my part only belong to the Gods.
Ass for you.
As for me my Fawn I am a bachelor now.
But you are a Cuckold still, and one that knows him∣self to be a cuckold.
Right, thats it and I knew it not, it were nothing and if I had not pursued it too, it had lain in oblivion, and shadowed in doubt, but now I ha blazed it.
The world shall know what you are.
True, isle pocket up no horns, but my revenge shall speak in thunder.
Indeed I must confess I know twenty are Cuckolds honestly &amp; decently enough a worthy gallant spirit (whose virtue suppresses his mishap) is lamēted but not disesteemed by it: Yet the world shall know—
I am none of those silen Coxcombs, it shall out.
And although it be no great part of injustice, for him to be struck with the scabbard that haz struck with the blade (for there is few of vs but hath made some one cuckold or other)
True I ha don't my self.
Yet.—
Yet I hope a man of wit may prevent his own mishap or if he can prevent it.—
Yet—
Yet make it known yet, and so known that the world may tremble with only thinking of it. Well Fawn whom shall I marie now? O heaven! that God made for a man no o∣there means of procreation and maintaining the world peo∣pled but by weomē, O that we could increase like roses by be¦ing slipped one frō another or like flies procreate with blowing, or any other way then by a womā, by womē who have no reasō in their love, or mercy in their hate, no rule in their pity, no pity in their revenge, no judgemēt to speak, &amp; yet no patiēce to hold their tongues; mās opposite, the more held down; they swell, aboue thē nought but will, beneath thē nought but hell
Or that since heaven hath given vs no other means to allay our furious appetite, no other way of increasing our pro∣genie, since we must entreat and beg for asswagement of our passions, and entertainment of our affections, why did not hey∣uen make vs a nobler creature then weomē to show unto, some admirable, deity of an vncorruptible beauty that be worth our knees, the expense of our heat, and the crinkling of our.
But that we must court, sonnet, flatter, bribe, kneel, sue to so feeble and imperfect, in constant, idle, vain, hollow, bubble, as woman is. O my face.
O my Lord look who here comes.
Death a man, is she delivered?
Delivered, yes. O my Don. delivered, yes Dona Zoya the grace of society, the music of sweetly agreeing perfectiō, more clearly chaste then ice or frozen rain, that glory of her sex, that wonder of wit, that beauty more freshy then any cool and trembling wind, that now only wish of a man is delivered, is delivered.
how
Frō Don. Zuc. that dry skalines, that sarpego, that barren drouth and shame of all humanity.
What fellows that.
your sometime husband.
alas poor creature.
The Princes prays your company. All but Hercules,
I waite upon her pleasure. Zuccone▪ Herod, and Nim. depart.
Gentlemen why hazard you your reputation in shame∣full company with such a branded creature,
Miserable man whose fortune were beyond tears to be pitied, but that thou art the ridiculous author of thine own laughed at mischief.
Without paraphrase your meaning.
Why thou women's fool?
Good gentlemen let one die but once.
Was not thou most curstfully mad to sever thy self from such an vnequalde rarity.
Is she not a strumpet? Is she not with Child?
yes with feathers.
why weakness of reason, could not perceive all was faind to be rid of thee?
Of me.
she with child, vntroddē snow is not so spotless
Chaste as the first voice of a new borne infant,
know she grew loathing of thy jealousy,
thy most pernicious curiosity,
whose suspicions made her unimitable graces motive of thy base jealousy.
why beast of man?
wretched aboue expression that snoredst over a beauty which thousands desired, neglecst her bed, for whose enjoying a very saint would have sued.
defamed her.
suggested privily against her.
gave foul language publicly of her.
and now lastly don that for her which she only praide for, and wished as wholesome air for, namely to be from such an unworthy.
senseless.
inuirious.
malicious.
suspicious.
mishapped.
ill languidg'd▪
unworthy
ridiculous.
jealous.
arch cox-combe as thou art.
O I am sick, my blood he's the cramp, my stomach or'eturnes; O I am very sick.
why my sweet Don. you are no cuckold.
thats the grief on it
thats, the grief ont that I ha wronged so sweet (and now in my knowledge) so delicate a creature, O me thinks I embrace her yet.
alas my Lord you have done her no wrong, no wrong in the world, you have done her a pleasure, a great pleasure, a thousand gentlemen, nay dukes will be proud to accept your leavings, your leavings, now is she courted, this heir sends her jewels, that lord proffers her ioynters, tother knight pro∣claims challenges, to maintain her, the only not beautiful, but very beauty of women.
but I shall never embrace her more.
nay that's true, that's most true (I would not af∣flict you, only think how vnrelentles you were to her but supposed fault.
O tic true, too true.
think how you scorned her tears,
most right,
Tears that were only shed I would not vex you in very grief to see you covet your own shame.
Too true, too true.
For indeed she is the sweetest modest soul, the fullest of pity.
O yes, O yes.
The softness and very courrtesie of her sex as one that never loved any —
But me.
So much that he might hope to dishonour her, nor a∣no so little that he might fear she disdained him. O the graces made her a soul as soft as spotless down upon the swans fair breast, that drew bright Cythereas chariot, yet think (I would not vex you) yet think how cruel you were to her.
As a Tiger, as a very Tiger.
And never hope to be reconcild, never dream to bee reconcild, never
Never, alas good Fawn what would wish me to do now?
Faith go hang your self my Don. thats best sure.
Nay thats too good, for Isle do worse then that, Isle marie again; where can pick out a morsel for me Fawn?
There is a modest matron like creature—
What years Fawn.
Some four score wan∣ting one.
A good sober age, is she wealthy?
Very wealthy.
Excellent.
She has three hairs on her scalp and four teeth in her head, a brow wrinkled and puckred like old parchment half burnt, she haz had eyes, no women's jaw-bones are more apparent, her sometimes envious lips, now shrink in, and give her nose and her chin leave to kiss each other very moistly; as for her reverend mouth it seldom opens, but the very breath that flies out of it, infects the fowls of the air, and makes them drop down dead, her breasts hang like cobwebs, her flesh will never make you cuckold, her bones may.
But is she wealthy
Very wealthy,
And will she ha me art sure?
No sure, she will not have you, why do you think that a waiting woman of three bastards, a strumpet nine times carted or a hag whose eyes shoot poison, that has been an old witch, and is now turning into a gib-cat will ha you? mary Don. Zucone
the contempt of women, and the shame of men, that has affli∣cted, contemnd, so choice a perfection as Dona Zoyas.
Alas Fawn I confess, what would ha me do?
Hang your self you shall not, marry you cannot, isle tell ye what you shall do, there is a ship of fools setting forth, if you make good means &amp; entreat hard, you may obtain a pas∣sageman,
be masters mate I warrant you.
Fawn, thou art a scurvy bitter knave, and dost flout Dons to their faces, it was thou flatteredst me to this, and now thou laugh at me, dost? though indeed I had a certain pro∣cliuity, but thou made me resolute, dost grin and gearne? O you comforters of life, helps in sickness, joys in death, &amp; preservers of vs, in our children, after death, women, have mer∣cie on me.
O my Don, that God made no other means of procre∣ation but by these women, I speak it not to vex you.
O Fawn, thou hast no mercy in thee, dost thou leer on me? well, isle creep upon my knees to my wife, dost laugh at me? dost gearne at me? dost smile? dost leer on me, dost thou? O I am an Ass, true, I am a Coxcomb, well, I am mad, good: A mischief on your cogging tongue, your soothing throat, your oily iavves, your supple hams, your dissembling smi∣les, and O the grand Devil on you all: when mischief fa∣uours our fortunes, and we are miserably, tho justly wretched
More pity, comfort, and more help we have
In foes professed, then in a flattering knave.
Thus few strike sail until they run on shelf,
The eye sees all things but his proper self,
In all things curiosity hath been
Vicious at least, but herein most pernicious,
What madness first to search and find a wound,
For which there is no cure? and which vnfound
Near rankles, whose finding only wounds
But he that upon vain surmise forsakes
His bed thus long, only to search his shame,
Gives to his wife youth, opportunity,
Keeps her in idlefull delitiousnesse,
Heats and inflames imagination,
Provokes her to revenge with churlish vvronges,
What should he hope but this? why should it lie in women,
Or even in chastity it self (since chastiti's a female)
T'auoide desires so ripened, such svvetes so canded;
But she that hath out-borne such mass of wrongs,
Out-dur'de all persecutions, all contempts,
Suspects, disgrace, all wants, and all the mischiefs
The baseness of a cankered churl could cast upon her,
With constant virtue, best fainde chastity,
And in the end turns all his jealousies,
To his own scorn, that Lady I implore,
It may be lawful not to praise, but even adore.
Are our sports ready, is the Prince at hand?
The Prince is now arrived at the Court gate.
What means our daughters breathless hast?
O my princely father now or never let your princely wisdom appear.
Fear not our daughter, if it rest within human reason I warrant thee, no I warrant thee, Granuffo if it rest in mans capacity, speak dear daughter.
My Lord the Prince.
The Prince, what of him dear daughter?
O Lord what wisdom our good parents need, to shield their chickens from deceipts, &amp; wiles of kite like youth.
Her very phrase displays whose child she is.
Alas had not your grace been provident, a very Nestor in advise and knowledge, ha, where had you poor Dulci∣mel been now, what veins had not I been drawn in∣to?
Fore God, she speaks very passionately. Alas daugh∣la, heauē gives every man his talent, indeed virtue &amp; wisdom are not fortunes gifts, therefore those that fortune cannot make virtuous, she commonly makes rich, for our own part wee acknowledge heavens goodness, and if it were pos∣sible, to bee as wise again as wee are, wee would near im∣put it to our selves: for as wee bee flesh and blood, alas we are fools, but as wee are Princes, Scholars, and have read Cicero de Oratore, I must confess there is another matter int, what of the Prince dear daughter?
Father doe you see that tree, that leanes just on my chamber window?
What of that tree?
O sir, but note the policy of youth, mark but the stratagems of working love, The prince salutes me, and thus greetes my ear.
Speak softly, he is entered.
Although he knew, I yet stood wavering, what to elect, because though I affected, yet destitute of means to in∣joy each other, impossibility of having, might kill our hope and with our hope desires to enjoy. Therefore to avoid all faint excuses, and vain fears, thus he devised: to Dulcimels chamber window. A well grown plain tree spreads his hap∣pie arms, by that in depth of night one may ascend, (despite all fathers jealousies and fears) into her bed.
Speak low, the Prince both marks and listens.
You shall provide a Priest (quoth hee) in truth I pro∣mist &amp; so you well may tell him, for I temporised and only held him off.
Politically, our daughter to a hair.
With full intention to disclose it all, to your preventing wisdom.
I let me alone for that: but when intends he this inuasi∣on? when will this Squirrel clime?
O Sir in that is al, when but this night?
This night?
This very night when the court revels had o'er waked your spirits, and made them full of sleep, then—
Then, verbum sat sapienti: go take your chamber, down upon your knees, thank god your father is no foolish sotte but one that can foresee and see.  my Lord wee discharge your presence from our Court.
What means the Duke?
And if to morrow past you rest in Vrbin, the privilege of an ambassador is taken from you.
Good your grace some reason?
What, twice admonished twice again offēding?
And now grown blushless; you promised to get into
Her chamber, she to get apriest,
Indeed she wished me tell you she cōfest it,
And there despite all fathers Jealous fears,
To consummate full joys: know Sir our daughter
Is our Daughter, and has wit at will
To gull a thousand easy things like you:
But sir depart, the parliament prepared
Shall on without you, all the Court this night
Shall triumph, that our daughter has escaped,
Her honours blowing up; your end you see,
We speak but short but full, Socratice.
What should I think, what hope, what but imagine of these Enigmas?
Sure sir the Lady loves you
With violent passion, and this night prepares
A Priest with nuptial rights to entertain you
In her most private chamber.
This I know,
With too much torture, since means are all unknown,
To come unto these ends, wheres this her chamber?
Then what means shall without suspicion
Convey me to her chamber? O these doubts,
End in despair—
Sir sir this plain tree was not planted here
To get into my daughters chamber: and so she praide me tell you
What though the maine arms spread into her window?
And easy labour climes it: Sir know
She has a voice to speak, and bid you welcome,
With so full breast that both your ears shall hear ant,
And so she praide me tell you: ha wee no brain;
Youth thinks that age, Age knows that youth is vain.
Why now I have it Fawn, the way, the means, &amp; mea∣ning, good Duke, and it were not for pity, I could laugh at thee, Dulcimel I am thine most miraculously, I will now be∣gin to sigh, read Poets, look pale, go neatly, and be most apparently in love, as for—
As for you old father.
Alas he and all know, this an old saw hath bin,
Faiths-breach for love, and kingdoms is no sin.
Where are we now, Cyllenian Mercury?
And thou quick issue of Ioues broken pate
Aide and direct vs: you better stars to knowledge
Sweet constellations that affect pure oil,
And holy vigil of the pale cheeckt Muses,
Give your best influence, that with able spright,
We may correct and please, giving full light,
To every angle of this various sense,
Works of strong birth, end better then commence.
Thou mother of chaste dew, nights modest lamp,
Thou by whose saint shine, the blushing lovers,
Join glowing cheeks, and mix their trembling lips.
In vows well kissed, rise all as full of splendour,
As my breast is of joy You Genitall,
You fruitful well mixed heats: O bless the sheets,
Of yonder chamber, that Ferraraes Dukedom,
The race of princely issue be not cursed,
And ended in abhorred barrennes.
At length kill all my fears, nor let it rest,
Once more my tremblinges, that my too cold son,
(That ever scorner of humainer loves)
Will still contemn the sweets of marriadge,
Still kill our hope of name in his dull coldness,
Let it bee lawful to make use ye powers,
Of human weakness, that pursues still,
What is inhibited, and most affects,
What is most difficult to be obtained:
So wee may learn, that nicer loue's a shade,
It follows fled, pursued, flies as afraid,
And in the end close all the various errors
Of passages, most truly comical:
In moral learning with like confidence,
Of him that vowed good fortune of the scene,
Shall neither make him fat, or bad make lean.
Ha, ha, ha.
Why dost laugh fool, hears no body with thee.
Why, therefore doe I laugh, because theres no body with me, would I were a fool alone I faith, I am come to attēd let me go, I am sent to the Princes, to come &amp; attend her father to the end of Cupids Parliament.
Why, ha they sat already upon any statutes?
Sat I, ell's agreed in the nether house:
Why, are they divided?
O Im Cupids Parliament, all the young gallants are a the nether house, and all the old signiors that can but only kiss are of the upper house: is the Princes aboue?
No sure, I think the Princes is beneath, man, ha they supped fool?
O yes, the confusion of tongues, at the large Table is broke up, for see the presence filles; A fool, a fool, a fool my Coxcomb for a fool.
Stop Ass, whats matter idiot?
O gallants, my fools that were appointed to weight on Don Cupped. have launched out their ship to purge their sto∣makes on the water, and before Iupiter I fear, they will prove defective in their attendance.
Pish, fool, theyle float in with the next tide.
I, but whens, that? lets see mine Almanac or prognosti∣cation.
What, is this for this year?
In true wisdom sir it is, Let me see the moon, fore pity, tic in the wayne, what grief is this? that so great a planet should ever decline or loose splendour — full sea at-
Wheres the sign now fool?
In Capricorn, Sir Amoroso.
What strange thing dos this Almanac speak of fool?
Is this your lady Sir Amorous?
It is, kiss her fool.
You may kiss her now, she is married.
So he might ha done before,
In sober modesty Sir, I doe not use to doe it behind.
Good fool be acquainted with this lady to, shoe's of a very honest nature I assure thee.
I easily believe you sir, for she hath a very vile face, I assure you.
But what strange things dos thy Almanac speak of good fool?
That this year no child shall be begot∣ten, but shall have a true Father.
Thats good news in faith, I am glad I got my wife with child this year,
Why Sir Amaros this may be, and yet you not the true father, may it not Herod?
But what more says it good Fawn?
Faith Lady very strange things, it says, that some La∣dies of your hair, shall have feeble hams, short memories and very weak eye sight, so that they shall mistake their own Page, or even brother in law, sometimes for their husbands.
Is that all Fawn?
No sir Amaros, hears likewise prophesied a great skarsitie of Gentry to ensue, and that some Bores shall be dubbed Sir Amoroso. A great scarcity of Lawyers is likewise this year to ensue, so that some one of them shall be entreated to take fees a both sides.
Most dear, dear Lady, wife, Lady, wife, O do not but look on me, and ha some mercy.
I will ha no mercy, I will not relent.
Sweet Lady.
The order shall stand, I am separated, and I will be se∣parated.
Dear, my love, wife.
Hence fellow, I am none of thy wife, no I will be tie∣rannous and a most deep revenger, the order shall stand, I will marry a fellow that keeps a fox in his bosom, a goat un¦der his arm holes, and a polecat in his mouth, rather then re∣accept thee.
Alas, by the Lord Lady what should I say? as heaven shall bless me— what should I say?
Kneel and cry man.
Was I not handsome, generous, honest enough from my foot to my feather, for such a fellow as thou art?
Alas I confess I confess.
But go thy ways &amp; wive with whom thou wilt for my part, thou hast spun a fair thread, whole kiss thee now? whole court thee now? whole ha thee now?
Yet be a woman—and for Gods sake help me.
And doe not stand too stiffly.
And doe not stand too stiffly, doe you make an Ass of me? but let these raskals laugh at me, Alas what could I doe withal? t'was my destiny that I should abuse you.
So it is your destiny that I should thus revenge your abuse: No the Irishman shall hate Aquauitae, the Welshman cheese and the Dutchman salt butter before isle love or receive thee, dos he cry? dos the babe pull? it is to late now, thou should∣dest ha cried before, it is to late now, go bury thy head in silence, and let oblivion be thy utmost hope.
Gallāts to dancing, loud music, the dukes vpō entrāce
Are the sports ready?
Ready.
Tic enough, of whose invention is this Parliament?
Ours.
It is enough, this night we will exult, O let this night
Be ever memorizd with prouder triumphs,
Let it be writ in lasting Character,
That this night our great wisdom did discover
So close a practise, that this night I say,
Our policy found out, nay dashed the drifts
Of the young Prince, and put him to his shifts,
Nay past his shifts, (fore Jove we could make a good Poet)
Delight vs, on, we dain our princely care
We are well plesd to grace you, then scorn fear.
Stand it is wisdom to acknowledge ignorance,
Of what we know not, we would not now prove foolish.
Expound the meaning of your show.
Triumphant Cupped that sleeps on the soft cheek
Of rarest beauty, whose thron's in Ladies eyes,
Whose force writhed lightning from Ioues shaking hand,
Forced strong Alcides to resign his club.
Plucked Neptunes trident from his mighty arm,
Vnhelmed Mars, he (with those trophes borne,
Led in by Sloth, Pride, Plenty, Drunkenness.
Followed by Folly, War, Laughter, Beggary,
Takes his fair throne, sit pleased for now we move,
And speak not for our glory, but for love.
A pretty figure, what, begins this sessiō with ceremony?
With a full health to our great Mistress Venus,
Let every state of Cupids parliament,
Begin the session, quote bonum faustumque sit precor.
Gived vs, weal pledge, nor shall a man that lives,
In charity refuse it, I will not be so old,
As not be graced to honour Cupped, gived vs full,
When we were young, we could ha trold it off.
Drunk down a Dutchman.
It is lamentable, pity your grace has forgot it: Drun∣kens, O it is a most fluent and swelling virtue, sure the most just of all virtues, it is justice it self, for if it chance to oppress and take too much, it presently restores it again. It makes the king and the peasant equal, for if they are both drunk alike, they are both beasts alike: As for that most precious light of heaven Truth, if time bee the father of her, I am sure drun∣kens is oftentimes the mother of her, and brings her forth, Drunkenness brings all out, for it brings all the drink out of the pot, all the wit out of the pate, and all the money out of the purse.
My Lord Granuffo, this Fawn is an excellent fellow.
Silence.
I warrant you for my Lord here.
Since multitude of laws are signs either of much tyranny in the prince, or much rebellious disobedience in the subject, we rather think it fit to study, how to have our old laws thoroughly executed, then to have new statutes combo∣rously invented.
Before Jove he speaks very well.
O sir, ove is very eloquent, makes all men good O∣rotors, himself then must needs be eloquent.
Let it therefore be the maine of our assembly, to sir∣uay our old laws, and punish their transgressions, for that cō∣tinually the cōplaints of lovers ascend up to our deity, that love is abused, and basely bought and sold, beauty corrupted,
affection fainde, and pleasure her self sophisticated. That young Gallants are proud in appetite, and weak in per∣formance, that young Ladies are phantastically inconstāt, old Ladies impudently unsatiate: wives complain of unmarried women, that they steal the dews belonging to their sheets: and maids exclaim upon wives, that they unjustly in∣gross all into their own hands, as not content with their own husbands, but also purloining that which should bee their comfort: Let vs therefore be severe in our justice: And if any of what degree soever have approuedly offended, let him be instantly vnpartially arrested and punished, read our statutes.
A statute made in the five thousand, four hundred, threescore and three year of the easeful reign of the mighty potent Don Cupped Emperor of sighs, and protestations, great king of kisses: Archduke of dalliance, and sole loved of him, for the maintaining and relieving of his old soldiers, maimed or dismembered in love.
Those that are lightly hurt, shame to complain; those that are deeply struck, are past recovery.
On to the next.
An Act against the plurality of Mistresses.
Read.
Whereas some over amorous and unconscionable co∣uetous young gallants without all grace of Venus, or the fear of Cupped in their minds, have at one time engrossed the care or cures of divers mistresses, with the charge of Ladies, into their own tenure or occupation, whereby their mistresses must of necessity bee very ill and vnsufficiently served, and likewise many able portly Gallants, live unfurnished of competent entertainmēt to the merit of their bodies: and whereas likewise some other greedy strangers have taken in the purlues, outset land, and the ancient commons of our sovereign Liege Don Cupped, taking in his very high ways, and enclosing thē, and annexing them to their own Lordships, to the much empo∣uerishing and putting of divers of Cupids true harts and loyal subjects, to base and abominable shifts: Bee it therefore enacted by the sovereign authority and erected ensign of Don Cupped, with the assent of some of the Lords, most of the
Ladies, and all the Commons, that what person or persons so∣ever, shall in the trade of honour, presume to wear at one time two Ladies favours, or at one time shall earnestly court two wo∣men in the way of marriage, or if any under the degree of a Duke, shall keep aboue twenty women of pleasure, a Dukes brother fifteen, a Lord ten, a knight or a Pentioner, or both four, a gentleman two. shall ipso facto, bee arrested by foal∣lies mace, and instantly committed to the ship of fools, with∣out either bail or maine-prize, Millessimo centesimo, quingintesi∣mo, quadragesimo nono. Cupidinis semper vnius. Nymphadoro to the bar.
Shame afolly, will Fawn now turn an informer? dos he laugh at me?
Domino Garbetza, did hee not ever pro∣test, you were his most only elected Mistress.
He did.
Domino Donella, did hee not ever protest you were his most only elected Mistress?
He did.
Domino Poueia, did hee not ever protest, that you were his most only elected Mistress.
He did.
Mercy.
Our mercy is nothing, unless some Lady will beg thee.
Out upon him, dissembling perfidious liar.
Indeed tic no reason Ladies should beg liers.
Thus he that loves many if once known, is justly plagued to be beloved of none.
An act against counterfeiting of Cupids royal coin, &amp; abusing his subjects with false money. To the bar Sir A∣morose. In most lamentable form complains to your blind celsitude, your distressed Orators, the women of the world, that in respect that many spend thriftes, who having exhausted and wasted their substance, and in stranger parts have with empty shows, treasonably purchased Ladies affe∣ctions, without being of ability to pay them for it with currāt money, and therefore have deceitfully sought to satisfy thē with counterfeit mettell, to the great displeasure, and no small loss of your humblest subjects. May it therefore with your pitiful assent been acted, that what Lord, Knight, or gentle∣mā soever, knowing himself insufficient, bankrupt, exhau∣sted and wasted, shall traitorously dare to entertain any lady, as wife, or mistress, ipso facto to be severed from all commerce∣meant
with women, his wife or mistress in that state offēding, to be forgiven with a pardon of course, and himself instantly to be pressed to sail in the ship of fools, without either bail or main-prise.
Sir Amorous is arrested.
Judgment of the court.
I take my oath upon thy brothers body, tic none of thine.
By the hart of dissemblance, this Fawn has wrought with vs as strāge Taylors work in corporate cities, where they are not free all inward, inward, he lurked in the bosom of vs, &amp; yet wee know not his profession: Sir let me have counsel?
It is in great Cupids case, you may have no counsel.
death a justice, are we in Normandy, what is my Ladies doom then?
Acquitted by the express parole of the statute, hence and in thy ignorance be quietly happy, away with him. on.
An Act against forgers of love letters, false braggarts of ladies favours, and vain boasters of counterfeit tokens.
Tic I, tic I, I confess guilty, guilty.
I will bee most human and right courteously languaged in thy correc∣tiō, and only say, thy vice frō apparāt here, has made thee an apparent beggar, and now of a false knave, hath made thee a true fool: Folly to the ship with him, and twice a day let him be duckt at the mayne-yeard.
Proceed.
An Act against slanderers of Cupids liege ladies names, and lewd defamers of their honours.
Tic I, tic I, I weep and cry out, I have been a most cō∣tumelious offender, my only cry is misercre.
If your relenting Lady will have pity on you, the fault against our Deity be pardoned.
Madam if ever I have found favour in your eyes, if ever you have thought me a reasonable handsome fellow, as I am sure before I had a beard, you might. O be merciful!
Well, upon your apparent repentance, that all modest spectators may witness, I have for a short time only thus fey∣neatly hated you, that you might ever after truly love me, up∣pone these cautions I reaccept you: first you shall vow.
I doe vow, as heaven bless me, I will doe.
What?
What ere it be, say on I beseech you.
You shall vow.
Yes.
That you shall never.
Never.
Fine love to my waiting woman or chamber maid.
No
Never promise them such a farm to their mariadge.
No.
If sheele discover but whom I affect.
Never.
Or if they know none that theil but take a false oath; I do, only to be rid of me.
I swear I will not, I will not only not counterfeitly love your women, but I will truly hate them an't be possible, so far from maintaining them that I will beggar them, I will no∣for pick their trunks for letters, search their pockets, ruffle their bosoms, or tear their foul smocks, never, never.
That if I chance to have a humour to be in a mask, you shall not grow Jealous.
Never.
Or grudge at the expense.
Never, I will eat mine own arms first.
That you shall not search, if my chamber door hinges be oyld to avoid creaking.
As I am a sensible creature—
Nor ever suspect the reason why my bedde-chamber floor is double matted.
Not as I have blood in me.
You shall vow to wear clean linen, and feed wholsomelie.
I and highly, I will take no more Tobacco, or come to your sheets drunk, or get wenches, I will ever feed on fried frogs, broild snails, and boiled Lamstones, I will adore thee more then a mortal, observe and serve you as more then a Mi∣stress, doe all duties of a husband, all offices of a man, all ser∣uices of thy creature, and ever live in thy pleasure, or die in thy service.
Then here my quarrel ends, thus cease all strife.
Until they loose, men know not whats a wife,
We slight and dully view the lamp of heaven,
Because we daily feet, which but bereaved,
And held one little vveeke from darkened eyes,
With greedy wonder, we should all admire,
Opinion of command, puts out loves fire.
An Act against mummers, false seemers, that abuse la∣dies with counterfeit faces, courting only by signs; &amp; seeming
wise only by silence.
The penalty.
To be urged to speak, &amp; thē if inward ability answer not outward seeming, to be committed instantly to the ship of fools, during great Cupids pleasure. My Lord Granuffo to the bar, speak, speak, is not this law just?
Just sure, for in good truth, or in good sooth, when wise men speak, they still must open their mouth.
The brazen head haz spoken.
Thou art arrested.
Me?
And judged away.
Thus silence, and grave looks with hums and hawes,
Makes many worshipped, when if tried the'are daws:
Thats the morality or lenuoy of it lenuoy of it, on.
An act against privy conspiracies, by which if any with ambitious wisdom, shall hope and strive to outstrip love to cross his words, and make frustrate his sweet plea∣sures, if such a presumptuous wisdom fall to nothing, &amp; die in laughter, the wizard so transgressing is ipso facto adjudged to offend in most deep treason, to forfeit all his wit at the will of the Lord, and be instantly committed to the ship of fools for ever.
I marry sir, O might Edipus riddle me out such a fellow, of all creatures breathing I doe hate those things that struggle to seem wise, and yet are indeed very fools, I remember when I was a young man in my fathers days, there were four gal∣lant spirits for resolution, as proper for body, as witty in dis∣course as any were in Europe, nay Europe had not such, I was one of them; wee four did all love one lady, a modest chaste virgin she was, wee all enjoyed her, I well remember, and so enjoyed her, that despite the strictest guard was set upon her, wee had her at our pleasure, I speak it for her honour and my credit: where shall you find such witty fellows now a days: Alas how easy it is in these weaker times to cross love tricks, ha ha ha alas, alas, I smile to think I must cōfesse with some glory to mine own wisdom, to think how I found out and crossed, and curbed, and ierkt, and firkte, and in the end made desperate Tiberios hope, Alas good silly youth, that dares to cope with age, and such a beard: I speak it without glory.
But what yet might your well known wisdom think
If such a one, as being most severe,
A most protested opposite to the match
Of two young lovers, who having bard them speech,
Alt internewes, all messages, all means,
To plot their wished ends, even he himself,
Was by their cunning made the go between.
The only messenger, the token carrier,
Told them the times when they might fitly meet,
Nay, showed the way to one another bed.
May one have the sight of such a fellow for nothing;
Doth their breath such an egregious Ass,
Is there such a foolish animal in rerum nature?
How is it possible such a simplicity can exist? let vs not lose our laughing at him for gods sake, let follies sceptre light vpō him, and to the ship of fools with him instantly.
Of all these follies I arest your grace.
Me? ha, me? me varlet? me fool? ha, toot'h Jail with him: what varlet call me Ass, me?
What grave Vrbins Duke, dares Follies sceptre touch his prudent shoulders, is he a Coxcomb, no, My Lord is wise, for wee all know that Vrbines Duke has eyes.
God a mercy Fawn, hold varlet, hold thee good Fawn railing reprobate?
Indeed I must confess, your grace did tell,
And first did intimate your daughters love,
To otherwise most cold Tiberio,
After conveyed her private favour to him,
A curious scarf, wherein her needle wrought,
Her private love to him.
What I do this? ha.
And last by her persuasion shewde the youth,
The very way and best elected time,
To come unto her chamber.
Thus did I sir?
Thus did you sir, but I must confess,
You meant not to doe this, but were ranckly gulled,
Made a plain natural. This sure sir you did.
And in assurance Prince Tiberio,
Renowned, wetted, Dulcimel appear,
The acts of constant honour cannot fear.
Royally wise, and wisely royal father.
Thats sententious now, a figure called in art Ironia.
I humbly thank your worthy piety, that through your only means I have obtained so fit, loving &amp; desired a hus∣band.
Death, a discretiō, if I should prove a fool now am not I an Ass, think you, ha? I will have them both boūd together, and sent to the Duke of Ferrari presently.
I am sure good Father wee are both bound together as fast as the Priest can make vs already, I thank you for it kind father, I thank you only for it.
And as for sending them to the Duke of Ferrari, See my good Lord, Ferraraes ore ioid prince, meets thē in fullest wish.
By the Lord I am ashamed of my self, that's the plain troth, but I know now wherefore this Parliament was: what a slumber have I been in?
Never grieve or wonder, all things sweetly fit.
There is no folly to protested wit.
What still in wondering, ignorance doth rest,
In private conference, your dear loved breast,
Shall fully take. But now we change our face.
And thus in bold, yet modest phrase we end,
He whose Thalia with swiftest hand hath pend,
This lighter subject, and hath boldly torn,
Fresh baize from Daphnes arm, doth only scorn,
Malicious censures of some envious few,
Who think they loose if others have their due.
But let such Adders hiss, know all the sting,
All the vain some of all those snakes that rings
Mineruas glassefull shield can never taint,
Poison or pierce, firm art disdains to faint,
But yet of you that with impartial faces,
With no prepared malice, but with graces,
Of sober knowledge, have surveyed the frame,
Of his slight scene, if you shall judge his flame,
Distemperately, weak, as faulty much,
In stile, in plot, in spirit, lo if such
He deigns in self accusing phrase to crave,
For praise but pardon which he hopes to have.
Since he protests he ever hath aspirde,
To be beloude, rather then admired.

EScalus.
My Lord.
Of Government, the properties to un∣fold,
Would seem in me to affect speech &amp; discourse,
Since I am put to know, that your own Science
Exceeds (in that) the lists of all advice
My strength can give you: Then no more remains
But that, to your sufficiency, as your worth is able,
And let them work: The nature of our People,
Our Cities Institutions, and the Terms
For Common Justice, y' are as pregnant in
As Art, and practise, hath enriched any
That we remember: There is our Commission,
From which, we would not have you warp; call hither,
I say, bid come before vs Angelo:
What figure of vs think you, he will bear.
For you must know, we have with special soul
Elected him our absence to supply;
Lent him our terror, dressed him with our love,
And given his Deputation all the Organs
Of our own power: What think you of it?
If any in Vienna be of worth
To undergo such ample grace, and honour,
It is Lord Angelo.
Look where he comes.
Always obedient to your Graces will▪
I come to know your pleasure.
Angelo:
There is a kind of Character in thy life,
That to the observer, doth thy history
Fully unfold: Thy self, and thy belongings
Are not thine own so proper, as to waste
Thy self upon thy virtues; they on thee:
Heaven doth with vs, as we, with Torches doe,
Not light them for themselves: For if our virtues
Did not go forth of vs, it were all alike
As if we had them not: Spirits are not finely touched,
But to fine issues: nor nature never lends
The smallest scruple of her excellence,
But like a thrifty goddess, she determines
Her self the glory of a creditor,
Both thanks, and use; but I do bend my speech
To one that can my part in him advertise;
Hold therefore Angelo:
In our remove, be thou at full, our self:
Mortality and Mercy in Vienna
Live in thy tongue, and heart: Old Escalus
Though first in question, is thy secondary.
Take thy Commission.
Now good my Lord
Let there be some more test, made of my mettle,
Before so noble, and so great a figure
Be stamp't upon it.
No more evasion:
We have with a leauen'd, and prepared choice
Proceeded to you; therefore take your honours:
Our haste from hence is of so quick condition,
That it prefers it self, and leaves unquestioned
Matters of needful value: We shall write to you
As time, and our concernings shall importune,
How it goes with vs, and doe look to know
What doth befall you here. So fare you well:
To the hopeful execution doe I leave you,
Of your Commissions.
Yet give leave (my Lord▪)
That we may bring you something on the way.
My haste may not admit it,
Nor need you (on mine honour) have to doe
With any scruple: your scope is as mine own,
So to enforce, or qualify the Laws
As to your soul seems good: Give me your hand,
Isle privily away: I love the people,
But doe not like to stage me to their eyes:
Though it doe well, I doe not relish well
Their loud applause, and Aves vehement:
Nor doe I think the man of safe discretion
That do's affect it. Once more fare you well.
The heavens give safety to your purposes.
Lead forth, and bring you back in happi∣ness.
I thank you, fare you well.
I shall desire you, Sir, to give me leave
To have free speech with you; and it concerns me
To look into the bottom of my place:
A power I have, but of what strength and nature,
I am not yet instructed.
It is so with me: Let vs with-draw together,
And we may soon our satisfaction have
Touching that point.
Isle wait upon your honour.
If the Duke, with the other Dukes, come not to composition with the King of Hungary, why then all the Dukes fall upon the King.
Heaven grant vs its peace, but not the King of Hungaries.
Amen.
Thou conclude like the Sanctimonious Pirate, that went to sea with the ten Commandments, but scraped one out of the Table.
Thou shalt not Steal?
I, that he razed.
Why? it was a commandment, to command the Captain and all the rest from their functions: they put forth to steal: There's not a Soldier of vs all, that in the thanks-giuing before meat, do relish the petition well, that prays for peace.
I never heard any Soldier dislike it.
I believe thee: for I think thou never was it where Grace was said.
No? a dozen times at least.
What? In meeter?
In any proportion. or in any language.
I think, or in any Religion.
I, why not? Grace, is Grace, despite of all con∣trouersie: as for example; Thou thy self art a wicked villain, despite of all Grace.
Well: there went but a pair of shears be∣tweene vs.
I grant: as there may between the Lists, and the Velvet. Thou art the List.
And thou the Velvet; thou art good velvet; you're a three pild-peece I warrant thee: I had as lief be a List of an English Kersey, as be piled, as thou art piled, for a French Velvet. Do I speak feelingly now?
I think thou dost: and indeed with most pain∣full feeling of thy speech: I will, out of thine own con∣fession, learn to begin thy health; but, whilst I live for∣get to drink after thee.
I think I have done my self wrong, have I not?
Yes, that thou hast; whether thou art tainted, or free.
Behold, behold, where Madam Mitigation comes. I have purchased as many diseases under her Roof, As come to
To what, I pray?
Judge.
To three thousand Dollours a year.
I, and more.
A French crown more.
Thou art always figuring diseases in me; but thou art full of error, I am sound.
Nay, not (as one would say) healthy: but so sound, as things that are hollow; thy bones are hollow; Impiety has made a feast of thee.
How now, which of your hips has the most profound Ciatica?
Well, well: there's one yonder arrested, and carried to prison, was worth five thousand of you all.
Who's that I pray'thee?
Marry Sir, that's Claudio, Signior Claudio.
Claudio to prison? it is not so.
Nay, but I know it is so: I saw him arrested: saw him carried away: and which is more, within these three days his head to be chopped off.
But, after all this fooling, I would not have it so: Art thou sure of this?
I am too sure of it: and it is for getting Madam Iulietta with child.
Believe me this may be: he promised to meet me two hours since, and he was ever precise in promise keeping.
Besides you know, it draws something near to the speech we had to such a purpose.
But most of all agreeing with the proclamatiō.
Away: let's go learn the truth of it.
Thus, what with the war; what with the sweat, what with the gallows, and what with poverty, I am Custom-shrunke. How now? what's the news with you.
Yonder man is carried to prison.
Well: what has he done?
A Woman.
But what's his offence?
Groping for Trouts, in a peculiar River.
What? is there a maid with child by him?
No: but there's a woman with maid by him you have not heard of the proclamation, have you?
What proclamation, man?
All houses in the Suburbs of Vienna must bee plucked down.
And what shall become of those in the City?
They shall stand for seed: they had gon down to, but that a wise Burger put in for them.
But shall all our houses of resort in the Sub∣urbs be pulled down?
To the ground, Mistress.
Why heere's a change indeed in the Common∣wealth: what shall become of me?
Come: fear not you: good Counsellors lack no Clients: though you change your place, you need not change your Trade: Isle bee your Tipster still; cou∣rage, there will bee pity taken on you; you that have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you will bee considered.
What's to doe here, Thomas Tipster? let's withdraw?
Here comes Signior Claudio, led by the Provost to prison: and there's Madam Iuliet.
Fellow, why dost thou show me thus to the world? Bear me to prison, where I am committed.
I do it not in evil disposition, But from Lord Angelo by special charge.
Thus can the demigod (Authority)
Make vs pay down, for our offence, by weight
The words of heaven▪ on whom it will, it will,
On whom it will not (so) yet still it is just.
Why how now Claudio▪ whence comes this re∣strained.
From too much liberty, (my Lucio) Liberty
As surfeit is the father of much fast,
So every Scope by the immoderate use
Turns to restraint: Our Natures doe pursue
Like Rats that rauyn down their proper Bane,
A thirsty evil, and when we drink, we die.
If I could speak so wisely under an arrest, I would send for certain of my Creditors: and yet, to say the truth, I had as lief have the foppery of freedom, as the mortality of imprisonment: what's thy offence, Claudio?
What (but to speak of) would offend again.
What, is it murder?
No.
Lechery?
Call it so.
Away, Sir, you must go.
One word, good friend:
Lucio, a word with you.
A hundred:
If they'll doe you any good: Is Lechery so looked after?
Thus stands it with me: upon a true contract
I got possession of Iulietas bed,
You know the Lady, she is fast my wife,
Save that we doe the denunciation lack
Of outward Order. This we came not to,
Only for propogation of a Dowre
Remaining in the Coffer of her friends,
From whom we thought it meet to hide our Love
Till Time had made them for vs. But it chances
The stealth of our most mutual entertainment
With Character too gross, is writ on Iuliet.
With child, perhaps?
Unhappily, even so.
And the new Deputy, now for the Duke,
Whether it be the fault and glimpse of newnes,
Or whether that the body public, be
A horse whereon the Governor doth ride,
Who newly in the Seat, that it may know
He can command; lets it strait feel the spur:
Whether the Tyranny be in his place,
Or in his Eminence that fills it up
I stagger in: But this new Governor
Awakes me all the enrolled penalties
Which have (like vn-scowr'd Armour) hung by the wall
So long, that ninteene Zodiacs have gone round,
And none of them been worn; and for a name
Now puts the drowsy and neglected Act
Freshly on me: it is surely for a name.
I warrant it is: And thy head stands so tickle on thy shoulders, that a milke-maid, if she be in love, may sigh it off: Send after the Duke, and appeal to him.
I have done so, but hoe's not to be found.
I prithee (Lucio) doe me this kind service:
This day, my sister should the Cloister enter,
And there receive her approbation.
Acquaint her with the danger of my state,
Implore her, in my voice, that she make friends
To the strict deputy: bid her self assay him,
I have great hope in that: for in her youth
There is a prone and speechless dialect,
Such as move men: beside, she hath prosperous Art
When she will play with reason, and discourse,
And well she can persuade.
I pray she may; as well for the encouragement of the like, which else would stand under grievous im∣position: as for the enjoying of thy life, who I would be sorry should bee thus foolishly lost, at a game of ticke-tacke: Isle to her.
I thank you good friend Lucio.
Within two hours.
Come Officer, away.
No: holy Father, throw away that thought,
Believe not that the dribbling dart of Love
Can pierce a complete bosom: why, I desire thee
To give me secret harbour, hath a purpose
More grave, and wrinkled, then the aims, and ends
Of burning youth.
May your Grace speak of it?
My holy Sir, none better knows then you
How I have ever loved the life removed
And held in idle price, to haunt assemblies
Where youth, and cost, witless bravery keeps.
I have delivered to Lord Angelo
(A man of stricture and firm abstinence)
My absolute power, and place here in Ʋienna,
And he supposes me trauaild to Poland,
(For so I have strewd it in the common ear)
And so it is received: Now (pious Sir)
You will demand of me, why I do this.
Gladly, my Lord.
We have strict Statutes, and most biting Laws,
(The needful bits and curbs to headstrong weeds,)
Which for this fourteen years, we have let slip,
Even like an ore-growne Lyon in a Cave
That goes not out to prey: Now, as fond Fathers,
Having bound up the threatening twigs of birch,
Only to stick it in their childrens sight,
For terror, not to use: in time the rod
More mocked, then feared: so our Decrees,
Dead to infliction, to themselves are dead,
And liberty, plucks Justice by the nose;
The Baby beats the Nurse, and quite a thwart
Goes all decorum.
It rested in your Grace
To unloose this tyde-vp Justice, when you pleased:
And it in you more dreadful would have seemed
Then in Lord Angelo.
I doe fear: too dreadful:
Sith it was my fault, to give the people scope,
'T would be my tirrany to strike and gall them,
For what I bid them doe: For, we bid this be done
When evil deeds have their permissiue pass,
And not the punishment: therefore indeed (my father)
I have on Angelo imposed the office,
Who may in the ambush of my name, strike home,
And yet, my nature never in the fight
To do in slander: And to behold his sway
I will, as it were a brother of your Order,
Visit both Prince, and People: Therefore I prithee
Supply me with the habit, and instruct me
How I may formally in person bear
Like a true Friar: More reasons for this action
At our more leisure, shall I render you;
Only, this one: Lord Angelo is precise,
Stands at a guard with Envy: scarce confesses
That his blood flows: or that his appetite
Is more to bread then stone: hence shall we see
If power change purpose: what our Seemers be.
And have you Nuns no farther privileges?
Are not these large enough?
Yes truly; I speak not as desiring more,
But rather wishing a more strict restraint
Upon the Sisterstood, the Votarists of Saint Clare.
Hoe? peace be in this place.
Who's that which calls?
It is a mans voice: gentle Isabella
Turn you the key, and know his business of him;
You may; I may not: you are yet vnsworne:
When you have vowed, you must not speak with men,
But in the presence of the Prioress;
Then if you speak, you must not show your face;
Or if you show your face, you must not speak:
He calls again: I pray you answer him.
Peace and prosperity: who is it that calls?
Hail Virgin, (if you be) as those cheeke-Roses
Proclaim you are no less: can you so steed me,
As bring me to the fight of Isabella,
A Novice of this place, and the fair Sister
To her unhappy brother Claudio?
Why her unhappy Brother? Let me ask,
The rather for I now must make you know
I am that Isabella, and his Sister.
Gentle &amp; fair: your Brother kindly greets you;
Not to be weary with you; he's in prison.
Woe me; for what?
For that, which if my self might be his Judge,
He should receive his punishment, in thanks:
He hath got his friend with child.
Sir, make me not your story.
It is true; I would not, though it is my familiar sin,
With Maids to seem the Lap wing, and to jest
Tongue, far from heart: play with all Virgins so:
I hold you as a thing en-skied, and sainted,
By your renouncement, an imortall spirit
And to be talked with in sincerity,
As with a Saint.
You doe blaspheme the good, in mocking me.
Doe not believe it: fewnes, and truth; tic thus,
Your brother, and his lover have embraced;
As those that feed, grow full: as blossoming Time
That from the seednes, the bare fallow brings
To teeming foison: even so her plenteous womb
Expresses his full Tilth, and husbandry.
Some one with child by him? my cousin Iuliet?
Is she your cousin?
Adoptedly, as schoole-maids change their names By vain, though apt affection.
She it is.
Oh, let him marry her.
This is the point.
The Duke is very strangely gone from hence;
Bore many gentlemen (my self being one)
In hand, and hope of action: but we doe learn,
By those that know the very Nerues of State,
His giuing-out, were of an infinite distance
From his true meant design: upon his place,
(And with full line of his authority)
Governs Lord Angelo; A man, whose blood
Is very snow-broth: one, who never feels
The wanton stings, and motions of the sense;
But doth rebate, and blunt his natural edge
With profits of the mind: Study, and fast
He (to give fear to use, and liberty,
Which have, for long, run-by the hideous law,
As Mice, by Lyons) hath picked out an act,
Under whose heavy sense, your brothers life
False into forfeit: he arrests him on it,
And follows close the rigour of the Statute
To make him an example: all hope is gone,
Unless you have the grace, by your fair prayer
To soften Angelo: And that's my pith of business
Twixt you, and your poor brother.
Doth he so,
Seek his life?
Has censured him already,
And as I hear, the Provost hath a warrant
For's execution.
Alas: what poor Abilitie's in me, to doe him good.
Assay the power you have.
My power? alas, I doubt.
Our doubts are traitors
And makes vs loose the good we oft might win,
By fearing to attempt: Go to Lord Angelo
And let him learn to know, when Maidens sue
Men give like gods: but when they weep and kneel,
All their petitions, are as freely theirs
As they themselves would owe them.
Isle see what I can doe.
But speedily.
I will about it strait;
No longer staying, but to give the Mother
Notice of my affair: I humbly thank you:
Commend me to my brother: soon at night
Isle send him certain word of my success.
I take my leave of you.
Good sir, adieu.
We must not make a scar-crow of the Law,
Setting it up to fear the Birds of prey,
And let it keep one shape, till custom make it
Their perch, and not their terror.
I, but yet
Let vs be keen, and rather cut a little
Then fall, and bruise to death: alas, this gentleman
Whom I would save, had a most noble father,
Let but your honour know
(Whom I believe to be most strait in virtue)
That in the working of your own affections,
Had time coheard with Place, or place with wishing,
Or that the resolute acting of our blood
Could have attained the effect of your own purpose,
Whether you had not sometime in your life
Er'd in this point, which now you censure him,
And pulled the Law upon you.
It is one thing to be tempted (Escalus)
Another thing to fall: I not deny
The Jury passing on the Prisoners life
May in the sworne-twelue have a thief, or two
Guiltier then him they try; what's open made to Justice,
That Justice ceizes; What knows the Laws
That thieves do pass on thieves? It is very pregnant,
The Jewel that we find, we stoop, and take it,
Because we see it; but what we doe not see,
We tread upon, and never think of it.
You may not so extenuate his offence,
For I have had such faults; but rather tell me
When I, that censure him, do so offend,
Let mine own Judgment pattern out my death,
And nothing come in partial. Sir, he must dye.
Be it as your wisdom will.
Where is the Provost?
Here if it like your honour.
See that Claudio
Be executed by nine to morrow morning,
Bring him his Confessor, let him be prepared,
For that's the utmost of his pilgrimage.
Well: heaven forgive him; and forgive vs all:
Some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall:
Some run from brakes of Ice, and answer none,
And some condemned for a fault alone.
Come, bring them away: if these be good peo∣ple in a Commonwealth, that doe nothing but use their abuses in common houses, I know no law: bring them away.
How now Sir, what's your name? And what's the matter?
If it please your honour, I am the poor Dukes Constable, and my name is Elbow; I doe lean upon In∣stice Sir, and doe bring in here before your good honour, two notorious Benefactors.
Benefactors? Well: What Benefactors are they? Are they not Malefactors?
If it please your honour, I know not well what they are: But precise villains they are, that I am sure of and void of all profanation in the world, that good Christians ought to have.
This comes off well: here's a wise Officer.
Go to: What quality are they of? Elbow is your name?
Why dost thou not speak Elbow?
He cannot Sir: he's out at Elbow.
What are you Sir?
He Sir: a Tipster Sir: parcel Baud: one that serves a bad woman: whose house Sir was (as they say) plucked down in the Suborbs: and now she professes a hot-house; which, I think is a very ill house too.
How know you that?
My wife Sir? whom I detest before heaven, and your honour.
How? thy wife?
I Sir: whom I thank heaven is an honest wo∣man.
Dost thou detest her therefore?
I say sir, I will detest my self also, as well as she, that this house, if it be not a Bawds house, it is pity of her life, for it is a naughty house.
How dost thou know that, Constable?
Marry sir, by my wife, who, if she had bin a wo∣man Cardinally given, might have bin accused in forni∣cation, adultery, and all vncleanlinesse there.
By the women's means?
I sir, by Mistress Ouer-dons means: but as she spit in his face, so she defied him.
Sir, if it please your honour, this is not so.
Prove it before these varlets here, thou honora∣ble man, prove it.
Doe you hear how he misplaces?
Sir, she came in great with child: and longing (saving your honours reverence) for stewed prewyns; sir, we had but two in the house, which at that very distant time stood, as it were in a fruit dish (a dish of some three pence; your honours have seen such dishes) they are not China-dishes, but very good dishes.
Go too: go too: no matter for the dish sir.
No indeed sir not of a pin; you are therein in the right: but, to the point: As I say, this Mistress Elbow, being (as I say) with child, and being great bellied, and longing (as I said) for prewyns: and having but two in the dish (as I said) Master Froth here, this very man, ha∣uing eaten the rest (as I said) &amp; (as I say) paying for them very honestly: for, as you know Master Froth, I could not give you three pence again.
No indeed.
Very well: you being then (if you be remem∣bred) cracking the stones of the foresaid prewyns.
I, so I did indeed.
Why, very well: I telling you then (if you be remembered) that such a one, and such a one, were past cure of the thing you wot of, unless they kept very good diet, as I told you.
All this is true.
Why very well then.
Come: you are a tedious fool: to the purpose: what was done to Elbows wife, that hee hath cause to complain of? Come me to what was done to her.
Sir, your honour cannot come to that yet.
No sir, nor I mean it not.
Sir, but you shall come to it, by your honours leave: And I beseech you, look into Master Froth here sir, a man of foure-score pound a year; whose father died at Hallowmas: Was it not at Hallowmas Master Froth?
Allhallond-Eue.
Why very well: I hope here be truths: he Sir, sitting (as I say) in a lower chair, Sir, it was in the bunch of Grapes, where indeed you have a delight to sit, have you not?
I have so, because it is an open room, and good for winter.
Why very well then: I hope here be truths.
This will last out a night in Russia
When nights are longest there: Isle take my leave,
And leave you to the hearing of the cause;
Hoping you'll find good cause to whip them all.
I think no less: good morrow to your Lord∣ship. Now Sir, come on: What was done to Elbows wife, once more?
Once Sir? there was nothing done to her once.
I beseech you Sir, ask him what this man did to my wife.
I beseech your honour, ask me.
Well sir, what did this Gentleman to her?
I beseech you sir, look in this Gentleman's face: good Master Froth look upon his honour; it is for a good purpose: doth your honour mark his face?
I sir, very well.
Nay, I beseech you mark it well.
Well, I doe so.
Doth your honour see any harm in his face?
Why no.
Isle be supposed upon a book, his face is the worst thing about him: good then: if his face be the worst thing about him, how could Master Froth doe the Con∣stables wife any harm? I would know that of your honour.
He's in the right (Constable) what say you to it?
First, and it like you, the house is a respected house; next, this is a respected fellow; and his Mistress is a respected woman.
By this hand Sir, his wife is a more respected per∣son then any of vs all.
Varlet, thou lie; thou lie wicked varlet: the time is yet to come that she was ever respected with man, woman, or child.
Sir, she was respected with him, before he mar∣ried with her.
Which is the wiser here; Justice or Iniquity? Is this true?
O thou caitiff: O thou varlet: O thou wick∣ed Hanniball; I respected with her, before I was married to her? If ever I was respected with her, or she with me, let not your worship think me the poor Dukes Off∣cer: prove this, thou wicked Hanniball, or isle have mine action of battery on thee.
If he took you a box of the ear, you might have your action of slander too.
Marry I thank your good worship for it: what is it your Worships pleasure I shall doe with this wick∣ed Caitiff?
Truly Officer, because he hath some offences in him, that thou would discover, if thou could, let him continue in his courses, till thou know what they are.
Marry I thank your worship for it: Thou see thou wicked varlet now, what's come upon thee. Thou art to continue now thou Varlet, thou art to continue.
Where were you borne, friend?
Here in Vienna, Sir.
Are you of fourscore pounds a year?
Yes, and 't please you sir.
So: what trade are you of, sir?
A Tipster, a poor widows Tipster.
Your Mistress name?
Mistress Ouer-do•.
Hath she had any more then one husband?
Nine, sir: Ouer-don by the last.
Nine? come hither to me, Master Froth; Master Froth, I would not have you acquainted with Tipsters; they will draw you Master Froth, and you will hang them: get you gon, and let me hear no more of you.
I thank your worship: for mine own part, I never come into any room in a Tap-house, but I am drawn in.
Well: no more of it Master Froth: farewell: Come you hither to me, Mr. Tipster: what's your name Mr. Tipster?
Pompey.
What else?
Bum, Sir.
Troth, and your bum is the greatest thing about you, so that in the beastliest sense, you are Pompey the great; Pompey, you are partly a bawd, Pompey; howso∣ever you colour it in being a Tipster, are you not? come, tell me true, it shall be the better for you.
Truly sir, I am a poor fellow that would live.
How would you live Pompey? by being a bawd? what doe you think of the trade Pompey? is it a lawful trade?
If the Law would allow it, sir.
But the Law will not allow it Pompey; nor it shall not be allowed in Ʋienna.
Do's your Worship mean to geld and splay all the youth of the City?
No, Pompey.
Truly Sir, in my poor opinion they will too't then: if your worship will take order for the drabs and the knaves, you need not to fear the bawds.
There is pretty orders beginning I can tell you: It is but heading, and hanging.
If you head, and hang all that offend that way but for ten year together; you'll be glad to give out a Commission for more heads: if this law hold in Vienna ten year, isle rent the fairest house in it after three pence a Bay: if you live to see this come to pass, say Pompey told you so.
Thank you good Pompey; and in requital of your prophecy, hark you: I advise you let me not find you before me again upon any complaint whatsoever; no, not for dwelling where you doe: if I doe Pompey, I shall beat you to your Tent, and prove a shrewd Caesar to you: in plain dealing Pompey, I shall have you whipped; so for this time, Pompey, fare you well.
I thank your Worship for your good counsel; but I shall follow it as the flesh and fortune shall better determine. Whip me? no, no, let Carman whip his Jade, The valiant heart's not whipped out of his trade.
Come hither to me, Master Elbow: come hither Master Constable: how long have you bin in this place of Constable?
Seven year, and a half sir.
I thought by the readiness in the office, you had continued in it some time: you say seven years toge∣there.
And a half sir.
Alas, it hath been great pains to you: they do you wrong to put you so oft upon it. Are there not men in your Ward sufficient to serve it?
Faith sir, few of any wit in such matters: as they are chosen, they are glad to choose me for them; I do it for some piece of money, and go through with all.
Look you bring me in the names of some six or seven, the most sufficient of your parish.
To your Worships house sir?
To my house: fare you well: what's a clock, think you?
Eleven, Sir.
I pray you home to dinner with me.
I humbly thank you.
It grieves me for the death of Claudio
But there's no remedy:
Lord Angelo is severe.
It is but needful.
Mercy is not it self, that oft looks so,
Pardon is still the nurse of second woe:
But yet, poor Claudio; there is no remedy.
Come Sir.
Hoe's hearing of a Cause; he will come straight, I'll tell him of you.
'Pray you doe; Isle know
His pleasure, may be he will relent; alas
He hath but as offended in a dream,
All Sects, all Ages smack of this vice, and he
To die for it?
Now, what's the matter Provost?
Is it your will Claudio shall die to morrow?
Did not I tell thee yea? had thou not order? Why dost thou ask again?
Lest I might be too rash:
Under your good correction, I have seen
When after execution, Judgment hath
Repented ore his doom.
Go to; let that be mine,
Doe you your office, or give up your Place,
And you shall well be spared.
I crave your Honours pardon:
What shall be done Sir, with the groaning Iuliet?
Shoe's very near her hour.
Dispose of her
To some more fitter place; and that with speed.
Here is the sister of the man condemned,
Desires access to you.
Hath he a Sister?
I my good Lord, a very virtuous maid,
And to be shortly of a Sister-hood,
If not already.
Well: let her be admitted,
See you the Fornicatress be removed,
Let her have needful, but not lavish means,
There shall be order for it.
'Saue your Honour.
Stay a little while: y' are welcome: what's your will?
I am a woeful Suitor to your Honour,
'Please but your Honour hear me.
Well: what's your suite.
There is a vice that most I doe abhor,
And most desire should meet the blow of Justice;
For which I would not plead, but that I must,
For which I must not plead, but that I am
At war, twixt will, and will not.
Well: the matter?
I have a brother is condemned to die,
I doe beseech you let it be his fault,
And not my brother.
Heaven give thee moving graces.
Condemn the fault, and not the actor of it,
Why every fault's condemned ere it be done:
Mine were the very Cipher of a Function
To fine the faults, whose fine stands in record,
And let go by the Actor:
Oh just, but severe Law:
I had a brother then; heaven keep your honour.
Giue't not ore so: to him again, entreat him,
Kneel down before him, hang upon his gown,
You are too cold: if you should need a pin,
You could not with more t•me tongue desire it:
To him, I say.
Must he needs die?
Maiden, no remedy.
Yes: I doe think that you might pardon him,
And neither heaven, nor man grieve at the mercy.
I will not do it.
But can you if you would?
Look what I will not, that I cannot doe.
But might you do it &amp; do the world no wrong
If so your heart were touched with that remorse,
As mine is to him?
Hoe's sentenced, tic too late.
You are too cold.
Too late? why no: I that doe speak a word
May call it again: well, believe this
No ceremony that to great ones longs,
Not the Kings Crown; nor the deputed sword,
The Marshalls Truncheon, nor the Judges Robe
Become them with one half so good a grace
As mercy does: If he had bin as you, and you as he,
You would have slipped like him, but he like you
Would not have been so sterne.
Pray you be gone.
I would to heaven I had your potency,
And you were Isabel: should it then be thus?
No: I would tell what it were to be a Judge,
And what a prisoner.
I, touch him: there's the vain.
Your Brother is a forfeit of the Law,
And you but waste your words.
Alas, alas:
Why all the souls that were, were forfeit once,
And he that might the vantage best have took,
Found out the remedy: how would you be,
If he, which is the top of Judgment, should
But judge you, as you are? Oh, think on that,
And mercy then will breathe within your lips
Like man new made.
Be you content, (fair Maid)
It is the Law, not I, condemn your brother,
Were he my kinsman, brother, or my son,
It should be thus with him: he must die to morrow.
To morrow? oh, that's sudden,
Spare him, spare him:
Hoe's not prepared for death; even for our kitchens
We kill the foul of season: shall we serve heaven
With less respect then we doe minister
To our grosse-selues? good, good my Lord, bethink you;
Who is it that hath died for this offence?
There's many have committed it.
I, well said.
The Law hath not bin dead, though it hath slept
Those many had not dared to doe that evil
If the first, that did the Edict infringe
Had answered for his deed. Now it is awake.
Takes note of what is done, and like a Prophet
Looks in a glass that shows what future evils
Either now, or by remissness, new conceived,
And so in progress to be hatc'hd, and borne,
Are now to have no successive degrees,
But here they live to end.
Yet show some pity.
I show it most of all, when I show Justice;
For then I pity those I doe not know,
Which a dismised offence, would after gaul
And doe him right, that answering one foul wrong
Lives not to act another. Be satisfied;
Your Brother dies to morrow; be content.
So you must be ye first that gives this sentence,
And hee, that suffers: Oh, it is excellent
To have a Giants strength: but it is tyrannous
To use it like a Giant.
That's well said.
Could great men thunder
As Jove himself do's, Jove would never be quiet,
For every pelting petty Officer
Would use his heaven for thunder;
Nothing but thunder: Merciful heaven,
Thou rather with thy sharpe and sulpherous bole•
Splits the vn-wedgable and gnarled Ok,
Then, the soft Mertill: But man, proud man,
Dressed in a little brief authority,
Most ignorant of what he's most assured,
(His glassy Essence) like an angry Ape
Plays such phantastique tricks before high heaven,
As makes the Angels weep: who with our spleens,
Would all themselves laugh mortal.
Oh, to him, to him wench: he will relent,
Hoe's coming: I perceiue't.
Pray heaven she win him.
We cannot weigh our brother with our self,
Great men may jest with Saints: tic wit in them,
But in the less foul profanation.
You're in th right (Girl) more of that.
That in the Captaine's but a choleric word,
Which in the Soldier is flat blasphemy.
Art advised of that? more on it.
Why doe you put these sayings upon me?
Because Authority, though it err like others,
Hath yet a kind of medicine in it self
That skins the vice of th top; go to your bosom,
Knock there, and ask your heart what it doth know
That's like my brothers fault: if it confess
A natural guiltiness, such as is his,
Let it not sound a thought upon your tongue
Against my brothers life.
She speaks, and it is such sense
That my Sense breeds with it; fare you well.
Gentle my Lord, turn back.
I will bethink me: come again to morrow.
Hark, how Isle bribe you: good my Lord turn back.
How? bribe me?
I, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you.
You had mared all else.
Not with fond Sickles of the tested-gold,
Or Stones, whose rate are either rich, or poor
As fancy values them: but with true prayers,
That shall be up at heaven, and enter there
Ere Sun rise: prayers from preserved souls,
From fasting Maids, whose minds are dedicate
To nothing temporal.
Well: come to me to morrow.
Go to: it is well; away.
Heaven keep your honour safe.
Amen.
For I am that way going to temptation,
Where prayers cross.
At what hour to morrow,
Shall I attend your Lordship?
At any time before noon.
'Saue your Honour.
From thee: even from thy virtue.
What's this? what's this? is this her fault, or mine?
The Tempter, or the Tempted, who sins most? ha?
Not she: nor doth she tempt: but it is I,
That, lying by the Violet in the Sun,
Doe as the Carrion do's, not as the flower,
Corrupt with virtuous season: Can it be,
That Modesty may more betray our Sense
Then women's lightness? having waste ground enough,
Shall we desire to raze the Sanctuary
And pitch our evils there? oh fie, fie, fie:
What dost thou? or what art thou Angelo?
Dost thou desire her foully, for those things
That make her good? oh, let her brother live:
Thieves for their robbery have authority,
When Judges steal themselves: what, doe I love her,
That I desire to hear her speak again?
And feast upon her eyes? what is it I dream on?
Oh cunning enemy, that to catch a Saint,
With Saints dost bait thy hook: most dangerous
Is that temptation, that doth goad vs on
To sin, in loving virtue: never could the Strumpet
With all her double vigour, Art, and Nature
Once stir my temper: but this virtuous Maid
Subdues me quite: Ever till now
When men were fond, I smiled, and wondered how.
Hail to you, Provost, so I think you are.
I am the Provost: whats your will, good Friar?
Bound by my charity, and my blessed order,
I come to visit the afflicted spirits
Here in the prison: doe me the common right
To let me see them: and to make me know
The nature of their crimes, that I may minister
To them accordingly.
I would do more then that, if more were needful
Look here comes one: a Gentlewoman of mine,
Who falling in the flaws of her own youth,
Hath blistered her report: She is with child,
And he that got it, sentenced: a young man,
More fit to doe another such offence,
Then dye for this.
When must he dye?
As I do think to morrow.
I have provided for you, stay a while
And you shall be conducted.
Repent you (fair one) of the sin you carry?
I doe; and bear the shame most patiently.
Isle teach you how you shall arraign your consciēce
And try your penitence, if it be sound,
Or hollowly put on.
Isle gladly learn.
Love you the man that wronged you?
Yes, as I love the woman that wronged him.
So then it seems your most offence full act
Was mutually committed.
Mutually.
Then was your sin of heavier kind then his.
I doe confess it, and repent it (Father.)
It is meet so (daughter) but least you do repent
As that the sin hath brought you to this shame,
Which sorrow is always toward our selves, not heaven,
Showing we would not spare heaven, as we love it,
But as we stand in fear.
I doe repent me as it is an evil,
And take the shame with joy.
There rest:
Your partner (as I hear) must die to morrow,
And I am going with instruction to him:
Grace go with you, Benedicite.
Must die tomorrow? oh injurious Love
That respits me a life, whose very comfort
Is still a dying horror.
It is pity of him.
When I would pray, &amp; think, I think, and pray
To several subjects: heaven hath my empty words,
Whilst my Invention, hearing not my Tongue,
Anchors on Isabel: heaven in my mouth,
As if I did but only chew his name,
And in my heart the strong and swelling evil
Of my conception: the state whereon I studied
Is like a good thing, being often read
Grown feared, and tedious: yea, my Gravity
Wherein (let no man hear me) I take pride,
Could I, with boot, change for an idle plume
Which the ayre beats for vain: oh place, oh form,
How often dost thou with thy case, thy habit
Wrench awe from fools, and tie the wiser souls
To thy false seeming? Blood, thou art blood,
Let's write good Angel on the Devils horn
It is not the Devils Crest: how now? who's there?
One Isabel, a Sister, desires access to you,
Teach her the way: oh, heavens
Why doe's my blood thus muster to my heart,
Making both it unable for it self,
And dispossessing all my other parts
Of necessary fitness?
So play the foolish throngs with one that swounds,
Come all to help him, and so stop the ayre
By which hee should revive: and even so
The general subject to a wel-wisht King
Quit their own part, and in obsequious fondness
Crowd to his presence, where their vn-taught love
Must needs appear offence: how now fair Maid.
I am come to know your pleasure.
That you might know it, wold much better please me,
Then to demand what it is: your Brother cannot live.
Even so: heaven keep your Honour.
Yet may he live a while: and it may be
As long as you, or I: yet he must die.
Under your Sentence?
Yea.
When, I beseech you: that in his Reprieve
(Longer, or shorter) he may be so fitted
That his soul sicken not.
Ha? fie, these filthy vices: It were as good
To pardon him, that hath from nature stolen
A man already made, as to remit
Their saucy sweetness, that do coin heavens Image
In stamps that are forbid: it is all as easy,
Falsely to take away a life true made,
As to put mettle in restrained means
To make a false one.
It is set down so in heaven, but not in earth.
Say you so: then I shall pose you quickly.
Which had you rather, that the most just Law
Now took your brothers life, and to redeem him
Give up your body to such sweet uncleanness
As she that he hath stained?
Sir, believe this.
I had rather give my body, then my soul.
I talk not of your soul: our compelled sins
Stand more for number, then for account.
How say you?
Nay Isle not warrant that: for I can speak
Against the thing I say: Answer to this,
I (now the voice of the recorded Law)
Pronounce a sentence on your Brothers life,
Might there not be a charity in sin,
To save this Brothers life?
Please you to do it,
Isle take it as a peril to my soul,
It is no sin at all, but charity.
Pleased you to do it, at peril of your soul
Were equal poise of sin, and charity.
That I do beg his life, if it be sin
Heaven let me bear it: you granting of my suit,
If that be sin, Isle make it my Morne-praier,
To have it added to the faults of mine,
And nothing of your answer.
Nay, but hear me.
Your sense pursues not mine: either you are ignorant,
Or seem so crafty; and that's not good.
Let be ignorant, and in nothing good,
But graciously to know I am no better.
Thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright,
When it doth tax it self: As these black Masques
Proclaim an en-shield beauty ten times louder
Then beauty could displayed: But mark me,
To be received plain, Isle speak more gross:
Your Brother is to dye.
So.
And his offence is so, as it appears,
Accountant to the Law, upon that pain.
True.
Admit no other way to save his life
(As I subscribe not that, nor any other,
But in the less of question) that you, his Sister,
Finding your self desired of such a person,
Whose credit with the Judge, or own great place,
Could fetch your Brother from the Manacles
Of the all-building-Law: and that there were
No earthly mean to save him, but that either
You must lay down the treasures of your body,
To this supposed, or else to let him suffer:
What would you doe?
As much for my poor Brother, as my self;
That is: were I under the terms of death,
The impression of keen whips, I'd wear as Rubies,
And strip my self to death, as to a bed,
That longing have bin sick for, ere I'd yield
My body up to shame.
Then must your brother die.
And it were the cheaper way:
Better it were a brother did at once,
Then that a sister, by redeeming him
Should die for ever.
Were not you then as cruel as the Sentence,
That you have slandered so?
Ignomy in ransom, and free pardon
Are of two houses: lawful mercy,
Is nothing kin to foul redemption.
You seemed of late to make the Law a tyrant,
And rather proved the sliding of your brother
A merriment, then a vice.
Oh pardon me my Lord, it oft false out
To have, what we would have,
We speak not what we mean;
I something do excuse the thing I hate,
For his advantage that I dearly love.
We are all frail.
Else let my brother die,
If not a fedarie but only he
Owe, and succeed thy weakness.
Nay, women are frail too.
I, as the glasses where they view themselves,
Which are as easy broke as they make forms:
Women? Help heaven; men their creation mar
In profiting by them: Nay, call vs ten times frail,
For we are soft, as our complexions are,
And credulous to false prints.
I think it well:
And from this testimony of your own sex
(Since I suppose we are made to be no stronger
Then faults may shake our frames) let me be bold;
I do arrest your words. Be that you are,
That is a woman; if you be more, you're none.
If you be one (as you are well expressed
By all external warrants) show it now,
By putting on the destined Livery.
I have no tongue but one; gentle my Lord,
Let me entreat you speak the former language.
Plainly conceive I love you.
My brother did love Iuliet,
And you tell me that he shall die for it.
He shall not Isabel if you give me love.
I know your virtue hath a licence in it,
Which seems a little fouler then it is,
To pluck on others.
Believe me on mine Honour,
My words express my purpose.
Ha? Little honour, to be much believed,
And most pernicious purpose: Seeming, seeming.
I will proclaim thee Angelo, look for it.
Sign me a present pardon for my brother,
Or with an out-stretcht throat Isle tell the world aloud
What man thou art.
Who will believe thee Isabel?
My vnsoild name, the austereness of my life,
My vouch against you, and my place in th State,
Will so your accusation ouer-weigh,
That you shall stifle in your own report,
And smell of calumny. I have begun,
And now I give my sensual race, the reine,
Fit thy consent to my sharpe appetite,
Lay by all nicety, and prolixious blushes
That banish what they sue for: Redeem thy brother,
By yielding up thy body to my will,
Or else he must not only die the death,
But thy unkindness shall his death draw out
To lingering sufferance: Answer me to morrow,
Or by the affection that now guides me most,
Isle prove a Tyrant to him. As for you,
Say what you can; my false, ore-weighs your true.
To whom should I complain? Did I tell this,
Who would believe me? O perilous mouths
That bear in them, one and the selfsame tongue,
Either of condemnation, or approof,
Bidding the Law make curtsy to their will,
Hooking both right and wrong to the appetite,
To follow as it draws. Isle to my brother,
Though he hath fallen by prompture of the blood,
Yet hath he in him such a mind of Honour,
That had he twenty heads to tender down
On twenty bloody blocks, hee'ld yield them up,
Before his sister should her body stoop,
To such abhord pollution.
Then Isabel live chaste, and brother die;
"More then our Brother, is our Chastity.
Isle tell him yet of Angelo's request,
And fit his mind to death, for his souls rest.
So then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo?
The miserable have no other medicine
But only hope: In have hope to live, and am prepared to die.
Be absolute for death: either death or life
Shall thereby be the sweeter. Reason thus with life:
If I do loose thee, I do loose a thing
That none but fools would keep: a breath thou art,
Servile to all the skyie-influences,
That dost this habitation where thou keepst
Hourly afflict: Merely, thou art deaths fool,
For him thou labourst by thy flight to shun,
And yet runst toward him still. Thou art not noble,
For all the accommodations that thou bear,
Are nursed by baseness: You're by no means valiant,
For thou dost fear the soft and tender fork
Of a poor worm: thy best of rest is sleep,
And that thou oft prouoakst, yet grossly fear
Thy death, which is no more. Thou art not thy self,
For thou exists on many a thousand grains
That issue out of dust. Happy thou art not,
For what thou hast not, still thou striu'st to get,
And what thou hast forgetst. Thou art not certain,
For thy complexion shifts to strange effects,
After the Moon: If thou art rich, you're poor,
For like an Ass, whose back with Ingots bows;
Thou bear thy heavy riches but a journey,
And death vnloads thee; Friend hast thou none.
For thine own bowels which do call thee, fire
The mere effusion of thy proper loins
Do curse the Gout, Sapego, and the Rheum
For ending thee no sooner. Thou hast nor youth, nor age
But as it were an after-dinners sleep
Dreaming on both, for all thy blessed youth
Becomes as aged, and doth beg the alms
Of palsied-Eld: and when thou art old, and rich
Thou hast neither heate, affection, limb, nor beauty
To make thy riches pleasant: what's yet in this
That bears the name of life? Yet in this life
Lie hid more thousand deaths; yet death we fear
That makes these odds, all even.
I humbly thank you.
To sue to live, I find I seek to die,
And seeking death, find life: Let it come on.
What hoe? Peace here; Grace, and good com∣panie.
Who's there? Come in, the wish deserves a welcome.
Dear sir, ere long Isle visit you again.
Most bole Sir; I thank you.
My business is a word or two with Claudio.
And very welcome: look Signior, here's your sister.
Provost, a word with you.
As many as you please.
Bring them to hear me speak, where I may be concealed.
Now sister, what's the comfort?
Why,
As all comforts are: most good, most good indeed,
Lord Angelo having affairs to heaven
Intends you for his swift Ambassador,
Where you shall be an everlasting Leiger;
Therefore your best appointment make with speed,
To Morrow you set on.
Is there no remedy?
None, but such remedy, as to save a head
To cleave a heart in twain:
But is there any?
Yes brother, you may live;
There is a devilish mercy in the Judge,
If you'll implore it, that will free your life,
But fetter you till death.
Perpetual durance?
I just, perpetual durance, a restraint
Through all the worlds vastiditie you had
To a determined scope.
But in what nature?
In such a one, as you consenting too't,
Would bark your honour from that trunk you bear,
And leave you naked.
Let me know the point.
Oh, I do fear thee Claudio, and I quake,
Least thou a feauorous life should entertain,
And six or seven winters more respect
Then a perpetual Honour. Dare thou die?
The sense of death is most in apprehension,
And the poor Beetle that we tread upon
In corporal sufferance, finds a pang as great.
As when a Giant dies.
Why give you me this shame?
Think you I can a resolution fetch
From flowery tenderness? If I must die,
I will encounter darkness as a bride,
And hug it in mine arms.
There spake my brother: there my fathers grave
Did utter forth a voice. Yes, thou must die:
Thou art too noble to conserve a life
In base appliances. This outward sainted Deputy,
Whose settled visagn, and deliberate word
Nips youth in th head, and follies doth •new
As Falcon doth the Foul, is yet a devil:
His filth within being cast, he would appear
A pond, as deep as hell.
The prenzie, Angelo?
Oh it is the cunning Livery of hell,
The damnest body to invest, and cover
In prenzie guards; dost thou think Claudio,
If I would yield him my virginity
Thou might be freed?
Oh heavens, it cannot be.
Yes, he would gived thee; from this rank offence
So to offend him still. This night's the time
That I should do what I abhor to name,
Or else thou die to morrow.
Thou shalt not do it.
O, were it but my life,
I'd throw it down for your deliverance
As frankly as a pin.
Thanks dear Isabel.
Be ready Claudio, for your death to morrow.
Yes. Has he affections in him,
That thus can make him bite the Law by the nose,
When he would force it? Sure it is no sin,
Or of the deadly seven it is the least.
Which is the least?
If it were damnable, he being so wise,
Why would he for the momentary trick
Be perdurablie find? Oh Isabel.
What says my brother?
Death is a fearful thing.
And shamed life, a hateful.
I, but to die, and go we know not where,
To lie in cold obstruction, and to rot,
This sensible warm motion, to become
A kneaded clod; And the delighted spirit
To bath in fiery floods, or to recide
In thrilling Region of thicke-ribbed Ice,
To be imprisoned in the viewlesse winds
And blown with restless violence round about
The pendant world: or to be worse then worst
Of those, that lawless and uncertain thought,
Imagine howling, it is too horrible.
The weariest, and most loathed worldly life
That Age, Ache, perjury, and imprisonment
Can lay on nature, is a Paradise
To what we fear of death.
Alas, alas.
Sweet Sister, let me live.
What sin you do, to save a brothers life,
Nature dispenses with the deed so far,
That it becomes a virtue.
Oh you beast,
Oh faithless Coward, oh dishonest wretch,
Wilt thou be made a man, out of my vice?
Is it not a kind of Incest, to take life
From thine own sisters shame? What should I think,
Heaven shield my Mother plaid my Father fair:
For such a warped slip of wilderness
Ne'er issued from his blood. Take my defiance,
Die, perish: Might but my bending down
Repreeue thee from thy fate, it should proceed.
Isle pray a thousand prayers for thy death,
No word to save thee.
Nay hear me Isabel.
Oh fie, fie, fie:
Thy sin's not accidental, but a Trade;
Mercy to thee would prove it self a Bawd,
It is best that thou die quickly.
Oh hear me Isabella.
Vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.
What is your Will.
Might you dispense with your leisure, I would by and by have some speech with you: the satisfaction I would require, is likewise your own benefit.
I have no superfluous leisure, my stay must be stolen out of other affairs: but I will attend you a while.
Son, I have ouer-heard what hath past between you &amp; your sister. Angelo had never the purpose to cor∣rupt her; only he hath made an assay of her virtue, to practise his judgment with the disposition of natures. She (having the truth of honour in her) hath made him that gracious denial, which he is most glad to receive: I am Confessor to Angelo, and I know this to be true, there∣fore prepare your self to death: do not satisfy your re∣solution with hopes that are fallible, to morrow you must die, go to your knees, and make ready.
Let me ask my sister pardon, I am so out of love with life, that I will sue to be rid of it.
Hold you there: farewell: Provost, a word with you.
What's your will (father?)
That now you are come, you will be gone: leave me a while with the Maid, my mind promises with my habit, no loss shall touch her by my company.
In good time.
The hand that hath made you fair, hath made you good: the goodness that is cheap in beauty, makes beauty brief in goodness; but grace being the soul of your complexion, shall keep the body of it ever fair: the assault that Angelo hath made to you, Fortune hath conveyed to my understanding; and but that frailty hath examples for his falling, I should wonder at Angelo: how will you doe to content this Substitute, and to save your Brother?
I am now going to resolve him: I had rather my brother die by the Law, then my son should be un∣lawfully borne. But (oh) how much is the good Duke deceived in Angelo: if ever he return, and I can speak to him, I will open my lips in vain, or discover his go∣uernment.
That shall not be much amiss: yet, as the mat∣la now stands, he will avoid your accusation: he made trial of you only. Therefore fasten your ear on my aduisings, to the love I have in doing good; a remedy presents it self. I doe make my self believe that you may most vprighteously do a poor wronged Lady a me∣rited benefit; redeem your brother from the angry Law; doe no stain to your own gracious person, and much please the absent Duke, if peradventure he shall ever re∣turn to have hearing of this business.
Let me hear you speak farther; I have spirit to do any thing that appears not foul in the truth of my spirit.
Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful: Have you not heard speak of Mariana the sister of Fre∣dericke the great Soldier, who miscarried at Sea?
I have heard of the Lady, and good words went with her name.
She should this Angelo have married: was af∣fianced to her oath, and the nuptial appointed: between which time of the contract, and limit of the solemnity, her brother Frederick was wrecked at Sea, having in that perished vessel, the dowry of his sister: but mark how heavily this befell to the poor Gentlewoman, there she lost a noble and renowned brother, in his love toward her, ever most kind and natural: with him the portion and sinew of her fortune, her marriage dowry: with both, her combynate-husband, this well-seeming Angelo.
Can this be so? did Angelo so leave her?
Left her in her tears, &amp; dried not one of them with his comfort: swallowed his vows whole, proton∣ding in her, discoveries of dishonour: in few, bestowed her on her own lamentation, which she yet wears for his sake: and he, a marble to her tears, is washed with them, but relents not.
What a merit were it in death to take this poor maid from the world? what corruption in this life, that it will let this man live? But how out of this can she a∣uaile?
It is a rupture that you may easily heal: and the cure of it not only saves your brother, but keeps you from dishonour in doing it.
Show me how (good Father.)
This fore-named Maid hath yet in her the con∣tinuance of her first affection: his unjust unkindness (that in all reason should have quenched her love) hath (like an impediment in the Current) made it more vio∣lent and unruly: Go you to Angelo, answer his requi∣ring with a plausible obedience, agree with his demands to the point: only refer your self to this advantage; first, that your stay with him may not be long: that the time may have all shadow, and silence in it: and the place answer to convenience: this being granted in course, and now follows all: wee shall advise this wronged maid to steed up your appointment, go in your place: if the encounter acknowledge it self hereafter, it may compel him to her recompense; and here, by this is your brother saved, your honour untainted, the poor Mariana advantaged, and the corrupt Deputy scaled. The Maid will I frame, and make fit for his attempt: if you think well to carry this as you may, the doubleness of the benefit defends the deceit from reproof. What think you of it?
The image of it gives me content already, and I trust it will grow to a most prosperous perfection.
It lies much in your holding up: haste you spy∣deli to Angelo, if for this night he entreat you to his bed, give him promise of satisfaction: I will presently to S. Lukes, there at the moated-Grange recides this deie∣cted Mariana; at that place call upon me, and dispatch with Angelo, that it may be quickly.
I thank you for this comfort: fare you well good father.
Nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will needs buy and sell men and women like beasts, we shall have all the world drink browne &amp; white bastard.
Oh heavens, what stuff is here.
It was never merry world since of two usuries the merriest was put down, and the worser allowed by order of Law; a furred gown to keep him warm; and furd with Fox and Lamb-skins too, to signify, that craft being richer then Innocence, stands for the facing.
Come your way sir: bless you good Father Friar.
And you good Brother Father; what offence hath this man made you, Sir?
Marry Sir, he hath offended the Law; and Sir, we take him to be a Thief too Sir: for wee have found upon him Sir, a strange Pick-lock, which we have sent to the Deputy.
Fie, sirrah, a Bawd, a wicked bawd,
The evil that thou cause to be done,
That is thy means to live. Do thou but think
What it is to cram a maw, or cloth a back
From such a filthy vice: say to thy self,
From their abominable and beastly touches
I drink, I eat away my self, and live:
Can thou believe thy living is a life,
So stinkingly depending? Go mend, go mend.
Indeed, it do's stink in some sort, Sir:
But yet Sir I would prove.
Nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin
Thou wilt prove his. Take him to prison Officer:
Correction, and Instruction must both work
Ere this rude beast will profit.
He must before the Deputy Sir, he he's given him warning: the Deputy cannot abide a Whore-ma∣ster: if he be a Whore-monger, and comes before him, he were as good go a mile on his errand.
That we were all, as some would seem to bee
From our faults, as faults from seeming free.
His neck will come to your wast, a Cord sir.
I spy comfort, I cry bail: Here's a Gentleman, and a friend of mine.
How now noble Pompey? What, at the wheels of Caesar? Art thou led in triumph? What is there none of Pigmalions Images newly made woman to bee had now, for putting the hand in the pocket, and extracting clutched? What reply? Ha? What say thou to this Tune, Matter, and Method? Is it not drowned in th last rain? Ha? What say thou Trot? Is the world as it was Man? Which is the way? Is it sad, and few words? Or how? The trick of it?
Still thus, and thus: still vvorse?
How doth my dear Morsel, thy Mistress? Pro∣cures she still? Ha?
Troth sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and she is her self in the tub.
Why it is good: It is the right of it: it must be so. Ever your fresh Whore; and your pouder'd Baud, an vnshun'd consequence, it must be so. Art going to pri∣son Pompey?
Yes faith sir.
Why it is not amiss Pompey: farewell: go say I sent thee thither: for debt Pompey? Or how?
For being a baud; for being a baud.
Well, then imprison him: If imprisonment be the due of a baud, why it is his right▪ Baud is he doubt∣less, and of antiquity too. Baud borne. Farewell good Pompey: Commend me to the prison Pompey, you will turn good husband now Pompey, you will keep the house.
I hope Sir, your good Worship will be my bail?
No indeed will I not Pompey, it is not the wear: I will pray (Pompey) to increase your bondage if you take it not patiently: Why, your mettle is the more: Adieu trusty Pompey. Bless you Friar.
And you.
Do's Bridge• paint still, Pompey? Ha?
Come your ways sir, come.
You will not bail me then Sir?
Then Pompey, nor now: what news abroad Fri∣er? What news?
Come your ways sir, come.
Go to kennel (Pompey) go:
What news Friar of the Duke?
I know none: can you tell me of any?
Some say he is with the Emperor of Russia: other some, he is in Rome: but where is he think you?
I know not where: but wheresoever, I wish him well.
It was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from the State, and usurp the beggary hee was never borne to: Lord Angelo Dukes it well in his absence: he puts transgression too't.
He do's well in it.
A little more lenity to Lechery would doe no harm in him: Something too crabbed that way, Friar.
It is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.
Yes in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred; it is well allied, but it is impossible to extirpe it quite, Friar, till eating and drinking be put down. They say this Angelo was not made by Man and Woman, after this downright way of Creation: is it true, think you?
How should he be made then?
Some report, a Sea-maid spawned him. Some, that he was begot between two Stock-fishes. But it is certain, that when he makes water, his Urine is con∣goaled ice, that I know to bee true: and he is a motion generatiue, that's infallible.
You are pleasant sir, and speak apace.
Why, what a ruthless thing is this in him, for the rebellion of a Codpiece, to take away the life of a man? Would the Duke that is absent have done this? Ere he would have hanged a man for the getting a hun∣dred Bastards, he would have paid for the Nursing a thousand. He had some feeling of the sport; hee knew the service, and that instructed him to mercy.
I never heard the absent Duke much detected for Women, he was not inclined that way.
Oh Sir, you are deceived.
It is not possible.
Who, not the Duke? Yes, your beggar of fifty: and his use was, to put a ducats in her Clack-dish; the Duke had Crochets in him. Hee would be drunk too, that let me inform you.
You do him wrong, surely.
Sir, I was an inward of his: a shy fellow was the Duke, and I believe I know the cause of his with∣drawing.
What (I prithee) might be the cause?
No, pardon: It is a secret must bee look with∣in the teeth and the lips: but this I can let you under∣stand, the greater file of the subject held the Duke to be wise.
Wise? Why no question but he was.
A very superficial, ignorant, vnweighing fellow
Either this is Envy in you, Folly, or mista∣king: The very stream of his life, and the business he hath helmet, must upon a warranted need, give him a better proclamation. Let him be but testimonied in his own bringings forth, and hee shall appear to the envious, a Scholar, a Statesman, and a Soldier: there∣fore you speak vnskilfully: or, if your knowledge bee more, it is much darkened in your malice.
Sir, I know him, and I love him.
Love talks with better knowledge, &amp; know∣ledge with dear love.
Come Sir, I know what I know.
I can hardly believe that, since you know not what you speak. But if ever the Duke return (as our prayers are he may) let me desire you to make your an∣swer before him: if it bee honest you have spoke, you have courage to maintain it; I am bound to call upon you, and I pray you your name?
Sir my name is Lucio, well known to the Duke.
He shall know you better Sir, if I may live to report you.
I fear you not.
O, you hope the Duke will return no more: or you imagine me to unhurtful an opposite: but indeed I can doe you little harm: You'll forswear this a∣gain?
Isle be hanged first: Thou art deceived in me Friar. But no more of this: Can thou tell if Claudio die to morrow, or no?
Why should he die Sir?
Why? For filling a bottle with a Tunne-dish: I would the Duke we talk of were returned again: this vngenitur'd Agent will vn-people the Province with Continence. Sparrows must not build in his house∣eeues, because they are lecherous: The Duke yet would have dark deeds darkly answered, hee would never bring them to light: would hee were returned. Marry this Claudio is condemned for untrussing. Farewell good Friar, I prithee pray for me: The Duke (I say to thee again) would eat Mutton on Fridays. He's now past it, yet (and I say to thee) hee would mouth with a beg∣gar, though she smelt browne-bread and Garlic: say that I said so: Farewell.
No might, nor greatness in mortality
Can censure scope: Back-wounding calumny
The whitest virtue strikes. What King so strong,
Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tong?
But who comes here?
Go, away with her to prison.
Good my Lord be good to me, your Honour is accounted a merciful man: good my Lord.
Double, and treble admonition, and still for∣feet in the same kind? This would make mercy swear and play the Tyrant.
A Bawd of eleven years continuance, may it please your Honour.
My Lord, this is one Lucio's information a∣against me, Mistress Kate Keepe-downe was with child by him in the Dukes time, he promised her marriage: his Child is a year and a quarter old come Philip and In∣cob: I have kept it my self; and see how hee goes about to abuse me.
That fellow is a fellow of much License: Let him be called before vs. Away with her to prison: Go too, no more words. Provost, my Brother Angelo will not be altered, Claudio must die to morrow: Let him be furnished with Divines, and have all charitable prepare∣tion. If my brother wrought by my pity, it should not be so with him.
So please you, this Friar hath been with him, and advised him for the entertainment of death.
Good'euen, good Father.
Bliss, and goodness on you.
Of whence are you?
Not of this Country, though my chance is now
To use it for my time: I am a brother
Of gracious Order, late come from the Sea,
In special business from his Holiness.
What news abroad in th World?
None, but that there is so great a Feauor on goodness, that the dissolution of it must cure it. No∣ueltie is only in request, and as it is as dangerous to be aged in any kind of course, as it is virtuous to be con∣stant in any undertaking. There is scarce truth enough alive to make Societies secure, but Security enough to make Fellowships accursed: Much upon this riddle runs the wisdom of the world: This news is old enough, yet it is every days news. I pray you Sir, of what dis∣position was the Duke?
One, that aboue all other strifes,
Contended especially to know himself.
What pleasure was he given to?
Rather rejoicing to see another merry, then merrrie at any thing which professed to make him rejoice. A Gentleman of all temperance. But leave wee him to his events, with a prayer they may prove prosperous, &amp; let me desire to know, how you find Claudio prepared? I am made to understand, that you have lent him visit∣tion.
He professes to have received no sinister mea∣sure from his Judge, but most willingly humbles him∣self to the determination of Justice: yet had he framed to himself (by the instruction of his frailty) many de∣ceyuing promises of life, which I (by my good leisure) have discredited to him, and now is he resolved to die.
You have paid the heavens your Function, and the prisoner the very debt of your Calling. I have la∣bored for the poor Gentleman, to the extremest shore of my modesty, but my brother-Iustice have I found so severe, that he hath forced me to tell him, hee is indeed Justice.
If his own life,
Answer the straitness of his proceeding,
It shall become him well: wherein if he chance to fail he hath sentenced himself.
I am going to visit the prisoner, Fare you well.
Peace be with you.
He who the sword of Heaven will bear,
Should be as holy, as seueare:
Pattern in himself to know,
Grace to stand, and Virtue go:
More, nor less to others paying,
Then by selfe-offences weighing.
Shame to him, whose cruel striking,
Kills for faults of his own liking:
Twice treble shame on Angelo,
To weed my vice, and let his grow.
Oh, what may Man within him hide,
Though Angel on the outward side?
How may likeness made in crimes,
Making practise on the Times,
To draw with idle Spiders strings
Most ponderous and substantial things?
Craft against vice, I must apply.
With Angelo to night shall lye
His old betrothed (but despised:)
So disguise shall by the disguised
Pay with falsehood, self exacting,
And perform an old contracting.
Take, oh take those lips away, that so sweetly were for sworn,
And those eyes: the break of day lights that doe mislead the Morn;
But my kisses bring again, bring again,
Seals of love, but sealed in vain, sealed in vain.
Break off thy song, and haste thee quick away,
Here comes a man of comfort, whose advice
Hath often stilled my brawling discontent.
I cry you mercy, Sir, and well could wish
You had not found me here so musical.
Let me excuse me, and believe me so,
My mirth it much displeased, but pleased my woe.
It is good; though Music oft hath such a charm
To make bad, good; and good prouoake to harm.
I pray you tell me, hath any body enquired for me here to day; much upon this time have I promised here to meet.
You have not bin enquired after: I have sat here all day.
I doe constantly believe you: the time is come even now. I shall crave your forbearance a little, may be I will call upon you anon for some advantage to your self.
I am always bound to you.
Very well met, and well come:
What is the news from this good Deputy?
He hath a Garden circummur'd with Brick,
Whose western side is with a Vineyard backed;
And to that Vineyard is a planched gate,
That makes his opening with this bigger Key:
This other doth command a little door,
Which from the Vineyard to the Garden leads,
There have I made my promise, upon the
Heavy middle of the night, to call upon him.
But shall you on your knowledge find this way?
I have t'ane a due, and wary note upon it,
With whispering, and most guilty diligence,
In action all of precept, he did show me
The way twice ore.
Are there no other tokens
Between you 'greed, concerning her observance?
No: none but only a repair in the dark,
And that I have possessed him, my most stay
Can be but brief: for I have made him know,
I have a Servant comes with me along
That stays upon me; whose persuasion is,
I come about my Brother.
It is well borne up.
I have not yet made known to Mariana
A word of this: what hoe, within; come forth,
I pray you be acquainted with this Maid,
She comes to doe you good.
I doe desire the like.
Do you persuade your self that I respect you?
Good Friar, I know you do, and have found it.
Take then this your companion by the hand
Who hath a story ready for your ear:
I shall attend your leisure, but make haste
The vaporous night approaches.
Wilt please you walk aside.
Oh Place, and greatness: millions of false eyes
Are stuck upon thee: volumes of report
Run with these false, and most contrary Quest
Upon thy doings: thousand escapes of wit
Make thee the father of their idle dream,
And rack thee in their fancies. Welcome, how agreed?
She'll take the enterprise upon her father,
If you advise it.
It is not my consent,
But my entreaty too.
Little have you to say
When you depart from him, but soft and low,
Remember now my brother.
Fear me not.
Nor gentle daughter, fear you not at all:
He is your husband on a pre-contract:
To bring you thus together it is no sin,
Sith that the Justice of your title to him
Doth flourish the deceit. Come, let vs go,
Our Cornea's to reap, for yet our Tithes to sow.
Come hither sirha; can you cut off a mans head?
If the man be a Bachelor Sir, I can:
But is he be a married man, he's his wives head,
And I can never cut off a women's head.
Come sir, leave me your snatches, and yield me a direct answer. To morrow morning are to die Clau∣dio and Barnardine: here is in our prison a common exe∣cutioner, who in his office lacks a helper, if you will take it on you to assist him, it shall redeem you from your Gyves: if not, you shall have your full time of imprison∣meant, and your deliverance with an unpitied whipping; for you have been a notorious bawd.
Sir, I have been an unlawful bawd, time out of mind, but yet I will bee content to be a lawful hang-man: I would bee glad to receive some instruction from my fellow partner.
What hoe, Abhorson: whore's Abhorson there?
Doe you call sir?
Sirha, here's a fellow will help you to morrow in your execution: if you think it meet, compound with him by the year, and let him abide here with you, if not, use him for the present, and dismiss him, hee cannot plead his estimation with you: he hath been a Bawd.
A Bawd Sir? fie upon him, he will discredit our mystery.
Go too Sir, you weigh equally: a feather will turn the Scale.
Pray sir, by your good favour: for surely sir, a good favour you have, but that you have a hanging look: Doe you call sir, your occupation a Mystery?
I Sir, a Mystery.
Painting Sir, I have heard say, is a Mystery; and your Whores sir, being members of my occupation, v∣sing painting, do prove my Occupation, a Mystery: but what Mystery there should be in hanging, if I should be hanged, I cannot imagine.
Sir, it is a Mystery.
Proof.
Every true mans apparel fits your Thief.
If it be too little for your thief, your true man thinks it big enough. If it bee too big for your Thief, your Thief thinks it little enough: So every true mans apparel fits your Thief.
Are you agreed?
Sir, I will serve him: For I do find your Hang-man is a more penitent Trade then your Bawd: he doth oftner ask forgiveness.
You sirrah, provide your block and your Axe to morrow, four a clock.
Come on (Bawd) I will instruct thee in my Trade: follow.
I do desire to learn sir: and I hope, if you have occasion to use me for your own turn, you shall find me y' are. For truly sir, for your kindness, I owe you a good turn.
Call hither Barnardine and Claudio:
The one has my pity; not a jot the other,
Being a Murderer, though he were my brother.
Look, here's the Warrant Claudio, for thy death,
It is now dead midnight, and by eight to morrow
Thou must be made immortal. Whore's Barnardine?
As fast locked up in sleep, as guiltless labour,
When it lies starkely in the Travellers bones,
He will not wake.
Who can do good on him?
Well, go, prepare your self. But hark, what noise?
Heaven give your spirits comfort: by, and by,
I hope it is some pardon, or repreeue
For the most gentle Claudio. Welcome Father.
The best, and wholsomst spirits of the night,
Inuellop you, good Provost: who called here of late?
None since the Curfew rung.
Not Isabel?
No.
They will then er't be long.
What comfort is for Claudio?
There's some in hope.
It is a bitter Deputy.
Not so, not so: his life is paralel'd
Even with the stroke and line of his great Justice:
He doth with holy abstinence subdue
That in himself, which he spurs on his power
To qualify in others: were he mealed with that
Which he corrects, then were he tyrannous,
But this being so, he's just. Now are they come.
This is a gentle Provost, seldom when
The steeled Jailer is the friend of men:
How now? what noise? That spirit's possessed with hast,
That wounds the vnsisting Postern with these strokes.
There he must stay until the Officer
Arise to let him in: he is called up.
Have you no countermand for Claudio yet?
But he must die to morrow?
None Sir, none.
As here the dawning Provost, as it is,
You shall hear more ere Morning.
Happily
You something know: yet I believe there comes
No countermand: no such example have we:
Besides, upon the very siege of Justice,
Lord Angelo hath to the public ear
Professed the contrary.
This is his Lords man.
And here comes Claudio's pardon.
My Lord hath sent you this note,
And by me this further charge;
That you swerve not from the smallest Article of it,
Neither in time, matter, or other circumstance.
Good morrow: for as I take it, it is almost day.
I shall obey him.
This is his Pardon purchased by such sin,
For which the Pardoner himself is in:
Hence hath offence his quick celerity,
When it is borne in high Authority.
When Vice makes Mercy; Mercie's so extended,
That for the faults love, is the offender friended.
Now Sir, what news?
I told you:
Lord Angelo (be-like) thinking me remiss
In mine Office, awakens me
With this unwonted putting on, methinks strangely:
For he hath not used it before.
Pray you let's hear.
Whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let Claudio be ex∣ecuted by four of the clock, and in the afternoon Bernar∣dine: For my better satisfaction, let me have Claudios head sent me by five. Let this be duly performed with a thought that more depends on it, then we must yet deliver. Thus fail not to doe your Office, as you will answer it at your peril.
What say you to this Sir?
What is that Barnardine, who is to be execu∣ted in the afternoon?
A Bohemian borne: But here nursed up &amp; bred,
One that is a prisoner nine years old.
How came it, that the absent Duke had not either delivered him to his liberty, or executed him? I have heard it was ever his manner to do so.
His friends still wrought Reprieves for him: And indeed his fact till now in the government of Lord Angelo, came not to an undoubtful proof.
It is now apparent?
Most manifest, and not denied by himself.
Hath he borne himself penitently in prison?
How seems he to be touched?
A man that apprehends death no more dread∣fully, but as a drunken sleep, careless, wreaklesse, and fearless of what's past, present, or to come: insensible of mortality, and desperately mortal.
He wants advice.
He will hear none: he hath evermore had the li∣bertie of the prison: give him leave to escape hence, hee would not. Drunk many times a day, if not many days entirely drunk. We have very oft awaked him, as if to carry him to execution, and showed him a seeming war∣rant for it, it hath not moved him at all.
More of him anon: There is written in your brow Provost, honesty and constancy; if I read it not truly, my ancient skill beguiles me: but in the boldness of my cunning, I will lay my self in hazard: Claudio, whom here you have warrant to execute, is no greater forfeit to the Law, then Angelo who hath sentenced him. To make you understand this in a manifested effect, I crave but four days respit: for the which, you are to do me both a present, and a dangerous curtsy.
Pray Sir, in what?
In the delaying death.
Alack, how may I do it? Having the hour li∣meted, and an express command, under penalty, to de∣liver his head in the view of Angelo? I may make my case as Claudio's, to cross this in the smallest.
By the vow of mine Order, I warrant you,
If my instructions may be your guide,
Let this Barnardine be this morning executed,
And his head borne to Angelo.
Angelo hath seen them both,
And will discover the favour.
Oh, death's a great disguiser, and you may add to it; Shave the head, and tie the beard, and say it was the desire of the penitent to be so bard before his death: you know the course is common. If any thing fall to you upon this, more then thanks and good for∣tune, by the Saint whom I profess, I will plead against it with my life.
Pardon me, good Father, it is against my oath.
Were you sworn to the Duke, or to the De∣putie?
To him, and to his Substitutes.
You will think you have made no offence, if the Duke avouch the justice of your dealing?
But what likelihood is in that?
Not a resemblance, but a certainty; yet since I see you fearful, that neither my coat, integrity, nor persuasion, can with ease attempt you, I will go further then I meant, to pluck all fears out of you. Look you Sir, here is the hand and Seal of the Duke: you know the Character I doubt not, and the Signet is not strange to you?
I know them both.
The Contents of this, is the return of the Duke; you shall anon ouer-reade it at your pleasure: where you shall find within these two days, he will be here. This is a thing that Angelo knows not, for hee this very day receives letters of strange tenor, perchance of the Dukes death, perchance entering into some Mo∣nasterie, but by chance nothing of what is writ. Look, the unfolding Star calls up the Shepherd; put not your self into amazement, how these things should be; all difficulties are but easy when they are known. Call your executioner, and off with Barnardines head: I will give him a present shrift, and advise him for a better place. Yet you are amazed, but this shall absolutely re∣solve you: Come away, it is almost clear dawn.
I am as well acquainted here, as I was in our house of profession: one would think it were Mistress Ouer-dons own house, for here be many of her old Customers. First, here's young Mr Rash, hoe's in for a commodity of browne paper, and old Ginger, nine score and seventeen pounds, of which hee made five Marks ready money: marry then, Ginger was not much in request, for the old Women were all dead. Then is there here one Mr Caper, at the suite of Master Three-Pile the Mercer, for some four suites of Peach-colour'd Satin, which now peaches him a beggar. Then have we here, young Dizzy, and young Mr Deepe-vow, and Mr Copperspurre, and Mr Starue-Lackey the Ra∣pier and dagger man, and young Drop-heire that kilt lu∣sty Pudding, and Mr Forthlight the Tilter, and brave Mr Shoot the great Traveller, and wilde Halfe-Canne that stabbed Pots, and I think forty more, all great doers in our Trade, and are now for the Lords sake.
Sirrah, bring Barnardine hither.
Mr Barnardine, you must rise and be hanged, Mr Barnardine.
What hoe Barnardine.
A pox of your throats: who makes that noise there? What are you?
Your friends Sir, the Hangman:
You must be so good Sir to rise, and be put to death.
Away you Rogue, away, I am sleepy.
Tell him he must awake,
And that quickly too.
Pray Master Barnardine, awake till you are ex∣ecuted, and sleep afterwards.
Go in to him, and fetch him out.
He is coming Sir, he is coming: I hear his Straw russle.
Is the Axe upon the block, sirrah?
Very ready Sir.
How now Abhorson?
What's the news with you?
Truly Sir, I would desire you to clap into your prayers: for look you, the Warrants come.
You Rogue, I have bin drinking all night,
I am not fitted for it.
Oh, the better Sir: for he that drinks all night, and is hanged betimes in the morning, may sleep the sounder all the next day.
Look you Sir, here comes your ghostly Fa∣there: do we jest now think you?
Sir, induced by my charity, and hearing how hastily you are to depart, I am come to advise you, Comfort you, and pray with you.
Friar, not I: I have bin drinking hard all night, and I will have more time to prepare me, or they shall beat out my brains with billets: I will not consent to die this day, that's certain.
Oh sir, you must: and therefore I beseech you
Look forward on the journey you shall go.
I swear I will not die to day for any mans per∣swasion.
But hear you:
Not a word: if you have any thing to say to me, come to my Ward: for thence will not I to day.
Unfit to live, or die: oh gravel heart.
After him (Fellows) bring him to the block.
Now Sir, how do you find the prisoner?
A creature unprepared, unmeet for death,
And to transport him in the mind he is,
Were damnable.
Here in the prison, Father,
There died this morning of a cruel Feauor,
One Ragozine, a most notorious Pirate,
A man of Claudio's years: his beard, and head
Just of his colour. What if we do omit
This Reprobate, till he were well inclined,
And satisfy the Deputy with the visage
Of Ragozine, more like to Claudio?
Oh, it is an accident that heaven provides:
Dispatch it presently, the hour draws on
Prefixed by Angelo: See this be done,
And sent according to command, whiles I
Persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.
This shall be done (good Father) presently:
But Barnardine must die this afternoon,
And how shall we continue Claudio,
To save me from the danger that might come,
If he were known alive?
Let this be done,
Put them in secret holds, both Barnardine and Claudio,
Ere twice the Sun hath made his journal greeting
To yond generation, you shall find
Your safety manifested.
I am your free dependant.
Quick, dispatch, and send the head to Angelo
Now will I write Letters to Angelo.
(The Provost he shall bear them) whose contents
Shall witness to him I am near at home:
And that by great Injunctions I am bound
To enter publicly: him Isle desire
To meet me at the consecrated Fount,
A League below, the City: and from thence,
By cold gradation, and weale-ballanc'd form.
We shall proceed with Angelo.
Here is the head, Isle carry it my self.
Convenient is it: Make a swift return,
For I would commune with you of such things,
That want no ear but yours.
Isle make all speed.
Peace hoe, be here.
The tongue of Isabel. She's come to know,
If yet her brothers pardon be come hither:
But I will keep her ignorant of her good,
To make her heavenly comforts of despair,
When it is least expected.
Hoe, by your leave.
Good morning to you, fair, and gracious daughter.
The better given me by so holy a man,
Hath yet the Deputy sent my brothers pardon?
He hath releasd him, Isabel, from the world,
His head is off, and sent to Angelo.
Nay, but it is not so.
It is no other,
Show your wisdom daughter in your close patience.
Oh, I will to him, and pluck out his eyes.
You shall not be admitted to his sight.
Unhappy Claudio, wretched Isabel,
Injurious world, most damned Angelo.
This nor hurts him, nor profits you a lot,
Forbear it therefore, give your cause to heaven,
Mark what I say, which you shall find
By every syllable a faithful verity.
The Duke comes home to morrow: nay, dry your eyes,
One of our Covent, and his Confessor
Gives me this instance: Already he hath carried
Notice to Escalus and Angelo,
Who do prepare to meet him at the gates,
There to give up their power: If you can pace your wis∣dome,
In that good path that I would wish it go,
And you shall have your bosom on this wretch,
Grace of the Duke, revenges to your heart,
And general Honour.
I am directed by you.
This Letter then to Friar Peter give,
It is that he sent me of the Dukes return:
Say, by this token, I desire his company
At Mariana's house to night. Her cause, and yours
Isle perfect him withal, and he shall bring you
Before the Duke; and to the head of Angelo
Accuse him home and home. For my poor self,
I am combined by a sacred Vow,
And shall be absent. Wend you with this Letter:
Command these fretting waters from your eyes
With a light heart; trust not my holy Order
If I pervert your course: whose here?
Good 'euen;
Friar, whore's the Provost?
Not within Sir.
Oh pretty Isabella, I am pale at mine heart, to see thine eyes so red: thou must be patient; I am fine to dine and sup with water and bran: I dare not for my head fill my belly. One fruitful Meal would set me too't: but they say the Duke will be here to Morrow. By my troth Isabel I loved thy brother, if the old fan∣tactical Duke of dark corners had been at home, he had lived.
Sir, the Duke is marvelous little beholding to your reports, but the best is, he lives not in them.
Friar, thou know not the Duke so well as I do: he's a better woodman then thou take him for.
Well: you'll answer this one day. Fare ye well.
Nay tarry, Isle go along with thee,
I can tel thee pretty tales of the Duke.
You have told me too many of him already sir if they be true: if not true, none were enough.
I was once before him for getting a Wench with child.
Did you such a thing?
Yes marry did I; but I was fine to forswear it,
They would else have married me to the rotten Meddler.
Sir your company is fairer then honest, rest you well.
By my troth Isle go with thee to the lanes end: if bawdy talk offend you, we'el have very little of it: nay Friar, I am a kind of Bur, I shall stick.
Every Letter he hath writ, hath disuouch'd other.
In most uneven and distracted manner, his actions show much like to madness, pray heaven his wisdom bee not tainted: and why meet him at the gates and re∣liver our authorities there?
I guess not.
And why should wee proclaim it in an hour before his entering, that if any crave redress of injustice, they should exhibit their petitions in the street?
He shows his reason for that: to have a dispatch of Complaints, and to deliver vs from devices here∣after, which shall then have no power to stand against vs.
Well: I beseech you let it bee proclaimed be∣times in the morn, Isle call you at your house: give notice to such men of sort and suite as are to meet him.
I shall sir: fare you well.
Good night.
This deed vnshapes me quite, makes me vnpregnant
And dull to all proceedings. A deflowered maid,
And by an eminent body, that enforced
The Law against it? But that her tender shame
Will not proclaim against her maiden loss,
How might she tongue me? yet reason dares her no,
For my Authority bears of a credent bulk,
That no particular scandal once can touch
But it confounds the breather. He should have lived,
Save that his riotous youth with dangerous sense
Might in the times to come have taken revenge
By so receiving a dishonoured life
With ransom of such shame: would yet he had lived.
Alack, when once our grace we have forgot,
Nothing goes right, we would, and we would not.
These Letters at fit time deliver me,
The Provost knows our purpose and our plot,
The matter being a foot, keep your instruction
And hold you ever to our special drift,
Though sometimes you doe blench from this to that
As cause doth minister: Go call at Flauia's house,
And tell him where I stay: give the like notice
To Valencius, Rowland, and to Crassus,
And bid them bring the Trumpets to the gate:
But send me Flauius first.
It shall be speeded well.
I thank thee Varrius, thou hast made good hast,
Come, we will walk▪ There's other of our friends
Will greet vs here anon: my gentle Ʋarrius.
To speak so in directly I am loath,
I would say the truth; but to accuse him so
That is your part, ye I •m advised to doe it,
He says, to veil full purpose.
Be ruled by him.
Besides he tells me, that if peradventure
He speak against me on the adverse side,
I should not think it strange, for it is a physic
That's bitter, to sweet end.
I would Friar Peter
Oh peace, the Friar is come.
Come I have found you out a stand most fit,
Where you may have such vantage on the Duke
He shall not pass you:
Twice have the Trumpets sounded.
The generous, and gravest Citizens
Have hent the gates, and very near upon
The Duke is entering:
Therefore hence away.
My very worthy Cousin, fairly met,
Our old, and faithful friend, we are glad to see you.
Happy return be to your royal grace.
Many and hearty thankings to you both:
We have made enquiry of you, and we hear
Such goodness of your Justice, that our soul
Cannot but yield you forth to public thanks
Forerunning more requital.
You make my bonds still greater.
Oh your desert speaks loud, &amp; I should wrong it
To locke it in the wards of covert bosom
When it deserves with characters of brass
A forted residence against the tooth of time,
And razure of oblivion: Give we your hand
And let the Subject see, to make them know
That outward courtesies would fine proclaim
Favours that keep within: Come Escalus,
You must walk by vs, on our other hand:
And good supporters are you.
Now is your time
Speak loud, and kneel before him.
Justice, O royal Duke, veil your regard
Upon a wronged (I would fine have said a Maid)
Oh worthy Prince, dishonour not your eye
By throwing it on any other object,
Till you have heard me, in my true complaint,
And given me Justice, Justice, Justice, Justice.
Relate your wrongs;
In what, by whom? be brief:
Here is Lord Angelo shall give you Justice,
Reveal your self to him.
Oh worthy Duke,
You bid me seek redemption of the devil,
Hear me your self: for that which I must speak
Must either punish me, not being believed,
Or wring redress from you:
Hear me: oh hear me, here.
My Lord, her wits I fear me are not firm:
She hath bin a suitor to me, for her Brother
Cut off by course of Justice.
By course of Justice.
And she will speak most bitterly, and strange.
Most strange: but yet most truly will I speak,
That Angelo's forsworn, is it not strange?
That Angelo's a murderer, is it not strange?
That Angelo is an adulterous thief,
An hypocrite, a virgin violator,
Is it not strange? and strange?
Nay it is ten times strange?
It is not truer he is Angelo,
Then this is all as true, as it is strange;
Nay, it is ten times true, for truth is truth
To the end of reckoning.
Away with her: poor soul
She speaks this, in the infirmity of sense.
Oh Prince, I conjure thee, as thou believe
There is another comfort, then this world,
That thou neglect me not, with that opinion
That I am touched with madness: make not impossible
That which but seems unlike, it is not impossible
But one, the wickedst caitiff on the ground
May seem as shy, as grave, as just, as absolute:
As Angelo, even so may Angelo
In all his dressings, carat, titles, forms,
Be an arch-villain: Believe it, royal Prince
If he be less, he's nothing, but he's more,
Had I more name for badness.
By mine honesty
If she be mad, as I believe no other,
Her madness hath the oddest frame of sense,
Such a dependency of thing, on thing,
As ere I heard in madness.
Oh gracious Duke
Harp not on that; nor do not banish reason
For inequality, but let your reason serve
To make the truth appear, where it seems hid,
And hide the false seems true.
Many that are not mad
Have sure more lack of reason:
What would you say?
I am the Sister of one Claudio,
Condemned upon the Act of Fornication
To loose his head, condemned by Angelo,
I, (in probation of a Sisterhood)
Was sent to by my Brother; one Lucio
As then the Messenger.
That's I, and't like your Grace:
I came to her from Claudio, and desired her,
To try her gracious fortune with Lord Angelo,
For her poor Brothers pardon.
That's he indeed.
You were not bid to speak.
No, my good Lord,
Nor wished to hold my peace.
I wish you now then,
Pray you take note of it: and when you have
A business for your self: pray heaven you then
Be perfect.
I warrant your honour.
The warrant's for your self: take heed to it.
This Gentleman told somewhat of my Tale.
Right.
It may be right, but you are in the wrong
To speak before your time: proceed,
I went
To this pernicious Caitiff Deputy.
That's somewhat madly spoken.
Pardon it,
The phrase is to the matter.
Mended again: the matter: proceed.
In brief, to set the needless process by:
How I persuaded, how I pried, and kneeled,
How he refeld me, and how I replied
(For this was of much length) the wild conclusion
I now begin with grief, and shame to utter.
He would not, but by gift of my chaste body
To his concupiscible intemperate lust
Release my brother; and after much debatement,
My sisterly remorse, confutes mine honour,
And I did yield to him: But the next morn betimes,
His purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant
For my poor brothers head.
This is most likely.
Oh that it were as like as it is true.
By heaven (fond wretch) you know not what thou speak,
Or else thou art suborned against his honour
In hateful practise: first his Integrity
Stands without blemish: next it imports no reason,
That with such vehemence he should pursue
Faults proper to himself: if he had so offended
He would have weighed thy brother by himself,
And not have cut him off: some one hath set you on:
Confess the truth, and say by whose advice
Thou came here to complain.
And is this all?
Then oh you blessed Ministers aboue
Keep me in patience, and with ripened time
Unfold the evil, which is here wrapped up
In countenance: heaven shield your Grace from woe,
As I thus wronged, hence unbelieved go.
I know you'd fine be gone: An Officer:
To prison with her: Shall we thus permit
A blasting and a scandalous breath to fall,
On him so near vs? This needs must be a practise;
Who knew of your intent and coming hither?
One that I would were here, Friar Lodowick.
A ghostly Father, belike:
Who knows that Lodowicke?
My Lord, I know him, it is a meddling Fryer,
I doe not like the man: had he been Lay my Lord,
For certain words he spake against your Grace
In your retirement, I had swinged him soundly.
Words against me? this he good Fryer belike
And to set on this wretched woman here
Against our Substitute: Let this Fryer be found.
But yesternight my Lord, she and that Fryer
I saw them at the prison: a saucy Friar,
A very scurvy fellow.
Blessed be your Royal Grace:
I have stood by my Lord, and I have heard
Your royal ear abused: first hath this woman
Most wrongfully accused your Substitute,
Who is as free from touch, or soil with her
As she from one vngot.
We did believe no less.
Know you that Friar Lodowick that she speaks of?
I know him for a man divine and holy,
Not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler
As he's reported by this Gentleman:
And on my trust, a man that never yet
Did (as he vouches) mis-report your Grace.
My Lord, most villainously, believe it.
Well: he in time may come to clear himself;
But at this instant he is sick, my Lord:
Of a strange Feauor; upon his mere request
Being come to knowledge, that there was complaint
Intended against Lord Angelo, came I hither
To speak as from his mouth, what he doth know
Is true, and false: And what he with his oath
And all probation will make up full clear
When soever he's convented: First for this woman,
To justify this worthy Noble man
So vulgarly and personally accused,
Her shall you hear disproved to her eyes,
Till she her self confess it.
Good Friar, let's hear it:
Doe you not smile at this, Lord Angelo?
Oh heaven, the vanity of wretched fools.
Give vs some seats, Come cousin Angelo,
In this I'll be impartial: be you Judge
Of your own Cause: Is this the Witness Friar?
First, let her show your face, and after, speak.
Pardon my Lord, I will not show my face
Until my husband bid me.
What, are you married?
No my Lord.
Are you a Maid?
No my Lord.
A Widow then?
Neither, my Lord.
Why you are nothing then: neither Maid, Wi∣dow, nor Wife?
My Lord, she may be a Puncke: for many of them, are neither Maid, Widow, nor Wife.
Silence that fellow: I would he had some cause to prattle for himself.
Well my Lord.
My Lord, I doe confess I ne'er was married,
And I confess besides, I am no Maid,
I have known my husband, yet my husband
Knows not, that ever he knew me.
He was drunk then, my Lord, it can be no better.
For the benefit of silence, would thou were so to.
Well, my Lord.
This is no witness for Lord Angelo.
Now I come to it, my Lord.
She that accuses him of Fornication,
In selfsame manner, doth accuse my husband,
And charges him, my Lord, with such a time,
When I'll depose I had him mine Arms
With all the effect of Love.
Charges she more then me?
Not that I know.
No? you say your husband.
Why just, my Lord, and that is Angelo,
Who thinks he knows, that he ne'er knew my body,
But knows, he thinks, that he knows Isabels.
This is a strange abuse: Let's see thy face.
My husband bids me, now I will unmask.
This is that face, thou cruel Angelo
Which once thou sworst, was worth the looking on:
This is the hand, which with a vowed contract
Was fast belocked in thine: This is the body
That took away the match from Isabel,
And did supply thee at thy garden-house
In her Imagined person.
Know you this woman?
Carnally she says.
Sirha, no more.
Enoug my Lord.
My Lord, I must confess, I know this woman,
And five years since there was some speech of marriage
Betwixt my self, and her: which was broke off,
Partly for that her promised proportions
Came short of Composition: But in chief
For that her reputation was dis-valued
In levity: Since which time of five years
I never spake with her, saw her, nor heard from her
Upon my faith, and honour.
Noble Prince,
As there comes light from heaven, and words frō breath,
As there is sense in truth, and truth in virtue,
I am affianced this mans wife, as strongly
As words could make up vows: And my good Lord,
But Tuesday night last gon, in's garden house,
He knew me as a wife. As this is true,
Let me in safety raise me from my knees,
Or else for ever be confixed here
A Marble Monument.
I did but smile till now,
Now, good my Lord, give me the scope of Justice,
My patience here is touched: I doe perceive
These poor informal women, are no more
But instruments of some more mightier member
That sets them on. Let me have way, my Lord
To find this practise out.
I, with my heart,
And punish them to your height of pleasure.
Thou foolish Friar, and thou pernicious woman
Compact with her that's gone: think thou, thy oaths,
Though they would swear down each particular Saint,
Were testimonies against his worth, and credit
That's sealed in approbation? you, Lord Escalus
Sit with my Cozen, lend him your kind pains
To find out this abuse, whence it is derived.
There is another Friar that set them on,
Let him be sent for.
Would he were here, my Lord, for he indeed
Hath set the women on to this Complaint;
Your Provost knows the place where he abides,
And he may fetch him.
Go, doe it instantly:
And you, my noble and well-warranted Cousin
Whom it concerns to hear this matter forth,
Doe with your injuries as seems you best
In any chastisement; I for a while
Will leave you; but stir not you till you have
Well determined upon these Slanderers.
My Lord, we'll doe it thoroughly: Signior Lu∣cio, did not you say you knew that Friar Lodowick to be a dishonest person?
Cucullus non facet Monachum, honest in nothing but in his Clothes, and one that hath spoke most villa∣nous speeches of the Duke.
We shall entreat you to abide here till he come, and enforce them against him: we shall find this Friar a notable fellow.
As any in Vienna, on my word.
Call that same Isabel here once again, I would speak with her: pray you, my Lord, give me leave to question, you shall see how Isle handle her.
Not better then he, by her own report.
Say you?
Marry sir, I think, if you handled her privately
She would sooner confess, perchance publicly she'll be ashamed.
I will go darkly to work with her.
That's the way: for women are light at mid∣night.
Come on Mistress, here's a Gentlewoman,
Denies all that you have said.
My Lord, here comes the rascal I spoke of,
Here, with the Provost.
In very good time: speak not you to him, till we call upon you.
Mum.
Come Sir, did you set these women on to slan∣der Lord Angelo? they have confessed you did.
It is false.
How? Know you where you are?
Respect to your great place; and let the devil
Be sometime honoured, for his burning throne.
Where is the Duke? it is he should hear me speak.
The Duke's in vs: and we will hear you speak,
Look you speak justly.
Boldly, at least. But oh poor souls,
Come you to seek the Lamb here of the Fox;
Good night to your redress: Is the Duke gone?
Then is your cause gone too: The Duke's unjust,
Thus to retort your manifest Appeal,
And put your trial in the villains mouth,
Which here you come to accuse.
This is the rascal: this is he I spoke of.
Why thou unreverend, and unhallowed Fryer:
Is it not enough thou hast suborned these women,
To accuse this worthy man? but in foul mouth,
And in the witness of his proper ear,
To call him villain; and then to glance from him,
To the Duke himself, to tax him with In∣justice?
Take him hence; to the rack with him: we'll towze you
Joint by joint, but we will know his purpose:
What? unjust?
Be not so hot: the Duke dare
No more stretch this finger of mine, then he
Dare rack his own: his Subject am I not,
Nor here Provincial: My business in this State
Made me a looker on here in Vienna,
Where I have seen corruption boyle and bubble,
Till it ore-run the Stew: Laws, for all faults,
But faults so countenanced, that the strong Statutes
Stand like the forfeits in a Barbers shop,
As much in mock, as mark.
Slander to the State:
Away with him to prison.
What can you vouch against him Signior Lucio?
Is this the man that you did tell vs of?
It is he, my Lord: come hither goodman bald-pate, doe you know me?
I remember you Sir, by the sound of your voice,
I met you at the Prison, in the absence of the Duke.
Oh, did you so? and do you remember what you said of the Duke.
Most notedly Sir.
Do you so Sir: And was the Duke a flesh-mon∣ger, a fool, and a coward, as you then reported him to be?
You must (Sir) change persons with me, ere you make that my report: you indeed spoke so of him, and much more, much worse.
Oh thou damnable fellow: did not I pluck thee by the nose, for thy speeches?
I protest, I love the Duke, as I love my self.
Hark how the villain would close now, after his treasonable abuses.
Such a fellow is not to be talked withal: Away with him to prison: Where is the Provost? away with him to prison: lay bolts enough upon him: let him speak no more: away with those Giglets too▪ and with the o∣there confederate companion.
Stay Sir, stay a while.
What, resists he? help him Lucio.
Come sir, come sir, come sir: foh sir, why you bald-pated lying rascal: you must be hooded must you? show your knaves visage with a pox to you: show your sheepe-biting face, and be hanged an hour: will it not off?
Thou art the first knave, that ere made a Duke.
First Provost, let me bail these gentle three:
Sneak not away Sir, for the Fryer, and you,
Must have a word anon: lay hold on him.
This may prove worse then hanging.
What you have spoke, I pardon: sit you down,
We'll borrow place of him; Sir, by your leave:
Hast thou or word, or wit, or impudence,
That yet can doe thee office? If thou hast
Rely upon it, till my tale be heard,
And hold no longer out.
Oh, my dread Lord,
I should be guiltier then my guiltiness,
To think I can be vndiscerneable,
When I perceive your grace, like power divine,
Hath looked upon my passes. Then good Prince,
No longer Session hold upon my shame,
But let my Trial, be mine own Confession:
Immediate sentence then, and sequent death,
Is all the grace I beg.
Come hither Mariana,
Say: was it thou ere contracted to this woman?
I was my Lord.
Go take her hence, and marry her instantly.
Doe you the office (Fryer) which consummate,
Return him here again: go with him Provost.
My Lord, I am more amazed at his dishonour,
Then at the strangeness of it.
Come hither Isabel,
Your Friar is now your Prince: As I was then
Advertising, and holy to your business,
(Not changing heart with habit) I am still,
Attornied at your service.
Oh give me pardon
That I, your vassal, have employed, and pained
Your unknown Sovereignty.
You are pardoned Isabel:
And now, dear Maid, be you as free to vs.
Your Brothers death I know sits at your heart:
And you may marvel, why I obscured my self,
Labouring to save his life: and would not rather
Make rash remonstrance of my hidden power,
Then let him so be lost: oh most kind Maid,
It was the swift celerity of his death,
Which I did think, with slower foot came on,
That brained my purpose: but peace be with him,
That life is better life past fearing death,
Then that which lives to fear: make it your comfort,
So happy is your Brother.
I doe my Lord.
For this new-maried man, approaching here,
Whose salt imagination yet hath wronged
Your well defended honour: you must pardon
For Mariana's sake: But as he adjudged your Brother,
Being criminal, in double violation
Of sacred Chastity, and of promise-breach,
Thereon dependant for your Brothers life,
The very mercy of the Law cries out
Most audible, even from his proper tongue.
An Angelo for Claudio, death for death:
Haste still pays haste, and leisure, answers leisure;
Like doth quit like, and Measure still for Measure:
Then Angelo, thy fault's thus manifested;
Which though thou would deny, denies thee vantage.
We doe condemn thee to the very Block
Where Claudio stooped to death; and with like haste.
Away with him.
Oh my most gracious Lord,
I hope you will not mock me with a husband?
It is your husband mock't you with a husband,
Consenting to the safe-guard of your honour,
I thought your marriage fit: else Imputation,
For that he knew you▪ might reproach your life,
And choke your good to come: For his Possessions,
Although by confutation they are ours;
We doe en-state, and widow you with all,
To buy you a better husband.
Oh my dear Lord,
I crave no other, nor no better man.
Never crave him, we are definitive.
Gentle my Liege.
You doe but loose your labour.
Away with him to death: Now Sir, to you.
Oh my good Lord, sweet Isabel, take my part,
Lend me your knees, and all my life to come,
I'll lend you all my life to doe you service.
Against all sense you doe importune her,
Should she kneel down, in mercy of this fact,
Her Brothers ghost, his paved bed would break,
And take her hence in horror.
Isabel:
Sweet Isabel, doe yet but kneel by me,
Hold up your hands, say nothing: I'll speak all.
They say best men are moulded out of faults,
And for the most, become much more the better
For being a little bad: So may my husband.
Oh Isabel: will you not lend a knee?
He dies for Claudio's death.
Most bounteous Sir.
Look if it please you, on this man condemned,
As if my Brother lived: I partly think,
A due sincerity governed his deeds,
Till he did look on me: Since it is so,
Let him not die: my Brother had but Justice,
In that he did the thing for which he did.
For Angelo, his Act did not ore-take his bad intent,
And must be buried but as an intent
That perished by the way: thoughts are no subjects
Intents, but merely thoughts.
Merely my Lord.
Your suite's unprofitable: stand up I say:
I have bethought me of another fault.
Provost, how came it Claudio was beheaded
At an unusual hour?
It was commanded so.
Had you a special warrant for the deed?
No my good Lord: it was by private message.
For which I doe discharge you of your office,
Give up your keys.
Pardon me, noble Lord,
I thought it was a fault, but knew it not,
Yet did repent me after more advice,
For testimony whereof, one in the prison
That should by private order else have did,
I have reserved alive.
What's he?
His name is Barnardine.
I would thou had done so by Claudio:
Go fetch him hither, let me look upon him.
I am sorry, one so learned, and so wise
As you, Lord Angelo, have still appeared,
Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood
And lack of tempered judgment afterword.
I am sorry, that such sorrow I procure,
And so deep sticks it in my penitent heart,
That I crave death more willingly then mercy,
It is my deserving, and I doe entreat it.
Which is that Barnardine?
This my Lord.
There was a Friar told me of this man.
Sirha, thou art said to have a stubborn soul
That apprehends no further then this world,
And squar'st thy life according: You're condemned,
But for those earthly faults, I quit them all,
And pray thee take this mercy to provide
For better times to come: Friar advise him,
I leave him to your hand. What muffeld fellow's that?
This is another prisoner that I saved,
Who should have died when Claudio lost his head,
As like almost to Claudio, as himself.
If he be like your brother, for his sake
Is he pardoned, and for your lovely sake
Give me your hand, and say you will be mine,
He is my brother too: But fitter time for that:
By this Lord Angelo perceives he's safe,
Methinkes I see a quickening in his eye:
Well Angelo, your evil quits you well.
Look that you love your wife: her worth, worth yours
I find an apt remission in my self:
And yet heere's one in place I cannot pardon,
You sirha, that knew me for a fool, a Coward,
One all of Luxury, an ass, a mad man:
Wherein have I so deserved of you
That you extol me thus?
Faith my Lord, I spoke it but according to the trick: if you will hang me for it you may: but I had ra∣there it would please you, I might be whipped.
Whipped first, sir, and hanged after.
Proclaim it Provost round about the City;
If any woman wronged by this lewd fellow
(As I have heard him swear himself there's one whom he begot with child) let her appear,
And he shall marry her: the nuptial finished,
Let him be whipped and hanged.
I beseech your Highness doe not marry me to a Whore: your Highness said even now I made you a Duke, good my Lord do not recompense me, in making me a Cuckold.
Upon mine honour thou shalt marry her,
Thy slanders I forgive, and therewithal
Remit thy other forfeits: take him to prison,
And see our pleasure herein executed.
Marrying a punk my Lord, is pressing to death,
Whipping and hanging.
Slandering a Prince deserves it.
She Claudio that you wronged, look you restore.
Joy to you Mariana, love her Angelo:
I have confessed her, and I know her virtue.
Thanks good friend, Escalus, for thy much goodness,
There's more behind that is more gratulate.
Thanks Provost for thy care, and secrecy,
We shall employ thee in a worthier place.
Forgive him Angelo, that brought you home
The head of Ragozine for Claudio's,
The offence pardons it self. Dear Isabel,
I have a motion much imports your good,
Whereto if you'll a willing ear incline;
What's mine is yours, and what is yours is mine.
So bring vs to our Palace, where we'll show
What's yet behind, that meet you all should know.

Brother from Venice, being thus disguised,
I come to prove the humours of my son:
How hath he borne himself since my departure,
I leaving you his patron and his guide?
I faith brother so, as you will grieve to hear,
And I almost ashamed to report it.
Why how first brother? what doth he spend
Beyond the allowance I left him?
How! beyond that? and far more: why, your exibiti∣on is nothing, hee hath spent that, and since hath borrowed, protested with oaths, alleged kindred to wring money from me, by the love I bore his father, by the fortunes might •all upon himself, to furnish his wants▪ that done, I have had since, his bond, his friend and friends bond, although I know that hee spends is yours; yet it grieves me to see the unbridled wildness that rains over him.
Brother, what is the manner of his life? howe is the name of his offences? if they do not relish altogether of dam∣dation, his youth may p•iuiledge his wantonness: I my self ran an unbridled course till thirty, nay almost till forty, well, you see how I am: for vice once looked into with the eyes of discretion, and well balanced with the waits of reason, the course past, seems so abominable, that the Landlord of him∣self, which is the heart of his body, will rather entomb him∣self
in the earth, or seek a new Tenāt to remain in him, which once settled, how much better are they that in their youth have known all these vices, and left it, then those that knew little, and in their age runs into it? Believe me brother, they that dye most virtuous, hath in their youth, lived most vicious, and none knows the danger of the fire, more then he that falls into i•: But say, how is the course of his life? lets hear his particulars.
Why Isle tell you brother, hee is a continual swearer,
And a breaker of his oaths, which is bad.
I grant indeed to swear is bad, but not in keeping those oaths is better: for who will set by a bad thing?
Nay by my faith, I hold this rather a virtue then a vice,
Well, I pray proceed.
He is a mighty brawler, and comes commonly by the worst.
By my faith this is none of the worst neither, for if he Brawl and be beaten for it, it will in time make him shun it: For what brings man or child, more to virtue, then correctiō? What reigns over him else?
He is a great drinker, and one that will forget him∣self.
O best of all, vice should be forgotten: let him drink on,
So he drink not churches.
Nay and this be the worst, I hold it rather a happiness in him,
Then any iniquity. Hath he any more attendants?
Brother, he is one that will borrow of any man.
Why you see so doth the sea, it borrows of all the small
Currents in the world, to increase himself.
I, but the sea pays it again, and so will never your son.
No more would the sea neither, if it were as dry as my son.
Then brother, I see you rather like these vices in your son,
Then any way condemn them.
Nay mistake me not brother, for tho I slur them o∣for now,
As things slight and nothing, his crimes being in the bud,
It would gall my heart, they should ever reign in him.
Ho! whose within ho?
That's your son, hee is come to borrow more money.
For Godsake give it out I am dead, see how heal take it,
Say I have brought you news from his father.
I have here drawn a formal will, as it were from my self,
Which Isle deliver him.
Goetoo brother, no more: I will.
Uncle, where are you Uncle? within,
Let my cousin in there.
I am a Sailor come from Uenice, and my name is Christopher.
By the Lord, in truth Uncle.
In truth would a served cousin, without the Lord.
By your leave Uncle, the Lord, is the Lord of truth.
A couple of rascals at the gate, set upon me for my purse.
You never come, but you bring a brawl in your mouth.
By my truth Uncle, you must needs lend me ten pound.
Give my cousin some small beer here.
Nay look you, you turn it to a jest now, by this light,
I should ride to Croydon fair, to meet sir Lancelot Spurrock,
I should have his daughter Luce, and for scurvy
Ten pound, a man shall loose nine hundred three-score and
odd pounds, and a daily friend beside, by this hand Uncle∣kle tic true.
Why, any thing is true for ought I know.
To see now: why you shall have my bond Uncle, or Tom Whites, Iames Brocks: or Nick Halls, as good rapier and dagger men, as any be in England, lets be damned if wee doe not pay you, the worst of vs all will not damn our selves for ten ponnd. A pox often pound.
Cousin, this is not the first time I have believed you.
Why trust me now, you know not what may fall:
If one thing were but true, I would not greatly care,
I should not need ten pound, but when a man cannot be be∣leeued, ther's it.
Why what is it cousin?
Mary this Uncle, can you tell me if the Katern∣hue be come home or no?
I mary first.
By God I thank you for that news.
What first in the poole can you tell?
It is; what of that?
What? why then I have six pieces of valet sent me
Isle give you a piece Uncle▪ for thus said the letter,
A piece of Ashcolour, a three piled black, a coloured deroy,
A crimson, a sad greene, and a purple: yes in faith.
From whom should you receive this?
From who? why from my father? with commenda∣tions to you Uncle, and thus he writes: I know saith he, thou hast much troubled thy kind Uncle, whom God-willing at my return I will see amply satisfied: Amply, I remember was the very word; so God help me.
Have you the letter here?
Y•s I have the letter here, here is the letter: no, yes, no let me see, what breechs wore I a Saturday: let me see, a Tues∣day, my Calymanka, a Wednesday, my peach colour Satin, a Thursday my Valor, a Friday my Callymanka again, a Saturday, let me see a Saturday, for in those breeches I wore a Saturday is the letter: O my riding breeches Ankle, those that you thought had been valet, In those very breeches is the letter.
When should it be date•?
Mary Didicimo tersios septembris, no no, trydisimo la∣sios Octobris, I Octobris so it is.
Dicditimo tersios Octobris: and here receive I a let∣la that your father dyed in June: how say you Kester?
Yes truly sir, your father is dead, these hands of mine ho•pe to wind him.
Dead?
I sir dead.
Sblood, how should my father come dead?
In faith sir according to the old Proverb,
The child was borne: and cried, became man,
After fell sick, and dyed.
Nay cousin doe not take it so heavily.
Nay I cannon weep you extempory, mary some two or three days hence, I shall weep without any stintance. But I hope he dyed in good memory.
Very well sir, and set down every thing in good or∣der,
And the Katherine and Hue you talked of, I came over in:
And I saw all the bills of lading, and the valet
That you talked of, there is no such aboard.
By God I assure you, then there is knavery abroad.
Isle be sworn of that: ther's knavery abroad,
Although there were never a piece of valet in V•nice.
I hope he dyed in good estate.
To the report of the world he did, and made his will,
Of which I am an unworthy bearer.
His will, have you his will?
Yes sir, and in the presence of your Uncle,
I was willed to deliver it.
I hope cousin, now God hath blessed you with wealth, you will not be unmindful of me.
Isle doe reason Uncle, yet in faith I take the denial of this ten pound very hardly.
Nay I donyde you not.
By God you denied me directly.
Isle be judge by this good-fellowe.
Not directly sir.
Why he said he would lend me none, and that had wont to be a direct denial, if the old phrase hold: Well Uncle, come weal fall to the Legacies, In the name of God, Amen.
Item, I bequeath to my brother Flowerdale, three hundred pounds, to pay such trivial debts as I owe in London.
Item, to my son Ma• Flowerdale, I bequeath two bail of false dice, Uidelliced, high men, and lo men, fullomes, stop cater traies, and other bones of function.
Sblood what doth he mean by this?
Proceed cousin.
These precepts I leave him, let him borrow of his oath,
For of his word no body will trust him.
Let him by no means marry an honest woman,
For the other will keep her self.
Let him steal as much as he can, that a guilty conscience
May bring him to his destinate repentance,
I think he means hanging. And this were his last will and Testament, the Devil stood laughing at his beds feet while he made it. Sblood, what doth hee think to fop of his posterity with Paradoxes.
This he made sir with his own hands.
I, well, nay come good Uncle, let me have this ten pound, Imagine you have lost it, or robbed of it, or misreckond your self so much: any way to make it come easily off, good Uncle.
Not a penny.
In faith lend it him sir; I my self have an estate in the City worth twenty pound, all that isle engage for him, he saith it concerns him in a marriage.
I marry doth it, this is a fellow of some sense, this: Come good Uncle.
Will you give your word for it Kes•er?
I will sir, willingly.
Well cousin, come to me some hour hence, you shall have it ready.
Shall I not fail?
You shall not, come or send.
Nay isle come my self.
By my troth, would I were your worships man.
What would thou serve?
Very willingly sir.
Why isle tell thee what thou shalt doe, thou saith thou hast twenty pound, go into Birchen Lane, put thy self into clothes, thou shalt ride with me to Croydon fair.
I thank you sir, I will attend you.
Well Uncle, you will not fail me an hour hence?
I will not cousin.
Whats thy name Kester?
I sir.
Well, provide thy self: Uncle farewell till anon.
Brother, how doe you like your son?
In faith brother, like a mad unbridled colt,
Or as a Hawk, that never stooped to lure:
The one must be tamed with an iron bites,
The other must be watched, or still she is wilde,
Such is my son, awhile let him be so:
For counsel still is follies deadly foe.
Isle serve his youth, for youth must have his course,
For being restrained, it makes him ten times worse:
His pride, his riot, all that may be named,
Time may recall, and all his madness tamed.
Sirrah Artichoake, get you home before,
And as you proved your self a calfe in bying,
Drive home your fellow calves that you have bought.
Yes forsooth, shall not my fellow Daffidill go along with me.
No sir, no, I must have one to waite on me.
Daffidill, farewell good fellow Daffidill,
You may see mistress, I am set up by the halues,
In steed of waiting on you, I am sent to drive home calves.
In faith Frank, I must turn away this Daffidill,
Hes grown a very foolish saucy fellow.
Indeed law father, he was so since I had him:
Before he was wise enough, for a foolish serving-man.
But what say you to me sir Lancelot?
O, about my daughters, well I will go forward,
Heers two of them God save them: but the third,
O shees a stranger in her course of life,
She hath refused you Moister Weathercock.
I by the Rood sir Lancelot that she hath,
But had she tried me, she should a found a man of me indeed.
Nay be not angry sir, at her denial,
She hath refused seven of the worshipfulst and worthiest hous-keepers this day in Kent:
Indeed she will not marry I suppose.
The more fool she.
What is it folly to love Charity?
No mistake me not sir 〈◊〉,
But tic an old proverb, and you know it well,
That women dying maids, lead apes in hell.
Thats a foolish proverb, and a false.
By the mass I think it be, and therefore let it go:
But who shall marry with mistress Frances?
By my troth they are talking of marrying me sister.
Peace, let them talk:
Fools may have leave to prattle as they walk.
Sentesses still sweet mistress,
You have a wit, and it were your Alliblaster.
Y•aith and thy tongue trips trench-more.
No of my knight-hood, not a shutter yet:
Alas God help her silly girl, a fool, a very fool:
But theirs the other black-browes a shroad girl,
She hath wit at will, and shutters two or three:
Sir Arthur Greene-sheld one, a gallant knight,
A valiant Soldier, but his power but poor.
Then theirs young 〈◊〉, the Deuen-shyre lad,
A wary fellow, marry full of wit,
And rich by the rood, but theirs a third all air,
Light as a feather, changing as the wind: young Flowerdal•.
O hee sir, hes a desperate dick indeed.
Bar him your house.
Fie not so, hes of good parentage.
By my fey and so he is, and a proper man.
I proper enough, had he good qualities.
I marry, theirs the point 〈◊〉 〈◊〉:
For theirs an old saying,
Be he rich, or be he poor,
〈◊〉 hye, or be he lowe:
Be he borne in barn or hall,
Tic manners makes the man and all.
You are in the right moister Weathers•ck.
Soul, I think I am sure crossed,
Or wi•ht with an owl, I have hinted them: Inn after Inn, booth, after booth, yet cannot find them, ha yonder they are, thats she, I hope to God 〈◊〉 she, nay I know tic she now, for •he treads her shoe a little awry.
Where is this •inn? we are past it Daffidill.
The good sign is here sir, but the back gate is before.
Save you sir, I pray may I borrow a piece of a word with you?
No pieces sir.
Why then the whole.
I pray sir, what may yonder gentlewomen be?
They may be Ladies sir, if the destinies and mortality work.
Whats her name sir.
Mistress Frances Spurcocke, sir Laucelots-Spurcockes daughter.
Is she a maid sir?
You may ask Pluto, and dame Proserpine that:
I would be loath to be ridelled sir.
Is she married I mean sir?
The Fates knows not yet what shoc-maker shall make her wedding shoes.
I pray where Inn you sir? I would be very glad to be∣stowe the wine of that gentlewoman.
At the George sir.
God save you sir.
I pray your name sir?
My name is moister Ciu•t sir.
A sweet name, God be with you good moister Civet.
A, have w• spied you stout S. George?
For all your dragon, you had best sells good wine:
That needs no 〈◊〉bush, well, w•le not sit by it,
As you do on your horse, this room shall serve•:
Drawer, let me have sack for vs old men:
For these girls and knaves small wines are best,
A pint of sack, no more.
A quart of sack in the three Tons,
A pint, draw but a pint 〈◊〉,
Call for wine to make your selves drink.
And a cup of small beer, and a cake good 〈◊〉.
How now, fie, sit in the open room, now good sir
Lancelot, &amp; my kind friend worshipful Ma•ster Weathercock,
What at your pint, a quart for shame.
Nay Roister by your leave we will away.
Come, gives some Music, weal go dance,
Begone 〈◊〉 Lancelot, what, and fair day too?
It were foully done, to dance within the fair.
Nay if you say so, fairest of all fairs,
Then isle not dance, a pox upon my tailor,
He hath spoiled me a peach colour 〈◊〉 shute,
Cut upon cloth of silver, but if ever the Rascal serve 〈◊〉 such an other trick, Isle give him leave in faith to put me in the ca∣lender of fools: and you, and you, sir 〈◊〉; and Moister Weathercock, my gold-smyth too on tother side, I bespoke thee Luce, a carkenet of gold, and thought thou should a had it for a fairing, and the Rogue puts me in 〈◊〉 for Orient Pearl: but thou shalt have it by sunday night wench.
Sir, here is one hath sent you a po•le of rhenish wine, brewed with Rose-water.
To me?
No sir to the knight; and desires his more acquain∣tance.
To me? whats he that proves so kind?
I have a trick to know his name sir,
He hath a months mind here to mistress Frances, his name 〈◊〉 moister Civet.
Ca• him in 〈◊〉.
O I know him sir, he is a fool,
But reasonable rich, his father was one of these lease-mongers, these corn•monger, these mony-mongers, but he never had the wit to be a whore-monget.
I promise you sir, you are at too much charge.
The charge is small charge sir,
I thank God my father left me wherewithal, if it please you sir, I have a great mind to this gentlewoman here in the way of marriage.
I thank you sir: please you come to L•wsome to my poor house, you shall be kindly welcome: I knew your fa∣there, he was a wary husband: to pay here Drawer.
All is paid sir: this gentleman hath paid all.
In faith you do vs wrong,
But we shall live to make amends 〈◊〉 long:
Moister Flowerdale, is that your man?
Yes faith, a good old knave.
Nay then I think you will turn wise,
Now you take such a servant:
Come, you'll ride with vs to Lewsome, lets away,
Tic scarce two hours to the end of day.
〈◊〉, lead your Soldiers to the ships,
There 〈◊〉 them have their coats, at their arrival
They shall have pay: farewell, look to your charge.
I, we are now sent away, and cannot so much as speak with our friends.
No man what ere you used a such a fashion, thick you cannot take your leave of your vreens.
Fellow no more, Lieuftenant lead them off.
Well, if I have not my pay and my clothes,
Isle venture a running away tho I hang fort.
Away surrha, charm your tongue.
Bin and you a presser sir?
I am a commander sir under the King.
Sfoot man, and you bee ne'er such a commander
Shut a spoke with my vreens before I chid agony, so shut.
Gontent your self man, my authority will stretch to press so good a man as you.
Press me? I deuye, press scoundrels, and thy mescals:
Press me, you scorns thee in faith: For see thee, here is a worcester∣ship full knight knows, cha• not to be pressed by thee.
Sir Arthur, welcome to Lewsome, welcome by my troth,
Whats the matter man, why are you vexed?
Why man he would press me.
O Fie sir Arthur, press him? he is man of reckoning.
I that he is sir Arthur, he hath the nobles,
The golden ruddockes he.
The fitter for the wars: and were he not in favour
With your worships, he should see,
That I have power to press so good as he.
Chill stand to the trial, so chill.
I marry shall he, presse-cloath and karsie,
White pot and drowsen broth: tut, tut, he cannot.
Well sir, tho you see vlouten cloth and karsie, you a zeene such a karsie coat wear out the town sick a zilken Jacket, as thick a one you wear.
Well sed vlitan vlattan.
A and well sed cocknell, and boe-bell too: what doest think cham a vearde of thy zilken coat, no •er vere thee.
Nay come no more, be all lovers and friends.
I tic best so, good moister Olyuer.
Is your name moister Oliuer I pray yo•?
What tit and be tit, and grieve you.
No bur I de gladly know if a man might not have a foolish plot out of moister Oliuer to work upon.
Work thy plots upon me, stand a side, work thy foolish plots upon me, i will so use the•, thou weart never so used since thy dame bound thy head, work upon me?
Let him come, let him come.
Zyrrha, zyrrha, if it were not for shame, you would a
given thee such a whister poop under the ear, you would a made thee a vanged an other at my feet: stand a side let me loose, cham all of a vlaming fire-brand; Stand aside.
Well I forbear you for your friends sake.
Avig for all my vreens, doest thou tell me of my vreens?
No more good moister Oliuer, no more sir Arthur, And maiden, here in the sight of all your shutters, every man of worth, Isle tell you whom I fainest would prefer to the hard bargine of your marriage bed: shall I be plain among you gentlemen?
I sir tic best.
Then sy•, first to you, I doe confess you a most gallant knight, a worthy soldier, and an honest man: but ho∣nestie maintains a french-hood, goes very seldom in a chain of gold, keeps a small train of servants: hath few friends: and for this wilde oats here, young Flowerdale, I will not judge, God can work miracles, but hee were better make a hundred new, then thee a thrifty and an honest one.
Believe me he hath bites you there, he hath touched you to the quick, that hath he.
Woodcock a my side, why moister Weathercock you know I am honest, howsoever trifles.
Now by my troth, I know no otherwise,
O your old mother was a dame indeed:
Heaven hath her soul, and my wives too I trust:
And your good father, honest gentleman,
He is gone a Journey as I hear, far hence.
I God be praised, he is far enough,
He is gone a pilgrimage to Paradise.
And left me to cut a caper against care,
Luce look on me that am as light as ayre.
Y faith I like not shadows, bubbles, broth,
I hate a light a love, as I hate death.
Girl hold thee there: look on this Deuen-shyre lad:
Fat, fair, and lovely, both in purse and person.
Well sir, cham as the Lord hath made me, You know me well yuine, cha have three-score pack a kerr∣say, and blackem hal, and chief credit beside, and my fortunes may be so good as an others, zoe it may.
Tic you I love, whatsoever others say?
Thanks fairest.
What would thou have me quarrel with him▪
Doe but say he shall hear from you.
Yet gentleman, howsoever I prefer this Deuen∣shire shutter,
Isle enforce no love, my daughter shall have liberty to choose whom she likes best, in your love shute proceed:
Not all of you, but only one must speed.
You have sed well: indeed right well.
Mistress hears one would speak with you, my fellow Daffidill hath him in the sellor already, he knows him, he met him at Croydon fair.
O I remember a little man.
I a very little man.
And yet a proper man.
A very proper, very little man.
His name is Monsieur Civet.
The same sir.
Come Gentlemen if other shutters come,
My foolish daughter will be fitted too:
But Delia my saint, no man dare move.
Hark you sir, a word.
What ha an you to say to me now?
Ye shall hear from me, and that very shortly.
Is that all, var thee well, you vere thee not, a wig.
What if should come more? I am fairly dressed.
I doe not mean that you shall meet with him,
But presently weal go and draw a will;
Where weal set down land, that we never saw,
And we will have it of so large a sum,
Sir Lancelot shall entreat you take his daughter:
This being formed, give it moister Weathercock,
And make sir Lancelots daughter heir of all:
And make him swear, never to show the will
To any one, until that you be dead,
This done, the foolish changing Weathercock,
Will straight discourse unto sir Lancelot,
The form and tenor of your Testament,
Nor stand to pause of it, be ruled by me:
What will inshue, that shall you quickly see.
Come lets about it: if that a will sweet Kyt,
Can get the wench, I shall renown thy wit.
Mistress still froward?
No kind looks unto your Daffidill, now by the Gods.
Away you foolish knave, let my hand go.
There is your hand, but this shall go with me:
My heart is thine, this is my true loves fee.
Isle have your coat stripped ore your ears for this,
You saucy rascal.
How now maid, what is the news with you?
Your man is something saucy.
Go too sirrah, Isle talk with you anon.
Sir I am a man to be talked withal,
I am no horse I trow:
I Know my strength, then no more then so.
A by the matkins, good sir Lancelot, I saw him the other day hold up the bucklers, like an Hercules, I faith God a mercy lad, I like thee well.
I, I like him well, go sirrah fetch me a cup of wine,
Th•• ere I part with moister VVeathercocke,
We may drink down our farewell in French wine.
I thank you sir, I thank you friendly knight,
Isle come and visit you, by the mouse-foot I will:
In the mean time, take heed of cutting Flowerdale,
He is a desperate dyck I warrant you.
He is, he is: fill 〈◊〉, fill me some wine, ha, what wears he on his arm?
My daughter Laces bracelet, I •is the same:
Ha to you moister Weathercock.
I thank you sir▪ Here Daffidill, an honest fellow and a tall thou art: well, isle take my leave good knight, and hope to have you and all your daughters at my poor house, in good sooth I must.
Thanks moister VVeathercocke, I shall be bold to trouble you be sure.
And welcome, heartily farewell.
Sirrah I saw my daughters wrong, and withal her bracelet on your arm, off with it: and with it my livery too, Have I care to see my daughter matched with men of worcester∣ship, and are you grown so bold? Go sirrah from my house, or isle whip you hence.
Isle not be whipped sir, theres your livery. 
This is a seruiegmans reward, what care I,
I have means to trust too: I scorn service I.
I a lusty knave, but I must let him go,
Our servants must be taught, what they should know.
Sir, as I am a maid, I doe affect you aboue any shutter that I have, although that soldiers scarce knows how to love.
I am a soldier, and a gentleman,
Knows what belonges to war, what to a lady:
What man offends me, that my sword shall right:
What woman loves me, I am her faithful knight.
I neither doubt your valour, nor your love, but there be some that bares a soldiers form, that swears by him they never think upon, goes swaggering up and down from house to house, crying God pays: and.
I faith Lady isle descry you such a man,
Of them there be many which you have spoke off,
That bear the name and shape of soldiers,
Yet God knows very seldom saw the war:
That haunt your Taverns, and your ordinaries,
Your ale-houses sometimes, for all alike
To uphold the brutish humour of their minds,
Being marked down, for the bondsman of despair:
Their mirth begins in wine, but ends in blood,
Their drink is clear, but their conceits are mud.
Yet these are great gentlemen soldiers.
No they are wretched slaves,
Whose desperate lives doth bring them timeless graves.
Both for your self, and for your form of life,
If I may choose, isle be a soldiers wife.
And tyt trust to it so then.
Ashure your self,
You shall be married with all speed we may:
One day shall serve for Frances and for Luce.
Why che wood vain know the time, for providing wedding rayments.
Why no more but this, first get your ashurance made, touching my daughters jointer, that dispatched, we will in two days make provision.
Why man i will have the writings made by tomorrow.
To morrow be it then, lets meet at the kings head in fishstreet.
No fie man no, lets meet at the Rose at Temple-bar,
That will be nearer your counsellor and mine.
At the Rose, be it then the hour nine,
He that comes last, forfeits a pint of wine.
A pint is no paymēt, let it be a whole quart, or nothing.
Moister, here is a man would speak with moister O∣•, he comes from young moister Flowerdale.
Why chill speak with him, chill speak with him.
Nay son Oliuer, isle surely see,
What young Flowerdale hath sent to you.
I pray God it be no quarrel.
Why man if he quarrel with me, chill give him his hands full.
God save you good sir Lancelot.
Welcome honest friend.
To you and yours my moister wishes health,
But unto you sir this, and this he sends:
There is the length sir of his rapier,
And in that paper shall you know his mind.
Here chill meet him my vreend, chill meet him.
Meet him, you shall not meet the Ruffin fie.
And I doe not meet him, chill give you leave to call
M• cut, where first sirrah? where first? where isle?
The letter shows both the time and place,
And if you be a man, then keep your word.
Sir he shall not keep his word, he shall not meet.
Why let him choose, heel be the better known
For a base rascal, and reputed so.
Zyrrha, zyrrha: and it were not an old fellow, and sent after an arrant, 〈◊〉 give thee something, but chud be no mo∣ny: But hold thee, for I see thou art somewhat testorne, hold thee, theres forty shillings, bring thy moister a 〈◊〉, i will give thee forty more, look thou bring him, i will mall him tell him, chill mar his dancing trestles, i will use him, he was ne'er so used since his dam bound his head, chill make him for capyring a∣ny more chy for thee.
You seem a man, stout and resolute,
And I will so report, what ere befall.
And fall out ill, ashurethy moister this,
Isle make him fly the land, or use him worse.
My moister sir, deserves not this of you,
And that you'll shortly find.
Thy moister is an unthrift, you a knave,
And isle attach you first, next clap him up:
Or have him bound unto his good behaviour.
I wood you were a sprite if you do him any harm for this: And you doe, 〈◊〉 ne'er see you, nor any of yours, while chill have eyes open: what doe you think, i will be abaffelled up and down the town for a messell, and a scoundrel, no chy bore you: zyrrha i will come, say no more, i will come tell him.
Well sir, my Moister deserves not this of you,
And that you'll shortly find.
No matter, he's an unthrift, I defy him.
No, gentle son, let me know the plac•.
Now chy for you.
Let me see the note.
Nay, chill watch you for zucth a trick.
But if che meet him zoe, if not, zoe: chill make him know me, or chill know why I shall not, chill var the worse.
What will you then neglect my daughters love?
Venture your state and hers, for a loose brawl?
Why man, chill not kill him, marry chill veze him too, and again; and zoe God be with you father.
What man, we shall met to morrow.
Who would a thought he had bin so desperate.
Come forth my honest servant Artichoake.
Now, what's the matter? some brawl toward, I warrant you.
Go get me thy sword bright scoured, thy buckler mended, O for that knave, that Villain Daffidill would have done good service. But to thee.
I, this is the tricks of all you gentlemen, when you stand in need of a good fellow. O for that Daffidill, O where is he? but if you be angry, and it bee but for the •egging of a straw, then out a doors with the knave, turn the coat o∣for his ears. This is the humour of you all.
O for that knave, that lusty Daffidill.
Why there tic now: our years wages and our veils will scarce pay for broken swords and bucklers that wee use in our quarrels. But Isle not fight if 〈◊〉 bee a tother side, that's flat.
Tic no such matter man, get weapons ready, and bee at London ere the break of day: watch near the lodging of the Deuon-shire Youth, but be unseen: and as he goes out, as he will go out, and that very early without doubt.
What would you have me draw upon him,
As he goes in the street?
Not for a world man: into the fields.
For to the field he goes, there to meet the desperate Flowerdal•,
Take thou the part of Olyuer my son, for he shall be my son,
And marry Luce: Doest understand me knave?
I sir I doe understand you, but my young mistress might be better provided in matching with my fellow Daf∣fidill.
No more; Daffidill is a knave:
That Daffidill is a most notorious knave.
Moister Weathercoeke you come in happy time, The desperate Flowerdale hath writ a challenge: And who think you must answer it? but the Devonshire man, my son Oliuer.
Mary I am sorry for it good sir Lancelot,
But if you will be ruled by me, weal stay the fury.
As how I pray?
Marry isle tell you, by promising young Flowerdale the red lipped Luce.
Isle rather follow her unto her grave.
I sir Lancelot I would have thought so too, but you and I have been deceived in him, come read this will, or deed, or what you call it, I know not: Come, come, your spectacles I pray.
Nay I thank God, I see very well.
Marry God bless your eyes, mine hath been dim al∣most this thirty years,
Ha what is this? what is this?
Nay there is true love indeed, he gave it to me but this very morn, and bid me keep it unseen from any one, good youth, to see, how men may be deceived.
Passion of me, what a wretch am I to hate this loving youth, he hath made me, together with my Luce 〈◊〉 loves so dear, executors of all his wealth.
All, all good man, he hath given you all.
Three ships now in the straits, &amp; homeward bound,
Two Lordships of two hundred pound a year:
The one in Wales, the other in Gloucestershire:
Debts and accounts, are thirty thousand pound,
Plate, money, Jewels, 16. thousand more,
Two houses furnished w•ll in Cole-man street:
Beside whatsoever his Uncle leaves to him,
Being of great demeans and wealth at Peckham.
How like you this good knight? how like you this?
I have done him wrong, but now 〈◊〉 make amends,
The Deuen-shyre man shall whistle for a wife,
He marry Luce, Luce shall be Flowerdales.
Why that is friendly said, lets ride to London and pre∣•ent their match, by promising your daughter to that lovely lad.
Weal ride to London, or it shall not need,
Weal cross to Dedfort-strand, and take a boat:
Where be these knaves? what Artichoake, what Fop?
Here be the very knaves, but not the merry knaves.
Here take my cloak, isle have a walk to Dedford.
Sir wee have bin scouring of our swords and buck∣lers for your defence.
Defence me no defence, let your swords rust, isle have no fighting: I, let blows alone, bid Delia see all things be in readiness against the wedding, weal have two at once, and that will save charges moister Weathercock.
Well we will doe 〈◊〉 sir.
By my truth this is good luck, I thank God for this, In good sooth I have even my harts desire: sister 〈◊〉, now I may boldly call you so, for your father hath frank and freely given me his daughter Frank.
I by my troth Tom, thou hast my good will too, for I thank God I longed for a husband, and would I might no∣for stir, for one his name was Tom.
Why sister now you have your wish.
You say very true sister Delia, and I prithee call me nothing but Tom and isle call thee sweetheart, and Frank: will it not doe well sister Delia?
It will doe very well with both of you.
But Tom, must I go as I doe now when I am marri∣ed?
No Frank, isle have thee go like a Citizen
In a guarded gown, and a French-hood.
By my troth that will be excellent indeed.
Brother, maintain your wife to your estate,
Apparel you your self like to your father:
And let her go like to your ancient mother,
He sparing got his wealth, left it to you,
Brother take heed of pride, some bids thrift adieu.
So as my father and my mother went, thats a jest indeed, why she went in a fringed gown, a single ruff, and a white cap.
And my father in a mocado coat, a pair of red satin •leaves, and a canuis back.
And yet his wealth was all as much as yours.
My estate, my estate I thank God is forty pound a year, in good leases and tenements, besides twenty mark a year at cuckoldes-hauen, and that comes to vs all by inheritance.
That may indeed, tic very fitly plied,
I know not how it comes, but so it falls out
That those whose fathers have died wondrous rich,
And took no pleasure but to gather wealth,
Thinking of little that they leave behind:
For them they hope, will be of their like mind,
But falls out contrary, forty years sparing
Is scarce three seven years spending, never caring
What will inshue, when all their coin is gone,
And all too late, then thrift is thought upon:
Ofthaue I heard, that pride and ryotkist,
And then repentance cries, for had I wist.
You say well sister Delia, you say well: but I mean to live within my bounds: for look you, I have set down my rest thus far, but to maintain my wife in her french∣hood, and her coach, keep a couple of geldings, and a brace of gray hounds, and this is all isle doe.
And you'll do this with forty pound a year?
I, and a better penny sister.
〈◊〉 you forget that at 〈◊〉.
By my troth well remembered 〈◊〉,
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 that to buy thee 〈◊〉.
Keep you the rest for points, alas the day,
Fools shall have wealth, tho all the world say nay:
〈◊〉 brot•r will you in, dinner stays for vs.
I good sister with all my heart.
I by 〈◊〉 troth Tom, for I have a good stomach.
And I the like sweet Frank, no sister
Doe not think isle go beyond my bounds.
God grant you may not.
Sirrah Kyt, tarry thou there, I have spied sir Lance∣•, and old Weathercock coming this way, they are hard at hand, I will by no means 〈◊〉 spoken with all.
Isle warrant you, go get you in.
Now my honest friend, thou doest belong to my∣ster Flowerdale?
I doe sir.
Is he within my good fellow?
No sir he is not within.
I prithee if he be within, let me speak with him.
Sir to tell you true, my moister is within, but indeed would not be spoke withal: there be some terms that stands upon his 〈◊〉, therefore he will not admit any confe∣rinse till he hath shook them off.
I 〈◊〉 tell him his very good friend sir Lance∣lot Spurcocke, entreats to speak with him.
By my troth sir, if you come to take up the matter between• my moister and the Deuen shire man, you doe but beguiley 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, and loose your 〈◊〉.
〈◊〉 〈◊〉, I have not any such thing to him, I 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 with him about other matters.
For my moister sir hath set down his resolution,
Either to 〈◊〉 his honour, or leave his life behind him▪
My 〈◊〉 I doe not know any quarrel, touching
Thy moister or any other person, my business is of a different nature to him, and I prithee so tell him.
For howsoever the Deuenshireman is, my masters
Mind is bloody: thats a round O.
And therefore sir, entreaty is 〈◊〉:
I have no such thing to him, I tell thee once again.
I will then so signify to him.
A sirrah, I see this mat•er is hotly carried,
But isle labour to dissuade him fr•m it, 
Good morrow moister. Flowerdale.
Good morrow good sir Lancelot, good morrow moister Weathercock.
By my troth gentlemen, I have been a reading over
Nick Matchiuill, I find him
Good to be known, not to be followed:
A pestilent humane fellow, I have made
Certain anatations of him such as they be:
And how first sir Lancelot? ha? how 〈◊〉?
A mad world, men cannot live quiet in it.
Moister Flowerdale, I doe understand there is some jar
Between the Deuen-shyre man and you.
They sir? •hey are good friends as can be.
Who moister Oliuer and I? as good friends as can be.
It is a kind of safety in you to deny it, and a generous
Silence, which too few are induced withal: But sir, such
A thing I hear, and I could wish it otherwise.
No such thing sir Lancelot, a my reputation,
As I am an honest man.
Now I doe believe you then, if you doe
Engage your reputation there is none.
Nay I doe not engage my reputation there is not,
You shall not bind me to any condition of hardness:
But if there be any thing between vt, then there is,
If there be not, then there is not: be or be not, all is one.
I doe perceive by this, that there is something be∣tweene you, and I am very sorry for it.
You may be deceived sir Lancelot, the Italian
Hath a pretty saying, Questo? I have forgot it too,
〈◊〉 out of my head, but in my translation
〈◊〉 hold thus, thou hast a friend, keep him.
Come, I doe see by this there is somewhat between If a foe, trip him.
And before God I could wish it otherwise.
Well what is between vs, can hardly be altered: you,
Sir Lancelot, I am to ride forth to morrow,
That way which I must ride, no man must deny
Me the Sun, I would not by any particular man,
Be denied common and general passage. If any one
Saith Flowerdale, thou possessed not this way:
My answer is, I must either on or return,
But return is not my word, I must on:
If I cannot, then make my way, nature
Hath done the last for me, and theirs the fine.
Moister Flowerdale, every man hath o•e tongue,
And two ears, nature in her building,
I• a most curious workmaster.
That is as much to say, a man should hear more•
Then he should speak.
You say true, and indeed I have heard more,
Then at this time I will speak,
You say well.
Slanders are more common then troathes moister Flowerdale?
But proof is the rule for both.
You say true, what doe you call him
Hath it there in his third canton?
I have heard you have bin wild: I have believed it.
It was 〈◊〉, it was necessary.
But I h•ue seen somewhat of late in you,
That hath confirmed in me an opinion of
Goodness toward you.
In faith sir, Jam sure I never did you harm:
Some good I have done, either to you or yours,
I am sure you know not, neither is it my will you should.
I your will sir.
I my will sir• foot doe you know ought of my will?
Begod and you doe sir, I am abused.
Go moister Flowerdale, what I know, I know,
And know you thus much out of my knowledge,
That I truly love you. For my daughter,
She yours. And if you like a marriage better
Then a brawl, all quirks of reputation set aside, go with me presently: And where you should fight a bloody battle, you shall be married to a lovely Lady,
Nay but sir Lancelot?
If you will not embrace my offer yet ashure your self thus much, I will have order to hinder your encounter.
Nay but hear me sir Lancelot.
Nay stand not you upon imputatiue honour.
Tic merely unsound, unprofitable, and idle:
Inferences your business is to wed my daughter therefore give me your present word to doe it, isle go and provide the maid, therefore give me your present resolution, either now, or never.
Will you so put me too it?
I before God, either take me now, or take me never,
Else what I thought should be our match, shall be our parting,
So fare you well for ever.
Stay: fall out, what may fall, my love
Is aboue all: I will come.
I expect you, and so fare you well.
Now sir, how shall we doe for wedding apparel?
By the mass thats true: now help Kyt,
The marriage ended, weal make amends for all.
Well no more, prepare you for your bride,
We will not want for clothes, what so ere betide.
And thou shalt see, when once I have my dower,
In mirth weal spend,
Full many a merry hour:
As for ths wench, I not regard a pin,
It is her gold must bring my pleasures in.
First possible, he hath his second living▪
Forsaking God, himself to the devil giving
But that I knew his mother firm and chaste▪
My heart would say, my head she had disgraced:
Else would I swear, he never was my son,
But her fair mind so foul a deed did shun,
How now brother, how doe you find your son?
O brother, heedless as a libertine,
Even grown a moister in the school of vice,
One that doth nothing, but in•ent defcei•:
For all the day he humours up and down,
How he the next day 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 his friend,
He thinks of nothing but the present time:
For one great 〈◊〉 down, heel pay a shilling,
But then the 〈◊〉 must needs stay for it.
When I was young, I had the scope of youth,
Both wild, and wanton, careless and desperate:
But such mad strains, as hoe's possessed withal,
I thought it wonder for to dream upon.
I told you so, but you would not believe it.
Well I have found it, but one thing comforts me.
Brother, to morrow hoe's to be married
To beauteous L•ce, sir Lancelots Spurcocks daughter.
First possible?
Tic true, and thus I mean to curb him,
This day brother, I will you shall arrest him:
If any thing will 〈◊〉 him, it must be that,
For he is rank in mischief, chamed to a life,
That will increase his shame, and kill his wife.
What, arrest him on his wedding day?
That were unchristian, and an vnhumane part:
How many couple even for that very day,
Hath 〈◊〉 years sorrow afterword?
〈◊〉 him then to day, doe it to morrow,
And this day mingle not his joy with sorrow.
Brother isle ha• it done this very day,
And in the 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 all, as he comes from Church▪
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 that he will take,
Upon my 〈◊〉 he will for swear the debt:
And for weal have the sum shall not be slight,
Say that he owes you 〈◊〉 three thousand pound:
Good 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 be done immediately:
Well, seeing you will ha•e it so▪
Brother isle doot, and strait provide the Sheriff.
So brother, by this means shall we perceive
What sir 〈◊〉 in this pinch will do:
And how his wife doth stand affected too him▪
Her love will then be tried to the uttermost:
And all the rest of them▪ Brother what I will doo,
Shall harm him much, and much 〈◊〉 him too.
Cham ashured thick be the place, that the scoundrel
Appointed to meet me, if a come •o: 〈◊〉 a come not, so▪
And che war aves, he should make a coistrel an vs,
Ched vese him, and che avenge him in hand, che would
Hoist him, and go•e it him too▪ and again, so chud:
Who bin a there sir Arthur, i will stay asi•e.
I have dogd the Deuen-shyre man into the field▪
For fear of any h•me that should befall him:
I had an inkling of that yesternight,
That Flowerdale and he should meet this morning▪
Tho of my soul, Oliuer fears him not,
Yet for id see fair play on either side,
Made me to come, to see their valo•s tried▪
God morrow to moister Whole•r.
God an good morrow.
What moister Whole•r are you angry▪
Why an it be▪ tyt and greeuen you▪
Not me at all sir▪ but I imagine•
By your being here thus armed,
You stay for some that you should •ight wi•all▪
Why and he doe, che would not de•ire you to take his part.
No by my troth, I think you need it not,
For he you look for, I think mean• not t• come.
No &amp; che war ashure a that, ch•d 〈◊〉 him in another place.
O sir Art•r, moister 〈◊〉 〈◊〉▪ 
Your love, and yours, and mine, sweet mistress 〈◊〉,
This morn is •arried to young Flowerd•.
Married to Flowerd•! tic impossible.
Married man▪ che hope thou doest but jest:
To make an a volowten merriment of it.
O tic too true. Here comes his Uncle.
God morrow sir Arthur, good morrow M. Oliuer.
God and good morn M. 〈◊〉. I pray you tellen
Is your scoundrel kinsman married?
M. Oliuer, call him what you will, but hee is married vs,
To sir 〈◊〉 daughter here.
Sir Arthur, unto her▪
I, ha the old fellow zarued me thick trick,
Why man he was a promise, i will chud a had her,
Is a such a voxe, chill look to his water che for him.
The music plays, they are coming from the Church.
Sheriff doe your Office: fellows, stand stoutly too it▪
God give you joy, as the old said Proverb is, and some zorrow among. You met vs well▪ did you not?
Nay be not angry sir, the fault is in me, I have done all the wrong, kept him from coming to the field to you▪ as I might sir, for I am a Justice, and sworn to keep th• peace.
I marry is he sir, a very Justice, and sworn to keep the peace, you must not disturb the weddings.
Nay, never frown nor storm sir, if you doe,
Isle have an order taken for you.
Well, Well, chill be quiet.
M. Flowerdale, sir Lancelot, look you who here is? M. 〈◊〉▪
M. Flowerdale, welcome with all my heart.
Uncle, this is she in faith: Moister Vnder-sheri•e
A•rest me? at whose suit? draw Kit.
At my suit sir▪
Why whats the matter M. Flowerd•?
This is the matter sir, this unthrift here,
Hath cozened you, and hath had of me,
In several sums three thousand pound.
Why Uncle, Uncle.
Cousin, cousin, you have vnckled me▪
And if you be not staid, you'll prove
A cousoner unto all that know you.
Why sir, suppose he be to you in debt
T•n thousand pound, his state to me appear,
To be at least three thousand by the year.
O 〈◊〉, I was too late informed of that plot,
How that he went about to cousin you▪
And formed a will, and sent it to your good
Friend there• moister Weathers•, in which was
Nothing true, but brags and 〈◊〉.
H•, hath he not such Lordships, lands, and ships?
Not worth a great▪ not worth a halfepenie he.
I pray tell vs true, be plain young Flowerdale?
My uncle here mad, and disposed to do me wrong,
But heir's my man, an hone• fellow
By the lord, and of good credit, knows all is true.
Not I sir▪ I am too old to lye, I rather know
You forgde a will, where every line you writ,
You studied where to coat your lands might lye.
And I 〈◊〉, where be thy honest friends?
Y faith no where sir, for he hath none at all.
Benedicitie, we are ore wretched I believe.
I am cou•end, and my hopefulst child undone.
You are not consent, nor is she undone,
They slander me, by this light they slander me;
Look you, my uncle here is a• usurer▪ and would undo me,
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 in law, do you but 〈◊〉 me, you shall do no more▪
You brother Civet, and moister Weathercock, doe but
Bail me, and let me have my marriage money
Paid me, and w•ride down, and there your own▪
Eyes shall see, how my poor tenants 〈◊〉 will welcome me▪
You shall but bail me, you shall doe no more,
And you gre•y gnat, their bail will serve.
I sir, isle, ask no better bail,
No sir you shall not take my bail, nor his,
Nor my son 〈◊〉, isle not be chea• I,
Shrive take your prisoner, isle not 〈◊〉 with him▪
Let's Uncle make false dice with his false bones,
I will not have to doe with him: mocked, gulled, &amp; wronged.
Come Girl, though it be late it falls out well,
Thou shalt not live with him in beggars hell.
He is my husband, &amp; hie heaven doth know,
With what unwillingness I went to Church,
But you enforced me, you compelled me too it:
The holy Church-man pronounced these words but now,
I must not leave my husband in distress:
Now I must comfort him, not go with you.
Comfort a cozoner? on my curse forsake him.
This day you caused me on your curse to take him:
Doe not I pray my grieved soul oppress,
God knows my heart doth bleed at his distress.
O M. Weathercock, I must confess I forced her to this match,
Led with opinion his false will was true.
A, he hath ouer-reached me too.
She might have lived like Delia, in a happy Virgins state.
Father be patient, sorrow comes too late.
And on her knees she begged &amp; did entreat,
If she must needs taste a sad marriage life,
She craved to be sir Arthur Greene-sheilds wife.
You have done her &amp; me the greater wrong.
O take her yet.
Not I.
Or, M. Oliuer, except my child, and half my wealth is yours.
No sir, i will break no Laws.
Never fear, she will not trouble you.
Yet sister in this passion doe not run headlong to confusion. You may affect him, though not follow him.
Doe sister, hang him, let him go.
Doe faith Mistress Luce, leave him.
You are three gross •ooles, let me alone,
I swear isle live with him in all moan.
But an he have his legs at liberty,
Cham averd hee will never live with you.
I but hee is now in hucksters handling for running away.
Huswife, you hear how you and I am wronged,
And if you will redress it yet you may:
But if you stand on terms to follow him,
Never come near my sight nor look on me,
Call me not father, look not for a great,
For all thy portion I will this day give
Unto thy sister Frances.
How say you to that Tom, I shall have a good deal,
Besides isle be a good wife: and a good wife
Is a good thing, I can tell.
Peace Frank, I would be sorry to see thy sister
Cast away, as I am a Gentleman.
What, are you yet resolved?
Yes, I am resolved.
Come then away, or now, or never come.
This way I turn, go you unto your feast,
And I to weep, that am with grief oppressed.
For ever fly my sight: come gentlemen•n
Lets in, isle help you to far better wives then her.
Delia upon my blessing talk not too her,
Base Baggage, in such hast to beggary?
Sheriff take your prisoner to your charge.
Uncle, be-god you have used me very hardly,
By my troth, upon my wedding day.
O M. Flowerdale, but hear me speak,
Stay but a little while good M. Sheriff,
If not for him, for my sake pity him:
Good sir stop not your ears at my complaint,
My voice grows weak, for women's words are faint.
Look you Uncle, she kneels to you.
Fair maid, for you, I love you with my heart,
And grieve sweet soul thy fortune is so bad,
That thou should match with such a graceless Youth,
Go to thy father, think not upon him,
Whom hell hath marked to be the son of shame.
Impute his wildness sir, unto his youth,
And think that now is the time he doth repent:
Alas, what good or gain can you receive,
To imprison him that nothing hath to pay?
And where nought is, the king doth lose his due,
O pity him as God •hall pity you.
Lady, I know his humours all too well,
And nothing in the world can doe him good,
But misery it self to chain him with.
Say that your debts were paid, then is he free?
I virgin, that being answered, I have done,
But to him that is all as impossible,
As I to scale the hye Piramydies.
Sheriff take your prisoner, Maiden fare thee well.
O go not yet, good M. Flowerdale:
Take my word for the debt, my word, my bond.
I by God Uncle, and my bond too.
Alas, I n ere ought nothing but I paid it,
And I can work, alas he can doe nothing:
I have some friends perhaps will pity me,
His chiefest friends doe seek his misery.
All that I can, or beg, get, or receive,
Shall be for you: O doe not turn away,
Me thinks within a face so reverent,
So well experienced in this tottering world,
Should have some feeling of a maidens grief:
For my sake, his fathers, and your brothers sake,
I for your souls sake that doth hope for joy,
Pity my state: do not two souls destroy.
Fair maid stand up, not in regard of him,
But in pity of thy haplesse choice,
Idoe release him, M. Sheriff I thank you:
And officers there is for you to drink.
Here maid take this money, there is a 100. Angels,
And for I will be sure he shall not have it,
Here Kester take it you, and use it sparingly,
But let not her have any want at all.
Dry your eyes Niece, doe not too much lament
For him, whose life hath been in royot spent:
If well he uses thee, he gets him friends,
If ill▪ 〈◊〉 shameful end on him depends.
A plague go with you for an old fornicator:
Come Kyt the money, come honest Kyt.
Nay by my faith sir, you shall pardon me.
And why sir pardon you? give me the money
You old Rascal, or I shall make you.
Pray hold your hands, give it him honest friend.
If you be so content, with all my heart.
Content sir, sblood she shall be content
Whether she will or no. A rattle baby come to follow me:
Go get you gone to the greasy chuff your father,
Bring me your dowry, or never look on me.
Sir she hath forsook her father, and all her friends for you.
Hang thee, her friends and father altogether.
Yet part with something to provide her lodging.
Yes, I mean to part with her and you, but if I part with one Angel, hang me at a post. Isle rather throw them at a cast at Dice, as I have done a thousand of their fellows.
Nay then I will be plain degenerate boy,
Thou had a Father would have been a shamed.
My father was an As•e, an old Ass.
〈◊〉 father? proud licentious villain:
What are you at your foils, isle foil with you.
Good sir for bear him.
Did not this whining woman hang on me,
Id teach thee what it was to abuse thy father:
Go hang, beg, starve, dice, game, that when all is gone
Thou moist after despair and hang thy self.
O doe not curse him.
I doe not curse him, and to pray for him were vain,
It grieves me that he bears his father name.
Well you old rascal, I shall meet with you,
Sirrah get you gone, I will not strip the livery
Over your •ares, because you paid for it:
But do not use my name, sirrah doe you hear? look you doe not
Use my name, you were best.
Pay me the twenty pound then, that I lent you,
Or give me security, when I may have it.
Isle pay thee not a penny, and for security, isle give thee none,
Minckins look you doe not follow me, look you doe not:
If you doe beggar, I shall slit your nose.
Alas what shall I doe?
Why turn whore, thats a good trade,
And so perhaps isle see thee now and then.
Alas the day that ever I was borne.
Sweet mistress doe not weep, isle stick to you.
Alas my friend, I know not what to do,
My father and my friends, they have despised me:
And I a wretched maid, thus cast away,
Knows neither where to go, nor what to say.
It grieves me at the soul, to see her tears
Thus stain the crimson roses of her cheeks:
Lady take comfort, doe not morn in vain,
I have a little living in this town,
The which I think comes to a hundred pound,
All that and more shall be at your dispose,
Isle strait go help you to some strange disguise,
And place you in a service in this town:
Where you shall know all, yet your self unknown:
Come grieve no more, where no help can be had,
Weep not for him, that is more worse then bad.
I thank you sir.
Well, cha a bin zerued many a sluttish trick,
But such a lerripoope as thick ych was ne'er a sarued.
Son Cinet, daughter Fcances, bear with me,
You see how I am pressed down with inward grief,
About that luckless girl, your sister Luce:
But tic fallen out with me, as with many families beside,
They are most unhappy, that are most belove•d.
Father tic so, tic even fallen out so,
But what remedy, set hand to your heart, and let it pass:
Here is your daughter Frances and I, and weal not say,
Weal bring forth as witty children, but as pretty
Children as ever she was: tho she had the prick
And praise for a pretty wench: But father, done is
The mouse, you'll come?
I son Civet, isle come.
And you moister Oliuer?
I, for che a vexed out this veast, chill see if again
Make a better veast there.
And you sir Arthur?
I sir, although my heart b• full,
Isle be a partner at your wedding feast.
And welcome all indeed, and welcome, come Frank are you ready?
Ieshue how hasty these husbands are, I pray father,
Pray to God to bless me.
God bless thee, and I doe: God make thee wise,
Send you both joy, I wish it with wet eyes.
But Fath•r, shall not my sister Delia go along with vs?
She is excellent good at cookery and such things.
Yes mary shall she: Delia, make you ready.
I am ready sir, I will first go to Greene-witch,
From thence to my cousin Chesterfeelds, and so to London.
It shall suffice good sister Delia, it shall suffice,
But fail vs not good sister, give order to cooks, and others,
For I would not have my sweet Frank
To soil her fingers.
No by my troth not I, a gentlewoman, and a married
Gentlewoman too, to be companions to cooks,
And kitchin-boyes, not I, in faith: I scorn that.
Why I doe not mean thou shalt sweet heart,
Thou see I doe not go about it: well farewell too:
You, Gods pity M. Weathercock, we shall have your cōpany too?
Withal my heart, for I love good cheer.
Well, God be with you all, come Frank.
God be with you father, God be with you sir Arthur, Moister Oliuer, and moister Weathercock, sister, God be with you all: God be with you father, God be with you every one.
Why how now sir Arthur? all a mort moister Oliuer, how now man?
Cheerely sir Lancelot, and merrily say,
Who can hold that will away.
I she is gone indeed, poor girl undone,
But when theyle be selfewilled, children must smart.
But sir, that she is wronged, you are the chiefest cause.
Therefore tic reason, you redress her wrong.
Indeed you must sir Lancelot, you must.
Must? who can compel me maifter VVeathercock▪
I hope I may doe what I list.
I grant you may, you may doe what you list.
Nay, but and you be well euisen, it were not good
By this vrampolnesse, and vrowardnesse, to cast away
As pretty adowssabell, as am chould chance to see
In a Summers day, i will tell you what chall doe,
I will go spy up and down the town, and see if I
Can hear any tale or die dings of her,
And take her away from thick a messell, for cham
Ashured, heel but bring her to the spoil,
And so var you well, we shall meet at your son 〈◊〉.
I thank you sir, I take it very kindly.
To find her out, isle spend my dearest blood. 
So well I loved her, to affect her good.
O moister 〈◊〉, what hap had I, to force my daughter
From moister 〈◊〉, and this good knight?
To one that hath no goodness in his thought.
Ill luck, but what remedy.
Yes I have almost devised a remedy,
Young 〈◊〉, is sure a prisoner.
Sure, nothing more sure.
And yet perhaps his Uncle hath released him.
It may be very like, no doubt he hath.
Well if he be in prison, isle have warren•
To tache my daughter till the law be tried,
For I will shu him upon cousinage.
Mary may you, and overthrow him too•
Nay thats not so, I may chance be sco•,
And sentence past with him.
Believe me so he may, therefore take heed.
Well howso•er, yet I will have warrants,
In prison, or at liberty, alls one:
You will help to serve them moister 〈◊〉?
A plague of the devil, the devil take the dice,
The dice, and the devil, and his dam•no go together:
Of all my hundred golden angels,
I have not left me one denier:
A poke of come a five, what shall I doe?
I can borrow no more of my credit:
There's not any of my acquaintance, man, nor boy,
But I have borrowed more or less off:
I would I knew where to take a good purse,
And go clear away, by this light isle venture for it,
Gods lid my sister Delia,
Isle rob her, by this hand.
I prithee Artichoake go not so fast,
The weather is hot, and I am something weary.
Nay I warrant you mistress Delia isle not tire you
With leading, weal go an extreme moderate pace.
Stand, deliver your purse.
O lord, thieves, thieves.
Come, come, your purse lady, your purse.
That voice I have heard often before this time,
What brother Flowerdale, become a thief?
I, a plague ont, I thank your father,
But sister, come, your money, come:
What the world must find me, I am borne to live,
Tic not a sin to steal, when none will give.
O God, is all grace banished from thy heart,
Think of the shame that doth attend this fact.
Shame me no shames, come give me your purse,
Isle bind you sister, least I fair the worse.
No, bind me not, hold there is all I have,
And would that money would redeem thy shame.
Thieves, thieves, thieves.
Thieves, where man? why how now mistress Delia,
Ha you a liked to bin a robbed?
No moister Oliuer, tic moister Flowerdale, hee did but jest with me.
How, Flowerdale, that scoundrel 〈◊〉, you me•en vs
Well, avenge thee that.
Well sin, isle not meddle with you, because I have a charge.
Here brother Flowerdale isle lend you this same money▪
I thank you sister.
I wad you woreysplit, and you let the mezell have a penny,
But since you cannot keep it, i will keep it my self.
Tic pity to relieve him in this sort,
Who makes a triumphant life, his daily sport.
Brother, you see how all men concur you,
Farewell, and I pray God amend your life.
Come, chill bring you along, and you safe enough
From twenty such scoundrels as thick a one is,
Farewell and be hanged zyrrha, as I think so thou
Wilt be shortly, come sir Arthur.
A plague go with you for a karsie rascal:
This Deuenshy 〈◊〉 I think is made all of pork,
His hands made only, for to he•ue up packs:
His hart as f•t and big as his face,
As differing far from all brave gallant minds
As I to serve the hogs, and drink with hinds,
As I am very near now: well, what remedy,
When money, means, and friends, doe grow so small,
Then farewell life, and 〈◊〉 an end of all.
By my troth god a mercy for this good Christopher,
I thank thee for my maid, I like her very well,
How doest thou like her 〈◊〉?
In good sadness Tom, very well, excellent well,
She speaks so prettily, I pray whats your name?
My name forsooth be called 〈◊〉.
By my troth a fine name, O 〈◊〉, you are excel∣lent for dressing one head a new fashion.
Me sall doe every ting about da head.
What countriwoman is she Kissed•r?
A dutch woman sir.
Why then she is outlandish, is she not?
I Sir she is.
O then thou can tell how to help me to cheeks and 〈◊〉
Y•s mistress very vell.
Cheeks and ears, why mistress Frances, want you Cheeks and ears? me thinks you have very fair ones.
Thou art a fool indeed Tom, thou know what I mean,
I, I Kester, tic such as they wear a their heads,
I prithee Kit have her in, and sheweher my house.
I will sir, come 〈◊〉.
O Tom, you have not bussed me to day Tom.
No Frances, we must not kiss before folks,
God save me Frank,
See yonder my sister Delia is come, welcome good sister.
Welcome good sister, how do you like the tier of my head?
Very well sister.
I am glad you're come sister Delia to give order for Supper, they will be here soon.
I, but if good luck had not served, she had
Not bin here now, filching Flowerdale had like
To peppord vs, but for moister Oliuer, we had bin robbed.
Peace sirrah, no more.
Robbed by whom?
Marry by none but by Flowerdale, he is turned thief.
By my faith, but that is not well, but God be praised
For your escape, will you draw near sister?
Sirrah come hither, would Flowerdale, •ee that was my moister, a robbed you, I prithee tell me true?
Yes in faith▪ even that Flowerdale, that was thy my∣ster.
Hold thee, there is a French crown, and speak no more of this.
Not I, not a word, now do I smell knauerit:
In every purse Flowerdale take•s, he is half▪
And gives me this to keep counsel, •o not a word I.
Why God a mercy.
Sister look here, I have a new Dutch maid,
And she speaks so fine, it would do• your heart good.
How doe you like her sister?
I like your maid• well.
Well dear sister, will you draw near, and give direc∣tions for supper, guess will be here presently.
Yes brother, lead the way 〈◊〉 follow you.
Hark you Dutch frowe a word.
Vat is your will wi• 〈◊〉?
Sister Luc•▪ tic not your broken language,
Nor this same habit, can disguise your 〈◊〉
From I that know you: pray tell me, what means this?
Sister, I see you know me, yet be secret:
This borrowed shape, that I have tan• upon me,
Is but to keep my self, a space un known,
Both from my father, and my n•erest friends▪
Until I see, how time will bring to pass,
The desperate course, of moister Flowerdale.
O hee is worse then bad, I 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 him▪
And let not once thy heart to think on him.
Do not persuade me, once to 〈◊〉 thought,
Imagine yet, that he is worse then nought:
Yet one lovers time, may all that ill undo,
That all his former life, did run into▪
Therefore kind sister doe not disclose my estate,
If ere his heart doth turn, tic ne'er too late.
Well, seeing no counsel can remove your mind,
Isle not disclose you, that art wilful blind.
Delia, I thank you, I now must please her∣eyes,
My sister Frances, neither fair nor wise.
On goes he that knows no end of his journey,
I have passed the 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 bounds of shifting,
I have no course now but to hang my self:
I have lived since yesterday two a clock, of a
Spice-cake I had at a burial▪ and for drink,
I got it at an Ale-house among 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 as
Will bear out a man, if he have no money indeed.
I mean out of their companies, 〈◊〉 they are men
Of good carriage. Who comes here?
The two Conycatchers, that won all my money of me.
Isle try if thaylelend me any.
What M. Richard how doe you?
How doest thou Raf? By God gentlemen the world
Grows bare with m•, will you do as much as lend
Me an Angel 〈◊〉 you both, you know you
Won a hundred of me the other day.
Ho•▪ Angel? God damb vs if we lost not every
Penny, within an 〈◊〉 after thou were• gone.
I prethy lend me so much as will pay for my supper,
Isle pay you again, as I am a Gentleman.
I faith, we have have not a farthing, not a myte:
I▪ wonder at it 〈◊〉 Flowerdale,
You will so carelessly undo your self,
Why you will loose more money in an hour,
Then any honestman spend in a year,
For shame betake you to some honest Trade,
And live not thus so like a Vagabond.
A Vagabond indeed, more villains you•
They gave me counsel that 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 me:
Those Devils first brought me to this I am,
And being thus, the first that doe me wrong.
Well, yet I have one friend left in store,
Not far from hence, there dwells a Cokatryce,
One that I first put in a satin gown,
And not a tooth that dwell within her head,
But stands me at the least in 20▪ pound:
Her will I visit now my coin is gone,
And as I take it here dwells the Gentlewomen.
What ho, is Mists 〈◊〉 within?
What sawfie Rascal is that which knocks so bold,
O, is it you• old spend▪ thrist, are you here?
One' that is turned Cozoner about the to 〈◊〉▪
My Mistress saw you, and sends this •ord by me▪
Either be packing quickly from the door,
Or you shall have such a greeting sent you strait,
As you will little like on, you had best be gone.
Why so, this is as it should be, being poor,
Thus art thou ser•ed by a vile painted whore.
Well, since thy damned crew doe so abuse thee,
Isle try of honest men, how they will use 〈◊〉.
Sir I beseech you to take compassion of a man,
One whose Fortunes have been better then at this instant
they seem to bee': but if I might crave of you so much little
portion, as would bring me to my friends, I should rest
thankful, v•till I had requited so great a 〈◊〉.
Fie, fie, young man, this course is very bad,
Too many such have wee about this City,
Yet for I have not seen you in this sort,
Nor noted you to be a common beggar:
Hold theres an Angel, to bear your charges,
Down, go to your friends, do not on this depend,
Such bad beginnings oft have 〈◊〉 ends.
Worser ends: nay, if it fall out
No worse then in old angels I care not,
Nay now I have had such a fortunate beginning,
Isle not let a: sixepennie-purse escape me,
By the Mass, here comes another.
God bless you fair Mistress.
Now would it please you gentlewoman to look into the
wants of a poor Gentle-man, a younger brother, I doubt not
but God will treble restore it back again, one that never
before this time demanded penny, 〈◊〉, nor farthing.
Wife. Stay Alexander, now by my troth a very pro∣per man, and tic great pity: hold my friend, theres all the money I have about me, a couple of shillings, and God bless thee.
Now God thank you sweet Lady: if you have any friend, or Garden-house, where you may employ a poor gentleman as your friend, I am yours to command in all se∣cret service.
I thank you good friend, I prethy let me see that a∣gain, I gave thee, there is one of them a brass shilling, give me them, and here is half a crown in gold. He gives it her. Now out upon thee Rascal, secret service: what doest thou make of me? it were a good deed to have thee whipped: now I have my money again, isle see thee hanged before I give thee a penny: secret service: on good Alexander.
This is will 〈◊〉 luck, I perceive 〈◊〉
Will not thrive: here comes more. God forgive me,
Sir Arthur, and M. Oliuer, before God, Isle speak to them,
God save you Sir Arthur▪ God save you M. Oliuer.
Bin you there 〈◊〉, come will you ytaken your self
To your tools, 〈◊〉?
Nay, M. 〈◊〉, Isle not fight with you,
Alas sir you know it was not my doings,
It was only a plot to 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 daughter:
By God, I never meant you 〈◊〉.
And whore is the Gentle-woman thy wife, Mezell?
Whore is she, 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉
By my troth M. Oliuer, sick, very sick;
And God is my Judge, I know not what means to make for her, good Gentlewoman.
Tell me true, is she sick? tell me true i•ch •ise thee?
Yes faith, I tell you 〈◊〉: M. 〈◊〉, if you would doe me the small kindness, but to lend me forty shillings: So God help me I will pay you •o 〈◊〉 as my ability shall make me able, as I 〈◊〉 a gentleman.
Well thou zaist thy wife is zicke: hold, theirs 〈◊〉 shillings, gived it to thy wife, look 〈◊〉 go•e it her, or I shall so veze thee, thou were not so vised this zeuen year, look too it.
Y faith M. Oliuer, it is in vain
To give to 〈◊〉 that 〈◊〉 thinks of her▪
Well, would che could 〈◊〉 〈◊〉▪
I tell you true, sir Arthur, as I am a gentle∣man.
Well fare you well 〈◊〉: come 〈◊〉 Arthur.
By the Lord this is 〈◊〉.
Five golden Angels compassed in an hour,
If this trade hold, isle never 〈◊〉 a new.
Welcome sweet gold: and beggary adieu.
See Kester if you can find the house.
Whose here, my Uncle, and my man Kester?
By the mass tic they.
How doe you Uncle, how dost thou Kester?
By my troth Uncle, you must n•edes lend
Me some money, the poor gentlewoman
My wife, so God help me, is very sick,
I was robbed of the hundred angels
You gave me, they are gone.
I they are gone indeed, come Kester away.
Nay Uncle, do you hear? good Uncle.
Out hypocrite, I will not hear thee speak,
Come leave him Kester.
Kester, honest Kester.
Sir, I ha•e 〈◊〉 to say to you,
Open the door to my kin, thou had best
Locked fast, sor theres a false knave without.
you are an old lying Rascal,
So you are.
Vat is de matter, Vat be you yonker?
By this light a Dutch Fro, they say they are called Kind, by this light isle try her.
Vat bin you yonker, why doe you not speak?
By my troth sweet heart, a poor gentleman that would desire of you, if it stand with your liking, the bounty of your purse.
O here God, so young an ermine.
Ermine sweet-heart, I know not what you mean by that, but I am almost a beggar.
Are you not a married man, vere bin your wife?
Here is all I have, take dis.
What gold young Fro? this is brave.
If he have any grace, heel now repent▪
Why speak you not, were be yo•r 〈◊〉?
Dead, dead, shees dead, tic she hath undone me,
Spent me all I had, and kept 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 mine nose to brave me.
Did you use her vell?
Use her, theres never a gentlewoman in England could be better v•ed then 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, I •old but Coatch her, her diet stood me 〈◊〉 pound a month, but she is dead and in her grave, my cares are buried.
Indeed dat was not scone.
He is turned more devil then he was before.
Thou doest belong to my•er Civet here, doest thou not?
Yes me doe.
Why theres it, theres not a handful of plate
But belongs to me, Gods my Judge:
If I had but such a wench as thou art,
Theres never a man in England would make more
Of her, then I would doe▪ so she had any stock. 
O why Tanikin.
Stay one doth call, I shall come by and by again.
By this hand, this Dutch wench is in love with me,
Were it not admiral to make her steal
All Ciuets Plate, and run away.
It were beastly. O moister Flowerdale,
Have you no fear of God, nor conscience:
What doe you mean, by this wild course you take?
What doe I mean, why to live, that I mean.
To live in this sort, fie upon the course,
Your life doth show, you are a very coward.
A coward, I pray in what?
Why you will borrow sixpence of a boy.
Snails is there such cowardice in that, I dare
Borrow it of a man, I and of the tallest man▪
In England, if he will lend it me,
Let me borrow it how I can, and let them come by it how they dare.
And it is well 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 rid out a hundred times
If I would: so I might.
It was not want of will, but cowardice,
There is none that lends to you, but know they gain:
And what is that but only stealth in you,
De•in might hang you now, did not her heart
Take pity of you for her sisters sake.
Go get you hence, least lingering here you stay,
You fall into their hands you look not for.
Isle tarry here, till the Dutch Fro
Comes, if all the devils in hell were here.
Where is the door, are we not past it Artichoake?
Bith mass here is one, isle ask him, doe you hear fir?
What are you so proud? doe you hear, which is the way
To moister Ciuets house? what will you not speak?
O me, this is filching Flwoerdale.
O wonderful, is this leaude villain here?
O you cheating Rogue, you cut-purse conicatcher,
What ditch you villain, is my daughters grave?
A cozening rascal, that must make a will,
Take on him that strict habit, very that:
When he should turn to angel, a dying grace,
Isle father in law you sir, isle make a will,
Speak villain, wheres my daughter?
Poisoned I warrant you, or knocked a the head:
And to abuse good moister Weathercock, with his fordged will,
And moister Weathercock, to make my grounded resolution,
Then to abuse the Devonshire gentlemen:
Go, away with him to prison.
Wherefore to prison? sir I will not go.
O hears his Uncle, welcome gentlemen, welcome all,
Such a cozoner gentlemen, a murderer too
For any thing I know, my daughter is missing:
Hath bin looked for, cannot be found, a wild upon thee.
He is my kinsman, although his life be wild.
Therefore in Gods name, doe with him what you will.
Marry to prison.
Wherefore to prison? sneck up, I owe you nothing.
Bring forth my daughter then, away with him.
Go seek your daughter, what doe you lay to my charge,
Suspicion of murder, go▪ away with him.
Murder your dogs, I murder your daughter,
Come Uncle, I know you'll bail me.
Not I, were there no more.
Then I the Jailer, thou the prisoner.
Go away with him.
O my life here, where will you ha de man?
Vat ha de younker done?
Woman he hath kilt his wife.
His wife, dat is not good, dat is not seen.
Hang not upon him huswife, if you doe isle lay you by him.
Have me no, and or way doe you have him,
He tell me dat he love me heartily.
Lead away my maid to prison, why Tom will you suffer that?
No by your leave father, she is no vagrant:
She is my wives chamber maid, &amp; as true as the skin between any mans brows here.
Go too, you're both fools: son Ciues,
Of my life this is a plot,
Some straggling counterfeit preferred to you:
No doubt to rob you of your plate and Jewels,
Isle have you led away to prison trull.
I am no trull, neither outlandish Frowe,
Nor he, nor I shall to the prison go:
Know you me now? nay never stand amazed.
Father I know I have offended you,
And tho that duty wills me bend my knees
To you in duty and obedience:
Yet this ways doe I turn, and to him yield
My love, my duty and my humbleness.
Bastard in nature, kneel to such a slau•?
O M. 〈◊〉, if too much grief
Have not stopped up the organs of your voice,
Then speak to her that is thy faithful wife,
Or doth contempt of me, thus tie thy tongue:
Turn not away, I 〈◊〉 Aethyope,
No wanton Cressed, nor a changing Hello•▪
But rather one made wretched by thy loss.
What turnst thou still from me? O then
I guess thee woefullest among haplesse men.
I am indeed wife, wonder among wives!
Thy chastity and virtue hath infused
Another soul in me, red with defame,
For in my blushing 〈◊〉 is seen my shame.
Out Hypocrite, I charge thee trust him not.
Not trust him, by hopes after bliss,
I know no sorrow can be compared to his.
Well since thou weart ordained to beggary,
Follow thy fortune, I defy thee I.
Ywood che were so well ydoussed as was ever white cloth in a tocking mill, and chea ha not made me weep.
If he hath any grace heel now repent.
It moves my heart.
By my troth I must weep, I can not choose.
None but a beast would such a maid misuse.
Content thy self, I hope to win his favour,
And to redeem my reputation lost,
And Gentlemen believe me, I beseech you,
I hope your eyes shall behold such change,
As shall deceive your expectation.
I would che were ysplit now, but che bell•eve him.
How, believe him.
By the mackins, I doe.
What doe you think that ere he will have grace?
By my faith it will go hard.
Well che vorye he is changed▪ and M. Flowerdale, in hope you been so, hold theres 〈◊〉 pound toward your get∣ting up: what bee not ashamed, avenge it man, avenge it, bee a good husband, louen your wife▪ and you shall not want for forty more, 〈◊〉 for thee.
My means are little, but if you'll• •ollow me,
I will instruct you in my ablest power:
But to your wife I give this Diamond,
And prove true Dimond fair in all your life.
Thanks good sir 〈◊〉, M. 〈◊〉,
You being my 〈◊〉, and grown so kind,
Binds me in all 〈◊〉 to restore.
What, restore me, no 〈◊〉 man,
I have forty pound more for Luce, here avenge 〈◊〉:
Zouth i will devie 〈◊〉 else, what do not think me
A Mezel or a Scondrell to throw away 〈◊〉 money▪ che have a hundred pound more to 〈◊〉 of 〈◊〉 good spotation: I hope your under and your uncle here will vollow my •amples.
You have gest right of me, if he leave of this course of life, he shall be mine heir.
But he shall never get a great of me,
A Cozoner, a deceiver, one that kilt his painful
Father, honest Gentleman that passed the fearful
Danger of the sea, to get him living and maintain him brave.
What hath he kilt his father?
I sir, with conceit of his wild courses.
Sir, you are misinformed.
Why thou old knave, thou toldst me so thy self.
I wronged him then: and toward my M. stock,
Theirs 20. Nobles for to make amends.
No Kester, I have troubled thee, and wrong thee more,
What thou in love gives, I in love restore.
Ha, ha, sister, there you played bo-peepe with
Tom, What shall I give her toward household?
Sister Delia, shall I give her my Fan?
You were best ask your husband.
Shall I 〈◊〉▪
I do Frank isle by thee a new one, with a longer handle.
A russet one Frank.
I with russet feathers.
Here sister, theres my Fan toward household, to keep you warm.
I thank, you sister.
Why this is well, and toward fair Lucas stock, here is forty shillings: and forty good shillings more, Isle give her marry▪ Come sir Lancelot, I must have you friends.
Not I▪ all this is counterfeit,
He will consume it, were it a Million.
Sir, what is your daughters dower worth?
Had she been married to an honest man,
It had been better then a thousand pound.
Pay it him, and isle give you my bond,
To make her jointer better worth then three▪
Your bond sir, why what are you?
One whose word in 〈◊〉 •ho I say it,
Will pass there for as much as yours.
VVeart not thou late that unthrifts serving∣man?
Look on me better, now my scarre is off.
Ne'er muse man at this metamorphose.
M. Flowerdale.
My father, O I shame to look on him.
Pardon dear father the follies that are past.
Son, son I doe, and joy at this thy change,
And applaud thy fortune in this virtuous maid,
Whom heaven hath sent to thee to save thy soul.
This adds joy to joy, hie heaven be praised.
M. Flowerdale, welcome frō death, good M. Flowerdale.
It was sed so here, it was sed so here good faith.
I caused that rumour to be spread my self▪
Because id see the humours of my son,
Which to relate the circumstance is needless▪
And sir see you run no more into that same disease:
For he thats once cured of that malady,
Of Riot, Swearing, Drunkenness, and Pride•,
And falls again into the like distress,
That favour is deadly, doth till death endure:
Such men die mad as of a callenture.
Heaven helping me, isle hate the course as hell.
Say it and do it Cozen, all is well.
Well being in hope you'll prove an honest man,
I take you to my favour brother Flowerdale,
Welcome with all my heart: I see your care
Hath brought these acts to this conclusion,
And I am glad of i•, come lets in and feast.
Nay zoft you awhile, you promised to make
Sir 〈◊〉 and me 〈◊〉, here is your wisest
Daughter, see which ans sheele have.
A Gods name, you have my good will, get hers.
How say you the• Damsel, titters hate?
I •ir, am yours.
Why, then send for a Vicar, and i will have it
Dispatched in a trice so chill.
Pardon me sir, I mean I am yours,
In love, in duty: and affection.
But not to love as wife, shall 〈◊〉 be said,
Delya was buried married, but a •aid.
Doe not condemn your self for ever
Virtuous fair, you were borne to love.
Why you say true sir 〈◊〉 she was ybere to it
So well as her mother▪ but I pray you show vs
Some zamples or reasons why you will not marry?
Not that I doe condemn a married life,
For tic no doubt a 〈◊〉 thing:
But for the care and crosses of a wife,
The trouble in this world that children bring,
My vow is in heaven in earth to live alone,
Husbands howsoever good, I will have none.
Why then i will will live Bachelor too,
Che get not a wig by a wife, if a wife get not a wig
By me▪ Come shalls go to dinner?
To morrow I crave your companies in Mark∣lane:
To night weal frolic in M. 〈◊〉 house,
And to each health, drink down a full carouse.

Lo how the trustless world the worldlings tosses,
And leads her lovers headlong unto death,
Those that doe court her most have maniest crosses,
And yet vain man, this halfe-spent spark of breath,
This dying substance, and this living shadow,
The sport of Fortune, and the spoil of Time,
Who like the glory of a halfe-mow'd meadow
Doth flourish now, and strait falls in his prime,
Still toils t'attaine (such is his foolish nature)
A constant good in this inconstant ill:
Unreasonable reasonable creature
That makes his reason subject to his will.
Whilst in the Stage of Contemplation placed
Of worldly humours I behold the strife,
Though different sprites have divers parts embraced,
All act this transitory Scene of Life:
Of curious minds who can the fancies fetter,
The Soul vnsatisfide, a prey t'each snare,
Still loathing what it hath, doth dream of better,
Which gotten, but begets a greater care.
And yet all labour for t'attaine the top
Of th'vnsure sovereign bliss that they surmise,
Flowers of Felicity, that few can crop,
Yea, scarce can be discerned by the wise.
Some place their happiness (unhappy beasts,
And I must say, more senseless then their treasures)
In gorgeous garments, and in dainty feasts,
To pamper breath-toss'd flesh with flying pleasures.
Some more austerely with a wrinkled brow
That triumph o'er their Passions with respects,
With neither fortune moved to brag or bow,
Would make the world enamoured of their sectes.
Some ravished still with virtues purest springs,
Feed on th'Idea of that divine brood,
And search the secrets of celestial things
As most undoubted heirs of that high good.
Thus with conceited ease and certain pain,
All seek by several ways a perfect bliss:
Which, O what wonder, if they not obtain,
Who cannot well discern what thing it is!
What happiness can be imagined here?
Though we our hopes with vain surmises cherish,
Who hardly conquer first what wee hold dear,
Then fear to loose it still that once must perish.
Think (though of many thousands scarcely any
Can at this point of Happiness arrive)
Yet if it chance, it chances not to many,
Only to get for what a world did strive.
And though one swim in th'Ocean of delights,
Have none aboue him, and his equals rare,
Ears joying pleasant sounds; eyes stately sights;
His treasures infinite; his buildings fair.
Yet doth the world on Fortunes wheel rely,
Which loue's t'aduance the wretched, wrack the great,
Whose course resembles an inconstant eye,
Ever in motion compassing deceit.
Then let the greedy of his substance boast,
Whilst th'excrements of th'earth his senses smother,
What hath he gained, but what another lost?
And why may not his loss enrich another?
But ah! all loose, who seek to profit thus,
And found their confidence on things that fade,
We may be robed from them, they robed from vs,
Al's grieved for th'one, as for the other glad.
Vain fool, that thinks solidity to find
In this frail world, where for a while we range,
Which like sea-waues, depending on the wind,
Ebbes, flows, calms, storms, still mooing, still in change.
Each surge, we see, doth drive the first away,
The some is whitest, where the Rock is near,
And as one grows, another doth decay,
The greatest dangers oft do least appear.
Their seeming bliss that trust in frothie shows,
In Fortunes danger, burdened with the Fates,
First to a full, then to confusion grows,
A secret Destiny doth guide great States.
But I scorn Fortune, and was ever free
From that dead wealth that wauers in her power,
I bear my treasure still about with me,
Which neither Time nor Tyrants can devour.
Light author of events, and vain adventures,
Now do thy worst, I know how to undo thee,
The way is stopped by which thy poison enters,
Thou can harm none but them that trust unto thee.
And I have learned to moderate my mind,
Contentment is the crown of my desires:
My clothes are course, my fare such as I find,
He hath enough that to no more aspires.
What satisfaction doth ouer-flow my soul,
While as I weigh the world which few hold fast,
And in my memories vnblotted scroll,
Judge of the present by the time that's past?
The poore-rich heir of breath that boastes of smoke,
And come of dust, yet of the dross still thinks,
Whilst baser passions doe his virtues choke,
The soul overbalanced with the body sinks.
Yet need I not to loathe the world and live,
As one whom stepdame she would never nourish,
I had a part of all that she could give,
My race, my house, by fame and wealth did flourish.
And if that I would vaunt of mine own deeds,
Fair City, where mine eyes first sucked the light,
I challenge might what most thy glory breeds
Whose labours both enlarged thy fame and might.
When Salamina utterly was lost,
And by the rascal multitude neglected,
A counterfeited fool, I went and crossed
All their designs, whose courses were suspected.
And when I had by policy persuaded
My country to embrace the wars again,
I both by stratagems and strength invaded
That famous Isle which vanquished did remain.
Then having compassed that exploit with speed,
And turned in triumph decked with strangers spoils,
No perfect bliss below worse did succeed,
The peace that was abroad bred civil broils.
What with more violence doth fury lead,
Then a rash multitude that wants a head?
The meaner sort could not their minds conform,
T'abide at what their betters did command:
Then the weale-publike in a dangerous storm,
All joined to place the ruder in my hand.
I re-vnited that divided state,
And managed matters with a good success,
Which farther kindled had been quenched too late,
That Hidra-headed tumult to suppress.
When I had both these glorious works effected,
And trod the path of sou'raignty a space,
The minion of the people most respected,
None could be great save such as I would grace.
Thus carried with the force of Fortunes stream,
I absolutely acted what I would,
For the Democratie was but a name,
My hand the rains did of the City hold.
I might a Tyrant still have governed so
But my pure soul could no such thought conceive,
And that oversight yet made me never woe,
If I may rule my self it's all I crave.
Yet some that seemed to be more subtile-witted,
Said my base sprite could not aspire t'a crown,
And foolish Solon had a fault committed,
Who would not doe the like in every town.
My mind in this a more contentment finds,
Then if a Diadem adorned my brow,
I chain d th'affections of undaunted minds,
And made them civil that were wilde till now.
I hardly could rich Citizens entice,
To embrace the statutes that my Laws contained,
What one approved another did despise,
Some loved, some loathed, even as they thought they gained.
At last at least in show, all rest content,
Even those that hate me most lend their applause,
A worthy mind needs never to repent
T'haue suffered crosses for an honest cause.
I travel now with a contented thought,
The memory of this my fancy feeds,
When all their Empires shall be turned to nought,
Time cannot make a prey of Virtues deeds.
Where seuen-mouth'd Nil from a concealed source
Inunding over the fields, no banks can bind,
I saw their wonders, heard their wise discourse,
Rare sights enriched mine eyes, rare lights my mind.
And if it were but this, yet this deletes,
Behold, how Croesus here the Lidian King,
To be his guest vs earnestly invites,
The which to some would great contentment bring.
But I disdain that world-bewitched man,
Who makes his gold his God, the earth his heaven,
Yet I will try by all the means I can
To make his judgment with his fortune eauen.
What can confine mans wandering thought,
Or satisfy his fancies all?
Is ought so great, but it seems small
To that tossed spirit, which still af flought
Doth dream of things were never wrought,
And would gripe more then it can hold:
This sea-inuiron'd centerd ball
Is not a bound unto that mind,
That mind, which big with monsters,
The right delivery never consters,
And seeking here a solide ease to find,
Would but melt mountains and embrace the wind.
What wonder, though the soul of man,
A spark of heaven, that shines below,
Doth labour by all means it can,
It self like to it self to show,
This heavenly essence, heaven would know,
But married with this mass we see,
With payne they spend lives little span,
The better part would be aboue,
The earth from th'earth cannot remove,
How can two contrair's well agree?
Thus as the best or worst part doth prevail,
Man is of much, or else of no avail.
O from what source can this proceed,
T'haue humours of so many kinds,
Each brain doth divers fancies breed,
Al's many men, al's many minds,
And in the world, a man scarce finds
Another of his humour right,
There are not two so like indeed,
If we remark their several graces
And lineaments of both their faces,
That can abide the proof of sight:
If the outward forms then differ as they do,
Of force th'affections must be different to.
Ah! Passions spoil our better part,
The Soul is vexed with their dissentions;
We make a God of our own hart,
And worship all our vain inventions.
This brain-bred mist of apprehensions???
The mind doth with confusion fill,
Whilst reason in exile doth smart;
And few are free from this infection,
For all are slaves to some affection,
Which doth extorse the senses still.
These partial tyrants rage the sight ouersyles,
And doth eclipse the clearest judgment while.
A thousand times ?? happy he,
Who doth his passions so subdue,
That he may with clear reasons eye,
Their imperfections fountains view,
And as it were himself renew.
If that one might prescribe them laws,
And set his soul from bondage free,
From reason never for to swerve,
And make his passions him to serve,
And be but moved as he had cause:
O greater were that monarch of the mind,
Then if he might command from Thule to Inde.
WHo ever was so favoured by the Fates,
As could like vs of full contentment boast,
Loved of mine own, and feared of foreign states,
I know not what it is for to be crossed.
No thwarting chance my good hap doth importune,
In all attempts my success hath been such,
The darling of heaven, the minion of fortune,
I wot not what to wish I have so much.
Mine eyes did never yet dismay my hart
With no delightlesse object that they saw,
My name applauded is in every part
My word an Oracle, my will a Law.
My breast cannot contain this flood of joys
That with a mighty stream o'reflowes my mind,
Which never dreamed of sorrow or annoys,
But did in all a satisfaction find.
My Soul then be content and take thy pleasure.
And be not vex't with fear of any ill,
My bliss abounds, I cannot count my treasure,
And gold that conquers all, doth what I will.
That Grecian (Sir) is at the Court arrived,
Whose wisdom, Fame so prodigally praise's.
And have you not t'extend my greatness strived,
And entertained his ears with courteous phrases.
I think in all the parts where he hath been,
In foreign Countries or his native home,
He never hath such stately wonders seen,
As since unto this princely Court he come.
When first he in the regal Palace entered,
As one, who borne amongst the craggy Mountains,
That never for to view the plains aduentred,
Acquainted but with dew and little Fountains:
If he be forced for to frequent the Veils,
And there the wanton water-Nimphs to see,
The rareness of the sight so far prevails,
Each strip appear's a flood, each flood a Sea.
So all that he re'ncountred by the way,
Did to his mind a great amazement bring,
The gold-embroidred Gallants made him stay,
Each groom appeared a Prince, each squire a King.
And now he com's t'attaine your Graces sight,
Whom in his mind, no doubt he doth adore,
He gazed on those, who held of you their light,
Of force he must admire your self far more.
Now he will set your happy Empire forth,
And be eye-witnes of your glorious Reign,
One wise mans testimony is more worth
Then what a world of others would maintain.
Disdain not (mighty Prince) the loving zeal,
Which a mean man, yet a good mind affords,
And who perchance as much affects your weal,
As those that paint their love with fairer words.
Thy love (sage Greek) is grateful unto vs,
Whom Fame long since enamoured of thy deeds,
We of thy virtues have heard her discuss,
Who in extolling of the same exceeds.
I wish that many such should here resort,
Whose unstained life would teach vs what were best;
Whose grave aspect would grace so great a Court,
And like clear Lamps give light unto the rest.
My Sovereign spare, I merit no such praise,
I am but one that doth the world despise,
And would my thoughts to some perfection raise,
A Wisedom-louer that would fine be wise.
Yet with great toil all that I can attain
By long experience, and in learned schools,
Is for to know my knowledge is but vain,
And those that think them wise are greatest fools.
This is the nature of a worthy mind,
It rather would be good then be so thought,
As if it had no aim but Fame to find,
Such as the shadow not the substance sought.
Yet that pursues thee too which thou so fliest,
Still troupes applaud thy worth though thou not spy them,
Whilst thou would press it down, it mounts up heist;
For Fame and Honour follow those that fly them.
And now I think in all the world none liue's,
That better may unfold what I would learn,
Then thou to whom frank Nature largely gives
The grace to see, the judgment to discern.
Il'e answer freely to what you propose,
If my small skill can comprehend the sense.
Lo, you have seen in what I most repose
My treasures huge, my great magnificence.
This is the dream of bliss that Fortune brings,
On which the wisest never have presumed
I saw nought but a heap of senseless things,
A momentary treasure soon consumed.
This only serves the body to decor,
And for corruption framed cannot persevere:
The mind immortal lays up better store
Of vnconsuming joys that last for ever.
I wot not what you mean by such surmises,
And faind Ideaes of imagined bliss,
This portrait of Fancy but intices
Sick brains to dream that which indeed they miss.
But I brooke more than their conceits can show,
Whose rich conjectures breed but poor effects:
And I beseek you, did you ever know
A man more blessed then I in all respects?
Yes, I knew Tellus an Athenian borne,
Whom I hold happy in the first degree:
Who even the harvest of Happiness hath shorn,
He lived with fame, and did with honour die.
For having long time lived, loved and respected,
His country in a conflict had the worst:
He come, and there fallen courage re-erected,
And having won the field did die unforced.
More happy now nor when he was alive;
He dead, doth reap the guerdon of his merit,
And in his childern doth again revive,
Who all their fathers worthy parts inherit.
Well, since that to a private Citizen
You do ascribe the first most blessed estate.
Now in the second rank of happy men
Whom would you number in your own conceit?
?? Cleobis and Biton! now I may
No doubt prefer you next, without reproach,
Their mother chanced on a festival day
To want two horses, for to draw her coach.
Them to supply the place, Love kindly raised,
Who drew her to that place of public mirth,
And both of them exceedingly were praised,
They for their piety, she for her birth.
This charitable office being ended,
Both in the Church were found dead the next morrow,
I think the gods who this good work commended,
Were loath to let them taste of farther sorrow.
For why? our lives are frail, do what we can,
And like the brittle glass, are but a glance,
And oft the heavens t'abate the height of man,
Do entersour our sweets with some sad chance.
Then from this Cathagorie am I secluded,
And is my state so vile unto thine eyes,
That as one of all happiness denuded,
Thou thus dost my felicity despise?
Or think thou me of judgment too remiss,
A miser that in misery remains,
The bastard child of Fortune, barred from bliss,
Whom heavens do hate, and all the world disdains?
Are base companions then to be compared
With one that may consume such in his wrath?
Who, as I please, do punish and reward,
Whose words, nay, even whose looks yield life or death.
Sir, be not thus commoo'ud without all reason,
Nor misconceive my meaning as you do,
Those that speak freely, have no mind of treason,
I cannot be your friend and flatter to.
Unto vs Graecians (Sir) the gods have granted
A moderate measure of a humble wit,
And in our Country there have never wanted
Some whom the world for wise men did admit.
And yet amongst vs all, the greatest number
Have here despaired of any perfect rest,
Though some a while in Fortunes bosom slumber,
And to world-blinded eyes seem to be blessed.
Yet over all mortal states, change so prevails,
We alterations daily do attend,
And hold this for a ground that never fails,
None should triumph in bliss before the end.
I may compare our state to table-playes,
Where by dumb judges matters are decided,
Their many doubts, the earnest mind dismays,
The dice must first cast well, then be well guided.
So all our days in doubt what thing may chance vs,
Time runs away, the breath of man doth chase it,
And when th'occasion coma's for to advance vs,
Amongst a thousand one can scarce embrace it.
When two by generous indignation moved,
Would try by sword, whose glory, fame will smother,
Whilst valour blindly by th'euent is proved,
And th'ones overthrow can only grace the other.
O what a fool his judgment will commit
To crown the one with undeserved applauses,
Where fortune is for to give sentence yet,
While bloody agents plead such doubtful causes.
This world, it is the field, where each man ventures,
And armed with reason, resolutely goes,
To fight against a thousand misadventures,
Both with external and internal foes.
And how can he the victors title gain,
That yet is busied with a doubtful fight,
Or he be happy that doth still remain
In Fortunes danger for a small delight.
Th'abortiue course of man away fast wears,
Course that consists of hours, hours of a day,
Day that giue's place to night, night full of fears,
Thus all things alter, still all things decay.
Who flourish now in peace, may fall in strife,
And have their fame with infamy suppressed;
The evening shew's the day, the death the life;
And many are fortunate, but few are blessed.
I see this Grecian of a simple spirit,
The which is capable of no great things,
Men but advance him far aboue his merit,
He can not comprehend the States of Kings.
Fame did so largely of his worth report,
It made me long to have him in my house,
But all my expectations are come short,
I think a Mountain hath brought forth a mouse.
THis king hath put his trust in trustless treasures,
Cloi'd with th'abundance of all worldy bliss,
And like a hooded hawk gorged with vain plea???sures
At random flies, and wots not where he is.
O how this makes me wonderfully sorry,
To see him keep this lifeless wealth so straightly,
Whilst witless worldlings wonder at his glory,
Which I not envy, no, but pity greatly!
Thus worms of th'earth, whose worst part doth prevail,
Love melting things, whose show the body fits,
Where Souls of clearer sight do never fail
To thesaurize the gifts of gallant wits.
Those worldly things do in this world decay,
Or at the least we leave them with our breath,
Whereas the other makes vs live foray,
So differ they as far as life and death.
And yet what wonder though that he be thus,
Whose knowledge clouded is with prosperous winds,
Though this indeed seem somewhat strange to vs,
Who have with learning purifide our minds.
Was he not borne heir of a mighty State?
And used with Fortunes smiles, not feared for frowns,
Doth measure all things by his own conceit,
Th'infirmitie that fatal is to Crowns:
He hath been from his infancy addicted
To all the pompous shows wealth could devise,
And still entreated, never contradicted,
Now doth all liberty of speech despise.
Though I durst not so to his fight appear,
Whose corrupt judgment was from reason sweruing,
I grieved to see your entertainment here
So far inferior to your own deserving.
That divine Wisdom which the world admires,
And ravished with delight amazed hears,
Because it answered not his vain desires,
Did seem unsavoury to distempered ears:
Ears that are ever stopped to all discourses
Save such as enter fraughted with his praises,
He can love none but them that love his courses,
And thinks all fools that use not flattering phrases.
This wrecks the great, and makes the heavens despite them;
Let virtue spread forth all her heavenly powers,
If not in their own livery to delight them,
They will not deign her audience a few hours.
I care not Aesop how the King conceited
Of my frank speeches, which I ever use,
I came not here, till I was first entreated,
Nor being come, will I my name abuse:
Should I his poisonous Sycophants resemble,
A hateful thing to honest men that know it,
I would not for his Diadem dissemble,
What the hart thinks, the tongue was made to show it.
And what, if his vain humour to have cherished,
I had my speeches for the purpose painted,
I had but gotten gifts that would have perished,
But nothing could have cleared my fame once tainted.
If I had show'n my self toward him officious,
It would in end have but procured my shame:
To have our virtue praised by one that's vicious,
This in effect is but a secret blame.
He thinks him simple, who his anger raises,
But better simply good, then doubly ill;
I never value my worth by others praises,
Nor by opinions do direct my will.
And it content's me more to be applauded
By one of judgment (though of mean degree)
Then by a Prince of princely parts defrauded,
Who hath more wealth, but not more wit then hee.
Who come to Court, must with Kings faults comport.
Who come to Court, should truth to Kings report.
A wise man at their imperfections winks.
An honest man will tell them what he thinks.
So should you loose your self, and them not win.
But I would bear no burden of their sin.
By this you should their indignation find.
Yet have the warrant of a worthy mind.
It would be long, ere you were thus preferred.
Then it should be the King not I that er'd.
They guerdon as they love, they love by guess.
They guerdon as they love, they love by guess.
Yet when I merit well, I care the less.
It's good to be still by the Prince approved.
It's better to be upright, though not loved.
But by this mean, all hope of Honour fails.
Yet honesty in end ever prevails.
I think they should excel as oft they do
All men in wit, that unto men give laws:
Kings are the Center of the Kingdom, to
The which each weighty thing by nature draws:
For as the mighty Rivers, little streams,
And all the liquid powers that rise or fall,
Do seek in sundry parts by several seames
To the maine Ocean that receiue's them all.
Who as he were but steward of those waters
Returne's them back by many secret veins,
And as the earth hath need of moisture, scatters
His humid treasures to refresh the plains.
So are Kings breasts the depth where daily flows
Clear streams of knowledge with rare treasures charged,
And thus continually their wisdom grows
By many helps that others want enlarged.
For those that have intelligence over all,
Do commonly communicate to Kings
All th'accidents of weight that chance to fall,
Their greatness to them this advantage brings.
They being jealous find out many drifts,
And by a long experience learn to scance them,
Then those whom Art or Nature lend's great gifts,
All come to Kings as who may best advance them.
No doubt, those Powers who put them in their places
To make their qualities with their charge even,
Do dote them with some supernatural graces,
Vice-gods on th'earth, great Lieutenants of heaven.
As you have shown, Kings have a good occasion
Whereby t'attaine unto the height of wit.
Which whosoever do embrace by good persuasion,
Are surely worthy on a Throne to sit.
But ah! those Rivers are not ever pure
The which through tainted channels whiles conveyed,
Vile flatt'ries poison rendered hath impure.
Thus are Kings hearts oft by their ears betrayed.
For impudent affronted persons dare
Court with vain words and detestable lies,
Whilst purer sprited men must stand afar,
The light is loathsome to diseased eyes.
But this doth ravish oft my soul with wonder,
Some that are wise, with flatt'ry can comport,
And though of all men best men's parts they ponder,
Yet ever entertain the baddest sort.
Is it that such men as those cannot control them,
Nor never cross their appetite in ought,
But for each purpose that they speak extol them,
Where better wits would argue as they thought,
Or as they would have none for to resist them,
So for th'aduancement of the worthiest sorry,
They will have none that may seem to assist them,
Lest any challenge interest in their glory.
This selfe-conceate is a most dangerous shelf,
Where many have made shipwreck unawares:
He that doth trust too much unto himself,
Can never fail to fall in many snares.
Of all that live, great Monarchs have most need
To balance all their actions, and their words,
And with advise in all things to proceed:
A faithful Counsel oft great good affords.
Lo, how th'inferior Spears their courses bend
There, whither the first Moouer doth them drive:
The Commons customs on the Prince depend,
His manners are the rules by which they live.
No man is only for himself brought forth,
And Kings for th'use of many are ordained,
They should like Suns, clear Kingdoms with their worth,
Whose life a pattern must be kept unstained.
Those that are virtuous have an ample field
T'expresse their wisdom and t'extend their merit,
Where mean men must to their misfortune yield,
Whilst lack of power doth burst a gallant spirit.
As precious Stones are th'ornaments of rings,
The Stone decors the ring, the ring the hand:
So Countries are conform unto their Kings,
The King decors the Court, the Court the Land.
And as a drop of poison spent alone,
Th'infected fountain doth with venom fill,
So mighty States may be orethrowne by one;
A vicious Prince is a contagious ill.
This is an easy thing, for vs to spy
And paint in the air the shadows of our minds,
And t'apprehend with th'intellectuall eye;
A blessing that no worldly Kingdom finds.
I grant imaginary grounds of ours
Will never move a world-bewitched Prince,
To disenchant himself, and spend some hours
His own designs of folly to convince.
Ere Croesus can refrain from this his fury,
He must forsake himself, and be renewed,
And in the Lethe of oblivion bury
The vanities that have his soul subdewd.
He first must his prerogatives al smother,
And be a man, a man to be controlled,
Then all his faults as they were in another
Like an unpartial Arbiter behold.
Could he cast off this veil of fond selfe-loue,
Through which all things not as they are he spies,
He would those wicked Parasites remove,
Vile instruments of shame that live by lies.
And th'onely means to force them to depart,
That he might judge more freely of his state,
Were to cast out the Idol of his hart
Which puffs him up with a pride-swolne conceit.
For foreign flatterers could not find access,
Were it not ouer-valuing his own worth too much,
He flattred first himself and thinks no less
But all their praises ought for to be such.
And when these hireling Sycophants have found
A Prince whose judgment selfe-conceat disarms,
They breach his weakest part, and bring to ground
The greatness of his State with flatteries charms.
Then bearing over his Passions once the sway,
Least by the better sort he be advised,
To wholesome counsel they close up the way,
And use all means t'haue honest men despised.
If you at Court to credit would arise,
You must not seek by truth t'acquire renown,
But learn t'applaud whiles what you most despise,
And smile in show, whilst in effect you frown.
From Court in time I will my self retire,
I find my humour is not fit for Court.
I'am none of those whom Croesus doth desire,
I can not always of his worth report.
O that he cannot see light Fortune flout him
While as he glories in this outward show,
Hedged in with greedy Harpies round about him,
That gape t'enrich themselves with his overthrow.
OF all the creatures below
We must call Man most miserable,
Who all his time is never able
T'attaine unto a true repose,
His very birth may well disclose
What miseries his bliss overthrow,
For being borne he can not know
Who to his state is friend or foe.
Nor how at first for to stand stable,
But even with cries and tears doth show
What dangers do his life enclose,
Whose griefs are sure, whose joys a fable?
Thus still his days in dolor so
He to all perils must expose,
And with vexation lives, and dies with wo,
Not knowing whence he come nor where to go.
While as he brookes this lowest place,
O how uncertain is his state,
Which governed by a secret fate
Is subject to inconstancy,
And ever changing as we see
Is still in toil, never in peace.
For if man prosper but a space,
With each good success too too bold,
And puffed up in his own conceit,
He but abuses Fortunes grace:
And when that with adversity
His pleasures come to end their date,
And with disasters are controlled,
Straight he begins for grief to die:
And still the top of some extreme doth hold,
Not suffering summers heate, nor winters cold.
His state doth in most danger stand
That most abounds in worldly things,
And soars too hie with Fortunes wings,
Which carry up aspiring minds
For to be beaten with all winds,
The course of such being rightly scand,
Whilst men can not themselves command
Transported with a pow'rles name,
Oft unexpected ruin brings.
W' have seen examples in this land,
How worldly bliss the senses blinds,
And on a reed vnsurely hings,
He that presumes upon the same
Hid poison in his pleasure finds,
And sailing rashly with the winds of fame,
Doth oft times sink into a sea of shame.
It's to be feared our King at last
Whilst he for nothing is afraid,
Be by prosperity betrayed,
For growing thus in greatness still,
And having worldly things at will,
He thinks though Time should all things wast,
Yet his estate shall ever last,
The wonder of th'inferiour round,
And in his own conceit hath said,
No course of heaven his state can cast,
Nor make his success to be ill;
If Fortune once those thoughts t'obbraid
Will have our King to be vn-cround,
She may that mind with horror fill,
And in an instant utterly confound
The state, that stands upon so slipprie ground,
When such a Monarchs mind is bent
To follow most the most unwise,
Who can their folly disaguise
With sugared speeches poisonous baits,
The secret canker of great states,
From which at first few disassent,
The which at last all do repent,
While as repenting lust must go,
When Kings begin for to despise
Of honest men the good intent,
Who to assure their Sovereigns seats,
Would fine in time some help devise,
And would cut off all cause of wo,
Yet can not second their conceits,
These dreadful Comets commonly forgo
The Kings destruction that's miscarried so.
WHat uncouth fancies do affright my soul,
And have captived it to a thousand fears?
Strange cares suggesting grief my joys control,
My mind some coming evil charactred bears,
And credulous suspicion too too wise,
To fortify my fears doth means invent,
Whilst sudden terrors do my sprite surprise,
An ominous presage of some bad event.
I think the soul come of immortal brood
As being partner of a divine power
Hath a fore-knowledge both of evil and good,
Although she can not fly a fatal hour.
Though with this mortal veil being made half blind,
She can not soar outright with her own wings,
Yet she communicates unto the mind
In cloudy dreams and mysteries strange things.
Th'imagination wonderful in force
Of foils the judgment with confusion so,
That presupposing all things to be worse
Then they fall forth, we double our own wo.
For as the shadow seems more monstrous still
Then doth the substance whence it hath the being,
So th'apprehension of approaching ill
Seems greater then it self, whilst fears are lying.
This alteration too seems more then strange,
Which at an instant hath ore-whelm'd my senses,
I see (more then I thought) all states may change,
Against the heaven th'earth can find no defences.
My soul her wonted pleasure else is loathing,
This hath indeed so deep impression left,
A dream, a fantasy, a shadow, nothing
Hath all my mirth even in a moment reft.
Whence (mighty Sovereign) can this change proceed,
That doth obscure the rays of princely grace,
Those that are schooled in wo may clearly reed,
A mighty passion written in your face.
And if a stranger may presume so far,
I would the copy of your passions borrow,
I else conjecture in what state you are,
Taught by a secret sympathy in sorrow.
Two strings in divers Lutes set in accord,
(Although th'one be but touched) together sound,
Even so souls tuned to grief the like afford,
And other with a mutual motion wound.
No doubt but it disburdens much the mind,
A Secretary in distress to have,
Who by his own another grief can find,
Where glad minds scorn what they can not conceive.
And I (Adrastus) would the cause declare
With which I so torment my self in vain,
O but I blush t'vnfold my foolish care,
It's but th'illusion of a drowsy brain.
According to the bodies constitution,
The soul by night with fancies is afflicted,
Or by these thoughts continual revolution,
To which by day the mind is most addicted.
Now whilst the Sun did peep through Thetis bower,
And on the beauties of Aurora gazed,
Out of my body spoiled of moving power,
All faculties of life dull sleep had razed,
While as the sprite more powerful then ever
Since least impeached with this earthly part
The verity from lies could best dissever
Hid mysteries vnclouding to the hart.
I only have two sons, and th'one you see
The sign of Natures indignation bears,
And from his birth day domme is dead to me,
Since he can power no pleasure in my ears.
The other Atis all my life's delight,
In whom the treasures of my soul are kept,
I thought (vain be my thought) in the twie-light
I wot not whether yet I walked or slept.
Whilst he was sporting void of worldly cares,
Not in a lists belonging to his merits,
A pointed tool of iron fell unawares,
And pierced his temples, and expelled his spirits.
Whilst the pale carcase seemed t'vpbraid mine eyes,
The horror of the sight my sense resold,
Which when I think of, yet my comfort dyes,
Such an exceeding fear my spirit appald.
This hath me moved, it touched my state so nearly,
To match my son in marriage at this time
With beauteous Caelia whom he loved most dearly,
That both might reap the pleasure of their prime.
And if the heavens his o'rethrow have decreed
By destiny that can not be revoked,
So shall we have behind some of his seed,
Ere in his blossom all our hopes be choked.
Thus ere his soul lodge in the lightless shade,
T'haue of his race twill mitigate my mind,
I can not hold him altogether dead,
That leaves his Image in some one behind.
And for the time we do all that seems best
For to prevent those but surmised annoys,
Yet for all this my mind hath never rest,
Some secret terror still disturbs my joys.
Ah Sir! if but th'imagind evil of this
Hath plunged your soul in such a gulf of grief,
Unhappy I who wail a thing that is,
And have not means to hope for no relief.
If all these dreadful fancies took effect
(Which heavy chance th'almightie Jove withhold)
It could not be compared in no respect
With those misfortunes that my state enfold.
For when your son fell by another hand,
You should but wail his death, and not your crime,
The heavens of me my brothers blood demand,
His fate, my fault, morn must I all my time.
In what strange form could this disaster fall,
That is th'occasion of so great distress,
Tell on at length th'originall of all,
To hear of greater grief t'will make mine less.
I have concealed my sorrows still till now,
As too offensive food for dainty ears,
Yet since of such a subject you allow,
Isle tell a tale that may move stones to tears.
My Father of the Phrigian Princes come,
Had in my growing age a tender care,
That all my education might become
One whom he might for mighty hopes prepare:
As yet four lusters scarcely had begun
For to discern my sex with downy cheeks,
When I into that Labyrinth was run,
Whence back in vain the straying entrer sheekes.
I loved, O fatal love! unlovely fate,
The virtuously fair, yet fairest Dame
That ever was enshrined in souls conceit,
Or gave a ditty to the sounds of fame.
Straight were my fancies to her beauties tied,
None can paint passions but in feeling minds,
I burned, freest, hopd, dispaird, and liud, and dyed,
My actions changed as oft as the Autumns winds.
Yet after many doubtful hopes and fears
That I attained the height of my desires,
She had subscribed a truce unto my tears,
And tempered with encountering flames my fires.
For as she was the most affected Saint,
Whose image was erected in my thought,
She had compassion too of my complaint,
And to acquit my firm affection sought.
Thus whilst I triumph in mine own conceit,
As one whose love his Lady did prefer,
I was corriuald (O unhappy fate!)
By one who loved, but was not loved by her.
He looking as I looked, saw what I saw,
Saw Natures wonder, and the worlds delight:
And as a blind god blind guide did him draw
Still like a lizard lived but by her sight.
Then strait he strives the Jewel for to won,
Whose unstained worth he rates aboue his breath,
He hates the light that comes not from my Sun,
And thinks to live without her worse then death.
And this affection favoured was by Fortune
Which seemed to ratify his high reared hopes,
The Nymph her parents daily did importune,
For to confine his flying fancies scopes.
Now judge if that my miseries were rife,
Who threatened thus with eminent mishap,
Was like to lose a dearer thing then life,
Whilst others strived my treasure to entrap.
The man that sought my joys to undermine,
I could not wish for this t'haue him overthrown,
Nor blame the sprite that sympathised with mine,
I envied not his hap, but wailed mine own.
Now in my breast a battle did begin,
Which forced my soul with inward wounds to bleed,
Some fancies feared to what his love might win,
And possibility for to come speed.
Then others called her constancy to mind,
Which would not yield although she were invaded,
Yet forced to fear the frailty of her kind.
A woman that hath ears may be persuaded.
Thus tossed with doubts into a deep of wo,
Which with suspicion had my joys supplanted,
I blamed the thoughts that durst accuse her so,
As virtues pattern had one virtue wanted.
As I concluded, so it come to pass,
Th'affliction served for fuel to affection,
For she who th'ornament of women was,
Would never wrong her worth with a defection.
When in my absence they had oft assayed
To have me from her memory removed,
The Sun burn's hottest when his beams are stayed,
The more that they would let, the more she loved.
And finding that delay no end affords,
And that fair generals are th'abusers Art,
She did repell him with disdainful words
To raze all thought of her out of his heart.
Love is a joy that upon pain depends,
A drop of sweet drowned in a sea of sours,
What Folly doth begin, oft Fury ends,
They hate for ever, that have loved for hours.
When all his arguments proved of no force,
Strait with disdain his soul in secret bur'nd,
And what he thought was evil, to make far worse,
He unto furor all his favour turned.
As he extremely loved, far more he hated,
And must of many means how to annoy her,
Which was the best a long time he debated,
To see her dead, or to see me enjoy her.
What? saith he when he first had must a space,
So hard it is to quench a great affection:
Shall I disfigure that angelike face,
And make the world ecclypsde of all perfection?
Shall she by me be to confusion brought,
To whom I vows and prayers did impart,
To whom I sacrificed my secret thought,
And on her beauties altar burned my hart?
Or shall I see her in another power,
And in his bosom lie t'vpbraid my loss,
Whilst both with scornful smiles then death more sour,
To point me out for sport report my cross?
That sight which sometime did me sweetly charm,
Should it become a cause of grief to me?
No, none that liue's, shall glory in my harm,
Since she will not be mine, she shall not be.
Th'unlouing Lover having vowed her death,
Did with a cup of poison drown my joys.
The fairest body from the sweetest breath
Was parted thus, (O Ocean of annoys!)
That Monster Fame, whose many mouths and ears
Must know, but not conceal a rare thing long,
And prodigal of ill, most chiefly bears
The worst news first, informed me of this wrong.
For neighbouring near the most unhappy part
That had been spoiled of such a beeauteous guest,
No sooner had death seazde on the chaste hart
Then sorrow on my ears to rob my rest.
How the sad news first sounded in my soul,
I will not weary you with long laments,
Rage did the outward signs of grief control;
When great winds blow the fire, the smoke worst vents.
Whilst generous disdain disguised my grief,
(As one transported with a mighty rage)
I ran unto the Theater of mischief,
A tragic Actor for a bloody stage.
For I was come no sooner to the place
Whereas I thought the Murderer to have found,
But I re'ncountred (O unhappy case)
Too dear a friend to catch an enemies wound.
Ah passions! dim'd mine eyes, wrath led my hand,
I was no more my self, sorrow had kilt me,
The first (t'was night) that did before me stand,
I fiercely did pursue, as Furor willed me.
And as it chanced, ere one could speak a word,
I filled his bosom with a luke warm flood,
And in his kind breast drowned the cruel sword,
That in another body drank my blood.
When as a Torch had partly robbed the night,
Proud of supposed revenge (ah bitter gain)
I saw, I knew, black knowledge, cruel sight,
T'was mine own brother that my self had slain.
O bitter loss that nothing can repair!
My soul at once with all woes army wounded,
Grief, rage, spite, shame, amazement and despair,
Gauld, tossed, burned, dashed, astonished, and confounded.
The thought of my offence torments me most,
Yet am I whiles by my Loves verdict cleansde,
And whiles my brothers violated ghost
By dreadful dreams doth boast to be revenged.
Now whilst this great disaster did occur,
What came of him who was the cause of all?
He having heard this lamentable stir,
Whom selfe-accusing thoughts did guilty call,
Srait stricken with a wonderful remorse,
I wot not whether fear or pity moved him,
If not t'ore-liue her death, or dreading worse,
He killed himself, his conscience so disproou'd him.
I grant the manner of so rare mischances
Would force compossion from your greatest foe,
Where all the griefe-begetting circumstances
Doe join to make a harmony in woe.
But natural love doth at our self begin,
It moos far more to feel then hear mishaps,
The perturbation that my sprite is in,
Me in a maze of miscontentments wraps.
We should such past misfortunes pretermit,
At least no more immoderately lament them,
And as for those which are but coming yet,
Use ordinary means for to prevent them.
No wonder Sir, although you take great care,
Lest all your hopes in Atis person perish.
I will by all the means I may, prepare
To save his youth, that he my age may cherish.
If it be possible for mortal states
To strive against the Stars and be more strong,
I'll unarm Fortune, and resist the fates,
By barring both all means to do me wrong.
I have commanded under pain of death,
That no such weapon be within my walls,
As I supposed should have abridged his breath,
T'eschew such sudden evil as rashly falls.
He shall go rarely to the fields, and then
With chosen bands be guarded all the time:
Lo where he communes with some countrymen,
We will go try what they would have of him.
Lend (Sir) a willing ear to humble words,
Let not our baseness bar vs from your grace,
Which still it self alike to all affords
Who bless their sight with that Maiestike face.
My Sovereign all his subjects well remembers,
As vile as our estate is thought of now
You are our head, and we are of your members,
And you must care for vs, we care for you.
Our poverty to vs is no reproach,
Which th'innocencie of our mind adorn's,
We never on our neighbours bounds encroach,
But by our labours live midst many thorns.
And ever busied for the Countries good,
We have no time to muse of vain conceits,
Yet earning with continual toil our food
We entertain the pomp of prouder States.
And (Sir) conceive not of our meaning ill,
That thus dare speak so freely as we do,
Whilst mediators do dilate our will
They wrest it as they will, and wrack vs too.
To countenance such as vs you need not shun,
A great man too well graced may do more harm:
And it is no stain unto the glorious Sun,
Though oft his beams an abject object warm.
Be not discouraged by your base estate,
Ye are my people, and I'll hear your plaint,
A King must care for all, both small and great,
And for to help th'afflicted never faint.
The Sceptre such as these should chiefly shroud,
Not cottages, but Castles spoil the Land,
T'aduance the humble and t'abate the proud;
This is a Virtue that makes Kings to stand.
Sir, our estate some speedy help requires,
In Misia near unto the famous Mountain
Of great Olimpus that the World admires,
There haunt's a Boar by Dianaes Fountain
Of a big body, and a hideous form,
His some Jaw with tusks like Javelins strikes,
And all parts in deformity conform,
His back hath bristles like to iron Pikes.
This Monster of Nature, wonder of Men,
The Forests tyrant, and the Countries terror,
Tears all to death, and draws them to his Den,
That chance into his way by fatal error.
Whilst tender-hearted Mothers do bewail
The goared Infants toiling in their blood,
Th'abhominable beast them doth assail,
And in his bowels buries both for food.
Then when we fly the field where he soiournes,
To have his hunger or his rage allayed,
He wastes the fruits, and ruins all the corns,
Thus the poor husbands hopes are all betrayed.
Ere this, of true Repose we were the types,
And pastur'd on each plain our fleecie flocks,
And made a consort of our warbling pypes,
With moving christals th'issue of the rocks.
And sometime to refresh vs after travel,
With flowery garlands shielded from Sunne-beames
We gazed upon Pactolus golden gravel,
Glassd, bathd, and quenched our thirst with his pure streams:
Whilst we preferred, the River seemed amazed,
Unto his golden bed, his grassy bank,
And lay and looked whereas our cattle grazd,
Without all envy of a greater rank.
That to repress oppression you take care,
This rest of ours is an effectual token,
Your Laws like Spiders webs do not ensnare
The feeble flies, and by the Bees are broken.
For we by them are fenced from great men's pride,
The Heavens perpetuate your prosperous reign,
And suffer not this savage Boar t'abide,
To turn that ease which men have spared to pain.
What would ye then, that should be done by me?
For to repay your loss; repair this wrong.
We crave none of your wealth, yet wish to see
This Boar be-blood the staff of the most strong:
Let valorous Atis worthily your son,
Backed with the best of all the Lidian Youth,
Go to the fields before the rising Sun
Quench with the mornings tears his mid-dayes drouth,
And we shall lead them crowned with laurel forth,
Where in a circuit small, yet a large Theater
For men to make a trial of their worth
This Monster stays: th'earth never nursed a greater.
So shall we both reap profit, and they pleasure,
Which may be brought to pass without great obstacle,
By making this waster of the worlds treasure,
Of a horrid sight, a delightful spectacle.
I may not spare my Son for a respect,
Which is not needful now for to be known,
But I'll send others for the same effect,
That this pestiferous Beast may be o'rethrowne.
Th'ostentiue gallants that our Grace attend,
And wait th'occasion but t'aduance their strength,
Against the Boar shall all their forces bend,
With hounds and darts still till he fall at length.
I swear this Monster shall when he is dead,
A memorable monument remain,
To Deans Church I'll consecrate his head,
The Virgin-goddesse darts no shaft in vain.
Ah wherein Father have I thus offended!
Or what vile sign of a degenerd mind
Have you remarked in me that ever tended
To the reproach of our Imperial kind?
That of this praise you would give me no part,
But bar me from a famous enterprise,
As one unworthy for to weeld a dart:
Who still in vile repose inglorious lies,
Lies like a wanton with vain thoughts bewitched,
Who spoiled of force effeminately lives,
A Peacock but with painted pens enriched,
Yet poor in all the parts that Glory gives.
What glory gives those glorious Styles to me
Which by succession fall, not by desert,
Should but my Fame with borrowd feathers flee;
For come of Kings a kingdom is my part.
Who only by his Birth advancement claims,
Like a base bastard doth his birth-right blote,
I will not beg my worth from dead men's names,
Nor conquer Credit only by my Cote.
What comforts this to brooke th'Imperiall seat,
And all the bliss that Majesty impartes?
If those whom only we exceed in State,
Be our Superiors in far better parts.
More then a Crown true Worth is to be valued,
Th'one Fortunes gift, and the other our own merit,
By which oft times th'afflicted Mind is salved,
When Fortune takes what we by her inherit.
I see what brave Desires boyle in thy Soul,
And make thee with immortal wings to flee,
This hie-bent courage, nothing can control,
All Lidia is not large euough for thee.
Go, seek an Empire equal with thy mind,
No common limits can confine thy thought;
But while a full perfection thou would find,
I fear thy fall turn all our hopes to nought.
And pardon me, (dear Son) it's a great Love
That makes me watch so warily o'er thy ways,
Th'affection of a Father what may move,
Whom such an eminent danger not dismays?
The Heavens of late aduertisde me by Dream,
That some sad fortune did attend thy Youth,
New Meteors and strange Stars through th'aire still stream,
Which are as Oracles of Ioues own mouth.
This was the cause that hastened Vs so much
To have thee bound to Himens hallowed Law,
This was the cause that all our care was such,
Out of our sight all weapons to withdraw.
Scorn not th'amazing Comets that thou notes,
The Stars to mortal States have terms prefixed,
And think not only that my love but dotes,
For if thou fall, my fate with thine is mixed.
Would God I had some means once ere my death
To satisfy that infinite desert;
Which I shall hold so long as I have breath,
Deep registered with reverence in my hart.
Yet (Sir) we see it is a natural thing
For too excessive love t'engender fears,
A sport like this can no great peril bring
Where either all delights the eyes or th'eares.
If from my former deeds I now should shrink,
As void of virtue to soft pleasure thrall,
Of your two Sons what might your subjects think,
Th'one wanting but one sense, and the other all.
What fancies might my late spousd love possess,
To see her husband hateful in their sights?
And from the height of Honour to digress,
To womanise with courtly vain delights:
Though women love t'haue men at their devotion,
They hate base minds that hatch no noble motion.
Well, well, my Son, I see thou must prevail,
Go follow forth the chase, use thine own will,
Yet stay, or let my words thus much avail,
Walk warily now t'eschue this threatened ill.
Thy haughty sprite t'attempt all hazards bent,
I fear transport thee to a fatal strife,
(God grant I be deceived) yet take good tent,
Thy ouer-franke courage may betray thy life.
And (dear Adrastus,) I must let him know
What benefits I have bestowed on thee,
Not to upbraid thee, no, but for to show
How I may trust thee best that's bound to me.
When thou from Phrigia come defiled with blood,
And a fraternal violated love:
When in a most extreme estate thou stood,
Chased from thy fathers face, cursed from aboue.
Thou found me friendly, and my Court thy rest,
A Sanctuary sacred for thy safety,
Where thou wast entertained as pleased thee best,
I think those dangers escaped should make thee crafty.
Yet though I graced thee erst, t'was but a sign
Of a heroic mind that helps the wretched:
But in thy hands my soul isle now consign,
And give a proof of love not to be matched.
Behold how Atis of our age the shield,
Whose harm as you have heard I feared ere now,
Is to go take his pastime in the field,
And with his custody isle credit you.
I must my friend even fervently exhort,
Wait on my son, remember of my dream,
This dangerously delectable sport,
Doth make me fear the grief exceed the game.
I never shall those courtesies neglect,
It irkes me not to think nor hear the same:
For while this sprite these members doth direct,
All shall concur to celebrate your fame.
If it were your will I would not hence depart,
Who all such motives unto mirth abhor,
But with my passions here, retired apart,
Would wail wo past and shun all cause of more.
For if I strive t'abandon my annoys,
I fear my fellowship infect with woe:
Those that would recreate themselves with joys,
Still strange mishaps attend me where I go.
Yet since you will commit this charge to me,
Isle use all means that you may not repent you,
At lest all my defects faith shall supply,
I covet nothing more then to content you.
Now for to see this monsters ugly shape,
With an inflamed desire my thoughts do burn,
And Father, be not feared for no mishap,
I hope soon, and victorious to return.
Return? and whither love? O deadly word!
That doth import thy parting from my sight,
I heard thee name, mishap, ah my dear Lord!
Should such strict limits bound so large delight?
O cruel resolution, unkind dealing,
And can thou condescend to leave me so?
Or from my presence privily thus stealing,
Think thou to rob a portion of my wo?
This might indeed to thee yield some relief,
To have thy ears not wounded with my moan,
But would wound me with a continual grief.
To fear all things where I should fear but one.
Desist in time from this intended strife,
With which thy thoughts have vnaduisdlie entered,
Remember I have interest in thy life,
Which I consent not to be thus aduentred.
Hast thou not given a proof in thy greene prime,
That may content the most ambitious hopes,
Whilst Atis was his own, O then t'was time
To follow fancies vnconfined scopes.
Thy self then only camped in Fortunes bounds,
Thou dost endanger Caelia likewise now,
You sigh her breath, she suffer's in your wounds:
You live in her, and she must dye in you.
Life of my soul, how do such broken speeches
From confused passions thus abruptly rise?
I know my love, thy love my mind o're-reaches,
Affection schooled with fears is too too wise.
I go o're-thwart the fields for sport to range,
Thy sighs do but my soul with sorrow fill,
And pardon (dear) I find this wondrous strange,
Thou never did till now resist my will.
If I trespass in aught against my duty,
Which makes thee thus my faith for to mistrust,
Mistrust not yet the chains of thine own beauty,
Which bind all my desires and so they must.
Are we not now made one such fears overcome,
Though I would fly my self my self do fetter,
And if that I would fly, from whom? to whom?
I can love none so well, none loves me better.
Have pity of those peerless (sweet eyes souls pleasures)
Lest they presage what thou would not have done,
The heavens had not given me those precious treasures
Of such perfections to be spoiled so soon.
THose that domino aboue,
High presidents of heaven,
By whom all things do move
As they have order given:
What worldling can arise
Against them to rapine?
Whilst castel'd in the skies
With providence divine
They force th'inferior round
Their judgements to confess,
And in their wrath confound
Proud mortals that transgress
The covenant they made
With Nature in heavens stead.
Base brood of earth, vain man,
Why bragst thou of thy might?
The heavens thy courses scan,
Thou walkst still in their sight,
Ere thou wast borne, thy deeds
Their registers dilate,
And think that none exceeds
The compass of his fate.
What heavens would have thee to
Though they thy ways abhor,
That thou of force must do,
And thou may do no more.
This reason would fulfil,
Their work should serve their will.
Are we not heirs of death,
In whom there is no trust,
Who tossed with circling breath,
Are but a dram of dust?
Yet fools when as we err
And do th'heauens wrath contract,
If they a while defer
A just revenge t'exact,
Pride in our bosom creeps,
And mis-informes vs thus,
That the Eternal sleeps,
Or takes no care of vs.
No, the eye of heaven beholds
All what our hart enfolds.
The gods digest no crime
Though they continue long,
And in th'offenders time
Seem to neglect their wrong,
Till others of their race
Fill up the cup of wrath,
Whom ruin and disgrace
Long time attended hath,
And Giges fault we fear
To Croesus charge be laid,
Which love will not forbear
Though it be long delayed:
For ?? sometime the gods
Must plague sin with sharp rods.
And lo how Croesus still
Tormented in his mind,
Like a reed on a hill,
Is shivering with each wind.
Each step a terror brings,
Dreams do by night afflict him,
And by day many things,
All his thoughts do convict him:
He his star would control,
This makes evil not the worst
Whilst he wounds his own soul
With th'apprehension frist:
Man may his fate foresee,
But not shun heavens decree.
CAn heaven behold hands stained with blood ofttimes,
And to the Stigian streams not headlongs hurled?
Can th'earth support one burdened with such crimes,
As may provoke the wrath of all the world?
Why sends not Jove t'haue my cursed course confined,
A death-denouncing flash of rumbling thunder,
Or a tempestuous terrour-breeding wind,
With violence to tear me all asunder.
What unknown corner from the world removed
T'inhabit in th'horizon of despair
Shall I go now possess and be approved
By monsters like my self that hate repair.
Isle go indeed whom all the world detests,
Who have no interest in the fields of bliss,
And barbarize among the barbarous beasts,
Where Tigers rage, Toads spue, and Serpents hiss.
Yet though both th'Artike and Antartike Pole
I should overpass, and find th'vnpeopled zones,
A wilderness where nought were to control
My damnable cruelties but trees and stones:
Yet of my deeds which all the world do tell,
All this could not deface th'infamous scroll,
Within my breast I bear about my hell,
And can not scope the horrors of my soul.
Those fearful monsters of confused aspects,
Chimera, Gorgon, Hydra, hellish apes,
Which in the world wrought wonderful effects,
And borrowed from the infernal shades their shapes.
Their devilish forms that did the world amaze,
Not half so monstrous as my self I find,
When on mine own deformities I gaze,
In the black depth of a polluted mind.
No, but my mind untainted still remains,
My thoughts in this dilict have had no part,
Which accidentally this foul fact staines,
My hands had no commission of my hart.
Yet, whether it was fortune or my fate,
Or some hell-hag that did direct my arm,
I quaild the Lidians hopes abortive date,
And am the instrument of all their harm.
Then swelling mountains come and fall upon me,
Your height may hide me from the wrath of heaven:
But this needs not, my fault hath else undone me,
No torment can with my offence be even.
Ah of what desert shall I now make choice,
T'auoid the countenance of an angry King?
I know th'auenging sword of Croesus voice,
To wound my soul hostess of rebukes doth bring.
No, th'obiect of distress isle stand alone,
A memorable monster of mishap,
For though Pandoraes plagues were poured in one,
All were too few so vile a wretch t'entrap.
O how the King is moved with Atis death,
His face th'impression of a passion bears
With bended eyes, crostarmes, and quivering breath,
His princely robe he desperately tears.
Lo, with a silent pittie-pleading look,
Which shows with sorrow mixed a high disdeine,
He whilst his soul seems to dissolve in smoke,
Whiles eyes the corps whiles him by whom it is slain.
Thou ruthless Tyrant, ruin of my bliss,
And did thou so disguise thy devilish nature
To recompense my courtesies with this?
Ah cruel wretch, abominable creature.
Thy Tigrish mind who could have well detected?
In mortal breasts so great barbarity?
What forward sprite could have such spite suspected?
In hospitality hostility?
Did I revive thee when thy hopes were dead,
When as thy life thy parents had not spared?
And having heaped such favours on thy head,
Is this? Is this?
he would say the reward.
I grant what you allege, and more, is true,
I have unto the height of hatred run,
A blood-staind Wretch, not worthy for to view
The rolling Circles, nor the ray Sun.
I'll never strive to cloak my foul abuses,
So for to make my forfeit to seem less,
And paint my fault with imperfect excuses,
It is greater far then words can well express.
Nor go I thus to aggravate my crime,
And damn my self to be absolved by others;
No, no, such Rhetoric comes out of time,
I'll not survive his death, as erst my brothers.
Whose unkind fall if I had followed straight,
As then indeed I dyed to all delight,
I had not groaned charged with this inward weight,
But slept with shadows in eternal night.
Yet must I die at last, though late grown wise,
This in my mind most discontentment breeds,
A thousand torturing deaths cannot suffice
To plague condignly for so heinous deeds.
Come, cause him, who the Spritelesse body buries,
Upon the Tomb to sacrifice my blood,
No fitter offering for the infernal Furies
Then one, in whom they reigned while as he stood.
In whom they oft infused their devilish rage,
And in my bosom all their Serpents nestled,
So that this hellish horror to assuage,
I all my days have with disasters wrestled.
I find Adrastus, when I deeply scaunce
Th'effectuall motives of this fatal cross,
That not thy malice, but mine own mischance
Hath been th'occasion of our bitter loss.
Whilst barely with a superficial wit,
We weigh the out-side of such strange events,
If but the mediate means our judgements hit,
We search not the first cause, this much contents.
When such prodigious accidents fall out,
Though they amaze our minds, and so they must,
The ground of all comes from our self no doubt,
Ah! man hath sinned, the heavens are always just.
Now when I search the secrets of my soul,
And rip the corners of my corrupt mind,
Mark of my former life th'offenciue scroll,
And do examine how I was inclined,
O then I see the angry hosts of heaven
Come girt with flames to plague for my offences,
Which once no doubt will with the world be even,
And judge our thoughts, words, acts, and vain pretences.
Son, it is my pride that hath procured thy fall,
I'm guilty of thy blood, I gave the wound
Which was thy death, and whose remembrance shall
My life each day with many deaths confound.
Then unjust Stars, your statutes I contemn;
O! if I were confronted with the gods,
I would their partial providence condemn,
That in such sort do exercise their rods.
Ah! my Sons death doth show their judgment nought,
What could he perpetrate against such Powers?
Should he have suffered for his Fathers fault?
Whom without cause their wrong-spent wrath devours.
Now all the world those deities may despise,
Which plague the guiltless, and the guilty spare:
Cease hapless man t'outrage thy self thus ways;
I pardon thee, and pity thy despair.
O cruel judgment of a rigorous fate!
Must I o're-liue my self t'entombe my Fame?
All things that I behold upbraid my state;
Too many monuments of one mans shame.
All (and no more then I) my deeds detest,
Yet some not find a friend, I find no foe
To rid the world of such a dangerous pest,
Borne but to be an instrument of woe.
I know what makes all worthy minds refrain
The sword against a Catife for to stretch,
They this opprobrious office do disdain,
To be the Deaths-men of so base a wretch.
Or must I yet a fouler fact commit,
And fill the world with th'horrour of my name?
Is there some new disaster resting yet,
And other funerals famous by my shame?
Or would some bastard thought lifes cause debate,
That in the blasted field of comfort gleanes,
No, no, in spite of heaven I'll force my fate,
One that's resolved to die, cannot want means.
Proud tyrant Death, and must thou make it strange?
Tinvolue my wearied soul in further strife,
Unless my courage with my fortune change,
I can appoint a Period to my life.
But this (Ay me) all hope of help devours,
What gains my soul by death in those sad times?
If potent still in all her wonted powers
She must remember of my odious crimes.
What though vnbodied she the world forsake?
Yet cannot from her conscience be divorced,
It will but vex her at the shadowy Lake,
Till even to groan the god of ghosts be forced.
But welcome death, and O would God I had
Less famous or more fortunately lived!
Then had I never shown my self so mad
T'haue only been by infamy survived.
Ah! have I lived to see my Lady die,
And die for me, for me not worth so much;
Ah! have I lived (unnatural man) to be
My Brothers death, whose love to me was such.
Ah! have I lived, with mine own hands to kill
A gallant Prince committed to my charge,
And do I gaze on the dead body still,
And in his Fathers sight my shame enlarge.
Ah! have I lived (O execrable Monster)
To be accounted of a devilish nature,
And even by them that best my actions construe,
For to be called (and justly called) a Traitor.
Yet with my blood this stain away I'll wash,
And lest my memory make th'earth detracted,
Let my name perish in my bodies ash,
And all my life be as a thought vnacted.
Brave Atis, now I come to plead for grace,
Although thou frown on my affrighted ghost,
And to revenge thy wrong this wound embrace;
Thus, thus, I toil t'attaine the Stygian coast.
The man himself doth desperately wound,
With leaden lights, weak legs, and head declined,
The body in disdain doth beat the ground,
That of his members one hath proved unkind:
The fainting hand falls trembling from the sword
With this micidiall blow for shame grown red,
Which strait the blood pursues with vengeance stored
To drown the same with the same floods it shed.
Who of those parties can the combat show,
Where both but one, one both, struck and sustained,
Or who shall triumph for this strange ore'throw
Whereas the Victor lost, the Vanquished gained.
Cursed eyes, what sudden change hath drowned your lights,
And made your mirthful objects mournful now?
Ye that were still inurde to stately sights
Since seated under an Imperial brow.
O'reclouded now with vapours of my cares,
Are low thrown down unto a hell of grief,
And have no prospect but my souls despairs,
The sad beholders of a rare mischief.
O dead Adrastus I absolve thy ghost,
Whose hand some secret destiny did charm,
Thou hated by the Heavens, were to thy cost
An accidental Actor of our harm.
No doubt some angry God hath laid this snare,
And whilst thy purpose was the Boar to kill,
Did intercept thy shaft amidst the air,
And threw it at my Son against thy will.
Ah Son! must I be witness of thy death,
Who view thee thus with violence to bleed,
And yet want one on whom to power my wrath,
To take just vengeance for so vile a deed?
This wretch whose guiltless mind hath cleared his hand
Grieved for his error, lo, vnforcd doth fall,
And not as one that did in danger stand,
For he lived still till I forgave him all.
Thus have I but the heavens on whom I may
Power forth the poison of my troubled spirit,
In my souls bitterness I'm forced to say,
This seconds not their custom and my merit.
WHy spend you (Sir) with sighs th'Imperious breath,
Which nought but words of Sovereignty should breed,
O weak revenge for one that's wronged by death,
To adorn his triumph with a mourning weed!
This pale-fac'd tyrant, author of our ill,
Who did, t'ecclypse our Joys, that black shaft borrow,
Should you frame Trophies to his Tigrish will,
And wear his livery, and succumb to sorrow?
No, though he might this outward bliss o're-throw,
And you save you of all that's yours might spoil,
Yet whilst of one that yields no sign you show,
You triumph still, and he receives the foil.
Th'o're-flowing humour that would drown your soul,
In baser breasts might better be excusde,
Who want the sprite their passions to control,
As from their birth still to subjection used.
But you, in whom high Thoughts have been innate,
To this decay how is your Virtue come?
I blush to see my Sovereign so abated,
And Majesty by misery overcome.
Nor are my words out of a rocky mind,
T'unnaturallize you, as not feeling smart,
No, none can bar a Prince from being kind,
Th'undoubted badge of an Heroic hart.
That supreme Power, by which great States do stand,
Should order but th'affection, not undo it
And I could wish you might your self command,
Which though you may not well, yet seem to doe it.
I will not now rehearse, t'enlarge my grief,
On what just reasons my laments are grounded,
But still will muse upon mine own mischief,
While as my soul a thousand ways is wounded.
What pensive pencil ever limm'd aright
The sad conceits of soule-consuming woe:
Ah! words are weak to show the swelling hight
Of th'inward anguish that o're-whelms me so.
Though many Monarchs jealously despise
The rising Sun that their declining staines;
And hate the Heir, who by their fall must rise,
As grieved to hear of death, or others reigns.
My love towards Atis otherwise appeared,
Whom, whilst for him I did my cares engage,
I as a Father loved, as King not feared,
The comfort, not th'encombrance of mine age.
And had thou Son, as reason would, survived me,
Who glauncd and vanished like a lightning-flash,
Then death of life could never have deprived me,
Whilst such a Phoenix had revived my ash.
Let not these woes eclipse your Virtues light.
Ah! rage and grief must once be at a hight.
Strive of your sorrows for to stop the source.
These salt eie-floods must flow &amp; have their course.
That is not kingly.
And yet it is kindly.
Where passions do domino they govern blindly.
Such woeful plaints cannot repair your State:
Th'infortunate at least may wail their Fate.
The meanest comfort can to a wretch return,
Is in calamine t'haue leave to morn.
What graue-browd Stoic void of all affections,
With teare-lesse eyes could that Youths death behold?
Though greene in years, yet ripe in all perfections,
A hoary judgment under lockes of gold.
No, no man lives but must lament to see
The worlds chief hope even in his blossom choked:
But men cannot control the Heavens decree:
And mischief done, can never be revoked.
Then let not this torment your mind no more,
This cross with you alike your Country bears,
If wailing could your ruined State restore,
Souls fraught with grief should sail in Seas of tears.
Lest all our comfort dash against one shelf,
And his untimely end occasion yours,
Have pity of your people, spare your self,
If not to your own use, yet unto ours.
When Sandanis, I first thy faith did find,
Thou dived so deeply in my bosorn then,
That since thou kept the key still of my mind,
And knew what I concealed from other men.
Behold, I go to open up to you
(Dear Treasurer of all my secrets still)
A mighty enterprise I mind for now:
A Physic in some sort t'asswage my ill.
Which may unto my soul yield some relief,
And make me to forgo sad thoughts content,
Or else acquire copartners in my grief,
If not for me, yet with me to lament.
This benefit must bind me with the rest,
To love your Majesty, and wish you well,
I'll give you my advise, and I protest,
That you take friendly what I freely tell.
Since that it hath not pleased the Divine powers,
That of my of-spring I might comfort claim,
Yet lest the ravenous course of flying hours
Should make a prey of my respected name,
I hope t'engender such a generous brood,
That the unborn shall know how I have lived,
And this no doubt would do my ghost great good,
To be by famous Victories revived.
I'll Eagle-like so are with Fems immortal wings,
Unless my hie-bent thoughts themselves deceive,
That having acted admirable things,
I may scorn death, and triumph o'er the grave.
Yet have I not so settled my conceit
That all opinions are to be despised,
Unfold your judgment touching my estate,
Take heed I'll tell you what I have devised.
Some Scithian Shepherd in a high disdain,
As I have heard rehearsed by true discourses,
To plague some of the Medes with endless pain,
Did entertain them with Thiestes courses.
And to content their more then Tigrish wishes,
They with the infants flesh the parents fed,
Who not suspecting such polluted dishes,
Did in their bowels bury whom they bred.
Then after this abominable crime,
They come unto my fathers famous court,
And working on th'aduantage of the time,
Did as they pleased of what was past report.
They showed what served to help, and hid the rest,
Whilst pity pleaded for afflictions part,
He noble-minded favouring the distressed,
Was won to them by this Sinonick art.
Oft Kings of Judges thence have parties gone,
Where both their ears were patent but to one.
Then Ciaxare Monarch of the Medes,
To prosecute those fugitives to death,
In indignation of my fathers deeds,
Did boast them both with all the words of wrath.
My father thinking that his court should be
A sanctuary for all supplicants,
Did levy men, that all the world might see
He helped the weak, and scorned the mighties vaunts.
Thus mortal wars on every side proclaimed,
With mutual damage did continue long,
Till both the armies by Bellona tamed,
Did irk t'auenge or to maintain a wrong.
It chanced whilst peace was at the highest dearth,
That all their forces furiously did fight,
A sudden darkness courtain'd up the earth,
And violently dispossessed the light.
I think for Phaeton the Sun looked sad,
And that the bloody objects that he saw
Did wound his memory, with grief gone mad,
He from the world his wagon did withdraw.
Yet Ignorance the mother of confusion,
With wresting natures course found cause of fears,
Which well edged on by wiser men's illusion,
Was cause of concord and of truce from tears.
Then straight there was a perfect peace begun,
And that it might more constantly endure,
Astiages the King of Medias son,
A marriage with my Sister did procure.
A deadly rancour reconciled again,
Must sealed with consanguinity remain.
He since his fathers age-worne course was ended.
Hath ruled his people free from blood or strife,
Till now a Viper of his loins descend,
Would by his ruin make himself a life.
I mean by Cirrus base Cambises brood,
Who by a Bitch nursed with the country swains,
Degener'd far from any princely blood,
The doggish nature of his nurse retains.
He come against his Grandfather to field,
And unexpected with a mighty power,
Overthrew his forces, forced himself to yield,
Who captive kept now waits for death each hour.
That you may see now what my interest is,
I made recital of this ruthful story,
Those circumstances show that shame of his
Tends to the derogation of our glory:
That any dare presume to trouble thus
One whom our kingdoms favour should defend,
In strict affinity combined with vs,
Yet not respected for so great a friend.
My ioylesse soul with this will be rejoiced,
Whilst I to war against that rebel go:
I hope that both shall know how they have choyc'd,
Th'one a kind friend, and the other a fearce foe.
Though Natures law you cared not to transgress,
And this your wronged ally would not repare,
Yet the regard t'a Monarch in distress,
Should move the mighty with a mutual care.
These terrors to that thunder in your ear,
I think the Lidians will not well allow,
For when the Cedar falls, the Oak may fear,
The Assirians ore-throw may astonish you.
And when we see our neighbours house afire,
Then we may judge our own to be in danger,
It's better first with others to conspire,
Or we be forced our selves t'inuade that stranger.
Ah this is but the out-side of your course,
A dangerous ambush by ambition planted,
There may come raging rivers from this source,
To drown your state whilst fancies are undaunted.
I know these new-borne monsters of your mind,
Have armed your ravished thoughts with fair conceits,
Yet may these wonders that you have divined,
Prove traitorous proiects painted for deceits.
And (pardon Sir) it is not good to be
Too rashly stout nor curiously wise,
Lest that you from that which is certain flee,
And not attain to that which you devise.
I grant indeed which very few shall know,
Though I design but to relieve my friend,
My thoughts are aimed (this unto you isle show,)
And not without great cause, t'a greater end.
You see how Fortune nought but change affects,
Some are reproached that others may be praisd,
And every age brings forth some strange effects,
Some must be ruined, others must be raised.
I doubt not you have heard who was the first
Whom fame for warring with the world revives,
Who had of sovereignty so great a thirst,
That it could not be quenched with thousands lives.
T'was he who first obtained the name of Jove,
Who was reputed for his glorious acts,
The most imperious of the powers aboue,
That vows and offerings of the world exacts.
He all his time could nought but terror breathe,
To make the world acquaint with war and dearth,
The chiefest sergeants deputed by death,
That made th'Assirians sovereigns of the earth.
Yet since his course the worlds first plague was past,
His successors who many ages reigned,
Made shipwreck of their Empire at the last,
And by the Medes were thrilled, scorned, and disdained.
This was the cause of that great kingdoms fall,
A King who could not judge of kingly treasures,
With loss of sceptre, honour, life and all,
Did buy his base delights and servile pleasures.
To that disastred Monarchies decay,
Th'aspiring Persians purpose to succeed,
But I intend to cross them by the way,
And quail their courage ere that they can speed.
The Persians once the Lidians force must prove,
And, O who knows but that it is ordained
At the Tribunal of the States aboue,
That I should reign where famous Ninus reigned.
This all the host of heaven ofttimes foretells,
To this the gods of Greece my mind have moved,
And he that in th'Arabian desert dwells,
By his response this enterprise approved.
Thus still in love with what we mind to do,
What we affect we fairest still conceive,
This feeds our humour whilst we labour, to
Seem full of wit our selves for to deceive.
You flatter so yourself, you can not spy
What secret danger this design doth bear,
But whilst I look with an indifferent eye
On your intentions, I find cause of fear.
You vnaduisdlie purpose to pursue
A barbarous people that are foes to peace,
Who but by rapine to their greatness grew,
And would for each light cause the wars embrace.
No dainty silks of the Assyrian dye,
Do deck their bodies to abase their minds,
But clothed with wild beasts skins they do defy
The force of Phoebus rays, and Eols winds.
They simply feed and are not grieved each day,
With stomachs cloyed decocting divers meates,
They fare not as they would, but as they may,
Of judgment sound not carried with conceits.
These uncorrupted customs that they hold,
Make all things easy that they feel no pain,
This cools the Summers heate, kills Winters cold,
This makes the Rivers dry, the Mountains plain.
Those whose ambition poverty did bound,
Of the delights of Lidia if they taste
Will have in hatred straight their barren ground,
And insolently all our treasures waste.
To govern such although that you prevail,
You shall but buy vexation with your blood,
And do your self and yours, if fortune fail,
From a possessed Sovereignty seclude.
Yea, though this rash desire your judgment leads,
I for my part must praise the gods for you,
The have not put into the Persians heads,
To war against the Lidians long ere now.
These flames that burn my breast must once burst out,
Your counsel for more quiet minds I leave,
And be you still thought wise, so I prove stout,
Isle conquer more, or lose the thing I have.
YEt am I forced out of afflictions store,
To ease my mind a few sad words to strain,
And but vnlode it now to lode it more,
I empty but mine eyes to fill again.
My soul must sound even as my passions strike,
Which now are tuned to nothing but mischief,
My breast and eyes are both accursed alike,
The cabinet of care, the cells of grief.
O cruel heaven, fierce star, unhappy fate,
Too foul injustice of the divine powers,
Whose high disdain t'wards me with partial hate,
The comfort of the world (sad world) devours.
Cursed be the day in which I first was borne,
When lying tongs affirmed I come to light,
A monstrous blasphemy, a mighty scorn,
Since t'was to darkness and a ioy-set night.
O happy if I then had chanced to smother,
That the first hour had been the last to me,
Then from one grave t'haue gone unto another,
I should have did to live, not lived to die.
What profited to me my parents joys,
That with such pomp did solemnise my birth,
When I must be the mirror of annoys,
And all my days taste but one dram of mirth?
Which served for nothing but to make me know,
The height of horror that was to succeed,
I was but raised up high to be brought low,
That short-liu'd joys might endless anguish breed.
That nothing might for my confusion lack,
All my best actions but betrayed my state,
My virtues too were guilty of my wrack,
And warred against me banded with my fate.
For whilst my Virgin-yeares with praise I past,
Which did (ah that it did) too much import,
My modest eye told that my mind was chaste:
This gained the warrant of the worlds report,
And Maids must have a great respect to fame,
No greater dowry then an unstained name.
Fair beauties Goddess, thou can bear record,
My offering never made thine altar rich,
All such lascivious fancies I abhord,
My free-borne thoughts no folly could bewitch.
Till happily (ah so it seemed to some)
Ah but unhappily th'euent hath proved:
All this and more to Atis ears did come,
Who straightway liked, and after liking loved:
Then to our ears his purpose did impart,
Not lip-sick-louer-like with words far sought,
His tongue was but the agent of his hart,
Yet could not tell the tenth part of his thought.
And lest his travels should have seemed to tend
To breach my honour, work my fems decay,
He brought his wishes to a lawful end,
And by th'effect, th'affection did bewray.
Their Iuno president of wedlockes vow,
And Hymen with his saffron-colour'd cote,
Our love with sacred customs did allow,
Whilst th'ominous Owls no crosses did denote.
The blessing that this marriage did procure,
It was too great to have continued long,
A thing that's vehement can not endure:
Our joys far past th'expressing of the tongue,
Who ever did full satisfaction find,
Yet with satiety were never cloyed,
We seemed two bodies governed by one mind,
Such was the happiness that we enjoyed.
He loved me dearly, I obeyed his will,
Proud of my self because that I was his,
A harmony remained betwixt vs still,
Each in another placed their chiefest bliss.
This moved th'Immortalls to a high disdain,
That thus two worldlings who of death were heirs,
Should in a paradise of joys remain,
Which did exceed, at least did equal theirs.
But chiefly Iuno did despite it most,
Who through a jealousy still jars with Jove,
That bodie-prison'd souls of that could boast,
Which she (although Heavens Queen) had not aboue.
Thus even for envy of our rare delights;
The fatal Sisters by the heavens suborned,
Of my souls treasure closed the lovely lights,
By which they thought the earth too much adorned.
O but he is not dead, he lives in me,
Ah but I live not, for I did in him,
The one without the other can not be,
If death have set his eyes, mine must look dim.
Since to my sight that Sun no more appeared,
From whom my beauties borrowed all their rays,
A long eclipse that never shall be cleared,
Hath darkened all the points of my sad days.
Ay me! I live too long, he did too soon,
Thus still the worst remain, the best depart,
Of him who told how this black deed was done.
The words like swords shall ever wound my hart.
Fierce tyrant Death, that in thy wrath did take
One half of me, and left an half behind,
Take this to thee, or give me the other back,
Be altogether cruel, or all kind.
For whilst I live, thou can not wholly dye,
O! even in spite of death, yet still my choice,
Oft with th'Imaginations loue-quicke eye,
I think I see thee, and I hear thy voice.
And to content my languishing desire,
Each thing to ease my mind some help affords,
I fancy whiles thy form, and then afire,
In every found I apprehend thy words.
Then with such thoughts my memory to wound,
I call to mind thy looks, thy words, thy grace,
Where thou did haunt, yet I adore the ground,
And where thou stepped, O sacred seems that place!
My solitary walks, my widowd bed,
My dreary sighs, my sheets oft bathd with tears,
These can record the life that I have led
Since first sad news breathed death into mine ears.
I live but with despair my sprite to dash,
Thee first I loved, with thee all love I leave;
For my chaste flames extinguished in thy ash
Can kindle now no more but in thy grave.
By night I wish for day; by day for night;
Yet wish far more, that none of both might bee;
But most of all, that banished from the light
I were no more, their courses for to see.
At night revoluing my despaird estate,
I go to sum with sighs my wonted joys,
When in an agony, a grieved conceit
Doth blot th'unperfect count with new annoys.
When Sleep the eldest brother of pale Death,
The Child of darkness, and Father of rest,
In a free prison hath confined my breath,
That it may vent, but not with words expressed.
Then with my sprite thou enterst for to speak
With honeyed speeches to appease my grief,
And my sad heart that labourd for to break,
In this fayn'd comfort finds a while relief.
Yea, it our souls remained united so,
This late divorcement would not vex my mind,
But when I waken, it augments my woe,
Whilst this a dream, and me a wretch I find.
O happy, if I had been happy never,
But happier, if my happiness had lasted:
Yet had I in this state chanced to persevere,
My days had with excessive joys soon wasted.
Why waste I thus, whilst vainly I lament,
The precious treasure of that swift Post Time?
Ah! pardon me, (dear Love) for I repent
My lingering here, my Fate, and not my crime.
Since first thy body did enrich the Tomb,
In this spoiled world, my eye no pleasure sees,
And Atis, Atis, lo, I come, I come
To be thy Mate, amongst the Myrtle trees.
Lo all our time even from our birth,
In nought but misery exceeds,
For where we find a moments mirth,
A Month of mourning still succeeds,
By all the evils that Nature breeds,
Which daily do our sprites appal,
Th'infirmities that frailty sends,
The loss of it, that fortune lends:
And such disasters as oft fall:
Yet to far worse our states are thrall,
Whilst wretched man with man contends,
And every one his whole force bends,
How to procure another losses;
But this torments vs most of all,
The mind of man, which many a fancy tosses,
Doth forge unto it self a thousand crosses.
O how the Soul with all her might
Doth all her heavenly forces strain!
How to attain unto the light
Of Natures wonders, that remain
Hid from our eyes, we strive in vain
To seek out things that are unsure:
In Sciences to seem profound,
We dive so deep we find no ground,
And the more knowledge we procure,
The more it doth our minds allure,
Of mysteries the depth to sound:
Thus our desires we never bound,
Which by degrees thus drawn on still,
The memory may not endure:
But like the tubs that Danaus daughters fill,
Doth drink no faster then it's forced to spill.
Yet how comes this? and O how can
Divine Knowledge the Souls chief treasure
Occasion such a cross to man?
That should afford him greatest pleasure:
O it's because we cannot measure
The limits that to it belong!
But for to tempt forbidden things,
Do soar too high with Natures wings:
Still weakest whilst we think vs strong,
The Heavens that think we do them wrong,
To try what in suspense still hings,
This cross upon vs justly brings:
With knowledge, knowledge is confused,
And grows a grief ere it be long.
That which a blessing is, being rightly used,
Doth grow the greatest cross, when it's abused.
Ah! what avails this unto vs,
Who in this veil of woes abide,
With endless toil to study thus,
To learn the thing that Heaven would hide:
And trusting in too blind a guide,
To spy the Planets how they move,
And too transgressing common bars
The constellation of the stars,
And all that is decreed aboue,
Whereof as oft th'euent doth prove,
Th'intelligence our welfare mars,
And in our breasts breeds endless wars,
Whilst what our Horoscopes foretell,
Our expectations do disprove,
Those apprehended plagues prove such a Hell,
That we would wish t'vnknow them till they fell.
This is the pest of great Estates;
They by a thousand means devise
How to foreknow their doubtful Fates,
And like new Giants scale the Skies,
Heavens secret store-house to surprise:
Which sacrilegious skill we see
With what great payne they apprehend it,
And then how foolishly they spend it,
To learn the thing that once must be:
Why should we seek our destiny?
If it be good, we long attend it,
If it be evil, none may amend it;
Such knowledge further rest exiles,
It is best to abide the Heavens decree,
It's to be feared, those whom this Art beguiles,
Do change their fate &amp; make their Fortune wheels.
And lo of late, what hath our King
By his preposterous travels gained,
In searching each particular thing
That Atis Horoscope contained;
But what the Heavens had once ordained,
He could not by no means prevent,
And yet he labours to find out
Through all the Oracles about,
Of future things th'vnsure event,
This doth his raving mind torment,
Now in his age unwisely stout
To fight with Cirrus, but no doubt
The Heavens are grieved for to hear told
Long ere the time their hid intent.
Let Tantalus b'a terror to th'o're-bold
That dare Ioues cloudy secrecies unfold.
Go, Let vs triumph o'er these vnthron'd thralls,
Whose maimed greatness to confusion runs,
Who forfeited their glory by their falls;
No hand that fights is pure, but that which wins.
The ravished world that fraught with doubts did stand,
To see the bloody end of this days toil,
Saw how the Heavens placed lightning in my hand,
To thunder on all those that sought my foil.
Now therefore let vs first devoutly go
And lose our vows, the gods detest th'ingrate,
And who delight t'adore their deities so,
Do never fail t'establish their estate.
Go load the Altars, smoke the sacred places
With Bullocks, Incense, Odours of all kinds,
Though none can give the gods that flow in graces
A sweeter Sacrifice then thankful minds.
Though all that indenized in this Vale
Walk here confined within this fertile Round,
And are tapestried with this azure Pale,
T'adore the gods by many means are bound.
Yet there are some particularly, I find,
Whose names are written in their dearest scrolls,
Whom extraordinary favours bind,
Even to prefer them to their very Souls.
Of which (Sir) you are one, your deeds declare,
Of you amidst innumerable broils,
Even from your cradle they have had a care,
And led you safe through all your greatest toils.
Though of the dangers of your youth I see
The thought no more with grief your mind importunes;
Yet I think on who had the hap to be
An Actor in your Tragick-Comick fortunes.
The accidents that in our Nonage chance,
When as our years grow ripe, slide out of thought
Like fabulous dreams that Darkness doth advance,
And are by Day disdained as things of nought.
For our Conceptions are not then so strong???
As for to leave th'impression long behind,
Yet mix (dear Friend) old griefs new Joys among,
And call afflicted Infancy to mind.
Who would not wonder at thy wondrous Fate,
Whose ruin ere thy Birth appeared conspired?
Who vnbegun, seemed to expire that date,
Which now begun, shall never be expired.
Your Mother first her Sire with cares did sting,
While as he dreamd, which yet his soul confounds,
That from her womb there did a Vine-tree spring,
Which did o're-shadow all great Asiaes bounds.
Then to the Magies strait he gave in charge,
To try what this strange Vision did presage,
Who having studied their dark Art at large,
Gave this response with a prophetic rage.
That once his Daughter should bring forth a Son,
For glorious Acts exceedingly renownd,
By whom th'Empire of Asia should be won;
By whom his Grandfather should be vncrownd.
This to Astiages a terror bred,
Who labouring to anull the heavens decree,
Advised as best his Daughter for to wed
T'a powrelesse stranger, but of base degree.
Then of Cambises he by chance made choice,
And for his barb'rous Countries cause the rather,
Whom by your birth the Princess did rejoice,
And further then before affright her Father.
Thus tyranny by feeble sprites begun,
Doth force the Parents in despair to fall,
A dastard to attempt, proud having won,
Which being feared of all, doth still fear all.
And tyrants no security can find,
For every shadow frights a guilty mind.
This Monarch, whom scarce Armies could surprise,
Whom gallant Guards and stately Courts delighted,
Who triumph o'er th'Earth, threatened the Skies,
A Babe scarce borne, come of himself, affrighted.
And whilst Lucina the last help did make,
As if some ugly Monster had been borne,
A Minotoure, a Centaur or a Snake,
The worlds terror, and the Mothers scorn.
The Nephews birth, that would have seemed t'impart
Unto the Grandfather great cause of joys,
As if the naked hand had pierced his hart,
Did wind him in a maze of sad annoys.
And to prevent a but suspected spite,
By giving an occasion of just hate,
He sought by robbing you the new-found Light,
To make your birth and burial of one date.
Soon after this he sent for me in hast,
Whom at that time (and not in vain) he loved,
Then showed me all the circumstances past,
Wherewith his marble mind seemed nothing moved:
Out of the which, as he would let me know,
All complements of pity were not blotted,
He would this superficial favour show,
Not with your blood to have his own hands spotted.
Thus having lulled asleep the conscience, still
The wicked would extenuate their crimes,
Not knowing those that but allow of ill,
Are Actors in effect, guilty all times.
Yet with his fault he would have burdend me,
And willed that I an Innocent should slay,
I promised to perform his rash decree,
Well weighing whom, but not wherein to obey.
When I had parted from his Highness face,
And carried you (then swaddled) with me too,
Through th'apprehended horror of my case,
I stood perplexed and wist not what to do.
Necessity took place, I wailed with tears
Th'vntimely funerals (as I thought) or you???
My soul confounded with a swarm of fears???
Did with sad sighs my message disallow.
Yet t'him I send a servant of mine own,
Who for the time was Heards-man to the King,
To whom I made all my commission known,
But as direct to him showed every thing.
Delivering you with an unwilling breath,
Then with a mantle of pure gold arrayed,
I threatened him with many a cruel death,
If that your death were any way delayed.
Straight for to execute th'intended doom,
He from my sight did all astonished go:
Too great a charge for such a simple groom,
The show of Majesty amazed him so.
O what a wonder is it for to behold,
Th'vnfailing providence of powerful Jove,
Whose brazen edicts can not be controlled,
Firm are the statutes of the states aboue.
That mortal whom th'Immortalls favour shields,
No worldly force is able to confound,
He may securely walk through dangers fields,
Times and occasions are t'attend him bound.
For lo before the Herds-man was come home,
His wife of a dead burden was delivered,
Who wondered so to see her Husband come,
That with a secret terror faintly shivered.
She straight grew curious for to know the form
How he a Babe so beautiful obtained,
Who did her suddenly of all inform,
And to what cruelty he was constrained.
See quickly then th'occasion to embrace,
No doubt inspired by some celestial power,
Prayed him t'expose her dead child in your place,
Yet where no beasts repaired him to devour:
So shall we have (saith she) a double gain,
Our off-spring shall receive a stately tomb,
And we a princely infant, to remain
Still nursed with vs as th'issue of my womb.
The Husband likte so well his Wives intent,
That all what she affected he effected,
And soon I had one of my household sent,
To try if all were done as t'was directed:
He seeing the babe dead, dead in that weed,
With that rich funeral furniture about him,
Told what the fellow told, and I indeed
Reposed on his report, for who could doubt him?
In end, Time posting with houre-feth'red wings,
Had given you strength with others of your years,
You past the time, not nephews unto Kings,
But for that time admitted for your peers.
They fail, call Fortune blind, she sight betrayed,
And your authority by lot enlarged,
In pasturall sports who still the sceptre swayed,
And as but borne for that, that best discharged.
Then with the other children as it chanced,
A noble man of Medeas son remained,
Who swollen with envy to see you advanced,
Your childish charge with scornful words disdained.
You spighting at that proud attempt of his,
Did punish him as it became a Prince:
I doubt now (Sir) if that you think on this,
The rest of rashness did your deed convince.
More mighty matters now to muse upon,
My memory with the remembrance cloy,
That those are all forgot, and yet tell on,
For I delight to hear this childish toy.
The father of the child informed the King
How such a base-borne boy abused his son,
And caused an Esquire straightway you to bring,
To suffer for the fault that you had done.
And when the King accused you in his sight,
As the presumptuous brat of a base clown,
You boldly did maintain that you had right
To scourge one that rebeld against your crown.
The King astonished at th'imperious words
Of one so magnanimous, and so young,
Doth pause awhile, and straightway he records,
That you were you, and I had done him wrong.
The tortour to the Net-heard was presented,
Who soon for fear confessed (O sudden change)
The King as seemed exceedingly contented,
Sent one for me to hear the tidings strange.
And as he had good cause, in show delighted,
Did for a solemn Sacrifice prepare,
And me as his most special guest invited,
Who with my son did straight to Court repair.
When light was banished by nights shadow sable,
The candles by his forfeit taking place,
They served me with my sons flesh at the table,
Then did upbraid me with his bloodless face.
What anguish, or what rage ore-flow'd my soul,
A loving father may imagine best,
Yet at that time I did my rage control,
But laid it up for ever in my breast.
Some of the wise men then I heard remained,
Who from their former sentence did recoil,
Saying, no danger was since I had raignd,
And so dismissed me for my native soil:
Where when I had my unripe season spent,
Your Letter came to give my fire new fuel,
And told how many of the Medes were bent,
T'abandon their own Lord that proved so cruel:
And wished if to that Sceptre I aspired,
That I should move the Persians to rebel,
Which did succeed even as my soul desired,
For they disdained in servitude to dwell.
I placed my gallant troupes in warlike ordour,
And lest th'occasion should have slipped away,
Marched with my army to my enemies bordour,
Whereas you had the conduct for that day.
Lo how those wretches that the heavens would wrack
Are spoiled of judgment: that proud Tyrant offred
The charge to me not thinking I would take
A high revenge for th'iniurie I suffered,
Which was so deeply rooted in my hart,
My countries thraldom, and mine own disgrace,
And all the horrors that death could impart,
Seemed nought to me so my disdain took place.
It is dangerous trusting one that's wronged we see,
Just rancour unrevenged can never die.
That was the first beginning of your glory,
Which since hath been augmented by degrees,
And which by time may breed so brave a story,
As may be precious in all Princes eyes.
Behold how Croesus with his riches blinded,
Durst come t'encounter with my warlike bands,
And through a long prosperity high-minded,
Was not afraid to fall before my hands.
But he and his confederates have seen,
How Victory doth still my troupes attend,
And Persia must be once all Asiaes Queen,
Orwe shall ???????????? to the worlds end.
Now Croesus is ore-come rich Sardis taken,
And Lidia fraught with gold is made our spoil,
Th'Egiptians have th'vnprosp'rous league forsaken,
This is the happy end of all our toil.
But ah one sour vnseasons all my sweets,
Brave Abradatus my brother in arms,
Whose praise through all the peopled circuit fleets,
And with his love each generous courage warmes.
Whilst but ouer-bold for to be backed so badly,
Th'Egiptian Chariots desperately he charged:
There with euill-fortun'd valour fighting madlie,
His soul out of th'earths prison was enlarged.
No doubt that dame this trouble hardly bears,
Who only seemed for him t'account of life:
I heard him whilst she bathed his Coach with tears,
Wish to prove worthy of so rare a wife.
When their farewell was sealed, last speeches spent,
She kissed the Coach that did contain her trust,
And with eyes big with pearl gazed where he went,
Still till her sight was choked with clouds of dust.
I hear you have not heard how his death proved
The black beginning of a bloody scene,
His wife Panthea at the first not moved,
Seemed as she had some marble image been.
The body that had oft her fancies fired
She caused bear out of sight, still dear, though dead,
But being to Pactolus banks retired,
She in her bosom did entomb his head.
And then from rage she did some respit borrow,
For sorrow by degrees a passage seeks,
Vapouring forth sighs that made a cloud of sorrow,
A tempest then of tears rained down her cheeks.
And whilst her eye the wonted object misses,
She many a languishing look doth cast,
And on the senseless lips still lavished kiss,
As affectionedlie as in times past.
I posted thither for to have relieved
This Lady of a portion of her woes,
Heaven bear me witness I was greatly grieved,
Who would, to save one friend, spare hosts of foes.
She first a space me passionately eyed,
Then with these words her lips did slowly move,
My husband lo hath valorously died,
Well worthy of your friendship, and my love.
When I had all the flowers of comfort used.
That a sad soul o'recharg'd with grief could show,
I went away with words that were confused,
And scarcely could my last farewell forth throw.
I was not well departed from her face,
When as she char'gd the Eunuchs out of sight,
Then prayed her nurse to bury in one place
Her and her Lord, as they deserved of right.
Then looking on his corps she drew a sword,
And even as if her soul had flown in him,
She stabbed her self, then falling on her Lord,
Her beauties blubbered stars were waxing dim.
The faithful Eunuchs for their Sovereign sorry,
And scorning to survive so rare a date,
In emulation of their mistress glory,
Did violently partners of her fate.
O sweet Panthea rich in rarest parts!
I must admire thy ghost though thou be gone,
Who might have made a monarchy of harts,
Yet loathed unlawful loves, and loved but one.
O wondrous wonders, wonders wondrous rare!
A woman constant, such a beauty chaste,
So pure a mind joined with a face so fair,
Beauty and Virtue in one person placed!
Both were well matched as any could devise,
Whose vndiuided end their choice alowes,
He valorous, she virtuous, both wise,
She worthy such a mate, he such a spouse.
And Harpagus, lest that it should be thought,
The memory of virtuous minds may dye,
Cause build a stately tomb with statues wrought,
Where their dead bodies may respected lye.
I'll raise a Pyramid of Croesus spoils,
Where all their famous parts shall be comprisde,
But how t'insist in these tumultuous broils,
It is best now (Sir) that you were well advised.
Your adversary doth attend your will,
This haughty city humbled hath her crest,
And therefore go to pardon, or to kill,
To save, or sack, even as you shall think best.
Abstract for old Croesus I am else resolved,
He with some captives which I keep in store,
Shall have their bodies by the fire dissolved,
As offrands to the Gods that I adore.
This city shall my soldiers pains defray,
Since by their force it hath been brought to bow,
I yield it unto them as their just pray,
Who taste the sweetness of their travels now.
Of other things we shall so well dispose,
That our renown o'er all the world shall shine,
Till Cirrus name b'a terror to all those,
I That dare against his Sou'raigntie rapine.
AH to what part shall I my steps address,
The burden of base bondage to eschew?
Lo, desolation, ruin, and distress,
With horror doth my native home pursue.
And now poor country take my last farewell,
Farewell all joy, all comfort, all delight:
What heavy tidings hast thou for to tell,
That tear'st thy garments thus, tell thy sad plight?
I tell the wrack of vs, and all that live
Within the circuit of this wretched soil.
A hideous shout we heard the City give,
Is it in th'enemies hands, is it made his spoil?
It's made his spoil.
And is our Sovereign kilt?
No, but yet nearly escaped doth live in danger.
Then let our ears be with disasters filled,
And must we bear the yoke of that proud stranger?
You know how Croesus at th'aduantage lay,
Still seeking means t'abate the Persians pride,
And his confederates had assigned a day
When they should for th'intended war provide.
But Cirrus having heard how that they should
Against his state so great an army bring,
Straight raising all the forces that he could,
Prevents, invades, o'recomes and takes our King.
This shows a Captain both expert and brave,
Fi???st well t'aduise, then t'execute with speed:
No circumstance (friend) vnrelated leave,
Which with our Kings did our confusion breed.
When Croesus saw that Cirrus came so soon,
He stood awhile with a distracted mind,
Yet what time would permit, left nought undone,
But made his Musters, marched his Foe to find.
Our stately Troupes that glisterd all with gold,
And with vmbragious Feathers fanned the ayre,
They with unwary insolence grown bold,
More how to triumph, then to overcome, took care.
The Lidian Horsemen are of great account,
And are for valour through the world renownd,
Them Cirrus chiefly labourd to surmount,
And this devise for that effect was found.
Untrussing all their baggage by the way,
Of the disburdened Camels each did bear
A grim-fac'd Groom, who did himself array
Even as the Persian Horsemen use to wear.
To them th'Infanterie did follow next,
A solide Squadron like a brazen wall,
But those in whom all confidence was fixed,
The brave Cauallerie came last of all.
Then Cirrus by the raynes his Courser took,
And being mounted, holding out his hands,
With an assured and Imperious look
Went breathing valour through th'vnconquer'd bands.
He willed all them that at Deaths game should strive,
To spare none of their foes in any form,
But as for Croesus, to take him alive,
And keep him captive for a greater storm.
Where famous Hellus doth to Hermus post
In his broad waives t'entombe his strength and name,
Our Army ran against a greater Host
T'enrich it likewise with our force and fame.
Our Troupes a time with equal valour stood,
Till giving place, at length we took the chase,
While as the River ran to hide our blood,
But still his borders blushed at our disgrace.
For so soon as the Camels once were come,
Our Horses loathing to endure their sight,
Ran raging back again, and of them some
Disordring ranks, put many to the flight.
Yet others that were of more martial minds,
Perceived the Stratagem that did deride them,
And lighting on their feet, like mighty winds,
Bare down before them all that durst abide them.
There, whilst: the world proved prodigal of breath,
The headless troncks lay prostrated in heaps,
This field of funerals, proper unto death,
Did paint out Horror in most hideous shapes.
There men unhorsed, horses vnmastred, strayed,
Some called on them whom they most dearly tendered,
Some ragde, some groaned, some sighed, roared, wept &amp; prayed,
Fighting, fainting, falling, desperate, maymde, rendered.
Those that escaped, like beasts unto a Den,
Fled to a Fortress, which true valour drowns,
Walls are for women, and the fields for men,
For Towns cannot keep men, but men keep Towns.
And we were scarcely entered at the Ports,
When as the enemies did the Town enclose,
And rearing many artificial Fortes,
To the Defenders did huge pains impose.
There all the military slights wearer found,
Which at the like encounters had prevailed,
Both for to use th'aduantage of the ground,
Or for to help with Art where Nature failed.
They ever compassing our Trench about,
Still where the Walls were weakest, made a breach,
Which being straight repaird, we threw tools out,
And killed all those that came within our reach.
There all the bolts of death edged by disdain,
That many curious wits inclined to ill,
Helped by th'occasion, and the hope of gain,
Had power t'inuent, were put in practise still.
Yet as we see, it oft times hath occurrde,
Where we suspected least, we were surprised,
Whilst fortune and the fates in one concurred
To have our ruin in their rolls comprisde.
The side of Sardis that was least regarded,
Which lies t'wards Tmolus, and was thought most sure,
Through this presumption, whilst t'was weakly guarded,
Th'orethrow of all Lidia did procure.
As one of ours (unhappily it chanced)
T'o're-take his helmet that had escaped his hand,
Along that steepy part his steps advanced
And was returning back unto his Band:
He was well marked by one that had not spared
No kind of danger for to make vs thralls,
For Cirrus had proposde a great reward
To any one that first could scale our walls.
And this companion seeing without stay,
One in his sight that craggy passage clim,
Straight followed on his footsteps all the way,
And many a thousand followed after him.
By whom all those that durst resist were killed,
The rest were forced, and knew not where to flee:
For every street was with confusion filled,
There was no corner from some mischief free.
O what a piteous clamour did arise,
Of ravished virgins, and of widowd wives!
Who pierced the heavens with lamentable cries,
And having lost all comfort, loathd their lives.
Whilst those proud Victors did insist t'haue stained
Themselves with all the wrongs that such like use,
They by a charge from Cirrus were restraind,
And durst no more their captives thus abuse.
No doubt but desolation then abounded,
Whilst with disdain the Conquerors bosom boiled,
Some with the sword, some with disgrace confounded,
Sacred Temples, private houses, all were spoiled.
None can imagine greater misery
Then all the sufferings of a captived City.
But whilst this famous City was distressed,
What could become of the hard-fortun'd King?
He seeing th'enemie of his State possessed,
And that confusion seazde on every thing,
Stood first amazed, scarce trusting his own sight,
His former fortune had him so transported,
Yet it is hard for to deny the light,
He saw a stranger that his wealth extorted.
And when that he had deeply apprehended
Th'vnbounded horrors that o'reflow'd his soul,
As one whose Joys had long before been ended,
He could no more the signs of grief control.
But bursting out in bitter sighs and tears,
Plungde in the deepest depth of black despair,
Through o'er great fear, leaving all kind of fears,
Did of his safety take no further care,
And never wished he so for a long life,
But he o're-wisht it, wishing for death now,
Still seeking danger in the bounds of strife,
Providing that he died, he cared not how.
Whilst thus he fostered furies in his breast,
A certain soldier by the way him meets,
As insolent as any of the rest,
That drunk with blood, ran raging through the streets:
And seeking but an object to his ire,
He made to him, and he to him again,
I wot not which of them did most desire,
Th'one for to slay, or the other to be slain.
But whilst so base a hand towering aloft,
Did to so great a Monarch threaten death,
His eldest Son, that as you have heard oft,
Was barred from the right function of his breath.
I cannot tell you well, nor in what fashion,
If that the destinies had so ordained,
Or if the vehemence of his passion
Did break the strings that had his tongue restraind.
But when he saw his Sire in such a danger,
He bursted forth into those words the rather,
Hold, hold thy hand in haste thou furious stranger,
Kill not King Croesus, murder not my Father.
The other hearing this, his hand retired,
Then called his Kings commandment to mind,
And to no small preferment he aspyrde,
To whom this desert did his Sovereign bind.
Now, when that Croesus, who for death did languish,
Was of this fair occasion disappointed,
O're-chargd with grief, and surfeiting of anguish,
To see himself for further evils appointed.
He with sad sighs those syllables did accord,
Now cruel destiny do what thou can,
Which would not unto me the grace afford
That I might perish like a private man.
Ah! must I live to wish t'haue been unborn,
Charactring shame in a dejected face?
Ah! must I live to my perpetual scorn,
The finger-pointed object of disgrace?
Yet this unto his soul more sorrow bred,
He King-like as in former times arrayed,
Was with a mighty acclamation led
Strait to the Tent whereas their Emp'rour stayde.
So soon as Cirrus got him in his power,
He caused bring bands of iron, burd'nous chains,
And clogd him hand and foot at that same hour,
As one that was designed for grievous pains.
Then caused in haste a pile of wood to make,
And in the midst where all men might espy him,
Caused bind the captived King unto a stake,
With fourteen others of the Lydians by him.
There, as th'oblation for his Victory,
With sacred flames their bodies to combure,
Although Jove hates prepostrous piety,
And doth delight in offerings that are pure.
Now whilst the fires were kindling round about,
As one that to some powerful god had vowed,
With eyes bent up, and with his hands stretched out,
O Solon, Solon, Croesus cried aloud.
Some hearing him to utter such a voice,
And seeing Cirrus curious for to know,
Now of what Deity dying he made choice,
Did pray him liberally his mind to show.
He answered; upon one in wit profound
He called, with whom he wished, if it might be,
That all the Rulers of th'inferior round
Had had some conference as well as he.
For he had told him whilst his fortune lasted,
As one expert in good advises giving,
That all his flowers of bliss might soon be blasted,
And could not be accomplished he being living.
Then he proceeded for to show at length
The Dialogue twixt Solon and twixt him,
Who prayed him not to trust in worldly strength,
By which unto true bliss no man could clim.
This speech moved Cirrus deeply, for to ponder
The great uncertainty of worldly things,
As thinking that himself might be brought under,
Who had no privilege more then other Kings.
Then having such a pattern placed before him,
Whose farre-changd fortune thoroughly was revolu'd,
He freely did his liberty restore him,
And willed him from the fire to be absolved.
O now Devotion! well appeared thy force,
Which binds the earth and opens up the Heaven,
In the celestial breasts a deep remorse
Was strangely wrought whilst Coesus prayed; for even
Whileas the flashing flames, in vain to quench,
All men did labour, but could do no good,
The clouds were opend and a shower did drench
The fiery ashes of the flaming wood.
Now whilst that Croesus coming from the fire,
Saw ruthless sould'ers sacking all the City,
To save the same he had a great desire,
And spake to Cirrus melting all in pity.
Great Prince, for famous Victories renownd,
Who dost in arms all others so surmount,
That it contents me much to be vncrownd
By one so worthy, and in such account:
And since I am constrained your thrall to be,
I must conform my self unto my fate,
And cannot hold my pace whereas I see
Ought to preiudge the greatness of your State,
Which ah! is wounded now with your own powers,
Whilst this rich City is sacked and o'rethrowne,
It is not mine no more, no, it is yours,
And therefore (Sir) have pity of your own.
Yea, though the loss of such a populous Town,
That's rich, that's yours, your mind could nothing move,
Yet think of this that doth import your Crown;
A piece of policy which time will prove.
The barb'rous Persians borne with stubborn minds,
Who but for poverty first followed you,
Their matchless worth in arms all Asia finds,
Their fear is fallen upon all Nations now.
But if you suffer them in such a sort
T'enrich themselves with plenteous Lidiaes spoil,
Not able then their Conquest to support,
The Victor of the vanquished gets the foil.
For this will make them wealthy out of measure:
Wealth to confusion many a Country leads;
Whilst feebled with delights, in-vilde with pleasure,
No thought of honour harbours in their heads.
Then Cirrus strait approving what he spake,
His soldiers from their pillage were restraind,
Pretending first the tenth part for to take,
As a rich offering for the Gods ordained.
Of our distress, this is the ruthful story;
A stranger is possessed of this Province;
Our King hath with the loss of all his glory
Bought breath a while, a poor thing for a Prince.
O woeful people! O unhappy King!
Our joys are spoiled, his happiness expired,
And no new chance can any comfort bring
To either now, whose fall the Fates conspired.
Go woeful messenger, hold on thy course,
For to have heard too much, it yrks our ears,
We ever must bewail thy sad discourse,
Accented with sighs, and pointed with tears.
WHat needs me more of my mishap to pause?
Though I have tasted of afflictions cup,
Yet it may be, the gods for a good cause
Have cast me down to raise a thousand up.
And never let a Monarch after me,
Trust in betraying titles glorious bates,
Who with such borrowed feathers rashly flee,
Fall melted with the wrath of greater states.
O had this precious wit enriched my mind,
Which by experience I have dearly bought,
Whilst fortune was within my court confined,
And that I could not think a bitter thought.
Then satisfied with Soueraignties erst proved,
I had disdained new dangers to embrace,
And clothed with majesty, admired and loved,
Had lived with pleasure, and had did in peace.
Yet it is wonderful in any state,
To see a worldling prosper, and not proud;
But chiefly we whose fortunes grow so great,
It's hard for vs to have our high thoughts bowd.
What could the world afford, or man affect,
Which did not glad my soul whilst I was such?
Who now am past the compass of respect,
Plagued with prosperity, clogged with too much.
Long luld asleep with scornful fortunes lies,
A slave to pleasure, drowned in base delights,
I made a covenant with my wandering eyes,
T'haue entertained them still with pleasant sights.
I held not from my heart none of her wishes,
But wallowing in vaine-glorie this worlds toy,
Still served with dainty, but suspicious dishes,
My soul was sick with pleasure, faint for joy.
There wanted nothing that might help to ease me,
All did divine my will, aim at my though,
And strive to do that which they trow'd would please me,
Which if I but allowed, no more was sought.
What ever come of me was held of weight,
My words were balanced and my looks were marked,
Those whom I graced were had in honour straight,
All speeches in my praises were embarked.
I in magnificence exceld all Kings,
Whilst drowsy in security I slumbered,
My coffers still were full of precious things,
My treasure infinite could not be numbered.
I reared rare buildings all embossed with gold,
Made ponds for fishes, forests for wild beasts,
And with transported fancies uncontrolled,
Oft spent the day in sport, the night in feasts.
I seemed t'vsurp the power that erst was Ioues,
And of the Elements the course would change,
For stately fountains, artificial groves,
These were so common, they were not thought strange.
With me (what more could any Monarch crave)
In all the parts of pomp none could compare,
My minions gallant, my counsellours grave,
My guards were strong, my concubines were fair:
Yea ere my state was cast upon this shelf,
I wanted nought that could with seeming merits
Breed wonder in the world, pride in ones self,
For to puff up the flesh and spoil the spirits.
Thus pressing with delight the grapes of pleasure,
I quaffed with Fortune still sense-pleasing vines,
Till drunk with wealth, and riotous out of measure,
I card not to consume all Tmolus mines.
Then weary to be well, and tired of rest,
T'engender discord I th'occasion sought,
Yet for to cloak th'ambition of my breast,
Did with devotion long disguise my thought.
I send of all the Oracles to inquire,
What was to come of this intended war,
Who said as seemed to second my desire,
That I a mighty Monarchy should mar.
Those doubtful words I wresting to my will,
In hope t'expugne th'impertous Persians powers,
Did ruin quite whilst all succeeded ill,
What many a age had conquered in few hours.
And this most wondrous is, because most strange,
I who disdained an equal of before,
(What cannot Fortune do, being bent to change)
Must a Superior now serve, and adore?
What eye not fraught with scorn my state surveys?
Whom Fates have forced for to o're-liue my shame,
And in mine enemies danger for some days,
But borrowd with the interest of my fame.
Though this sweet gale of life-bestowing winds,
Would seem a favour (so it seems to some,
Who by the baseness of their muddy minds,
Show of th'ignoble multitude they come)
I scorn unlike my self for to be seen,
Though to my comfort this appeared to tend,
As if that all misfortunes past had been,
A Tragic entry to a Comic end.
Of all that plague my state the greatest pest
It is base life, that faints from th'earth to sever,
And hath in one united all the rest,
To make me die each day, and yet die never.
Life in my breast no comfort can infuse,
An enemies gift could never come for good,
It but gives time of misery to muse,
And bathe my sorrows in a bitter flood.
Ah! had my breath euanish'd with my bliss,
And closed the windows that give light to life,
I had not apprehended as it is
The height of my mishaps that now are rife:
Whilst with a thousand sighs I call to mind,
The death of Atis and mine own decay,
My sprite in such perplexity I find,
That to lives passage I would fine make way.
But since I see reserved for further spite,
I with sad thoughts must burden yet my soul,
My memory t'a melancholious spright,
Of all my troubles shall present a scroll.
Of which while as th'account I go to cast,
Th'enormities still numbering of my fate,
I'll whiles look back upon my pleasures part,
And by them balance my (now) haplesse state.
Is it not a wonder for to see
How by experience each man reeds,
In practised volumes penned by deeds,
Th'inconstant courses that there bee,
Yet whilst our selves continue free,
We ponder oft, but not apply,
That precious oil, which we might buy
Best with the price of others pains;
Which as what nought to vs pertains,
To use we will not condescend,
As if we might the Fates defy,
While as untouched our state remains:
But soon the heavens a change may send,
No perfect bliss before the end.
When first we fill with fruitful seed,
The apt-conceauing womb of th'earth,
And seem t'expell all fear of dearth,
With the increase that it may breed,
Yet dangers do our hopes exceed,
The frosts may first with cold confound
The tender greens that dect the ground,
Whose wrath though the Aprils smiles assuage,
It hath t'abide th'Eolian rage,
Which t'o'repasse whilst we attend,
T'haue Ceres wandering tresses bound,
The rains let from their cloudy cage,
May spoil what we expect to spend,
No perfect bliss before the end.
Lo whilst the Vine-tree great with grapes
With nectard liquor strives to kiss
Th'imbracing Elm not loved amiss:
Those clusters loose their comely shapes,
Whilst by the thunder burned in heaps,
All Bacchus hopes fall down and perish:
Thus many a thing doth fairly flourish,
That no perfection can attain,
And yet we worldlings are so vain,
That our conceits we highly bend,
If fortune but our spring-time cherish,
Though we have storms for to sustain,
Ere to the harvest our years ascend,
No perfect bliss before the end.
By all that in this world have place,
There is a course that must be run,
And let none judge himself t'haue won,
Till he have finished first his race,
The forests through the which we trace,
Breed ravenous beasts that do abhor vs,
And lye in wait for to devour vs,
Whilst brambles do our steps beguile,
The fear of which though we exile,
And to our mark with gladness tend,
Then balls of gold are laid before vs,
To entertain our thoughts a while,
And our good meaning to suspend,
No perfect bliss before the end.
Behold how Croesus long hath lived,
Throughout this spacious world admired,
And having all that he desired
A thousand means of joy contrived,
Yet now is suddenly deprived
Of all that wealth, and strangely falls;
For every thing his sprite appals;
His Sons decease, his Countries loss;
And his own State which huge storms toss:
Thus he, who could not apprehend,
Whilst as he slept in marble walls,
No, nor imagine any cross,
To bear all those, his breast must lend:
No perfect bliss before the end.
And we the Lydians that designed
To reign over all that were about vs,
Behold how Fortune too doth flowt vs,
And hath vs utterly resigned:
For we that had t'our selves assigned
A Monarchy, but knew not how,
Yet thought to make the world to bow,
That at our forces stood afraid;
We, we, by whom these plots were laid,
To think of bondage must descend,
And bear the yoke of others now;
O it is truth, that Solon said,
While as he yet doth breath extend;
No man is blessed, behold the end.

WHat thundering power grow'n jealous of my state
With such hostility my troupes o're-throwes,
And armed with lightning, breathing flames of hate,
Big with disdain, high indignation shows
Whilst soothed with self conceits ashamed to doubt,
In greatness shadow I securely slept,
Lo change-affecting Fortune wheels about,
And ruins all that me from ruin kept.
Thus I, whose only name amazed my foes,
Whom th'earth adored, as Monarch, once over all,
Am so degraded now, and sunk in woes,
That who admired my might, admire my fall.
Ah then indeed I fell, when gallants stood,
And Phoenix-like renewed their life by death,
Who having sealed their force and faith with blood,
Would rather die, then draw a borrowed breath.
Yet I, but then not I, viewed not avenged,
Those monstrous mountains of my subjects slain,
Although my conscience hath my courage cleng'd,
And knows what valour was employed in vain.
Through greatest dangers death I did pursue,
Till heaps of slaughtered bodies bared my way,
And changed my Chariot to a scarlet hue,
Ere wounded honour could be drawn away.
O how I envy yet their happy Ghosts,
Who died whilst hope of victory remained,
And in the presence of two famous hostess
Left bloody records that they died unstained?
Shall I survive that soule-ouerwhelming shame,
To be th'eternall stain of Persians praise?
No rather let me die, and let my name,
Be quite exstinguish'd with my hateful days.
Starre-bosting Babilon blush to behold
One called thy King surmounted and abated:
How may thy Towrs but tremble, when it's told,
Thy Prince entreats, whom Princes erst entreated?
Not vassal-like; I will not yield to this:
Were all my Empire to a period come,
Yet none shall vaunt that ever I was his:
Hearts holding courage are not all overcome.
This tongue inured still to command doth scorn
To breath base words, to scope a minutes pains.
Let them obey, who to obey were borne:
For Darius this indignity disdains.
Since I was once judged worthy to command,
Shall I return to be a base entreater?
No, whilst a sword yields homage to this hand,
Isle not acknowledge in the world a greater.
Brave spirits, who now possess the pleasant bowers,
And glorious gardens of th'Elisian plain,
(For if deserts may move the infernal powers,
That happy shade your shadows must contain)
Those fields where-as your praises are set forth
Do bury but your bodies, not your fame:
Men shall adore the relics of your worth,
And rear immortal Trophies to your name.
Isle sacrifice as incense to your souls,
His dying sighs, and sorrowing parents tears,
Who now, while none his insolence controls,
Our conquered ensigns in his triumph bears.
For it may ease your Ghosts to hear his groans,
Whilst th'earth ouer-burdend sends rebounding back
A plaintiff Echo from the woods and stones,
To sound through all the air his armies wrack.
Why spend I speeches to disturb your rest?
What idle disputations do I hold?
A mighty furor hath inflamed my breast,
And burns me, till I be avenged seven-fold.
Did I that strong Cadusian first affront,
Who durst advance himself to brave our bands,
Then turned applauded, and in high account,
Charged with his spoils the honour of my hands?
And could I then all kind of doubt remoouing,
Aduenter only to an Armies shame?
And should I now that ancient praise disprouing,
With squadrons compassed loose that glorious name?
Blind fortune, O, thy stratagems are strange:
Thou wrak'st my greatness, wound mine honour to,
And having made my state the stage of change,
Hast acted all inconstancy could do.
Lo I, who late of swarming troupes did bossed,
Am spoiled of all in whom I then reposed,
And those imprisoned, whom I fancy most,
Are to th'insulting victors pride exposed.
O torment but to think, death to believe,
That any may command my dearest part,
And wretched I notable to relieve
The Jewel of mine eye, joy of my hart.
Dear object of my thoughts, my life, my love,
Sweet source of my delights, my one, my all,
Bright Image of excellencies aboue,
What? dost thou breath, and come not when I call?
And can I be, and not be where thou art?
Hath heaven the force me from thy face to bar?
Or are my hands grown traitors to my hart,
That they should shrink from doing what it dare?
O could my mind but distribute a space
These emulating thoughts that toss my breast,
Among those pointless Ciphers that spend place:
Then I alone might animate the rest.
Since in this great disgrace I chanced to fall,
Now nothing rests to rase my fame forlorn,
But to doe desperately, and hazard all.
Isle live with praise, or by my death fly scorn.
Some prosperous issue afterword may purge
This crime, with which th'euent would burden me,
This crime, that carries with it self a scourge:
No greater torment than the want of thee.
But what hope rests to re-obtaine that treasure,
Which auaritious tyrants once possess?
Another now disposes at his pleasure
Of all my wealth: how can I look for less?
Now, not till now, I deem my state in danger,
When I imagine how my best beloved
Must entertain my enemy a stranger,
I being far from offering aide removed.
A host of furies in my breast I find,
Which do my soul with dreadful horrors fill,
And foster in my melancholious mind
Strange apprehensions that affright me still.
And this surmised disgrace, grown thoroughly strong,
Reads hourly in my ears a hateful scroll
Of an imagined, yet recureles wrong,
Such poisoned thoughts like serpents sting my soul.
Blind love beguiles me not, sharpe-sighted fears
Find great appearances for to suspect thee:
Would God I had no hart, nor eyes, nor ears,
To think, to see, or hear thou should neglect me.
This aggrauates the wight of my despair,
When doubt objects, t'annull loves fast defence,
How he is young and fierce, she young, and fair,
He bent t'offend, and she exposd t'offence,
From which I fear both cannot long abstain:
Her beauty is sufficient to allure:
His bravery is sufficient to obtain.
Captains will force, and captives must endure,
O Alexander, tender my renown,
Although thou travel to usurp my throne.
I rage to have arrival in my Crown:
But in my love I can comport with none.
Lode her not with disgrace, and me with grief,
Least so thou rob her honour, and my life:
Spare in this point t'ouercharge me with mischief:
In all things else let arms decide our strife.
But where doth fury thus transport my spirits,
With light belief my best half to mistrust?
Dear, pardon, I trespass to wrong thy merits,
Whom I have still found faithful loving just.
Pure chaistitie doth then most firmly stand,
When fortified it is with wedlockes band.
Yet let me doubt, or let me leave to love:
To fear the worst it is affections part.
I'll not mistrust thy truth? yet it may prove,
Thy face betray thy faith, thy hap thy hart.
But on thy love approved my hope relies,
This doth dissolve suspicions power to nought.
I will repell reports, as slanderous lies,
Which second not thy virtue, and my thought.
Though virtues foe, and worth-enuying fortune,
Hath wronged my valour with an evil success;
Life of my life, yet must I thee importune,
Join not with her to double my distress.
O More then miserable mind,
That of all things it self worst knows,
And being through presumption blind
Is puffed up with every wind,
Which fortune in derision blows.
Such one no stable bliss can find,
Whose hart is guided by his eye,
And trusts unto betraying shows,
Which seem not as they be.
Oft short prosperity,
Breeds long adversity:
For who abuse the first, the last o're-throwes.
A dead security all care exiles:
Tic no small danger to be happy whiles.
Who on himself too much depends,
A makes an Idol of his wit,
For every favour fortune sends,
Self-flatterer himself commends,
And will no sound advise admit,
But at himself begins, and ends,
And never takes a moments leisure,
To try what fault he may commit,
But drunk with froths of pleasure,
Thirsts for praise aboue measure,
Imaginary treasure,
Which slowly commas, and soon away doth flit:
And what is most affected at this time,
Succeeding ages may account a crime.
A Potentate that is respected,
And by his subjects thought a God,
Thinks, as his name on high erected
Hath what he list at home effected,
It may like wonders work abroad.
O how his folly is detected!
For though he sit in Royal seat,
And as he list his vassalls lod;
Yet others that are great.
Live not by his conceit,
Nor ponder what he threat,
But plague his pride oft ere he fear the rod.
There are rare qualities required in Kings:
A naked name can never work great things.
They who themselves too much esteem,
And vainly vilipend their foe,
Oft find not fortune, as they deem,
And with their treasure would redeem
Their error past: Behold even so
From blame who can our King exeeme,
Who his adversary to scorn,
Thought he who in his name did go
The laurel should have worn,
His triumph to adorn?
But he with shame hath shorn
The fruits of folly ever ripe with woe.
An enemy (if it be well advised)
Though he seem weakt, should never be despised.
But what? the Minions of our Kings,
Who speak at large, and are believed,
Dare boast of many mighty things,
As they could fly, though wanting wings,
And deeds by words might be atch??eued,
But time at length their lies to light,
Their sovereign to confusion brings.
Yet so they gain, they are not greeue'd,
But charm their Princes sight,
And make what's wrong seem right.
Thus ruin they his might,
That when he would, he cannot be relieved.
More kings in chambers fall by flatterers charms,
Then in the field by th'aduersaries arms.
All that the success hath approved
By Charidemus was foreshowne:
Yet with his words no man was moved:
For good men first must be removed,
Before their worth can well be known.
The King would hear but what he loved,
And what him pleased not did despise.
So were the beater sort overthrown,
And Sycophants unwise,
Who could the truth disguise,
Were suffered for to rise,
That him, who raised them up, they might cast down.
Thus Princes will not hear, though such deceive them,
Things as they are, but as themselves conceive them.
Behold, the heavens with a benign aspect,
To prosper this brave enterprise intend,
And with propitious stars seem to direct
This great beginning to a glorious end.
Who would be famous must of force aspite:
All those astonished, who my troupes do view,
Doubt of those two which most they should admire;
My coming, or my conquering with so few.
So mighty minds t'atchieue great actions bent
Force Fortune oft to favour them in all:
Where baser breasts divining evil event,
Through superstitious fears procure their fall.
O howe I wonder, when I call to mind
That monstrous camp, which not so much as doubted!
Dim seemed the Sun, while-as their armour shined
Men had not heard the thunder, whilst they shouted.
Th'auant-courours, that came for to examine,
When they so mean my nombers had perceived,
Did think them small to satisfy the famine,
That their huge host of daughter had conceived.
And yet in end this proved a poisoned food,
Which of their own to their confusion yields
Mountains of murdered corps, and seas of blood:
Un buried bodies buried all the fields.
So now that few, whom they contemned so far,
(See how mortality it self deceives)
Have far ouer-match'd their multitudes in war,
And made the world waste to people the graves.
Then, dear Parmenio, since the fates afford
So fair an entry to our first designs,
Let vs go prosecute with dint of sword
That fortune, which the heavens our hopes assigns.
This high attempt, as we would wish succeeds.
What hostess have we ouerthrow'n? what cities razed?
Lo, populous Asia trembles at our deeds,
And martial Europe doth remain amazed.
Proud Greece, whose spirits oft preast to scorn the skies,
A prostrate supplicant before thee falls:
Rebellious Thebes, that durst thy power despise,
Lies now entombed within her broken walls.
That sea-impyring Tyre, reposing much
In liquid Castles, and a waving maine,
Hath ratified thy forces to be such,
That nothing can resist thy just disdain.
No doubt the ancient Graecians ghosts are glad
To see the fierce Barbarians brought so lowe;
Yet are for envy of thy fortune sad,
And though vnbo-died blush at this overthrow.
Miltiades by all men was admired,
Who once in Greece their flying troupes pursued:
And he that with a stratagem retired,
And Salaminaes straits with blood imbrued.
But yet for all the Captains of that age
The Eastern Monarckes empire was enlarged,
Who coming to their country, wars to wage,
The sea with ships, the land with armies charged.
He with more swarms of me??, then th'Autumns clu???sters,
Dried rivers up, &amp; marched on Neptunes back;
By measure, not by number made his musters,
And did attempt the mountains plain to make.
Then Europe feared for to beforc'd to bow,
Wil'st th'earth did groan to bear so great an host?
But thou hast come, seen, and ouercom'd them now
Even in the bounds wherein their might was most.
That haughty foe, who vilipended oft
Our predecessors armies, and our own,
Now laid as lowe, as he was once aloft,
With his disgrace must make thy valour known.
He cannot but acknowledge his distress
In labouring first to have his friends restored:
This message (potent Prince) imports no less:
By his request thy conquest is decor'd.
For the recovery of his captived Queen
He offred hath innumerable gold;
And would present a treasure to be seen
More, as they say, then Macedon may hold.
My counsel is that you accept those offers,
And render her, as th'auncient custom binds;
Who would make war must not have empty coffers:
For hope of gain moves mercenary minds.
And further, if those Princesses doe tarry,
It sumptuous is to entertain their state.
Women, and babes are cumbersome to carry;
Th'one young in years, and the other in conceit.
If I were come to traffic in this land,
And like a greedy merchant to embrace
Before all hope of glory gain in hand,
This your inuild opinion might have place.
But soon I surfeit of such melting things,
And famish but for fame, and crowns of Kings.
So, were I Alexander, would I do.
If I Parmenio were, so would I to.
Their ransom would defray your soldiers fee.
I'll rather without ransom set them free.
The good is lost that's done unto a foe.
The greater glory to o'recomme him so.
Gold is the God that conquers in all parts.
True magnanimity doth ravish harts.
Rich treasures serve for th'arters of the war.
No, but courageous harts that all things dar.
The want of wages makes a mutinous band.
But who dare disobey, when I command?
Why should you, Sir, co??temne so rich a treasure?
A noble spirit with praise no gain doth measure.
But who deletes in such an airy store?
If I be singular, I ask no more.
Although that you conceive no such suspicion??,
Yet I hear how your soldiers oft exclame,
They sacrifice their bloods for your ambition,
And perish to perpetuate your name.
And yet, without regard what they endure,
You compass all the empire of the East,
And more within your mind: this may procure
Some sudden tumult, when you fear it least.
Retire in time, while as the heavens are clear:
You have performed, performed, and that right soon,
More the?? your own could hope, your foes could fear,
Or then the world can credit, when it is done.
Your worth in war is wonderfully shown,
And to the terror of all Asia tried:
Now let your skill in peace be likewise known,
And for the maint'nance of your state provide.
Good government the same of Kings doth raise
No less then conquest made of Realms and towns:
It is harder far, and doth deserve more praise
To guide, then get: to keep, then conquer crowns.
Your glory in her heist sphere is placed,
And may not move except it be more lowe:
And if it once descend to be disgraced,
Each artisan your statues will o're-throwe,
For in the war, as you may well perceive,
No little part depends upon fame:
If we but once the least affront receive,
The world will gather to exstripe our name.
Then tempt not Fortune further then you need,
Let reason bridle this aspiring thought:
Least, whilst your hopes with trophies faind you feed,
A moment turn your travels all to nought.
Let Darius be a lively patron now
Of th'euer-changing course of states and crowns:
That Prince to whom the Orient once did bow,
His desolation only now renounes.
He scarcely loot length become content
To call you King, though twice put in dis-order:
In dowry with his daughter doth present
The famous Euphrates, to be your border.
Or otherwise he condescends to give
Great store of Gold, or what your self desires,
If that his mother, wife, and children live,
To have them rend'red, as he oft requires.
And let not vain ambition blind your eyes:
Remember what strange nations will embrace him,
Whom scarce he knows by name, or never sees,
Where if he fled, your troops would tire to chase him.
Peace, peace Parmenio, now thou make me rage,
With these words vn-worthy of our ears:
It seems the coldenesse of decaying age,
Hath killed thy courage with a frost of fears.
Did I abandon thee my native soil,
And shadowed with my Ensigns vnknow'n coasts;
That after infinite distress and toil,
Whilst in contempt of vs our foe yet boastes,
I should retire, effecting nought at last,
But sharpened a desire, t'augment my merits,
Then die in discontemment, when it is past
The time, that should have pacified my spirits?
No, I will reign, and I will reign alone:
From this desseigne my fancy never wanders,
For as the heavens can hold no Sun but one:
The earth cannot contain two Alexanders.
The ample circuit of this spacious round
Seems insufficient to confine my thought:
And ?? would God there could more worlds be found,
That many might to adorn our deeds be brought.
O, I could wish that th'Ocean were firm land,
Where none but hideous Giants had retreat,
Such as at Phlegra field in strife did stand
Against the Gods for the Ethereal seat.
These could encourage martial minds to strike,
Who being won would yield eternal praise:
I conquer men; but many did the like:
And after-ages may my equal raise.
But since none such my triumphs are to grace,
Such as there are I'll to subjection bring:
And here I swear no kind of ease to embrace,
Till all the world adore me for their King.
If you or any else that live in dreede
With-drawe your selves, your Princes part despising;
Remember always in his greatest need
Ye fly to stop his honour in the rising.
Pass home, and live like men in prison pent:
I measure not my courage by my numbers.
Your Majesty misconsters my intent:
You know what I have thold, what cares, what cum???bers,
And all for you: I to your eyes appeal,
Which well can witness what my hands have wrought.
All that I spake, proceeded of a zeal
And not of cowardice, or fear of ought.
Nor match I vile repose with honest pains:
My courage is nor yet become so cold:
That wonted vigour hath not left my veins,
Which spurt my spirit in youth, though I be old.
It is not enough that you your self be so:
To be the same you should the rest exhort.
Is he returned, who was ordained to go
And view the Captives, what doth he report?
As we were since by some of them instructed,
While they as yet not of support despaired,
And to a tent were courteously conducted,
Which we of purpose cause to be prepared;
Even in the way one fortuned to espy
The Diadem that Darius erst had borne,
Which on the earth so abjectly did lie,
As each thing his calamine would scorn.
Then they imagined, from his royal head,
Whose dignity it some-time did decor,
None could it cast, except himself were dead:
And if so were, they longed to live no more.
When they had entered in the tent to weep,
Leonatus came and at the entry knocked:
They stood so still, he thought an yornie sleep
Had locked their eyes, or else that he was mocked.
At length by force he made a patent way,
And was advanced them lovingly to greet;
When lo, these dolorous Ladies prostrate lay,
And with a flood of tears bedewed his feet.
Then sobbing said, we not refuse to die:
Let vs entomb first Darius like a King:
Then when that we his latter honour see,
Death cannot but a great contentment bring.
This so they urged, as he could scarce persuade
That Darius was not dead as they supposed,
But lived, in hope through dangers Seas to wade
And in the power of other Realms reposed.
And further he protested on your part,
That they might look for clemency and grace.
Thus after that I had assuaged their smart,
It seemed they longed to see my Sovereigns face.
Of my good-will they may themselves assure:
I never warred with such as were subjected:
And if my presence may their ease procure,
Straight to their tent my steppes shall be directed.
OF all the passions that possess the soul,
None so disturbs vain mortals minds
As this Ambition, that so blinds
The sense of man, that nothing can control
Nor curb their thoughts who will aspire.
This raging vehement desire
Of sovereignty no satisfaction finds,
But in the breasts of men doth ever roll
The restless stone of Sisiph to torment them.
And as his hart, who steeled the heavenly fire,
The vulture gnaws, so doth Ambition rent them:
Had they the world, the world would not content them.
This race of Ixion to embrace the clouds,
Contemn the state wherein they stand,
And would all but themselves command,
As one desire is quenched another buds:
When they have travelled all their time,
Heaps blood on blood, and crime on crime,
There is a hier power that guides their hand.
More happy he whom a poor cottage shrouds
Against the tempest of the threatening heaven,
He stands in fear of none, none envy him:
His hart is upright, and his ways are eauen,
Where others states are still twixt six and seven.
That damned wretch up with Ambition blow'n,
While-as he turns the wheel about,
Whiles cast within, whiles cast without,
In striving for the top is still thrown down.
Those that delight in climbing hie
Oft with a precipice doe die:
So doe the stars sky-climbling worldlings flout.
But this disease is fatal to a crone;
Kings, who have most strive most t'augment their bounds;
And if they be not all, they can not be:
Which to their damage commonly redounds.
Too great a state her proper weight confounds.
Th'ambitious toiling to enlarge their state
Themselves exceedingly deceive,
In hazarding the hap they have
For a felicity that they conceit.
Though their dominions they increase,
Yet their desires grow never les:
For though they conquer Climats, more they crave.
This is the misery of being great.
Such eye-beguyling pomp is all but fume;
Such glorious shows disguise the minds distress;
And who to conquer all the earth presume,
A little earth shall them at last consume.
And if it fortune that they die in peace
(A wonder wondrous rarely seen)
Who conquer first; their empire clean
Is ruined by some persons of their race:
Who coming to the crown with rest,
And having all in peace possessed,
Do straight forget what bloody broils have been
Before their Fathers could attain that place.
As th'Ocean flows, and ebbes states rise and fall:
And Princes, when their actions prosper best,
For fear their greatness should oppress the small,
Are of some hated, and eny'd of all.
We know what end the mighty Cirrus made,
Whom, while he strived to conquer still,
A woman did most wildly kill,
And in a bloody vessel told his head;
Then said, Content thy self with blood:
Thou still did famish for such food:
Now quench thy thirst of blood with blood at will.
Some of his successors, since he was dead
Have reigned a space with pomp, and yet with pain.
Now all their glory cannot doe vs good.
What they so long have laboured to obtain,
All in an instant must be lost again.
Lo, Darius once so magnified by fame,
By one whom he contemned overcome,
For all his bravery now made dombe,
With downe-cast eyes must signify his shame.
Who puffed vpwith pernicious pride
Think still t'haue fortune on their side,
They cannot scope to be a pray to some.
They spend their prosperous days as in a dream,
And as it were in fortunes bosom sleeping,
They in this dull security abide,
And of their doubtful state neglect the keeping,
Whilst gaist lie ruin comes upon them creeping.
Thus the vicissitude of worldly things
Doth to our eyes it self detect,
When heavenly powers exalt, deject,
Confirm, confound, erect and ruin Kings.
So Alexander mighty now,
To whom the vanquished world doth bow.
With all submission, homage, and respect
Doth fly a borrowed flight with Fortunes wings:
Nor enters he his dangerous course to ponder,
Yet, if that Fortune bend her cloudy brow:
All those, who at his sudden success wonder,
May gaze as much to see himself brought under.
O Dismal day detested by the light,
And would to God (but God neglects our case)
The world were wrapped in a Cymerian night,
That no proud eye might gaze on our disgrace.
Why did the heavens reserve my feeble age,
To go to grave with infamy and grief?
Could nothing but my shame their wrath assuage
Thus offred upon th'altar of mischief?
Ah, have I spent my youth in pomp and pleasure,
And had my spring-time graced with pleasant flowers,
That th'Aurumne, which should reap the So??mers trea???sure,
Might be disastred with such stormy showers?
And did smooth calms, and sun-shines of delight
Make all my voyage through the world a sport;
That tossed with a tempest of despite
I now might perish entering at my port?
Yet for all this, were I exposed alone
Th'accursed object of heavens plaguing-armes,
I should not think I had just cause to moan,
When I but wailed mine own, not others harms.
Ay me, on those, whom more then life I love
The state-disturbing blasts of Fortune fall:
Yet each of them some several sorrows move,
But wretch I suffer ship-wracke in them all.
I suffered, when I saw Oxatres slain,
My loving son, and most entirely loved:
died in Darius, when he tried in vain,
What fates would doe, yet still their hatred proved.
Ah, doe the destinies extend my breath
For further evil? O extreme cruelty,
To use so many instruments of death,
Against one burdened with calamity.
Yet Jove, if this may dis-en-flame thine ire,
Let all thy lightning light upon mine head:
To be consumed with a celestial fire
Some comfort were, since that I must be dead.
Leave mother these immoderate laments
To me the very source, and seat of sorrow,
Whose days are burdened with so sad events,
That hell it self may of my torments borrow.
Lo, the dear Lord and treasure of my thought,
Whose presence I my Paradise esteemed,
To such a headlong praecipice is brought,
That with the world his glory dead is deemed.
Ah, on what prop can I repose my trust,
When first the greatness of his state I ponder;
Next how his Diadem drenched in the dust
Was Fortunes Trophy, and all Asias wonder?
He whose imperious speech the world respected,
And as an oracle had in regard,
Now vanquished and contemptiblie neglected
Can scarcely as a supplicant be heard.
And yet I know this more his mind afflicts,
Then doth the ruin of his regal state,
That him my sight another interdicts,
Who am the sovereign of his souls conceit.
Shall he, pure quintessence of my best part,
Then only testify the love he bears?
No, by mine eyes I will distill my hart,
And for his sake dissolve my self in tears.
Would God my breast like Crystal were transparent,
That all the world might see my sincere mind,
And that my loyal thoughts were all apparent,
Whose great affection cannot be confined.
They have imprisoned only my poor eyes,
And banished them from th'obiect of their joy:
My fiery hart with winged fancies flies
And where thou goosed doth still my steps convoy.
Thy Queen is such, as whilst thou draw this air,
In counting ciptiues men may still accept her:
For whilst thou liust, how can thy spouse despair,
Whom thou prefer even to thy soul and sceptre?
Yet flatter I my self that am accursed:
The apprehension, which with grief I cherish,
Of thy mishap may serve to make me burst.
Ah, ah I faint, I feel my spirits perish.
Help, help alice, alice, the Empress falls.
O doleful day of darkness; world of woes.
This grievous spectacle my spirit appals:
Heaven, earth, and all are now become our foes.
I may more justly moan then any other,
Whose ears have heard the hard hap of my father;
Whose eyes behold the anguish of my mother,
Whom both do load with all the woes of either.
What inhumaine humanity is this,
With such a cruel pity to oppress;
To bring pale ghosts back from the fields of blis,
Yet to be plunged in th'Ocean of distress?
O unkind kindness that by saving slays,
And would with loveless love my love control.
Ah, of this odious Sun th'unhappie rays
Doe clear mine eyes but to confound my soul.
Dear daughter, strive your passions to restrain,
Least that the torrent of your grief grow such,
That it both carry you to'agroundlesse maine,
And him o'rewhelme for whom, ye morn so much.
No doubt but he, if we rest captives thus,
Disdaining these indignities of ours,
T'auenge himself in re-obtaining vs
Will hazard all his Oriental powers.
But ah, what comfort can a wretch afford,
Whose careworn bread the word of wo contains?
Yet though my hart would fine impugn my word,
I hope-lesse speak of hope, t'appease her pains.
Such consolations now came not in season,
Since we must hold our grief the greatest good:
Dissemble not your sorrow, we have reason
Yea to sigh out our sprites and weep our blood.
I wail my son. Stat. Reg. And I my husbands fall.
I wail my father, and in him vs all.
No woe like mine, mine cannot be relieved.
I wail his woe, who should my woe assuage,
Who lives by me, by whom I should have lived,
Sport of my youth, and pillar of mine age.
No wo like mine, who faithful to my fear
For love of him all others had forsaken.
But what a fear? my self, or one more dear:
Yet from my self my self by force am taken.
No wo like mine, who borne a Monarchs child
Thought that my birth good hap should heap upon me:
Yet all my expectations are beguiled,
And what I hoped in most hath most undone me.
I morn for him who in my womb was formed.
I morn for him in who?? love me transformed.
I morn for him by whom I formed was.
Shall I not see my self in that clear glass?
Ah! shall I never in his joy rejoice?
Ah! shall I never here his cheerful voice?
Would God fro?? death my death might him exeeme.
would God my life my lives life might redeem.
Would God the life he gave him life might give.
Must these gray hairs my sons green youth survive?
I will prevent him and not live to languish.
Can I remain behind to live in anguish?
But whiles our wretched state we justly moan,
We may lament this infant too a space,
Who in mishap inferior were to none,
If he could apprehend his tragic case.
O then how can my hart but burst asunder,
Whom nature moves most to bemoan his harms?
I think I see the hostess of heaven all thunder
On me, my spouse, and this babe in my arms.
Dear image of my self, in whom I live,
Thy shape shames not the greatness of thy Sire,
But of thy birth clear evidence doth give:
Thy soure-sweete sight adds coals to my desire.
Thou that should comfort most, torme??t'st thou me?
Huge hostess of passions now my soul assembles.
O how I grieve! and yet am glad to see
Thee, though not him, whom thy sweet face resembles,
Go, bear this babe from hence: a wound too deep
Makes in my breast compassion of his part:
Yet let him stay; I joy to hear him weep:
This motherly affection melts my hart.
Of many woes this last is not the least,
That vn-begun thy glory must be ended;
Thy fortunes Sun, my Son, set in the East,
While thy faire-rysing all the world attended.
Ah! must this innocent taste of mishap,
Whose tender age cannot discern his state,
And be thus plagued, yea in his nurses lap
Inherit woe by birth? Ah cruel fate.
If thou coldest hope, what great hopes hast thou lost
That art defrauded of so fair a throne?
Ah in thy cradle must I see thee crossed,
Whom I designed so great when we were gone?
Yet happy haplesse child, thou can not know
From whence the fountain of our sorrow flows,
Nor what it is for to be hie, or low,
Nor on what thorne the rose of honour grows.
Yet hast thou felt the prick before the smell.
Is this the benefit thy birth-right brings
Here in constrained captivity to dwell?
Then better not be borne, then come of Kings.
O what a noise is that that doth affright me?
I trow to interrupt these tears of mine,
Least that such sad lamentings should delight me,
They will not let me plain, yet make me pine.
Or is it some that doth condole our case,
And commas with pity moved to see vs pined,
And to behold how we can death embrace,
Death sovereign salve of a diseased mind?
By many signs we may our selves assure,
It is Alexander, whom we longed not for.
What? ah I die! and must my eye endure
Th'vpbraiding object which I most abhor?
Suppress such speeches now, least all go wrong.
We are environed with outrageous hostess:
And weakness must give place unto the strong:
For Victors rage, when as the vanquished bostes.
I will entreat him to, not for my self
(Mine olde-age is become to death a debtor)
But that you may eschew this wrackful shelf,
Whose flower pot faded yet deserves better.
No, if you needs will sue, sue for my grave:
I will not be indebted to him living:
I rather death should once the maistrie have,
Then I should die so oft with death still striving.
RIse mother, rise, remove those causeless fears:
I come t'appease nort to procure your woe:
The honour which I owe those aged hears
Permits me not to see you prostrate so.
Most gracious Prince, forgive me if I er'd,
In taking him for you, that stands by.
I find no fault to see my friend preferred
Even to my self: this is another I.
My sorrows so confounded have my mind,
That scarce I know my self, much less another:
My soul in such an agony I find,
As if some mighty mountain did me smoother.
I pray you, mother, set those plaints apart:
They vex me more then sterne Bellonaes broils.
This tender name of mother wounds my hart,
Pronounced by him who of that name me spoils.
I was (woe that I was) a mother late
Of two fair sons, fair sons lights of my life:
Now th'one is dead, and in a worse estate,
Doth the other live involved in woe and strife,
Like th'auncient trunk of some dis-branched tree,
Which Eols rage hath to confusion brought,
Dis-arm'd of all those imps that sprung from me,
Vn-profitable stock I serve for nought.
I serve for nought, since him I cannot serve,
Whose sight may only my dead joys revive.
I with the famine of all comfort starve,
Since I want him for whom I wished to live.
I live without my half, without my whole,
Prodigious monster, whom the world admires:
I want the point, the Pilot, and the Pole,
That drew, addressed, and governed my desires,
Now tossed with storms in th'Ocean of despair
By ruin only I attend relief,
Threatened aboue with pitchy clouds of care,
Threatened below with swelling gulfs of grief.
My soul seems to presage disastrous chances,
And varying with her self hath never peace:
My hare oppressed falls into deadly trances:
My eyes must grace the ground of my disgrace.
Hell hath assembled all her horrors here:
Ah, in the concave of this cursed breast,
As in the dark Tartarian groves, appear
A thousand shadows to bereave my rest.
Fair Princess, spare those passionate co??plaints
Which may augment, but not amend your harms:
This voice, which with your woe the world acquaints,
Doth move me more, then all the Persians arms.
Madame, take courage, be afraid of none:
You may expect what help I can afford:
I swear by Ioues inviolable throne,
And doe protest by my imperial word,
That neither I, nor any wight shall wrong you.
Yea more then this, I lay my faith in paund,
You shall be honoured here as doth belong you:
And, as it were, in your own Court command.
Ah how can I command, whilst I am thrall?
What can I have who wanting one want all?
Though it seem glorious in some victors sight
T'abuse their captives, and triumph in ill:
The larger grow the limits of my might,
The more I strive for to restrain my will,
The save guard of my favour shall extend
Not only t'wards you, but t'wards all your train.
I shall have care that who on me attend
From offering wrong you, or yours refrain.
If any press t'impugne what I appoint,
Or would in ambush for your honour lie,
Or discontent you but in any point,
As Alexander lives, that wretch shall die.
O what a host of evils, where ere I go,
Are still encroaching on my down-cast state?
And must I be beholden to my foe,
Who doth divide me from my royal mate?
Should he help me who would extermine him?
Cursed be my hart, if it betray him thus.
Eternal shadows mot these eyes first dim,
Ere such a light be grateful unto vs.
I hold not of my self; Lord, I am thine:
Thy love was sow'ne not in a barren field,
But in a fertile ground: this hart of mine
To thee, my dear, no small increase doth yield.
Yet this good fortune doth mis-fortune bring;
My constancy shall now be clearly known:
Another might have loved a happy King:
But I will love thee though thou be ore-throwne.
Fine would I strive to co??fort in some measure
This mourning Queen, and mitigate her pain;
Whose woe doth make my victory no pleasure,
But hath ensowr'd the sweetness of my gain.
Most mighty King, thou dost deserve indeed
That, as for Darius, we should pray for thee,
Who doest so far in clemency exceed,
That thou bewailst our loss no less then he.
Thou hast not only by thy worth surmounted
All other Kings in dignity alone,
And benefits of Fortune most accounted,
But in all virtues worthy of a throne.
Thou dost vouchsafe on me (more then I crave)
The title of a Queen, and mother still:
But I confess my self thy humble slave,
Whose life hath now no limits but thy will.
I have all that imagined good forgot,
Which greatness gave: I'll look no more so sadly:
But will allow of this my present lot,
And bear the burden of my bondage gladly.
If that this wretched woman here were free,
Who hath no heaven except her husbands face,
I could content my self (great Prince) to be
The meanest hand-maide that attends your grace.
You may command me, as I were your Son,
Whose duteous love shall prove no less entire.
Heavens recompense the curtsy thou hast done
Which all succeeding ages shall admire.
Those captived Princesses have pierced my soul,
Who even amidst our heaven have found a hell.
What stoic brow his passions could control,
As not to weep, if he re-marked well
The tears of these fair Ladies causing wonder,
Who need not challenge nature of her duty;
But borne to bring, although they be brought under,
Give grief a grace for to apparel beauty,
Sir, such a victory hath not been seen
As you have gained, whose greatness well appears;
The largest kingdom, and the fairest Queen,
That Asia vaunted of these many years.
Durst Ledaes or Agenors brood compare
With that sweet Queen, the honour of her kind?
But as she is aboue all other fair,
As far her daughters make her go behind.
It seemed at first that sorrow had been sleeping
While as these Virgins in their Grand-dames bosom
With weeping beauty, and with beauties weeping
Did with a hail of pearl blast beauties blossom.
So large a power is to no Prince allotted,
As to loves Empire in their face confined.
O how is my Hephestion thus assotted?
Dare folly seek t'assault so brave a mind?
Dare Cupped enter in an armed camp,
And Mars own minions thus presume to danton?
Must his soft seal steele-wearing stomachs stamp,
And make them tributaries to that wanton?
We dare resist (whilst many a thousand dies)
Against th'inuasion of a world of men:
Yet if in ivory orbs two Sunny eyes
Assault the soul at unawares, O then
Some secret sympathy, some vn-knowne motion
So charms the mind, that vain are all defences.
The hart drunk with the eyes contagious potion
Corrupts the spirits and poisons all the senses.
But I in my conceit doe scorn all such:
No, I resolve to be a thrall to none:
Yea, ere I but abase my self so much,
I'll rather die ten thousand deaths in one.
Should I be bound with vile affections chains,
As one oblivious of my former same?
This resolution still my soul retains,
To balance nothing with a noble name.
O what a great indignity is this
To see a Conqueror to his lust a slave?
Who would the title of true worth were his
A mind surmounting every vice must have.
The bravest trophy ever man obtained
Is that, which o'er himself himself harh gained.
I joy, my sovereign, that as you excel
Not only men, but Mars himself in arms:
So you by virtues might the power repell
Of beauty, love, and Cithereas charms.
Your virtue bright, whose rays shine in your words
And thence to harts center are reflected;
Now over my self such power to me affords,
That with fond love I loath to he infected.
NOw since, Narbazanes, we are come hither,
Let vs accomplish what we have intended:
And join our wit, our force, and all together,
That it may be no sooner known then ended.
You see occasion call vs, whilst we sleep,
And point vs out the way to be advanced;
Yea blames our sluggishness that cannot keep
The course of things which for our weal have chanced
The heavens abhor our King, &amp; strive t'vndo him:
Nothing doth prosper that he enterprises:
Some new disaster daily falls unto him:
Some cross o'er-thwarts all things that he devises.
In no strict limits should our thoughts be bounded
Whom so great happiness seems to importune:
For since our King is like to be confounded,
Upon his fall we both may build our fortune.
I shall not fail for to perform my part:
I of your words exceedingly allow:
Honour, and wealth are the idols of my hart,
Which if I may obtain, I care hot how.
And yet I would we had some fair pretence.
Our countries care must seem our souls to cumber:
This seeming zeal must shadow our offence:
For such a show will satisfy a number.
Let vs be well advised, ere we resolve:
And then endeavour t'execute it soon.
If we our selves once in this work involve,
And then not finish it, we are undone.
He hath sent one to Alexander late
To speak of peace, but did the same in vain:
And now involved in a despaired estate,
Bared from accord, he cannot wary sustain.
His purpose is his Captains to conuene,
To ask of them some counsel for his safety:
A time more fit for vs could not have been.
Who mind to compass Kings must: needs be crafty.
For to achieve that which we think to doe,
A course more fit we by no means could find,
Then crooked seeming-vpright counsel to
Disguise our practises, and mask our mind.
We will advise him to renounce a space
His state to some one, whom he may desire
But for the fashion to accept his place,
And as himself a certain time empire.
Whose better fortune may perchance bring back
That which his ever ebbing bears away:
Then he again his Diadem shall take,
And as before the regal sceptre sway.
Well then amongst our selves, t'auoid, debate
Which undermines so many a mighty action.
I will prefer you to the imperial seat.
And to approve the same will frame my faction.
All that is one, which of vs two receive it,
Since every thing doth equally belong vs:
I'll take it for the form, not that I crave it,
For we will part his Empire all among vs.
But if he condescend to this we crave,
Which at the first unfolding would seem good:
Let him not think vs two such fools to leave
That which so many Monarchs buy with blood.
Who once advanced would willingly go down,
And not love in authority to stand?
It is not the custom so to quite a Crown,
When one hath know'n how sweet it's to command.
This name of faith but to get credit feigned,
If it were balanced with a kingdom, straight
In them whose consciences are most restrained
T'would soon succumb, a sceptre hath such weight.
Yet to betray our King we have no reason:
When I muse on th'attempt it makes me sorry:
Our name stained with this odious stile of treason
Shall leave our successors more shame, then glory.
We first must end all our designs with pain,
Then reign with fear, and live securely never;
As in a dream a space with pomp remain,
Then die disgraced, infamy for ever.
The sacred title of a Sovereign King
Doth strike a terror in my troubled thought,
And majesty, t'amaze my mind, doth bring,
Whose aspect only hath great wonders wrought.
To idle sounds, and frivolous reports
Give thou a passport, for they last not long:
And all that thou alleges nought imports.
A Crown may cover any kind of wrong.
What heinous thing so odious is by nature,
That for a Kingdom hath not been committed:
To be a King let me be called a traitor;
Faith, if for ought, for this may be omitted.
Those are but feeble brains, which fancies lode
With timorous dreams, that bare surmising brings.
Who fear vain shadows must not come abroad.
Too warie-wits dare never work great things.
If our brave project happily succeed,
(As now I doubt not but it shall do soon)
We straight will find enough t'applaud our deed,
And sooth vs up in all that we have done.
To have the time and manner then praefixt,
Command the Bactrians all themselves to arm,
And to attend till we advertise next,
Prompt for all perils at the first alarm.
Then through the Camp a rumour we will spread,
That hopeless Darius hath dispairdlie gone
With violence to dwell amongst the dead,
And seem therefore excessively to moan.
The Persians we with promises must feed,
So to disarm him of his native powers:
Then we will apprehend himself with speed:
For while that he is free nothing is ours.
That we may seem to use him with respect,
(As to the state of such a Prince pertains:)
We will not this last ornament neglect;
He shall be bound, but bound with golden chains.
To Alexander after we will send,
And offer Darius in his hands t'appease him;
Then crave his favour, that he will defend
Vs as his friends, who have done all to please him;
If his good-will we cannot thus procure,
And he vs with extremity pursue;
With Darius death we will our states assure,
Then raise fresh forces, and the wars renew.
Let vs henceforth for nothing be dismayed,
But strive our selves courageously to bear:
This dangerous action would not be delayed,
Least time work his assurance, and our fear.
Time, through Ioues judgment just,
Huge alterations brings:
Those are but fools that trust
In transitory things,
Whose tails bear mortal stings,
Which in the end will wound.
And let none think it strange,
Though all things earthly change
In this inferior round.
What is from ruin free?
The elements which be
At variance (as we see)
Each other doe confound:
The earth and air make war:
The fire and water are
Still wrestling at debate:
All those through cold and heate,
Through drouth, and moisture jar:
No wonder though men change and fade,
Who of those changing elements are made.
How dare vain worldlings vaunt
Of fortunes goods not lasting,
Evils that our wits enchant,
Exposed to loss and wasting.
Lo we to death are hasting,
Whilst we these things discuss.
All things from their beginning,
Unto an end are running:
Heaven hath ordained it thus.
We hear how heaven doth thunder;
We see th'earth burst asunder;
And yet we never ponder,
What this imports to vs.
Those fearful signs doe prove,
That th'angrie powers aboue
Are moved to indignation
Against this wretched nation,
Which they no longer love:
What are we but a puff of breath,
Who live assured of nothing but of death?
Who was so happy yet,
As never had some cross:
Though on a Throne he sit,
And is not used with loss,
Yet fortune once will toss
Him, when that least he would.
If one had all at ones
Hydaspes precious stones,
And yellow Tagus gold,
All th'Orient all treasure,
And every earthly pleasure,
Even in the greatest measure,
It should not make him bold.
For while he lives secure,
His state is most unsure.
When it doth least appear,
Some heavy plague draws near,
Destruction to procure.
We may compare th'earths glory to a flower,
That flourishes and fades in an hour.
In what we most repose
We find our comfort light:
The thing we soonest lose
That's precious in our sight.
For honour, riches, might
Our lives im paund we lay:
Yet all like flying shadows,
Or flowers enambling meadows,
Euanish and decay.
Long time we toil to find
Those idols of the mind,
Which got we cannot bind
T'abide with vs one day.
Then why should we presume
On treasures that consume,
Difficile to obtain,
Difficile to retain,
A dream, a breath, a fume;
Which vex them most who them possess,
Who starve with store, and famish with excess.
AH, must I poison now my Princes ears
with the worst news that ever burthe??'d fame?
Had I as many tongues, as I have tears,
All would not serve my sorrows to proclaim.
Great signs of grief I in thy face discern:
Spare not for to report this heavy cross
To one, I fear, whom it doth most concern.
First death, disgrace, destruction, treason, loss?
Tell on the sum of honour at the first:
With no ambiguous words my pain prolong:
It is comfort to a wretch to know the worst:
And I have learned to be unhappy long.
What least I speak, and yet suspect too much,
First some ludibrious message of my scorn,
Which must wound me? but ah no torment such,
As this to them who that disgrace have borne.
She was not wronged, as you have misconceived.
The Gods have had a care for to preserve her:
Such favour of the victor she received,
As of her subjects that were bound to serve her.
But what a volley doth my voice prepare
Of woes to charge your ears, woes full of dread?
Would God ere I the sum thereof declare,
That I might die in saying she is dead.
Cursed caitiue, was it not enough, allas,
That I beheld her die, and would have died,
But that I must armed with sad tidings pas
To wound all them that hear what I have spied?
See how he fares shot with these words of mine,
As one become the pray of grief, and death.
Yet doth the Sun on my affliction shine,
And sees the air infected with my breath.
And can I live, and look them in the face,
That have my ignominious o're-throw seen?
And how I vanquished, vanquished with disgrace
Engaged at once my kingdom, and my Queen?
Heaven bruise me all to powder with thy thunder,
That I no more may in the world remain
The object of thy wrath, and Fortunes wonder;
Spoiled of all hope; yet kept for greater pain.
Ah! art thou dead, and doe I lieu behind thee?
Thy faulty husband think thou so to fly?
If it be thus, then I know where to find thee.
This only grieves me that too late I die.
O Alexander, what such heinous ill
Have I done thee, that thou requit'st me thus?
Whom of thy friends, or kindred did I kill?
This cruelty comes undeserved of vs.
Think that thou had just causes to make war:
Yet upon women should thy wrath be wroken?
This Tyranny shall all thy Triumph mar,
And ever shall to thy reproach be spoken.
Sir, without cause you guilty him esteem.
I know her death did grievously displease him:
A wondrous thing (which few, or none would deem)
He took it so, that nothing could appease him.
Even as my Sovereign now, so then he smarted;
And when he came to ease your mothers grief,
As if that his own mother had departed;
He seemed to need, not for to give relief.
If any sparks of that respect remain,
Which should with reason move thy mind to ruth,
I pray the Tiriotes now be plain,
Or else strange torments shall exact the truth:
I loath to let this question scope my mouth,
Which both I blush to crave, and long to know,
First possible so insolent a youth
Did never tempt the treasure which I owe?
Could this imperious Prince in flower of age
Have such a peerless beauty in his power,
And yet not seek to quench his ardent rage
With the destruction of her honours flower?
Spare not to tell upon what deadly shelf
My joy is perished quite, and I defaced.
The fear of evil is worse then th'euill it self:
I'ts to die twice, to die, and die disgraced.
Let not those loue-bred fears abuse your thought:
By all the world no fable I contrive.
If I speak partially, or lie in ought,
Earth open up, and swallow me alive.
He whom your Grace so wrongfully suspects,
No, not in thought, hath once your Queen abused,
But as his sister still in all respects,
As chastely, and as honourably used.
When fortune first our warlike troupes had scattered,
And with great slaughter put them all to flight;
We, whom she late so lovingly had flattered,
Were made the patterns of that changelings might.
For having found a Crown trod on the ground.
O lasting shame that cannot be recurred.
We straight imagined that some cruel wound
Had kilt my Lord, and wailed it as assured.
Would God I then had died, as I desired,
So t'haue prevented those ensuing harms;
Before my honour and my hap expired,
With Crown on head, &amp; with my Queen in arms.
But Alexander having heard our cries
Sent one t'enquire th'occasion of our woe;
Who finding whence our error did arise,
Gave full assurance that it was not so.
Then he himself unto our tent resorted,
And with most courteous speeches full of love
Your mother, wife, and children oft exhorted
Such vain surmised terrors to remove.
With protestation that they should expect
No harm of him their courage to appal:
Each thing he did accordingly direct,
That no man might endomage them at all.
Thus having them against all dangers armed
(I think for fear, for who would not have feared
Least such an Angels graces had him charmed)
He never more before her face appeared.
Or was it virtue that would fly the sting
Of trustless pleasures that abuse the sense?
So continent a victor, and a king
Was never seen. He fled what cause offence.
He doth his fame aboue all things prefer,
And will not be where it may blemish find,
Nor give his eyes commodity to err,
Nor suffer impure thoughts to stain his mind.
He stayed till that fair face had lost all vigour,
And with the colours of pale death was painted.
Injurious heaven that with such hellish rigour
The purest work that nature made hath tainted.
When he beheld death triumph in that face,
Which late had triumphed o'er a Monarcks hart,
He moaned no less her miserable case,
Then you that lost in her your better part.
And when some days his dolor had ou'r-come,
Her funerals solemnly to decor
He used such honour, as might well become
The Persian pomp in prosperous times before.
O supreme power that of Empires dispose,
And ratifiest thy will with fearful thunder,
Who, as thou please, placest, and de-posest
Uncertain worldlings whiles aboue, whiles under,
I pray thy Deity in my souls distress,
If that th'inhabitants of heaven can hear
The plaints of those who this lowe point possess,
Or that th'immortall can give mortals ear,
Vouchsafe this my last suit for to fulfil:
Establish first this sceptre in my hand:
But if through my deserving, or thy will
The race of Cirrus must no more command;
And if thy heavenly breast such hate contracts,
That I must needs my Diadem forgo:
Let him succeed who proves in all his acts
So just a Victor, and so mild a foe.
IF Fortune had joined me with dastard minds,
Who to a noble death base life preferred,
I should not harangue here unto the winds,
But be content to have my fate deferred.
O, I repent I proved your worth too much,
Who still have followed me in all estates.
I rather should, then doubt that you are such,
Press to prove worthy of so worthy mates.
Ye only rest of all that I conducted,
Of whose great force and faith, which many sing,
I by two fights, and flights have been instructed:
Yet having you I think my self a King.
He hath placed traitors in my towns most ample,
Not that he honours them (he hates their humour)
But to seduce you to by their example,
Then banish all for every little rumour.
Ye have not to my Fortune had regard,
But freelie-follow'd my evil fortuned wars:
Which, though that I might not, Jove would reward,
And all the world extol you to the stars.
How long shall I a vagabond remain,
And fly a stranger who my right would reeve?
Since by one battle we may re-obtaine
All that we lost, or loose all that we have.
Like those vile traitors, whom I will arraign
To hold me up, shall I go cast me down?
Must Darius only by entreaty reign?
No, none hath power to take, or give my Crown.
I shall not my authority survive,
Nor will I proffer a submissive breath:
My hand shall hold a sceptre while I live:
My head shall bear a Diadem till death.
If those frank thoughts that doe possess my soul,
Such flames of virtue kindled have in you;
A Macedonian never shall control
Our noble acts, nor laugh to see vs bow.
My state may testify frail Fortunes change:
May she not him o're-whelme, as well as me?
At least our hands bear death, if not revenge:
For who can stop a stout hart for to die?
Think of your ancestors, I you exhort,
Who made the Gracious tributaries ever;
And of whose wondrous acts men do report
Great things, the fame whereof shall perish never.
Shall future ages in your praise be dombe,
Whilst they your Fathers memory adore?
I am resolved, my Triumph, or my Tomb
A Laurel, ore Cyprus shall decor.
What vain amazement doth disturb our spy???ritz?
Let vs consult no further but go to.
He, who the Persians wonted worth inherits,
Will not rest long advising what to doe?
Come let vs with our best attire and arms
Accompany our King to this last strife:
Through bloody squadrons, and through hot alarms
By slaughter only we must look for life.
And when our host, as I hope shall prevail,
Our country shall have peace, we praise of right:
And if our Fortune, not our courage, fail,
We die with honour in our Sovereigns sight.
Let vs, if vanquished, be ashamed to be.
A glorious death may greater honour give.
Doe to overcome, and yet not fear to die.
It's needful that we fight, not that we live,
My words will first your Majesty displease:
Yet duty makes me speak where silence spills:
The fine Physician cures a sharpe disease
With some sour potion that corruption kills.
The skilful Pilot when he fears a storm,
To save the ship will cast out precious things:
Yet I persuade you not in any form
To further, but to stay what ruin brings.
We war against the Gods, we cannot speed:
To all our actions Fortune is opposed.
We must of force some other way proceed:
So have the heavens of our affairs disposed.
Dear Sir, give o'er the government and stile
To some more happy man, not in effect?
But cloth him with your shadow for a while,
Till he your Realms half ruined re-erect.
When he hath climbed this tempest now so hot,
And settled Asia with a good success?
He will your kingdoms lost with what he got
Restore: appearance promises no less.
All Bactria yet abides at your command:
The Indians, lo, would die to doe you good:
Yea many thousand thousands armed stand,
Bent for your pleasure to bestow their blood.
What? should we rush like beasts to needless strife?
Be well prepared, and then pursue that stranger:
Brave minds should death despise not loathing life.
Base cowards crave to die for fear of danger.
But virtue, to have no support o'er past,
Will first on all means possible be thinking:
And when that all is proved, death is the last,
To which it is enough to go not shrinking.
Now for the time let Bactria be our seat,
To Bessus for the form your Crown resign:
Who, when he once hath re-aduanc'd you state,
Shall quite all sovereignty at the first sign.
Wretch, trauellest thou thy sovereign to betray?
Such treason dare thou to our ears impart?
Such treason under trust? Stay traitor, stay:
Isle sheath my sword even in thy traitorous hart.
Sir, you must strive to have this passion broken.
Consider what they are, what is the time:
It may be they through ignorance have spoken:
In thought, and not in word, consists a crime.
Since to affront your enemy you go,
You must not stir for every little object:
But tolerate your own, t'offend your foe.
For now i'ts time time to love not lose a subject.
I shall get trial upon what pretence
This ou'r-sight in advise hath been committed.
If through simplicity, not for offence,
He must be pardoned and his speech remitted.
I wish that it were so. I take no pleasure
To ruin them that would my fortune cherish.
Your grace will grant me mercy in some measure.
First hear, and if I fail then let me perish.
I call the Gods to witness of my case,
Who can decipher every secret thought:
If I intended treason toward your Grace,
Straight where I stand let me be turned to nought.
I counselled but according to my skill:
It was my upright mind that made me bold.
I rue my wit not answered to my will:
Yet zeal what it conceives must needs unfold.
We should beware to speak in great affairs,
Where words are damned, or balanced by th'euent.
For if things fail, the fault is still thought theirs
Who gave th'aduise, though of a good intent.
I fall before your feet here for refuge:
Then let me not be without cause rejected:
At least, examine first before you judge:
Isle rather die absolved, then live suspected.
Your fond opinion first was to be feared,
Which seemed indeed sinistriouslie inclined:
For at the first your speech to me appeared
Th'envenom'd birth of some malicious mind.
But since you purge you so, Isle not arraign you,
Not further call your loyalty in doubt:
But in the same degree of grace retain you,
That you were in before these words brake out.
I think that Patron looks with speaking eyes,
As if his mind were mightily perplexed:
Come, Patron, tell what in thy bosom lies,
Wherewith thou seem so wonderfully vexed.
Sir, I would speak in privy, If I could,
That which th'affection of my soul affords:
It must be sealed with silence, and I would
That none were present to report my words.
Of fifty thousand Greeks four only rest,
Companions in all perils with your host:
Alike with you delighted and distressed:
As faithful now as when you flourished most.
Where you remain we must remain with you:
All kind of fortunes have vs joined together.
Appoint our tents for your Pavilion now;
And we will guard you, if that you come thither.
We have abandoned Greece, our native soil:
We have no Bactria to be our retreat:
Our hope is all in you: those that would spoil
Vs of your person ruin all our state.
Would God that all your army did their due:
To use more words th'occasion is not fit.
I should not urge you, if your own were true,
Your custody to strangers to commit.
What sudden accident doth this dismay you
That you such inconveniences forecast?
Sir, Bessus and Narbazanes betray you???
This day to you, or them will be the last.
They fine repentance only to dissemble,
Till every thing be for the fact prepared.
Their friends in hast doe all their force assemble,
And once ere night mind to invade your guard.
I credit you: but yet I cannot wrong
My subjects so, to think of them the worst:
Shall I leave them who followed me so long?
By doing so to make my self accursed.
I will await on what the heavens will offer,
For who can stand when fates his fall conspire?
Among mine own I willingly will suffer.
I live too long if they my death desire.
Take heed, Sir, to this subtile-witted Greek:
The Grecian faith to all the world is known.
I am informed he by all means doth seek
To win his grace who hath your state o're-throwne.
And marvel not though mercenary men,
Who sell themselves, sell all: believe them never.
They have no God but gold, nor house: how then
Can they be constant that are changing ever?
Although that he pre-occupie you thus,
And others who themselves abuse your Grace:
Faith shall be found inviolate in vs,
When our accuser dare not show his face.
Who hope to have of Alexander gain,
Or honour to be false, they have no reason:
No man on earth doth traitors more disdain,
Nor more seuearly will b'aueng'd on treason.
Well, Sir, you shall see shortly what we are:
I will go see your Ensigns all displayed.
It's better now since things are gone so far,
Then seem for to mistrust, to be betrayed.
Lo Artabazus, I have acted here
My part of greatness, and my glass is run.
Now Patrons speech doth evident appear.
I see my end, yet can it no way shun.
The Bactrians only meddled have with this.
Go to the Graecians camp, when that is done.
And when your danger once divulged is,
The Persians all will follow after soon.
And what if I were gone to patrons Tent,
And guarded with the Greeks as you desire:
He hath but thousands four that are well bent;
They thirty thousand that my fall conspire.
And doing this I should their deed excuse,
In giving them a motion who have might.
They may indeed my lenity abuse:
But by my deed they shall pretend no right.
O deplorable Prince, who can but weep
To see thee now reduced to this estate?
Retire you all, and seek your selves to keep:
I here attend the issue of my fate.
I know ye wonder all how I can stand,
Down from the top of all contentment thrown,
And not die desperately by mine own hand.
Isle die through others guilt, not through mine own.
None of you all have falsified your troth,
But with me loyal still to th'end ye abide.
Now I you all disburth???n of your oath:
Leave me alone, and for your selves provide. 
O Wretched Monarchy, vain mortals choice,
The glorious st???p to a disgrace-full fall:
Our power depends upon the peoples voice,
And to seem sovereign needs we must serve all.
Yet blown, like blathers, with ambitions wind,
On envied scepters weaklie we rely:
And calling not our frail estate to mind,
Not only earth, but heavens themselves defy.
This hellish hag our restless mind doth toss,
While carried with a popular applause,
T'enlarge our limits with our neighbours loss,
We of our own confusions are the cause.
And when th'ecclipse comes of our glories light,
Then what avails th'adoring of our name:
A mere illusion made to mock the sight,
Whose best was but the shadow of a dream?
Let greatness of her glascie scepters vaunt;
Not sceptours, no, but reeds, soon bruised soon broke??:
And let this worldly pomp our wits enchant.
All fades, and scarcely leaves behind a token.
Those golden Palaces, those gorgeous halles,
With fourniture superfluouslie fair:
Those stately Courts, those sky-encountring walls
Evanish all like vapours in the air.
O what affliction jealous greatness bears,
That still must travel to hold others down;
Whilst all our guards not guard vs from our fears?
So grievous is the burden of a Crown.
Where are they all who at my feet did bow,
While I was made the idol of so many?
What joy had I not then? what have I now?
Then honoured of all, now scarce of any.
Our painted pleasures but apparel pain:
We spend our days in dread, our lives in dangers,
Balls to the stars, and thralls to Fortunes reign,
Known unto all, yet to our selves but strangers.
A golden Crown doth cover leaden cares:
The Sceptre cannot lull their thoughts asleep,
Whose breasts are fraught with infinite despairs,
Of which the vulgar wits sounds not the deep.
The Bramble grows, although it be obscure;
While mighty Cedars feel the blustering winds:
And mild Plebeian spirits may lieu secure,
While mighty tempests toss imperial minds.
What are our days, but dreams, our reigns but tra?????ces,
Whilst brain-sick reaving with our Fortunes fever.
We still are vexed with changes and mischances,
Till death vs both from life and sceptre sever?
The vanity of greatness I have proved,
And been the wonder of each gazing eye:
Now that deceiving shadow is removed;
And I my wretched state too late espy.
Now bound with chains, (which though they be of gold,
Diminish not my thraldom ought the more)
When this preposterous honour I behold,
It but upbraids me what I was before.
And what was I before (though to each eye
The form of my affliction was not known)
But fettered in effect, while I seemed free,
And in a labyrinth of labours thrown?
Was I not bound to serve then all men's humour,
Or to be censured with some Critic story;
Still clogged with cares, as sloughed for every rumour.
O glorious bondage, burthen-able glory.
That dignity which deified me late,
And made the world doe homage to my name,
Now cannot succour my accursed state,
But hath with my mis-fortune fethered same.
My best was but a momentary blis,
Which leaves behind this everlasting sting,
That of all woe no woe is like to this,
To think I was, and am not now a King.
No man with me in all accomplished joys,
That satisfy the soul, could once compare:
No man may match me now in sad annoys,
And all the miseries that breed despair.
Thrice Fortune did my gallant troupes entrap,
And I to fall did desperately stand;
Yet could not be so happy in mishap,
As for t'haue died by some renowned hand.
But for my greater grief, disgrace, and scorn,
(The minds of men so apt are to deceive)
They whom aloft my favours wings have borne,
Even they made me their moister thus a slave.
Ah, did not death in prison from me reeve
The sacred sovereign of my souls desires,
I wretch not being present to receive
The last cold kiss that might assuage my fires?
Yet ?? thrice happy thou, that hast not lived
To bear a burden of this great disgrace.
More then a thousand deaths this had thee grieved,
To know I died, and died in such a case.
Ah, doe the pledges of our mutual love
(The only comfort that the fates have left me)
Rest prisoned yet? And may I not remove
My mother thence? then is all bliss bereft me.
My pains are more then with my pleasures even,
Since first I in authority did enter.
Was I exalted once up to the heaven,
To be cast head-long down to mischiefs center?
My ample Empire, and my Princely birth,
My great magnificence, and vain excess,
All cannot yield my mind one minutes mirth,
To ease me now in this extreme distress.
Lo here, reduced unto the worst of ills,
Past help, past hope, and only great in grief,
I wait upon two abject vassals wills,
And dare not, no, not think upon relief.
Death would I scorn (my course must once have rue??)
If I had first repaired mine honours breach,
Whose wounds so thrill my soul, as vnbegun
The life I wish that does my fame impeach.
This mortal veil I willingly resign,
Since to an end my days the destinies bring:
Nor will I so from Majesty decline,
As to doe ought vn-worthie of a King. 
SOme new disasier day lie doth for show
Our coming ruin: We have seen our best.
Now fortune bent vs utterly t'ore-throw,
Throws down our King from her wheels top so low,
As by no means his state can be redressed.
And since his foes by arms have him oppressed,
His friends, and servants leave him all alone.
Few have compassion of his state distressed:
Yea, false to him them selves doe many show.
So foes and f???ended friends conspire in one;
Frail Fortune, and the fates with them agree.
With axes all run on this falling tree.
This Prince in prosperous state hath flourished long,
And never dreamed of any evil success,
But was well followed while his state was strong:
Him flattering Sirens with a charming song
Strived to exalt: while-as he did possess
This earthly dross, that with a vain excess
He might reward their mercenary love.
But now when fortune drives him to distress,
His favourites whom he remained among,
With foes and fortune straight their faith remove.
And who for gain to follow him were wont,
They after gain by his destruction hunt.
O more then happy ten times were that King,
Who were unhappy but a little space,
So that it did no utter ruin bring,
But made him prove (a profitable thing)
Who of his train, did best deserve his grace;
Then could, and would of those the best embrace,
And fly such vultures as devour him living;
That these whom he found faithful might have place.
O how this doth a generous stomach sting,
To see some graced for craft and lies contriving?
This is the grief that bursts an honest hart;
Lords favour commas by chance, not by desert.
Those Minions to whom Princes do extend,
Aboue their worth, immoderate good-will,
To the disgrace of good men, show in end
They only in prosperity depend
Not upon them, but on their Fortune still.
Which if it change, they change. the?? though they fill,
Their hopes with honour, and their chests with coin
Yet if they fall, or their affairs go ill,
Those whom they raised, will not with them descend,
But with th'ascending Sun will straight way join.
And doe forget all that they gave before,
For that of them they can expect no more.
The truth hereof in end now hath th'euent
In Bessus, and Narbazanes approved:
On whom their Prince so prodigally spent
Affection, honour, titles, treasure, rent,
And all that might each honest mind have moved
So bountiful a Prince for to have loved,
Who so beningly tendered their estate.
Yet they to him vile traitors now have proved:
By them he is in-chain'd, disgraced and shent;
So as he well may rue, although too late,
That he such sly Chameleons changing hew
Preferred to servants dutiful and true.
But though a while those traitors speed,
No doubt the heavens once vengeance will exact:
The very horror of this heinous deed
Doth make the harts of honest men to bleed:
Yea, even the wicked hate this barbarous act:
The heavens no hier choler can contract,
Then for th'invasion of a sacred King:
Who, as it were, out of the stars extract,
Should fear and reverence inferiors breed,
To whom from him both health and wealth doth spring.
But though on earth men should neglect this wrong,
Heavens will those traitors plague ere it be long.
WHat story or what fable can record
Of such a nombrous troupe so strangely lost?
I know they quaked to know it was my Lord,
Whose name alone is worth another host.
It scarce seems credible in many parts:
But traitors fear though al the world would back the??.
They were but bodies destitute of harts:
More prisoners they were then men to take them.
Who would believe so few durst strive to find
So great an army, and the army shrinks
What is impossible to a brave mind?
True valour dare attempt all that it thinks
In this encounter for t'haue had the best
It would content more then a common thought:
But since we want the chief, what of the rest?
I would be satisfied in all, or nought.
Those traitors thought t'haue finished all the war
With giving me their Lord, whom they had bound:
But I distrust not mine own force so far,
As for to build upon so base a ground.
Although indeed that Darius did me wrong,
I will not suffer others to oppress him.
I keep him for my self: he doth belong
To me alone: none other should distress him.
Whilst he did only in himself confide,
I laboured by all means to make him bow:
But since his hard estate abates that pride,
Turned is my fury to compassion now.
Although he oft contemned me by his letter,
Yet I am grieved to see him so deceived.
If he had but acknowledged me his better,
It was not his blood, nor kingdom that I craved.
And if those traitors have not kilt him straight,
Yet his delivery shall my name renoune:
I would not loose a subject of such weight,
By which my clemency might be made known:
Sir, now your coming cannot doe him good.
What al are fled? none have my force withstood?
Yet Darius cannot be redeemed again.
Why, have they set him free? or is he slain?
Now hath he got a liberty at last
With no less ransom then his dearest breath.
Then is all Asias expectation past.
Tell on at length the manner of his death.
The boiling ardour of th'ascending Sun
Had cause in me a moisture parching drouth,
Which made me from the way a little run,
To find some fountain to refresh my mouth,
Their where a source her liquors softly scatters,
Which shadowed was from Titans parching beams,
I cooled my thirst with the cold crystal waters.
Which seemed to murmur that I forced their streams.
When lo I saw (a lamentable sight)
Two wounded horses draw a bloody coach,
All clad with skins in most uncomely plight,
Which narrowly t'espy I did approach.
One was within, who could not long escape
The doubtful passage of the infernal gates:
Yet majesty triumphing o'er mishap,
He seemed to threaten fortune; and the Fates,
And as not to so basse a fortune borne,
While all his blood abundantly deval'd,
Burst forth into these words in Fortunes scorn,
As one whose courage could not be appalled,
You gaze to see, and have good cause wherefore,
A man, no man; a King, no King; what monster?
Now less then nought, who once was both, &amp; more:
Which few now by my present state would construe.
And yet amidst my evils I must rejoice,
That this last comfort doth fore-goe my end:
I speak to one that understands my voice,
And not in vain my dying-speeches spend.
I am, but how? in name, but not in power,
That wretched Darius (which I should suppress)
Once happy, as you heard, but at this hour
The very pattern of extreme distress;
Then a while pausing after thus proceeded:
Tell Alexander these last words from me:
Although my hatred still t'wards him exceeded,
Yet I am forced far in his debt to die.
I thank him highly for his great good-will,
My mother, wife, and children so preserving.
Pray him t'vse them that rest as gently still
For his own goodness sake, not my deserving.
They to his foe pertain, and yet he strives
To have them honoured now, as in times past:
But those who held of me both lands and lives,
Of land and life have me deprived at last.
I pray you on my part entreat him thus
Not to permit that unrevenged below
My ghost do wander. By his care of vs
That men his Justice, and their fault may know.
Beside the honour, which he shall acquire
In plaguing them that have betrayed my trust;
Men shall his magnanimity admire,
And fear t'offend him whom they find so just.
Lo, all my pomp is past, my time expired:
My wealth evanished like watery bubbles.
O'er many a mighty people I impyr'd:
Yet hath my life been but a stage of troubles.
And since my glass is run, my glory gone,
And I dead to the world, the world to me;
I wish that all parts of th'earths globe in one
May condescend his subjects for to be.
Then drooping down, faint, bloodless, and half dead,
He prayed to give him water that stood by.
(A small request by such a Monarcke made)
Which when that he had got: yet, ere I die,
This cross must come (said he) t'vndoe me quite:
Though most parts of the world once homage ought me;
I have not now the power for to requite
This little benefit that thou hast brought me.
But Alexander shall reward thee well;
And him the heavens, who hath not done amiss,
To those that have been mine: his foe must tell
That undeserved curtsy of his.
Though none have power his pleasure to control;
If he entreat them well whom he retains;
It will procure no small rest to my soul,
And make him famous, while the world remains.
When my spirit parts out of this tent of clay,
Entreat some with my burial to take order;
Least churlish Charon force me for to stray
An unrespected ghost on Stygian border.
Let first my corps be carried to my mother,
Who may it with my ancestors entomb:
And, as she hath more cause then any other,
May wail this woeful burden of her womb.
In pledge of that affection, which I bear
Thy Sovereigns worth, whom now I must see never,
Have here a Princes hand, I hold him dear,
And recommend me to his grace for ever.
I scarce had got his hand, or touched his vesture,
When like a torch whose wax and week is spent,
Somewhat perplexed, yet with a princely gesture,
He died in peace: his spirit appeared content.
Who could refrain fro?? tears to hear declared
The desolation of this wretched wight:
Have subjects slain their prince who?? strangers spared?
Vs hath he fled, that perish thus he might?
I for his fall am wonderfully sorry,
Who Nestors age was worthy t'haue attained:
I envy death, because it robed the glory,
Which I in giving him his life had gained.
Since death hath put a period to his woes,
The favour that t'wards him you thought t'extend,
Convert to furor now against his foes.
For your designs can have no fairer end.
So shall you both attain perpetual praise,
And win their harts who see their Lord revenged,
Then reap no little profit in your days,
To have the country of such vipers cleng'd.
If but one virtue should adorn a King,
It should be Justice: many great defects
Are veiled thereby; whereas each virtuous thing
In one that is unjust, the world suspects.
Although your counsel, or yet his request
Had not the power to penetrate my ears:
A generous stomach could not well digest
So great a wrong: my mind it hardly bears.
My spirit impatient of repose disdains
That they so long this infamy survive.
But I will punish with most grievous pains
The horrid treason that they did contrive.
What? do they think, deceived with some illusion.
That Bactria is a bulwark for my ire?
Fly where they list, they cannot scope confusion:
My wrath shall follow like consuming fire.
Heaven cannot be a sanctuary for them:
I dare to force the infernal caves adventer:
Th'earth cannot keep them safe, if I abhor them:
Isle search them out though they were in the center.
And having gotten once those malefactors,
Betwixt the bending boughs of two strong trees,
Unto th'eternall terror of all traitors,
They shall dismembered be before my eyes.
Sir, may it please your Grace to take some care,
That some his funeral offices perform.
Go presently and every thing prepare
According to the military form.
THis look, alas, hath fraught my soul with fears,
Speak, for my life doth on thy lips depend:
Thy countenance (ah) a doleful copy bears
Of some sad summons to denounce my end.
Starve not my ears with famish for thy words:
That swallowed yet may make my hart to burst.
Madame the message that my'soule affords
Must once be known, and once known still accursed,
Be not a niggard of evil news.
And why?
Fame will tell the world.
But first to you.
Tel soon.
Your son is dead.
The?? let me die.
Her joys and pleasures are all perished now.
Why opens not the earth for to devour
A cursed caitiue, that all joy hath lost?
The longer that I live, my grief grows more:
Borne I am to mischief, kept to be crossed.
Would God this body in mishaps abounding
Were covered with some mountain of huge weight;
Or else that th'Ocean o'er these fields inunding
Might make my burial in her bosom straight.
O Alexander, hast thou robbed his life,
Yet entertained me still in hope to find him?
Why did thou not first kill this poor old wim
Who was not worthy to have lived behind hi?
Ah, tended all thy curtsy to this,
That I should live till thou hast slain my son?
You wrong that worthy Prince: for he and his
Came him to help, who was ere then undone.
What impious hands durst one that wore a crown,
And was thereof most worthy, murder so?
Two who?? himself raised up have cast him down:
More faithful then his own he found his foe.
Tell on thy message, message of my death,
And load my mind with all mischief and horror:
That in sad sighs I may dissolve my breath,
Whilst thou relat'st these tidings full of terror.
When Alexander eftsoones back had sent
Th'Ambassadours that peace had sought in vain,
A general muster, then to try th'euent
Of doubtful Mars, King Darius did ordain,
And in one battle to adventure all
Intending, cause his will to be proclaimed,
While two vile traitors did conspire his fall,
Who Bessus, and Narbazanes were named.
These two in counsel did discover first
Some portion of the poison of their hart:
Which cause the King suspect, but not the worst.
Yet with a sword he sought to make them smart.
But having escaped the first brunt of his rage,
With tears of Crocodiles they so lamented,
As they his indignation did assuage,
Whilst in appearance only they repented.
They came to Artabazus, honest man,
Who judged of others by his upright mind,
And could not, or through bounty would not scan
What they with craft and malice had desing'd.
A sincere mind is ever least suspicious:
They think all faulty who themselves are vicious.
They urged him with the King to intercede.
That in his favour he would give them place;
With promise that by some notorious deed
Of arms they would seek to deserve his grace.
He in their favour first informed the King,
The battle would bear witness of their truth;
Then both before his majesty did bring,
Who was by their submission moved to ruth.
Their hands stretched up to heaven, &amp; hue??bled knees,
Their tears like those the Crocodiles doe shed,
Woe in their face, and pity in their eyes
Did for compassion and for mercy plead.
The king of nature mild, prompt to receive them,
While they dissembledly were thus complaning,
Not only of his lenity forgave them,
But wept in earnest too while they were faining.
Then as he used, his danger now not feeling,
He mounted to his Coach: they came behind
With a submissive voice most humbly kneeling
To him, whom shortly they were bent to bind.
The Grecian Captain followed them with speed,
Who being called, and asked what he desired,
Solicited the King to take good heed
Of those that had against his life conspired.
He told him how he had their treason tri'de,
And seen the Bactrians to a tumult bent;
Then prayed him for his safety to provide,
In going with him to his trusty tent.
The King grow'n careless, and his safety shunning
Refused this offer on affection grounded.
Or with some powerful fate his fall fore-running,
Was carried headlong thus to be confounded.
The Greek past thence despairing of his safety,
Who thus recur elesse help and health refused.
Then Bessus did begin with speeches crafty
To purge himself, and errors past excused.
The King then Artabazus did command
T'approch, and Patrons speech at length reported:
He then did doubt what danger was at hand,
And to go with the Greek his Grace exhorted.
But when he found this resolution placed,
Within his breast, no peril for to fly:
With mutual tears each other they embraced,
Parting like two, that living went to die,
Now silent night in pitchy vapours cled
Had mustered mists, and marched unto the West,
A shadowy horror o'er the earth was spread,
The Sentinels were set, and all at rest.
When a strange terror troubled all the host:
The multitudes did murmur in all parts:
They did resemble ships in storms near lost,
Whilst each to the other cause of fears imparts.
Those who their King appointed were to guard
All shrunk away to corners none staid there:
And having to his danger no regard
His better-fortunes Minions fled else where.
The desolation then was wondrous great:
With a few Eunuchs Darius left alone
Did enter deeply to revolve his state,
And thus be-spake them; who did for him moan.
Depart in peace and for your selves provide,
Least ye be likewise with my ruin caught:
I will the issue of my fate abide:
They hearing this, as of their wits distraught
Went howling through the host with dolorous cries:
This made the King as dead to be bewaild.
And in the army did a rumour rise,
That he had kilt himself, when all hope failed.
The Persians grieved, while these things did occur,
Did first encourage all their country bands
To help their Prince: but yet they durst not stir
For fear of falling in the Bactrians hands.
Even in the time when this confusion was
The traitors, to defer the fact no more,
Did to their sovereigns own Pavilion pass,
And rooke, and bound him, whom they served before.
He, who in golden coach superbelie rode,
Was cast in one for bassest carriage used:
And who of late was honoured like a God,
By servants as a bond slave was abused.
Those royal hands to bear a sceptre borne
Were bou??d with chains: this also much did grieve him
That fortune his adversity would scorn
With golden bands, that served not to relieve him.
Then Alexander, having heard in end
That Darius came not forward to affront him,
To find him out did all his forces bend,
Not doubting but he eftsoones would surmount him.
But being at the last at length informed
How he was made a Captive to his own,
At this indignity he highly stormed,
And swore he would avenge it by his crown.
Out of his host he did select a few,
Who were best horsed, whose equipage was light:
With whom his foes he did so fast pursue,
That, ere they could suspect, he came in sight.
The traitors troubled with this he had done
Came to the Cart wherein the King was carried,
And bad him mount on horse back, and flee soon,
Least that his foe should take him if he tarried.
He looked aloft, and cried aloud: this day
Th'eternall Justicer sees through the stars:
I will not with such perjured rebels stay,
And fly from him, who moou's but honest wars.
Then those in whom impiety abounds,
Throwed darts at him who?? they should have defended
And hurt the horses with an hundredth wounds.
While they performed the Parricide intended.
Their hands were feeble, as their harts untrue:
For when their foes began them once to cumber,
The traitors first, then all the traitorous crew
Fled them, who were inferior far in number.
But to the confines of deaths kingdom brought
The King retired out from the way aside,
More wounded with ingratitude then ought,
Did fly the world whose follies he had tri'de.
Scarce was the lasting last divorcement made
Twixt soul and body whilst that th'eyes grew dim
When Alexander came, and found him dead,
Who long had laboured for t'haue ruined him.
Yet with the vesture which himself then wore
He covered the dead corps, and not eschewed it;
But even with tears his coffin did decor,
To the great wonder of all them that viewed it.
And having wailed his death aboue all measure,
For t'haue his funerals made in Princely wise
He bids you spare no cost, but use his treasure,
And them, as best becommes, to solemnise.
He hath his body hither sent by me,
That the last honours you to him may do:
He thinks they so shall best accomplished be,
And who him bare shall see him buried to.
Behold how grief hath her of sense berest,
And choked her breath with super-abounding groans,
No will or power to live is to her left,
Since all her weal evanish'd is at ones.
Ah shall I see (no let me first be blind)
That body breath-lesse, which I brought to light?
Where would my soul a force sufficient find
T'endure the dolor of that deadly sight.
O flinty hardened hart, that wilt not break
With the remembrance of so many woes,
Why part'st thou not, faint spirit, that whilst I speak,
In opening of my lips mine eyes might close?
This heritage of death, this withered stock
Is but a receptacle of despairs:
A torture to it self, a stumbling block,
Whose aged furrows fertile are in cares.
What helps it now to have been made the mother
Of one who to such dignity did clim?
More miserable now then any other,
I live to wail my death, who died in him.
Aye me, malicious Fates have done me wrong:
Who came first to the world should first depart.
It not becommes the old t'ou'r-liue the young:
This dealing is praeposterous and ou'r-thwart.
Ah, why should death so indiscreet be found
To save a caitiue, and confound a Prince:
My halfe-dead body, weighed down to the ground,
Through grief is grow'n ripe for the grave long since.
WHat makes vain worldlings so to swell with pride,
Who came of earth, and to the earth return?
So hellish furies with their fire brands burn
Proud and ambitious men, as they deui???e
Them from themselves, and so turmoil their minds,
That all their time they study still
How to content a bound-lesse will,
Which never yet a full contentment finds.
Who so this flame within his bosom smothers
Doth many fantasies contrive,
And even forgets himself a-liue,
To be remembered after death by others.
Thus while he is his pains are never ended;
That while he is not, he may be commended.
What can this help the happiness of Kings,
So to subdue their neighbours, as they doe,
And make strange nations tributaries to?
The greater state the greater trouble brings.
Their pomps and triumphs, stands them in no stead:
Their Arches, Tombs, Pyramids hie,
And Statues are but vanity:
They die, and yet would live in what is dead:
And while they live, we see their glorious actions
Oft wrested to the worst: and all their life
Is but a stage of endless toil and strife,
Of tumults, vprores, mutinies, and factions.
They rise with fear, and lie with danger down:
There is no burden weightier then a Crown.
And as Ambition Princes undermines;
So doth it those that under them rule all.
We see in how short time they rise, and fall;
How oft their light eclipsed but dimly shines.
They study by all shifts and slights to move
Their Prince of their deserts t'account:
And when they by his favour mount,
O what a danger is it to be aboue?
For straight exposed to hatred, and despite,
With all their skill they cannot march so even,
But some opprobrious scandal will be given:
For all men envy those that have most might.
And if the King dislike them once, then straight
The wretched Courtiers fall with their own weight.
Some of a poorer Spirit, who would be praised,
And yet have not wherefore to be esteemed,
What they are not indeed would fine be deemed,
And indirectly labour to be raised.
This crew each public place of honour haunts,
And changing garments every day
While they would hyde, doe but bewray
With outward ornaments their inward wants.
And men of better judgment justly loath
Those, who in outward shows place all their care,
And deck their bodies, while their minds are bare,
Like to a shadow, or a painted cloth.
The multitude, who but th'apparrell notes,
Doth homage not to them, but to their cotes.
Yet Princes must be served, and with all sorts,
Some both to doe, and counsel what is best:
Some serve for Ciphers to set out the rest,
Like live less pictures, that adorn the ports.
Fair palaces replenished are with fears:
Those seeming pleasures are but snares:
The Royal Robe doth cover cares,
The Assyrian dye dear buys he, that it bears.
Those dainty delicates, and far fetched food
Oft through suspicion savour out of season:
Embroidered beds and tapesteries hatche treason:
The golden goblets mingled are with blood.
Such glorious gorgeous shows do serve for nought:
All cannot calm the tempest of the thought.
O happy he, who far from fame at home
Doth sit securely by a quiet fire,
Who hath not much, and doth not much desire,
Nor curious is to learn who go, or come,
For satisfied with what his father left
His mind he measures by his store,
And is not pined to gape for more;
Nor eats ought that iniquity hath reft:
He hath his little cleanly, and in peace,
And looks not with suspicious eye.
No poison comes in Cups of tree:
No treason harbours in so poor a place.
No troublous dream doth interrupt his sleep:
A quiet conscience doth his cottage keep.
He doth not study oft what storms may blow:
His poverty cannot be much impaired:
He fears no foreign force, and craves no guard:
None covets his spoil, none looks so low:
Where as the great are commonly once crossed,
As Darius hath been in his flower,
Or Sisigambis at this hour,
Who hath escaped long, and now at length is lost.
But how commas this that Potentates oft fall,
Forced to confess the afflictions of their soul?
There is some hier power that can control
The Monarchs of the earth, and censure all,
Who once will call their doings to account,
Their pride repressing, who t'oppresse were prompt.

Back from th'umbragious bounds still robed of rest
Must I return, where Phoebus gilds the fields,
A ghost not worthy to be Plutoes guest,
Since one to whom the world no burial yields.
O what a great disgrace is this to me,
Whose trophies th'earth in every corner keeps,
That I (contemned) cannot transported be,
A passenger through the sulphurean deeps.
Dare churlish Charon, though not used to bow,
The raging torrent of my wrath gain estand?
Must I succumb amidst hells dungeons now,
Though over the world accustomed to command?
But it may be that this hath wrought me harm.
What bloodless ghosts stray on the Stygian bank,
Whose falls (made famous by my fatal arm)
Whose falls (made famous by my fatal arm)
Gave terror oft to many a martial rank?
Yet for a prey exposde to ravenous beasts,
Could never have the honour of a tomb.
But (though for such rude guests too precious feasts)
Were basely buried in their brutish womb.
Thus as it seems the horiour of such deeds
With like indignity attends my sprite,
What stormy breast this thirst of vengeance breeds,
T'accuse for that which valour did acquit.
Ah might Alcmenaes son (as worthy of Jove)
Once force the infernal fortes of endless night,
T'encounter Dis in the Tartarian grove,
And draw forth th'ougly Cerberus to light.
Then leading Theseus through the caverns dark,
That would have forced th'inferiour regions Queen,
By violence used he th'auernall bark,
As Conqueror of the pallide Empire seen.
And may not I down in the center sit?
Their renting th'earth (as thence when vapours rise)
T'inlarge th'imprison'd souls, the pitchy pit,
That once the light may lighten lightless eyes.
What though I from th'aetheriall circles swerve,
Whom in this state it may be some mistake,
May not the voice of Alexander serve
To make th'earth tremble, and the depths to shake?
Or shall I go aboue with new alarms,
To spoil the princes of the peopled round?
And turn back, backed with squadrons all in arms,
T'affright the ghosts that are beneath the ground.
But (ah) what comfort can I find aboue,
Where those whom I advanced, lo now in th'end
The titles of my of-spring strive t'improue?
And to my chair by violence ascend.
Ingratitude torments my troubled sprite:
Would God therefore, that with a body stored,
I might return t'enioy the days clear light.
My back with arms, my hand charged with a sword,
As when I entered in a populous town.
To war alone with thousands in my wrath,
Whilst (pricing honour dearer than my Crown)
Each of my blows gave wounds, each wound gave death.
Then thundering vengeance on rebellious bands
I would make them redeem my grace with groans,
Where now my Ghost hedged in with horror stands:
Less graced then those whom I commanded once.
And yet thaduancement by those captains had,
Whom first my Ensigns did acquaint with same,
Doth make my soul a thousand times more sad,
Then all the sufftings that the hells can claim.
O now I see what all my minions blinds,
My funerals to perform that none takes pain,
My state betraying me distracts their minds,
That have forgot all love, but love to reign.
But Ptholomie doth yet by time intend
Back t Alexandrta to transport me once:
Not moved by love; no, for an other end,
In hope my fortune will attend my bones.
And must I then so great a trouble have,
That lately had all thearth, and all thearths store,
For some few foots of earth, to be a grave
Which mean men get: and great men get no more?
Though many a thousand at my sign did bow,
Is this the end of all my conquests then,
To be barred from that little circuit now,
The benefit thats common unto men?
But of it all that once was thrall to me,
Lest that a little part my body bound,
I think all thearth my fatal bed should be,
That still all confines scorned but the azure round.
O blind ambition! great minds viprous brood,
The scourge of mankind, and the foe to rest,
Thou guilty art of many a millions blood,
And whilst I raignd, did reign within my breast.
This to my soul but small contentment brings,
That I some Cities reared, and others razd:
And made Kings captives, captives to be Kings:
Then whilst the wondering world did stand amazed,
All that but now torments me after death,
Which raised my fame on pillars, that were rare.
O costly conquest of a little breath,
Whose flattering sounds, both come and go with th'aire!
Can I be he that thought it a disgrace,
Once to be made with other mortals even,
That would be thought of an immortal race,
The of-spring of great Jove, the heir of heaven?
I by al1 means the peoples minds did move,
T'haue Altars (as a god) with offerings stored;
Till of his glory Jove did jealous prove,
All Princes should be reverenced, not adored.
Ah whilst transported with a prosprous state,
I toiled t'exalt my throne aboue the stars,
That pride of mine, the thunderer bent t'abate,
Did wound my fame with most infamous wars.
Made I not grave Calistines to smart,
That did disdain a dying flesh t'adore?
And bent t'unknow my knowledge, by vain Art
Though known a man sought to b'imagin'd more.
All feared t'incurre the danger of my wrath:
Which as a sleeping Lion, none durst wake.
Mine anger was the messenger of death,
That many a time made armies all to quake.
So much Ambition did my thoughts engage,
That I could not abide my fathers praise:
But (though my friend) killed Clitus in a rage,
That in my presence Philips fame durst raise.
Thus though that I mine enemies did abate,
I made my greatest friends become my foes,
Who did my barbarous insolences hate,
And for the like afraid, wailed others woes.
Those tyrannies which thousands chanced to see
As inhumane a multitude admired:
And feared to be familar more with me,
As from an odious tyrant stood retired:
Yea there were many too that did conspire,
By base ambushments whiles t'entrap my life.
Of all my labours, lo this was the hire,
Those must have store of toils, that toil for strife:
And I remember that amidst my joys,
Even whilst the chase of armies was my sport,
There wanted not a portion of annoys
To counterpoise my pleasures in some sort.
Of those in th'earth most happy that remain,
(As aged experience constantly records)
The pleasures far exceeded are by pain,
Life greater grief then comfort still affords.
What rage and sorrow seized upon my soul,
Whilst big with hopes a battle bent to prove!
That sudden sickness did my course control,
Which Cidnus cold embracings chanced to move.
From the Physician then (though deemed for ill)
I took his drink, and gave th'inuectiue lines.
Then whilst he red did drink, yet eyd him still,
And by accusing looks searched guilty signs.
Not that suspicious fears could make me sad.
This was the ground whence did proceed my pain,
Lest death that victory prevented had,
Which I was sure (if present once) to obtain.
But when that I extended had my state,
From learned Athens to the barbarous Ends,
Still my tumultuous troupes my pride did hate,
As monstrous mutinies unmasked their minds.
I (so my name more wonderful to make)
Of Hercules and Bacchus past the bounds.
And (whilst that Memnons sun burnt bands did quake)
Did write my worth in many a Monarchs wounds,
Kings were my subjects, and my subjects kings:
Yet my contentment further did require,
For I imagind still more mighty things,
And to a greater greatnesle did aspire,
The compass of the career of the sun,
By many a famous victory I wan:
Yet wept that there were no more worlds to win,
As all had been to little for one man.
Was I not honoured as a God by some,
Whilst what I interprizd it still prevailed?
Whom I assailed I always did ore-come,
No project of my fancies ever failed.
This made me thought immortalizd to be,
Which in all minds amazement yet contracts,
For I led Fortune, Fortune followed me,
As forced t'attend the greatness of my acts.
Yet I have found it a more easy thing,
To conquer all the mansions of the wind,
Then mine own self; and of my passions king
To order the disorders of my mind.
What comfort justly could my soul receive
Of all my conquests past, if that even then
Whilst I triumphed, (to wrath and wine as slave)
I escaped not scandal more then other men.
Ah, seazing without right on every state,
I but my self too great a Monarch made:
Since all men gaped to get the golden bate,
Which by my death seemed easy to be had.
Whilst from humanity too much divorced
My deeds all hearts with fear and horror filled:
I whom the force of foes yet never forced,
Was by my friends most fraudulently killed.
But now I see the troublous time draws near,
When they shall keep my obsequies with blood.
No wonder too, though such a warriors bier,
At last do swim amids a scarlet flood:
For as my life did breed huge broils over all,
My death must be th'occasion of great cumbers,
And it doth best become a strong mans fall,
To be renowned by ruining of numbers.
The snaky-tressed sisters shall not need
T'vse fatal firebrands, loathsome Plutoes pestes,
Or poisonous inspirations, so to bred,
A thirst of murder in transported breasts.
Yet my ambitious ashes once may shine
T'enflame my Minions minds with strange desires:
If of their spirits each keep a spark of mine,
To waste the world, their breasts may furnish fires.
The beauties once of th'earth shall all look red,
Whilst my lieuetenants through that pride of theirs
With unkind arms, huge streams of blood do shed,
By murdering of mine heirs to be mine heirs.
Is this the gain of greatnesses did I pine
To be made eminent, to be overthrown,
To ruin first my self then root out mine;
As conquering others, but to lose mine own?
O happy I, but happier far my race,
If with my fathers conquests still content,
I managed had th'Aemathian power in peace,
Which was made lawful by a long descent.
Then far sequestered from Bellonaes rage,
I had the true deletes of nature tried,
And aged with honour; honoured in my age
Had left my sceptre to my son and dyed,
And he succeeded had t'a quiet state,
Which then because less great had bin more sure.
And not exposd to envy, nor to hate,
That do against the greatest States conjure.
But since they mind t'enearth mine earthly part;
Which now no badge of majesty reraines.
To roaring Phlegeton I must depart,
Far from the lightsome bounds of the air Plains.
And must I there, that did the world surmount,
(Arrested by the Monarch of the Ghosts)
To Radamanthus render an account,
Of all the deeds done by my ravenous hostess?
There whilst with Minos Oecus sits down,
A rigorous Judge in Hells most horrid court.
Though far before his Nephew in renown,
He will not with one of his race comport.
O what pale troops of ghosts are gathered here,
That were of bodies spoiled by my decree!
And first the wronged Parmenio doth compeere,
From whom I nought, but who did much from me,
At the tribunal of Tartarian powers:
He aggrauates a ingratitude too great.
And (whilst the infernal tyrant foaming lours)
All whom I wronged for vengeance stand t'intreat:
Yet guilty thoughts torment me most of all.
No sprite can be by plaging Furies pind,
(Though charged without with snakes, within with gall)
As by the slings of a remording mind.
If it be true that drowsy Laethes streams
Drown in obliuions deeps all things at last,
There let me bury far from Phoebus beams
The loathed remembrance of my Labours past.
What strange adventures now
Distract distressed minds,
With such most monstrous storms?
When silence seems t'allow
The peace that Nature finds,
And that tumultuous winds
Doe not disturb with storms,
An vniuer sall rest:
When Morpheus hath repressed,
Th'impetuous course of cares,
And with a soft skip b???ndes
Those tyrants of the breast,
That would spread forth most dangerous snares,
T'inuo'ue th'afflicted in despairs.
Huge horrors then arise,
Which th'elements doe mar,
With most disastrous signs;
Armed sq??adorns in the Skies,
With Lances thrown from far,
Doe make a monstrous war,
Whilst Fury nought confines:
The Dragons vomit fire,
And make the stars retire
Out of their orbs for fear:
Some of those warriors are
To satisfy their ire,
That th'azure buildings not forbear,
But seem the crystal Towers to tear.
Amidst the air fierce blasts
Doe boast with blustering sounds,
T'vndoe this mighty frame,
Which (whilst the tempest lasts)
Doth rent the stately rounds,
To signify what wounds
Strait t'all her of-springs shame,
Shall burst th'earths veins with blood.
And this all-circkling flood
(As it were the heavens to drown)
Doth pass th'appointed bounds,
And all the scaly brood,
Rear roaring Neptunes foamie crown,
Whilst th'earth for fear seems to sink down.
Those that th'earth charged, what horror?
Their ashy lodgings leave,
To re-enioy the light,
Or else some panic terror
Our judgment doth bereave,
Whilst first we misconceive,
And so preiudge the sight;
Or in the bodies stead,
The genius of the dead
Turns back from Styx again,
Which Dis will not receive,
Till it a while engendering dread;
Give whilst it doth on th'earth remain,
To others fear, and to it self pain.
These fearful signs foreshow,
The doubtful world t'appall,
What plagues are to succeed;
When death had laid him low,
That first had made vs thrall,
We heard that strait his fall,
Our liberty would breed:
But this proves no relief
For many (O what grief)
The place of one supply;
And we must suffer all;
Thus was our comfort brief:
For rarely doth th'vsurper die,
But others will his fortune try.
WHateie not big with tears can view this host?
Which hath in one (ah) as the end doth prove?
A King, a Captain, and a Brother lost:
Crowned, followed, tried, by right, for worth, in love.
I think amongst vs all there is not one,
Whom diverse favours do not justly bind,
T'appease that Heroes ghost, though from vs gone,
With all th'oblations of a thankful mind.
Ah, had the Fates been subject to my will,
Such clouds of sorrow had not darkened life,
But we had had great Alexander still,
And he those kingdoms that procure this strife.
Yet heavens decrees can never be recalld,
And thoughts of harms past help breed double pain:
Though being to grief a space by passions thralled,
The living must embrace the world again.
As one whose interest in his life was chief,
I of his death have cause to curse th'effects:
But will not frustrate so the general grief,
To wail apart particular respects.
Though th'aire be plenish'd yet with plaintive sounds
Of widowed hopes that wedded have despairs:
Yet Time must cicatrize our inward wounds,
And to the public weal draw private cares.
Let vs give physic to the sickened state,
That at this present in great danger stands:
Whilst grudging subjects that our greatness hate,
Would enfranchise their violated lands.
Those that are thralled by force to be made free,
Praecipitate themselves in dangers still;
And this th'instinct of Nature seems to bee,
What realm not scorns t'attend a strangers will?
From forced obedience nought but hate proceeds,
The more we have subdued, the more our foes:
A sovereign head this states huge body needs,
That might make vs securely to repose.
And who more meet t'enioy that great mans place,
Wh'of those whose states he took, received the hearts:
Then one descended from th'illustrous race,
Whose birth both worth and right to reign impartes.
If heaven enrich Roxana with a son,
That long'd-for birth a lawful sovereign brings,
And till that course of doubtful hopes be done,
Let some appointed be to rule all things.
Though Macedonians tuned minds not scorn,
That t'Alexander strangers should succeed,
Can men obey a babe, a babe not borne?
What fancies strange would this confusion breed?
This could not well become our grave foresight,
A doubtful birth t'attend so long in vain,
That may b'abortiue, and though brought to light,
Through Natures error made not apt to reign.
But if affection carry vs so far,
That of that race we must be ruled by some:
Though neither being practised in peace nor war,
As those that have indeed by kind overcome.
Then have we Hercules the eldest son,
That t'our great Prince was by Barsines borne:
Who fourteen years of age hath else begun
His princely birth by virtues rare to adorn.
Might not the Macedonians all b'asham'd,
If rendered vassals thus t'a barbarous brood?
What? should we bear the yoke that we have framed,
To buy disgrace have we bestowed our blood.
Our ancestors whose glory wee obscured,
Would get some vantage of their Nephues thus:
They warrd that peoples wrack to have procured,
And have we ward to make them Lords o'er vs?
Ah, bury this as a'xecrable thing,
And let this purpose be no more pursued,
For though they were begotten by our king,
Yet were they borne of those that we subdued.
Obraue Leonides, I like thy strife,
That with so few perforrnd so glorious things:
And death preferrd before th'infamous life,
That bondage still from a Barbarian brings.
Those loathed t'accept a stranger for their Lord,
And with their blood gave flame t'an unknown field,
Yet we would honour them that they abhorrd,
And though being victors to the vanquished yield.
For where-to tended that renownd attempt,
Which makes the Persians yet abase their brow;
But even t'our countries scorn in a contempt.
To take by force that which we offer now.
Was this the scope of all our conquersts then,
Of our own captives to be made the prey?
No, let vs still command like valorous men,
And rule our Empire by some other way.
May we not use this policy a space,
Till better wits some better means devise?
Lest dangerous discords do disturb our peace,
Still when we would of serious things advice.
Let a majestic Senate gathered be,
And them amongst the Imperial chare of state:
That of th'authoritie all signs may see,
Then whilst we compass that respected seat.
There those that were in credit with the king,
Whose merits in men's minds have reverence bred:
Shall in their judgements balance every thing,
How kingdoms should be ruled, how Armies led.
And what the greatest part hath once approved,
To that the rest must obliged be t'incline:
All th'armie by this harmony being moved,
Will execute what ever we design.
This concord would prove happy for vs all,
Since it each state in greatest surety renders:
And by this means our Macedony shall,
In place of one have many Alexanders.
Though silence I confess becomes me best,
That am a stranger, and the less believed:
Yet since a partner of your toils I rest,
I must unfold my mind, a mind that's greeeu'd.
And think you that a babe repairs our loss,
How are the deep est judgements thus beguiled?
This in all Countries hath bin thought a cross,
Wo to that soil whose sovereign is a child.
Nor would these great men as is thought agree,
They be too many bodies for one mind:
Ah, pardon Ptolomie, it can not be,
This union would all disunite I find.
Thus would all th'armie from good order swerve,
When many might forgive, all would offend:
As thinking well though they did death deserve,
Ther's none so bad but some man will defend.
And when so many kings were in one court,
One court would then have many humours too:
Which fostring factions for each light report,
Would make them jar as neighbouring princes doe.
No, let this strange opinion be suppressed,
Whilst equals all, all would unequal be:
So that their minds by jealousy possessed,
From pale suspicion never could be free.
But ah, what needs contention at this time,
T'obscure a matter that was made so clear:
And doye now account it for no crime,
T'impugne his will that once was held so dear?
When that great Monarch marched t'encounter death,
Whist all his captains were assembled there:
And did demand whilst he might use his breath,
Whom he himself adopted for his heir.
Then that such doubtful questions should not need,
As loving valour more then his own race:
He that t'a brave man, brave men might succeed,
Said, let the worthiest have the worthiest place.
Nor did he speak this in a secret part
With Sphinx his phrase, a greater doubt t'haue moved:
As breathing thoughts in each ambitious hart,
To have his worth in Vulcans furnace proved
For whilst ye hedged the fatal bed about,
With an unpartial care distracted long:
Then he amongst you all did choose one out,
That for so great a burden seemed most strong.
He to Perdiccas did present the ring
That used to seal the secrets of the state:
By which it seemed that he designed him king,
Ad so would seize him of the highest seat.
Thus made this worthy man a worthy choice,
That no new troubles might the state deform:
And all the world now justly may rejoice,
That thus prevented was a'mpetuous storm.
For if this had not been his latest will,
Ye Mars his Minions should have lived at jar:
Whilst emulation amongst equals still,
Had made the trumpet sound t'intestine wars.
What huge disorders threatened to burst forth,
If that our sovereign had no prince designed:
That oft hath been a witness of our worth,
And can weigh virtue in a virtuous mind.
I see consenting signs applaud my speech,
Rise, do Perdicas that which they decree,
Whilst modesty doth majesty impeach,
Though thou crau'st not this crown, this crown craves thee.
I wonder not though thus Perdicas shrink,
T'accept so mighty a charge amidst th'alarmes:
The Sun must make Nictimine to wink,
This Sceptre weighs too much for so weak arms.
The Gods will never grant, nor men agree
That such a one should domineer over vs.
Though vulgar minds might yield his thrales to be,
Those that his betters are scorn to how thus.
He prays vs all Roxanaes birth t'attend,
Which though it came to pass as some expect:
He can exchange or cause be brought to???n end,
As bent t'allow all means when one effect.
Thus would he temporise though t'our great scorn,
Till time assist t'accomplish his designs:
No kings Perdicas likes but babes unborn,
He labours well in undiscovered mines.
I need not now insist to tell at large,
What brave men be amids this martial band,
That better do deserve so great a charge,
Both for their skill and courage to command.
Yet are the best not worthy to succeed,
To that rare man that never can be matched:
Whose memory must make our minds to bleed,
Whose aduersar's for this advantage watched.
But if that great man did consent so soon,
That our obedience should be thus abused:
Of all that ever he desired t'haue done,
I think this only ought to be refused.
Th'vndanted band whose worth the world oft proved,
Then whilst their glory shined through silver shields:
By all that monarchs merits not being moved,
As conquered, would have left the conquered fields.
And if that they contemned a princes throne,
To whom his ancestors their sceptre brought,
What reverence would they bear to such a one,
That all this time was as their equal thought?
To those that over their equals raise their state,
Advancement envy breeds, and envy hate.
If such with all would rest familiar still,
This in contempt th'authoritie it brings:
And if they second not their subjects will,
Men cannot bear with them as with borne kings.
Our lofty bands some lofty mind must tame,
Whose princely birth doth procreate regard:
Whose country may confound each slanderous claim,
As one with whom none else can be compared.
Ther's Alexanders brother, Philips son,
That always was a partner of our pain;
Can there be any else below the sun,
Over Macedonians that deserves to reign?
And I must wonder what so strange offence,
Hath forfeited his title, maimed his right:
That any now with a disguised pretence,
Dare wrong him thus, even in his peoples sight.
None needs to wonder much though we negle
One whose election might procure our shame:
His mothers baseness Justice might object,
Whom bastardy secludes from such a claim.
But yet had nature purged the spot she made,
We with his birth the better might comport:
Whilst father-like in all affairs he had,
Given proof of parts that might the state support.
He falsifies his race of wit so weak,
That all his inward wants are soon perceiud:
All of his judgment in derision speak,
By which great things can hardly be conceived.
And though his body might from pains be spared,
Whose constitution is not very strong,
But with infirmities so far impairde
That it aline cannot continue long:
Yet since in state he never hath bin schooled,
His ignorance would rack him still with fears:
Whiles he that ruled still needing to be ruled,
Spake but with others tongues, heard with their ears.
A inconstant king great confusion makes,
Whom all mistrust, and most amidst a Camp:
Whilst soft like wax, he each impression takes,
And doth for frivolous things still change the stamp.
Ah, should our lives depend upon his breath,
That of himself cannot discern a crime:
But dooms by informations men to death,
Then barren pity yields when out of time.
Thus whilst some always must his judgment sway,
That still doth harbour in another head:
Of Sycophants this prince may be the prey,
That where they list, thauthoritie will lead.
And being but base, that they may be the best,
Such still will toil that we may be ore-throwne:
And some-time may the credulous king suggest,
To taint our fame, lest it obscure their own.
What grief were this tvs, whilst such as those,
Might make their vantage of thall-powrefull breath,
And that our actions balanced by our foes,
Were guerdond with disdain, or else with death?
Since private hopes your judgment do bewitch,
Isle leave this counsel where no good can please:
Come follow me all those that would be rich,
Few have regard (poor soldiers) of your ease
That shall prove best which first I went about,
Though some wold wrest my words from what I thought
The malice of Meleager now bursts out,
Like flaming fires that burn themselves to nought.
Thus naughty minds that never dream but ill,
Do construe every thing t'a crooked sense:
What I proposde t'aduance our country still,
He would interpret it as an offence.
And this irreverent parting hence of his,
Hath t'a1l his former wrongs yet added one,
By his seditious words incensed ere this
The soldiers arc to sack the treasures gone.
Then let vs all of one accord conclude,
That Alexanders hoped for race must reign:
So shall w'establish still th'annointed blood,
Whose government both glory gave, and gain.
And let vs now before we part, appoint
Who govern shall till that the Babe be borne:
And circumspectly put all things t'a point,
That the success our counsels may adorn.
I hear a tumult made amongst the tents,
And Arideus is proclaimed a King,
To which th'inconstant multitude consents,
That build on all that changes best doe bring.
The footmen all are t'indignation moved,
That in th'assembly they got not a seat:
That our proceedings they might have approved,.
As knowing all that did concern the States.
Their Princes memory rests soon despised,
That they dare thus revolt, and unconstrained:
Save but by too much liberty entisde,
Which makes the giver still to be disdained.
The want of discipline all things confounds,
Their deeds want order and their pride all bounds.
And dare they then against that fortress rise,
Where Alexanders colours once are reared:
Or violate the walls where-as he lies,
May not his shadow serve to make them feared?
What, how comes this? and dare they then presume
T'encounter their commanders and in arms?
Arms, arms, just wrath these rebels must consume,
Our countenance will dash them, sound th'alarmes.
LO here a great and a most sudden change,
All men for mirth were like to have gone mad,
So that of late it would have been thought strange,
In all this city to have seen one sad.
Each wall resounded some melodious song,
To ravish curious ears with rare delight:
Strange tapestries were stretched the streets along,
And stately objects made t'amuse the sight.
As if his conquests gloriously to crown,
Of all the world a Parliament to hold:
He came with pomp to this imperial town,
The height of all magnificence t'vnfold.
Here Glory in her richest robes arrayed,
Should have shown all that greatness could expect:
Yet were our hopes even at the height betrayed,
To death those trophes Fortune did erect.
A tragic end this triumph quite confounds.
All our applauses are turned to complaints,
Our music marred by melancholious sounds,
Spoiled by the Cypress, lo the Laurel faints.
To funeral shrikes our shouts of joy we turn,
Our gorgeous garments must give place to grief:
We that so much rejoiced, far more must morn,
Days spent with woe are long, with pleasure brief.
This greatest anguish breeds when one compares
The time that present is, with it that's past:
And ponders the particular despairs.
That all heroic minds with woe do waste.
These two between what difference find we forth,
The rising Sun, and it that is declined?
Where is that bright Zodiac of all worth,
From whence the light of Valour only shined.
Now desolation spreads it self over all,
A solitary silence grief allows:
Ah as being bruised by that great Monarchs fall,
How many malcontents abase their brows.
A strange suspicion hath possessed the streets,
Whilst every man his neighbours fall conspires:
When unawares one with another meets,
As strait suspecting treason he retires.
Of rumours strange all ears are greedy grown,
Which (though all doubtful) move the mind to ruth:
And as all hearts have idols of their own,
What they conjecture all affirm for truth.
The heaven with wrathful eyes our actions views
As it towards vs that high disdain doth bear,
Lo all men's heads are heavy for evil news,
And though we know not what, yet still we fear.
For since the widowed world doth want a head,
Each member now doth labour to be chief:
Which whilst they divers ways the body lead,
May a beginning give t'an endless grief.
Some like the fool that thunder feigned like Jove,
Would make their same like Alexanders sound:
And to bring others lowe, or t'be aboue,
Would either govern all, or all confound.
Then some vain wits that only would seem wise,
Whilst by prepostrous fancies being deceived,
Do every thing that is not theirs despise,
And perish would, or them another saved.
A number too that all things doe content,
What each one thinks, are still resolved to doe:
They make a choice, then doe the choice repent,
And strait repent of that repentance too.
The public weal is spoi'ld by private hopes,
Whilst many thus the highest honour claim:
This variance gives their fancies freest scopes,
Its best to fish within a troubled stream.
See how dissention hath dissolved so soon,
All kind of order and confusion brought:
This discord hath our council quite undone,
Whilst one would have done all, all have done nought.
Though that Perdiccas (as it would have seemed)
As being devoted to the sacred blood:
Sought (by that means more virtuous to b'esteem'd)
His Princes honour, and his Countries good.
Yet having his companions in contempt,
He sought by subtle means himself t'aduance,
And so to shadow his disguised attempt,
Aimed at th'imperiall place as but by chance.
He care pretends that none th'vnborne beguile,
As by the heavens for th'orphans weal reserved:
Yet wanting of a King nought but the stile;
He would not want that when th'occasion served.
And Meleager with the like respect,
To cross Perdiccas counterfeits a love
To bastatd Philips right, though in effect,
His purpose is but th'others to disprove.
And so providing, that his enemy fail,
He cares not much what Emperor they proclaim:
And his design with many may prevail,
The cloak of right apparels any claim.
They whose descent their titles doth disclose,
Being borne in possibility to reign,
Must be preferred by reason unto those,
That of all right without the bounds remain.
The furious footmen insolently stout,
Bent to maintain a title, braved our band:
And indignation thundering threatenings out,
Would with our blood have did this barb'rous land.
O what indignity would this have bin,
Whilst those that we subdued with such great toils,
Had in this sort their victors vanquished seen,
And without pain possess their spoilers spoils.
Thus darkening all that we had done before,
(Our swords being stained by ignominious wounds)
We of our conquests could have kept no more,
But burials base (if those) in th'enemies bounds.
O what excellence consists in one,
More than in many as witnesses this hour!
Some with a word or look doth more alone,
Than thousands joined with policy and power.
When squadrons armed with ensigns all displayed,
As those that of their Prince all reverence lost,
His generous course t'haue obstinately stayed,
Did best t'abandon him when busied most.
Then of disorder yielding bitter fruits,
They boldly marched before th'imperiall tent,
And charged their sovereign with unlawful suits,
As t'innouations violently bent.
They by no band of duty more detained,
First grudgde, grew factious next, then rebels plain:
Like waters by industrious means restraind,
Which if their dams once break forth floods do rain.
But of th'vntainted tip of matchless worth,
Whom imitate none may, al must admire:
Through just disdain when fury sparkled forth,
Th'astonish'd troops all trembling did retire.
His stately countenance calmed tumultuous sounds,
Lightning forth majesty through clouds of wrath:
That even as if his words had given them wounds,
They prostrated themselves expecting death.
Those lofty bands that were of late so proud,
That they disdained t'attend their Emperors will:
Then by his sight being at an instant bowed,
Did beg for licence but to tarry still.
And yet what wonder though he wanne all harts,
That to his sacred presence did repair,
With that accomplishment of virtuous parts,
As large in him, as in all others rare.
Whiles when we come to meet as each man sees,
In this maimed state bent t'entertaine some life,
Still having in contempt all our decrees,
The soldiers are not stayed from civil strife.
And who can call that valorous Prince to mind,
That any reverence unto virtue bears:
But he must be constrained, or prove unkind,
To offer up a tribute of some tears.
His death of sorrow makes my soul the prey,
Though many thought that I for it had longed:
For if by those that he rests bound to obey,
One can be wronged, then I indeed was wronged.
Fame to mine ears by divers tongues did bring,
T'a danger huge how you were once exposde,
But specifide not each particular thing,
Which by your self I long to hear disclosed.
When sage Calistines for no request,
With superstitious customs could comport:
But with frank words all flattery did detest,
He was abused, and in a barbarous sort.
So plaging him (no doubt) the king did ill,
Yet to prosperity we must impute
Those fatal faults that follow Fortune still,
As being of all great minds a bastard fruit.
We should in kings, as loath their states to tush,
Speak sparingly of vice, praise virtue much.
But I whose soul that wise man dearly loved,
Whilst spying his perfections thus injured:
To tender passions by compassion moved,
Would his relief have willingly procured.
But when my credit failed, all hope being past,
That I could purchase grace in any sort:
I gave him desperate physic at the last,
That if his life was evil, it might be short.
The king enraged that I had thus presumde,
To limit his revenge by sudden death:
That by a Lion I should be consumed,
Did throw my doom out of the depths of wrath.
But when with rolling eyes the Lion roared,
He by my strength as strengthless was orethrowne:
Which to the king whose mind did then remord,
My courage and my constancy made known.
So that incontinent I was set free,
By this rare proofeesteem'd amongst the strong:
And with a mind from inward rancor free;
As he his wrath, so I forgot my wrong.
For whilst alone he through a forest ranged;
If it had bin but so, to purchase fame:
Some by that means had former wrongs revenged,
Bent like Erostratus t'acquire a name.
Yet that which others did attempt in vain,
And tired by travel, of a surfeit did,
I did perform him bringing back again,
While???t I did run as swift as he could ride.
And of that deed my sprite rests well apaid,
For since that time my sovereign held me dear,
Which afterwards he to the world bewraid,
Whilst in this form his favour did appear.
When unawares he chanced my brow to wound,
To stay my blood that strived to die his lance:
My temples with his diadem he crowned,
A happy sign, though coming but by chance.
And O! who knows but once before I die,
That the success may second the presage?
What hinders vs our fortune now to try?,
And for a diadem our cares t'engage?
Those bended minds that aim at greatness still,
Grown popular by th'armie to be praised:
Doe wind themselves in every mans good-will,
And would seem humble that they may be raised.
What counterfeited friends seal trustless bands,
Whilst in the general cause that each pretends,
Though never joining hearts, all join their hands,
And work one way, yet work for diverse ends?
Yea those whose thoughts intend t'attend the state,
Have purchased powers, being purposde for the fields,
With jealous minds their rivals bent t'abate,
Whilst ??????lls all, now none t'another yields.
Yet with suspended thoughts all doubtful stand,
And their designs t'accomplish doe forbear,
Lest all the rest joined by a general band,
March him t'orethrow that first gives cause of fear.
But he may prosper best whom burning thirst
Of government inflames at first to advance:
Some to be second, doubting to be first,
Will make their hopes depend upon his chance.
And by a battle when that one prevails,
There will ???each hopes at a'easie rate be sold:
For of that faction first whose fortune fails,
Even all will strive who shall be first to fold.
All this to me great cause of fear affords,
I est that we two protract the t???me too long:
And wounded be before we draw our swords,
If those we not prevent that would vs wrong.
No chance of late hath brought me so to bow,
But I expect a part of those great hopes:
Yet in my mind a judgment most allow,
That over a dangerous ditch aduis'dly leaps.
There are t'our charge some provinces assigned,
Whose peaceful states we manage must awhile:
Till all attempt that which they have designed,
Whilst from the world each the other doth exile.
Then living but like those whose force is small,
From which the world no great thing can expect:
We shall profess a favour to them all,
And an indifference pretend t'affect.
Yet shall not then our thoughts have leave to sleep,
But subtilties must circumspectly frame:
The mighty men at variance still to keep,
So always strengthening vs, and weakening them.
And when th'occasion stricter dealing claims,
We shall make war with some ere it b??????ong:
Like cunning Wrestlers at th'Olympicke games,
That exercise themselves to be more strong.
And when themselves have thus prepared the way,
Whilst that their pomp doth bear a lower sail:
For at the last their force must much decay,
Since all must always loose, though one prevail.
Then prompt t'atchiue that which we now contrive,
By ruining the remnant that remains:
We may possess the state for which they strive;
Thus they the toils, and we shall get the gains.
O happy was that guiltless age,
In which Astray lived below:
And that Bellonaes barbarous rage
Did not all order quite orethrow.
Then whilst all did themselves content
With that thing which they did possess,
And gloried in a little rent,
As wanting means to make excess.
Those could no kind of want bemoan,
For craving nought they had all things:
And since none sought th'emperious throne,
Whilst none were subjects, all were kings:
O to a true bliss their course was set,
That got to live, not lived to get.
Then Innocence naked lived,
And had no need nor thought of arms,
Whilst spiteful sprites no means contrived,
To plague th'vnprouident with harms.
Then snaring laws did not extend
The bounds of reason as they doe:
Strife being begun where it should end,
Clearing one doubt t'ingender two.
Then customs but by conscience stood,
By which dark things were soon discerned,
Whilst all behooved there to be good;
Whereas no evil was to be learned:
And how could any then prove nought,
Whilst virtue by example's taught?
Then mortal minds all most pure,
Free from corruption lasted long:
Whilst armed with innocence sure,
When none did know how to doe wrong:
Then stingd with no suspicious thought,
Men mischief did from none expect:
For that which in themselves was not,
In oath???rs they would not suspect.
And though none did sterne laws impart,
That might t'vse virtue men compel,
Each in the table of his hart
Had graved a law of doing well:
And all did wickedness forbear,
Through a free-will, and not for fear.
The first that spoiled the public rest,
And did disturb this quiet state,
T'was Avarice the greatest pest
That ever past the infernal gate:
A monster very hard to daunt,
Lean, as dried up with inward care,
Though full of wealth for fear of want,
Still at the borders of despair.
Scarce taking food t'haue nature eased,
Nor for the cold sufficient clothing.
She with her riches never pleased,
Thinks all hath much, she hath nothing.
This daughter of sterne Pluto still,
Her fathers dungeon strives to fill.
That monster-tamer most renowned,
The great Alcides, Thebes glory.
That for twelve several labours crowned,
Was famous made by many a story.
As one that all his time had toiled,
To purge the world of such like pests,
That robbers robed, and spoilers spoiled,
Still humbling haughty tyrants crests:
He by this monster once or'e-throwne,
Did pass in Spain his strength to try:
And there took more then was his own,
What right had he to Gerions ky?
Thus avarice the world deceives,
And makes the greatest conquerors slaves.
Ah, when to afflict the world with grief,
This poore-rich monster once was borne,
Then weakness could find no relief,
And subtlety did conscience scorn:
Yet some that laboured to recall
The bliss that gilded th'ancient age,
Did punishment prepare for all,
That did their thoughts to vice engage.
And yet the more they Laws did bring,
That to be good might men constrain,
The more they sought to do the things,
From which the laws did them restrain:
So that by custom altered quite,
The world in evil doth most delight.
NOw fortune smile upon my rising state,
And seems to promise more then I require:
Lo by degrees my glory doth grow great,
And by their death that did my death conspire.
Proud Meleager that disdained to bow,
And my advancement always did mislike,
Hath with his blood sealed my assurance now,
T'astonish those that would attempt the like.
Yet of his fall the form my mind appals,
At th'altar of the gods without regard:
We were too rash to violate those walls,
Which the most impious persons would have spared
Lascivious Aiax by Mineruaes spite,
Erst for profaning such a sacred place,
On the Capharian rocks did loose the light,
And all his navy to his great disgrace.
We should not irritate celestial powers,
Then all beginnings are considered most:
And by this sacrilegious act of ours,
I fear that we the hearts of some have lost.
Let others seek t'obserue such points as those,
I'am not so scrupulous, for I protest
Over all, and by all means isle kill my foes,
And then there-after dispute of the rest.
They wrong the Gods that think their church should bee
As a refuge for male-factors still:
For with their justice this can not agree,
Who guard th'euill-doers guilty are of ill.
Was he not stained with many a moonstrous crime?
And like the Salamander in the fire,
Did love to live in trouble all his time,
And alterations always did require.
One humorous head that doth in brawls delight,
May poison thousands with the gall of spite.
As still seditiously affecting strife,
He but abused the credit of his king.
And sent some of his slaves to take my life,
Such bitter envy did his stomach sting.
I saw, how that advanced before your band,
You first did check, then chase them in the end:
And with what mighty courage you did stand
Our Sovereigns corps (though dead) bent to defend.
He but a dastard is t'a foe that yields,
And in no conflict hath his fortune tried:
We (if by time not venturing to the fields)
Like beasts being sacrificed had simply dyed.
But when without we masters did remain,
Lest Babilon had straight bin barred from food:
I those rebellious squadrons did constrain,
Even t'our advantage concord to conclude.
Th'agreement that gave me a great relief,
Made my competitor his mark to miss:
For when I came, though hee before was chief:
The shadow of my greatness darkened his.
Yet in this treaty all the world may see,
Th'opinion of the multitude prevailed:
He whom they did elect our prince must be,
And our design hath altogether failed.
But how comes this? that every captain gets,
A certain realm assigned now to his charge:
And with a warlike army forward sets,
The limits of his government t'enlarge?
I by my means have every great man crowned,
That from my greatness great things might proceed:
Yet to make my authority renowned,
The doing likes me better than the deed.
I this division chiefly did procure,
To make the court from other great men free:
That so my credit might remain more sure,
And they by such great gifts engaged to me.
For him that hath them thus to honour brought,
They must be bound to hold in high account:
And I have not advanced them thus for nought,
They be the means by which I mind to mount.
O but your fancies may be much deceived,
There is no bond that binds ungrateful minds:
I fear th'aduancement that they thus received,
Have shown them ways to sail by other winds.
So long of late as they had need of you,
To seem your constant friends they kindly sought:
But since their greatness gives them freedom now,
They do disdain what may abase them ought.
To those all great men frankest friends do prove,
Whom without cause they always favour still:
And can not be as it were compelled to love,
Those whose deserts do challenge their good will.
This would preiudge the freedom of their state,
That any might claim interest in their hearts:
No, kings can hold of none their kingly seat,
None must upbraid them with so great deserts.
And in my judgment you have greatly and,
Them thus t'exalt whose states you would surprise:
Their common custom is that are preferrd,
That they may stand, not to let others rise.
Isle make their breasts such jealous thoughts im???brace,
That every one shall seek his mate t'ore-throw:
And then I purpose to supply their place,
When by such sleights the highest are brought low.
This subtle course rests by experienee tried,
The strongst else is to confusion gone:
I long to learn how Leonatus died,
Not that I mind his funerals to bemoan.
That prince magnanimous whom all admire
Through his accustomed clemency proclaimed:
That banished Graecians might to Greece retire,
Save only such whom murder had defamed.
At this, some Grecian great men were common'd,
Whose partial grudge occasioned their exile:
Lest th'others restitution should have proved,
A means t'haue brought their state t'a lower stile.
And th'indignation that they had conceived,
Did burst out in rebellion for a time:
The which the king deep in his mind engraved,
And thought by Athens spoils t'avenge that crime.
But since that death ministered them relief,
Grown bold to prosecute their proud attempt:
To Athenians and the Aetolians were the chief,
That brought Antipater first in contempt.
And being by them constrained to quit the field,
He in a little town enclosed at last:
Was once reduced in dangers near to yield,
And stain the glory of his actions past.
But yet by accident as whiles it falls,
It's better to be fortunate then wise:
An unsuspected shaft thrown from the walls,
The Athenian captain happened to surprise.
Then did Antipater his courage rear,
That had almost his staggering hopes betrayed:
And yet not altogether freed from fear,
He sent to Leonatus seeking aid.
And he that seemed his friendship much t'affect,
Did careful of his countrymen appear:
But if he had prevailed some do suspect,
Antipater had bought his succours dear.
Yet by th'effect his purpose bent to show,
What ever that he was, he seemed a friend:
But when the Athenians did his coming know,
T'encounter him they did directly tend.
And though their thoughts in depths of doubts did fleet,
They, whilst alone, to match him thought it best:
Then whilst they marched adventurous troupes to meet,
Hard was the welcome of th'vnwelcome guest.
For when both th'armies were t'a battle brought,
And all the fruits of valour did afford:
Rash Leonatus like a Lyon fought,
Bent to prove worthy of his wonted Lord.
But whist he bravely did his charge acquit,
He lost himself that others came to save:
And by their Captains fall discouraged quite,
His scatred troupes great damage did receive.
Yet when the news to Antipater were told
Of their mishap that come for his relief:
He not one sign of sorrow did unfold,
A little gain doth mitigate great grief.
For he did know, though then his foes prevailed,
That this great fight enfeebled had their host:
And then he took to him which much auai'ld,
Those beaten bands that had their Captain lost.
Yet that in which he did most comfort find,
Was his delivery from a secret foe:
Which did with jealousy torment his mind,
Though outwardly not seeming to be so,
Thus we that underneath one ensign warrd,
Slept in one tent, and all one fortune proved,
And with a friendship then that never iarrd,
As Pilades and mad Orestes loved.
Since wanting now a Lord. that all be Lords,
We lo renounce all kind of kindness now:
And secret rancor budding in discords,
Even every one doth th'others ruin vow.
Such is the sacred famine of a crown,
That it to satisfy before we fail,
What stands within our way, all must go down,
And bands of blood or friendship nought avail.
These glory-rauish'd souls that would be great,
Will pretermit no means although unjust:
????????? of copartners in the state;
????????? there can be no trust.
????????? Well, I perceive Antipater doth tend,
????????? power, t'attaine that sacred prey:
????????? of late augmented now in th'end,
Through every danger once may make a way.
And Alexander sometimes spake at large,
Then whilst Antipater with Ages strived,
That he without the limits of his charge,
More like a king than a Lieutenant lived.
Anti???onus, and Ptholomie in arms
Are ioy'nd in one, our ruin bent to breed:
I fear that friendship procreate our harms,
Unless their spite prevented be with speed.
Isle lodge you now Eumenes in my breast,
And let you see the ground of my designs:
Since that we both alike must toil or rest,
As those whose course one planet now confines.
Since at his death, I by our dying Lord
Was in his place appointed to succeed,
And that my fortune doth a means afford,
How that I compass may what he decreed,
To leave that place I cannot well agree,
As if I wanted courage to command:
Isle take that which the fates do throw on me:
For if without a throne, I cannot stand.
And those that would perform difficult things,
Must not regard what way, so they prevail;
Of slight, then force a greater furtherance brings,
The Fox must help if that the Lyon fail.
So for Antipater a snare t'haue laid,
His daughter I in marriage did require:
That so the time might but have bin delayed,
Till that I had accomplished my desire.
For with the shadow of pretended love,
And hope of that affinity to come:
I from his bounds was minded to remove,
A warrelike troupe wherewith himself t'orecome.
But to deceive deceivers, it is most hard,
He quickly did mistrust th'intended wrong:
And from my messengers his ears he barred,
As did Vlisses from the Sirens song.
This to your state, I think, might much import
If to your self you chose a virtuous mate:
Whose beauty pleasure, birth might bring support,
And both concur in one to bless your state.
If you to make your high designs more sure,
By Hymens means with some your self ally:
Thus of some Prince you may the power procure,
That will conioynd with you one fortune try.
What grief were this if you have hap t'attaine,
That fair Idea which your fancies frame:
If after you of yours none doe remain,
That may enjoy your conquests, and your name.
Kings live most sure, that of their own have heirs,
Whose sacred persons none dare seek to wound:
Since though they die, yet there rest some of theirs,
That are t'auenge their death by nature bound.
Noght rests vntride that might enlarge my might
I mind to match my self with such a one:
That if she have my power to prove her right,
May be thought worthy of the Aemathian throne:
I with Olympias have devised a thing,
That may assure her state, and make mine strong:
The which I hope shall prove a prosprous spring,
From whence may flow great things ere it belong.
By Cleopatra may a means be caught,
That our designs t'a glorious end may bring:
I mean she whom his father Philip matched,
With Alexander of th'Epirots King.
He having heard great Alexanders fame,
In emulation of that monarchs praise:
Went with his troupes th'Etrurians bent to tame,
Which enterprise did but abridge his days.
In marriage with that widowed Queen combined,
If that her mother thus our course assist;
Whilst I effect that which I have designed,
Who dare presume my purpose to resist?
For whilst this friendship doth my name renown,
It may my thoughts from further fear seclude:
Since having thus a title to the Crown,
As one engraffde within the royal blood.
I fear that this your purpose to prevent,
A number now take arms all in one form:
As those that have discovered your intent,
And by the lowering clouds foreknow a storm.
For lo how many else together run,
That for our ruin wonderfully thirst.
Where do you think that we should then begin
And exercise hostility at first?
Though we our selves in strangers thrones instil,
And having Asia to subjection brought:
Make Nilus, Induce, and Euphrates thrall,
Yet all those victories would serve for nought.
Whilst martial Macedonie living free,
The spring that still will power new armies forth,
Doth not acknowledge you her king to be,
Nor hath not proved your military worth.
To those that would pursue a Prince in arms,
His chiefest realm the greatest vantage gives:
Where if the war hold out, it is with his harms,
Since that within his bowels th'enemy lives.
And wars protracted with a peoples loss,
Doe from their sovereign alienate their love:
They lose their hearts whom fortune once doth cross,
And foiled at home can no where else remove.
He that hath Macedonie, hath the best,
Which of our Monarchy the Mistress is:
That conquered hath courageously the rest,
And but depends on Mars as only his.
If you were Lord of that undaunted soil,
And by Olympias conntenaunc'd but a while:
Strait from Antipater all would recoil,
And him as traitor to the state exile.
To you that are a Macedonian borne,
If matched with Cleopatra great in powers:
The Macedonians gladly would be sworn,
And if commanding them, then all were yours.
Yet this opinion partly I disprove,
Which would not (as you think) our troubles end:
For if that we from hence our force remove,
And to the Aemathian bounds directly tend.
There must at first a doubtful war be proved,
With those brave bands whose valour is well known:
Of whom Craterus dearly is beloved,
That bound t'Antipater are all his own.
And though indeed as kindly to those parts,
My friendship is affected to by some:
Yet others have preoccupied their harts,
And will discredit vs before we come.
Then whilst that we the Macedonians boast,
And leave those realms unarmed that else are ours:
Strait Ptolomie, when strengthened is his host,
May enter Asia and supplant our powers.
I by my judgment willingly would take,
The course that seems to make our state most sure:
It dangerous is t'haue foes behind our back,
That unawares our ruin may procure.
My purpose is, though yet to none made known,
That Egipt first shall burdend be with war:
For if that Ptolomie were once orethrowne,
Then that from Greece all hope of help would bar.
Hold still with you those of the sacred blood,
Whom to protect you always must pretend:
The countnance of the great may doe much good,
Whom still though weak, the world delights t'attend.
LEt sorrow then even tyrannise my soul,
Whose rage with reason now no measure keeps:
What of my tears the torrent can control,
Since flowing from afflictions deepest deeps?
How can my breast but burst whilst sobs rebound?
Since once the seat of joys now not the same:
May not huge horrors press me to the ground,
In thinking what I was, and what I am.
I was a great mans wife, a greaters mother,
Even she to whom the heavens their best did give:
Yet I, even I, more plagued than any other,
In dungeons now of desolation live.
My son that was the glory of his time,
Stain of times past, and light of times to come:
(O frail mortality, O sliderie slime,)
Though having all orecom'd, death did overcome.
And I (dejected wretch) whose dying eyes,
He was by Natures custom bound t'haue closed:
Was not to shut his stars with th'iuorie skies,
That tapestried where majesty reposed.
But ah! his falling in a foreign part,
Hath (if it can b'enlargde) enlargde my grief:
Else I on him would melted have my hart,
And spent my self t'haue purchased his relief.
Yet though I was not present at his death,
He shall not be defrauded of my tears:
But for his funeral fires my flaming breath
Doth smoke, and to his ghost a tribute bears.
Ah, to what corner rolls my watery sight?
Where it not finds some matter to bemoan:
O foolish eyes! why loose ye not your light?
Since that your treasure is to ruin gone.
Once of all Queens I might the fortune scorn,
To whom just love that great man did engage:
Whose match in worth the world hath never borne,
Nor never shall enrich another age.
When those perfections whiles transport my mind
Which admiration only doth dilate:
I'm woe that me the destinies designed,
To be the partner of his glorious state.
And I repent that to his sight I past,
Though highly graced on a festival day:
A feast that many a time must make me fast,
And with slow woe that flying mirth defray.
Then if my fortune had not blinded me,
But ah! whose judgment had it not bereaved?
Whilst the worlds Monarch deigned to like of me,
I had th'euent of my high flight conceived.
He of th'Asian Prince whose state did then decline,
Had both the wife and daughters at his will:
Whose beauties glory would have darkened mine,
Yet free from snares retained his fancies still.
Then when my father chose out from the rest,
Those virgins all whom Fame affirmed for rare:
Though having viewed them all, he loved me best,
Then thought most fortunate (if not most fair.)
And when his martial nobles were dismayed,
That he himself with captives had alide:
He by that means (as love had dited) said,
Took from the vanquished shame, from victors pride.
Then me as Empress all did entertain,
Though his inferior far in all respects:
Till I from him by death diuorcde remain,
Whom with his son now all the world neglects.
Although this will but aggravate my woe,
From whom the Fates all comfort now seclude:
Yet do I reverence his remembrance so,
That of my son to hear it doth me good.
And daughter now, to double my distress,
Make me at length acquainted with his death:
That sorrow may each part of me possess,
Sad news mine ears, tears eyes, and sighs my breath.
Though grief to me scarce liberty affords,
T'expresse the passions that oppress my mind:
Yet would affection wrestle out some words,
To speak of him that all my joys confined.
When he had conquered all that could resist,
A monarchy not equal with his mind:
Still in his haughty course he did insist,
And searched out th'Ocean other worlds to find.
But when from it his navy was redeemde,
He stood in doubt where trophies next to rear:
For all the world for him too little seemed,
His mind could more conceive than nature bear.
Then ah this Emperor purposde was in th'end,
At Babylon his glories height to show:
Where all the world his coming did attend,
As Jove aboue, he only raignde below.
When he drew near that then thrice Monarchs seat,
All th'Astrologians by their skill foretold,
What dangers there were threatened to his state,
The which else-where might better be controlled.
But he that was not capable of fear,
And could not muse of misadventures then:
Caused through that town him self in triumph bear,
Backed with more kings, than other kings with men.
There as a god in all his subjects sights,
Which mirth with mourning I must still record:
He spent, or lost a time in al delights,
That a successful fortune could afford.
Till Thessalus, for mischief but reserved,
Once to his house invited him to dine:
Where false Cassandra at the table served,
And as he used, with water mixed his wine.
Alas, alas, and so it proved in th'end,
But who could fear a benefited friend?
The creatures al esteemed of greatest worth,
That either are in th'earth, the sea, or th'aire:
In Persia, Arabia, or the End's brought forth,
That walk, that swim, that fly, that grow, were there.
Then when that reason drunk with pleasure slept,
Which all things did abundantly afford:
And whilst that nought save music measure kept,
With Ceres, Bacchus only was adored.
But when the King beginning was to drink,
As strangely moved he thundered forth a groan:
And from the table suddenly did shrink,
As one whose strength was at an instant gone.
Then when he softly was t'a chamber led,
That Death a title to his body claimed:
The sorrowing soldiers swarmd about his bed,
With looks, once fierce, then for compassion framed.
But he whom victory had still arrayed,
This battle with the rest bent to make even:
Did look like one whom all the world obeyed,
And boasted shortly then to take the heaven.
Then that he comfort might th'afflicted bands,
He stretched them out to kiss respected parts:
More by the Sword than Sceptre honoured hands,
On which it seemed they melted all their harts.
Last, unto them those generous words he told,
Yet to my life my death doth bring no blot:
Thus to die young in years, in glory old,
Of all our family it is the lot.
And since that no mo worlds now rest t'orecome,
It's time to die: I did an Empire found,
And lived and raignde; it's done for which I come,
Now my great ghost must go beneath the ground.
Then having thus discharged all debt of life,
He with a countnance constant even in death:
As too victorious of that fatal strife,
All th'aire perfuming spent th'imperious breath.
But when that it once through the camp was known.
That from the world that world of worth was gone,
What anguish was it cannot well be shown,
I had my part, yet had not all alone.
O let that day which makes my days all night,
Be registered amongst the dismal days:
Whose inauspicious and lugubrious light,
The world with some disaster still dismays.
And Babilon, cursed be thy fatal towers,
Once seat of Monarchs, mistress of all th'earth:
But from henceforth a slave to foreign powers,
Still burdened be thy bounds with blood and dearth.
You need not use those execrations more,
Though Babilon of breath that prince deprived:
Yet as an Oracle had told before,
In Macedonie was his death contrived.
T'Antipater t'was told, how divers times
The king against him had been moved to wrath:
And doomed, as guilty of opprobrious crimes,
His son in law Lincestes unto death.
And he had heard the king did strictly try,
How his Lieutenants had their places used:
Still making all as traitors strait to die,
That had the same in any sort abused.
Then he that private was t'his own misdeeds,
Had learned by others what he might expect:
As whose ambitious breast in pride exceeds,
And always did a sovereignty affect.
But when Craterus was named to his place,
And he in his required the wars t'attend:
He thought that it was but a means to embrace,
To plague his pride with a deserved end.
Then to prevent that, which I think was still
More feared by him, then purposde by the king:
With guilty thoughts best exercised in ill,
He sought what might to death his sovereign bring.
And this the traitor compassde at the last,
As I alas, have learned (although too late)
When to my son, his son Cassandra past,
As to congratulate his prosprous state.
Then in his company he did retain,
A poison powerful where it was employed:
Whose violence no mettle could restrain,
But in a horses hoof was still conveyed.
He, and his brother then th'advantage watched,
And for their prince a cup of poison made:
Thus he that never was by th'enemies matched,
Doth by the treason of his friends lye dead.
And could, or durst those traitors be so bold,
The glory of the world to undermine:
But ah, Madam, Antipater of old,
Against your greatness always did rapine.
And I remember on a time he sent
A Messenger, of mind to make you bow:
That to your son a letter did present,
Full of invectives to discredit you.
The king whilst reading what it did comprise,
Did with a scornful smile t'Hephestion say:
In writing of such things he is not wise,
Which straight one mothers tear will wash away.
My son indeed I many a time advised,
How that disloyal man strived to be great:
But as a women's wit, mine was despised,
And wrested still unto the sense of hate.
Yet of my son I thought the deeds were such,
That t'admiration comed they past envy:
And that none durst his sacred person touch,
On which the daunted world did whole rely.
How oft have I those bitter throws allowde,
By which I brought that demi-god to light?
And well I might of such a birth be proud,
That made me glorious in the peoples sight.
Though divers too, as I have sometime known,
T'estrange his love from me did ways t'prepare:
Yet were their slights by duteous love ore-t hrowne,
And I respected with a reverent care.
His tender love towards me was much extolled,
Then when he sought t'establish a decree:
That I amongst th'Imortalls might b'enrold,
And as t'a Goddess, honours done to me.
Ah, how can I this tragic time survive,
That lost a son so great, a son so kind?
And th'only means that make me now to live,
Is with revenge, hope t'entertaine my mind.
His love towards you no doubt behooved t'abound
(By nature parents of their own are loved)
But those towards whom he by no bond was bound,
Of his humanity the fruits have proved.
His clemency did make his state more sure,
Then all the terrors rising from his name:
Which whilst he lived did public love procure,
And after death a never dying fame.
Th'vnhappy Sisigambis taking heart
Of her own natural son, the death survived:
And t'Alexander did that love impart,
The which was due to Darius whilst he lived.
But when the tidings wounded had her ears,
That from the world was robbed that glory of men:
Then suddenly dissoulde in floods of tears,
She hated life as never spoiled till then.
And with her widdow'd-nephew at her feet,
That of Hephestion did the death bewail:
Her soul amidst a sea of woes did fleet,
Whose forces as ouer-whelmde began to fail.
Then barrde from food she grovelling did abide,
Till that the course of life t'an end was run:
Thus she suruiude her son, yet with him did,
In whom she found th'affections of a son.
If but by hearing of his dolorous end,
A stranger (once his captive) did for grief.
Ah, shall his mother on new hopes depend,
As such a loss might look for some relief?
And so I will, for it were a great disgrace
To me the mother of th'all conquering man:
Like other women to give fortune place,
And yield to misery as many can.
Though grief at first must mollify me once,
(Else as unnatural I might be admired)
Yet will I not still burst my breast with groans,
Than that of me more courage is required.
Isle not degener from my generous kind,
(Faint-hearted hinds brought never Lyon forth)
Nor yet a mother of an abject mind,
Had never borne a monarch of such worth.
And, O, who knows, but once the time may come,
That I t'auenge my self a means may have?
And may against these traitors yet move some,
That with their blood may bathe their sovereigns grave.
Now on Perdiccas repose my trust,
That with Eumenes would our wrongs redress:
Their valour venturing in a cause so just,
Doth by appearance promise good success.
Lo, now of late delivered of a son,
I to these captains scarce dare make it known:
That else to part his kingdoms have begun,
And might, by killing him, make all their own.
Ay me (Madam) this makes me most to pause,
That still th'ambition of those great men fear:
Lest by pretending but a public cause,
They seek themselves th'authoritie to bear.
Ah, they of my young babe as moved with ruth,
Would but be Tutors first, and traitors then:
Void of obedience, duty, love, or truth,
No dearer things then diadems to men.
As those whose courage cannot be dismayed,
Let vs a faction study now to find:
And whilst that pity doth procure for aide,
Go tune the peoples passions now t'our mind.
Unless their love have perished with his life,
Of Alexander, in a high degree:
I think the son, the mother, and the wife,
Must of the Macedonians reverenced be.
And this doth with disdain my soul consume,
That Arideus amongst other wrongs:
And proud Euridice his wife presume,
To usurp those honours that but t'vs belongs.
O they shall find my fortune not so changed,
But I am able yet t'abate their pride:
What? what? Olimpias must be revenged:
That (save her self) a Queen disdains t'abide.
Lo how all good decayed
And evils begin t'abound,
In this skie-compasst round:
There is no kind of trust
For mankind whilst it strays,
In pleasure-paued ways
With floods of vice is drowned,
And doth far from refuge
In endless shadows lodge:
Yet strives to rise no more,
No doubt as most unjust,
The world once perish must:
And worse now to restore,
Then that it was before,
When at the last deluge,
Men by Ducalion once,
Were made again of stones.
And well this wicked race
Betrays a stony kind,
That bears a stubborn mind,
Still hardened unto sin.
Lo, now in every place
All virtuous motions cease.
And sacred faith we find
Now far from th'earth is fled,
Whose flight huge evils hath bred,
And fills the world with wars,
Whilst impious breasts, begin
Still to let treason in:
Which common concord mars,
Whilst all men live at jars,
And nets of fraud do spread
Th'vnwarie to surprise,
Too witty, but not wise:
Yet those that in deceit
Their confidence repose,
A dearer thing do lose
Then can by guile be gained.
Which being repented late,
Brings ruin to their state,
Whilst purer spirits disclose
Wherewith their breasts are stord:
For though they would remord,
They get not trust again;
But having honour stained,
And covenants prophain'd
Are held in high disdain,
And do in end remain
Of all the world abborr'd;
Not trusty when they should,
Not trusted when they would.
But ah, our Nobles now,
Lo, like Lisander still,
So that they get their will,
Regard not by what way,
And with a shameless brow,
Doe of th'effect allow,
Even though the means were ill.
Which all the world may see
Disgraces their degree,
That should not learn to lower,
But throw base sleights away.
What can brave minds dismay?
Whose worth is as a tower
Against all fortunes power,
Still from all fraud being free?
These keep their course unknown,
Whom it would shame if shown:
Who not from worth digress
T'vse sleights that fear imparts.
Doe show heroic hearts,
The which would rather far
An open hate profess,
Then secretly suppress,
Honour scorns fearful arts.
But those that doe vs lead,
As for dissembling made,
Even though that they intend
Amongst themselves t'haue war,
Seem in no sort to jar,
But friendship do pretend,
Not like their Lord thats dead,
That trusting to his worthy,
Still what hee meant spake forth.
The great men not for nought
Do seek the peoples love:
And them their deeds t'approue,
Do labour still t'allure.
But Perdiccas it's thought
Too sparingly hath sought
Our minds towards him to move,
As one that still conceits
Hee may command the fates:
His pride so great is grown,
That none can it endure:
Yet stands his state unsure,
Since odious to his own,
He must b'at last ore-throwne
Whose humour each man hates:
Pride doth her followers all,
Lead headlong to a fall.
TOugh stormy discord and tumultuous wars
Doe fire the minds of men with flames of rage,
That having haughty thoughts as heaven hath stars,
Their indignation nothing can assuage.
Yet lo, amongst the soldiers waving bowers,
The Heralds cries, whiles calms the trumpets sounds,
And peace dare inter-pose her unarmed powers,
To limit for a time Bellonaes bounds.
And whilst of fury they suspend th'effects,
The seeming-friended foes have conference whiles,
And each shows the other what his soul affects,
A shadow of the bliss that Mars exiles.
Thus men magnanimous amidst the field,
Dare to th'assurance of their enemies trust:
And loathing what disloyalty doth yield,
Not violate their vows, nor prove unjust.
Though Love be past, yet Truth should still remain,
I virtuous parts even in my foes applaud;
A gallant mind doth greater glory gain,
To die with honour than to live by fraud.
And why Eumenes as mistrusting me,
Else standing on your reputation long,
Did you disdain to come (as all men see)
T'a greater than yourself, and t'one more strong.
Though we not come to plead our birthright here,
Let him (but warriors take not so their place)
In whom best signs of nobleness appear,
Be thought extracted of the noblest race.
Most noble he that still by virtue strives,
To leave his name in minds of men engraved;
And to his of-spring greater glory gives,
Than of his ancestors he hath received.
Erst we by birth in war not marshalld stood,
As at the table upon Ivory beds;
A soldiers worth consists not in his blood,
But in the blood of th'enemies that he sheds.
What ever others of my linage try,
I am Eumenes, and I scorn t'accord,
That there can be a greater man than I,
While as I have a heart, a hand, a sword.
Lo, when prosperity too much prevails,
Aboue the judgment thus of vulgar minds,
As little barges burdend with great sails,
They leap aloft being swollen with fortunes winds.
And as adversity the sprite refines,
From out the dross of pride, and passions base:
That virtue in affliction clearest shines,
And makes one all the ways of wit to trace.
So good success doth make the judgment die,
Then whilst the fortunate their ease doe take:
And lulled asleep in Pleasures meadows lie,
As fatted for the slaughter, ripe to shake.
Yet this the nature is of gallant men,
To rest (being in no state too much involved)
When prospring best most wary and humble then;
If crossed, then more courageous and resolved.
What though your first attempts renowned are,
By which you in two fields victorious stood,
And did orethrow two thunderbolts of war,
That lost their lives amidst a scarlet flood?
Yet is that course of victory controlled,
And you have tried what force your force exceeds:
Then let not withered Laurels make you bold,
As still reposing on your by-past deeds.
For by the same t'an indignation moved,
The Macedonians all abhor your name;
That at that time so proud a conqueror proved,
And with their great men's slaughter winged your fame.
No fortune past so puffs up my conceit,
That it contempt of further danger brings:
Nor am I so dejected now of late,
But I intend to doe far greater things.
He by prosperity made never proud,
That knows the frailty of this earthly frame,
Can hardly by adversity be bowd;
The Sun (although eclipsed) remains the same.
Think not that worth consists in the success,
As th'essence did on th'accidents depend:
The fault of fortune makes it not the less,
On which oft-times the hardest hippos attend.
For Fortune bears not still the badge of worth,
Nor misery the signs of gallant minds:
Which yet still like themselves are sparkling forth,
In every state some tokens of their kinds.
Now at this time o're-match'd by numbrous powers,
I kept my courage, though I lost the field:
And vaunt no more of it, for some few hours
May once to me the like advantage yield.
And it's not long since that to Fortune dear,
The world had never me but victor spied;
Though I protest before th'immortalls here,
Moved by Necessity, and not by Pride.
Proud Neopolemus that traitor still,
Not worthy of a Macedonians name,
Bent to betray the host, and me to kill,
Had labord long to his eternal shame.
But of Craterus I lament the fall,
Whom for his virtue I did dearly love,
And was constrained; (I Jove to witness call,)
For my defence that last refuge to prove.
How fortuned you your forces to dispose,
So well t'auoyd that storm of threatened harms?
For then you had to deal with mighty foes,
That were in war grown hoary under arms.
When faithless Neoptolemus did spy,
That all his treason was t'our knowledge brought,
To th'enemies camp he suddenly did fly,
A foolish traitor that was false for nought.
There he informde, or mis-informde my foes,
That haughty through my victories of late:
I in my tent did carelessly repose,
Though not by force, yet to b'orecomd by fate.
And further then t'Antipater he told,
That if the Macedonians at that time,
The countnance of Craterus might behold,
They willingly would yield themselves to him.
Now they had labord earnestly before,
That I abandon would Perdiccas part:
And did protest, that they would give me more,
Than yet I had, or hoped for in my hart.
But Love borne free, cannot be thrald, nor bought,
More than a shameful peace I liked just strife:
To generous minds more dear than honour nought,
And ere I leave my faith, Isle lose my life.
Thus being despaired that I would prove their friend,
They sought in time t'orethrow me as their foe,
Where love could not begin, that hate might end,
And came in haste bent to surprise me so.
But I that knew Neoptolemus-his slight,
Did him against the Macedonians bend:
And to conceal Craterus from their sight,
T'encounter him, caused troupes of strangers tend.
This policy which none could justly blame,
I with my self in secret did conspire:
And had my shirt bin privy to the same,
It should have bin an offering to the fire.
When once that the first game of death was past,
I Neoptolemus did toil to find,
And he me too, which happened at the last,
Two will do much to meet, being of one mind.
Then whilst we met for whom both th'armies warred,
Whose fortune then depended on our hands,
All was performed that force or fury dared,
Bent by revenge t'abate each th'others bands.
And yet the heavens would not betray my trust,
Foul treason never had a fairer end:
The gods smiled on my cause because t'was just,
And did destruction to the traitor send.
For forcde by him whose force he did despise,
Though fighting fiercely long he lost his breath:
As one more strong than true, more stowt than wise,
Whose greatest honour was his honest death.
But weakened with huge wounds, almost I dived
In seas of blood, being quite from knowledge strayed,
Yet by so great a victory revived,
My courage grew more than my strength deceit.
I having finished thus this fatal strife,
Came where Craterus ne'er his course had run:
Even in the confines placed twixt death and life,
Whilst th'one was gone and the other not begun.
He with great valour had resisted long,
As all Briareus hands had moved his sword:
And did his Masters memory no wrong,
Being with his courage, not his fortune stored.
What life refused to obtain by death he sought,
For life and death are but indifferent things:
And of themselves not to be shunt, nor sought,
But for the good or th'euill that either brings:
With endless glory bent t'exchange his breath,
Of desprate valour all the power was proved:
And for great Captains no more glorious death,
Then to die fighting with a mind vnmou'd.
When this days toils were drawn unto an end,
Whilst th'armies courage with their captain fell,
That I might safely show my self a friend,
I went where death his senses did cancel.
And whilst I told how both to be betrayed,
By Neoptolemus were brought about:
My woe with tears I to the world bewraid,
Mild pity and true kindness must burst out.
Ah, if the news of this my good success,
Had combed in time unto Perdiccas ears:
He might have lived their pride now to repress,
That by his fall were first deuorcde from fears.
The humour of that man was too well known,
Could he have parted other men from pride:
That was becomd a slave unto his own,
And for the same forcde by his followers, did.
The proud must still be plagued by prouder ones,
There must be had sharp steel to smooth rough stones.
No vice than pride doth greater hate procure,
Which foes doe scorn and friends can not endure.
Yet majesty must not it self deject,
A lofty carriage doth procure respect.
A haughty gesture shows a tyrants hart,
All love a courteous countnance void of Art.
Yet manners too submiss as much condemned,
Do make kings scorned and captains be contemnd.
A humble port, kind looks, words smooth, and soft,
Are means by which great minds may mount aloft.
Those are indeed for such as raise their flight,
They may doe more whose course is at the height,
A imperious form an empire must defend,
Thus hastened was Perdiccas to his end.
That worthy man had many fair designs,
But virtue still by envy is pursued:
Though as a candle in the night best shines,
It in a vicious age may best be viewed.
There was a man that scorned secure delights,
As prodigal of pains, attemptiue, bold:
A strict observer of all th'antient rites,
And th'vncorrupted discipline of old.
He loved to have the soldiers of his band,
Chusd at the musters, not in markets bought:
And would not flatter where he might command,
More meet t'enioy, than seek that which he sought.
But soldiers now in this degenerd age,
Are fawnd on by faint minds, bribed in such sort:
That having still the reins loosd to their rage,
They cannot with so straight a course comport.
For that which was misfortune known to all,
Their malice as misgouernement did cite:
All things must help th'vnhappy man to fall,
They thus spout forth the poison of their spite,
For hating his frank form and naked words,
By that occasion whetting their desires:
They in their captains body shed their swords,
A deed which even barbarity admires.
Those trait'rous troops may spot the purest bands,
If for a fact so vile they be excusde:
This will set swords in all our soldiers hands,
Against vs, and not for vs to be used.
I would be glad that soldiers never thought,
But that thing which their Generals first conceived:
Much less t'attempt against their bodies ought,
The which by them as sacred should be saved.
Nor like I captains that like blustering winds
Would over their troupes triumph as tyrants still,
Without regard to merits, or to minds,
As carried headlong with a blinded will.
From selfe-presumption first pride borrows might,
Which with contempt being matched, both do conspire,
And twixt them bring base cruelty to light,
Th'abhorred of-spring of a hated sire.
Such of Perdiccas was th'excessiue pride,
The vice from which that viler vice proceeds,
That it strange ways for his advancement tried,
And did burst forth in most prodigious deeds.
The murder of Mel???ager first began
To tell what tyrants harbourd in his hart,
To whom faith given, nor yet the church he wan,
Though sacred both no safety could impart.
And being by him constrained to quite the field,
The guiltless Capadocians desprate bands,
Chose rather than to that proud victor yield,
To perish by the power of their own hands.
Yet what against his foes he did perform,
From martial minds might plead for some excuse,
Whilst vindictive thoughts that wronged do storm,
In th'irritated mind did fury infuse.
But yet why sought he in a servile sort
T'extend his tyranny, even towards his friends,
That could not with disdainful forms comport?
More than an enemies yoke a friends offends.
And when of late by Ptolomie constrained,
He brought his bands with disadvantage back:
How by the same his government was stained,
The world can witness by his armies wrack.
But Hate being judge, each error seems a crime,
Then whilst the present aggrauates whats gone:
His soldiers moved by fortune, and the time,
Did by his death avenge all their wrongs in one.
As noughtsmells well to a distempered taste,
So to conceits preoccupied before:
Even good seems bad in them that they detest,
Men must mislike when they can like no more.
To you that loathed Perdiccas and his state,
What came of him could never yet seem good:
And I not wonder though your soul did hate
One that had right and power to take your blood.
For fled from him to whom you once belongd,
His trumpet still breathed terror in your ear:
Then all men hate those whom they once have wronged,
And by no means can love them whom, they fear.
That which you speak of hate, in love I spy,
Love cannot find an imperfection forth:
But doth excuse, extenuate, or deny
Faults where it likes, with shadows of no worth.
I left Perdiccas, but did him no wrong,
That first to take my life all means did prove:
I told t'Antipater, how he so long
Had bin abused by a pretended love.
For as I frankly love, whilst loved again,
If me the ingrate ingrately do aquite:
Straight kindling fury with a just disdain,
I by love past proportion, then my hate.
And yet Eumenes, I commend thy mind,
That to defend thy friend hast proved so free;
And since in love so constantly inclined,
I would contract a friendship firm with thee.
Then where that now thy state hath bin brought low,
Since spoiled of him in whom thou did repose:
Whilst aided by our power thou great may grow,
And raise thy hopes of kingdoms to dispose.
Isle be your friend, whilst friend to right you rest,
For without virtue friendship is but vain;
Which cannot build in a polluted breast,
Whose impious thoughts doe sacred things profane.
So long as th'oath is kept that once was sworn,
Both t'Alexanders self, and t'all his race,
Still shall this sword for your defence be borne,
But in my heart they hold the highest place.
And do not thus as over one vanquished vaunt,
Nor think me thrall'd though once by chance ore-thrown
Whilst ther's a world adventurers cannot want,
Isle toss all states t'establish once mine own.
ANd must we buy our pomp at such a rate,
That bear th'authoritie, or whom it bears?
O, O! how thorny are the ways of state,
With open dangers paved and secret fears?
Each of our steps is waited with some snare,
Whilst from our selves we all repose repell:
And through the waives of greatness tossde with care,
Do seek a haven, whose heaven is but a hell.
Whilst Eolus and Neptune joined in all,
With winds and waives beat th'earth and bossed the skies:
The tumbling mountains doe not rise and fall,
Though each of them another doth surprise;
As do th'aspiring potentates with doubt,
Tossed through the waving world on stormy thorns,
That are as in a circle hurled about,
Ascending and descending both at once.
Lo, some whose hope would by their birth have seemed
Within the compass of contempt confined:
Have from the vulgar yoke themselves redeemde,
To doefarre more than such could have designed.
And some to whom the heavens mishaps will give,
Though on their breath the breath of thousands hings
Lo, whiles brought low, cannot have leave to live,
Made less then subjects, that were more than kings.
Thus some without appearance do procure,
The most respected place where greatness stays:
And some whose states seemed once t'all eyes secure,
Thrown from their fortunes height lose glorious baize.
My father, lo, t'attaine th'imperiall place,
Marched through impossibilities of late:
And greater then the greatest, for a space,
Was Monarch of the Macedonian state.
But I his son, that as some would suppose,
Might keep with ease, that which he got with pain:
Can by no means my restless thoughts repose,
Such raging tyrants over my fancies reign.
And yet I think you have an easy part,
To whom your father did his state resign:
For it may make you smile that made him smart,
Some press the grape, and others drink the wine.
Isle not believe that ever any ill,
Was bred for me within my fathers breast;
Since children must suppose their parents will,
(Though seeming bad) still purposde for the best.
And yet my fathers ghost must pardon me,
Though when from vs he minded to remove:
I think the tenor of his last decree,
Show lack of judgment, or at least of love.
For what base course had ever bin begun,
To make me seem unworthy of his place,
That he preferred a stranger to his son,
And sought t'obscure the glory of his race.
Thus since in such a sort he did neglect,
The son that should his name from death exempt:
As dis-regarded for some great defect,
All other men may have me in contempt.
But ere his age expired th'expected date,
He saw my brows with Laurel boughs arrayed:
And spied my skill in war, and wit in state,
Which grew as much as the other mans decayed.
Nor can my courage so be brought to bow,
But Polispercon shall experience soon:
That in my fathers wil1, I will allow,
Not what he did, but what he should have done.
And since by him high dignities were won,
I mind to prosecute what he began:
For such a fathers greatness from his son,
Takes the security of a private man.
Lo, Polispercon by our power repeld,
From Macedonie hath retired dismayed:
And for the fear of vs hath bin compelled,
T'engage his glory for another aid.
Let him not think the shadow of the kings,
Can match my power with these his borrowed bands,
For his faint flight that's framed with others wings,
Will never bear him from Cassanders hands.
And though Olimpias countnanc'd once his cause,
As from Epirus brought to ruin me:
Now of her own mishap she most must pause,
Since brought by vs of late t'a low degree.
And yet Olimpias had a good success,
When first she touched the Macedonian bounds:
Whilst Polispercon proudly did repress
All those that durst resist with words, or wounds.
Though Philip and Euridice his Queen,
T'encounter with their troupes in time arrived:
Yet when the Macedonians had her seen,
As their own Queen to honour her they strived.
And haplesse Philip being constrained to yield,
There for a kings did take a captives state:
And his wretched mate (though flying from the field)
Was followed by their forces, and her fate.
Then thus her husband and her self gave place,
Whose brows of late th'imperiall badge had borne:
But then thrown down in th'Ocean of disgrace,
A prey t'a women's pride, the butt of scorn.
Those were the means that did them first en???trap,
But have you heard how after they were thrall:
To plague the world with honour and mis-hap,
Th'enragde Olimpias tyrranizde over all.
Some doubtful rumours did frequent each ear,
Such as rash fame confusedly durst unfold:
But yet concealed, by favour, or for fear,
The certainty to vs hath not bin told.
When thus the famished tigress did surprise
Those miserable souls, (as in a dream)
Her heart at first seemed scarce to trust her eyes,
She surfeited her sight so with their shame.
But when she saw by reason of her power,
That she might safely let her rage burst out:
She caused about them both to build a tower,
Within whose walls they scarce could turn about.
And in that dungeon as entombed they stood,
With high disgrace t'asswage more high disdains:
Far from all comfort whilst a little food
Their life prolonged, but to prolong their pains.
But Pity for th'vnfortunate contends,
As Envy still prosperity controls:
The Macedonians doubtful of their ends,
Would sometime murmur for those marterd souls.
The peoples grudge Olimpias did perceive,
And to prevent what fury might effect,
She strait resolved lifes remnant to bereave,
From weakened powers that did no less expect.
And when some barbarous Thracians bent for blood,
As she appointed in th'excesse of spite:
Had murdered Philip and his Queen imbrued,
With purple streams that spoiled her husbands spright.
She sent to her, whose soul in grief did sink,
As messengers of death to assault her breast:
A sword, a cord, and an empoisoned drink,
A Tyrants presents, yet a wretches best.
Those when the Queen perceived, vnmou'd she spake
As one that had embraced some great relief:
Fit gifts for her to give, for me to take,
Since she exceeds in hate, and I in grief.
And tell the tyrant that I gladly die,
That th'irritated gods t'auenge my death,
May thunder forth that judgment, which I spy
With blood must choke that bloody women's breath.
Then looking on her Lord that there lay slain,
Once partner or his joy, then of his woe:
Whilst that his roses did her lilies stain,
She kissed his wounds as taking leave to go.
And lest her resolution were betrayed,
Her snowy neck (not used with such a chain)
She binding with her belt, died vndismaide,
And if she sighed, she sighed but for disdain.
This barbarous act my breast with grief doth sting,
Can spite so much transport the meekest kinder?
And yet in th'earth ther's no more cruel thing,
Then malice raging in a women's mind.
But yet this sacrifice could not assuage,
The boiling thoughts of her unbounded will:
For entering thus she rioted in rage,
(As dogs that once get blood would always kill.)
Each light occasion kindling still her wrath,
The sovereignty she shamefully abused:
And put my brother Nicanor to death,
Though for no crime condemned; no, not accused.
Yea more, her hate extended toward the dead,
Whose cruelty no flood of blood confined,
The monument that t'Iolas was made,
She razed and rent his ashes with the wind.
To be Cassanders friend was such a crime,
As none could scope that ever favoured me.
Thus huge disorders did abound a time,
Where nothing lawful is, all things are free.
Then when I heard of this outrageous pride,
That made my native soil contemned to be:
I those indignities could not abide,
The shame whereof redounded most to me.
So that at last, moved by my countries care,
As much as by particular respects:
I with great speed an army did prepare,
To punish, or prevent the like effects.
But when I was to Macedonie combed
To fortify a town she did design:
Which by my valour quickly was ore-comd,
Whilst famine forcde the fortress to resign.
Then pride unto necessity gave place,
Her lofty courage was constrained to bow:
So that she rests depending on our grace,
To be disposed as it shall please vs now.
This chance the world to wonder may invite;
Lo, there a Queen that had (though now distressde)
The rarest fortune, and the greatest spirit,
That ever any of her sex possessed.
The widowed Empress that first warrde with th'Indes,
Nor stout Tomiris, though most gallant seen:
Nor all the Amazons borne with martial minds,
Had never stouter stomachs then this Queen.
Her lives first progress did but prove too sweet,
Whom all th'earths treasures once concurred to bless:
But now sad soul, trod under fortunes feet,
Her misery no creature can express.
Those were but fortunes gifts that made her great
All was without her-selfe that made her praised:
Her imperfections did but stain the state,
To which another merits had her raised.
For when she first with famous Philip matched,
Then her behaviour was not free from blame:
But even though she with Argos eyes was watched,
As t'was supposed she forfeited her fame.
At least, her husband feared for some disgrace,
From her himself had publikly divorced:
And entertained another in her place,
Which, for the time, to suffer she was forced.
Yet this in th'end did his destruction breed,
For which her spiteful thoughts had laboured long,
She was acquainted with Pausanias deed,
And spurred him to perform th'intended wrong.
She sought, that by such means t'ambitious will,
Her husbands murder might enlarge the rains,
Whilst with authority she did all the isle,
Of which too late th'afflicted realm complains.
Long suffered for the greatness of her son,
She plaid the tyrant safely as she pleased:
But by the course that I have else begun,
I hope those whom she plagued shall now b'appeasde.
Yet of Olimpias, though abasde by you,
The sight her son, and husband will revive:
And so may make the Macedonians now,
For her relief strange courses to contrive.
Of those whose greatness doth regard extort,
Th'afflictions must entender every mind:
And still th'affections of the vulgar sort,
Are head-long led, too cruel, or too kind.
O, but I can precipitate her fall,
Even by the means that might support her most:
For pity shall spoil pity, whilst they all,
Sigh for their friends that through her pride was lost.
As those to whom all other things are free,
Must have their life, and reign both of one date:
So private men that pass their own degree,
Can hardly turn to take their former state.
Thus you commit your fortune to the fates,
None can retire that enters in such things:
For those that ought attempt against great states,
Must die as traitors, or else live as kings.
And though you would but some disorders stay,
You deal with those that borne not to be thrall
As torrents bear away what stoppes their way,
And either must do nothing, or doe all.
No, keep not such, to sigh when they are gone,
That scorn to take the thing that they should give;
For all must die, that dare but touch a throne,
Those that might take their life, they must not live.
Since in this course that I can once but err,
I shall be sure ere she herself withdraw.
And yet what surety can you have of her?
Can Laws bind them that are aboue the Law?
It's hard t'establish concord twixt the two,
Where th'one must hate, and the other always fear.
O but I mind to use the matter so,
That both from hence shall further strife forbear.
What can his freedom and your peace procure?
Death both can make his free, and make me sure.
And would you do such evil to shed her blood?
I, t'others evil, so that it do me good.
The Macedonians will abhor this wrong.
And yet obey me if be most strong.
But who shall have the realm amidst those broils?
Who ever wins the field must keep the spoils.
So to possess the realm you have no right.
But I have more, so long as I have might.
This state doth to it self an heir afford.
All kingdoms rights are pleaded by the sword.
The people all will grudge against your state.
But dare not stir whilst fear exceeds their hate.
And in their hearts they will detest you too.
Think what they will that have not power to do.
What though Olympias in a little space,
May lose her power, together with her breath?
Yet there remains another of her race,
That is by nature bound t'auenge her death.
Th'impetuous streams of a tempestuous flood,
That drowns all th'olde, not yields the young relief?
What fool that of his foes victorious stood,
Would spoil an army, and yet spare the chief?
No, since I must my self with murder stain,
Isle by the roots raze all the royal race,
So that no power shall spring from thence again,
T'oregrow my greatness, and my plants displace.
The strength hath left great Alexanders arm,
Whose mothers fatal thread is now near spun;
And I have means to keep my self from harm,
Both of Roxane, and her tender son.
But since this course may serve our states t'aduance,
By which a ground for great designs is lay de;
I must entreat you now what ever chance,
To lend your approbation, though not aid.
Isle be your friend, yet wish you would refrain,
From doing this; but ere you be undone,
Since that I by your guiltiness may gain,
Isle suffer that which I would not have done.
CAn I be she whom all the world admired?
As being the happiest Queen that raignd below?
Whom all the planets have to plague conspired,
Of fickle fortunes course th'effects to show.
No, it is not I, nought could my course control,
Nor force me thus t'attend another will:
Since I despise this prison of my soul,
Where it disdains t'abide in bondage still.
Ah, whilst I did on th'outward pomp rely,
My state the power of higher powers did tempt,
My state that once bred reverence and envy:
Though now it breed but pity and contempt.
Olimpias once high as Olimpius stood,
The wife of Philip Alexanders mother:
That matched Alcides and Achilles blood,
T'ingender one more worth than both together.
Am I the woman whose maiestike state
Seemed once so happy to deceived conceits?
I, I am she, and never yet more great,
Than at this present, in despite of Fates.
A double bondage long did burden me,
I to my self, my self to fortune thrall:
But now captivity hath set me free,
That could not rise till first I had a fall.
The sprite thats with prosperity benumbed,
Scarce like it self can to the world appear:
When Virtue hath Adversity ore'com'd,
Then shines true greatness in her highest sphere.
Our glory now I see consists no more
Without our-selues in eie-betraying shows,
But in the breasts inestimable store,
That neither Time entombs, nor Power orethrowes.
O never were my thoughts enlargde till now,
To mark my self, and quintessence my mind,
For long a prey to pride, I know not how,
A mist of fancies made my iudgemcnt blind.
As those that dream sweet dreams, awaked, at last
Do find their error when their eyes find light,
Freed from the slumbering of my fortune past,
I now arise to judge of all things right.
That cloud of pomp whose smoke me shadowd once,
Lo now removed vnmaskes my life too late:
And now I see, that scepters, crowns, and thrones,
Are burdnous badges of a dangerous state.
O happy woman, of true pleasure sure,
That in the country leadst a guiltless life:
From Fortunes reach retired, obscure, secure,
Though not a Queen, yet a contented wife.
Thy mate more dear to thee than is the light,
Though lowe in state, loves in a high degree:
And with his presence still to bless thy sight,
Doth scorn great courts whilst he lives courting thee.
And as thou woundst him not with hid disgrace,
He with no jealous thought torments thy breast:
Thus both lie down to rest, and rise in peace,
Then if they strive, they strive who should love best.
But though thou have not as the mighty ones,
Thy neck surchargde with chains (ah chains indeed)
Nor cares weight down with oriental stones,
Nor robes, whole worth may admiration breed.
So want thou that which we have ever had,
Sad miscontentments, jealousy, and spite:
And though thy back be not with purple clad,
Thy thoughts are clad with innocencies quite.
As Birds, whose cage of gold the sight deceives,
Do seem to sing whilst they but wail their state:
So with the mighty matched, made glorious slaves,
We happy seem whilst we but curse our fate.
That bliss whose show in vs vain eyes doe please,
Makes thee indeed a true contentment breathe,
Thou spendst thy youth in mirth, thy age in ???as,
And know not what it is to die till death.
Ah since I lived, I have done nought but die,
Still when I seemed most blessed, then most accursed:
Since on frail greatness first I did rely,
How oft hath my swollen breast bin like to burst?
The Fates with Fortune from my birth conspired,
To make my life a pattern of their might:
For both my parents from the world retired,
When I was scarcely comed t'inioy the light.
The world may judge how I was justly grieved,
Whilst angry Philip sought for my disgrace,
(A thing which once I scarce could have believed)
And unto Cleopatra gave my place.
Then though I long as desprate of relief,
For his offence afflicted had my mind:
Yet did his sudden death augment my grief,
He was my husband, though he was unkind.
And when my sons rare trophies, and renown,
With wonder filled the world, and me with joy:
Those as himself that strived to throw his down,
Did to supplant my state their powers employ.
Yet stood my courage when my fortune fell,
And still I toilde distracted from repose:
Those that had him betrayed from th'earth t'expell,,
And with their blood to register my woes.
And my designs a time so prosperd too,
That some of them did try by torments strange,
All what a women's just disdain could do,
Whilst spurred by jealousy, spite and revenge.
But this arch-traitor ruler of the rest,
That thirsts to drink the blood of all our race:
Even then when my design succeeded best,
Did compass me with ruin and disgrace.
Such was the tenor of my fortune past,
Whose least mis-hap had made another burst:
First orphaned, widowed, and vnchilded last,
A daughter, wife, and mother all accursed.
Heavens plague Cassandra, let that base wretch try,
That Jove his judgment but a while defers,
And let his wife bewail as well as I,
I murderd for my son, and she by hers.
Even as th'incestuous. Thehans monstrous brood,
So may thy sons contend with mutual wounds:
And never let thy house be free from blood,
Till quite excluded from th'vsurped bounds.
Thus notwithstanding of my wonted power,
To me, save wishes, nothing doth remain:
But though condemned to die, yet at this hour
Should I begin to curse, and to complain?
No no, that custom best becomes poor souls,
Whose resolution cannot climb more hie:
But I whose courage that base course controls,
Must still triumph what ever state I try.
Death is an open haven t'each storme-tossde mind,
Since th'end of labour, th'entrie unto rest:
Death hath the bounds of misery confined,
Whose sanctuary saves th'afflicted best.
To suffer whiles with a courageous heart,
It merits far more praise than deeds most known,
For in our actions Fortune hath a part,
But in our sufferings, all things are our own.
Lo now I loathe the world and worldly things,
Of which I have both proved the best and worst:
Yea th'apprehended death great comfort brings,
And hath no cross but that it should be forced.
O hear me now (dear son) if that thy ghost
May leave th'Elysian fields to look on me:
Of all things else this doth content me most,
That from this time I may remain with thee.
And blush not son to see thy mothers end,
My death in glory with thy life shall strive:
It Fortune as a captive shall attend,
That as thy fellow followed thee alive.
AH, ah, though man since th'image of great Jove,
And th only creature that gives Reason place,
Made to make faith below of powers aboue,
Should seek his heavenly progeny to prove,
By still resembling most th'immortall kind,
Yet makes the world our better part so blind,
That we the clouds of vanity embrace,
And from our first excellence decline.
This doth extinguish that celestial grace,
Which should make souls to burn with virtues love,
Whose fancies vice luxuriously now feasts,
Vice is the Circa that enchants the mind,
And doth transform her followers all in swine:
Whilst poisond pleasures so corrupt our tates,
That of halfe-gods we make our selves whole-beasts.
And yet of ruthless Plutoes raging host,
The vice that doth transport presumptuous hearts,
And makes men from the gods to differ most.
It is cruelty, that to the sufferers cost
And actors both, must oftentimes b'appeasd.
The gods delight to give, and to forgive,
By pardoning more than by plaging pleased.
And why should men excogitate strange arts,
T'extend their tyranny as those that strive
To feed on mischief still, though the Author smarts
Oft for the deed of which himself did boast,
Whilst whence the blow first come the grief doth turn,
For that by which the mind at first was eased,
May it in end the greatest burden give.
Oft those whose cruelty makes many morn,
Do by the fires that they first kindled burn:
Of the other tyrants that extort the mind,
With pleasure some delight it in such sort,
That first the honey, then the gall we find;
And others, though from Honours court declined
Some comfort yield, though base by hope of gain:
And though some make vs to be loathed of one,
We by their means another love obtain.
But cruelty, with which none can comport,
Makes th'author hated when the deed is gone.
Oft even by those whom it did most support,
As that which alienates men from kind,
And as humanity the mind enchants,
So savage souls that from the same resraine,
More fierce than fiercest beasts are loved of none.
With barbarous beasts one with less danger hints,
Than with the man whose mind all mercy wants;
Yet though the mind of man, as strong, and rude,
Be ranish'd, whiles with violent desire,
And must, if sir'd with rage, be quench with blood.
How can this tender sex whose glory stood
In having hearts iuclinde to pity still,
Delight it self by any barbarous deed?
For Nature seems in this t'haue used her skill,
In making women's minds, though weak, entire,
That weakness might love, and devotion breed,
To which their thoughts, if pure, might best aspire,
As aptest for th'impression of all good:
But from the best to worst all things do wear,
Since cruelties from feeble minds proceed:
In breasts where courage fails, spite, shame, and fear
Make envy, hate, and rigour rule to bear.
Our Queen Olimpias, that was once so great,
And did such monstrous cruelties commit:
In plaging Philip, and his Lady of late.
Lo, now being brought to taste the like estate,
Must take such entertainment as she gave.
And it's good reason that it should be so;
Such measure as we give we must receive,
Whilst on a throne she did superbly sit,
And with disdainful eyes looked on her foe,
As but being vanquished by her power and wit.
Not mindful of th'ineuitable fate.
O, the Imortalls that command aboue,
Of every state in hand the rudder have:
And as they lie, can make vs stay or go:
The grief of others should vs greatly move,
As those that sometime may like fortune prove.
But as experience with rare proofs hath shown,
Do look on others, we have Linx-his eyes:
Whilst we would have their imperfections known,
Yet like blind Moles can never mark our own.
Such clouds of selfe-regarde doe dim our sight,
Why should we be puffed up by a'cnemies fall?
Since what the day doth on another light,
The same the morrow may our state surprise.
Those that on this inconstant constant ball,
Do live environed with th'all-circkling skies,
Have many means whereby to be ore-throwne,
And why should dying wordlings swollen with wroth,
So tyrannize over an afflicted wight?
Since miseries are common unto all,
Let none be proud that draws a doubtful breath;
Good hap attends but few still till their death.
LOng have I now invr'd th'eyes of my mind,
On natures labours curiously to look:
And of all creatures finding forth the kind,
Strange wonders read in th'vniuersall book.
I mark the world hy contraries maintained,
Whose harmony doth most subsist by strife:
Whilst of all things within the same contained,
The death of one still gives another life.
But as all things are subject unto change,
That partners are of th'elementall powers:
So rolled about with revolutions strange,
The state of man rests constant but few hours,
For what doth fame more frequently report,
Then of our sudden rising; and our falls?
I think the world is but a tennis-court,
Where men are tossde by fortune as her balls.
And never any age shewde more than this,
The wavering state of soule-ennobled wights;
That soar too high to seize on the air bliss,
Whilst lowest falls attend the highest flights.
The matchless Monarch that was borne it seemed,
To show how high mortality attains:
Hath not from death the adored flesh redeemed,
But pain hath made an end of all his pains.
And these brave bands that furnished fame with b???eath,
Whilst all the world their valorous deeds did spy:
Rest now confounded (since their sovereigns death)
Like Poliphemus having lost his eye:
And they are like that teeth-ingendred brood,
That took their life out of a monster dead:
Whiles each of them pursues for others blood,
Since the great Drag once death that was their head.
So change all things that subject are t'our sight;
Disorder order breeds, and order it,
Next night comes darkness, and next darkness light.
This never changing change transcends our wit.
Thus poverty and riches, sickness, health:
Both honour and dishonour, life and death,
Do so depend on other, that by stealth,
All go and come as th'accidents of breath.
T'ech worldly state the heavens a height appoint,
Where when it once arrives it must descend:
And all perfections have a fatal point,
At which excellence it self must end.
But as all those that walk on th'earth are crossed
With alterations, happning oft and strange:
The greatest states with greatest storms are tossde,
And sought of many must make many a change.
Nor speak I this by speculation now,
As gathring credit out of ancient scrolls: souls.
No, I have lived at court and I know how,
Ther's nought on th'earth more vexed, then great men's souls.
Thrilled to the tyrant honour, whilst they moan
Their plaints to subjects ears ashamed t'empart:
They must bear all the weight of woes alone,
Where others of their grief lend friends a part.
Their rising vs aboue to such a height,
Which seems their best is worst, whilst since being lords:
They never hear the truth that comes to light,
When frank society speaks naked words.
Whilst sadness, whiles seems majesty, time tells
How dear they buy their pomp with loss of rest:
Some fine three furies but in all the hells,
And ther's three thousand in one great mans breast.
I think all monarchies are like the Moon,
Which whiles eclipsed, whiles under cloud, whiles clear,
Grows by degrees, and is when full, undone;
Yet Aeson like renewed doth re-appeare.
For so the first, but small, begin to shine,
And when they once their spherick form obtain,
Do then begin to languish and decline;
Yet fallen in other realms, doe rise again.
The Assyrians once made many a nation bow;
Then next, all power was in the Persians hand:
And lo, the Macedonians monarchs now
Amongst themselves divided cannot stand.
A secret fate, alternantly all things
Doth in this circle circularly lead:
Still generation from corruption springs,
To th'end that some may live, some must be dead.
Each Element another strength devours;
The air to the fire succumbs, the fire to rain:
The water strives to drown all th'earth with showers,
Which it by vapours vomits out again.
Thus with a gordian knot together bound,
All things are made, vn-made, and made again:
Whilst ruin founds, perfection doth confound,
And norhing in one state doth long remain.
But nought in th'earth more dangerously stands
Than sovereignty, that's rated at such worth,
Which like the stormy deities blustering bands,
Doth fly from East to West, from South to North.
A long experience now makes this noght strange,
Though mighty states whose reins one only leads;
Be whiles distracted and constrained to change,
As too great bodies for so little heads,
Since every Common-wealth where all men's wits
Do join in one, t'increase the public ease,
Is subject oft to fevers, and to fits,
Which Physic whiles, whiles poison must appease.
For (ah) the multitude more rash then wise,
A Hyhra-headed beast whilst nought it binds,
Doth passionately praise, or else despise,
As some prepostrous fancies move their minds.
Oft vice and virtue have like danger bred,
Whilst envy th'one procured, and the other hate:
By jealousy, or emulation dred,
Those ruined are by it that raised the state.
Whilst some their betters, others equals scorn,
The government that's popular decays:
And when it dies the Monarchy is borne,
Whose violence disorders broils alaies.
It from corruption doth continue clean,
As freest from infirmities we find:
Still whilst it humbly high, doth hold a mean,
Twixt tyranny, and too remiss a mind.
But though th'one-headed state may flourish long,
Whilst th'one knows to command, the rest to obey:
Whilst guerdon follows goodness, vengeance wrong,
That virtue cherished is, vice made decay.
Yet (if nought else) time doth great states overcome,
Heavens have confined all by some fatal hour:
And there may many misadventures come
To dissipate the most united power.
For huge mishaps a monarchy may mar,
When once prosperity begins t'expire:
To further which, whiles strangers must make war,
And whiles seditious subjects may conspire.
As jealousy, or else ambition moves,
All Princes would suppress aspiners still:
And then a subjects course most dangerous proves,
When either fear or hope transports his will.
But though to the beginning, and to th'end
Great states are guided by a secret fate:
Yet their designed destrudion doth depend,
Still, either on contempt, or else on hate;
Of those the first kings lack of courage breeds,
Which makes th'ambitious minds t'attempt more bold:
And the other doth attend tyrannike deeds,
By violence t'haue violence controlled.
Yet never did so many Monarchs fall,
By foreign battles, nor intestine broils,
As by themselves, that seeming free, were thrall,
Whilst smooth-tong'd minions gloried of their spoils.
Those that have reigned by choice, by birth, or worth,
Or yet through others errors, or their crime,
Oft suffer ugly vices to burst forth,
Which virtues colours gilted till that time.
Men are descipherd best then whilst they rest
Most high aduaunc'd being free from hope or fear:
That which is eminent is marked best,
And highest fortunes hardest are to bear.
Low fortunes cloak the faults that some commit,
Whilst imperfections th'earth perfections deems,
Stupidity seems patience, fear seems wit,
Will constancy, and softness goodness seems.
But when in the worlds theatre one must stand,
A public actor placed in all men's sight:
And sways the sign of power, and in his hand
Doth hold the balance both of wrong and right;
Then he for every action that is his,
The censure of a thousand tongues must have,
Not only damned for doing of things amiss,
But for not doing of all that all men crave.
O, he but undermines the sovereign state,
That cares not who be weak so he be strong:
More studious for himself then for the state,
Or if for it that he may hold it long.
For where Jove him for all men's good ordains,
He thinks both them and theirs made him to please,
As if a charge of weight, a place of pains,
Were but a bed of rest, a haven of ease.
The worlds great weight that Atlas shoulders bear,
Is not so weighty all to weigh one down,
As that which on his head a king doth wear.
There is no burden heavier than a crown.
The Aegean waives more easy are t'appease,
Then are their thoughts whose mind for state prepares:
Can they have rest that toil for all men's ease?
The purple ever must be lined with cares.
Good kings are like the fire, which flaming bright
Doth waste it self, to serve another turn:
And sovereignty is like fires glancing light,
Which if but viewed, delights, if touched, doth burn.
I like for warmness to stand Vulcan by,
More than to burn amidst the Lemnian flame:
And rather in the Cedars shadow lie,
Than on the top to stand the wind-gods game.
All th'eie-attracting pomp, and splendrous shows
Do merit scorn, though they amazement breed:
The world them pity more then envy owes,
That to seem happy would be wretched indeed.
For alterations strange attend a throne;
As if the sphere of fortune were a crown,
The great still tossde, like Sisiphus his stone,
Whilst highest up, rest readiest to fall down.
Of this what greater proof can Fame afford,
Then mighty Philips memorable fall:
That daunted had the Gracious by the sword,
Though not till then t'a stranger being made thrall?
He, he, then whilst he solemnised with state,
His daughters marriage, suddenly was lost:
So that it seemed that Monarchs days to date,
That Hymens torch gave light to Plutoes post.
Then when that I conceived with grief of heart
The miseries that proper were to court:
I thought them happy that retired apart,
Could never know such things, but by report.
I might have lived with Alexander still,
To virtuous men, whose savours were not scarce:
Yet rather chose, though having both at will,
To obey with Pallas, then command with Mars.
And whilst he toiled over others Lord to be,
I laboured over my self to be made Lord:
Yet made as great a conquest too as hee:
My pen shall be as famous as his sword.
And had I willingly engaged my rest,
The way to trace, that to vaine-glory tends:
I might have lived respected with the best,
As one of Alexanders chiefest friends.
For though of him that I did merit nought,
He entertained my friendship till his death:
And when he once our cities ore-throw sought,
At my request he pacified his wrath.
Then once to me a mass of gold he sent,
And offred too a stately Asian town
Which I refused, pleased more with my poor rent,
Than he with all the treasures of a crown.
I told, that such a sum but served, to make
Him a corrupter, me corrupted thought:
And foul for him to give, for me to take,
If used, shamde both, vnusde, did serve for nought.
But all those baits I never deigned to touch,
Lest I that all my life had lived so free
Might be possessed too much; possessing much,
If taking riches, it had taken me.
No, I would rather learn to live on less,
Then for superfluous furniture to strive:
Who seeks out substance t'entertaine excess,
Doth live t'vse it, not it that he may live.
My fortune doth afford sufficient means,
That may preserve all Natures powers in force:
And he that on a golden sceptre leanes,
Can not have more, but may well use it worse.
Ah, since abundance but abuses brings,
Why seek men more then serves t'haue Nature eased?
And why should men toil for so many things,
Since Nature with a little can be pleased?
Lo how the heavens, whose love towards man exceeds,
Have made his body strong, his mind divine:
And have made th'earth to furnish all his needs,
Lest downe-weigh'd cares might make his thoughts de???clean.
So that he hath a means to raise his flight,
If winged with Virtue, and may mounting hie,
Aspire t'approach to the celestial light,
And deify himself before he die.
Yet doth he strait forgo that glorious way,
To toil for things that th'earth unforced affords:
The which his wants first framed were to defray,
But by himself are of his life made Lords.
O how unworthy of the worth of man,
Are many labours that delight him most,
Since that corruption boldly first began,
To make men nourish vice at virtues cost.
And now what hath great Alexander gained
By endless labours, and excessive cares?
Of whom lo now it's only said he reigned,
But death unto himself, worse to his heirs.
Lo, for the guiltless blood that he hath spilled;
The partners of his conquests doe begin
To die by the same swords by which they killed,
And all his of-spring expiates his sin.
Such is the revolution of all things,
The wheel of Fortune still must slippery prove,
And chiefly when it burdend is with kings,
Whose states as weightiest most must make it move.
Yet Alexander I must say was blessed,
That over the world a victor always ranged:
And having ended all his wars, in rest,
Did die in time before his fortune changed.
And for his favour which I oft did try,
Whilst earnestly he labord me to advance:
Whilst earnestly he labord me to advance:
I'm sorry that himself so soon did die,
And that his of-spring hath so hard a chance.
His successors have set all Greece on fire,
Of which I fear to perish by some spark:
For Polipercon doth my death conspire,
And who can scope thats made a great mans marker?
But for my countries cause Isle give my blood,
Whilst safely praised all follow virtue can:
But when with danger threatened to doe good,
Thats only worthy of a worthy man.
Nor do I tender so this puff of breath,
But I could be contented it t'expell:
A mind that is resolved triumphs over death,
He hath lived long enough that hath lived well.
I Doubt not now (great heroes) but ye all
What ever miscontentment ye pretend
Doe rest well pleased, since those by me made thrall,
That might have made you end, have made an end.
Loathe not the means, if ye allow th'effect,
For though by this I have a realm obtained:
It yields you more, whose course none can suspect,
I'm only guilty, and ye all have gained.
Yet to pursue my life they first began,
For my defence this last refuge I proved:
Nought than himself is nearer unto man,
All men with their own dangers are most moved.
And had not proud Olimpias did in time,
By offering up her blood to work my peace:
Then mine had been the harm, and hers the crime,
I but prevented her a little space.
And if her of-spring had survived her death,
Whose rising could not but procure our fall:
Ye, now that nought but sovereignty do breathe,
Had breathed obedience, or not breathed at all.
You from a dangerous yoke have vs relieved,
Which I suspect we had experienced soon:
And why then should we labour to seem grieved
At that thing done, which we wish not undone?
No, since that all for sovereignty doe strive,
And have once tasted what it is to reign:
Theres none of vs but rather die, than live
To embrace a subjects servile state again.
And though perchance with Alexanders son,
If heir both of his fathers worth and state:
We might have most respected places won,
As special pillars of the Princes seat.
Yet though more great than others, as before,
It would have grieved vs, less then one to fall:
The fall from first to second grieves one more,
Then from the second to the last of all.
Our old renown to vs had ruin brought,
And would have made vs odious to remain:
It's dangerous for a subject to be thought,
One that desires, or yet deserves to reign.
When any tempest threatened had his throne,
He would have sought assurance at our cost:
For when that jealousy hath seizd on one,
The greatest virtues are suspected most.
Yea though we could to quite our state consent,
Vs from suspicion nought but death could purge:
Still greatness must turmoil, or then torment,
If borne, a burden, if laid down, a scourge.
But When we have within bur bosom weighed
The ruin of all Alexanders race;
Whom without blushing we might have obeyed,
By right succeeding in our sovereigns place.
How can our souls but highly be ashamed,
That one inferior both to them and vs,
Doth seek by wrong that which by right they claimed,
And by their orethrow would b'exalted thus?
Nor need I more as in suspense remain,
To mask my meaning with ambiguous words:
No, no, our words may as his deeds be plain,
Which fame, (and without whispring) now records
Ye hear how that Antigonus of late,
Whose thoughts winged with ambition soar too high:
Doth strive aboue vs all to advance his state,
And on his former fortune doth rely.
Since to his hands Eumenes was betrayed,
Lo, quite transported by prepostrous pride,
As if in nought addicted now t'our aide,
He hath laid all regard of vs aside.
Thus Time the truth of all things doth proclaim,
Man is a crafty creature, hard to know,
That can a face for every fortune frame,
No trust in mortals, nor no faith below.
Whiles as our own particulars doe move,
We what we wish for most, seem to mislike:
And oft of others doe the course disprove,
Whilst we want nought but means to doe the like.
Then whilst Perdiccas did attempt before
To make the rest that were his equals thrall,
Who than Antigonus detested more,
Th'ambitious mind of one that would have all?
But since Perdiccas and his faction fell,
Whom he as traitors to the state pursued:
He in his place succeeding to rebel,
Hath what he seemed t'vndo again renude.
And yet I many a time have must of this,
How from the world he did Eumenes send.
How? But by treason as his custom is,
False at the first, and cruel at the end.
I know, that after divers doubtful fights,
He hath orethrowne Eumenes at the last:
But by what stratagems or treacherous slights,
I would be glad to hear how all hath past
Antigonus was at the first afraid,
To match Eumenes by plain force in fight:
And the refuge that fear affords assaide,
For valour frank bent t'vse some wary slight.
Amongst Eumenes troupes, their minds to prove
He scattred letters with allurements stored:
By promised treasures, and protested love,
To move some one that might betray his Lord.
But he being wise, his troupes in time advised,
To clear their virtue by their enemies vice:
And gave them thanks that would not be entisde,
To sell their faith at such a bloody price.
Then said, that th'Author of those scrolls was he,
That when they spied such practises again,
They still would take them always but to be,
Their Captains trial, not their enemies train.
Thus by the means that should have him entrapped,
His adversary did deluded stay:
For both he from the present danger escaped,
And to prevent the like prepared a way.
Then when this traitorous policy had failed,
And that there had some doubtful conflicts past:
Antigonus that had at one prevailed,
As having had some vantage at the last:
He with Eumenes did procure to speak,
And as t'one vanquished offred him good-will:
But he whose mind could not be brought to break,
Would never talk but as t'his e???uall still.
For when a band between them made, did bear
That he t'Antigonus should help impart,
He did reform that form, and would first swear,
With Alexanders of-spring to take part.
Thus where they his submission did attend,
Imperiously conditions he imposde:
So that there after to procure his end,
Still the other by all means his mind disposed.
And shortly of his bands a vain debate,
For his confusion fit occasion brought:
Still, as small things by concord doe grow great.
By discord great things are reduced to nought,
T'Eumenes whilst he fortunately lived,
That th'haugh tie Agiraspides gave place,
With him for state two of their captains strived.
And would not his authority embrace.
Such was that spite of theirs to have him spoiled,
That though of valour he rare wonders proved,
And oft by force Antigonus had foiled,
Yet from their mind it could not be removed:
For being by them allurde all the other bands,
To get some baggage that they lost again,
Did give their captain bound to th'enemies hands,
So darkening all their glory by one stain.
And though Eumenes trusting to new hopes,
By flying laboured a relief t'haue found,
He was prevented by his traitrous troupes.
And like to some base fugitive was bound,
Scarce could his stormy stomach bent to break,
Deign then t'entreate those that had him betrayed,
Yet having hardly purchased leave to speak,
He stretched them forth his fetterd hands and said;
Lo here th'apparrell that your General wears,
Since with your faith his liberty was lost:
Yet he those bands not given by th'enemie bears,
But by his own in whom he trusted most.
And must he thus be led that should you lead?
Is this the triumph that I should receive,
For all my victories thus to be made,
Of captain, captive, of a conqueror, slave?
How oft (my soldiers) have ye all of late,
To me by solemn oaths sworn to be true?
But it becomes not one in a'abiect state,
With lofty words his Masters to pursue.
Nor crave I further favour at this hour,
Then strait to bathe your weapons in my breast;
Let not my life be in mine enemies power,
Lo all that your commander doth request.
????????? Antigonus doth take no care,
????????? get my body, so he get my head:
A???d he regards not, neither when, nor where,
No??? in what sort I die, so I be dead.
But if through horror of so vile a deed,
Your eyes look down, your hair erected stands,
Which in your minds this much remorse doth breed,
That with your hearts ye will not stain your hands:
Then as your captain, since not force I may,
Isle as your friend entreat, that now in time
I may but have a sword, my self to slay,
So you t'excuse whilst partner of your crime.
But when he saw that words could not assuage
Their barb'rous thoughts, that nothing could control:
Then having turned his courage all in rage,
He thus flamed forth the fury of his soul.
O damned rascals, that have lost all faith,
Whom neither duty nor yet merit binds:
How oft was Alexander moud to wrath
By those your mutinous and malicious minds?
And, O what could I at those hands attend,
That yet were smoking with Perdiccas blood;
Of those that by like treason did intend,
With old Antipaters t'haue been imbrued?
Heaven thunder on you from th'aetheriall rounds,
And make you live a'abominable band;
Base vagabonds, barred from your native bounds,
Then die detested in a barbarous land.
And as ye have the world with murder filled,
So may your blood by the same swords be shed:
By which ye have more of your captains killed
Than of your foes, from whom like beasts ye fled.
But neither courteous, nor outrageous words
Could change his soldiers from their first intent,
That forward led their captain chained with cords,
A sacrifice prepared for th'enemies tent;
Where being arrived, to th'end he soon might end,
He asked what stayed Antigonus to go,
By setting of him free to win a friend,
Or by his death to rid him of a foe.
And straight Antigonus did haste his fall,
By this great magnanimity, not moved:
And the Agiraspides dispersed over all,
As murderers murder from the world removed.
Thus oft have traitors bin dispatched by time,
By those whom their upbraiding looks dismay:
For the remembrance thus of th'Authors crime,
Can but by th'Actors death be wiped away.
Now claims Antigonus when fame doth feast,
In rank aboue his sovereigns self to sit:
For Alexander did subdue all th'east,
And he hath conquered them that conquered it.
No doubt, since he that great advantage wan,
He hath within himself high things designed:
For whilst prosperity transports a man,
Nought seems difficult to th'ambitious mind.
Of those in whom he did suspect a spirit,
Whose courage served his courses to resist,
He hath himself by divers means made quite,
In others wreakes his safety doth consist.
Thus martial Pithon that no danger spared,
Whom Alexander held in high account:
Did at the last receive a hard reward,
For helping him Eumenes to surmount.
His spirit t'attemp and power fit to perform.
Made jealousy Antigonus torment:
And yet he feigned to love him for the form,
Till that his court he moved him to frequent:
Where whilst he did mistrusting nought abide,
He publicly in all the peoples sight:
(Though seeming justly) damned unjustly died,
No viler wrong then wrong that looks like right.
Thus divers governors within short space,
Their government, or then their life have lost:
And others are preferred unto their place,
That did depend upon his favour most.
Oft likewise me, he laboured to surprise,
And policy was used, t'haue me ore-throwne:
But I, whom Pithons danger had made wise,
Learned by his ruin to prevent mine own.
To save my life abandoned is my state,
And I have fled with danger as ye see,
That you may know, how that man doth grow great,
Whose pride may plague you all, as well as me.
Then let vs be resolved, what course t'intend;
Lest out of time being wise we rue too late.
It's better to pursue then to defend.
It's good to quench a fire ere it grow great.
Then let vs send to Antigonus in haste,
To redemand th'vsurped bounds again;
Since in this war we did our treasures waste,
We should be likewise partners of the gain.
But if against our suit his ears he bar,
And do with scornful words contemn our claim,
Then may our Messenger denounce the war,
And we shall shortly intimate the same.
A mutual band must made amongst vs be,
To make one fortune common to vs all:
And from hence-forth we must all four agree,
To stand together, or together fall.
And since the princely buds for which we cared,
How ever dead, are dead; what ere we doe
T'engender so towards vs the more regard,
We with the state must take the title too.
And we must both be crowned, and known forkings,
The Diadem is greatness strongest tower:
All vulgar judgements lean on th'outward things,
And reverence state, where they obey but power.
IS there a heaven? and are their heavenly powers,
To whose decree terrestrial things are thrall?
Or strives the tyrant that begets the hours,
To triumph over eternity and all?
Lo, nature travels now, being big with change,
Since mortals all humanity have lost;
And in th'old Chaos, or some mass more strange
To re-entombe their essence all things bossed.
Can reasonable souls from reason barred,
Even strive which most in cruelty exceeds?
What eye hath seen, or yet what ear hath heard
Such monstrous accidents, prodigious deeds?
Th'Arrabian robbers, nor the Scithians wild,
That with the savage beasts (as barbarous) haunt,
With such foul facts have not themselves desil'd,
As those that of civility do vaunt.
Since Gracious are grown barbarous as we find,
Where can faith have a corner free from spot?
O careless heavens, wretched earth
What loads thy mind?
Amultitude of murders.
What?
What not.
We know that since our sovereign lest to breath,
Th'earth hath been bathed with many a scarlet flood,
Perdiccas did procure Meleagers death,
And his own soldiers drowned his breath with blood.
The Athenians prey, Leonatus did remain,
And by Eumenes subtlety dismayed,
Craterus and Neoptolemus were slain,
Then by his own Eumenes did betrayed.
Man with his skill against his knowledge strives,
Where death his way attends, that way he tends,
And to Atropos the fatal razor gives,
To cut the thread on which his life depends.
When the Asian victor after all his wars,
To visit Babilon had bent his mind:
Both I, and others, studious of the stars,
Did show that there his ruin was designed.
To his successors too we oft have shown,
The means by which their fate might be controlled;
Yet was our skill contemnde, and they ore-thrown,
As we fore-told, and as they now have told.
They have told much, and yet I must tell more;
Their news were evil, yet were they not the worst,
And have the heavens reserved mo plagues in store,
As if we yet were not enough accursed?
As th'earth in pride, the heavens in plagues abounds,
Our highest hopes have perished but of late.
Then wound our ears by hearing others wounds,
That pity now may tread the steppes of hate.
Our Queen Olimpias ravished by revenge,
All Macedony did with murders fill;
Which from her part the people did estrange,
Whilst nought but rigour limited her will.
So that when fierce Cassandra sought her wreak,
She did mistrust the Macedonians minds:
And for the time the nearest strength did take,
There till the storm was past t'attend fair winds.
But soon Cassandra did the town enclose,
And as she held him out, did hold her in,
That like a captive guarded by her foes,
She knew not by what way a way to win.
And when their lifes provision did decay,
Then did bare walls but small refuge afford:
She Scilla escaped to be Charibdis prey,
That fell on famine flying from the sword.
Strait like pale Ghosts faint soldiers did remain,
Whose bowels hunger like a Harpy tears:
And with courageous words, the Queen in vain
Did raise their spirit; (the belly hath no ears.)
All then began to languish, and to fade,
As if being tired to bear themselves about;
Legs failed the body, and the neck the head,
Then whilst the flesh fell in, bones bursted out:
And when that th'ordinarie meates were spent,
Then horses, dogs, cats, rats, all served for food;
Of which no horror th'eater did torment,
For all that was not poison, then seemed good.
Some mouths accustomed once with dainty meates
Wished what they oft had loathed, isle crumbs, foul floods
And Ladies that had lived in pompous states,
Fed, as brought up with wolves amidst the woods:
Yea, nursed by those whom they themselves had nursed,
Oft then by the of springs death th'engendrer lived;
And which was worst, whilst breasts were like to burst
None comfort could, for all themselves were grieved.
Such was their state, no friend bewaild bis friend,
No wife her husband, nor no Sire his son;
For apprehending their approaching end.
All with compassion of them selves were won.
The dead men's smell empoisoned them that lived,
Whilst first made faint by a defrauded womb:
Heaps were of breath and burial both deprived,
That all the town in end was but a tomb.
Life is the subject of distress and grief
That still ministers matters to bemoan;
And only but by death can have relief,
To live and to be wretched are both but one.
Yet foolish worldlings tossde with endless care,
Though at too dear a rate would still buy breath;
And following after feathers thrown through th'aire,
Like life (though wretched) more then a happy death.
When thus the world Olimpias plagued did spy,
All sought Cassandra, though for several ends.
As from a pest all from th'vnhappy fly,
Th'eclipse of Fortune threatens loss of friends.
And she considering that she could not long
Hold out the siege, since vittailes were grown scant,
Did send (as weak) for peace t'intreat the strong.
What cannot time and travel sometime daunt?
Then did Cassandra know that need constrained
Her so to bow as strangely being diseasde:
And though he her request not quite disdained,
Th'agreement was appointed as he pleased.
For all the favour that she could procure,
Was leave to live a private person still;
And yet of that she could not be made sure,
Which did depend upon her enemies will.
Then whilst Cassandra fought his enemies ends,
There wanted not strange troupes with him t'abide;
Yet might have many followers, and few friends:
Friends by the touchstone of distress are tried.
But though the Queen was rendered in this sort,
With protestation t'haue her life preserved.
The tyrant with her spirit could not comport,
But from his faith for her confusion sweru'd.
The Macedonians were together brought,
There to consult what did concern their Queen;
But when of them a number deeply thought,
Both what she was, and what she once had been;
Even as Cassandra had suborned them all,
Their parents came whom she had damned to death,
And did her rigour to remembrance call,
By which the multitude was moved to wrath.
Whilst from their brazen breasts all ruth was barred,
They did conclude, their Queen behou'd to die.
Durst subjects damn their sovereign, and not heard?
So still may clouds obscure the worlds bright eye.
Yet did Cassandra put (all sleights t'assay)
A mask of pity on a cruel mind,
And offred her a ship to fly away,
As if to death against his will assigned.
Nor Was this course for her deliverance framed,
But only as by chance that she might drown:
So for her death that he might not be blamed,
But only Neptune, that had thrown her down.
Yet she a princess of a mighty spright,
Whose lofty courage nothing could ore-come,
Said, ere she escaped by such a shameful flight,
That she would hear the Macedonians doom.
But when Cassanders counsel was contem'nd,
Lest that the multitude had changed their mind,
When they remembered whom they had condemned,
And warily weighed what rashly they designed.
To rid her soon from pain, and him from fear,
He sent some bands from pity most estranged;
Yet she against fortune did a banner bear,
And not her heart, no, not her countenance changed.
She constant still, though moaned, would never moan,
Whose stately gesture scorned their foul attempt:
And did unite her virtues all in one,
To grace disgrace, and glorify contempt.
She on two Ladies shoulders leaned her arms,
And with a Majesty did march towards death:
Like Alexander once amidst th'alarmes,
As if in triumph bent t'abandon breath.
The height of virtue admiration brings,
At this great magnanimity amazed:
As spying th'Image of their auncieat kings,
Or then some goddess; all the soldiers gazed.
But ah, some bosted by the tyrant strived
To spoil (unnatural) natures fairest frame;
And th'Alabaster balls between they driu'd
Th'vnwilling swords, that strait grew red for shame.
Then she in worth, that would her self excel,
Would neither word, nor tear, nor sigh forth send;
But spread her garments over her whilst she fell,
As jealous of her honour still to th'end.
O strange barbarity, most monstrous deed,
Could men a woman, subjects kill their Queen?
And could her fortune past no pity breeds?
Who ever gave the wound hath not her seen.
The ugly Authors of those odious evils,
Feared for deserved plagues must still be sad,
His breast t'a hell, his thoughts all turned to devils,
Through horror of himself must make him mad.
And yet the plague of these detested times.
Hath wrought more mischief t'aggrauate our groans.
No end in sin, crimes are maintained by crimes
Who fall in th'Ocean touch the bottom once,
The path of honour hath but narrow bounds,
On which who steps attentive must remain.
It's raised so hie aboue the vulgar grounds,
That who thence fall can never rise again.
Thus now Cassandra since he cannot win
True reputation, but lives tainted still,
Embarked in mischief sails the depths of sin,
So, if not loved as good, yet feared as ill.
Though by his means his ruthless eyes have seen,
Fates (as it were from Fortunes bosom) rend
His King by poison, by the sword his Queen;
In wickedness t'exceede himself in th'end:
He prospring in impiety, grew proud,
And murdered both his masters son and wife:
Thus he that all the world by birthright owed,
Could hold no part of it, no not his life.
Yet could Roxanes death not ease his mind,
Nor her young son too soon made Plutoes guest:
But bent t'vndoe all Alexanders kind,
That to revenge the rest there might none rest.
By treason he (as all his deeds are done,)
Caused Hercules his brothers steppes to trace:
That was great Alexanders bastard son,
And th'onelie remnant of that great mans race.
Lo thus Cassandra th'enemie to all good,
Whose soul so much for Macedonie longs:
Hath to the Sceptre swimd through seas of blood,
Yet, O weak right thats builded but on wrongs!
O how ambition doth abuse the great,
That with enough not pleased still strive for more:
Lo how our Sovereign seemed to raise his state,
Yet made it but to fall whilst starved with store.
And since his trophies reared in several fields,
Both him and his have to confusion brought:
Then what is all the good that greatness yields,
Which makes it self seem much to be made nought?
Thus though the mountains make a mighty show,
They are but barren heaps borne up aloft,
Where plains are pleasant still, though they lie lowe,
And are most fertile too, though trod on oft.
Greatness is like a cloud in the air bounds,
Which th'earths base vapours have congeald aboue:
It brawls with Vulcan, thundering forth huge sounds, fear,
Yet melts, and falls there whence it first did move.
Since that worlds conq'ror then whilst free from
Weighed with his greatness down so soon was dead,
What makes each of his captains strive to bear,
The diadem that crushed so strong a head?
O when my mind is ravished through the stars,
To search the secret secrets of the fates:
What treasons, murders, mutinies and wars,
Are threatening once t'orethrow th'vsurped seats.
And false Cassandra that betrayed his Lord,
And spoiled the princely race in mischief chief:
A traitor, both of heaven and earth abhorrd,
Shall live but with disgrace, and die with grief.
His sons, in wickedness himself t'exceede,
Shall make the woman die that made them live:
Then when being drunk with blood, to death shall bleed
And none of theirs their funerals shall survive.
Then when ambition should be cooled by age,
Lysimachus shall by Seleucus die:
Nor shall Seleucus long enjoy the stage,
But by like violence shall breathless lie.
And subtle Ptolemies degenerd race,
Long only famous for infamous things:
Shall end, and once to th'enemies pride give place,
Whilst a lascivious Queen confusion brings.
Antigonus shall be in battle killed,
His son a captive perish with disgrace:
And after that it Greece with blood hath filled,
In end, destruction doth attend that race.
The last in power, though of their line not bred,
A niggard and a dastard beaten down:
Shall through a strangers town a captive led,
Bound of the Macedonians th'old renown.
WHat damned furies thus toss mortals minds
With such a violent desire to reign?
That neither honour, friendship, duty, blood,
Nor yet no band so sacred is as binds
The ambitious thoughts that would a kingdom gain:
But all is buried in black Laethes flood,
That may the course of sovereignty restrain,
Which from the breast doth all respects repell:
And like a torrent cannot be gainstoode:
Yea many would a Sceptre so to obtain,
In spite of all the world, and Ioues own wrath,
March through the lowest dungeons of the hells:
And underneath a diadem would breathe,
Though every moment threatened them with death.
Yet though such restless minds attain in th'end
The height to which their haughty hearts aspirde,
They never can embrace th'imagin'd bliss,
Which their deluded thoughts did apprehend,
Though by the multitude they be admired,
That still to power do show themselves submiss;
Yet by the soul still further is required,
That should seal up the accomplishment of joy:
Thus doth a partial judgment aim amiss,
At things that stand without our reach retired:
Which whilst not ours as treasures we define,
But not the same whilst we the same enjoy.
Some things afar doe like the Glowworm shine,
That looked to near have of that light no sign.
No charge on th'earth more weighty to discharge,
Than that which of a kingdom doth dispose.
O those that manage must the reins of state,
Till that their ghost b'imbarkt in Charons barge,
Doe never need t'attend a true repose.
How hard is it to please each mans conceit?
When gaining one they must another lose.
Thus hardly kings themselves ca??? evenly bear,
Whom if severe, as cruel subjects hate,
Contempt dare to the mild it self oppose.
In time who spare as niggards are despised,
Men from too frank a mind exactions fear.
Though in all shapes as Proteus being ??????sguisde,
Kings by some scandal always are surprised,
Yet one might well with every thing comport,
That on th'opinion only doth depend,
If further danger followed not by deeds.
But every monarch lo in many a sort,
Death doth disguised in divers shapes attend,
Of some by mut'nous swords the life forth bleeds,
By unsuspected poison others end,
Which whilst they always labour to prevent,
A thousand deaths within their breasts life breeds.
Lo, this is all for which the great contend.
Who (whilst their pride hemselues and others spoils)
With their dominions doe their cares augment.
And O vain man, that toils to abound in toils;
Though still the victory the victor foils.
Thus Alexander still himself dis???asde,
Whilst he t'vndoe his state did wale prepare,
Which when made most, diminished most remained,
Where with his fathers bounds had he bin pleased,
He might have left our crown in peace to his heir;
That by his conquest nought but death hath gained:
Yet for no pains a number now doth spare,
To work for that by which his wreak was wrought,
Which (though from it they rage to be restraind:)
Would (if possessed) their pleasures but impair:
Yet they by hurme of others seek the thing,
That by their harm of others will be sought;
To him and his, each of them death would bring,
That it might once be said he was a King.
We may securely sitting on the shore,
To see the great (as tossed on th'Ocean) groan,
Learn by their toils t'esteeme much of our rest,
For this doth thousands with affliction store.
That as th'vnhappiest in the world do moan,
If they but chance to view some few more blessed,
Where if they would but mark how many a one
More wretched than they in misery doth live;
It would strait calm the most unquiet breast.
The cottage whiles is happier than the throne,
To think our own state good, and others ill,
It could not but a great contentment give???
There much consists in the conceit and will,
Since t'vs all things are as we think them still.

THough I a goddess glance through th'azure round,
Whilst the eie-feather'd birds my coach do move:
And am with radiant stars heavens Empress crowned,
The sister, and the wife of thundering Jove.
And though I banquet in th'Aetheriall bowers,
Where Ambrosia and Nectar serves for meat:
And at the meeting of th'immortall powers,
Am still advanced unto the highest seat:
Yet by those glorious shows of boundless bliss,
My martred mind can no way be relieved,
Since immortality affords but this,
That I may ever live being ever grieved.
In vain, vain mortals seek for help at me,
With Sacred odours on my Altars thrown:
What expectation can they have to see,
One avenge their wrongs, that cannot avenge her own?
Might Pallas once drown thousands in the seas.
And metamorphose Diomedes mates?
And must mine enemies always live in ease,
As me to spite, appointed by the fates?
Of all the dying race that lives below,
With such indignities none could comport,
As wound my breast, whom gods and men do know
To be abused by Jove in many a sort.
Though known to me, from others if concealed,
His faults might breed me grief, but yet not shame:
Where lo, now both through heaven &amp; earth reveled,
Each standerous Theater doth his scorn proclaim.
If heavenly souls divinely lived aloft,
Th'inferior world would imitate them then:
But humanised by hinting mortals oft,
Where men should grow like gods, gods grow like men.
My painted Iris in her beauties pride,
Smiles not on Phoebus with so many hues:
As Jove in divers shapes himself can hide,
When he poor maids by Cupped spurred pursues.
He Dane in a golden shower deceiude,
And did a Swan in Ledaes bosom light,
Then being a Bull Agenors daughter reaved,
And Iö made a Cow to mock my sight.
But would to god that with such wanton dames,
He still to sport would as with me remain,
Not able then to embrace celestial flames,
All like the drunkards mother might be slain.
Then such a troupe as Rhea• bosom stores,
Would not hold him and me at endless jars:
The heavens are pestered with my husbands whores,
Whose lights impure, do taint the purest stars.
All injuries are heavy to digest,
Yet th'actors greatness doth some grief remove:
Of whom to suffer wrong it shames one least;
If I were wronged, I would be wronged by Jove.
But (ah) this long hath tirraniz'd my breast,
A man, a boy, a shepherd, yea and worse,
The Phrygian fire-brand, the adultrous guest,
That first wrought wrong by fraud and then by force.
He, he, was he whose verdict moved me most,
Whilst it on Ida wronged my beauties right;
No wonder too though one all judgment lost,
That had three naked goddesses in sight.
And yet I know were not his wandering eyes,
The Ciprian bribed by some lascivious smiles,
My pompous birds in triumph through the skies,
Had borne the gold that oft her nymphs beguiles.
Am not I she whose greatness is admired,
Whom Jove for wife, whom thousands court for love?
Whom haughty Ixion once to embrace desired,
Yet with a cloud deluded did remove.
What needed me a matter to submit,
Where my authority might have auailde?
Whilst though I promised wealth, and Pallas wit,
Yet with a young man Venus gift prevailed.
But how durst he t'ones pleasure thus give place,
Where two contemnd their honour would repair?
Is not our Sex impatient of disgrace?
Of which there's none, but loves to be thought fair.
T'auenge my self no kind of pain I spared,
And made his greatest gain his greatest loss:
As Venus gave him Helen for reward,
I gave him Helen for his greatest cross.
Nor did he long her love with joy enjoy,
Whose faithless flames his country did confound:
Whilst armies armed, for her did Troy destroy,
And leuel'd Neptunes labours with the ground.
Whilst Simois seemed to be a burial field,
Whose streams as streets were with dead bodies paved
All Xanthus plain as turned t'a sea did yield
A flood of blood, from Heroes wounds received
By braving thousands once though much esteemed,
By dust and blood deformed, of Hector slain
(Nor like Patrocius by the sword redeemed)
The body basely was bought back again.
Then by the same mans son that kilt his son,
The old Priamus surprised sighed forth his breath:
And being most harmed where he for help had run,
Whilst taking th'Altar, taken was by death;
Though wrestling long t'auoide the heavens decree,
By th'enemies sword being parted from the light,
He that l•u'de Helen, and was loath de by me,
Died as a sacrifice t'appease my spite.
Last having lived (if misery be a life)
T'entombe all hers, that high mishaps had tried
Though once being both, nor mother then, nor wife,
The fertile Hecub', as being barren did.
Thus by those means it would have seemed to some,
That my scorned beauty had bin highly vengde:
But whilst they were ore-com'd they did ore-come,
Since they for better states their states have changed.
I in one part, that people did confound,
But did enlarge their power in every place:
Al warlike nations through the world renowned,
Now from the Phrygian ruins raise their race.
And yet two traitors that betrayed the rest,
(O heavens, that treason thus should prosper whiles)
Of the Dardanian race did chance the best,
More happy then at home in their exiles.
Did not Antenor stealing through his foes,
Near to the Euganian mountains build a town,
Of which some nurslings once shall seek repose
Amidst the waives, and in the depths sit down?
Their city spousing Neptune, shall arise
The rarest common-wealth that ever was.
Whose people, if as stowt, as rich and wise,
Might boast to bring miraculous things to pass.
Then false Aeneas (though but borne to obey)
Did of a fugitive become a King:
And some of his near Tibers streams that stay,
Would all the world to their obedience bring.
Their ravenous Eagles soaring over all lands,
By violence th'imperiall prey have won:
That bastard brood of Mars with martial bands,
Have conquered both the mansions of the Sun.
Their course by mountains could not be controlled,
No, Neptune could not keep his bosom free.
Th'antartike heate, nor yet the artike cold,
No limits to their legions could decree.
O of that city there could come no good,
Whose rising walls with more than barbarous rage,
The builder first bathed with his brothers blood,
Which their prodigious conquests did presage.
That town hath oft my soul with anguish filled,
Whose new-borne state oft triumphed over my wrath:
Like my old foe that in his cradle killed,
The serpents that I sent to give him death.
By Sabins, Albans, Tuscans oft assailed,
Even in her infancy I tossde Romes state:
Yet still Laomedons false race prevailed,
And angry Iuno could doe nought but hate.
Then when the gallant Gaules had vanquished Rome,
That basely bought her liberty with gold:
A banished man Camillus chauncde to come,
And her imbalanced state redeemde of old.
Great Hanniball our common cause pursued,
And made his bands within their bounds remain,
With Consuls and with Praetors bloods imbrued,
At Thrasimene and at Cannes slain.
In Romans minds strange thoughts did fear infuse
That did attend the taking of their town:
But he that vanquish could, not victory use,
Was by their brazen destiny thrown down.
O what a torrent of Barbarians once,
Inunding over the Alps their walls did bossed,
Whilst Teutons and the Cimbers big of bones,
Like giants marched a more than monstrous host.
But though from unknown parts to ruin Rome,
I led those troops that all the world admired,
Yet did the tyrant Marius them overcome,
And I in vain to avenge old wrongs aspirde.
By baser means I likewise sought her harms,
Whilst Ianus church imported never peace,
I raised up abject Spartacus in arms,
That near eclipsed Romes glory with disgrace.
Though I that all the world for help have sought,
From Europe, Affrike, and from Asia thus:
Gaules, Carthaginians, and Cimbers brought,
Yet did the damage still redound to vs.
Of heaven and earth I all the powers have proved,
And for their wrack have each advantage watched:
But they by foreign force could not be moved,
By Romans, Romans only may be matched.
And I at last have kindled civil war,
That from their thoughts which now no reason bounds,
Not only laws, but Natures laws doth bar,
The son the sire, the brother brother wounds.
Whilst th'Eagl•s are opposde to th'Eagles so,
O what contentment doth my mind contain:
No wround is wrong bestowed, each kills a foe,
What ever side doth lose I always gain.
But this my soul exceedingly annoys,
All are not subject to the like mis-hap:
The war helps some as others it destroys,
And those that hate me most, have still best hap.
Whilst with their blood their glory thousands spend,
Ah, ones advancement aggrauates my woe:
That vaunts himself from Venus to descend,
As if he claimed by kind to be my foe.
I mean the man whose thoughts nought can appease
Whilst them too high a blind ambition bends,
Whom as her minion Fortune bent to please,
Her rarest treasures prodigally spends.
Not only hath he daunted by the sword,
The Gaules, the Germans, and th'Aegyptians now,
But of all lords pretends to be made lord,
That who command the world to him may bow.
Thus dispossessing princes of their thrones,
Whilst his ambition nothing can assuage:
That the subjected world in bondage groans,
The prey of pride, the sacrifice of rage.
Men rail on Jove, and sigh for Saturnes time,
And to the present still th'Age past prefer:
Then burden would the gods with every crime,
And damn the heavens where only th'earth doth err.
Though Jove as stupid still with Cupped sports,
And not the humour of proud Caesar spies:
That may (if forcing thus the worlds chief forts)
More powerful than the Titans scale the skies.
Yet lest hee thrall him too that none free leaves,
We from the bounds aboue must him repell:
To brawl with Pluto in th'vmbragious caves,
There since he will be first made first in hell.
What? with that tyrant I will strait be even,
And send his soul to the Tartarian grove:
For though Ione be not jealous of his heaven,
Yet Iuno must be jealous of her Jove;
And though none in the heauem would do him ill,
He raise up some in th'earth to haste his death;
Yea though both heaven and earth neglect my will,
Hell can afford me ministers of wrath.
Isle cross Cocytus and the smoking lakes,
To borrow all my brothers damned bands:
The Furies armed with firebrands and with snakes,
Shall plant their hell where Rome so stately stands.
Whilst by my fury Furies furious made,
Do spare the dead to have the lilting pined:
O with what joy will I that army lead?
Nought than revenge more sweet t'a wronged mind.
Isle once make this a memorable age,
By this high vengeance that I have conceived:
But what though thousands die t'appease my rage?
So Caesar perish, let no soul be saved.
WE should be grieved t'offend the gods,
That hold vs in a balance still;
And as they will,
May weigh vs up or down,
Those that by folly engender pride,
And doe deride
The terror of th'eternalls rods,
In seas of sin their souls doe drown.
And others but abhor them as unjust,
Those that religion want deserve no trust.
How dare frail flesh presume to rise?
Whilst it deserves heavens wrath to prove,
On th'carth to move,
Lest that it opening straight,
Give death and burial both at once:
How dare such ones
Look up unto the skies,
For fear to feel the thunders weight?
All th'elements th'immortalls will attend,
And are as prompt to plague as men to offend.
None scopes some plague that gods displease:
Then whilst he Bacchus rites did scorn,
Was Penthouse torn:
The Delians high disdain
Made Niobe though turned t'a stone,
With tears still moan,
And Pallas spite t'appease,
Arrachne weaues loathd webs in vain.
Heaven hath prepared or ever they begin,
A fall for pride, a punishment for sin.
Lo Iuno yet doth still retain,
That indignation once conceived,
For wrong received,
From Paris as we find,
And for his cause, bent to disgrace
The Trojan race,
Doth hold a high disdain,
Long laid up in a lofty mind,
We should abstain from irritating those,
Whose thoughts (if wronged) not till revenged repose:
Thus those for Paris fond desire,
That of his pleasures had no part,
For them must smart,
Such be the fruits of lust.
Can heavenly breasts so long time lodge,
A secret grudge,
Like mortals thrall to ire,
Tilll Justice whiles doth seem unjust?
Of all the furies that afflict the soul,
Lust and revenge are har dest to control:
The gods give them but rarely rest,
That do against their will contend,
And plagues doe spend
That fortunate in nought
Their sprites being parted from repose,
May still expose
Th'vpbraiding troubled breast,
A prey to each tyrannic thought:
All selfe-accusing souls no rest can find,
What greater torment than a, troubled mind:
Let vs adore th'immortall powers,
On whose decree, of every thing
The State doth hinge,
That far from barbarous broils,
We of our life this little space
May spend in peace,
Free from afflictions showers,
Or at the least from guilty toils,
Let vs of rest the treasure strive t'attaine,
Without the which nought can be had but pain.
NOw have my hopes attained th'exspected haven,
In spite of partial envies poisnous blasts:
My fortune with my courage hath proved even,
No monument of miscontentment lasts.
Those that corriualld me, by me orethrowne,
Did by their falls give feathers to my flight:
I rather in some corner live unknown,
Than shine in glory, and not shine most bright,
What common is to two, rests no morerare,
No Phoenix is in all the world save one:
Grieved of my deeds that any claims a share,
Would God that I had acted all alone.
And yet at last I need to morn no more,
For envy of the Macedonians praise;
Since I have equalled all that went before,
My deeds in number doe exceed my days.
Some erst, (whose deeds rest registered by fame,)
Did from their conquests glorious titles bring:
But greatness to be great must have my name,
It's more to be a Caesar than a King.
Those warlike nations that did nations spoil,
Are by thy legions now, t'our laws made thrall;
What can not virtue doe by time and toil,
True magnanimity triumphs over all.
Th'outragious Gaules that in most monstrous swarms,
Went wasting Asia, thundering down all things;
And marching over the Macedonians arms,
Did insolently make and vnmake kings.
Those Gaules that having the worlds conq'rors foiled,
As if the world might not have matched them then,
Would sacrilegiously have Delphos spoiled:
And warrd against the gods, contemning men,
Yea those whose ancestors our city burned.
The people that the Romans only feared:
By me Romes nursling matched and orematchtmurn'd,
So what they first eclipsed again they cleared.
Then as to subjects having given decrees,
I left the Gaules their rash attempts to rue:
And wounding Neptunes bosom with winged trees,
The world divided Britains did subdue.
The Germans from their birth inurde to war,
Whose martial minds still haughty thoughts have bred,
Whilst neither men nor walls my course could bar,
Masked with my banners saw their Rhine run red,
And th'orientall realms amidst of late,
My coming and orecomming was but one:
With little pain so Pompey was called great,
That warrd with those whose glorious days were gone:
But what though thousands setones praises forth,
For fields which shadows and not swords obtained;
Yet th'easie rate but vilifies the worth,
No glory without labour can be gained.
From dangers past my comfort now proceeds,
Since all difficulties I did ore come:
And in few words to comprehend my deeds,
Rome conquered all the world, and Caesar Rome.
Lo, those that strived your virtue to suppress,
And were opposde to all your actions still:
Whilst labouring but too much to make you less,
Have made you to grow great against your will.
Great Pompeys pomp is past, his glory gone,
And austere Cato by himself lies killed:
Than dastard Cicero more you honours none,
Thus all your foes are with confusion filled.
The Senators whose wrath could not b'affwag'd,
Long to your prejudice their power abused,
Till at their great ingratitude enraged,
I said our swords would grant what they refused.
When having escaped, endangered, and despised,
That Curio' and I did to your camp resort,
In old bare gowns like some base slaves disguised,
All sighed to see vs wronged in such a sort.
Th'inhabitants of heaven that know all harts,
They know my thoughts as pure as are their stars:
And that constrained I came from foreign parts,
To seem uncivil in the civil wars.
I mooude that war which all the world bemones,
Being urged by force to free my self from fears:
Still when my hand gave wounds, my heart gave groans,
No Romans blood was shed, but I shed tears.
But how could any cleuated spright,
That had for honour hazarded his blood;
Yet yield by froward foes outrageous spite,
To be defrauded of th'expected good.
When as a multitude of battles won,
Had made Romes Empire, and my glory great;
And that the Gaules (oft vanquished) had begun
To embrace the yoke that they disdained of late.
Then pompous Pompey, my proud son in law,
And Cato, that still crossed what I designed,
From favouring me the people did withdraw,
And unto me a successor assigned.
Not that he should succeed in dangerous broils,
But even through envy, as thay had ordained,
That he might so triumph of all my toils,
And rob the glory that I dearly gained.
Could one with such indignities comport,
That values honour dearer then the light?
No, (whilst my soul rests sovereign of this fort)
None shall have power to rob me of my right.
And yet by Jove, that all the world commands,
T'vse any violence I did mislike:
And offred oft t'abandon all my bands,
If that my enemies would have done the like.
But the tumultuous multitude that still
As waives with winds are carried with conceits,
With nought but my disgrace would bound their will,
And I committed all unto the fates.
Yet when at Rubicon I stood perplexed,
And weighed the horror of my high attempt,
My soul was with a thousand fancies vexed,
Which resolution buried in contempt.
Nought in a captains more confounds his foes,
Then sudden resolutions swift effects;
For so surprised ere they their thoughts dispose,
All good advice prodigious care neglects.
Though when you marched towards Rome, your power
The sudden news so thundered in each ear: (was small,
That (as if heaven had fallen upon them all,)
They bred amazement, and th'amazement fear,
Some secret destiny as then appeared,
Doth guide mensactions and their judgements bounds,
Them whom huge armies could not once have feared:
A shadow or a rumour whiles confounds.
First that th'encroaching danger dulls their spritz.
And doth prevent their resolutions power,
Or that some destiny distracts their wits,
When heavens determined have their fatal hour?
Pompey the great that was grown aged in arms,
And had triumphed over all the worlds three parts
(Being quite discouraged with imagined harms)
Fled Rome, though without reach of th'enemies darts.
Then as t'a torrent all gave place to you,
Rome whom she called a rebel made her Lord:
Your successor Domitius forced to bow,
Did trust your favour more than fear your sword.
When in th'Iberian bounds you did arrive,
There th'aduersarie that did vaihely vaunt,
Had all th'aduantage that the ground could give,
And wealth of vittailes that with vs were scant.
Yet the celerity that you had used
Did so discourage their disordered band,
That (as Jove in their breasts had fear infused,)
They had no strength against our strokes to stand.
And when Romes general with brave Legions stored
Seemed to possess all that his soul required,
Whilst vs t'ouerthrow both famine and the sword,
The sea, the land, and all in one conspired;
Then for your offices they did contend,
As those that of the victory were sure:
And where they might th'affaires of state attend
In Rome, for lodgings fondly did procure.
Yet memorable now that day remains,
When all the world was in two armies ranged:
That Mars went raging through th'Aemathian plains,
And to despairs high expectations changed.
That famous field when the Pompeyans lost,
(As Lyons doe their prey) you did pursue
The scattred remnant of that ruined host,
On which new heads still like to Hydra grew.
Though victory in Africa fatal seemed
To any army that a Scipio led;
Yet you showed there, for worth in war esteemed
That Rome a better then a Scipio bred:
And all our enemies were confounded thus,
That vs in number ever did surmount;
But Caesar and his fortune were with vs,
Which we did more than many thousands count.
The sweetest comfort that my conquests gave,
It was the mean how to do many good;
For every day some Romans life I save,
That in the field to fight against me stood.
Thus may my mind be judged by the event,
That (even when by my greatest foes assailed)
To win the battle never was more bent,
Then promptto pardon when I had prevailed.
Not covetous of blood of spoils nor harms,
I (though being victor) did insult over none,
But laid aside all hatred with my arms,
A foe in fight, a friend when it was gone.
I like the praise of clemency, more then
Of force, that with affliction th'enemie lodes,
For force proves oft the worst thing that's in men,
And clemency the best thing in the gods.
Sterne Cato, but by Cato that would die,
And either death or life, if given disdained;
O, I envy thy death that did envy,
The glory that I saving thee had gaind'.
Yet I to rents and dignities restore
Even those that my destruction had designed:
And O, it doth delight my mind far more
By benefits then by constraint to bind.
I would have all my foes brought to their ends.
I rather have my foes all made my friends.
Their blood whom I suspect'd should quench all strife.
So might one doe that liked of nought but life.
Still life would be redeemde from dangers forth.
Not with a ransom then it self more worth.
Than life to man, what thing more dear succeeds?
The great contentment that true glory breeds.
Men by all means this blast of breath prolong.
Men should strive to live well, not to live long.
And I would spend this momentary breath,
To live by fame for ever after death▪
For I aspire in spite of fates to live.
I fear that some too soon your death contrive.
Who dare but lodge such thoughts within their minds.
Those that the shadow of your greatness blinds.
The best are bound to me by gifts in store.
But to their country they are bound far more.
Then loath they me as th'enemie of the state?
You as th'vsurper of the same they hate.
I by huge battles have enlarged their bounds.
By that they think your power to much abounds.
Yet I from doing wrong refrain my will.
They fear your power, because it may do ill.
The present state still miscontentment brings
To factious minds affecting matters strange,
That burdens to themselves irk of all things;
And so they change, regard not what they change:
In populous towns where many make repair,
(Whose confluence by conference all things touch)
They further than their bounds extend their care,
The idle that doe nothing, must think much.
Lo, Rome (though wasted all with civil wars,
Whilst private grudge pretended public good;
And that equality engendering jars,
Did prove too prodigal of Roman blood;)
Yet having through huge toils attained to rest,
That it by yielding t'one may banish tears:
It if constrained disdains to embrace the best,
This word necessity so wounds the ears.
And th'insolent with vile seditious words,
That trembled whilst they heard the trumpets sound:
Stir now their tongues, as we did then our swords,
And what Mars spared, make Mercury confound.
The people thus in time of peace agree,
T'abase the greatest still, even in that form
As in calm days they doe disbranch the tree,
That shrouded them of late against a storm.
But now I looked for liberty to bossed,
That once my deeds triumphed had over envy:
As all dark shadows doe evanish most,
Then when the Sun shines highest in the sky:
And though their hatred deeply they disguise,
Yet they conceal not so their souls desires:
But that their spite rest sparkling through their eyes,
And bosts to burst out once in open fires.
Since first (great Caesar) I discerned thy worth,
On all thy actions I did still attend:
And therefore what some whisper, Isle speak forth,
T'admonish freely it becomes a friend.
Since first men did suspect that you aspire
T'a Monarchy, the government to change;
They in their souls your ruin do conspire,
And their affections far from you estrange.
Since chaste Lucretia by proud Tarquin stained,
Washed with her blood the violated bed,
Whilst by his power supreme Rome was constrained
All things to obey, that his cursed brain had bred.
This government which some tyrannic call,
It sounds so odious in the peoples ears,
As Tyrants wild, that they detest them all
Whose greatness gives them any cause of fears.
I not affect the title of a king,
For love of glory, or desire of gain,
Nor for respect of any private thing,
But that the state may by my travels gain.
You know Sibillaes books that never fail,
In many minds have an opinion bred:
That over the Parthians Rome cannot prevail,
Till by a sovereign prince her bands be led.
For as confusion is the fruit we find
Of those affairs that divers thoughts dispose;
So sovereignty matched with a gallant mind,
Breeds reverence in ones own, fear in his foes.
And, O it grieves me that these steps of ours,
Have trod so oft on many a millions necks,
Whilst yet the Parthian vilipends our powers,
And all our victories vnuanquish'd checks.
Ah, should a General of the Roman race
Be by Barbarians killed, and not revenged?
And should his ensigns, signs of our disgrace,
Rest in the rank of conquered relikes ranged?
No, no, wretched Crassus, now thy self content,
Isle pacify thy ghost with Parthians spoils:
For still my boiling fancies have bin bent
T'ore-match th'vnmatch'd, and daunt th'vndaunted soils
With victories being cloyed, will you not then
Your safety once, more then new wars respect?
No, though I have surmounted other men,
My fancies yet do greater things affect:
In emulation of my self at last,
Even enviously I look on mine own deeds;
And bent to make the new surpass things past,
Now to my mind old praise no pleasure breeds.
The world hath seen thee (great man) for Romes good,
In danger oft of many a dangerous shelf:
Whilst for her glory thou engaged thy blood,
Of others careful, careless of thy self.
Though whilst in th'April of my blooming age,
I from the vulgar rate redeemd my name,
Some with my deeds did burden youths hot rage,
And an ambitious appetite of fame.
Yet since the coldness of declining years
Bosts to congeal the blood that boiled of late,
Whilst else my life the sun of glory clears,
That now of all the world remain most great.
I cannot covet that thing which I have,
I have all honour that can be required.
And now (as th'only wanted thing) would crave,
To taste the pleasures of a life retired.
But only now t'aduance the state I strive,
For, O neglecting th'ecchoes of renown
I could content my self unknown to live
A private man, with a Plebeian gown.
Since (Anthony) thus for the state I care,
And all delights that nature loves disdain:
Go, and in time the peoples minds prepare,
That as the rest, I may the title gain.
Yet indirectly at the first, assay
To what their doubtful minds do most incline:
But as without my knowledge, that they may
All mark your mind, and yet not think of mine.
DId I survive th'impetuo us Sillies rage,
And in a torrent of destruction stood:
Whilst tyrants did make Rome a tragic stage,
Through a voluptuous appetite of blood?
Escaped I confusion in a time so bad,
Of liberty and honour once to taste,
That bondage now might make my soul more sad,
By the remembrance of my fortunes past?
What though I once (when first by same made known)
From Catilines strange treason did preserve
This town, that's still endangerd by her own,
Since first the world from equity did swerve?
A spark of that conspiracy remains,
Not yet extinguished to have our state imbroyld;
That now on Rome flames of confusion rains,
Thus one was spared that we might all be spoiled.
O worthy Cato, in whose wondrous mind,
Three rarely matched things Nature did reveal:
Wit, honesty, and courage which designed
A citizen for Platoes commonwealth.
Whilst courteous Pompey did things as a friend,
Thou as a wiseman spake, and still foretold,
To what all Caesars deeds would turn in th'end,
If that his pride were not in time controlled.
And had we him as wisely thou advised,
Given to the Germans whom he had injured:
We had not now bin thus like slaves despised,
To see Romes glory, and our own obscured.
But yet I may disbanding former cares,
A space comport with that proud tyrants powers;
Age gives assurance by my witherd hairs,
That death will seal my surety in few hours.
Yet ye whose youth and sprite might have attained
Those dignities that Caesar hath undone:
O ye have lost as much as he hath gained,
Whose rising hopes must be retrenched so soon.
Though innovations at the first seem strange,
Yet oft experience approbation brings:
And if with upright thoughts we weigh this change,
On it the safety of our city hings.
As in the depths dashed with redoubling waives,
A ship by different minds rests more imbroilde,
So was our city plag'd with diverse laws,
By th'all-confounding multitude turmoilde.
As whilst t'one sickness diverse drugs are used,
Whose powers repugnant in digestion jar:
Th'impatient patients fancies rest confused,
So did we long distressed with civil war.
But now great Caesar from tempestuous winds,
Romes scattred ruins recollects of late:
A Pilot meet to calm tumultuous minds,
A doctor fit for a distempered state.
The state from storms secure by drowning proves,
Now whilst despair doth doubtful fears appease:
He with the life th'infirmitie removes,
Thus is the physic worse than the disease.
This commonweal (as whiles the world did spy)
Though some proud sprites in civil wars involved,
Yet like black clouds that would obscure the sky,
Their tumid humours suddenly dissolved.
And no disgrace t'our government redounds,
But to th'ambitious that had it abused:
Who (had their power like Caesars wanted bounds)
Had whilst they ruled a greater rigour used.
There in all parts are people of all kinds,
And as advanced some bad men did abide,
Of power their equals, and of better minds,
Some always virtuous were to curb their pride.
But since that sacred liberty was lost,
The public power t'a private use one turns:
And as his lawless ways did always bossed,
The common weal by violence ore-turnes.
Though what you burden Caesar with were true,
Him of all crime Necessity hath cleared:
That was foes force t'eschew, forcde to pursue,
Whilst by contempt t'attempt great things being cheerd:
To th'enemies envy more obliged he rests,
Then t'his own wit that no such courses scand,
Till by being barred from using of requests,
Not looked for means were offred to command.
All to mount high his haughty thoughts did tempt,
True worth disdains to suffer open wrong:
And a great courage kindled by contempt,
Must by revenge be quenched whilst rage makes strong.
O Decius, now a wrong account you cast,
Th'intent; and not th'euent defines the mind:
Tread back the steppes of all his actions past,
And at the mark he hit all aimed we find
As by some sprite inspirde proud Scilla said,
That there in Caesar many Marians were:
And Rome was warned in time to be afraid
Of the euill-girded youth, with smoothe-comb'd hair.
Then when (as still to quietness a foe,)
The memory of Marius he renewd:
By re-erecting tyrants statues so,
His thoughts all bent to tyranny were viewed.
That people-pleaser might have bin perceived,
By courteous complements beneath his rank;
That lavishing forth gifts the world deceived,
And to gain more than his, of his proved frank.
Though nought at all indulgent to his wife,
By prostrated pudicity disgraced:
Yet did he save th'adultrous Clodius life,
To soothe the multitude whose steppes he tract.
These be the means by which ambition mounts,
Without most humble, when most high within:
And as it fled from that thing which it hunts,
Still wasting most, when most it minds to win.
And he that still strived tyranny to embrace,
Was thought conioynd with Catilin to bee;
And had wise Catoes counsel taken place,
Had with the rest received his death by me.
Yet having sunk himself in some men's souls,
He with his partial faction suiting oft:
Did get the consulship which nought controls,
And matching pride with power did look aloft.
To flatter them that now must flatter him,
His power to advance unlawful laws prevailed:
And those to cross that scorned he so should clime,
He furnished was with Force, where Reason failed.
But yet because he could not well b'assur'd,
T'act all alone according to his will;
To govern France he craftily procured,
So to be strengthened with an army still;
As Rome first warred at home till being made strong,
She thought her self of power the world t'orecome:
So Caesar warred against strange nations long,
Till that he thought his might might conquer Rome.
Then having all that force or fate assigns,
He cause of discontentment did pretend;
So to dissemble fore-conceiu'd designs,
One soon may find a fault that seeks t'offend.
But when he first in a prodigious dream
His mother seemed incestuously to use:
It might have shown to his eternal shame,
How he the bounds that bare him went t'abuse.
And yet I think avoiding threatened harms,
He was constrained t'imbarke in civil broils:
Did he not covenant to quit his arms,
As not desirous of his countries spoils?
Durst he with those that had his charge confined,
Stand to prescribe conditions as their mate;
Where t'haue attended and obeyed their mind,
It was his duty, and their due of late.
What? what? durst he, whom borne to obey the law,
The people all did willingly promote;
The sword which they bad given, against them draw,
When it was sharpened first to cut their throat?
That had not comed which all our anguish breeds,
If he vnforcde, when as his charge expired,
Till that the Senate censurde had his deeds,
Had from his province peaceably retired.
No, he hath but betrayed his native town,
Those bands by which she did him first prefer;
T'extend her borders, and his own renown,
Those hath he used to tyrannise over her.
My passions (ah transported as you see,
With an excessive love to my dear soil,)
Have made my tongue of my hearts-store too free,
By flaming forth what in my breast doth boil.
That Ceasars part might justly be excusde,
Lo, with the cause alleadgd his course accords:
Of which th'humanitie that he hath used,
A testimony to the world affords.
Though forcde to fight, he always had great care,
To save our Citizens as each man knows;
And bade his captains still all Romans spare,
But on Barbarians bodies spend their blows.
Of th'aduersaries after bloody strife,
When of the might have made some captives smart:
Not only was he liberal of their life,
But pardond them still to take Pompeys part.
Even at th'infortunate Pharsalian field,
When he securely might have used the sword:
He both did spare all th'enemies that would yield,
And them to rents and dignities restored.
Then when th'Aegyptians so to obtain relief,
Brought to his sight pale Pompeys bloodless head;
He testified with tears his inward grief,
And graced his statues after he was dead.
Those his proceedings might appear t'approue,
That he against his will maintained this war;
And to his country bears a tender love,
That could comport to reine his rage so far.
Those counterfeited favours which he show,
According to ones custom that aspires,
Were spent on many as the world might view,
T'insinuate himself in their desires.
But where he thus spared some, he spoild' whole hosts
And the Barbarians all to Rome not wrought
Such harm as he that of his goodness boasts,
Yet her best men hath to confusion brought.
The great man that of no mishap could pause,
But still prevailed, whilst warring without right,
Armed for the common weal in a good cause,
With Caesar did unfortunately fight.
From Lesbos fled with his afflicted wife,
Three base-born grooms (can fortune change so soon)
Stood to consult upon great Pompeys life,
And did what thousands durst not once have done.
Then he whose knees had oft been kissed by kings,
(Most highly happy, had he did in time)
By one of his own slaves with abject things,
Had his last funerals framed (O monstrous crime)
T'entombe Romes greatest captain all alone,
The Roman that arrived with reason said,
The fatal glory was too great for one,
And to have part of that last honour staid.
The tears bestowed by Caesar on his head,
Forth from a guilty mind remorse had thrown,
Or else he wept to see his enemy dead,
By any others hands than by his own.
Then constant Cato that even death did scorn,
The rare arch-tipe of an accomplished man,
That lived as not t'himselfe but t'all men borne,
Moved by his tyranny to ruin ran.
He justly whilst more just, himself more strong
Then Caesar thought, that for no Justice card,
And since discovering what he cloakd so long,
Said right, that Caesar and not he was snared.
Thus Caesar conquered all but Catoes mind,
That would not by a tyrants tolerance breathe:
But in such sort his famous course confined,
Than Caesars life more glorious was his death.
Those great men thus brought to disastrous ends,
The author of their death make me despise,
That whilst t'vsurpe th'authoritie he tends,
By treading down all good men strives to rise.
Now made most great by lessening all the great,
He proudly doth triumph in Rome, over Rome.
And we must seem t'applaud the present state,
Whose doubtful breath depends upon his doom.
Yet had I not enlargde my griefs so long,
To you whom Caesar doth pretend to love;
Were it nor I know touched with the common wrong,
A just disdain all generous minds must move.
Had Caesar willingly resignd his arms,
And rendered Rome her liberty at last,
When as from foes he feared no further harms,
But had repaird his just displeasures past.
More then for all the love thats showed to me,
He should have had an Altar in my breast:
As worthy for his virtuous decdes to be
Feared by the bad, and honoured by the best.
But since though conq'ring all the world by might,
He to himself a slave would make Rome thrall;
His benefits are loathsome in my sight,
And I am grieved that he deserves to fall.
My fancies move not in so lowe a sphere,
But I disdain that one over Rome impires;
Yet it is best, that with the time we bear,
And with our power proportion our desires.
Though I dissembled first your mind to try,
And told what Fame to Caesars praise relates;
Yet was I pleased that more were grieved than I,
All mis-contented men are glad of mates.
Since tyranny all liberty exiles,
We must our selves no more our selves disguise;
Then learn to mask a mourning mind with smiles,
And seem t'extoll that which we most despise.
Yet all our deeds not Caesars humour please,
That (since mistrusted once) esteems vs still
When dumb disdaineful, flatterers when we praise,
If plain, presumptuous, and in all things ill.
Yea we, whose freedom Caesar now restrains,
As his attenders all his steppes must trace;
And know, yet not acknowledge his disdains,
But still pretend t'haue interest in his grace.
Though all my thoughts detest him as a foe,
To honour him a thousand means I move;
Yet But to save my self, and plague him so,
No hate more harms than it that looks like love.
His pride that through prepostrous honour swells,
Hath by the better sort, made him abhorrd;
The gods are jealous, and men envious else,
To see a mortal man so much adored.
Well, Cicero let all means be entertained,
That may embark vs in his bosoms depths,
Till either willingly or then constrained,
He justly quite what he unjustly keeps.
This life of ours is like a Rose,
Which whilst it beauties rare array,
Doth then enjoy the least repose
When virgin-like it blush we see:
Then is it every hand the prey,
And by each wind is blown away:
Yea though from violence escaped free,
(Whilst time triumphs, it leads all thralls)
Yet doth it languish and decay.
O Whilst the courage hottest boils,
And that our life seems best to be,
It is with dangers compassed still,
Whilst it each little change appals,
The body force without whiles foils,
It th'owne distemprature whiles spoils:
Of which, though none it chance to kill:
As nature fails the body falls,
Of which, save death, nought bounds the toils.
What is this mooing tower in which we trust?
A little wind closed in a cloud of dust.
And yet some spirits though here being pent,
In this frail prisons narrow bounds,
With what might suffice not content,
Do always bend their thoughts too hie,
And aim at all the peopled grounds,
Then whilst their breasts ambition wounds,
Though feeding as bent straight to die.
They build as they might always live,
Being famished for fems empie sounds:
Of such no end the travels ends,
But a beginning gives whereby
They may b'imbroild worse then before,
For whilst they still new hopes contrive,
Th'exspected good more anguish sends
Then the possessed contentment lends,
Like beasts that taste not, but devour.
They swallow much, and for more strive,
Whilst still their hope new hap attends:
And how can sueh but still themselves annoy,
That know to conquer, but not how t'enioy?
Since as a ship amidst the depths,
Or as an Eagle through the air,
Of which their way no impression keeps,
Most swift when seeming least to move:
This breath of which we take such care,
Doth toss the body every where,
That it may hence with haste remove:
Life slips and sleeps always away,
Then whence, and as it came goes bare,
Whose steps behind no trace doth leave.
Why should heauen-banish'd souls thus love
The cause, and bounds of their exile,
Where they as restless strangers stray,
And with such pain why should they reeve
That which they have no right to have:
Which with them selves within short while,
As summers beauties must decay,
And can give nought except the grave,
Though all things doe to harm him what they can,
No greater enemy then himself to man:
Whilst oft environed with his foes
That threatened death on every side,
Great Caesar parted from repose,
As Atlas underneath the stars
Did of a world the weight abide.
But since a prey t'excessiue pride,
More then by all the former wars,
He now by it doth harmed remain
And of his fortune doth defied
Made rich by many a Nations wrack,
He breaking through the liquid bars,
In Neptunes arms his minion forced,
Yet still pursued new hopes in vain.
Ah, would th'ambitious looking back,
Of their inferiors knowledge take,
They from huge cares might be divorced,
Whilst viewing few more wealth attain,
And many more than they to lack.
Lo, th'only plague from men that rest doth reeve,
Is valuing what they want, not what they have.
Since thus the great themselves involve
In such a labyrinth of cares,
Whence none to scope can well resolve,
But by degrees is forward led
Through waives of hopes, rocks of despairs:
Let vs anoyd ambitions snares,
And far from storms by envy bred,
Still seek securely a humble rest,
With minds where no proud thought repairs,
That in vain shadows doth delight:
Thus may our fancies still be fed
With that which Nature freely gives.
Let vs iniquity detest,
And hold but what we owe of right,
Th'eyes treasure is th'al-circling light:
Not that vain pomp for which th'earth strives,
Whose glory but a poysnous pest,
T'orethrow the soul delights the sight,
Ease comes with ease where all by pain buy pain:
Rest we in peace, by war let others reign.
NOw, Brutus now, we need no more to doubt,
Nor with blind hopes our judgment to suspend:
Lo, all our exspectations are worn out,
For now it's time t'attempt, and not t'attend.
Th'imperious people that did th'earth appal,
Ah vanquished by their victories at last,
Are by their too much liberty made thrall,
Since all their strength but serves themselves to cast.
And we that once seemed borne t'aime at great things,
Of the worlds mistress mighty minions once,
That might have laboured to give laws to kings,
Laws from a king, must look for now with groans.
For such of Caesar is the monstrous pride,
That though he domineers else at this hour,
And to his clients kingdoms doth divide,
With an vnlimitd tyrranicke power.
Yet of Dictator he disdains the name,
And seeks a tyrants title with the place:
Not for his honour, no, but for our shame,
As only bent to brag of our disgrace.
I thought to see that man (as others are)
Walk reapparrel'd with a private gown,
As one that had unwillingly made war
T'hold up himself, not to cast others down.
So Silla, though more inhumane then he,
Whilst having all to what his heart aspirde,
The sovereignty resigned, and set Rome free
When all such expectation was expired.
By Caesars worth we must think that he too,
Will liberty restore t'our troubled state:
When first the world hath viewed what he might doe,
His thoughts are generous as his mind is great.
And though some insolences scope him whiles,
His dying fury sparkles but a space:
Nought th'inspirations quite of Mars exiles,
Till one be used with th'innocencie of peace.
Those that by violence did t'all things tend,
Scarce can themselves t'a quiet course conform:
Their stately carriage and frank words offend,
Whilst peace cannot comport with wars rude form.
I hope that Caesar settling civil broils,
When disaccustomde is intestine rage:
Will strive to mitigate his countries toils,
Bent all those flames that burned his breast t'asswage.
Thus of his course you by your own conceived
As if like thoughts of both did bound the will:
Ah, honest minds are with least pain deceive▪d:
Those that themselves are good dream not of ill.
But of bad minds to sound th'vnsound device,
Their inclination must your judgment sway:
The square of virtue cannot measure vice,
Nor yet a line that's straight a crooked way.
So Caesar may prevail t'vsurpe the state,
He cares not by what violence nor slight:
O, one may soon deceive men and grow great,
That leaves religion, honesty and right,
When as the Senators (no more their own)
Came to that Tyrant whom ambition blinds,
And shout him by what honours they had shown,
To gratify his greatness grateful minds.
He in a chair imperiously being placed,
Not deigned to rise nor bow in any sort:
As both of them had but their due embraced,
When he a haughty, they an humble port.
But if he thus, ere we be thoroughly thrall'd
Dare so disdainfully such great men use:
When in a regal throne by vs installed
Then will he break that which he now doth bruise.
Was he not first that ever yet began,
To violate the sacred Tribuns place;
And punished them for punishing a man,
That had transgressde the laws in time of peace?
The laws there doe of death all guilty hold,
Whose actions seem to tirranie inclined:
So earnest were our ancestors of old,
To quench the light of tyrants ere it shined:
And shall our Nephews (heirs of bondage) blame
Vs dastard parents that their hopes deceived,
That saw, that suffered, that survived such shame,
Not leaving dead, what we being borne received?
By Caesars friends to an assembly brought,
The Senators intend to call him king.
Isle not be there.
But what if we be sought
T'assist as Praetors such a public thing?
Then isle resist that violent decree;
None of Romes crown shall long securely bossed,
For ere that I live thrall'd, isle first die free:
What can be kept when liberty is lost?
O with what joy I swallow up those words,
Words worthy of thy worth, and of thy name:
But Brutus be not feared, this cause affords
Thee many mates in danger, few in fame.
When Anthony proud Caesars Image crowned
The people by a silent sorrow told,
In what a depth of woes their thoughts were drowned
That Comet of confusion to behold.
What do those scrolls thrown in thy chair import,
Which what thou art to thy remembrance brings?
Be those the fancies of th'inferiour sort?
No, none but noble minds dream of great things.
Of other Pretors people look for shows,
And distributions whose remembrance dyes:
Whilst bloody fencers fall with mutual blows,
And Affricks monsters made t'amaze their eyes.
But from thy hands they liberty attend,
A glory hereditary to thy race,
And following thee their blood will frankly spend,
So thou succeed in thy great parents place;
That Romes redeemer once did Tarquin foil,
Though from his birth obeyed, and without strife,
Where thou should but th'aspiring tyrant spoil,
That would t'extinguish'd tyranny give life.
I weigh thy words, with an afflicted heart,
That for compassion of my country bleeds,
And would to God that I might only smart,
So that all others escaped th'euill that succeeds.
Then never man himself from death did free
With a more quiet and contented mind,
Then I would perish, if I both could be
To Caesar thankful, and t'our country kind.
But though that great mans grace towards me en∣largde
May challenge right in my affections store:
Yet must the greatest debt be first discharged,
I ow him much, but to my country more.
This in my breast hath great dissention bred;
I Caesar love, but yet Romes enemy hate:
And as Jove lives, I could be moved to shed
My blood for Caesar, Caesars for the state.
I for my fathers death loathde Pompey long,
Whilst just disdain did boyle within my breast,
Yet when he warred to avenge the common wrong,
I ioynde with him because his cause was best.
A mind t'vsurpe if Caesar now reveal.
I will in time precipitate his end
Thus being still bent t'aduance the Commonwealth,
I helped a foe, and now must hurt a friend.
Least of his favour thou the poison prove,
From swallowing of such baits (dear friend) beware:
No tyrant (trust me) can entirely love,
Nor none that for himself doth only care.
He by such courtesies doth but intend
T'imbase thy virtues, undermine thy mind,
And thy suspected courage to disband,
Yea (though with silken bonds he would thee bind.)
This of all tyrants is the common tread,
To wreak all those in whom most worth he finds:
Or (whilst that terrors toss his jealous head,)
T'vse subtilties t'amuse the greatest minds:
As when we for the Pretorship did strive,
Then both were held in hope that so deceived
We others harms might study to contrive,
Through emulation and disdain conceived.
Thus subtle Caesar by such sleights hath toyld
To sow dissention, that we both may pause
Of private wrongs; and by such means embroiled,
Still courting him, neglect the common cause.
But nought from others must our thoughts estrange,
That must in time the tyrants course restrain:
Let other men lament, we must revenge,
I scorn to bear a sword and to complain.
Though Caesar (now) I must conspire thy fall,
My heart towards thee, yet never harboured hate:
But (pardon me) who ever make it thrall,
From bondage Brutus must redeem the state,
Of this my course what ever others judge,
Here I protest it is for good designed;
My thoughts are guilty of no private grudge,
For reason, and not fury moves my mind.
Nor is it ambition that inflames my breast,
With a prodigious appetite to reign,
That when I have made Caesar Plutoes guest,
I in his room a monarch may remain.
No, if that glory did my fancies charm,
To which blind-folded tyrants doe aspire;
I needed not to do, nor suffer harm,
But with less pain might compass my desire.
For if I would but temporise a space,
Till Time, or Death diminish Caesars might.
He thinks that I deserve t'enioy his place,
And I could make my day succeed his night.
Yet doe I not endear my self so much,
That Isle seek honour by my countries shame,
But O, I would (my zeal to it is such)
To save it from reproach seem worthy of blame.
Yea so, that I may free with honoured wounds,
My soil than is my soul more dear to me:
I care not strait to be barred from the bounds,
That at so dear a rate I would set free.
What man doth breath of Mars his martial race,
But will with Brutus sacrifice his blood,
And charged with arms ere tyranny take place,
Dare venture all things for his countries good?
Can any judgment be deceived so far,
But that it else most clearly may behold,
How that this change Rome greatness strait will mar,
And raze the trophies that she reared of old.
Of old in Rome all those that once had worn
The peace-importing gown, or warrelike shield,
Of dignities as capable being borne,
Durst aim at all that liberty could yield.
Those in affairs to deal that would set forth,
Were not discouraged by their birth, though base,
And poverty could not hold back true worth,
From having honour both by war and peace.
Then emulation violently driu'd
All gallant minds t'attempt great actions still;
That in the love of venue rivals lived,
Whilst Glory in their bosoms balm did still.
Fabricius first was from the plow advanced,
The rudder of the commonwealth to hold;
Yet by no means his private wealth enhauncde,
As rich in virtue still, as poor in gold.
Rude Marius too, to match red Mars in fame
Forth from the vulgar dross his race removed,
And lo, of Cicero the ridiculous name,
As famous as the Fabians now hath proved.
Each abject mind disdained to be obscure,
When still preferrement followed lofty cares,
And that one might by dangers past procure,
Fame to himself, and honour to his heirs.
But since that state by Caesar is oreturn'd,
Whilst all our lives depend upon ones lips;
Of breasts that once with love of glory burned,
From soaring thoughts this course the feathers clips.
Advancement now attends not on desert,
But on th'opinion of a flattred mind;
That to th'applauding hireling doth impart,
High honours that true worth can hardly find.
To these all tyrants most addicted prove,
Whom without reason they have raised too hie,
As thinking those that stand but by their love,
To entertain the same all means must try.
Where they whose virtue reapes a due reward,
Not building only on th'aduauncers grace,
Doe by deserts not gain so great regard,
Whilst they maintain, as they obtain their place.
And if a worthy man to work great things,
Winged with th'vsurpers favours raise his flight.
The highest course to him most harm still brings,
That till he fall, can not have leave to light.
Those that by force would have th'affection moved,
When willingly men hold such gallants dear.
They rage that any should be freely loved,
Whose virtue makes their vice more vile appear.
The man that now to be preferrd aspires,
Must with affronted flatteries servile form,
Still soothing Caesar, seal all his desires,
And in some shadow lurk t'auoyde a storm,
A number else of that proud rebels foes,
Grieved to behold th'occasion of their grief.
Strive in obscurity t'entombe their woes,
So waiting, and not working for relief.
But we whose lofty minds disdain to lower,
As those that seek but their own safety thus;
When shall we spend an indignations power,
Thats worthy of true Romans, and of vs;
Since no indignity resolved t'indure,
I see our minds doe sympathise in this,
Should we by suffering seek to live secure,
Whose action must amend what is amiss?
No, no such abject thought must stain our breast,
To cure calamity but by discourse,
Whilst but like beasts, affecting food and rest,
Where men by reason should direct their course.
Like those of other parts secure from strife,
If Caesar had bin borne, or chusde our Prince,
Then those that durst attempt to take his life,
The world of treason justly might convince.
For still the states that flourish for the time,
By subjects should b'inuiolable thought;
And those no doubt commit a monstrous crime,
That lawful sovereignty profane in ought.
And we must think (though now being brought to bow,
The Senate king, a subject Caesar is,
Th'authoritie that violating now,
The world must damn as having done amiss.
We will (dear Cassius) for our countries sake,
Our selves expose to danger, or to death;
And let vs now advise what course to take,
Whilst nought bur th'aire can bear away our breath.
I think this matter needs not many words,
Since but one deed can bound the common shame;
In Caesars body we must sheathe our swords,
And by his death our liberty reclaim.
But since his fortune did confound them all,
That in the fields to match him did begin;
Whilst he by thousands made their bands to fall,
With hoary legions always used to win.
As Pompeys, Scipioes, and Petreius ghosts,
In lightless shades may by experience tell,
That after th'ouerthrow of their numbrous hosts,
All famous (though infortunately) fell,
And since provided for the Parthian wrarre,
His army in arms attends on his decree,
Where we sequestered from such forces far,
Would, if suspected, strait prevented be;
With some few friends, whom all things now t'assay,
A love to vs, or to their country binds,
We to his wrack must walk another way,
Whilst ere our tongues, our hands doe tell our minds.
Now when most high, and therefore hated most,
Th'assembled Senate seeks to make him king;
We must go give the blow before we boast,
And him to death, Rome out of bondage bring.
In all this course I only one thing blame,
That we should steal, what we may justly take,
By clothing honour with a cloak of shame,
Which may our cause (though good) more odious make.
O, I could wish, with honourable wounds
T'affront Romes enemy in the battles dust;
No sweeter music than the Trumpets sounds,
When Right and Valour keep a consort just.
Then free if quick, else dead for nought being feared,
I always once contented might remain;
What tomb t'a man more glorious can be reared,
Than mountains made of them that he hath slain?
But how are my transported thoughts grown such,
That they disdain a measure now t'admit?
As bent not what to doe, but to do much,
I on the throne of Glory strived to sit.
No, to the state me from my self I give,
Free from particular respects, t'expose
My life and all for it, and whilst I live,
So that it gain, I care not what I lose.
Isle never rest till he for ever rest,
That gives my country such a cause of grief;
And that t'effect no form I will detest,
Nor for my fame endanger Romes relief.
But (worthy Cassius) ere we further doe,
Let vs the minds of our familiars feel,
Of which I hope to have assistance too,
Who will not hazard for his countries weal.
Now whilst my soul rests ravished in a trance,
I think I see great Rome her courage raise,
Bent to beat th'aire with songs, th'earth with a dance,
And crown thy virtues with deserved praise.
MY dearest half, my comfort, my delight,
That only serve to sweeten all my sours,
Thou in my bosom used t'vncharge thy spright,
And in my presence spared afflictions powers.
Still when domestike broils disturbed thy rest,
Whilst by thy self thou labord for relief,
Thou with calm words disguised a stormy breast,
Lest I had bin infected with thy grief:
For such of me was thy respective care,
No cause of miscontentment was made known,
But with affections colours painted fair,
All that might make me glad, was gladly shown.
What makes thee then thy courage thus to lose,
That thou can look so sad, and in my sight?
Lend me (dear love) a portion of thy woes,
A burden being divided doth grow light.
I see the Roses fading in thy face,
The Lilies languish, Violets take their place.
Thou hast (dear Lord) prevented my design,
Which was to ask of thee, what makes me pale;
It Phoebus had no light, could Phoebe shine?
No, with the cause of force th'effed must fail.
The mirror but gives back as it receives,
A just resemblance of th'obiected form:
And such impression as th'engrauer leaves,
The wax retains still to the stamp conform.
O I'm the mirror that reflects thy mind,
According to the influence of thine eyes,
I take the state in which thy state I find,
Such is my colour as thy countnance dies.
Then how can I rejoice whilst thou art sad,
Whose breast of all thy crosses is the scroll?
I am still as thou art, if grieved, or glad,
Thy bodies shadow, th'essence of thy soul.
On that great planet that divides the years,
As th'increase of th'inferiour fields depends;
And as it doth euanish, or appears,
In th'earths cold bosom life begins, or ends:
Sun of my soul, so I subsist by thee,
Whose course rests to thy secret motions thrall,
For when thou art from cloudy fortunes free,
I rise in joys, but if thou faint, I fall.
This countnance with my custom but accords,
That as you know yet never from my birth,
Light gestures used joined with lascivious words,
Nor yet ridiculous fashions that move mirth.
My melancholious nature feeds on cares,
Whilst smothered sorrow by a habit smokes,
A thoughtful breast thats burdend with affairs,
Doth make a silent mouth, and speaking looks.
As for my paleness it imports but good,
Th'abasing of the body mounts the mind:
Where fatness comed from food, but serves for food,
In fattest bodies leanest sprites we find.
Ah, since I saw th'abhorr'd Thessalian bounds
All drenched with blood of Senators and kings:
(As if my soul yet smarted in their wounds,)
A secret sorrow oftentimes me stings.
But since thy famous father with strange blows,
In the most hideous form affronted death,
To him my mind a sad remembrance owes,
Which sorrow shall exact still whilst I breath.
Yet am I grieved t'haue given thee cause of grief,
That thought some new mis-hap did me dismay;
To such old soars it's worst to give relief,
But time in end may wear my woes away.
Why should thou so from me thy thoughts con∣ceale?
From thine own soul that in thy bosom sleeps,
To whom, though shown, thou dost them not reveal,
But in thy self more inwardly them keepst?
And thou can hardly hide thy self from me,
That straight in thee each alteration spy,
I can comment on all that comes from thee,
True love still looks with a suspicious eye.
Rests not within our bosom every thought,
Tuned by a sympathy of mutual love?
Thou marrst the music if thou change in ought,
Which straight by my distemperature I prove.
Soul of my soul, unfold what is amiss,
My mind some great disaster doth divine,
And even excuse my couriousnesse in this,
Since it concerns thy state, and therefore mine.
I wonder that thou dost thy frailty show,
All women are by nature curious still;
And yet till now thou never craved to know,
More then I pleased t'impart of my free will.
Nought save the wife a man within the walls,
Nor nought save him without fits her to embrace:
And it's unseemly though it sometime falls,
When any sex usurps another place.
Dear, their wonted course thy cares inure;
I may have matters that import the state,
Whose opning up might my disgrace procure,
Whose weight would for thy weakness be too great.
I was not (Brutus) matched with thee, to bee
A partner only of thy board and bed,
Each servile whore in those might equal me,
That did her self to nought but pleasure wed;
No, Portia spousde thee with a mind t'abide
Thy fellow in all fortunes, good, or ill.
With chains of mutual love together tide,
As those that have two breasts, one heart, two souls, one will.
With sacred bands whom holy Hymen binds,
They tweene them should communicate all things;
Yea both the bodies labours, and the minds,
Whence either pleasure or displeasure springs.
If thus thou seek thy sorrows to conceal
Through a disdain, or a mistrust of me;
Then to the world what way can I reveal,
How great a matter I would doe for thee.
And though our sex too talkative be deemed,
As those whose tongues import our greatest powers,
For secrets still bad treasurers esteemed
Of others greedy, prodigal of ours;
Good education may reform defects,
And I this vantage have t'a virtuous life,
Which other minds do want, and mine respects:
I'm Catoes daughter, and I'm Brutus wife;
Yet would I not repose my trust in ought,
Still thinking that thy cross was great to bear,
Till that my courage was t'a trial brought,
Which suffering for thy cause can nothing fear.
For first t'experience how I could comport,
With sterne afflictions spirit-enfeebling blows,
Ere I would seek t'assault thee in this sort,
To whom my soul a duteous reverence owes.
Lo, here a wound, which makes me not to smart,
Though by my self being made, to make me known,
Since thy distress strikes deeper in my heart,
Thy grief (lifes joy) makes me neglect mine own.
Thou must (dear love) that which thou sought receive,
Thy heart so high a sail t'a tempest bears,
That thy great courage doth deserve to have
Our enterprise entrusted to thine ears.
Thy magnanimity prevails so far,
That it my resolution must control:
And of my bosom doth the depths unbar,
To lodge thee in the centre of my soul.
Thou see in what a state the state now stands,
Of whose strong pillars Caesar spoiled the best:
Whilst by his own preventing others hands,
Our famous father fell amongst the rest.
That insolent usurper doth presume
To re-erect detested Tarquines throne,
Thus the worlds mistress all-commanding Rome,
Must entertain no minion now but one.
Th'old blood of Mars that marks to what he tends,
Swells with disdain, their countries scorn to see,
And I'm one of the number that intends
By his death, or mine own, to be made free.
And without me can thou resolve so soon
T'assay the dangers of a doubtful strife?
As if despaired and always to b'vndone,
Being tired of me, yea tired of thy life.
Yet since thou thus thy rash design hath shown,
Leave Portias portion, venture not her part:
Endanger nought but that which is thine own,
Go where thou lik'st, I will hold still thy heart.
But lest by holding of thy best part back,
That the other perish t'aggrauate my groans,
That would be so thonght guilty of thy wrack,
Take all thy treasure to the Seas at once.
Like th'Asian Monarchs wife that with short hairs,
(Sad signs of bondage) past still where he past,
To wear away, or bear away thy cares,
Isle follow thee, and of thy fortune taste.
These hands that were with my own blood embrued,
To strike another may more strength afford:
At least when thou by th'enemie art pursued,
Isle set my self betwixt thee and his sword.
But if too great a privilege I claim,
Whose actions all should be disposed by thee:
Ah, pardon me (dear Brutus,) do but blame
These my excessive sorrows, and not me.
Thou ask what thou should give, forgive dear mate,
This venturous course of mine, which must have place,
Though it make fortune tyrant of our state,
Whose fickle foot-steps virtue grieves to trace.
And wonder not, though this towards thee I prove,
Since private passions now all power have left;
For I regard not glory, profit, love,
Nor no respect that doth import me most:
So to the land of which I hold my life,
I may perform the work that I intend,
Let me be called unkind unto my wife:
Yea worst of all, ingrate unto my friend:
But as th'instinct of nature makes vs know,
There are degrees of duty to be past:
Of which the first we to th'immortalls owe,
The next t'our Country, and t'our friends the last.
Proud tyrants from his native bounds to drive,
Did th'author of my race with ardent zeal,
Make those to die whom he had made to live,
And spoiled himself to advance the commonweal?
To raise the state which Caesar now ore-throwes,
That bred so many brave men whilst it stood,
He with the Tyrant interchanging blows,
Most gloriously did offer up his blood.
And did that man t'oppresse the common foe,
Then damn his sons to death? and with dry eyes?
And is his successor degenerd so,
That he in abject bondage basely lies?
No, his posterity his name not staines,
That t'imitate his steps doth yet draw near;
Yet of his spirit in vs some spark remains,
That more then life our liberty hold dear.
Then prosecute thy course, for I protest,
Though with some grief, my soul the same approves:
This resolution doth become thy breast,
Where in the sphere of honour virtue moves.
And doe this enterprise no more defer,
What thee contents, to me contentment brings;
I to my life thy safety doe prefer,
But hold thy honour dear aboue all things.
It would but let the world my weakness see,
If I sought my delights, not thy desires:
Though it give grief, and threaten death to me,
Go follow forth that which thy fame requires.
Though nature, sex, and education breed
No power in me, that's with my purpose even;
He lend assistance to th'intended deed,
If vows and prayers may penetrate the heaven:
But difficulties huge my fancy finds,
Save the success nought can defray my fear:
Ah, Fortune always frowns on worthy minds,
As hating all that trust in ought save her.
Yet I despair not but thou may prevail,
And by this course t'appease my present groans,
I this advantage have which cannot fail,
Isle be a freemans wife, or else be nones.
For if all prosper not as we pretend,
And that the heavens Romes bondage do decree,
Straight with thy liberty my life shall end,
Who have no comfort but what comes from thee.
My father hath me taught what way to die,
By which if I be barred t'encounter death,
Another means (though far more strange) Isle try,
For after Brutus none shall see me breathe.
Thou for my cause abandoned others else,
But now forsakst thy self t'adhere to me,
That of thy passions thus the power repells,
And with thy mind discords with mine t'agree.
Isle since by thee approved securely go,
And vilipend the dangers of this life,
Heavens make my enterprise to prosper so,
That I prove worthy of so worthy a wife.
But ah! of all thy words those grieve me most,
That bossed me with th'abridgement of thy days;
What? though I in so good a cause were lost,
None flies th'appointed fate that for him stays.
Do not defraud the world of thy rare worth,
But of thy Brutus the remembrance love,
And from so fair a prison break not forth,
Till first the fates have forcde thee to remove.
I fear the heavens have our confusion sworn,
Since this illage can with no good accord;
Thou and my father (ah) should have bin borne,
When Virtue was advanced, and Vice abhorrd.
Then ere the light of virtue was declined,
Your worth had reueren•de bin, not thrown away,
Where now ye both have but in darkness shined,
As stars by night, that had bin suns by day.
My treasure, strive to pacisie thy breast,
Lest sorrows but sinistrously presage,
That which thou would not wish, and hope the best,
Though virtue now must act on Fortunes stage.
THan liberty of earthly things
What more delights a generous breast?
That doth receive,
And can conceive,
The matchless treasure that it brings;
It making men securely rest,
As all perceive,
Doth none deceive,
Whilst weighed with doubts none balanced hings,
But feared for nought, doth what seems best:
Then men are men when they are all their own,
Not but by others badges when made known.
Yet should we not misspending hours,
A freedom seek, as oft it falls,
With an intent,
But to content
These vain delights and appetites of ours,
For then but being made greater thralls,
We might repent,
Our not being pent
In stricter bounds by others powers,
Whilst fear licentious thoughts appals:
Of all the tyrants that the world affords,
Ones own affections are the fiercest Lords.
As Libertines those only live,
That from the bands of vice set free,
Vile thoughts cancel,
And seek t'excell
In all that doth true glory give,
From which when as no tyrants be,
Them to repell,
And to compel
They deeds against their thoughts to strive,
They blestare in a high degree,
For such of same the scrolls can hardly fill,
Whose wit is bounded by another will.
That Rome from Tarquins yoke redeemde,
Who first obtained,
And then maintained
Their liberty so dearly loved;
They from all things that odious seemed,
Though not constrained,
Themselves restraind,
And willingly all good approved,
Bent to be much, yet well esteemed;
And how could such but aim at some great end,
Whom liberty did lead, and glory attend?
They leading valorous legions forth,
Though wanting kings, triumphed over kings,
And still aspird,
By Mars inspired
To conquer all from South to North;
Then lending Fame their Eagles wings,
They all acquired,
That was required,
To make them rare for rarest things,
The world being witness of their Worth:
Thus those great minds that domineered over all.
Did make themselves first free, then others thrall:
But we that hold nought but their name,
From that to which they in times gone,
Did high ascend,
Must low descend,
And bound their glory with our shame.
Whilst on an abject tyrants throne
We basely attend,
And doe intend,
Vs for our fortune still to frame,
Not it for vs, and all for one:
As liberty a courage doth impart,
So bondage doth disband, else break the heart.
Yet O who knows but Rome to grace,
Another Brutus may arise,
That may effect
What we affect:
And Tarquins steppes make Caesar trace,
Though seeming dangers to despise,
He doth suspect,
What we expect,
Which from his breast hath banished peace,
Though fairly he his fears disguise:
Of tyrants th'iniurie revenge affords,
All fear but theirs, and they fear all men's swords.
Dear cousin, Cassius did acquaint mine ears,
With a design that tossed my mind a space,
For when strange news a strangers breath first bears,
Then should not trust t'each rash report give place.
I would not then discover what I thought:
Lest he t'entrap my tongue a snare had framed,
Till I with thee t'a conference first was brought,
Whom he for patron of his purpose named.
One should beware to whom his mind he leaves,
In dangerous times when tales by walls are told,
Men make themselves most miserably slaves,
Of those to whom their secrets they unfold.
As Cassius told thee pitying Romes distress,
That t'our disgrace in bondage doth remain,
We straight intend what ever we profess,
With Caesars blood to wash away this stain.
Though for this end a few sufficient are,
To whom their virtue courage doth impart,
Yet were wee loath to wrong thy worth so far,
As of such glory to give thee no part.
Since both this cause, and that thy name thee bind,
In this adventurous band to be comprisde,
There needs no rhetoric to raise thy mind,
That t'execute which thou should have devised.
I thought no creature should my purpose know
But he whose interest promised mutual cares,
Of those to whom one would his secrets show,
No greater pledge of trust than to know theirs.
As when two meet being masked (though whiles near friends)
With them as strangers no respect takes place,
But when that friendship one of them pretends,
Then the other likewise doth vncloude his face:
So as thou first, Isle now at last be bold
My breast with the same birth long great hath gone,
Yet I t'another durst it not unfold,
Nor yet attempt to compass it alone.
But since this course, of which I long did pause,
On such great pillars now so strongly stands,
Whose countenance may give credit t'any cause,
It hath my heart, and it shall have my hands.
T'our enterprise propitious signs are sent,
So that the gods would give vs courage thus,
For all that ever heard of our intent,
Would willingly engage themselves with vs,
Let other men discourse of virtuous rites,
Ours but by th'action only should be shown,
Bare speculation is but for such sprites,
As want of power or courage keeps unknown,
In those that Virtue view when crowned with deeds,
Whose beauties through the glass of glory shined,
Sh'a violent desire to embrace her breeds,
As th'adamant to th'yrne being to the mind.
What though a number now in darkness lies,
That are too weak for matters of such weight,
We that are eminent in all men's eyes,
Let vs still hold the height of honour straight.
Whilst that our faction might be strengthened thus
I labord much to purchase all their powers,
Whom hate towards Caesar, love to Rome, or t'vs,
Might move t'imbarke in those great hopes of ours.
By sickness being imprisoned in his bed,
Whilst I Ligarius spied whom pains did prick,
When I had said with words that anguish bred,
In what a time Ligarius art thou sick.
He answered straight as I had physic brought,
Or that he had imagined my design,
If worthy of thy self thou would do ought,
Then Brutus I am whole, and wholly thine.
Since Caesar caused him be accused of late,
For taking Pompeys patt, yet at this hour,
He (though absolved) doth still the tyrant hate,
For being endangerd by his lawless power.
Whilst it exasprates thus such great sprites spites,
Heaven of our course the progress doth direct,
One inspiration all our souls incites,
That have aduisdly sworn this fact t'effect.
So I with Cicero did confer at length,
Who I perceive the present state detests,
And though that age diminished have his strength,
In him a will t'auenge his country rests.
That man whose love still towards his country shined,
Would willingly the commonwealth restore,
Then he I know, though he conceals his mind,
None Caesar more dislikes, nor likes vs more.
Yet to his custody Isle not commit,
The secrets of our enterprise so soon,
Men may themselves be oftentimes not fit,
To doe the things that they would wish were done,
He still being timorous, and by age grown worse,
Might chance to lay our honour in the dust,
All cowards must inconstant be of force,
With bold designs none fearful breasts can trust.
Then some of ours would hold their hands still pure,
That ere they be suspected, for a space
Amidst the tumult may remain secure,
And with the people mediate our peace.
But who than Tullius fitter for that turn,
Whose eloquence is used t'enchant their ears?
His banishment they in balcke gowns did morn,
Whose age and merits each one reurence bears.
Those studious wits that have through dangers gone,
Would still be out, ere that they enter in;
Who must of many things, resolve of none,
And thinking of the end, cannot begin.
The mind that looks no further than the eye,
And more to Nature trusts, than unto Art,
Such doubtful fortunes fittest is to try,
A furious actor for a desprate part.
We have enough, and of the best degree,
Whose hands are to their hearts, their hearts t'vs true,
And if that we seek more, I fear we be
To act close too many, if disclosed, too few.
Let vs advise with an industrious care,
Now ere the tyrant intercept our minds;
The time, the place, the manner, when, and where,
That we should trust our treasure to the winds.
And since our fortunes in the balance hinge,
Let every point be circumspectly weight'd,
A circumstance, or an indifferent thing,
May whiles mar all for not being well conveyed.
As for the time, none could be wished more fit,
Than this thats present to perform our vow,
Since all the people must allow of it,
Moved by a recent miscontentment now.
When represented in his triumph past,
Great Catoes mangled entrails made them weep,
And desprate Scipio whilst he leaped at last,
To seek a Sanctuary amidst the depth.
Then all those great men that in several parts,
Bent for Romes freedom Caesar did overthrow,
Did by their pictures pierce the peoples harts,
And made a piteous (though a pompous) show.
So that they did conceive a just disdain,
To be upbraided in so strange a sort,
Whilst he that only by their loss did gain
Of their calamity but made a sport.
But yet his purpose grieves them most of all,
Since that he strives to be proclaimed a King,
And not contents himself to make vs thrall,
But to perpetual bondage would vs bring.
Thus whilst the people are with him displeased,
We best may doe that which t'our part belongs;
For after this they may be best appeased,
If whilst their wrath doth last we avenge their wrongs.
And since we nought intend but what is right,
Whilst from our country we remove disgrace:
Let all be acted in the Senates sight,
A common cause, and in a common place.
Let those whose guilty thoughts doe damn their deeds
In corners like Mineruaes birds abide:
That which t'our country good, t'vs glory breeds,
May by the lights of heaven and earth be tried.
The Senators by our ensample moved,
Pleased with this action that imports them too,
To have the yoke of tyranny removed,
May at the least authorize what we doe.
So all the Senators were said of old,
To have king Romulus amongst them torn:
That than to tyrannize was grown to bold,
And from his first humanity had worn.
Yea, what though Caesar were immortal made
As Romulus, whose deity him revives?
It's easier as a God t'adore him dead,
Then as a king to obey him whilst he lives.
That place indeed, most for our glory makes,
A Theater worthy of so great an act▪
Where in their sight from whom most power he takes,
We of the tyrant vengeance may exact.
But I must recommend unto your mind,
A course (though strict) of which we must allow,
Least it ore-throw all that we have designed,
Being past recovery, if neglected now,
There is Antonius Caesars greatest friend,
A man whose nature tyranny affects,
Whom all the soldiers doe delight t'attend,
As one that nought but to command respects.
I fear that he when we have Caesar slain,
To the other faction furnish still a head:
So when we end, we must begin again,
Against one living worse then he that's dead.
And in my judgment, I would think it best,
When sacrificed the proud usurper lies,
That that seditious enemy of rest,
Should fall with him with whom he first did rise,
Thus of our liberty we now may lay,
A solid ground that can be shook by none:
Those of their purpose that a part delay
Two labours have, that might have had but one.
I cannot Cassius condescend to kill
(Thus from the path of Justice to decline)
One faultless yet, lest after he prove ill,
So to prevent his guiltiness by mine.
No, no, that neither honest were, nor just,
Which rigorous form would but the world affright:
Men by this mean our meaning might mistrust,
And for a little wrong damn all that's right;
If we but only kill the common foe,
Our zeal t'our country must acquire due praise:
But if like Tyrants tyrannising so,
We will be thought that which we raze to raise.
And where we but intend t'aduance the state,
Though by endangering what we hold most dear;
If slaying him as armed e by private hate,
We to the world still partial will appear.
Ah, ah, we must but too much murder see,
That without doing evil cannot do good:
And would the gods that Rome could be made free,
Without th'effusion of one drop of blood.
Then their is hope that Anthony in end,
When first our virtue doth direct the way:
Will leagued with vs the liberty defend,
And being brought back will blush for going astray.
Well Brutus, I protest against my will,
From this black cloud, what ever tempest fall,
That mercy but most cruelly doth kill.
Which thus saves one, that once may plague vs all.
When Caesar with the Senators sits down,
In this your judgements generally accord;
That for affecting wrongfully the crown,
He lawfully may perish by the sword.
No greater harm t'our purpose can be brought,
Then by protracting of th'appointed time,
Least that which acted would b'a virtue thought,
Be (if prevented) consterd as a crime.
Can one thing long in many minds be pent?
No, purposes would never be delayed
That are interpreted but by th'euent,
If prospering reason, treason if betrayed.
There may amongst our selves some man remain,
Whom if afraid, his pardon to procure,
Or if being greedy for the hope of gain,
Time to disclose his consorts may allure.
Then ruin for our recompense we reap,
If ought our course by being abortive mar,
For if discovered once, we cannot scope,
As Tyrants ears hear much, their hands reach far.
The breast in which so deep a secret dwells,
Would not be long charged with so weighty cares,
For I conjecture by appearance else,
Mo privy are t'our minds then we to theirs:
Even but of late one Casca came to see,
That curious was to have our purpose known,
And said to him that which thou bid from me,
To me by Brutus hath at length bin shown.
Then by some things that he had learned before,
He of our course deep in discourse did fall,
Till Casca thinking that he had known more,
Scarce kept his tongue from staggering out with all.
Then Laena to vs once came in like sort,
And wished that our design might prosper well;
Yet vs to haste did earnestly exhort,
Since others told what we refused to tell:
Whilst strangers rest familiar with our mind,
And ere t'our knowledge thus t'our counsel rise,
Make forward fast, or we will come behind.
F•••e winged with breath most violently flies.
Their words but from uncertainties burst forth,
For whilst considering of their bondage thus:
Of Caesars tyranny, and of our worth,
They think this should be done, and done by vs:
Such conjurations to confirm of old,
Some drinking others bloods; swore on their swords,
And cursing those that did their course unfold,
Used imprecations, execrable words.
And yet then this though voluntarily vowed,
Free from all bonds, save that which virtue binds,
More constantly no course was still allowed.
Till now that th'end must manifest our minds.
And since so many frankly keep their faith,
Still what they first designed t'accomplish bent:
No doubt in spite of fickle fortunes wrath,
But the success shall yield our souls content.
Might some few Thebans from the Spartans pride,
By divers tyrants deaths redeem their town?
And one Athenian that his virtue tried,
By thirty Tyrants ruins win renown?
And to the Greeks are we inferior grown,
That where they have so many tyrants spoiled,
There cannot one be by vs all orethrowne,
Whose state yet brangling may be soon imbroyld?
O I'm resolved, and with my thoughts decree,
What ever fortune either sweet or sour,
I shall my soil from tyranny set free,
Or then my self free from the tyrants power.
By Lepidus invited this last night,
Whilst Caesar went to sup, and I with him,
Of all deaths shapes to talk we took delight,
So at the table to beguile the time.
And whilst our judgements all about were tried,
Straight Caesar (as transported) to the rest
With a most sudden exclamation cried,
O, of all deaths unlooked for death is best.
For from our selves it steals our selves so fast,
That even the mind no fearful form can see,
Then is the pain ere apprehended past,
All sours ere tasted would digested be.
The threatened destiny thus he diuinde,
It would appear divinely being inspirde,
For now I hope that he shall shortly find,
That form of death which he himself desired.
Whilst of our band the fury flames most hot,
And that their will t'atchiue this work is such,
Lest Caesars absence disappoint the plot,
Which would of some abate the courage much,
It (Decius) were exceedingly well done,
That to his lodging you addressed your way,
Him by some means to further forward soon,
Lest by some sudden chance allured to stay.
There where the Senate minds this day to sit,
Stand all prepared t'approach where danger dwells,
And for the sacrifice when all is fit,
Isle bring an offering consecrated else.
LOng-lookt for time that should the glory yield,
Which I through Neptunes trustless reign have sought,
And through the dust of many a bloody field,
As by all dangers worthy to be bought.
Thy coming now those lowering shadows clears,
That did th'horizon of my hopes ore-cast,
This day defrays the toils of many years,
And brings the haru'st of all my labours past.
The Senators a messenger have sent,
Most earnestly entreating me to come,
And hear my self discerned by their consent,
To wear a crown over all excepting Rome.
Thus they devise conditions at this hour,
For him, of whom Mars hath made them the prey;
As subjects limit could their sovereigns power,
That must have mind of nought but to obey.
But having pacifide those present things,
I mind to lead my valorous legions forth,
To th'orientall realms, adoring kings
That can exhibit honours due to worth.
Than swim my thoughts in th'Ocean of delight,
Whilst on the pillow of soft praise reposed,
Those eyes to gaze upon my glories light,
That envy op'ned, admiration closed.
Ah, though your fancies great contentment find,
Whilst thus the world your virtue doth advance,
Yet a prepostrous terror stings my mind,
And boasts me with I know not what mischance,
My wavering hopes oreballanc'd are with fears,
That to my soul sinistrous signs impart,
And ominous rumours so assault mine ears,
That they almost make breaches in my heart.
What, doe debattelld Pompeys followers strive
To recollect their ruins from the dust?
Dare they that only by my tolerance live,
More to their strength than to my favour trust?
Or dost thou fear his sons dejected state,
That steals infamous flying through those floods,
Which his great father, Admiral of late,
Did plant with ships till all their waives seemed woods?
Then makes his brothers death his courage more,
Since by them straited in a bloody strife,
I, that in all the battles given before,
Did fight for victory, then fought for life.
Or whilst to march toward Parthia I prepare,
Doth a suspicion thus afflict thy sprite,
For Crassus fortune feared that perished there,
Th'opprobrious prey of the Barbarians spite?
To those same bands that Cassius thence brought back,
A place amongst my legions Isle allow,
Whose foes shall find whilst they avenge th'olde wrack
Though the same sheep, another shepherd now.
Do not imagine matters to bemoan,
For whilst there stands a world, can Caesar fall?
Though thousand thousands were coniurd in one,
I, and my fortune might confound them all.
No, none of those my mind doth miscontent,
That vndisguisde still like themselves remain,
Unlooked for harms are hardest to prevent,
There is no guard against concealed disdain,
But in whom further can your trust repose,
Whom danger now over all, by all attends,
Where private men but only fear their foes,
Oft kings have greatest cause to fear their friends,
For since being trusted fittest to betray,
Those unto whom ones favour force affords,
May for his life the worst ambushments lay,
Whilst falsest hearts are hid with fairest words.
And some report (though privately) yet plain,
That Dolabella and Antonius now,
By your destruction do pretend to obtain,
That which you keep by making all men bow.
No corpulent sanguinians make me fear,
That with more pain their beards than th'enimies strike
And doe themselves like th'epicurians bear,
To Bacchus, Mars, and Venus borne alike.
Their hearts do always in their mouths remain,
As streams, whose murmuring shows the course not deep
Then still they love to sport, though gross and plain,
And never dream of ought but when they sleep.
But those high sprites that hold their bodies down,
Whose visage lean their restless thoughts records,
Whilst they their cares depth in their bosoms drown,
Their silence fears me more than th'others words.
Thus Cassius now and Brutus seem to hold
Some great thing in their mind, whose fire whiles smoks
What Brutus would, he vehemently would,
Think what they like, I like not their pale looks.
Yet with their worth this cannot well agree,
In whom of virtue th'image seem to shine,
Can those that have received their lives from me,
Prove so ingrate again as to take mine?
Dare Cassius me pursue new hopes to have,
At the Helespont that fortune feared to try,
And like a dastard did his Galleys leave,
In all (save courage) though more strong than I?
Shall I suspect that Brutus seeks my blood,
Whose safety still I tendered with such care,
Who when the heavens from mortals me seclude,
Is only worthy to be Caesars heir?
The corners of the heart are hard to know,
Though of those two the world the best doth deem,
Yet do not trust too much th'externall show,
For men may differ much from what they seem.
None oft more fierce than those that look most mild,
Impiety sometime appears devout,
And that the world the more may be beguiled,
Whiles Vice can clothe it self with Virtues cote.
Though that they have long since laid hatred down,
By benefits bestowed, you might attend,
There's no respect can counterpoise a crown,
Ambition hath no bounds, nor greed no end.
Through vindictive hate, and emulous pride,
Since some your person, some your place pursue,
All threatened dangers to prevent provide,
Being wise in time, lest out of time you rue.
No armour is that can hold treason out.
T'affright your foes with bands be backed about.
So dastard tyrants strive themselves to bear.
It better is to give, than to take fear.
No stronger guard than is the peoples love.
But nought in th'earth doth more inconstant prove.
Guards showing fear t'inuade me men might tempt.
Guards would put them from hope, you from contempt.
My breast from terror hath bin always clear.
When one fears least, oft danger lurks most near.
It's better once to die, than still fear death.
But worst of all to fall by th'enemies wrath.
Isle not dis-taste my present pleasures so,
By apprehending what may chance to come,
This world affords but too much time for woe,
Whilst crosses come contentment to overcome.
By joys in time we must embrace relief,
That when they end, we in some measure may,
By their remembrance mitigate the grief,
Which still attends all those on th'earth that stay.
I think the Senate is assembled now,
And for my coming doth begin to gaze,
Isle go condignly once to adorn my brow,
And feast mine ears by drinking in due praise.
Stay, stay (dear Lord) retire thy steps again,
And spare one day to prorogate whole years,
Let not this ominous day begin thy reign,
That fatal and unfortunate appears.
An Astrologian through the world renownde,
Thy horoscopes just calculation lays,
And doth affirm as he by signs hath found,
That th'Ides of March doe boast to bound thy days.
Walk not this days where harms may be received,
Since by no great necessity being forede,
For though his judgment may be far deceived,
In things that touch thy life, suspect the worst.
Whilst I reformed the Calender by fits,
That long disordered th'order of the year;
I waded through the depths of all their wits,
That of the stars the mysteries make clear.
Those pregnant sprites that walk betwixt the poles,
And lodge at all the zodiackes several signs,
Do read strange wonders wrapped in th'azure scrolls,
Of which our deeds are words, our lives are lines.
By speculation of superior powers,
Some Natures secrets curious are to know,
As how celestial bodies rule over ours,
And what their influence effects below.
Yea they sometime may strange conjectures make,
Of those whose parts they by their birth doe prove,
Since naturally all inclination take,
From Planets then predominant aboue.
And yet no certainty can so be had,
Some virtuously against their stars have strived,
As Socrates that grew, (though borne but bad,)
The most accomplished man that ever lived.
But of the hour ordained to close our lights,
No earth-clogd soul can to the knowledge come;
For O the destinies far from our sights,
In clouds of darkness have involved our doom.
And some but only guess at great men's falls,
By bearded comets, and prodigious stars,
Whose sight-distracting shapes the world appals,
As still denouncing terror, death, or wars.
The time uncertain is of certain death,
And that fantastike man far past his bounds,
He is too bold that with ambiguous breath,
Not speaks of things to come, whose deeps none sounds
But this all day did my repose extort,
And from my breast of cares a tribute climbed,
Now vilipend not that which Isle report,
Though but a dream, and by a woman dreamd.
I thought (alas) the thought yet wounds my breast,
Then whilst we both as those whom Morpheus weds,
Lay softly buried with a pleasant rest,
I in thy bosom, thou within the beds.
Then from my soul strange terrors did withdraw
Th'exspected peace by apprehended harms;
For I imagined, no, no doubt I saw,
And did embrace thee bloody in mine arms.
Thus whilst my soul by sorrows was surchargde,
Of which huge weight it yet some burden bears;
I big with grief two elements enlargde,
Th'aire with my sighs, the water with my tears.
That which I heard, with thy report accords,
Whilst thou all seemed dissolved in grief at once,
A heavy murmuring made with mangled words,
Was interrupted oft by tragic groans.
The memory, but not the judgment makes
Th'impression thus of passions in the brain,
For what the soul most suffers when it wakes,
With it asleep it doth turmoyld remain.
From superstitious fears this care proceeds,
Which still would watch o'er that which thou dost love,
And in thy mind melancholy thus breeds,
Which doth those strange imaginations move.
Ah, in so light account leave off to hold
Those fatal warnings that the heavens have made,
Which by all means most manifest unfold,
What dangers huge do hinge aboue thy head.
He with the sacred garlands that divines,
By th'entrailes of the consecrated beast,
Sees in the sacrifice sinistrous signs,
And I entreat thee do not hence make haste.
When I in Spain against young Pompey went,
Thus the diviner threatened me before,
Yet did I prosecute my first intent,
Which with new laurels did my brows decor.
And yet you hardly there as whiles I hear,
From dangers (far engagde) redeemd your life,
But now more monstrous tokens do appear,
And I suspect far worse than open strife.
Lest I too much seem wedded to my will,
As one that others counsels scorns t'alow,
With jealous eyes Isle search about me still,
And even mistrust my self to trust thee now.
Yet if I stay the Senators deceived,
May my beginning straight begin to hate,
So might I perish seeking to be saved,
By flying, many fall upon their fate.
But here one comes that can resolve me much,
With whom I use t'aduise affairs of weight:
Whence come thou Decius, that thy haste is such?
Is ought occurred that craves our knowledge straight?
I come to tell you how the Senate stays,
Till your exspected presence bless their sight,
And the conclusion yet of all delays,
Till that your approbation make it right.
T'accomplish your contentment they intend,
And all their thoughts seem at one object bent,
Save that they doe amongst themselves contend,
Who you to please shall strangest ways invent.
Than that no treasure to my soul more dear,
Which straight t'enioy from hence I long to part,
But yet I know not what arrests me here,
And makes my feet rebellious to my heart.
From thee (dear friend) I never do conceal
The weightiest secrets that concern me most:
And at this time I likewise will reveal,
How heavens by signs me with destruction bossed:
To superstition though not being inclined,
My wife by dreams doth now presage my fall:
It a Sooth-sayer likewise hath divined,
The sacrifice prodigious seems t'vs all;
So that till this disastrous day be gone,
All company I purpose to disuse.
And to the Senators Isle send some one
To paint my absence with a fair excuse.
Do not repose on superstitious signs,
You to suspect the people thus to bring,
Whilst soueraigne-like you limit their designs,
Seem not a tyrant seeking to be king.
How can we satisfy the worlds conceit,
Whose tongues still in all ears your praise proclames?
O! shall we bid them leave to deal in state,
Till that Calphurnia first have better dreams?
If that this day you private would remain,
The Senate to dissolve your self must go,
And then incontinent come back again,
When you have shown towards it some reverence so.
With thy advise (as powerful) I agree,
The Senators shall have no cause to grudge:
A little space, all part apart from me,
And isle be shortly ready to dislodge.
WHence come this huge and admirable change,
That in my breast hath uncouth thoughts infused?
Doth th'earth then erst yield terrors now more strange,
Or but my mind less courage then it used?
What spiteful fate against my state contends,
That I must now t'vnlook'd for plagues give place,
By foes not moved, yet feared amongst my friends,
By war secure, endangered but by peace?
T'encounter me when strongest troops did come,
Then did my heart the highest hopes conceive:
I warred with many, many to overcome,
The greatest battles, greatest glory gave.
As th'enemies number still my courage grew,
Oft have I through the depths of dangers past,
Yet never did those boundless labours rue,
To have none greater first, none equal last.
When as the Gaules feared by their neighbours falls,
Had from the fields, no, from my fury fled,
And hid themselves with arms, their arms with walls,
Whilst I my troupes t'inclose Alexia led:
Then though there swarmed forth from the bounds about,
Huge hostess to compass me, inflamed with wrath,
That the besieger being besieged about
Seemed drawn with danger in the nets of death.
Yet I that could not with the pride comport,
That those Barbarians by vain bosts betrayed,
Did reassault th'assaulters in such sort,
That words by wounds, wounds were by death repayd,
Of those within the town t'asswage their toils,
Till being ore-com'd their coming was not known:
Who straight upbraided by the barbarous spoils,
Did yield themselves with th'others as ore-throwne,
Then whilst with liquid legions tumid bosts,
The trident-bearer strived my spoils to bear:
Though threatened thrice amidst his humid hosts,
I always scorned t'acquaint my self with fear.
I used those Pirats that had me surprised,
Still as my servants thundering threatenings forth,
And gave them money more than they devised,
Grieved to be rated at too little worth.
Yet gathering ships, I signed not long the shore,
But traced their printles steps through th'vnpau'd way:
And taking them, as I had vowed before,
By nought but death their ransom would defray.
Then when without th'aduise of others minds,
Iventred through the hoary waives by night,
Whilst in a little bark against great winds,
That even the Pilot looked not for the 〈◊〉
The roaring waives themselves seemed to divide,
That in their gravel I might choose a grave.
And in a crystal arch aboue me bide,
That I of me a tomb might worthy have.
Whilst dangers seemed to merit Caesars death,
As Neptune raised his head, raised my heart;
And showing what I was with constant breath,
T'amazde Amiclas courage did impart,
Was I not once amidst large Nilus flot,
Whilst me to wound a wood of darts did fly,
Yet swim'd so careless of my enemies shot,
That in my hand I held some papers dry?
With open dangers thus in every place,
I whilst being compassed both by sea and land,
Did vndismaid look horror in the face,
As borne for nought but only to command.
But since a world of victories have filled,
With Trophies Temples, Theaters with my praise,
That bathed with balm from th'oyle of glory stilled,
With friends in peace I looked to spend my days.
The chambers music now affrights me more,
Then once the trumpets sound amids the field,
And gowns (though signs of peace) worse, then before
The pompous splendour of a flaming shield.
Those thoughts of late that had disdained to doubt,
Though I alone had marched amongst my foes,
Lo, whilst amongst my friends I'm backed about,
Doe greater dangers now then th'eies disclose.
If ought t'assemble any number brings,
I insurrections fear from common wrath;
Yea, if two talk apart of private things,
Straight I suspect that they conspire my death.
When sudden rumours rise from vulgar smoke,
Whilst the•••• motions roll my restless eyes;
I at each corner for ambushments look,
And start astonished least some tumult rise.
When rising Titans beams renew th'earths toils,
I still despair to re-enioy the night,
And when mine eyes th'all-couering darkness spoils,
I never look t'enrich them with the light.
For when that light with darkness makes a change,
To flatter mortals with a dream of rest,
What ugly Gorgons, what Chimeras strange,
Do bossed the little world within my breast?
Th'appointed time t'appease impetuous cares
Doth double mine, that view most when being blind:
I apprehen'd huge horrors and despairs,
Whilst th'outward object not distract my mind.
What comfort of my conquests now remains?
Where is the peace pursued by many a strife?
Have I but taken pain t'abound in pains,
And sought by dangers for a dangerous life?
Is this the period of aspiring powers,
In promised calms to be most plagued by storms?
Lurk poisnous serpents under fairest flowers.
And hellish furies under heavenly forms?
It will not grieve my gost below to go,
If circumuented in the wars I end,
As bold Marcellus by Romes greatest foe,
That gave his ashes honour as a friend.
Or like Epaminondas prosprous death,
O would to God I had amidst th'alarmes
Being charged with recent spoils, bin spoiled of breath,
Whilst I toward Pluto might have marched in arms.
Yet t'end this life that nought but toils affords,
Isle pay to death the tribute that he owes,
Straight with my blood set some come die their swords,
My body shall be bared to embrace their blows.
But ah, how have the furies seized my breast,
And poisoned thus my spirit with desperate rage:
That with their horrid serpents barred from rest,
Nought can imagined be my toils t'asswage.
No, Atropos, yet spare my thread a space,
That ere I to the Stigian streams go down,
I may of honour have the highest place,
And if I fall, yet fall beneath a crown.
Whilst I would bend my ears t'applauding shouts,
My thoughts divided are within my breast,
And my tossde soul doth flote between two doubts,
Yet knows not on what ground to build her rest.
The Senators they have this day designed,
To show the world how they esteem my worth;
Yet do portentuous signs perturb my mind,
By which the heavens would point my danger forth;
The gods from me with indignation gone,
Have charactred in every thing my death,
And must both heaven and earth conspire in one,
To quench a little spark of still-tossde breath?
My safety would that I should stay within,
Till this disastrous day give darkness place:
But honour hunts me forward to begin,
To reap the glory of my painful race:
And Isle advance in spite of threatened broils,
For though the fates effect that which we dream,
When death retires from forcing those frail spoils,
Though breathless, isle be breathed over all by fame.
WHat furie' is this that filles the breast,
With a prodigious rash desire,
Which banishing their souls from rest
Doth make those live that high aspire,
Whilst it within their bosom boils
As Salamanders in the fire,
Or like to serpents changing spoils
Their witherd beauties to renew:
Like Vipers with unnatural toils,
Of such the thoughts themselves pursue,
That for all lines themselves do square,
Whilst like Chameleons changing hue,
They only feed but on the air.
To pass ambition monstrous matters brings.
And (save contentment) can attain all things.
This active passion doth disdain
To match with any vulgar mind,
As in base breasts where terrors reign,
To great a guest to be confined;
It doth but lofty thoughts frequent,
Where it a spacious field may find,
It self with honour to content,
Where reverenced fame doth loudest sound:
Those at great things that t'aime are bent,
(Far lifted from this lumpish round)
Would in the sphere of glory move,
Whilst lofty thoughts which nought can bind,
All rivals live in virtues love:
On abject preys as th'Eagle never lights,
Ambition poisons but the greatest sprights.
And of this restless vultures brood,
If it grow not to too great a flame,
A little spark may while do good,
Which makes great minds affecting fame,
To suffer still all kind of pain:
There fortune at the bloody game,
Who hazard would for hope of gain.
Were not burned by a thrist of praise:
The learned lo, t'a higher strain,
Their wits by emulation raise,
As those that hold applauses dear:
And what great mind at which men gaze,
It self can of ambition clear,
Which is being rated at the highest price,
A generous error, a heroic vice.
But when this frenzy flaming bright
Doth so the souls of some surprise,
That they can taste of no delight
But what from sovereignty doth rise;
Then huge affliction it affords,
Such must themselves so to disguise,
Prove prodigal of courteous words,
Give much to some, and promise all,
Then servile seem, to be made Lords,
Yea first being made to many thrall,
Must pity impart if not support,
T'all those that crushed by fortune fall,
And grieve themselves to please each sort:
Are not those wretched that over a dangerous snare
Hinge but by hopes, being balanced in the jeer?
Then when they have the port attainde,
That was through Seas of dangers sought,
They (lo) at last but loss have gained,
And by great trouble, trouble bought.
There minds are married still with fears,
T'engender many a jealous thought,
With searching eyes and watching ears,
To learn that which they grieve to know.
The breast that such a burden bears,
What huge afflictions toil t'orethrow:
Thus princes are as all perceive,
No more exalted than brought low,
Of many a Lord, to many a slave.
That idol greatness which th'earth doth adore,
Is conquered with great pain, and kept with more
He that to this imagined good,
Did through his countries entrails tend,
Neglecting friendship, duty, blood,
And all on which trust can depend,
Or by which love could be conceived,
Doth find of what he did attend,
His exspectations far deceived;
For since suspecting secret snares,
His soul hath still of rest bin reaved.
Whilst squadrons of tumultuous cares,
Forth from his breast extort depth groans:
Thus Caesar now of life despairs,
Whose hap his hope exceeded once,
And who can long well keep an evil won state?
Those perish must by some whom all men hate.
A Regenerous Romans so degenerd now,
That they from honour have estranged their hands?
And used with burdens do not blush to bow,
Yea (though being broken) shake not off their bands.
This glorious work was worthy of your pain,
Whose best ye may by others dangers have,
But what enchants you thus that ye abstain,
That (which ye should have taken) to receive?
Where be those inundations of delight,
That should burst out through thoughts ore-flow'd with joy,
Whilst emulous virtue may your minds incite,
That which we conquered have, at least t'enioy?
Or quite conformd unto your former state,
Do still your minds of servitude allow,
As broken by adversity of late,
Not capable of better fortune now?
Lo, we that by the tyrants favour stood,
And grieved but at the yoke that you outraged,
Have our advancement, riches, rest, and blood,
All liberally for liberty engaged.
Thou like thy great progenitor in this,
Hast glory to thy self, t'vs freedom brought,
Than liberty what greater treasure is?
Small with it much, without it much seems nought.
But pardon vs (heroic man) though we
T'a high perfection hardly can aspire,
Though every man cannot a Brutus be,
That which we cannot imitate, w'admire.
At this strange course with too much light made blind
We our opinions must suspend a space,
When any sudden chance dismays the mind,
The judgment to the passion first gives place,
What wonder now though this most barbarous deed,
Have with amazement closed your judgment in,
Which O I fear shall great confusion breed,
When Caesars toils did end, Romes did begin.
The most suspicious minds had not believed,
That Romans reverenced for their worth by vs,
Would have presumde to kill, yea, or t'haue grieved,
A inviolable hallowd body thus.
Who would but once have dreamd of such despite?
What strange hostility in time of peace,
To slay, though not accused, against all right,
A sacred man, and in a sacred placed
If Caesar as a Citizen had lived,
And had by law decided every strife,
Then I would grant those treason had contrived,
That went without a law to take his life.
But to pervert the laws, subvert the state,
If all his travels did directly tend,
Then I must say, we did no wrong of late,
Why should not tyrants make a tragic end?
Since destinies did Caesars soul enlarge,
What course can we for his recovery take?
Ah, th'vnrelenting Charons restless barge
Stands to transport all over, but brings none back.
Of lifes frail glass when broken, with vain groans
What earthly power the ruins can repair?
Or who can gather up when scattered once,
Ones blood from th'earth, or yet his breath from th'aire?
Let vs of those that pass Obliuions flood,
B'obliuious still since hope of help is gone,
And spend our cares where cares may doe most good,
Lest Rome wail many, where she wails but one.
Still concord for the commonwealth were best,
To reconcile divided thoughts again,
Then discord to great towns no greater pest,
Whose violence no reverence can restrain.
Yet oftentimes those wary wits have erred,
That would buy wealth and ease at any cost,
Let honesty to profit be preferred,
And t'a vile peace, war when it wounds vs most.
But seeking peace what surety can we find?
Can faithless men give faith just fears to stay?
No sacred band impiety can bind,
That swears for trust, seeks trust but to betray.
What helped it Caesar that we all had sworn,
His body still from dangers to redeem,
Those that are once perjured hold oaths in scorn,
All are most frank of what they least esteem.
None needs in states that are from tyrants free,
Loathde execrations to confirm his will,
Where willingly men would with good agree,
And without danger might despise all ill.
All odious oaths by those are only craved,
Whose suit from reason doth a warrant want,
Whilst all deceivers feared to be deceived,
Seek of men thralled what none being free would grant
When Caesar had prevailed in Libia and Spain,
His fortune building on his countries wrack,
Of liberty a shadow to retain,
We gave him all that he was bent to take.
The Senate had reserved nought but a show,
Whose course to it by Caesar was imposde,
That lifted up by bringing others lowe,
Of offices and provinces disposed.
Then that our witherd hopes might never spring,
When bent t'abide the Parthians wooden shower,
He for five years disposed of every thing,
Even in his absence leaving vs no power.
O how some aggravate our deed with hate,
That durst by violence his body strain,
Though consecrated by constraint of late,
Yea but reputed holy, yet profane,
And doe forget how he (a wondrous case)
Did violate the tribune ship t'our scorn,
Which our forefathers (free) in time of peace,
Aduisdly had inviolable sworn.
Did he not once appropriate (swollen with wrath)
The public treasure to his private use,
And to the sacred Tribune threatened death,
That did resist, grieved at so great a'abuse?
Tweene Romans and a tyrant what avails
A covenant whilst right rests trod on thus?
Who can build further when the ground first fails?
Could we save him that sought to ruin vs?
So absolutely good no man remains,
Whose natural weakness never him beguiles,
Even virtues die from vice may take some staines,
And worthy minds foul imperfections whiles.
As in fine fruits or weeds fat earth abounds,
Even as the laborers spend or spare their pain,
The greatest sprites disdaining vulgar bounds,
Of what they seek the highest height must gain.
They, that the crown of glory may b'enioyd,
As only borne to be in action still,
Had rather be (than idle) evil employed,
Great sprites must doe great good, or then great ill.
The glorious Sun that golden rays doe arm,
The treasure of the world that doth most good,
Whilst on a time misgouernd did much harm,
Till th'ouerbold Coach-man fell amidst a flood.
Then whilst he by the rules of reason lived,
When lawfully elected by the State,
What glorious deeds by Caesar were achieved,
Which all the world as wonders must relate.
But when of right he buried all respects,
As blind ambition had bewitched his mind,
What harm ensude by pitiful effects.
We at the first, he at the last did find.
Whilst like Narcissus with himself in love,
He with our bondage banqueted his sight,
And for a while uncertain joys to prove,
Would sauce with all our sorrows his delight,
How could such gallant virtuous men as those,
That of their countries weal are jealous still,
But stoutly to all storms their states expose,
So th'authour of their infamy to kill?
But since our freedom flows from Caesars blood,
Let vs embrace that which too long we lack,
Peace gives to Justice power, and it t'all good,
Where war breeds wrong, and wrong al kind of wrack.
This city hath experienced with great pain,
Th'all-burdning troubles of intestine strife,
Which by her ruins registered remain,
Since first the Gracchi gave contention life.
When Silla once and Marius (mad through pride)
Seemed but to strive who most tyrannic proved,
What memorable miseries were tried
From Romans minds can never be removed.
Then last by Caesar and his son in law,
What thousands ghosts to Pluto were dispatched?
Ah that the world those hosts divided saw,
Which joined in one no world of worlds had matched.
Yet with this wit that we have dearly bought,
Let vs abhor th'apparance of such broils,
Lest when we have our selves to ruin brought,
In end Barbarians bear away our spoils.
Rome to those great men hardly can afford,
A recompense according to their worth,
That by a tyrants ore-throw have restored,
The light of liberty that was put forth.
Yet by due praises with their merits even,
Let vs illustrate their illustrous minds,
And to their charge let provinces be given;
Still virtue grows when it preferrement finds.
Those barbarous realms by whose respective will,
Of Caesars conquests monuments are shown,
As if they held them highly honoured still,
That warrd with Caesar though they were orethrowne.
Can this disgrace by their proud minds be borne,
Whilst we dishonour whom they honour thus,
And shall we not (whilst as a tyrant torn,)
Give him a tomb that gave the world to vs?
Must his decrees be all reduced again,
And those degraded whom he graced of late,
As worthy men unworthily did gain
Their rooms of reputation in the state?
If as a tyrant we him damn so soon,
And for his murd'rers do rewards devise,
Then what he did, must likewise be undone,
For which I fear a foul confusion rise.
Ah (great Antonius) sow not seeds of war,
And if thou always dost delight in arms,
The haughty Parthians yet undaunted are,
Which may give thee great praise, and vs no harms.
Detest in time th'abhominable broils,
For which no conqueror to triumph hath comed,
Whilst this wretched town (which still some party spoils)
Must loathe the victor, and lament th'orecomd,
And shall we still contend against all good,
To make the yoke where we should bound abide?
Must still the commons sacrifice their blood,
As only borne to serve the great men's pride.
Whilst I the depths of my affection found,
And read but th'obligations which I owe,
I find my self by oaths, and duty bound,
All Caesars foes, or then my self t'orethrow.
But when I weigh what to the state belongs,
The which to plague no passion shall get place,
Then I with grief digesting private wrongs,
War with my self to give my country peace.
Yet whilst my thoughts of this last purpose muse,
I altogether dis-assent from this,
That we should Caesars fame, or body abuse,
By torturing tyrants as the custom is.
Lest guilty of ingratitude we seem,
(If guerdoning our benefactors thus)
Great Caesars body from disgrace redeem,
And let his acts be ratified by vs.
Then for the public weal of which we pause,
Towards those that have him killed t'extend regard,
Let them be pardond for their kinsmens cause,
Remission given for evil is a reward.
We stand not dashed like malefactors here,
With a dejected and remorseful mind,
So in your presence supplicants t'appeare,
As who themselves of death doe guilty find;
But looking boldly with a lofty brow,
Through a delight of our design conceived,
We come to challenge gratefulness of you,
That have of vs so great a good received.
But if ye will suspend your thoughts a space,
Though not the givers, entertain the gift,
Do vs reject, yet liberty embrace,
To have you free, lo, that was all our drift.
So Rome her ancient liberties enjoy,
Let Brutus, and let Cassius banished live,
Thus banishment would breed vs greater joy,
Than what at home a tyrants wealth could give.
Though some misconstrue may this course of ours,
By ignorance or then by hate deceived,
Yet truth depends not on opinions powers,
But is it self how ever misconceived.
Though none themselves t'acknowledge vs would deign,
Our merit of it self is a reward,
Of doing good none should repent their pain,
Though neither getting guerdon nor regard.
Isle venture yet my fortune in the field,
With every one that Rome to bondage draws:
And as for me, how ever others yield,
Isle nought obey but reason and the Laws.
What fools are those that further travel take,
For that which else they past recovery know?
Who can revive the dead, or bring time back?
At least no mortal that remains below.
Great Pompey (now) for whom the world still weeps,
Lies low, neglected on a barbarous shore;
Selfe-slaughtred Scipio flotes amidst the depths,
Whom it may be sea-monsters do devour.
Of Lybian wolves wise Cato feasts the wombs,
Whose death of worth the world defrauded leaves:
Thus some that merited Mausolean tombs,
Not have a title graved upon their graves.
And yet may Caesar that procured their death,
By brave men slain be buried with his race:
All civil war being banished with his breath,
Let him now dead, and vs alive have peace.
We should desist our thoughts on things to set,
That may harm some, and can give help to none,
Learn to forget that which we can not get,
And let our cares be gone, of all that's gone.
Those that would strive all crosses to ore-come,
Must to the present time conform their course:
And doing the best for that which is to come,
Not meddle with things past but by discourse.
Seek not the thing which doth not good being found,
Since Caesar now is dead, how ever dead;
Let all our grief go with him to the ground,
For sorrow best becomes a lightless shade.
It's best that reconioynde with mutual love,
We physic for this wounded state prepare:
Neglecting those that from the world remove,
All men on earth for earthly things must care.
O how those great men friendship can pretend,
By soothing others thus with painted winds,
And seem to trust, where treason they attend,
Whilst love their mouth, and malice filles their minds.
Those but to them poor simple souls appear,
Whose countnance doth discover what they think,
That make their words as is their meaning clear,
And from themselves can never seem to shrink.
Lo how Anthonius fains to quench all jars,
And kindly the conspirators to embrace,
Yet as he furthered first the former wars,
It's feared he now be enemy to peace.
Now where Calphurnia stays our steps address,
By this last sudden chance her loss was chief:
All visit should their neighbours in distress,
To give some comfort, or to get some grief.
WHen darkness last imprisoned had mine eyes,
Such monstrous visions did my soul affright,
That my dejected sprite still stupid dyes,
Through terrors then contracted in the night.
A melancholious cloud so dimmes my breast,
That it my mind fit for misfortune makes,
A lodging well disposed for such a guest,
Where nought of sorrow but th'impression lacks.
And I imagine every man I see
(My senses so corrupted are by fears)
A Herald to denounce mishaps to me,
That should infuse confusion in mine cares.
O there he comes to violate my peace,
In whom the object of my thoughts I see:
Thy message is charecter'd in thy face,
Which by thy looks directed is to me:
Thy troubled eyes rest rolling for relief,
As lately frighted by some ugly sight,
Thy breath doth pant as if being big with grief,
And feared to bring some monstrous birth to light.
The man of whom the world in doubt remained,
If that his mind, or fortune was more great,
Whose valour conquered, clemency retained
All nations subject to the Roman state;
Him fraud harmed more then force, friends more then, foes
Ah, must this sad discourse by me be made?
Stay; ere thou further go defray my woes,
How doth my love? where is my life? Nū. Dead. Cal. dead.
Though apprehending horrors in her mind,
Now since she hath a certainty received,
She by experience greater grief doth find,
Till borne, the passions cannot be conceived.
When as a high disaster force affords,
O how that tyrant whom affliction bears,
Bars theares from comfort, &amp; the mouth from words.
And being obdur'd cannot dissolve in tears.
Ah, since the lights of that great light are set,
Why doth not darkness spread it self over all?
At least what further comfort can I get
Whose pleasures had no period but his fall.
O would the gods I always might confine
Aetna' in my breast, and th'Ocean in mine eyes,
That t'entertaine so great a grief as mine,
Thence might sufficient furniture arise.
Yet I disdain though by distress ore-throwne,
By such external means to seek relief:
The greatest sorrows are by silence shown,
Whilst all the senses are shut up with grief:
But misery doth so tyrannic grow,
That it of sighs and tears a tribute claims:
Ah, when the cup is full it must ore-flow,
And fires that burn must offer up some flames.
Yet though that thy last words my last might be,
Which are deep sunk within a melted heart,
Of my lives death report each point to me,
That I for every circumstance may smart.
What fatal warnings did fore-go his end,
Which by his stay to frustrate some did try?
But he that scorned excuses to pretend,
Was by the Destinies drawn forth to die.
Whilst by the way he chanced t'encounter one
That had his deaths-day named, he to him said;
Now th'Ides of March be comed, but yet not gone,
Straight tho'other answered, and still constant staide.
Another brought a letter with great speed,
Which the conspiracy at length did touch,
And gave it Caesar in his hand to read,
Protesting that it did import him much.
Yet did he lay it up where still it rests,
As do the great whom happy th'earth reputes,
That grieved to be importuned by requests,
Of simple supplicants neglect the suits:
Or he of it the reading did defer,
Still troubled by attendanrs at the gate,
Whilst some to show their credit did confer
To flatter some, for something some t'entreat.
Not only did the gods by divers signs
Give Caesar warning of his threatened harms,
But did disturb all th'aduersaries designs,
And to their troubled thoughts gave strange alarms.
A Senator that by some words we find,
To the conspirators (though none of theirs)
Had shown himself familiar with their mind,
Then chanced to deal with Caesar in affairs.
That sight their souls did with confusion fill,
For thinking that he told their purposde deeds;
They straight themselves, or Caesar thought to kill
A guilty conscience no accuser needs.
But marking that he used (when taking leave)
The gesture of a suitor that gave thanks,
They of their course did greater hopes conceive,
And ranged themselves according to their ranks.
Then Caesar marched forth to the fatal place,
Near Pompyes theater where the Senate was,
Where when he had remained a little space,
All the confederates flocked about. Calph. Alas.
First for the form Metellus Cimber craved,
To have his brother from exile restored;
Yet with the rest a rude repulse received,
Whilst it they all too earnestly implored.
Then Cimber that in strife with him did stand,
Did draw the gown over Caesars sacred head:
But the first blow was given by Cascaes hand,
Which on his neck a little wound but made.
Then Caesar starting whilst the stroke he spied,
By strength from further striking Casca stayde:
Whilst both the two burst out at once and cried,
Th'one traitor Casca, the other brother aid.
Then all the rest against him did arise
Like desperate men, whose fury force affords,
That Caesar on no side could set his eyes,
But every look r'encountred with some swords.
Yet as a Lyon when by nets surprised,
Stands struggling still so long as he hath strength;
So Caesar, as he had their power despised,
Did with great rage resist; till at the length
He thus cried out (when spying Brutus come)
And thou my son? then grief did back rebound,
Nought but unkindness Caesar could ore-come,
That of all things doth give the deepest wound.
Ah, when unkindness is where love was thought,
A tender passion breaks the strongest heart,
For of all those that give offence in ought,
Men others hate, but for th'vnkinde they smart.
Ah, taking then no more delight in light,
As which would then his life have bitter framed:
Or then from Brutus blow t'absent his sight,
As of so great ingratitude ashamed.
He with his gown being covered first over all,
As one that neither sought, nor wished relief;
Not wronging majesty in state did fall,
No sigh consenting to betray his grief.
Yet (if by chance or force I cannot tell,)
Even at the place whereas his statue stood,
As craving Pompcy pardon Caesar fell,
That in revenge it might exhaust his blood.
But when his corps abandond quite by breath
Did Fortunes frailties monument remain,
That all might have like interest in his death;
And guilty alike, look for like praise or pain.
Then Cassius, Brutus, and the rest began
With that great Emperors blood t'imbrue their hands:
What beast in th'earth more cruel is than man,
When over his reason passion once commands?
Whilst brutish Brutus, and proud Cassius thus
Romes greatest Captain under trust deceived,
Where was Anthonius (since a friend to vs,)
That he not lost himself, or Caesar saved?
The whole conspirators remained in doubt,
Had he and Caesar joined, to be undone;
And so caused one him t'entertaine without,
Who feigned a conference till the fact was done.
Then knowing well in such tumultuous broils,
That the first danger always is the worst,
He fled in haste, disguised with unknown spoils,
For rage and for disdain being like to burst.
The Senators that were assembled there,
When they beheld that great man brought t'an end,
What was their part? to what inclined their care?
I fear affliction could not find a friend.
Of those that in the Senate-house did sit,
As grieved so sad an object to behold:
Or feared what further murdrers might commit,
Each towards his house a several way did hold.
This act with horror did confound their sight,
And unawares their judgment did surprise,
When any hasty harms unlooked for light,
The resolution hath not time to rise.
That man on whom the world did once rely,
By all being reverenced, and adored by some,
Had none t'attend him left, but two and I.
To what an ebb may fortunes full whiles come▪
Why should men following on the smoke of pride,
Leave certain ease to seek a dreamed delight,
Which when they have by many dangers tried,
They neither can with safety keep, nor quite?
The people that by force subdued remain,
May pity those by whom oppressed they rest.
They but one tyrant have, where as there reign,
A thousand Tyrants in one tyrants breast.
What though that Caesar once commanded kings,
Whose only name whole nations did appal?
Yet now (let no man trust in worldly things)
A little earth holds him that held it all.
Ah, had he but believed my faithful cares,
That t'haue his state established always strived:
Then scoping this conspiracy of theirs,
He honoured still, and I had happy lived.
Did I not spend of supplications store,
That he within his house this day would waste,
As I by dreams advertised was before,
Which showed that was to come, which now is past:
Whilst the soothsayers sacrificed did find,
A beast without a heart their altars stain:
By that presage my soul might have divined
That I without my heart would soon remain.
But all those terrors could not terrors give,
To that great mind whose thoughts could not be tamed;
But by his fortune confident did live,
As him to obey the heavens had all things framed.
Yet though he ended have his fatal race,
T'insult for this let not his murdrers strive,
For, O I hope to see within short space,
Him dead adored, and them abhorred alive.
Though now his name the multitude respects,
Since murdering one that had held him so dear,
Whilst th'inward thoughts each outward thing reflects,
Some monstrous shape to Brutus must appear.
Just Nemesis must plague proud Cassius soon,
And make him kill himself from hopes estranged;
Once all the wrongs by foes to Caesar done,
May by themselves be on themselves revenged.
Some for th'earths sovereign Fortune strive to prove
As heavens their course confusdly did advance,
Nought comes to men below, but from aboue,
By providence, not by a staggering chance.
Though to the cause that last foregoes the end,
Some attribute th'euent of every thing,
That cause on other causes doth depend,
From heaven to earth that chaind together hinge.
Of those decrees that heavens for vs appoint,
Who-euer them approves, or yet disprooues,
No mortal man can disappoint a point,
But as they please here moos, or hence remooues.
We when once comed the worlds vain pomp to try,
Led by the fates, t'our journeys end must haste,
For when first borne, we straight begin to die,
Lifes first day is a steppe unto the last.
And is there ought more swift than days and years,
Which wear away this breath of ours so soon?
Whilst Lachesis to no request gives ears,
But spinnes the threedes of life till they be done.
Yet foolish worldelings following that which flies,
As if they had assurance still to breathe,
To frail preferrement fondly strive to rise,
Which but a burden weighs them down to death.
Ther's none of vs but must remember still,
How that the gods by many a wondrous sign,
Did show as it were how that against their will,
The destinies would Caesars days confine.
A monstrous star amidst the heaven hath been,
Still since they first against him did conspire,
The solitary birds at noon were seen,
And men to walk enuirond all with fire.
What wonder though the heavens at such a time,
Upbraid the earth with apparitions strange,
Then whilst intending such a monstrous crime,
Unnatural men make natures course to change.
Though all such things seem wonderful to some,
They may by reason comprehended be,
Yet if ought more than common custom come,
It th'ignorant with wondering eyes must see.
Those bastard stars not heritours of th'aire,
Are first conceived below, then borne aboue,
And when fore-knowing things sprites take most care,
And by illusions superstition move.
Yet this no doubt a great regard should breed,
When Nature hath brought forth a monstrous birth,
Where men in secret characters may read,
The wrath of heaven, and wickedness of earth.
The Naturalists, and th'Astrologians skill,
May whiles r'encountring manifest like care,
Since th'one looks back, and the other forward still,
Th'one may tell what, and the other why things are.
Shall sorrow through the waives of woes to sail
Have still your tears for seas, your sighs for winds,
T'affliction what do base complaints avail?
A higher course becomes heroic minds.
None are orecom'd save only those that yield,
Though they from froward fortune blows have borne.
Let Virtue be t'Aduersitie a shield,
No greater grief to grief than th'enemies scorn.
This makes your foes but laugh to see you weep;
At least these tears but for your self bestow,
And not for that great sprite, whose spoils heavens keep,
For he no doubt rests deified ere now.
I only wail my life, and not his death,
That now amongst th'immortalls doth repose,
And shall so long as I have blood or breath,
To furnish forth those elements of woes.
I care not who rejoice, so I lament,
That do to darkness dedicate my days,
And since the light of my delight is spent,
Shall have in horror all Apolloes rays.
I will retire my self to wail alone,
As do the trusty Turtles for their mates,
And my misfortune always bent to moan,
Will spurn at pleasures, as empoisond baits.
No second guest shall press great Caesars bed,
Warmd by the flames to which he first gave life,
I think there may be greater honour had,
Being Caesars widow, than another wife.
This had afforded comfort for my harms,
If I (ere chancde abandond thus to be,)
Had had a little Caesar in mine arms,
That represented had his sire to me.
Yet doth that idol which my thoughts adore,
With me of late most strictly match remain,
For where my arms but held him whiles before,
Now in my heart I shall him still retain.
That (though I have no precious things t'impart)
Thy deity may by me b'acknowledgde oft,
Still offering up my thoughts upon my hart,
My sacred flame shall always mount aloft.
WHat fools are those that do repose their trust,
On what this mass of misery affords?
And bragging but of th'excrements of dust,
Of lifeless treasures labour to be lords:
Which like the Sirens songs, or Circes charms,
With shadows of delight hide certain harms.
Ah whilst they sport on pleasures icy ground,
Oft poisond by prosperity with pride,
A sudden fall doth floating joys confound,
Of those that stumble after th'eielesse guide,
That so inconstantly her self doth bear,
To hope th'vnhappy, happy have cause to fear.
The fortunate that bathe in floods of joys,
To perish whiles amidst their pleasures chance,
And mirthless wretches wallowing in annoys,
Oft by adversity themselves advance:
Whilst fortune bent to mock vain worldlings ears
Doth change despairs in hopes, hopes in despairs.
That gallant Grecian, whose great wit so soon
Th'innumerable army did overcome,
Were not he was undone, had bin undone,
And if not banished had not had a home:
To him fear courage gave (what wondrous change,)
And many doubts a resolution strange.
He that told one that then was fortunes child,
As if with horror to congeal his blood,
That Caius Marius being from Rome exiled:
Wretched on the ruins of great Carthage stood:
Though both being plag'd by grief, and by disgrace
The consulship regained, and died in peace.
And that great Pompey (all the worlds delight,)
Whom of his theater then th'applauses pleased,
Whilst praise-transported eyes endeerd his sight,
That by youths toils should have his age then eased:
He by one blow of fortune lost far more,
Then many a battle conquered had before.
Such sudden changes so disturb the soul,
That still the judgment balanced is by doubt,
But on around, what wonder though things roll,
And since within a circle turn about?
Whilst heaven on earth strange alterations brings,
To scorn our confidence in worldly things.
And chancde there ever accidents more strange,
Than in this stormy bounds where we remain?
A shepherds Staff did here t'a Sceptre change,
The nurceling of a woolfe over men to reign:
A little village grew a mighty town,
Which whilst it had no king, held many a crown.
Then by how many sundry sorts of men,
Hath this great state bin ruled? though now by none,
Which first obeyed but one, then two, then ten,
Then by degrees returned to two, and t'one,
Of which three states their ruin did abide,
Two by twos lusts, and one by two men's pride.
What revolutions huge have happened thus,
All by a secret violence being led,
Though seeming but by accident to vs,
Yet in the depths of heavenly breasts first bred;
As arguments demonstrative to prove,
That weakness dwells below, and power aboue.
Lo Caesar, though being burdend in short space,
Both with strange nations, and his countries spoils,
Even when he seemed by war t'haue purchased peace,
And roses of sweet rest from thorns of toils:
Then whilst his mind and fortune raise most hie,
Hath bin constrained the last distress to try.
What warnings large were in a time so short,
Of that dark course which by his death now shines?
It speechless wonders plainly did report,
It men reueald by words, and gods by signs:
Yet by the chains of destinies being bound,
He saw the sword, but could not scope the wound.
O what a curtine over our knowledge hings!
Whiles closed, whiles op'ned by th'aetheriall host,
Which makes vs sometime sharpe to see small things,
And yet quite blind when as we should see most:
That curious brains may rest amazed at it,
Whose ignorance makes them presume of it.
Then let vs live, since all things change below,
When raised most high as those that once may fall,
And hold when by disasters brought more lowe,
The mind still free what ever else be thrall:
Those Lords of Fortune sweeten every state,
That can command thēselues, though not their fate.

AS in battles, so in all other act∣once that are to bee reported, the first, and most necessary part is the description of the place, with his opportunities, and properties, when∣there they be natural, or artificial. The great hall (wherein the Mask was presented) received this division, and order: The upper part where the cloth &amp; chair of State were placed, had scaffolds and seats on either side continued to the screen; right before it was made a partition for the dancing place; on the right hand whereof were consorted ten Musiti∣once, with Basse and Mean Lutes, a Bandora, a double Sack-bott, and an Harpsicord, with two
treble Violins; on the other side somewhat nearer the screen were placed 9. Violins and three Lutes, and to answer both the Consorts (as it were in a triangle) six Cornets, and six Chapel voices, were seated almost right against them, in a place raised higher in respect of the piercing sound of those Instruments-eighteen foot from the screen, an other Stage was raised higher by a yard then that which was prepared for dancing: This higher Stage was all enclosed with a double vale, so artifi∣cially painted, that it seemed as if dark clouds had hung before it: within that shroud was concea∣led a greene valley, with greene trees round about it, and in the midst of them nine golden trees of fife∣teene foot high, with arms and branches very glorious to behold: From the which grove toward the State was made a broad descent to the dan∣cing place, just in the midst of it; on either hand were two ascents, like the sides of two hills, dressed with shrubs and trees; that on the right hand lea∣ding to the bower of Flora: the other to the house of Night; which bower and house were placed op∣posit at either end of the screen, and between them both was raised a hill, hanging like a cliff o∣for the grove below, and on the top of it a good∣lie large tree was set, supposed to be the tree of Di∣ana; behind the which toward the window was a small descent, with an other spreading hill that cli∣med up to the top of the window, with many trees on the height of it, whereby those that played on the Hoboyes at the Kings entrance into the hall
were shadowed: The bower of Flora was very spa∣cious, garnished with all kind of flowers, and flowery branches with lights in them; the house of Night ample, and stately, with black pillors, whereon ma∣ny stars of gold were fixed: within it when it was empty, appeared nothing but clouds and stars, and on the top of it stood three Turrets underpropped with small black starred pillars, the middlemost be∣ing highest and greatest, the other two of equal proportion: about it were placed on wire artificial Battes, and Owls, continually moving: with ma∣ny other inventions, the which for brevity sake I pass by with silence.
Thus much for the place, and now from thence let vs come to the persons.
The Mockers names were these, (whom both for order and honour I mention in the first place.
Their number Nine, the best and amplest of numbers, for as in Music seven notes contain all variety, the eight being in nature the same with the
first, so in nūbring after the ninth we begin again, the tenth being as it were the Diappason in A∣rithmetick. The number of 9. is famed by the Mu∣ses, and Worthies, and it is of all the most apt for change, and diversity of proportion. The chief habit which the Mockers did use, is set forth to your view in the first leaf: They presented in their fey∣ned persons the Knights of Apollo, who is the father of heat, and youth, and consequently of amorous affections.
These are the principal persons that bear sway in this invention, others that are but secunders to these, I will describe in their proper places, discour∣sing the Mask in order as it was performed.
As soon as the King was entered the great Hall, the Hoboyes (out of the wood on the top of the hill) entertained the time till his Majesty and his train were placed, and then after a little expectation the consort of ten began to play an Ayre, at the sound whereof the vale on the right hand was withdrawn, and the ascent of the hill with the bower of Flora were discovered, where Flora &amp; Zepherus were bu∣sly plucking flowers from the Bower, and throw∣ing them into two baskets, which two Siluans held, who were attired in changeable Taffeta, with wreathes of flowers on their heads. As soon as the baskets were filled, they came down in this order, First Zepherus and Flora, then the two Siluans with baskets after them: Four Siluans in greene taffeta, and wreathes, two bearing mean Lutes, the third a base Lute, and the fourth a deep Bandora.
As soon as they came to the descent toward the dancing place, the consort of ten ceased, and the four Siluans played the same Ayre, to which Zephe∣rus and the two other Siluans did sing these words in a base, Tenor, and treble voice, and going up and
down as they song, they strewn flowers all about the place.
Now hath Flora robed her bowers
To befrend this place with flowers;
Strowe about, strowe about,
The Sky rayn'd never kindlier Showers.
Flowers with Bridals well agree,
Fresh as Brides, and Bridgromes be,
Strowe about, strowe about,
And mix them with fit melody.
Earth hath no Princelier flowers
Then Roses white, and Roses red,
But they must still be mingled.
And as a Rose new plucked from Venus thorne
So doth a Bride her Bride grooms bed adorn.
Divers divers Flowers affect
For some private dear respect,
Strowe about, strew about,
Let every one his own protect.
But hes none of Floras friend
That will not the Rose commend.
Strew about, strew about,
Let Princes Princely flowers defend.
Roses the Gardens pride,
Are flowers for love, and flowers for Kings,
In courts desired, and Weddings.
And as a Rose in Venus bosom worn,
So doth a Bridegroom his Brides bed adorn.
The Musique cease, and Flora speaks.
FLowers and good wishes Flora doth present,
Sweet flowers, the ceremonious ornament
Of maiden marriage, Beauty figuring,
And blooming youth, which though we careless fling
About this sacred place, let none profane
Think that these fruits from common hills are tan,
Or Vulgar valleys which do subject lie
To winters wrath, and cold mortality.
But these are hallowed and immortal flowers
With Floras hands gathered from Floras bowers.
Such are her presents, endless, as her love,
And such for ever may this nights joy prove.
FOr ever endless may this nights joy prove,
So eccocs Zephyrus the friend of love.
Whose aide Venus implores when she doth bring
Into the naked world the greene leaved spring.
When of the Suns warm beams the Nets we weave
That can the stubborn'st heart with love deceive.
That Queen of beauty, and desire by me
Breaths gently forth this Bridal prophecy.
Faithful and fruitful shall these Bedmates prove,
Blessed in their fortunes, honoured in their love.
ALL grace this night, &amp; Siluans so must you,
Offering your marriage song with chāges new
The song in form of a Dialogue.
WHO is the happier of the two,
A maid, or wife?
Which is more to be desired
Peace or strife?
What strife can be where two are one,
Or what delight to pine alone?
None such true friends, none so sweet life,
As that between the man and wife.
A maid is free, a wife is tied.
No maid but fine would be a Bride.
Why live so many single then.
Tic not I hope for want of men?
The bow and arrow both may fit,
And yet tic hard the mark to hit.
He levels fair that by his side
Lays at night his lovely Bride.
Sing Io: Hymen, Io: Io: Hymen.
THis song being ended the whole vale is sudden∣lie drawn, the grove and trees of gold, and the hill with Dianas tree are at once discovered.
Night appears in her house with her 9. hours, apparelled in large robes of black taffeta, painted thick with stars, their hairs long, black, and spangled with gold, on their heads coronets of stars and their faces black, every hour bore in his hand a black torch, painted with stars, and lighted. Night presently descending from her house spake as follows.
VAnish dark vales, let night in glory shine
As she doth burn in rage, come leave our shrine
You black haired hours, and guide vs with your lights,
Flora hath wakened wide our drowsy sprights
See where she triumphs, see her flowers are thrown,
And all about the seeds of malice sown?
Despiteful Flora first not enough of grief
That Cynthia's robbed, but thou must grace the thief?
Or did not here Nights sovereign Queen complain
Hymen had stolen a Nymph out of her train.
And matched her here plighted henceforth to be
Loves friend, and stranger to Virginity
And make thou sport for this?
BEe mild sterne night
Flora doth honour Cynthia, and her right,
Virginity is a voluntary power,
Free from constraint, even like an untouched flower
Meet to be gathered when tic thoroughly blown.
The Nymph was Cinthias while she was her own,
But now another claims in her a right
By fate reserved thereto, and wise foresight.
CAn Cynthia one kind virgins loss bemoan?
How if perhaps she brings her ten for one?
Or can she miss one in so full a train?
Your Goddess doth of too much store complain.
If all her Nymphs would ask advise of me
There should be fewer virgins then there be.
Nature ordained not Men to live alone,
Where there are two, a Woman should be one.
THou breath sweet poison wāton Zephyrus
But Cynthia must not be deluded thus.
Her holy Forests are by thieves profaned,
Her Virgins frighted, and lo, where they stand
That late were Phoebus Knights, turned now to trees
By Cynthias vengement for their injuries
In seeking to seduce her Nymphs with love:
Here they are sixth and never may remove
But by Dianaes power that stuck them here.
Apollos love to them doth yet appear,
In that his beams hath guilt them a they grow,
To make their misery yield the greater show.
But they shall tremble when sad Night doth speak,
And at her stormy words their boughs shall break.
Toward the end of this speech Hesperus begins to de•cend by the house of Night, and by that time the speech was finished he was ready to speak.
Hail reverend angry Night, hail Queen of Flowers,
Mild sprited Zephyrus hail, Siluans and Hours.
Hesperus brings peace, cease then your needless jars
Here in this little firmament of stars.
Cynthia is now by Phoebus pacified,
And well content her Nymph is made a Bride▪
Since the fair match was by that Phoebus graced
Which in this happy Western Isle is placed
As he in heaven, one lamp enlightening all
That under his benign aspect doth fall▪
Deep Oracles he speaks, and he alone
For arts and wisdoms meet for Phoebus throne.
The Nymph is honoured, and Diana pleased:
Night be you then, and your black hours appeased▪
And friendly listen what your Queen by me
Farther commands, let this my credence be,
View it, and know it for the highest gem,
That hung on her imperial Diadem.
I know, and honour it lovely Hesperus,
Speak then your message, both are welcome to
YOur Sovereign frō the virtuous gem she sends vs.
Bids you take power to retransforme the friends
Of Phoebus, metamorhpos'd here to trees,
And give them straight the shapes which they did leese.
This is her pleasure.
HEsperus I obey,
Night must needs yield when Phoebus gets the day.
Honoured be Cynthia for this generous deed.
Pity grows only from celestial seed.
IF all seem glad, why should we only lower?
Since t'expresse gladness we have now most power.
Frolic graced Captives, we present you here
This glass, wherein your liberties appear,
Cynthia is pacified, and now blithe Night
Begins to shake off melancholy quite.
WHo should grace mirth, &amp; revels but the night,
Next love she should be goddess of delight.
Tic now a time when (Zephyrus) all with dancing
Honour me, aboue day my state advancing.
Isle now be frolic, all is full of hart,
And even these trees for joy shall bear a part.
Zephyrus they shall dance.
Dance Goddess? how?
Seems that so full of strangeness to you now?
Did not the Thracian harp long since the same?
And (if we rip the old records of fame)
Did not Amphions lyre the deaf stones call,
When they came dancing to the Theban wall?
Can music then joy? joy mountains moves
And why not trees? joys powerful when it loves.
Could the religious Oak speak Oracle
Like to the Gods? and the tree wounded tell
T'Aeneas his sad story? have trees therefore
The instruments of speech, and hearing more
Then th'aue of pacing, and to whom but Night
Belong enchantments? who can more affright
The eye with magic wonders? Night alone
Is fit for miracles, and this shall be one
Apt for this Nuptial dancing jollity.
Earth then be soft and passable to free
These fettered roots? joy trees the time draws near
When in your better forms you shall appear.
Dancing, and music mnst prepare the way,
Ther's little tedious time in such delay.
This spoken, the four Siluans played on their in∣struments the first strain of this song following: &amp; at the repetition thereof the voices sell in with the instruments which were thus divided, a treble and a base were placed near his Majesty, and an other treble and base near the grove, that the words of the song might be heard of all, because the trees of gould instantly at the first sound of their voices began to move, and dance according to the measure of the time which the musicians kept in singing, and the nature of the words which they delivered.
Move now with measured sound
You charmed grove of gould,
Trace forth the sacred ground
That shall your forms unfold.
Diana, and the starry night for your Apollos sake
Endue your Sylvan shapes with power this strāge delight to make
Much joy must needs the place betide where trees for gladness move,
Afairer sight was ne'er beheld, or more expressing love.
Yet nearer Phoebus throne
Mete on your winding ways,
Your Bridal mirth make known
In your high-graced Hayes.
Let Hymen lead your sliding rounds, &amp; guide thē with his light,
While we do Io Hymen sing in honour of this night
Join three by three, for so the night by triple spell decrees
Now to release Apollos knights from these enchanted trees.
This dancing song being ended, the golden trees stood in ranks three by three, and Night ascended up to the grove, and spake thus, touching the first three severally with her wand.
BY virtue of this wand, and touch divine,
These Sylvan shadows back to earth resign,
Your native forms resume, with habit fair,
While solemn music shall enchant the air
Presently the Siluans with their four instrumēts, 
and five voices, began to play, and sing together the song following at the beginning whereof that part of the stage whereon the first three trees stood be∣began to yield, and the three foremost trees gently to sink, and this was effected, by an Engine placed un∣der the stage. When the trees had sunk a yard they cleft in three parts, and the Mockers appeared out of the tops of them, the trees were suddenly con∣uayed away, and the first three Mockers were raised again by the Engine. They appeared then in a false habit, yet very fair, and in form not much unlike their principal, &amp; true robe. It was made of greene taffeta cut into leaves, and laid upon cloth of sell∣for, and their hats were suitable to the same.
NIght, and Diana charge,
And th'Earth obeys
Opening large
Her secret ways,
While Apollos charmed men
Their forms receive again.
Give gracious Phoebus honour then,
And so fall down, and rest behind the train
Give gracious Phoebus honour then and so fall &amp;c.
When those words were sung, the three mockers made an honour to the King, and so falling back the other six trees three by three came forward, &amp; when they were in their appointed places Night spake▪ again thus
THus can celestials work in humane fate,
Transform, &amp; form as they do love or hate.
Like touch, and change receive: the Gods agree
The best of numbers is contained in three.
The song of transformation again.
Night and Diana, &amp;c.
THen Night touched the second three trees and the stage sunk with them as before. And in brief the second three did in all points as the first: Then night spake again.
THe last, &amp; third of nine, touch magic wand,
And give them back their forms at nights command
Night touched the third 3. trees &amp; the same charm of Night and Diana was sung the third time, the last three trees were transformed, and the Mockers raised. When presently the first Musique began his full Chorus.
Again this song revive and sound it hie,
Long live Apollo Britains glorious eye.
THis Chorus was in manner of an Echo, seconded by the Cornets, then by the consort of ten, then by the consort of twelve, and by a double Chorus of voices standing on either side, the one against the other bearing five voices a piece, and sometime e∣very Chorus was heard severally, sometime mixed, but in the end altogether: which kind of harmony so distinguished by the place, and by the several nature of instruments, and changeable conveyance of the song, and performed by so many excellēt masters, as were actors in that music, (their number in all a∣mounting to forty two voices and instruments) could not but yield great satisfaction to the hearers.
While this Chorus was repeated twice over, the Nine mockers in their greene habits solemnly de∣scended to the dancing place, in such order as they were to begin their dance, and as soon as the Cho∣rus ended, the violins, or consort of twelve began to play the second new dance, which was taken in form of an Echo by the cornets, and then cat'cht in like manner by the consort often, sometime they mingled two musickes together; sometime plaid all at once; which kind of echoing music rarely be∣came their Sylvan attire, and was so truly mixed to∣gether, that no dance could ever bee better graced then that, as (in such distraction of music) it was performed by the mockers. After this dance Night descended from the grove, and addressed her speech to the mockers, as follows.
PHoebus is pleased, and all rejoice to see
His servants, from their golden prison free,
But yet since Cynthia hath so friendly smiled,
And to you tree-borne Knights, is reconcild,
First ere you any more work undertake,
About her tree solemn procession make,
Dianas tree, the tree of Chastity,
That placed alone on yonder hill you see.
These greene leau'drobes wherein disguised you made
Stelths to her Nymphs through the thick forests shade
There to the goddess offer thankfully,
That she may not in vain appeased be.
The night shall guide you, and her hours attend you
That no ill eyes, or spirits shall offend you.
At the end of this speech Night began to lead the way alone, &amp; after her an Hour with his torch and after the hour a mocker, and so in order one by one, a torch-bearer and a mocker, they march on to∣wards Dianas tree. When the Mockers came by the house of Night, every one by his hour recei∣ued his helmet, and had his false robe plucked off, &amp; bearing it in his hand, with a low honour offred it at the tree of Chastity, and so in his glorious habit, with his hour before him marched to the bower of Flora. The shape of their habit the picture before discovers, the stuff was of Carnation satin laid thick with broad silver lace, their helmets being made of the same stuff. So through the bower of Flora they came, where they joined two torch-bea∣rears, and two Mockers, and when they past down to the grove: the hours parted on either side, and made way between them for the Mockers, who de∣scended
to the dancing place in such order as they were to begin their third new dance. All this time of procession the six Cornets, and six Chapel voices sung a solemn motet of six parts made up∣on these words.
WIth spotless minds now mount we to the tree
Of single chastity.
The root is temperance grounded deep
Which the coldiewc't earth doth steep:
Water it desires alone,
Other drink it thirsts for none:
Therewith the sober branches it doth feed,
Which though they fruitless be,
Yet comely leaves they breed,
To beautify the tree,
Cynthia protectress is, and for her sake,
We this grave procession make.
Chaste eyes and ears, pure hearts, and voices
Are graces wherein Phoebe most rejoices.
The motet being ended the Violins began the third new dance, which was lively performed by the Mockers, after which they took forth the La∣dies, and danced the measures with them, which be∣ing finished, the Mockers brought the Ladies back a∣gain to their places: and Hesperus with the rest de∣scended from the grove into the dancing place, &amp; spake to the Mockers as follows.
KNights of Apollo proud of your new birth,
Pursue your triumphs still with joy and mirth,
Your changed fortunes, and redeemd estate
Hesperus to your Sovereign will relate,
It is now high time he were far hence retired,
Th'ould Bridal friend, that ushers Night desired
Through the dim evening shades, then taking flight
Gives place and honour to the nuptial Night.
I that wished evening star must now make way
To Hymens rights much wronged by my delay.
But on Nights princely state you ought t'attend,
And t'honour your new reconciled friend.
HEsperus as you with concord came, even so
It is meet that you with cōcord hence should go
Then join you that in voice, and art excel,
To give this star a musical farewell.
A Diologue of four voices two Bases and two trebles.
Of all the stars which is the kindest
To a loving Bride?
Hesperus when in the west
He doth the day from night divide.
What message can be more respected
Then that which tells wished joys shall be effected?
Do not Brides watch the evening star?
O they can discern it far:
Love Bridegrooms revels?
But for fashion.
And why?
They hinder wished occasion.
Longing hearts and new delights,
Love short days, and long nights
HEsperus since you all stars excel
In Bridal kindness kindly farewell farewell.
WHile these words of the Chorus (kindly fare∣well farewell) were in singing often repeated Hesperus took his leave seue ally of Night, Flora, &amp; Zephyrus, the Hours, and Siluans, and so while the Chorus was sung over the second time, hee was got
up to the grove, where turning again to the sing∣ers, and they to him. Hesperus took a second farewell of them, and so past away by the house of Night: Then Night spake their two lines, and therewith all retired to the grove where they stood before.
COme Flora let vs now withdraw our train
That th'ecclipst revels may shine forth again
Now the Mockers began their lighter dances as Currantoes, Leualtas and galliards, wherein when they had spēt as much time as they thought fit, night spake thus from the grove, and in her speech descē∣ded a little into the dancing place.
HEre stay, Night leaden-eied, and sprighted grows
And her late hours begin to hang their brows
Hymen long since the Bridal bed hath dressed,
And longs to bring the turtles to their nest.
Then with one quick dence sound up your delight,
And with one song weal bid you all god-Night.
At the end of these words, the violins began the 4. new dance, which was excellētly discharged by the Mockers, &amp; it ended with a light chāge of music &amp; measure: After the dance followed this dialogue of 2 voices, a base &amp; tenor sung by a Sylvan, &amp; an Hour.
TEll me gentle hour of night
Wherein dost thou most delight?
Not in sleep,
Wherein then?
In the frolic view of men?
Love thou music?
O it is sweet.
Whats dancing?
Even the mirth of feet
Joy you in Fairies and idelues?
We are of that sore our selves,
But Sylvan say why do you love
Only to frequent the grove?
Life is fullest of content
Where delight is innocent.
Pleasure must vary not be long,
Come then lets close, and end our song.
YEt ere we vanish from this princely sight,
Let vs bid Phoebus, &amp; his states god-night
This Chorus was performed with several Echoes of music, and voices, in manner as the great Chose before. At the end whereof the Mockers putting off their visards, &amp; helmets, made a low honour to the King, and attended his Ma: to the banqueting place
Neither buskin now, norbayes
Challenge I, a Ladies praise
Shall content my proudest hope,
Their applause was all my scope
And to their shrines properly
Revels dedicated be:
Whose soft ears none ought to pierce
But with smooth and gentle verse,
Let the tragic Poem swell,
Raising raging seendes from hell,
And let Epic Dactils range
Swelling seas and Countries strange.
Little room small things contains
Easy praise quites easy pains.
Suffer them whose brows do sweat
To gain honour by the great.
It s enough if men me name
A Retailer of such fame.
Quid tu te numeric immis•es? anne medente•
Metra cathedratum ludicra scripta decent
Musicus &amp; medicus, celebris quoque Phoebe Poet e•
Et lepor aegrotos art rogante i•uat.
Cred mihi doctum queen carmen non sapit, item
Non habit ingentum, nec genium medici.

HOw oft have I with public voice run on?
To censure Romes last Hero for deceit:
Because he wept when Pompeis life was gone,
Yet when he lived, hee thought his Name too great•
But now I doe recant, and Roman Lord
Excuse too rash a judgement in a woman:
My Sex pleads pardon, pardon then afford,
Mistaking is with vs, but too too common.
Now doe I find by self Experience taught,
One Object yields both grief and joy:
You wept indeed, when on his worth you thought,
But joyed that slaughter did your Foe destroy.
So at his death your Eyes true drops did rain•
Whom dead, you did not wish alive again.
When Herod liu•d, that now is done to death,
Oft have I wished that I from him were free:
Oft have I wished that he might lose his breath,
Oft have I wished his Carcass dead to see.
Then Rage and Scorn had put my love to flight,
That Love which once on him was firmly set:
Hate hid his true affection from my sight,
And kept my heart from paying him his debt.
And blame me not, for Harrods Jealousy
Had power even constancy it self to change:
For hee by barring me from liberty,
To shun my ranging, taught me first to range.
But yet too chaste a Scholar was my hart,
To learn to love another then my Lord:
To leave his Love, my lessons former part,
I quickly learned, the other I abhord.
But now his death to memory doth call,
The tender love, that he to Miriam bare:
And mine to him, this makes those rivers fall,
Which by an other thought vnmoistned are.
For Aristobolus the lowliest youth
That ever did in Angels shape appear:
The cruel Herod was not moved to ruth,
Then why grieves Miriam Harrods death to hear?
Why joy I not the tongue no more shall speak,
That yielded forth my brothers latest dome:
Both youth and beauty might thy fury break,
And both in him did ill befit a Tomb.
And worthy Grandsire ill did he requite,
His high Assent alone by thee procured,
Except he murdered thee to free the spright
Whi•• 〈◊〉 he thought on earth too long immured.
How happy was it that Sohemus mind
Was moved to pity my distressed estate•
Might Harrods life a trusty servant find,
My death to his had been vnseparate.
These thoughts have power, his death to make me bear,
Nay more, to wish the news may firmly hold:
Yet cannot this repulse some falling tear,
That will against my will some grief unfold.
And more I owe him for his love to me,
The deepest love that ever yet was seen:
Yet had I rather much a milke-maide bee,
Then be the Monarch of Iudeas Queen.
It was for nought but love, he wished his end
Might to my death, but the vaunt-currier prove:
But I had rather still be foe then friend,
To him that saves for hate, and kills for love.
Hard-hearted Miriam, at thy discontent,
What floods of tears have drenched his manly face?
How can thou then so faintly now lament,
Thy truest lovers death, a deaths disgrace:
I now mine eyes you do begin to right
The wrongs of your admirer• And my Lord,
Long since you should have put your smiles to flight,
Ill doth a widowed eye with joy accord.
Why now me thinks the love I bare him then,
When virgin freedom left me vnrestraind:
Doth to my heart begin to creep again,
My passion now is far from being faind.
But tears fly back, and hide you in your bank•s,
You must not be to Alexandra seen:
For if my moan be spied, but little thanks
Shall Miriam have, from that incensed Queen.
WHat means these tears? my Miriam doth mistake,
The news we heard did tell the Tyrants end:
What weepst thou for thy brothers murders sake,
Will ever wight a tear for Herod spend?
My curse pursue his breathless trunk and spirit,
Base Edomite the damned Esaus heir:
Must he ere Iacobs child the crown inherit?
Must he vile wretch be set in Dauids chair?
No Dauids soul within the bosom placed,
Of our forefather Abram was ashamed:
To see his seat with such a toad disgrac'te,
That seat that hath by Iudas race been feigned.
Thou fatal enemy to royal blood,
Did not the murder of my boy suffice,
To stop thy cruel mouth that gaping stood?
But must thou dim the mild Hersanus eyes?
My gracious father, whose too ready hand
Did lift this Idumean from the dust:
And he ungrateful catiffe did withstand,
The man that did in him most friendly trust.
What kingdoms right could cruel Herod claim,
Was he not Esaus Issue, heir of hell?
Then what succession can he have but shame?
Did not his Ancestor his birth-right sell?
O yes, he doth from Atoms name derive,
His cruel nature which with blood is fed:
That made him me of Sire and son deprive,
He ever thirsts for blood, and blood is red.
Weepst thou because his love to thee was bent?
And readst thou love in crimson characters?
Slew he thy friends to work thy hearts content?
No: hate may Justly call that action hers.
He gave the sacred Priesthood for thy sake,
To Aristobolus. Yet doomed him dead:
Before his back the Ephod warm could make,
And ere the Mitre settled on his head.
Oh had he given my boy no less then right,
The double oil should to his forehead bring:
A double honour, shining doubly bright,
His birth anointed him both Priest and King.
And say my father, and my son he •lieu,
To royalize by right your Prince borne breath:
Was love the cause, can Miriam deem it true,
That Miriam gave commandment for her death?
I know by fits, he showed some signs of love,
And yet not love, but raging lunacy:
And this his hate to thee may justly prove,
That sure he hates Hercanus family.
Who knows if he inconstant wavering Lord,
His love to Doris had renewed again?
And that he might his bed to her afford,
Perchance he wished that Miriam might be slain.
Doris, Alas her time of love was past,
Those coals were rakte in embers long ago:
If Mariams love and she was now disgraced,
Nor did I glory in her overthrow.
He not a whit his first borne son esteemed,
Because as well as his he was not mine:
My children only for his own he deemed,
These boys that did descend from royal line.
These did he stile his heirs to Dauids throne,
My Alexander if he live, shall sit
In the Majestic seat of Solomon,
To will it so, did Herod think it fit.
Why? who can claim from Alexanders brood
That Gold adorned Lyon-guarded Chair?
Was Alexander not of Dauids blood?
And was not Miriam Alexanders heir?
What more then right could Herod then bestow,
And who will think except for more then right,
He did not raise them, for they were not low,
But borne to wear the Crown in his despite:
Then send those tears away that are not sent
To thee by reason, but by passions power:
Thine eyes to cheer, thy cheeks to smi•es be bent,
And entertain with joy this happy hour.
Felicity•, if when she comes, she finds
A mourning habit, and a cheerless look,
Will think she is not welcome to thy mind,
And so perchance her lodging will not brooke.
Oh keep her whilst thou hast her, if she go
She will not easily return again:
Full many a year have I endured in woe,
Yet still have sud her presence to obtain:
And did not I to her as presents send
A Table, that best Art did beautify
Of two, to whom Heaven did best feature lend,
To woe her love by winning Anthony:
For when a Princes favour we doe crave,
We fir•• their Minions loves do seek to win:
So I, that sought Felicity to have,
Did with her Minion Anthony begin,
With double slight I sought to captivate
The warlike lover, but I did not right:
For if my gift had borne but half the rate,
The Roman had been ouer-taken quite.
But now he fared like a hungry guest,
That to some plenteous festival is gone,
Now this, now that, hee deems to eat were best,
Such choice doth make him let them all alone.
The boys large forehead first did fairest seem
Then glanced his eye upon my Mariams cheek:
And that without comparison did deem,
What was in either but he most did leek.
And thus distracted, eiders beauties might
Within the others excellence was drowned:
Too much delight did bare him from delight,
For eiders love, the others did confound.
Where if thy portraiture had only gone,
His life from Herod, Anthony had taken:
He would have loved thee, and thee alone,
And left the browne Egyptian clean forsaken.
And Cleopatra then to seek had been,
So firm a lover of her waned face:
Then great Anthonius fall we had not seen,
By her that fled to have him hold the chase.
Then Miriam i• a Romans Chariot set,
In place of Cleopatra might have shown:
A mart of Beauties in her visage met,
And part in this, that they were all her own.
Not to be Empress of aspiring Rome,
Would Miriam like to Cleopatra live:
With purest body will I press my Toome,
And wish no favours Anthony could give.
Let vs retire vs, that we may resolve
How now to deal in this reversed state:
Great are th'affaires that we must now revolve,
And great affairs must not be taken late.
MOre plotting yet? Why? now you have the thing
For which so oft you spent your suppliant breath:
And Miriam hopes to have another King,
Her eyes doe sparkle joy for Harrods death.
If she desired another King to have,
She might before she came in Harrods bed
Have had her wish. More Kings then one did crave,
For leave to set a Crown upon her head.
I think with more then reason she laments,
That she is freed from such a sad annoy:
Who first will weep to part from discontent,
And if she joy, she did not causeless joy.
You durst not thus have given your tongue the rain,
If noble Herod still remained in life:
Your daughters betters far I dare maintain,
Might have rejoiced to be my brothers wife.
My betters far, base woman it is untrue,
You scarce have ever my superiors seen:
For Mariams servants were as good as you,
Before she came to be Iudeas Queen.
Now stirs the tongue that is so quickly moved,
But more then once your collor have I borne:
Your fumish words are sooner said then proved,
And Salomes reply is only scorn.
Scorn those that are for thy companions held,
Though I thy brothers face had never seen,
My birth, thy baser birth so far exceld,
I had to both of you the Princess been.
Thou party Jew, and party Edomite,
Thou Mongrel: issued from rejected race,
Thy Ancestors against the Heavens did fight,
And thou like them wilt heavenly birth disgrace.
Still twit you me with nothing but my birth,
What odds betwixt your ancestors and mine?
Both borne of Adam, both were made of Earth,
And both did come from holy Abrahams line.
I favour thee when nothing else I say,
With thy black acts isle not pollute my breath:
Else to thy charge I might full justly lay
A shameful life, besides a husbands death.
Tic true indeed, I did the plots reveal,
That past betwixt your favourites and you:
I meant not I, a traitor to conceal.
Thus Salome your Minion Ioseph slue.
Heaven, dost thou mean this Infamy to smo∣there?
Let sl•ndred Miriam op thy closed ear:
Self guilt hath ever been suspicious mother,
And therefore I this speech with patience bear.
No, had not Salomes vnstedfast heart,
In Iosephus stead her Constabarus placed,
To free her self, she had not used the art,
To slander haplesse Miriam for unchaste.
Come Miriam, let vs go: it is no boot
To let the head contend against the foot.
Lives Salome, to get so base a still•
As foot, to the proud Miriam Harrods spirit:
In happy time for her endured exile,
For did he live she should not miss her merit:
But he is dead: and though he were my Brother,
His death such store of Cinders cannot cast
My Coals of love to quench: for though they smo∣there
The flames a while, yet will they out at last.
Oh blessed Arabia, in best climate placed,
I by the Fruit will censure of the Tree:
Tic not in vain, thy happy name thou hast,
If all Arabians like Silleus bee:
Had not my Fate been too too contrary,
When I on Constabarus first did gaze,
Silleus had been object to mine eye:
Whose looks and personage must allies amaze.
But now ill Fated Salome, thy tongue
To Constabarus by it self is tide:
And now except I doe the Hebrew wrong
I cannot be the fair Arabian Bride:
What childish lets are these? Why stand I now
On honourable points? Tic long ago
Since shame was written on my tainted brow:
And certain tic, that shame is honours foe.
Had I upon my reputation stood,
Had I affected an unspotted life,
Iosephus veins had still been stuffed with blood,
And I to him had lived a sober wife.
Then had I never cast an eye of love,
On Constabarus now detested face,
Then had I kept my thoughts without remove••
And blushed at motion of the least disgrace:
But shame is gone, and honour wiped away,
And Impudence on my forehead sits:
She bids me work my will without delay,
And for my will I will employ my wits.
He loves, I love; what then can be the cause,
Keeps me for being the Arabians wife?
It is the principles of Moses laws,
For Contabarus still remains in life,
If he to me did bear as Earnest hate,
As I to him, for him there were an ease,
A separating bill might free his fate:
From such a yoke that did so much displease.
Why should such privilege to man be given?
Or given to them, why bard from women then?
Are men then we in greater grace with Heaven?
Or cannot women hate as well as men?
Isle be the custome-breaker: and begin
To show my Sex the way to freedoms door,
And with an offering will I purge my sin,
The law was made for none but wh• are poor.
If Herod had lived, I might to him accuse
My present Lord. But for the futures sake
Then would I tell the King he did refuse
The sons of Baba in his power to take.
But now I must divorce him from my bed,
That my Silleus may possess his room:
Had I not begged his life he had been dead,
I curse my tongue the hindrer of his doom,
But then my wandering hey•• to him was fast,
Nor did I dre•me of change: Silleus said,
He would be here, and see he comes at last,
Had I not named him longer had he staid.
WEll •and fair Salome Iudaeas pride,
Hath thy inn•ted wisdom found the way
To make Silleus deem him deified,
By gaining thee a more then precious pray?
I have devised the best I can devise,
A more imperfect means was never found:
But what cares Salome, it doth suffice
If our endeavours with their end be crowned.
In this our land we have an ancient use,
Permitted first by our law-giuers head:
Who hates his wife, though for no just abuse,
May with a bill diuor•• her from his bed.
But in this custom women are not free,
Yet I for once will wrest it, blame not thou
The ill I doe, since what I does for thee,
Though others blame, Silleus should allow.
Thinks Salome, Silleus hath a tongue
To censure her fair action•: let my blood
Bedash my proper brow, for such a wrong,
The being yours, can make even vices good:
Arabia joy, prepare thy earth with greene,
Thou never happy were indeed till now:
Now shall thy ground be trod by beauties Queen,
Her foot is destined to depress thy brow.
Thou shalt fair Salome comm•not as much
As i• the royal ornament were thine:
The weakness of Ara•ease King is such,
The kingdom is not his so much as mine.
My mouth is our Obodas oracle,
Who thinks not ought but what Sill•us will?
And thou rare creature. Asias miracle,
Shalt be to me as It: Oboe••as still.
Tic not for glory I thy love accept,
Iudea yields me honours worthy store:
Had not affection in my bosom crept,
My native count•y should my life ••plore.
Were not Silleus n• with home I go,
I would not change my Palestine for Rome:
Much less woul• I a glorious state to show,
Go far to purc•as an Arabian room•
Far be it from Silleus so to think,
I know it is thy gratitude requites
The love that is in me, and shall not shrink
Till death doe sever me from earths delights.
But whist; me thinks the wolf is in our talk,
Be gone Silleus, who doth here arrive?
Tic Constabarus that doth hither walk,
Isle find a quarrel, him from me to drive.
Farewell, but were it not for thy command,
In his despite Silleus here would stand.
OH Salome, how much you wrōg your name,
Your race, your country, and your husband most?
A strangers private conference is shame,
I blush for you, that have your blushing lost.
Oft have I found, and found you to my grief,
Consorted with this base Arabian here:
Heaven knows that you have bin my comfort chief,
Then doe not now my greater plague appear.
Now by the stately Carved edifice
That on Mount Zion makes so fair a show,
And by the Altar fit for sacrifice,
I love thee more then thou thy self doest know.
Oft with a silent sorrow have I heard
How ill Iudeas mouth doth censure thee:
And did I not thine honour much regard,
Thou should not be exhorted thus for me.
Did thou but know the worth of honest fame,
How much a virtuous woman is esteemed,
Thou would like hell eschew deserved shame,
And seek to be both chaste and chastely deemed.
Our wisest Prince did say, and true he said,
A virtuous woman crowns her husbands head.
Did I for this, uproar thy lowe es•ate?
Did I for this requital beg thy life,
That thou had forfeited hapless fate?
To be to such a thankle• wretch the wife.
This hand of mine hath lifted up thy head,
Which many a day ago had fallen full lowe,
Because the sons of Baba are not dead,
To me thou doest both life and fortune owe.
You have my patience often exercised,
Use make my choler keep within the banks:
Yet boast no more, but be by me advised.
A benefit upbraided, forfeits thanks:
I prethy Salome dismiss this mood,
Thou doest not know how ill it fits thy place:
My words were all intended for thy good,
To raise thine honour and to stop disgrace.
To stop disgrace? take thou no care for me,
Nay do thy worst, thy worst I set not by:
No shame of mine is like to light on thee,
Thy love and admonitions I defy.
Thou shalt no hour longer call me wife,
Thy Jealousy procures my hate so deep:
That I from thee doe mean to free my life,
By a diuorcing bill before I sleep.
Are Hebrew women now trāsform'd to men?
Why do you not as well our battles fight,
And wear our armour? suffer this, and then
Let all the world be topsy turued quite.
Let fishes graze, beasts, swine, and birds descend,
Let fire burn downew•rd• whilst the earth aspires:
Let Winters heat and Summers cold offend,
Let Thistles grow on Vines, and Grapes on Briers,
Set vs to Spin or Sow, or at the best
Make vs Wood-hewers, Waters-bearing wights:
For sacred service let vs take no rest,
Use vs as Ioshua did the Gibonites.
Hold on your talk, till it be time to end,
For me I am resolved it shall be so:
Though I be first that to this course do bend,
I shall not be the last full well I know.
Why then be witness Heaven, the Judge of sins,
Be witness Spirits that eschew the dark:
Be witness Angels, witness Cherubins,
Whose semblance sits upon the holy Arc:
Be witness earth, be witness Palestine,
Be witness Dauids City, if my heart
Did ever merit such an act of thine:
Or if the fault be mine that makes vs part,
Since mildest Moses friend unto the Lord,
Did work his wonders in the land of Ham,
And slew the first-borne Babes without a sword,
In sign whereof we eat the holy Lamb:
Till now that fourteen hundred years are past,
Since first the Law with vs hath been in force:
You are the first, and will I hope, be last,
That ever sought her husband to divorce.
I mean not to be led by president,
My will shall be to me in stead of Law.
I fear me much you will too late repent,
That you have ever lived so void of awe:
This is Silleus love that makes you thus
Reverse all order: you must next be his.
But if my thoughts aright the cause discuss,
In winning you, he gains no lasting bliss,
I was Silleus and not long ago
Iosephus then was Constabarus now:
When you became my friend you proved his foe,
As now for him you break to me your vowed.
If once I loved you, greater is your debt:
For certain tic that you deserved it not.
And undeserved love we soon forget,
And therefore that to me can be no blot.
But now fare ill my once beloved Lord,
Yet never more beloved then now abhord.
Yet Constabarus bid•h thee farewell.
Farewell light creature. Heaven forgive thy sin:
My prophesying spirit doth foretell
Thy wavering thoughts doe yet but new begin.
Yet I have better escaped then Ioseph did,
But if our Harrods death had been delayed,
The valiant youths that I so long have hid,
Had been by her, and I for them betrayed.
Therefore in happy hour did Caesar give
The fatal blow to wanton Anthony.
For had he lived, our Herod then should live,
But great Anthonius death made Herod dye.
Had he enjoyed his breath, not I alone
Had been in danger of a deadly fall:
But Miriam had the way of peril gone,
Though by the Tyrant most beloved of all.
The sweet faced Miriam as free from guilt
As Heaven from spots, yet had her Lord come back
Her purest blood had been unjustly spilt.
And Salome it was would work her wrack.
Though all Iudea yield her innocent,
She often hath been near to punishment.
THose minds that wholly dote upon delight,
Except they only joy in inward good:
Still hope at last to hop upon the right,
And so from Sand they leap in loathsome mud.
Fond wretches, seeking what they cannot find,
For no content attends a wavering mind.
If wealth they doe desire, and wealth attain,
Then wondrou• fine would they to honour lep:
Of mean degree they doe in honour gain,
They would but wish a little higher step.
Thus step to step, and wealth to wealth they ad,
Yet cannot all their plenty make them glad.
Yet oft we see that some in humble state,
Are chreefull, pleasant, happy, and content:
When those indeed that are of higher state,
With vain additions do their thoughts torment.
Th'one would to his mind his fortune bind,
T'hother to his fortune frames his mind.
To wi•h variety is sign of grief,
For if you like your state as now it is,
Why should an alteration bring relief?
Nay change would then be feared as loss of blis.
That man is only happy in his Fate,
That is delighted in a settled state.
Still Miriam wished she from her Lord were free,
For expectation of variety:
Yet now she •ees her wishes prosperous bee,
She grieves, because her Lord so soon did die.
Who can those vast imaginations feed,
Where in a property, contempt doth breed?
Were Herod now perchance to live again,
She would •gain as much be grieved at that:
All that she may, she ever doth disdain,
Her wishes guide her to she knows not what.
And sad must be their looks, their honour sower,
That care for nothing being in their power.
Tic true Graphin•, now the time draws ny
Wherein the holy Priest with hallowed right,
The happy long desired knot shall tie,
Pheroras and Graphina to unite:
How oft have I with lifted hands implored
This blessed hour, till now implord in vain,
Which hath my wished liberty restored,
And made my subject self my own again.
Thy love fair Maid upon mine eye doth sit,
Whose nature hot doth dry the moisture all,
Which were in nature, and in reason fit
For my monachall Brothers death to fall:
Had Herod lived, he would have plucked my hand
From fair Graphinas Palm perforce: and tide
The same in hateful and despised band,
For I had had a Baby to my Bride:
Scarce can her Infant tongue with easy voice
Her name distinguish to another ear:
Yet had he lived, his power, and not my choice
Had made me solembly the contract swear.
Have I not cause in such a change to joy?
What? though she be my Niece, a Princess borne:
Near bloods without respect: high birth a toy.
Since Love can teach blood and kindreds scorn.
What booted it that he did raise my head,
To be his Realms Copartner, Kingdoms mate,
Withal, he kept Graphina from my bed,
More wished by me then thrice Iudeas state.
Oh, could not he be skilful Judge in love,
That doted so upon his Mariams face?
He, for his passion, Doris did remove.
I needed not a lawful Wife displace,
It could not be but he had power to judge,
But he that never grudged a Kingdoms share,
This well known happiness to me did grudge:
And meant to be therein without compare.
Else had I been his equal in loves host,
For though the Diadem on Mariams head
Corrupt the vulgar judgements, I will boast
Graphina: brow's as white, her cheeks as red.
Why speaks thou not fair creature? move thy tongue,
For Silence is a sign of discontent:
It were to both our loves too great a wrong
If now this hour do find thee sadly bent.
Mistake me not my Lord, too oft have I
Desired this time to come with winged feet,
To be inwrapt with grief when tic too no,
You know my wishes ever yours did meet:
If I be silent, tic no more but fear
That I should say too little when I speak:
But since you will my imperfections bear,
In spite of doubt I will my silence break:
Yet might amazement tie my moving tongue,
But that I know before Pheroras mind,
I have admired your affection long:
And cannot yet therein a reason find.
Your hand hath li•ted me from lowest state,
To highest eminence wondrous grace,
And me your hand-maid have you made your mate,
Though all but you alone doe count me base.
You have preserved me pure at my request,
Though you so weak a vassal might constrain
To yield to your high will, then last not best
In my respect a Princess you disdain,
Then need not all these favours study crave,
To be requited by a simple maid:
And study still you know must silence have,
Then be my cause for silence justly waide,
But study cannot boot nor I requite,
Except your lowly hand-maides steadfast love
And fast obedience may your mind delight,
I will not promise more then I can prove.
That study needs not let Graphina smile,
And I desire no greater recompense:
I cannot vaunt me in a glorious stile,
Nor show my love in far-fetcht eloquence:
But this believe me, never Harrods heart
Hath held his Prince-borne beauty famed wife
In nearer place then thou fair virgin art,
To him that holds the glory of his life.
Should Harrods body leave the Sepulchre,
And entertain the severed ghost again:
He should not be my nuptial hinderer,
Except he hindered it with dying pain.
Come fair Graphina, let vs go in state,
This wish-indeered time to celebrate.
NOw valiant friend you have our lives redeemed,
Which lives as saved by you, to you are due:
Command and you shall see your self esteemed,
Our lives and liberties belong to you.
This twice six years with hazard of your life,
You have concealed vs from the tyrants sword:
Though cruel Harrods sister were your wife,
You durst in scorn of fear this grace afford.
In recompense we know not what to say,
A poor reward were thanks for such a merit,
Our truest friendship at your feet we lay,
The best requital to a noble spirit.
Oh how you wrong our friendship valiant youth,
With friends there is not such a word as det:
Where amity is tide with bond of truth,
All benefits are there in common set.
Then is the golden age with them renewed,
All names of properties are banished quite:
Division, and distinction, are eschewed:
Each hath to what belongs to others right.
And tic not sure so full a benefit,
Freely to give, as freely to require:
A bounteous act hath glory following it,
They cause the glory that the act desire.
All friendship should the pattern imitate,
Of Iesses Son and valiant Ionathans
For neither Sovereigns nor fathers hate,
A friendship f•xt on virtue sever can.
Too much of this, tic written in the heart,
And need no amplifying with the tongue:
Now may you from your living tomb depart,
Where Harrods life hath kept you over long.
Too great an injury to a noble mind,
To be quick buried, you had purchased fame,
Some years a go, but that you were confined.
While thousand meaner did advance their name.
Your best of life the prime of all your years,
Your time of action is from you bereft.
Twelve winters have you operpast in fears:
Yet if you use it well, enough is left.
And who can doubt but you will use it well?
The sons of Babus have it by descent:
In all their thoughts each action to excel,
Boldly to act, and wisely to invent.
Had it not like the hateful cuckoo been,
Whose riper age his infant nurse doth kill:
So long we had not kept our selves unseen,
But Constabarus safely crossed our will:
For had the Tyrant fixed his cruel eye,
On our concealed faces wrath had swayed
His Justice so, that he had forced vs die.
And dearer price then life we should have paid,
For you our truest friend had fallen with vs:
And we much like a house on pillars set,
Had clean depressed our prop, and therefore thus
Our ready will with our concealment met.
But now that you fair Lord are daungerlesse,
The Sons of Baba shall their rigour show:
And prove it was not baseness did oppress
Our hearts so long, but honour kept them low.
Yet do I fear this tale of Harrods death,
At last will prove a very tale indeed:
It gives me strongly in my mind, his breath
Will be preserved to make a number bleed:
I wish not therefore to be set at large,
Yet peril to my self I do not lear:
Let vs for some days longer be your charge,
Till we of Harrods state the truth do hear.
What art thou turned a coward noble youth,
That thou beginst to doubt, undoubted truth?
Were it my brothers tongue that cast this doubt,
I frō his hart would have the question out:
With this keen fashion, but tic you my Lord
Against whose head I must not lift a sword:
I am so tide in gratitude Constable. believe
You have no cause to take it ill,
If any word of mine your heart did grieve
The word discented from the speakers will,
I know it was not fear the doubt begun,
But rather valour and your care of me,
A coward could not be your fathers son,
Yet know I doubts unnecessary be:
For who can think that in Anthonius fall,
Herod his bosom friend should scope vnbrusde:
Then Caesar we might thee an idiot call,
If thou by him should be so far abused.
Lord Constab: let me tell you this,
Upon submission Caesar will forgive:
And therefore though the tyrant did amiss,
It may fall out that he will let him live.
Not many years agony it is since I
Directed thither by my fathers care,
In famous Rome for twice twelve months did live,
My life from Hebrews cruelty to spare,
There though I were but yet of boyish age,
I bent mine eye to mark, mine ears to hear.
Where I did see Octauious then a page,
When first he did to Iulions sight appear:
Me thought I saw such mildness in his face,
And such a sweetness in his looks did grow,
Withal, comixed with so may•tick grace,
His Phi•money his Fortune did for•show:
For this I am indebted to mine eye,
But then mine ear received more evidence,
By that I knew his love to clemency,
How he with hot•est choler could dispense.
But we have more then barely heard the news,
It ha•• bin twice confirmed. And though some tongue
Might be so fall•e, with fall•e report t'abu•e,
A fall•e report hath never la••ed long.
But be it so that Herod have his life,
Concealment would not then a whit avail:
For certain it is, that she that was my wife,
Would not to set her accusation fail.
And therefore now as good the venture give,
And free our selves from blot of cowardice:
As show a pitiful desire to live,
For, who can pity but they must despise?
I yield, but to necessity I yield,
I dare upon this doubt engage mine arm:
That Herod shall again this kingdom weeld,
And prove his death to be a false alarm.
I doubt it too: God grant it be an error,
Tic best without a cause to be in terror:
And rather had I, though my soul be mine,
My soul should lie, then prove a true divine.
Come, come, let fear go seek a dastards nest,
Undaunted courage lies in a noble breast.
YOur royal buildings bow your lofty side,
And scope to her that is by right your Queen:
Let your humility upbraid the pride
Of those in whom no due respect is seen:
Nine times have we with Trumpets haughty sound,
And banishing sow'r Lea•en from our taste:
Observed the feast that takes the fruit from ground.
Since I fair City did behold thee last,
So long it is since Mariams purer cheek
Did rob from mine the glory. And so long
Since I returned my native Town to seek:
And with me nothing but the sense of wrong.
And thee my Boy, whose birth though great it were,
Yet have thy after fortunes proved but poor:
When thou were borne how little did I fear
Thou should be thrust from forth thy Fathers door.
Art thou not Harrods right begotten Son?
Was not the hapless D•ris, H•rods wife?
Yes: ere he had the Hebrew kingdom won,
I was companion to his private life.
Was I not fair enough to be a Queen?
Why ere thou were to me false Monarch tide,
My lake of beauty might as well be seen,
As after I had lived five years thy Bride.
Yet then thine oath came pouring like the rain,
Which all affirmed my face without compare:
And that if thou might Doris love obtain,
For all the world besides thou did not care.
Then was I young, and rich, and nobly borne,
And therefore worthy to be Harrods mate:
Yet thou ungrateful cast me off with scorn,
When Heavens purpose raised your meaner fate.
Oft have I begged for vengeance for this fact,
And with dejected knees, aspiring hands
Have prayed the highest power to enact
The fall of her that on my Trophy stand•.
Revenge I have according to my will,
Yet where I wished this vengeance did not light:
I wished it should high-he•rted Miriam kill.
But it against my meanwhile Lord did fight
With thee sweet Boy I came, and came to try
If thou before his bastards might be placed
In Harrods royal seat and dignity.
But Mariams infants here are only graced,
And now for vs there doth no hope remain:
Yet we will not return till Harrods end
Be more confirmed, perchance he is not slain.
So glorious Fortunes may my Boy attend,
For if he live, he will think it doth suffice,
That he to Doris shows such cruelty:
For as he did my wretched li•e despise,
So doe I know I shall despised die.
Let him but prove as natural to thee,
As cruel to thy miserable mother:
His cruelty shall not upbraided bee
But in thy fortunes. I his faults will smother.
Each mouth within the City loudly cries
That Harrods death is certain: therefore wee
Had best some subtle hidden plot devise,
That Mariams children might subverted •ee,
By poisons drink, or else by murderous Knife,
So we may be advanced, it skils not how:
They are but Bastards, you were Her•ds wife,
And foul adultery blotteth Mariams brow.
They are too strong to be by vs removed,
Or else revenges foulest spotted face:
By our detested wrongs might be approved,
But weakness must to greater power give place.
But let vs now retire to grieve alone,
For solitariness best fitteth moan.
WEll met Iudean Lord, the only wight
Silleus wished to see. I am to call
Thy tongue to strict account.
For what despite
I ready am to hear, and answer all.
But if directly at the cause I guess
That breeds this challenge, you must pardon me:
And now some other ground of fight profess,
For I have vowed, vows must vnbroken be.
What may be your expectation? let me know.
Why? ought concerning Salom, my sword
Shall not be welded for a cause so low,
A blow for her my arm will scorn t'afford.
It is for slandering her unspotted name,
And I will make thee in thy vows despite,
Suck up the breath that did my Mistress blame,
And swallow it again to doe her right.
I prithee give some other quarrel ground
To find beginning, rail against my name:
Or strike me first, or let some scarlet wound
Inflame my courage, give me words of shame,
Doe thou our Moses sacred Laws disgrace,
Deprave our nation, doe me some despite:
I'm apt enough to fight in any case,
But yet for Salome I will not fight.
Nor I for ough• but Salome: My sword
That owes his service to her sacred name:
Will not an edge for other cause afford,
In other fight I am not sure of fame.
For her, I pity thee enough already,
For her, I therefore will not mangle thee:
A woman with a heart so most unsteady,
Will of her self sufficient torture bee.
I cannot envy for so light a gain,
Her mind with such inconstancy doth run:
As with a word thou did her love obtain,
So with a word she will from thee be won.
So light as her possessions for most day
Is her affections lost, to me tic known:
As good go hold the wind as make her stay,
She never loves, but till she call her own.
She merely is a painted sepulchre,
That is both fair, and vilely foul at once:
Though on her out-side graces garnish her,
Her mind is filled with worse then rotten bones.
And ever ready lifted is her hand,
To aim destruction at a husbands throat:
For proofs, Iosephus and my self do stand,
Though once on both of vs, she seemed to do at.
Her mouth though serpent-like it never hisses,
Yet like a Serpent, poisons where it kisses.
Well Hebrew well, thou bark'st, but wilt not bite.
I tell thee still for her I will not fight.
Why then I call thee coward.
From my heart
I give thee thanks. A cowards hateful name,
Cannot to valiant minds a blot impart,
And therefore I with joy receive the same.
Thou know I am no coward: thou were by
At the Arabian battle the other day:
And saw my sword with daring valiancy,
Amongst the faint Arabians cut my way.
The blood of foes no more could let it shine,
And it was enamelled with some of thine.
But now have at thee, not for Salome
I fight: but to discharge a cowards stile:
Here gins the fight that shall not parted be,
Before a soul or two endure exile.
Thy sword hath made some windows for my blood,
To show a horrid crimson physiognomy:
To breath for both of vs me thinks it were good,
The day will give vs time enough to die.
With all my hart take breath, thou sh•lt have time,
And if thou list a twelve month, let vs end:
Into thy cheeks there doth a paleness clime,
Thou can not from my sword thy self defend.
What neatest thou for Salome to ••light,
Thou hast her, and may keep her, none strives for her:
I willingly to thee resign my right,
For in my very soul I do abhor her.
Thou see that I am fresh, unwounded yet,
Then not for fe•re I do thy• offer make:
Thou art with loss of blood, to fight unfit,
For here is one, and there •another take.
I will not leave as long as breath remains
Within my wounded body: spare your word•,
My heart in bloods stead, courage entertains,
Salomes love no place for fear afford•.
Oh could thy soul but prophecy like mine,
I would not wonder thou should long to die:
For Salome if I aright divine
Will be then death a greater misery.
Then list, Isle breath no longer.
Do thy will,
I hotels fight, and charitably kill. I, I, they fight,
Pity thy self Silleu•, let not death
Intru'd before his time into thy hart:
Alas it is too late to fear, his breath
Is from his body now about to part.
How far'st thou brave Arabian? Silleus very well,
My leg is hurt, I can no longer fight:
It only grieves me, that so soon I fell,
Before fair Salo•s wrong• I came to right.
Thy wounds are less then mortal. Never fear,
Thou shalt a safe and quick recovery find:
Come, I will thee unto my lodging bear,
I hate thy body, but I love thy mind.
Thank• noble Jew, I see a courtiou• foe,
Sterne enmity to friendship can no art:
Had not my heart and tongue engagde me so,
I would from thee no foe, but friend depart.
My heart to Salome i• tide so fast,
To leave her love for friendship, yet my skill
Shall be employed to make you favour last,
And I will honour Constabarus still.
I op my bosom to thee, and will take
Thee in, 〈◊〉 friend, and grieve for thy complaint:
But if we doe not expedition make,
Thy loss of blood I fear will make thee faint.
TO hear a tale with ears prejudicate,
It spoils the judgment, and corrupts the sense:
That humane error given to every state,
Is greater enemy to innocence.
It makes vs foolish, heady, rash, unjust,
It makes vs never try before we trust.
It will confound the meaning change the words,
For it our sense of hearing much deceives:
Besides no time to Judgment it affords,
To way the circumstance our ear receive•.
The ground of accidents it never tries,
But makes vs take for truth ten thousand lies.
Our ears and hearts are apt to hold for good,
That we our selves doe most desire to bee:
And then we drown objections in the flood
Of partiality, tic that we see
That makes false rumours long with credit p•st,
Though they like rumours must conclude at l•st.
The greatest part of vs prejudicate,
With wishing Harrods death do hold it true:
The being once deluded doth not bate,
The credit to a better likelihood due.
Those few that wish it not the multitude,
Doe carry headlong, so they doubts conclude.
They not object the weak uncertain ground,
Whereon they built this tale of Harrods end:
Whereof the Author scarcely can be found,
And all because their wishes that way bend.
They think not of the peril that ensued,
If this should prove the contrary to true••.
On this same doubt, on this so light a breath,
They pawn their lives, and fortunes. For they all
Behave them as the news of Harrods death,
They did of most undoubted credit call:
But if their actions now doe rightly hit,
Let them commend their fortune, not their wit.
Urge me no more Graphina to forsake,
Not twelve hours since I married her for love:
And doe you think a sisters power cane make
A resolute decree, so soon remove?
Poor minds they are that honour not affects.
Who hunts for honour, happiness neglects.
You might have been both of felicity,
And honour too in equal measure seasde.
It is not you can tell so well as I,
What tic can make me happy, or displeased.
To match for neither beauty nor respects
One mean of birth, but yet of meaner mind,
A woman full of natural defects,
I wonder what your eye in her could find.
Mine eye found loveliness, mine ear found wit,
To please the one, and to enchant the other:
Grace on her eye, mirth on her tongue doth sit,
In looks a child, in wisdoms house a mother.
But say you thought her fair, as none thinks else,
Knows not Pheroras, beauty is a blast:
Much like this flower which to day excels,
But longer then a day it will not last.
Her wit exceeds her beauty,
Wit may show
The way to ill, as well as good you know.
But wisdom is the porter of her head,
A•d b•res all wicked words from issuing thence.
But of a porter, better were yo• sped,
If she against their entrance made defence.
But wherefore comes the sacred Ananell,
That hitherward his hasty steppes doth bend?
Great sacrificer you're arrived well,
Ill news from holy mouth I not attend.
MY lips, my son, with peaceful tidings blessed,
Shall utter Honey to your listening ear:
A word of death comes not from Priestly breast,
I speak of life: in life there is no fear.
And for the news I did the Heavens salute,
And filled the Temple with my thankful voice:
For though that mourning may not me pollute,
At pleasing accidents I may rejoice.
Is Herod then revived from certain death?
What? can your news restore my brothers breath?
Both so, and so, the King is safe and sound,
And did such grace in royal Caesar meet:
That he with larger stile then ever crowned,
Within this hour Jerusalem will greet.
I did but come to tell you, and must back
To make preparatives for sacrifice:
I knew his death, your hearts like mine did rack,
Though to conceal it, proved you wise.
How can my joy sufficiently appear?
A heavier tale did never pierce mine ear.
Now Salome of happiness may boast.
But now Pheroras is in danger most.
I shall enjoy the comfort of my life.
And I shall loose it, loosing of my wife.
Joy heart, for Constan: shall be slain•.
Grieve soul, Graphina shall from me be tan•.
Smile cheeks, the fair Silleus shall be mine.
W••pe eyes, for I must with a child combine.
Well brother, cease your mons, on one con∣dition
He undertake to win the Kings consent:
Graphina still shall be in your tuition,
And her with you be ne'er the less content.
What's the condition? let me quickly know,
That I as quickly your command may act:
Were it to see what Herbs in Ophir grow,
Or that the lofty Tie•us might be sacked.
Tic no so hard a task: It is no more,
But tell the King that Consta: hid
The sons of Baba, done to death before:
And tic no more then Consta. did.
And tell him more that he for Harrods sake,
Not able to endure his brothers foe:
Did with a bill our separation make,
Though •oath from Consta: else to go.
Believe this tale for told, Isle go from hence,
In Harrods •are the Hebrew to deface:
And I that never studied eloquence,
Doe mean with eloquence this tale to grace.
This will be Constabarus quick dispatch,
Which from my mouth would lesser credit find:
Yet shall •e not decease without a match,
For Miriam shall not linger long behind.
First Jealousy, if that avail not, fear
Shall be my minister to work her end:
A common error moves not Harrods •are,
Which doth so firmly to his Miriam bend.
She shall be charged with so horrid crime,
As Harrods fear shall turn his love to hate:
He make some swear that she desires to clime,
And seeks to poison him for his estate.
I scorn that she should •iue my birth t'vpbraid,
To call me base and hungry Edomite:
With patient show her choler I betrayed,
And watched the time to be revenged by 〈◊〉
Now tongue of mine with scandal load her name,
Turn hers to fountains, Harrods eyes to flame•
Yet first I will begin Pheroras suite,
That he my earnest business may effect:
And I of Miriam will keep me mute,
Till first some other doth her name detect.
Who's there, Silleus man? How fares your Lord•
That your aspects doe bear the badge of sorrow•
He hath the marks of Constabarus sword,
And for a while desires your sight to borro•
My heavy curse the hateful sword pursue,
My heavier curse on the more hat•full arm
That wounded my Sill•us. But renew
Your tale again. Hath he no mortal harm?
No sign of danger doth in him appear,
Nor are his wounds in place of peril seen:
Hee bides you be assured you no• not fear,
He hopes to make you yet Arab•as Queen.
Commend my heart to be Silleus charge,
Tell him, my brothers sudden coming now:
Will give my foot no room to walk at large,
But I will see him yet ere night I vow.
SOhemus, tell me what the news may he
That makes your eyes so full, your cheeks so blew?
I know not how to call them. Ill for me
Tic sure they are: not so I hope for you.
Herod.
Oh, what of Herod? Sohem. Herod live•.
How! lives? What in some Cave or forest hid•
Nay, back returned with honour. Caesar gives
Him greater grace then ere Anthonius did.
Foretell the ruin of my family,
Tell me that I shall see our City burned:
Tell me I shall a death disgraceful die,
But tell me not that Herod is returned.
Be not impatient Madam, be but mild,
His love to you again will soon be bred:
I will not to his love be reconcilde,
With solemn vows I have forsworn his Bed.
But you must break those vows.
Isle rather break
The heart of Miriam. Cursed is my Fate:
But speak no more to me, in vain ye speak
To live with him I so profoundly hate.
Gre• Queen, you must to me your pardon give,
Sohemus cannot now your will obey:
If your command should me to silence drive,
It were not to obey, but to betray.
Reject, and slight my speeches, mock my faith,
Scorn my observance, call my counsel nought:
Though you regard not what Sohemus saith,
Yet will I ever freely speak my thought.
I fear •re long I shall fair Miriam see
In woeful state, and by her self undone:
Yet foe• your issues sake more temperate bee,
The heart by affability is won.
And must I to my Prison turn again?
Oh, now I see I was an hypcorite:
I did this morning for his death complain,
And yet doe morn, because he lives ere night.
When I his death believed, compassion wrought,
And was the stickler twixt my heart and him:
But now that Curtaine's drawn from off my thought,
Hate doth appear again with visage grim:
And paint• the face of Herod in my heart,
In horrid colours with detested look:
Then fear would come, but scorn doth play her part,
••d saith that scorn with fear can never brooke.
〈◊〉 now I could enchain him with a smile:
••d lead him captive with a gentle word,
•corn my look should ever man beguile,
•r other speech, then meaning to afford.
•ls Salome in vain might spend her wind,
•n vain might Harrods mother whet her tongue:
•n vain had they complotted and combined,
For I could overthrow them all ere long.
Oh what a shelter is mine innocence,
To shield me from the pangs of inward grief:
Against all mishaps it is my fair defence,
And to my sorrows yields a large relief.
To be commandress of the triple earth,
And sit in safety from a fall secure:
To have all nations celebrate my birth,
I would not that my spirit were impure.
Let my distressed state unpitied bee,
Mine innocence is hope enough for me.
Poor guiltless Queen. Oh that my wish might place
A little temper now about thy heart:
Unbridled speech is Mariams worst disgrace,
And will endanger her without desert.
I am in greater hazard. O'er my head,
The fatal axe doth hang vnstedily:
My disobedience once discovered,
Will shake it down: Sohemus so shall die.
For when the King shall find, we thought his death
Had been as certain as we see his life:
And marks withal I slighted so his breath,
As to preserve alive his matchless wife.
Nay more, to give to Alexanders hand
The regal dignity. The sovereign power,
How I had yielded up at her command,
The strength of all the city, Dauids Tower.
What more then common death may I expect,
Since I too well do know his cruelty:
It were death, a word of Harrods to neglect,
What then to doe directly contrary?
Yet life I quite thee with a willing spirit,
And think thou coldest not better be employed:
I forfeit thee for her that more doth merit,
Ten such were better dead then she destroyed.
But fare thee well chaste Queen, well may I see
The darkness palpable, and rivers part:
The sun stand still: Nay more retorted bee,
But never woman with so pure a heart.
Thine eyes grave majesty keeps all in awe,
And cuts the wings of every loose desire:
Thy brow is table to the modest law,
Yet though we dare not love, we may admire.
And if I die, it shall my soul content,
My breath in Mariams service shall be spent.
Tic not enough for one that is a wife
To keep her spotless from an act of ill:
But from suspicion she should free her life,
And bare her self of power as well as will.
Tic not so glorious for her to be free,
As by her proper self restrained to bee.
When she hath spacious ground to walk upon,
Why on the ridge should she desire to go?
It is no glory to forbear alone,
Those things that may her honour overthrow.
But tic thanke-worthy, if she will not take
All lawful liberties for honours sake.
That wife her hand against her fame doth rear,
That more then to her Lord alone will give
A private word to any second ear,
And though she may with reputation live.
Yet though most chaste, she doth her glory blot,
And wounds her honour, though she kills it not.
When to their Husbands they themselves doe bind,
Doe they not wholly give themselves away?
Or give they but their body not their mind,
Reserving that though best, for others pray?
No sure, their thoughts no more can be their own,
And therefore should to none but one be known.
Then she usurps upon another right,
That seeks to be by public language graced:
And though her thoughts reflect with purest light,
Her mind if not peculiar is not chaste.
For in a wife it is no worse to find,
A common body, then a common mind.
And every mind though free from thought of ill,
That out of glory seeks a worth to show:
When any's ears but one therewith they fill,
Doth in a sort her pureness overthrow.
Now Miriam had, (but that to this she bent)
Been free from fear, as well as innocent.
Hail happy city, happy in thy store,
And happy that thy buildings such we see:
More happy in the Temple where w'adore,
But most of all that Miriam lives in thee.
Art thou returned? how fares my Miriam?
She's well my Lord, and will anon be here
As you commanded.
Muffle up thy brow
Thou days dark taper. Miriam will appear.
And where she shines, we need no• thy dim light,
Oh hast thy steps rare creature, speed thy pace:
And let thy presence make the day more bright,
And cheer the heart of Herod with thy face.
It is an age since I from Miriam went,
Me thinks our parting was in Dauids days:
The hours are so increased by discontent,
Deep sorrow, Iosua like the season stays:
But when I am with Miriam, time runs on,
Her sight, can make months, minutes, days of weeks
An hour is then no sooner come then gon.
When in her face mine eye for wonders seeks.
You world commanding city, Europes grace,
Twice hath my curious eye your streets surveyed,
And I have seen the statue filled place,
That once if not for grief had been betrayed.
I all your Roman beauties have beheld,
And seen the shows your Ediles did prepare,
I saw the sum of what in you exceld,
Yet saw no miracle like Miriam rare.
The fair and famous Levy, Caesars love,
The worlds commanding Mistress did I see:
Whose beauties both the world and Rome approve,
Yet Miriam: Levy is not like to thee.
Be patient but a little, while mine eyes
Within your compassed limits be contained:
That object straight shall your desires suffice,
From which you were so long a while restrained.
How wisely Miriam doth the time delay,
Least sudden joy my sense should suffocate:
I am prepared, thou need no longer stay:
Whose there, my Miriam, more then happy fate?
Oh no, it is Pheroras, welcome Brother,
Now for a while, I must my passion smother.
ALl health and safety waite upon my Lord,
And may you long in prosperous fortunes live
With Rome commanding Caesar; at accord,
And have all honours that the world can give.
Oh brother, now thou speak not from thy hart,
No, thou hast struck a blow at Harrods love:
That cannot quickly from my memory part,
Though Salome did me to pardon move.
Valiant Phasaelus, now to thee farewell,
Thou were my kind and honourable brother:
Oh hapless hour, when you self stricken fell,
Thou fathers Image, glory of thy mother.
Had I desired a great•r suit of thee,
Then to withhold thee from a harlots bed,
Thou would have granted it: but now I see
All are not like that in a womb are bred.
Thou would not, had thou heard of Harrods death,
Have made his burial time, thy bridal hour:
Thou would with clamours, not with joyful breath,
Have showed the news to be not sweet but sour.
Phasaelus great worth I know did stain
Pheroras petty valour: but they lie
(Excepting you your self) that dare maintain,
That he did honour Herod more then I.
For what I shout, loves power constrained me show,
And pardon loving faults for Mariams sake.
Miriam, where is she?
Nay, I do not know,
But absent use of her fair name I make:
You have forgiven greater faults then this,
For Constabarus that against you will
Preserved the sons of Baba, lives in bliss,
Though you commanded him the youths to kill.
Go, take a present order for his death,
And let those traitors feel the worst of fears:
Now Salome will whine to beg his breath,
But Isle be deaf to prayers: and blind to tears.
He is my Lord from Salom divorced,
Though her affection did to leave him grieve•:
Yet was she by her love to you enforced,
To leave the man that would your foes relieve.
Then haste them to their death. I will requite
Thee gentle Miriam. Salom I mean
The thought of Miriam doth so steal my spirit,
My mouth from speech of her I cannot wean.
ANd here she comes indeed: happily met
My best, and dearest half: what ails my dear?
Thou doest the difference certainly forget
Twixt Dusky habits, and a time so clear.
My Lord, I suit my garment to my mind,
And there no cheerful colours can I find.
Is this my welcome? have I longed so much
To see my dearest Miriam discontent?
What first that is the cause thy heart to touch?
Oh speak, that I thy sorrow may prevent.
Art thou not Juries Queen, and Harrods too?
Be my Commandress, be my Sovereign guide:
To be by thee directed I will woo,
For in thy pleasure lies my highest pride.
Or if thou think Iudaeas narrow bound,
Too strict a limit for thy great command:
Thou shalt be Empress of Arabia crowned,
For thou shalt rule, and I will win the Land.
Isle rob the holy Dauids Sepulchre
To give thee wealth, if thou for wealth do care:
Thou shalt have all, they did with him inter,
And I for thee will make the Temple bare.
I neither have of power not riches want,
I have enough, nor doe I wish for more:
Your offers to my heart no ease can grant,
Except they could my brothers life restore.
No, had you wished the wretched Miriam glad,
Or had your love to her been truly tide:
Nay, had you not desired to make her sad,
My brother nor my Grandsire had not did.
Wilt thou believe no oaths to clear thy Lord?
How oft have I with execration sworn:
Thou art by me beloved, by me adored,
Yet are my protestations heard with scorn.
Hercanus plotted to deprive my head
Of this long settled honour that I wear:
And therefore I did justly doom him dead,
To rid the Realm from peril, me from fear.
Yet I for Mariams sake doe so repent
The death of one: whose blood she did inherit:
I wish I had a Kingdoms treasure spent,
So I had ne'er expelled Hercanus spirit.
As I affected that same noble youth,
In lasting infamy my name enrol:
If I not mournd his death with hearty truth.
Did I not show to him my earnest love,
When I to him the Priesthood did restore?
And did for him a living Priest remove,
Which never had been done but once before.
I know that moved by importunity,
You made him Priest, and shortly after die.
I will not speak, unless to be believed,
This froward humour will not doe you good:
It hath too much already Herod grieved,
To think that you on terms of hate have stood.
Yet smile my dearest Miriam, doe but smile,
And I will all unkind conceits exile.
I cannot frame disguise, nor never taught
My face a look dissenting from my thought.
By heaven you vex me, build not on my love.
I will not build on so unstable ground.
Nought is so fixed, but peevishness may move.
Tic better sleights cause then none were foūd.
Be judge your self, if ever Herod sought
Or would be moved a cause of change to find:
Yet let your look declare a milder thought,
My heart again you shall to Miriam bind.
How oft did I for you my Mother chide,
Revile my Sister, and my brother rate:
And tell them all my Miriam they belide,
Distrust me still, if these be signs of hate.
what hast thou here?
A drink procuring love,
The Queen desired me to deliver it.
Did I: some hateful practise this will prove,
Yet can it be no worse then Heavens permit.
Confess the truth thou wicked instrument,
To her outrageous will, tic passion sure:
Tell true, and thou shalt scope the punishment,
Which if thou doe conceal thou shalt endure.
I know not, but I doubt it be no less,
Long •ince the hate of you her heart did cease.
Know thou the cause thereof?
My Lord I guess,
Sohemus told the tale that did displease.
Oh Heaven! Sohemus false! Go let him die,
Stay not to suffer him to speak a word:
Oh damned villain, did he falsify
The oath he swore even of his own accord?
Now doe I know thy falsehood, painted Devil
Thou white Enchantress. Oh thou art so foul,
That Ysop cannot cleanse thee worst of evil.
A beauteous body hides a loathsome soul,
Your love Sohemus moved by his affection,
Though he have ever heretofore been true:
Did blab forsooth, that I did give direction,
If we were put to death to slaughter you.
And you in black reu•nge attended now
To add a murder to your breach of vow.
Is this a dream?
Oh Heaven, that it were no more,
Isle give my Realm to who can prove it so:
• would I were like any beggar poor,
So I for false my Miriam did not know.
Foul pith contained in the fairest rind,
That ever graced a Caedar. Oh thine eye
Is pure as heaven, but impure thy mind,
And for impurity shall Miriam die.
Why did thou love Sohemus? Mar: they can tell
That say I loved him, Miriam says not so.
Oh cannot impudence the coals expel,
That for thy love in Harrods bosom glow•:
It is as plain as water, and denial
Makes of thy falsehood but a greater trial.
Hast thou beheld thy self, and could thou stain
So rare perfection: even for love of thee
I doe profoundly hate thee. Were thou plain,
Thou shoul'dst the wonder of Iudea bee.
But oh thou art not. Hell it self lies hid
Beneath thy heavenly show. Yet never were thou chaste:
Thou might exalt, pull down, command, forbid,
And be aboue the wheel of fortune placed.
Had thou complotted Harrods massacre,
That so thy son a Monarch might be stilt,
Not half so grievous such an action were,
As once to think, that Miriam is defiled.
Bright workmanship of nature sullied ore,
With pitched darkness now thine end shall bee:
Thou shalt not live fair fiend to cozen more,
With heavy semblance, as thou cousnedst me.
Yet must I love thee in despite of death,
And thou shalt die in the despite of love:
For neither shall my love prolong thy breath,
Nor shall thy loss of breath my love remove.
I might have seen thy falsehood in thy face,
Where coul'dst thou get thy stares that served for eyes?
Except by theft, and theft is foul disgrace:
This had appeared before were Herod wise,
But I'm a sot, a very sot, no better:
My wisdom long ago a wandering fell,
Thy f•ce incoun•ring it, my wit did fetter,
And made me for delight my freedom •ell.
Give me my heart false creature, tic a wrong,
My guliltles heart should now with thine be slain:
Thou had no right to look it up so long,
And with usurpers name I Miriam stain.
Have you designed Sohemus to his end?
I have my Lord Herod: Then call our royal guard
To doe as much for Miriam, they offend
Leave ill vnblam'd, or good without reward.
Here take her to her death Come back, come back,
What meant I to deprive the world of light:
To muffle Jury in the foulest black,
That ever was an opposite to white.
Why whither would you carry her: Sold: you bad
We should conduct her to her death my Lord.
Wie sure I did not, Herod was not mad,
Why should she feel the fury of the sword?
Oh now the grief returns into my heart,
And pulls me piecemeal: love and hate doe fight:
And now hath above acquired the greater part,
Yet now hath hate, affection conquered quite.
And therefore bear her hence: and Hebrew why
Seize you with Lyons paws the fairest lam
Of all the flock? she must not, shall not, die,
Without her I most miserable am.
And with her more then most, away, away,
But bear her but to prison not to death:
And is she gon indeed, stay villains stay,
Her looks alone preserved your Sovereigns breath.
Well let her go, but yet she shall not die,
I cannot think she meant to poison me:
But certain tic she lived too wantonly,
And therefore shall she never more be free.
Foul villain, can thy pitchy coloured soul
Permit thine ear to hear her caules doom?
And not enforce thy tongue that tale control,
That must unjustly bring her to her too me.
Oh Salome thou hast thy self repaid,
For all the benefits that thou hast done:
Thou art the cause I have the queen betrayed,
Thou hast my hart to darkest false-hood won.
I am condemned, heaven gave me not my tongue
To slander innocents, to lie, deceive:
To be the hateful instrument to wrong,
The earth of greatest glory to bereave.
My sin ascends and doth to heaven cry,
It is the blackest deed that ever was:
And there doth sit an Angel notary,
That doth record it down in leaves of brass.
Oh how my heart doth quake: Achitophel,
Thou founds a means thy self from shame to free:
And sure my soul approves thou did not well,
All follow some, and I will follow thee.
NOw here we step our last, the way to death,
We must not tread this way a second time:
Yet let vs resolutely yield our breath,
Death is the only ladder, Heaven to clime.
With willing mind I could my self resign,
But yet it grieves me with a grief untold:
Our death should be accompanied with thine,
Our friendship we to thee have dearly sold.
Still wilt thou wrong the sacred name of friend?
Then should thou never stile it friendship more:
But base mechanic traffic that doth lend,
Yet will be sure they shall the debt restore.
I could with needless complement return,
Tic for thy ceremony I could say:
Tic I that made the fire your house to burn,
For but for me she would not you betray.
Had not the damned woman sought mine end,
You had not been the subject of her hate:
You never did her hateful mind offend,
Nor could your deaths have freed your nuptial fate.
Therefore fair friends, though you were still unborn,
Some other subtlety devised should bee:
Were by my life, though guiltless should be torn,
Thus have I proved, tic you that die for me.
And therefore should I weakly now lament,
You have but done your duties, friends should die:
Alone their friends disaster to prevent,
Though not compelled by strong necessity.
But now farewell fair city, never more
Shall I behold your beauty shining bright:
Farewell of Jewish men the worthy store,
But no farewell to any female wight.
You wavering crew: my curse to you I leave,
You had but one to give you any grace:
And you your selves will Mariams life bereave,
Your common-wealth doth innocence chase.
You creatures made to be the humane curse,
You Tigers, Lionesses, hungry Bears,
Tea•e massacring Hienas: nay far worse,
For they for pray doe shed their fained tears.
But you will weep, (you creatures cross to good)
For your unquenched thirst of humane blood:
You were the Angels cast from heaue'n for pride,
And still doe keep your Angels outward show,
But none of you are inly beautified,
For still your heaven depriving pride doth grow.
Did not the sins of many require a scourge,
Your place on earth had been by this withstood:
But since a flood no more the world must purge,
You staid in office of a second flood.
You giddy creatures, sowers of debate,
You'll love to day, and for no other cause,
But for you yesterday did deply hate,
You are the wreak of order, breach of laws.
You best, are foolish, froward, wanton, vain,
Your worst adulterous, murderous, cunning, proud•
And Salome attends the latter train,
Or rather he their leader is allowed.
I do the sottishness of men bewail,
That doe with following you enhance your pride:
It were better that the humane race should fail,
Then be by such a mischief multiplied.
Chams servile curse to all your sex was given,
Because in Paradise you did offend:
Then doe we not resist the will of Heaven,
When on your wills like servants we attend?
You are to nothing constant but to ill,
You are with nought but wickedness endued:
Your loves are set on nothing but your will,
And thus my censure I of you conclude.
You are the least of goods, the worst of evils,
Your best are worse then men: your worst then devils.
Come let vs to our death: are we not blessed?
Our death will freedom from these creatures give:
Those trouble quiet sowers of unrest,
And this I vow that had I leave to live,
I would for ever lead a single life,
And never venture on a di•ellish wife.
NAy, she shall die. Die quoth you, that she shall:
But for the means. The means! Me thinks tic hard
To find a means to murder her withal,
Therefore I am resolved •he shall be spared.
Why? let her be beheaded.
That were well,
Think you that swords are miracles like you:
Her skin will every Curtlax edge refill,
And then your enterprise you well may •ue.
What if the fierce Arabian notice take,
Of this your wretched weaponless estate:
They answer when we bid resistance make,
That Mariams skin their fanchions did rebate.
Beware of this, you make a goodly hand,
If you of weapons doe deprive our Land.
Why drown her then.
Indeed a sweet de∣vice,
Why? would not every River turn her course
R•there then doe her beauty prejudice?
And be reverted to the proper source.
So not a drop of water should be found
In all Iudeas quondam fertile ground.
Then let the fire devour her.
T'will not bee:
Flame is from her derived into my heart:
Thou nurse flame, flame will not murder thee,
My fairest Miriam, fullest of desert.
Then let her live for me.
Nay, she sha• I die:
But can you live without her?
doubt you that?
I'm sure I cannot, I beseech you try:
I have experience but I know not what.
How should I try?
Why let my love be slain,
But if we cannot live without her sight
You'll find the means to make her breathe again,
Or else you will bereave my comfort quite.
Oh I: I warrant you.
What is she gone?
And gone to bid the world be overthrown:
What? is her hearts composure hardest stone?
To what a pass are cruel women grown?
She is returned already: have you done?
First possible you can command so soon?
A creatures heart to quench the flaming Sun,
Or from the sky to wipe away the Moon.
If Miriam be the Sun and Moon, it is:
For I already have commanded this.
But have you seen her cheek?
A thousand times.
But did you mark it too?
I very well.
What first?
A Crimson bush, that ever limes
The soul whose foresight doth not much excel.
Send word she shall not dye. Her cheek a bush,
Nay, then I see indeed you marked it not.
Tic very fair, but yet will never blush,
Though foul dishonours do her forehead blot.
Then let her die, tic very true indeed,
And for this fault alone shall Miriam bleed.
What fault my Lord?
What fault first? you that ask:
If you be ignorant I know of none,
To call her back from death shall be your task,
I'm glad that she for innocent is known.
For on the brow of Miriam hangs a Fleece,
Whose slenderest twine is strong enough to bind
The hearts of Kings, the pride and shame of Greece,
Troy flaming Helens not so fairly shined.
Tic true indeed, she lays them out for nets,
To catch the hearts that doe not shun a bait:
Tic time to speak: for Herod sure forgets
That Mariams very tresses hide deceit.
Oh doe they so? nay, then you doe but well,
Insooth I thought it had been hair:
Nets call you them? Lord, how they doe excel,
I never saw a net that showed so fair.
But have you heard her speak?
You know I have.
And were you not amazed?
No, not a whit.
Then t'was not her you heard, her life Isle save,
For Miriam hath a world amazing wit.
She speaks a beauteous language, but within
Her hey•t is false as powder: and her tongue
Doth but allure the auditors to sin,
And is the instrument to doe you wrong.
It may be so: nay, tic so: shoe's unchaste,
Her mouth will op to every strangers ear:
Then let the executioner make haste,
Lest she enchant him, if her words he hear.
Let him be deaf, lest she do him surprise
That shall to free her spirit be assigned:
Yet what boots deafenes if he have his eyes,
Her murderer must be both deaf and blind•
For if he see, he needs must see the stars
That shine on either side of Mariams face:
Whose sweet •spect will terminate the wars,
Wherewith he should a soul so precious chase.
Her eyes can speak, and in their speaking move,
Oft did my heart with reverence receive
The worlds mandates. Pretty tales of love
They utter, which can humane bondage weave.
But shall I let this heavens model dye?
Which for a small selfe-portraiture she drew:
Her eyes like stars, her forehead like the sky,
She is like Heaven, and must be heavenly true.
Your thoughts do rave with doting on the Queen,
Her eyes are ebon hewde, and you'll confess:
A sable star hath been but seldom seen,
Then speak of reason more, of Miriam less.
Your self• are held a goodly creature here,
Yet so unlike my Miriam in your shape:
That when to her you have approached near,
My self hath often tan you for an Ape.
And yet you pra•e of beauty: go your ways,
You are to her a Sun burnt Blackamoor:
Your paintings cannot equal Mariams praise,
Her nature is so rich, you are so poor.
Let her be staide from death, for if she die,
We do we know not what to stop her breath:
A world cannot another Miriam buy,
Why stay you lingering? countermand her death.
Then you'll no more remember what hath past,
Sohemus love, and hers shall be forgot:
Tic well in truth: that fault may be her last,
And she may mend, though yet she love you not.
Oh God: tic true. Sohemus: earth and heaven,
Why did you both conspire to make me cursed:
In cousning me with shows, and proofs vneu'n?
She showed the best, and yet did prove the worst.
Her show was such, as had our singing king
The holy Dauid, Mariams beauty seen:
The Hit•its had then felt no deadly sting,
Nor Bethsabe had never been a Queen.
Or had his son the wi•est man of men,
Whose fond delight did most consist in change:
Beheld her face, he had been staid again,
No creature having her, can wish to range.
Had Asuerus see•e my Mariams brow,
The humble Iewe, she might have walked alone:
Her beauteous virtue should have staid below,
Whiles Miriam mounted to the •ersian throne.
But what avails it all: for in the weight
She is deceitful, light as vanity:
Oh she was made for nothing but a b•it,
To train some hapless man to misery.
I am the hapless man that have been trained,
To endless bondage. I will see her yet:
Me thinks I should discern her if she fainde,
Can humane eyes be dazde by women's wit?
Once more these eyes of mine with hers shall meet,
Before the headsman doe her life bereave:
Shall I for ever part from thee my sweet?
Without the taking of my latest leave.
You had as good resolve to save her now,
Isle stay her death, tic well determined:
For sure she never more will break her vow,
Sohemus and Iosephus both are dead.
She shall not live, nor will I see her face,
A long heald wound, a second time doth bleed:
With Ioseph I remember her disgrace,
A shameful end ensues a shameful deed.
Oh that I had not called to mind anew,
The discontent of Mariams wavering hart:
It was you: you foul mouthed Ate, none but you,
That did the thought hereof to me impart.
Hence from my sight, my black tormentor hence,
For had not thou made Herod unsecure:
I had not doubted Mariams innocence,
But still had held her in my heart for pure.
Isle leave you to your passion: tic no time
To purge me now, though of a guiltless crime.
Destruction take thee: thou hast made my hart
As heavy as revenge, I am so dull,
Me thinks I am not sensible of smart,
Though hiddious horrors at my bosom pull.
My head ways downwards: therefore will I go
To try if I can sleep away my woe.
AM I the Miriam that presumed so much,
And deemed my face must needs preserve my breath?
I, I it was that thought my beauty such,
At it alone could countermand my death.
Now death will •each me: he can pale as well
A cheek• of roses, as a cheek less bright:
And dim an eye whose shine doth most excel,
As soon as one that casts a meaner light.
Had not my self against my self conspired,
No plot: no adversary from without
Could Harrods love from Miriam have retired,
Or from his heart have thrust my semblance out.
The wanton Queen that never loved for love,
False Cleopatra, wholly set on gain:
With all her slights did prove: yet vainly prove,
For her the love of Herod to obtain.
Yet her allurements, all her courtly guile,
Her smiles, her favours, and her smooth decay•:
Could not my face from Harrods mind exile,
But were with him of less then little weight.
That face and person that in Asia late
For beauties Goddess Paphos Queen was tan:
That face that did captive great Iulius fate,
That very face that was Anthonius bane.
That face that to be Egipts pride was borne,
That face that all the world esteemed so rare:
Did Herod hate, despise, neglect, and scorn,
When with the same, he Mariams did compare.
This made that I improuidently wrought,
And on the wager even my life did pawn:
Because I thought, and yet but truly thought,
That Harrods love could not from me be drawn.
But now though out of time, I plainly see
It could be drawn, though never drawn from me:
Had I but with humility been graced,
As well as fair I might have proved me wise:
But I did think because I knew me cha•te,
One virtue for a woman, might suffice.
That mind for glory of our sex might stand,
Wherein humility and chastity
Doth march with equal paces hand in hand,
But one 〈◊〉 •ingle seen, who sets by?
And I had single• o•e, but tic my joy,
That I was ever innocent, though sower:
And therefore can they but my life destroy,
My Soul is free from adversaries power.)
You Princes great in power, and high in birth,
Be great and high, I envy not your hap:
Your birth must be from dust: your power on earth,
In heaven shall Miriam sit in Saraes lap.
I heaven, your beauty cannot bring you thither,
Your soul is black and spotted, full of sin:
You in adultry lived nine year together,
And heaven will never let adultry in.
What art thou that dost poor Miriam pursue?
Some spirit sent to drive me to despair:
Who sees for truth that Miriam is untrue,
If fair she be, she is as chaste as fair.
I am that Doris that was once beloved,
Beloved by Herod: Harrods lawful wife:
It was you that Doris from his side removed,
And robed from me the glory of my life.
Was that adultry: did not Moses say,
That he that being matched did deadly hate:
Might by permission put his wife away,
And take a more beloved to be his mate?
What did he hate me for: for simple truth?
For bringing beauteous babes for love to him:
For riches: noble birth, or tender youth,
Or for no stain did Doris honour dim?
Oh tell me Miriam, tell me if you know,
Which fault of these made Herod Doris foe.
These thrice three years have I with hands held up,
And bowed knees fast nailed to the ground:
Besought for thee the dreggs of that same cup,
That cup of wrath that is for sinners found.
And now thou art to drink it: Doris curse,
Upon thy self did all this while attend,
But now it shall pursue thy children worse.
Oh Doris now to thee my knees I bend,
That hart that never bowed to thee doth bow:
Curse not mine infants, let it thee suffice,
That Heaven doth punishment to me allow.
Thy curse is cause that guiltless Miriam dies.
Had I ten thousand tongues, and every tongue
Inflamed with poisons power, and steeped in gall:
My curses would not answer for my wrong,
Though I in cursing thee employed them all.
Hear thou that did mount Gerarim command,
To be a place whereon with cause to curse:
Stretch thy revenging arm: thrust forth thy hand,
And plague the mother much: the children worse.
Throw flaming fire upon the baseborne heads
That were begotten in unlawful beds.
But let them live till they have sense to know
What tic to be in miserable state:
Then be their nearest friends their overthrow,
Attended be they by suspicious hate.
And Miriam, I doe hope this boy of mine
Shall one day come to be the death of thine.
Oh! Heaven forbid. I hope the world shall see,
This curse of thine shall be returned on thee:
Now earth farewell, though I be yet but young,
Yet I, me thinks, have known thee too too long.
THe fairest action of our humane life,
Is scorniug to revenge an injury:
For who forgives without a further strife,
His adversaries heart to him doth tie.
And tic a firmer conquest truly sed,
To win the heart, then overthrow the head.
If we a worthy enemy doe find,
To yield to worth, it must be nobly done:
But if of baser mettle be his mind,
In base revenge there is no honour won.
Who would a worthy courage overthrow,
And who would wrestle with a worthless foe?
We say our hearts are great and cannot yield,
Because they cannot yield it proves them poor:
Great hearts are task't beyond their power, but seld
The weakest Lyon will the loudest roar.
Truths school for certain doth this same allow,
High hartednes doth sometimes teach to bow.
A noble heart doth teach a virtuous scorn,
To scorn to owe a duty ouer-long:
To scorn to be for benefits forborne,
To scorn to lie, to scorn to doe a wrong.
To scorn to bear an injury in mind,
To scorn a free-borne heart slaue-like to bind.
But if for wrongs we needs revenge must have,
Then be our vengeance of the noblest kind:
Doe we his body from our fury save,
And let our hate prevail against our mind?
What can against him a greater vengeance bee,
Then make his foe more worthy far then hee?
Had Miriam scorned to leave a due unpaid,
She would to Herod then have paid her love:
And not have been by sullen passion swayed
To fix her thoughts all injury aboue
Is virtuous pride. Had Miriam thus been proved,
Long famous life to her had been allowed.
WHen, sweetest friend, did I so far offend
Your heavenly self: that you my fault to quit
Have made me now relator of her end,
The end of beauty? Chastity and wit,
Was none so hapless in the fatal place,
But I, most wretched, for the Queen t'chuse,
Tic certain I have some ill boding face
That made me could to tell this luckless news.
And yet no news to Herod: were it new,
To him unhappy it had not been at all:
Yet doe I long to come within his view,
That he may know his wife did guiltless fall:
And here he comes. Your Miriam greets you well.
What? lives my Miriam? joy, exceeding joy.
She shall not die.
Heaven doth your will repell.
Oh doe not with thy words my life destroy,
I prethy tell no dying-tale: thine eye
Without thy tongue doth tell but too too much:
Yet let thy tongues addition make me die,
Death welcome, comes to him whose grief is such.
I went amongst the curious gazing troop,
To see the last of her that was the best:
To see if death had hart to make her stoop,
To see the Sun admiring Phoenix nest.
When there I came, upon the way I saw
The stately Miriam not debased by fear:
Her look did seem to keep the world in awe,
Yet mildly did her face this fortune bear.
Thou dost usurp my right, my tongue was framed
To be the instrument of Mariams praise:
Yet speak: she cannot be too often famed:
All tongues suffice not her sweet name to raise.
But as she came she Alexandra met,
Who did her death (sweet Queen) no whit bewail,
But as if nature she did quite forget,
She did upon her daughter loudly rail.
Why stopped you not her mouth? where had she words
To dark that, that Heaven made so bright?
Our sacred tongue no Epithet affords,
To call her other then the worlds delight.
She told her that her death was too too good,
And that already she had lived too long:
She said, she shamed to have a part in blood
Of her that did the princely Herod wrong.
Base picke-thanke Devil. Shame, it was all her glory,
That she to noble Miriam was the mother:
But never shall it live in any story
Her name, except to infamy isle smother.
What answer did her princely daughter make?
She made no answer, but she looked the while,
As if thereof she scarce did notice take,
Yet smiled, a dutiful, though scornful smile.
Sweet creature, I that look to mind doe call,
Full oft hath Herod been amazed withal.
Go on, she came vnmou'd with pleasant grace,
As if to triumph her arrival were:
In stately habit, and with cheefull face:
Yet every eye was moist, but Mariams there.
When justly opposite to me she came,
She picked me out from all the crew:
She beckoned to me, called me by my name,
For she my name, my birth, and fortune knew.
What did she name thee? happy, happy man,
Wilt thou not ever love that name the better?
But what sweet tune did this fair dying Swan
Afford thine care: tell all, omit no letter.
Tell thou my Lord, said she.
Me, meant fl•e me?
First true, the more my shame: I was her Lord,
Were I not made her Lord, I still should bee:
But now her name must be by me adored.
Oh say, what said she more? each word she sed
Shall be the food whereon my heart is fed.
Tell thou my Lord thou saw me loose my breath.
Oh that I could that sentence now control.
If guiltily eternal be my death,
I hold her chaste even in my inmost soul.
By three days hence if wishes could revive,
I know himself would make me oft alive.
Three days: three hours, three minutes, not so much,
A minute in a thousand parts divided,
My penitence for her death is such,
As in the first I wished she had not died.
But forward in thy tale.
Why on she went,
And after she some silent prayer had sed:
She did as if to die she were content,
And thus to heaven her heavenly soul is fled.
But art thou sure there doth no life remain?
First possible my Miriam should be dead,
Is there no trick to make her breathe again?
Her body is divided from her head.
Why yet me thinks there might be found by art,
Strange ways of cure, tic sure rare things are don:
By an inventive head, and willing heart.
Let not my Lord your fancies idly run.
It is as possible it should beseene.
That we should make the holy Abraham live,
Though he entombed two thousand years had been,
As breath again to slaughtered Miriam give.
But now for more assaults prepare your ears,
There cannot be a further cause of moan,
This accident shall shelter me from fears:
What can I fear? already Mariams gone.
Yet tell even what you will:
As I came by,
From Mariams death I saw upon a tree,
A man that to his neck a cord did tie:
Which cord he had designed his end to bee,
When me he once discerned, he downwards bowed,
And thus with fearful voice she cried aloud,
Go tell the King he trusted ere he tried,
I am the cause that Miriam causeles did.
Damnation take him, for it was the slave
That said she meant with poisons deadly force
To end my life that she the Crown might have:
Which tale did Miriam from her self divorce.
Oh pardon me thou pure unspotted Ghost,
My punishment must needs sufficient bee,
In missing that content I valued most:
Which was thy admirable face to see.
I had but one inestimable Jewel,
Yet one I had no monarch had the like,
And therefore may I curse my self as cruel:
It was broken by a blow my self did strike.
I gazed thereon and never thought me blessed,
But when on it my dazzled eye might rest:
A precious Mirror made by wondrous art,
I prized it ten times dearer then my Crown,
And laid it up fast folded in my heart:
Yet I in sudden choler cast it down.
And poshed it all to pieces: it was no foe,
That robbed me of it; no Arabian host,
Nor no Armenian guide hath used me so:
But Harrods wretched self hath Herod crossed.
She was my graceful moiety, me accursed,
To slay my better half and save my worst.
But sure she is not dead you did but jest,
To put me in perplexity a while,
It were well indeed if I could so be dressed:
I see she is alive, me thinks you smile.
If sainted Abel yet deceased bee,
Tic certain Miriam is as dead as hee.
Why then go call her to me, bid her now
Put on fair habit, stately ornament:
And let no frown ore shade her smoothest brow,
In her doth Herod place his whole content.
Sheel come in stately weeds to please your sense,
If now she come attired in robe of heaven:
Remember you your self did send her hence,
And now to you she can no more be given.
Shoe's dead, hell take her murderers, she was fair,
Oh what a hand she had, it was so white,
It did the whiteness of the snow impair:
I never more shall see so sweet a sight.
Tic true, her hand was rare.
her hand? her hands;
She had not singly one of beauty rare,
But sueh a pair as here where Herod stands,
He dares the world to make to both compare.
Accursed Salome, had thou been still,
My Miriam had been breathing by my side:
Oh never had I: had I had my will,
Sent forth command, that Miriam should have did.
But Salome thou did with envy vex,
To see thy self out-matched in thy sex:
Upon your sexes forehead Miriam sat,
To grace you all like an imperial crown,
But you fond fool have rudely pushed thereat,
And proudly pulled your proper glory down.
One smile of hers: Nay, not so much a: look
Was worth a hundred thousand such as you,
Iudea how can thou the wretches brooke,
That robbed from thee the fairest of the crew?
You dwellers in the now deprived land,
Wherein the matchless Miriam was bred:
Why grasp not each of you a sword in hand,
To aim at me your cruel Sovereigns head.
Oh when you think of Herod as your King,
And owner of the pride of Palestine:
This act to your remembrance likewise bring,
Tic I have overthrown your royal line.
Within her purer veins the blood did run,
That from her Grandam Sara she derived,
Whose beldam age the love of Kings hath won,
Oh that her issue had as long been li'ud.
But can her eye be made by death obs•ur?
I cannot think but it must sparkle still:
Foul sacrilege to rob those lights so pure,
From out a Temple made by heavenly skill.
I am the Villain that have done the d•ed,
The c•uell deed, though by another hand,
My word though not my sword made Miriam bleed,
Hircanus Grandchild did at my command.
That Miriam that I once did love so dear,
The partner of my now detested bed,
Why shine you sun with an aspect so clear?
I tell you once again my Mariams dead.
You could but shine, if some Egiptian blows,
Or Ethiopian doudy lose her life:
This was, then wherefore bend you not your brows,
The King of Juries fair and spotless wife.
Deny thy beams, and Moon refuse thy light,
Let all the stars be dark, let Juries eye
No more distinguish which is day and night:
Since her best birth did in her bosom die.
Those fond Idolaters the men of Greece,
Maintain these orbs are safely governed:
That each within themselves have Gods a piece,
By whom their steadfast course is justly led.
But were it so, as so it cannot bee,
They all would put their mourning garments on:
Not one of them would yield a light to me,
To me that is the cause that Mariams go•.
For though they •am their Sa•urn melancholy,
Of sour behaviours, and of angry mood:
They •am him likewise to be just and holy,
And justice needs must seek revenge for blood,
Their Jove, if Jove he were, would sure desire,
To punish him that slew so fair a lass:
For Ladies beauty set his heart on fire,
Yet she not half so fair as Miriam was.
And Mars would deem his Venus had been slain,
Sol to recover her would never stick:
For if he want the power her life to gain:
Then Physics God is but an Empiric.
The Queen of love would storm for beauties sake,
And Harms too, since he bestowed her wit,
The nights pale light for angry grief would shake,
To se• chaste Miriam die in age unfit.
But oh I am deceived, she past them all
In every gift, in every property:
Her Excellencies wrought her timeless fall,
And they rejoiced, not grieved to see her die.
The Paphian Goddess did repent her wast,
When she to one such beauty did allow:
Mercurius thought her wit his wit surpassed,
And Cynthia envied Mariams brighter brow.
But these are fictions, they are vo•d of sense,
The Greeks but dream, and dreaming falsehoods tell:
They neither can offend nor give defence,
And not by them it was my Miriam fell.
If she had been like an Egiptian black,
And not so fair, she had been longer lived:
Her overflow of beauty turned back,
And drowned the spring from whence it was deriude.
Her heavenly beauty it was that made me think
That it with chastity could never dwell:
But now I see that heaven in her did link,
A spirit and a person to excel.
Isle muffle up my self in endless night,
And never let mine eyes behold the light.
Retire thy self vile monster, worse then hee
That stained the virgin earth with brothers blood,
Still in some vault or den enclosed bee,
Where with thy tears thou moist beget a flood,
Which flood in time may drown thee: happy day
When thou at once shalt die and find a grave,
A stone upon the vault, some one shall lay,
Which monument shall an inscription have.
And these shall be the words it shall contain,
Here Herod lies, that hath his Miriam slain.
WHo ever hath beheld with steadfast eye,
The strange events of this one only day:
How many were deceived? How many die,
That once to day did grounds of safety lay?
It will from them all certainty bereave,
Since twice six hours so many can deceive.
This morning Herod held for surely dead,
And all the Jaws on Miriam did attend:
And Constabarus rise from Saloms bed,
And neither dreamd of a divorce or end.
Pheroras joyed that he might have his wife,
And Babus sons for safety of their life.
To night our Herod doth alive remain,
The guiltless Miriam is deprived of breath:
Stout Constabarus both divorced and slain,
The valiant sons of Baba have their death.
Pheroras sure his love to be bear•t,
If Salome her suit unmade had left.
Herod this morning did expect with joy,
To see his Mariams much beloved face:
And yet ere night he did her life destroy,
And surely thought she did her name disgrace.
Yet now again so short do humours last,
He both repents her death and knows her chaste.
Had he with wisdom now her death delayed,
He at his pleasure might command her death:
But now he hath his power so much betrayed,
As all his woes cannot restore her breath.
Now doth he strangely lunatickly rave,
Because his Mariams life he cannot save.
This days events were certainly ordained,
To be the warning to posterity:
So many changes are therein contained,
So admirablie strange variety.
This day alone, our sagest Hebrews shall
In after times the school of wisdom call.

FOrtune, not Reason, rules the state of things,
Reward goes backwards, Honour on his head;
Who is not poor, is monstrous; only Need
Gives form &amp; worth to every humane seed.
As Cedars beaten with incessant storms,
So great men flourish; and doe imitate
Unskilful statuaries, who suppose
(In forging a Colossus) if they make him
Stroddle enough, stroote, and look big, and gape,
Their work is goodly: so our Tympanouse statists
(In their affected gravity of voice,
Sowernesse of countenance, manners cruelty,
Authority, wealth, and all the spawn of Fortune)
Think they bear all the kingdoms worth before them;
Yet differ not from those Colossicke Statues,
Which with Heroic forms, without overspread,
Within are nought but mortar, flint and lead.
Man is a Torch borne in the wind; a Dream
But of a shadow, summed with all his substance;
And as great Seamen using all their powers
And skils in Neptunes deep invisible paths,
In tall ships richly built and ribbed with brass,
To put a Girdle round about the world,
When they have done it (coming near their Haven)
Are glad to give a warning piece, and call
A poor staid fisher-man, that never past
His Contries sight, to waft and guide them in:
So when we wander furthest through the waives
Of Glassy Glory and the Gulfs of State,
Topped with all Titles, spreading all our reaches,
As if each private Arm would sphere the world;
Wee must to virtue for her guide resort,
Or wee shall shipwreck in our safest Port.
There is no second place in Numerous State
That holds more than a Cipher: In a King
All places are contained. His words and looks
Are like the flashes and the bolts of Jove,
His deeds inimitable, like the Sea
That shuts still as it ops, and leaves no tracts,
Nor prints of President for poor men's facts:
There's but a Thread betwixt me and a Crone;
I would not wish it cut, unless by nature;
Yet to prepare me for that likely Fortune,
Tic fit I get resolved spirits about me.
I followed D'Ambois to this greene Retreat;
A man of spirit beyond the reach of fear,
Who (discontent with his neglected worth)
Neglects the light, and loves obscure Abodes;
But he is young and haughty, apt to take
Fire at advancement, to bear state and flourish;
In his Rise therefore shall my bounties shine:
None lothes the world so much, nor loves to scoff it,
But gold and grace will make him surfeit of it.
What, D'Ambois?
He sir.
Turned to Earth, alive?
Up man, the Sun shines on thee.
Let it shine.
I am no mote to play in it, as great men are.
Think thou men great in state, motes in the sun?
They say so that would have thee freeze in shades,
That (like the gross Sicilian Gurmundist)
Empty their Noses in the Cates they love,
That none may eat but they. Do thou but bring
Light to the Banquet Fortune sets before thee,
And thou wilt loath lean Darkness like thy Death.
Who would believe thy Mettle could let sloth
Rust and consume it? If Themistocles
Had lived obscured thus in th'Athenian state,
Xerxes had made both him and it his slaves.
If brave Camillus had lurckt so in Rome,
He had not five times been dictator there,
Nor four times triumphed. If Epaminondas
(Who lived twice twenty years obscured in Thebs)
Had lived so still, he had been still unnamed,
And paid his Country nor himself their right:
But putting forth his strength, he rescued both
From imminent ruin; and like Burnished Steel,
After long use he shined; for as the light
Not only serves to show, but render vs
Mutually profitable; so our lives
In acts exemplary, not only win
Our selves good Names, but doth to others give
Matter for virtuous Deeds, by which wee live.
What would you wish me doe?
Leave the troubled streams,
And live as Thriuers doe at the Well head.
At the Well head? Alas what should I doe
With that enchanted Glass? See devils there?
Or (like a strumpet) learn to set my looks
In an eternal Brake, or practise juggling,
To keep my face still fast, my hart still loose;
Or bear (like Dames Schoolemistresses their Riddles)
Two Tongues, and be good only for a shift;
Flatter great Lords, to put them still in mind
Why they were made Lords: or please portly Ladies
With a good carriage, tell them idle Tales,
To make their Physic work; spend a mans life
In sights and visitations, that will make
His eyes as hollow as his Mistress heart:
To doe none good, but those that have no need;
To gain being forward, though you break for haste
All the Commandments ere you break your fast?
But Believe backewards, make your Period
And Creeds last Article; I believe in God:
And (hearing villainies preached) to unfold their Art
Learn to commit them, Tic a great mans Part.
Shall I learn this there?
No, thou need not learn,
Thou hast the Theory, now go there and practise.
I, in a threadbare suit; when men come there,
They must have high Naps, and go from thence bare:
A man may drown the parts often rich men
In one poor suit; Brave Barks, and outward Gloss
Attract Court eyes, be in parts ne'er so gross.
Thou shalt have Gloss enough, and all things fit
T'enchase in all show, thy long smothered spirit:
Be ruled by me then. The rude Scythians
Painted blind Fortunes powerful hands with wings,
To show her gifts come swift and suddenly,
Which if her Favourite be not swift to take,
He loses them forever. Then be ruled:
Stay but a while here, and I'll send to thee.
What will he send? some Crones? It is to sow them
Upon my spirit, and make them spring a Crone
Worth Millions of the feed Crones he will send:
But hoe's no husband here; A smooth plain ground
Will never nourish any politic seed;
I am for honest Actions, not for great:
If I may bring up a new fashion,
And rise in Court with virtue; speed his plow:
The King hath known me long as well as hee,
Yet could my Fortune never fit the length
Of both their understandings till this hour.
There is a deep nick in times restless wheel
For each mans good, when which nick comes it strikes;
As Rhetoric, yet works not persuasion,
But only is a mean to make it work:
So no man rises by his real merit,
But when it cries Clincke in his Raisers spirit:
Many will say, that cannot rise at all,
Mans first hours rise, is first steppe to his fall.
Il'e venture that; men that fall low must die,
As well as men cast headlong from the sky.
Humour of Princes. Is this man endued
With any merit worth a thousand Crones?
Will my Lord have me be so ill a Steward
Of his Revenue, to dispose a sum
So great with so small cause as shows in him?
I must examine this: Is your name D'Ambois?
Sir.
Is your name D'Ambois?
Who have wee here?
Serve you the Monsieur?
How?
Serve you the Monsieur?
Sir, you're very hot. I serve the Monsieur;
But in such place as gives me the Command
Of all his other servants: And because
His Graces pleasure is, to give your good
A Pass through my Command; Methinks you might
Use me with more good fashion.
Cry you mercy.
Now you have opened my dull eyes, I see you;
And would be glad to see the good you speak of:
What might I call your name?
Monsieur Miff.
Monsieur Miff? Then good Monsieur Miff,
Pray let me know you better.
Pray doe so,
That you may use me better, For your self,
By your no better outside, I would judge you
To be a Poet; Have you given my Lord
Some Pamphlet?
Pamphlet?
Pamphlet sir, I say.
Did his wise excellence leave the good
That is to pass your charge, to my poor use,
To your discretion?
Though he did not sir,
I hope tic no bad office to ask reason,
How that his grace gives me in charge, goes from me?
That's very perfect sir.
Why very good sir;
I pray then give me leave: If for no Pamphlet,
May I not know what other merit in you,
Makes his compunction willing to relieve you?
No merit in the world sir.
That is strange.
You're a poor soldier, are you?
That I am sir.
And have Commanded?
I, and gone without sir.
I see the man: A hundred Crones will make him
Swagger, and drink healths to his highness bounty;
And swear he could not be more bountiful.
So ther's nine hundred Crones, saft; here tall soldier,
His grace hath sent you a whole hundred Crones.
A hundred sire nay doe his Highness right;
I know his hand is larger, and perhaps
I may deserve more than my outside shows:
I am a scholar, as I am a soldier,
And I can Poetise; and (being well encouraged)
May sing his Fame for giving; yours for delivering
(Like a most faithful Steward) what he gives.
What shall your subject be?
I care not much,
If to his excellence I sing the praise
Of fair great Noses, And to your Deserts
The reverend virtues of a faithful Steward;
What Qualities have you sir (beside your chain
And velvet Jacket) Can your worship dance?
A merry Fellow faith: It seems my Lord
Will have him for his Easter; And believe it,
Such men are now no fools, Tic a Knights place:
If I (to save my Lord some Crones) should urge him
T'abate his Bounty, I should not be heard;
I would to heaven I were an errant Ass,
For then I should be sure to have the Ears
Of these great men, where now their Easters have them:
Tic good to please him, yet Isle take no notice
Of his preferment, but in policy
Will still be grave and serious, lest he think
I fear his wooden dagger: Here sir Ambo,
A thousand Crones I bring you from my Lord;
Serve God, play the good husband, you may make
This a good standing living, Tic a Bounty,
His Highness might perhaps have bestowed better.
Go, you're a Rascal; hence, Away you Rogue.
What mean you sir?
Hence; prate no more;
Or by thy villans blood thou prat'st thy last:
A Barbarous Groom, grudge at his masters Bounty:
But since I know he would as much abhor
His hind should argue what he gives his friend,
Take that Sir, for your aptness to dispute.
These Crones are sown in blood, blood be their fruit.
Duchess of Guise, your Grace is much enriched,
In the attendance of this English virgin,
That will initiate her Prime of youth,
(Disposed to Court conditions) under hand
Of your preferred instructions and Command,
Rather than any in the English Court,
Whose Ladies are not matched in Christendom,
For graceful and confirmed behaviours;
More than the Court, where they are bred is equalled.
I like not their Court form, it is too crestfalne,
In all observance; making Semi-gods
Of their great Nobles; and of their old Queen
An euer-yoong, and most immortal Goddess.
Assure you Cousin Guise, so great a Courtier,
So full of majesty and Royal parts,
No Queen in Christendom may boast her self,
Her Court approoues it, Thats a Court indeed;
Not mixed with Rudeness used in common houses;
But, as Courts should be th'abstracts of their kingdoms,
In all the Beauty, State, and Worth they hold;
So is hers, amply, and by her informed.
The world is not contracted in a man,
With more proportion and expression
Than in her Court, her Kingdom: Our French Court
Is a mere mirror of confusion to it:
The King and subject, Lord and every slave
Dance a continual Haie; Our Rooms of State,
Kept like our stables; No place more observed
Than a rude Market place: And though our Custom
Keep this assured deformity from our sight,
Tic ne'er the less essentially unsightly,
Which they would soon see, would they change their form
To this of ours, and then compare them both;
Which we must not affect, because in Kingdoms,
Where the Kings change doth breed the Subjects terror,
Pure Innovation is more gross than error.
No Question we shall see them imitate
(Though a far off) the fashions of our Courts,
As they have ever Ap't vs in attire;
Never were men so weary of their Skins,
And apt to leap out of themselves as they;
Who when they travel to bring forth rare men,
Come home delivered of a fine French suit:
Their Brains lie with their Tailors, and get babies
For their most complete issue; Hoe's first borne
To all the moral virtues, that first greetes
The light with a new fashion, which becomes them
Like Apes, disfigured with the attires of men.
No Question they much wrong their real worth,
In affectation of outlandish Scum;
But they have faults, and wee; They foolish-proud,
To be the Pictures of our vanity;
We proud, that they are proud of foolery.
Come mine own sweet heart I will enter thee.
Sir, I have brought this Gentleman t'attend you;
And pray, you would vouchsafe to doe him grace.
D'Ambois, I think.
Thats still my name, my Lord, though I be some???thing altered in attire.
I like your alteration, and must tell you,
I have expected th'offer of your service;
For we (in fear to make mild virtue proud)
Use not to seek her out in any man.
Nor doth she use to seek out any man:
He that will win, must woo her; shoe's not shameless.
I urged her modesty in him, my Lord, and gave her those Rites, that he says she merits.
If you have wooed and won, then Brother wear him.
You are mine, my love; See here's the Guises Duchess. The Countess of Mountsurreaue; Beaupres, come I'll inseam thee; Ladies, you're too many to be in Counsel: I have here a friend, that I would gladly enter in your Graces.
If you enter him in our Graces, me thinks by his blunt behaviour, he should come out of himself.
Has he never been Courtier, my Lord?
Never, my Lady.
And why did the Toy take him in th'head now?
Tic leap year, Lady, and therefore very good to
enter a Courtier.
The man's a Courtier at first sight.
I can sing prickesong, Lady, at first sight; and why not be a Courtier as suddenly?
Heere's a Courtier rotten before he be ripe.
Think me not impudent, Lady, I am yet no Courtier, I desire to be one, and would gladly take entrance (Madam) under your Princely Colours.
Sir, know you me?
My Lord?
I know not you: Whom doe you serve?
Serve, my Lord?
Go to Companion; Your Courtship's too saucy.
Saucy? Companion? Tic the Guise, but yet those terms might have been spared of the Guiserd.
Companion? Hoe's jealous by this light: are you blind of that side Sir? Isle to her again for that. Forth Madam, for the ho???nor of Courtship.
Cease your Courtship, or by heaven Isle cut your throat.
Cut my throat? cut a whetstone; good Accius Noeuius, doe as much with your tongue as he did with a Ra???sor; cut my throat?
Isle do it by this hand.
That hand dares not do it; you've cut too many
Throats already Guise; and Robbed the Realm of
Many thousand Souls, more precious than thine own.
Come Madam, talk on; Sfoote, can you not talk?
Talk on I say, more Courtship, as you love it.
What new-come Gallant have wee here, that dares mate the Guise thus?
Sfoote tic D'Ambois; The Duke mistakes him (on my life) for some Knight of the new edition.
Cut my throat? I would the King feared thy cut???ting of his throat no more than I fear thy cutting of mine.
So Sir, so.
Heere's some strange distemper.
Heere's a sudden transmigration with D'Ambois, out of the Knights ward, into the Duchess bed.
See what a Metamorphosis a brave suit can work.
Slight step to the Guise and discover him.
By no means, let the new suit work, we'll see the issue.
Leave your Courtship.
I will not. I say mistress, and I will stand unto it, that if a woman may have three servants, a man may have threescore mistresses.
Sirha, Isle have you whipped out of the Court for this in???solence.
Whipped? Such another syllable out a the presence, if thou dare for thy Dukedom.
Remember, Poltroon.
Pray thee forbear.
Passion of death! Were not the King here, he should strew the Chamber like a rush.
But leave Courting his wife then.
I will not: Isle Court her in despite of him??? Not Court her! Come Madam, talk on; Fear me nothing: Well moist thou drive thy master from the Court; but never D'Ambois.
His great heart will not down, tic like the Sea
That partly by his own internal heat,
Partly the starr's daily and nightly motion,
Ardor and light, and partly of the place,
The divers frames; And chiefly by the Moon,
Bristled with surges, never will be won,
(No, not when th'hearts of all those powers are burst)
To make retreat into his settled home,
Till he be croun'd with his own quiet some.
You have the mate. Another.
No more.
Why heir's the Lion, skirt with the throat of a dung???hill Cock; a fellow that has newly shook off his shackles;
Now does he crow for that victory.
Tic one of the best Jigs that ever was acted.
Whom does the Guise suppose him to be trow?
Out of doubt, some new denizond Lord; and thinks that suit come new out a the Mercers books.
I have heard of a fellow, that by a fixed imagination loo???king upon a Bulbaiting, had a visible pair of horns grew out of his forehead: and I believe this Gallant ouerioied with the conceit of Monsieurs cast suit, imagines himself to be the Mon???sieur.
And why not? as well as the Ass, stalking in the Li???once case, bear himself like a Lion, roaring all the huger beasts out of the Forest?
Peace, he looks this way.
Marry let him look sir, what will you say now if the Guise be gone to fetch a blanquet for him?
Faith I believe it for his honour.
But, if D'Ambois carry it clean?
True, when he curuets in the blanquet.
I marie sir.
Sfoote, see how he stares on's.
Lord bless vs, let's away.
Now sir, take your full view: how does the Object please ye?
If you ask my opinion sir, I think your suit sits as well as if it had been made for you.
So sir, and was that the subject of your ridiculous joy???litie?
What's that to you sir?
Sir, I have observed all your fleerings; and resolve your selves ye shall give a strict account for it.
O strange credulity! Doe you think your self Such a singular subject for laughter, that none can fall into Our merriment but you?
This jealousy of yours sir, confesses some close defect in your self, that wee never dreamed of.
We held discourse of a perfumed Ass, that being dis???guessed with a Lions case, imagined himself a Lion: I hope that touched not you.
So sir: Your descants doe marvelous well fit this ground, wee shall meet where your Buffonly laughters will cost ye the best blood in your bodies.
For lifes sake let's be gone; he will kill's outright.
Go at your pleasures, Isle be your Ghost to haunt you, and ye sleep an't, hang me.
Go, go sir, Court your mistress.
And be advised: we shall have odds against you.
Tush, valour stands not in number: Isle maintain it, that one man may beat three boys.
Nay you shall have no odds of him in number sir: hoe's a gentleman as good as the proudest of you, and ye shall not wrong him.
Not sir.
Not sir: Though he be not so rich, hoe's a better man than the best of you; And I will not endure it.
Not you sir?
No sir, nor I.
I should thank you for this kindness, if I thought these perfumed muske-Cats (being out of this privilege) durst but once mew at vs.
Does your confident spirit doubt that sir? Come foal???low vs and try.
Come sir, we'll lead you a dance.
THis desperate quarrel sprung out of their envies
To D'Ambois sudden bravery, and great spirit.
Neither is worth their envy.
Less then either
Will make the Gall of Envy overflow;
She feeds on outcast entrails like a Kite:
In which foul heap, if any ill lies hid,
She sticks her beak into it, shakes it up,
And hurl's it all abroad, that all may view it.
Corruption is her Nutriment; but touch her
With any precious ointment, and you kill her:
When she finds any filth in men, she feasts,
And with her black throat bruits it through the world;
(Being sound and healthful) But if she but taste
The slenderest pittance of commended virtue,
She surfeits of it, and is like a fly,
That passes all the bodies so undest parts,
And dwells upon the sores; or if her squint eye
Have power to find none there, she forges some:
She makes that crooked ever which is strait;
Call's valour giddiness, Justice Tyranny:
A wise man may shun her, she not her self;
Whither soever she flies from her Harms,
She bears her Foe still clasped in her own Arms:
And therefore cousin Guise let vs avoid her.
What Atlas, or Olympus lifts his head
So far past Covert, that with air enough
My words may be informed? And from his height
I may be seen, and heard through all the world?
A tale so worthy, and so fraught with wonder,
Sticks in my jaws, and labours with event.
Come thou from D'Ambois?
From him, and the rest
His friends and enemies; whose sterne fight I saw,
And heard their words before, and in the fray.
Relate at large what thou hast seen and heard.
I saw fierce D'Ambois, and his two brave friends
Enter the Field, and at their heals their foes;
Which were the famous soldiers; Barrisor,
L'Anou, and Pyrrhot, great in deeds of Arms:
All which arrived at the evenest piece of earth
The field afforded; The three Challengers
Turned head, drew all their rapiers, and stood ranked:
When face to face the three Defendants met them,
Alike prepared, and resolute alike,
Like bonfires of Contributory wood:
Every mans look showed, Fed with eiders spirit,
As one had been a mirror to another,
Like forms of life and death, each took from other;
And so were life and death mixed at their heights,
That you could see no fear of death, for life;
Nor love of life, for death: But in their brows
Pyrrho's Opinion in great letters shone;
That life and death in all respects are one.
Past there no sort of words at their encounter?
As Hector, twixt the Hosts of Greece and Troy???
(When Paris and the Spartan King should end
The nine years war) held up his brazen lance
For signal, that both Hosts should cease from Arms,
And hear him speak: So Barrisor (advised)
Advanced his Naked Rapier twixt both sides,
Ripped up the Quarrel, and compared six lives;
Then laid in balance with six idle words,
Offered remission and contrition too;
Or else that he and D'Ambois might conclude
The others dangers. D'Ambois liked the last;
But Barrisors friends (being equally engaged
In the maine Quarrel) never would expose
His life alone, to that they all deserved.
And (for the other offer of remission)
D'Ambois (that like a Laurel put in fire,
Sparkled and spit) did much much more than scorn,
That his wrong should incense him so like chafe,
To go so soon out; and like lighted paper,
Approve his spirit at once both fire and ashes:
So drew they lots, and in them Fates appointed,
That Barrisor should fight with fiery D'Ambois;
Pyrhot with Melynell; with Brisac L'Anou:
And then like flame and Powder they comixed,
So sprightly, that I wished they had been spirits,
That the ne'er shutting wounds, they needs must open,
Might as they opened, shut, and never kill:
But D'Ambois sword (that lightened as it flew)
Shot like a pointed Comet at the face
Of manly Barrisor; and there it stuck:
Thrice plucked he at it, and thrice drew on thrusts,
From him, that of himself was free as fire;
Who thrust still as he plucked, yet (past belief!)
He with his subtle eye, hand, body, escaped;
At last the deadly bitten point tuggd'd off,
On fell his yet undaunted Foe so fiercely,
That (only made more horrid with his wound)
Great D'Ambois shrunk, and gave a little ground;
But soon returned, redoubled in his danger,
And at the heart of Barrisor sealed his anger:
Then, as in Arden I have seen an Ok
Long shook with tempests, and his lofty top
Bent to his root, which being at length made loose
(Even groaning with his weight) he began to Nod
This way and that: as loath his curled Brows
(Which he had oft wrapped in the sky with storms)
Should stoop: and yet, his radical fevers burst,
Storme-like he fell, and hid the feare-cold Earth.
So fell stout Barrisor, that had stood the shocks
Often set Battles in your Highness war,
Against the sole soldier of the world, Navarre.
O piteous and horrid murder!
Such a life
Me thinks had mettle in it to survive
An age of men.
Such, often soonest end.
Thy felt report calls on, wee long to know
On what events the other have arrived.
Sorrow and fury, like two opposite fumes,
Met in the upper Region of a Cloud,
At the report made by this worthies fall,
Brake from the earth, and with them rose Revenge,
Entering with fresh powers his two noble friends;
And under that odds fell surcharged Brisac,
The friend of D'Ambois, before fierce L'Anou;
Which D'Ambois seeing, as I once did see
In my young travels through Armenia,
An angry Unicorn in his full carrier
Charge with too quick an eye a Jeweller,
That watched him for the Treasure of his brow;
And ere he could get shelter of a tree,
Nail him with his rich Antler to the Earth:
So D'Ambois ran upon revenged L'Anou,
Who eyeing th'eager point borne in his face,
And giving back, fell back, and in his fall
His foes vncurbed sword stopped in his heart:
By which time all the life strings of the tw'other
Were cut, and both fell as their spirits flew
Upwards: and still hunt Honour at the view.
And now (of all the six) sole D'Ambois stood
Untouched, save only with the others blood.
All slain outright?
All slain outright but he,
Who kneeling in the warm life of his friends,
(All feebled with the blood, his Rapier raind)
He kissed their pale cheeks, and bade both farewell;
And see the bravest man the French earth bears.
Now is the time, you're Princely vowed my friend,
Perform it Princely, and obtain my pardon.
Else Heaven, forgive not me: Come on brave friend.
If ever Nature held herself her own,
When the great Trial of a King and subject
Met in one blood, both from one belly springing:
Now prove her virtue and her greatness One,
Or make the t'one the greater with the t'other,
(As true Kings should) and for your brothers love,
(Which is a special species of true virtue)
Doe that you could not doe, not being a King.
Brother I know your suit; these wilful murders
Are ever past our pardon.
Manly slaughter
Should never bear th account of wilful murder;
It being a spice of justice, where with life
Offending past law, equal life is laid
In equal balance, to scourge that offence
By law of reputation, which to men
Exceeds all positive law, and what that leaves
To true men's valours (not prefixing rights
Of satisfaction, suited to their wrongs)
A free mans eminence may supply and take.
This would make every man that thinks him wronged,
Or is offended, or in wrong or right,
Lay on this violence, and all vaunt themselves,
Law-menders and suppliers though mere Butchers;
Should this fact (though of justice) be forgiven?
O no, my Lord; it would make Cowards fear
To touch the reputations of full men,
When only they are left to imp the law,
Justice will soon distinguish murderous minds
From just revengers: Had my friend been slain,
(His enemy surviving) he should die,
Since he had added to a murdered fame
(Which was in his intent) a murdered man;
And this had worthily been wilful murder:
But my friend only saved his fems dear life,
Which is aboue life, taking th'vnder value,
Which in the wrong it did, was forfeit to him;
And in this fact only preserves a man
In his uprightness; worthy to survive
Millions of such as murder men, alive.
Well brother, rise, and raise your friend withal
From death to life: and D'Ambois, let your life
(Refined by passing through this merited death)
Be purged from more such foul pollution;
Nor on your scope, nor valour more presuming,
To be again so violent.
My Lord,
I loath as much a deed of unjust death,
As law it self doth; and to Tyrannise,
Because I have a little spirit to date,
And power to doe, as to be Tyrannised;
This is a grace that (on my knees redoubled)
I crave to double this my short lifes gift;
And shall your royal bounty Centuple,
That I may so make good what God and nature
Have given me for my good: since I am free,
(Offending no just law) let no law make
By any wrong it does, my life her slave:
When I am wronged and that law fails to right me,
Let me be King my self (as man was made)
And doe a justice that exceeds the law:
If my wrong pass the power of single valour
To right and expiate; then be you my King,
And doe a Right, exceeding Law and Nature:
Who to himself is law, no law doth need,
Offends no King, and is a King indeed.
Enjoy what thou intreat'st, we give but ours.
What you have given, my Lord, is ever yours.
Mort dieu, who would have pardoned such a murder?
Now vanish horrors into Court attractions,
For which let this balm make thee fresh and fair.
How shall I quite your love?
Be true to the end:
I have obtained a Kingdom with my friend.
He will have pardon sure.
It were pity else:
For though his great spirit something overflow,
All faults are still borne, that from greatness grow:
But such a sudden Courtier saw I never.
He was too sudden, which indeed was rudeness.
True, for it argued his no due conceit
Both of the place, and greatness of the persons:
Nor of our sex: all which (we all being strangers
To his encounter) should have made more manners
Deserve more welcome.
All this fault is found
Because he loved the Duchess and left you.
Alas, love give her joy; I am so far
From Envy of her honour, that I swear,
Had he encountered me with such proud slight:
I would have put that project face of his
To a more test, than did her Dutchesship.
Why (by your leave my Lord) Isle speak it here,
(Although she be my ante) she scarce was modest,
When she perceived the Duke her husband take
Those late exceptions to her servants Courtship
To entertain him.
I, and stand him still.
Letting her husband give her servant place:
Though he did manly, she should be a woman.
D'Ambois is pardond: wher's a king? where law?
See how it runs, much like a turbulent sea;
Here high, and glorious, as it did contend
To wash the heavens, and make the stars more pure:
And here so low, it leaves the mud of hell
To every common view: come count Montsurry
We must consult of this.
Stay not, sweet Lord.
Be pleased, Isle strait return.
Would that would please me.
Isle leave you Madam to your passions.
I see, ther's change of weather in your looks.
I cannot cloak it: but; as when a fume,
Hot, dry and gross: within the womb of earth
Or in her superficies begot:
When extreme cold hath stroke it to her heart,
The more it is comprest, the more it rages;
Exceeds his prisons strength that should contain it,
And then it tosses Temples in the air;
All bars made engines, to his insolent fury:
So, of a sudden, my licentious fancy
Riots within me: not my name and house
Nor my religion to this hour observed
Can stand aboue it: I must utter that
That will in parting break more strings in me,
Than death when life parts: and that holy man
That, from my cradle, counseld for my soul:
I now must make an agent for my blood.
Yet, is my Mistress gracious?
Yet unanswered?
Pray thee regard thine own good, if not mine,
And cheer my Love for that; you do not know
What you may be by me, nor what without me;
I may have power t'aduance and pull down any.
Thats not my study: one way I am sure
You shall not pull down me: my husbands height
Is crown to all my hopes: and his retiring
To any mean state, shall be my aspiring:
Mine honour's in mine own hands, spite of kings.
Honour, whats that? your second maidenhead:
And what is that? a word: the word is gone
The thing remains: the rose is plucked, the stalk
Abides: an easy loss where no lack's found:
Believe it ther's as small lack in the loss,
As there is pain ith losing: archers ever
Have two strings to a bow: and shall great Cupped
(Archer of archers both in men and women)
Be worse provided than a common archer?
A husband and a friend all wise wives have.
Wise wives they are that on such strings depend,
With a firm husband, weighing a dissolute friend.
Still you stand on your husband, so doe all
The common sex of you, when yare encountered
With one ye cannot fancy: all men know
You live in court here by your own election,
Frequenting all our solemn sports and triumphs,
All the most youthful company of men:
And wherefore doe you this? To please your husband???
Tic gross and fulsome: if your husbands pleasure
Be all your Object, and you aim at Honour,
In living close to him, get you from Court,
You may have him at home; these common Puttofs
For common women serve: my honour? husband?
Dames meritorious, ne'er were meritorious:
Speak plain and say I do not like you Sir,
You're an illfauor'd fellow in my eye,
And I am answered.
Then I pray be answered:
For in good faith my Lord I do not like you
In that sort you like.
Then have at you here:
Take (with a politic hand) this rope of Pearl;
And though you be not amorous: yet be wise:
Take me for wisdom; he that you can love
Is near the further from you.
Now it comes
So ill prepared, that I may take a poison,
Under a medicine as good cheap as it:
I will not have it were it worth the world.
Horror of death: could I but please your eye,
You would give me the like, ere you would loose me:
Honour and husband?
By this light my Lord
You're a vile fellow: and Isle tell the King
Your occupation of dishonouring Ladies
And of his Court: a Lady cannot live
As she was borne; and with that sort of pleasure
That fits her state: but she must be defamed
With an infamous Lords detraction:
Who would endure the Court if these attempts,
Of open and professed lust must be borne?
Whose there? come on Dame, your are at your book
When men are at your mistress; have I taught you
Any such waiting women's quality?
Farewell good husband.
Farewell wicked Lord.
Was not the Monsieur here?
Yes, to good purpose.
And your cause is as good to seek him too
And haunt his company.
Why what's the matter?
Matter of death, were I some husbands wife:
I cannot live at quiet in my chamber
For opportunities almost to rapes
Offered me by him.
Pray thee bear with him:
Thou know he is a Bachelor, and a Courtier,
I, and a Prince: and their prerogatives
Are, to their laws, as to their pardons are
Their reseruations, after Parliaments
One quits another: form gives al their essence:
That Prince doth high in virtues reckoning stand
That will entreat a vice, and not command:
So far bear with him: should another man
Trust to his privilege, he should trust to death:
Take comfort then (my comfort) nay triumph,
And crown thy self, thou part'st with victory:
My presence is so only dear to thee,
That other men's appear worse than they be.
For this night yet, bear with my forced absence:
Thou know my business; and with how much weight,
My vow hath charged it.
True my Lord, and never
My fruitless love shall let your serious profit,
Yet, sweet Lord, do no stay, you know my soul
Is so long time without me, and I dead
As you are absent.
By this kiss, receive
My soul for hostage, till I see my love.
The morn shall let me see you:
With the sun
Isle visit thy more comfortable beauties.
This is my comfort, that the sun hath left
The whole worlds beauty ere my sun leaves me.
Tic late night now indeed: farewell my light.
Farewell my light and life: But not in him.
Alas, that in the wave of our affections
We should supply it with a full dissembling,
In which each youngest maid is grown a mother,
Frailty is fruitful, one sin gets another:
Our loves like sparkles are that brightest shine,
When they go out most vice shows most divine:
Go maid, to bed, lend me your book I pray:
Not like your self, for form, Isle this night trouble
None of your services: Make sure the doors,
And call your other fellows to their rest.
I will, yet I will watch to know why you watch.
Exit.
Now all the peaceful regents of the night,
Silently-gliding exhalations,
Languishing winds, and murmuring false of waters,
Sadness of heart, and ominous securenesse,
Enchantments, dead sleeps, all the friends of rest,
That ever wrought upon the life of man,
Extend your utmost strengths; and this charmed hour
Fix like the Center; make the violent wheels
Of Time and Fortune stand; and Great Existence
(The Makers treasury) now not seem to bee,
To all but my approaching friends and me:
They come, alas they come, fear, fear and hope
Of one thing, at one instant fight in me:
I love what most I loath, and cannot live
Unless I compass that that holds my death:
For love is hateful without love again,
And he I love, will loath me, when he sees
I fly my sex, my virtue, my Renown,
To run so madly on a man unknown.
See, see the gulf is opening, that will swallow
Me and my fame for ever; I will in,
And cast my self off, as I ne'er had been.
Come worthiest son, I am past measure glad,
That you (whose worth I have approved so long)
Should be the Object of her fearful love;
Since both your wit and spirit can adapt
Their full force to supply her utmost weakness:
You know her words and virtues, for Report
Of all that know, is to a man a knowledge:
You know besides, that our affections storm,
Raised in our blood, no Reason can reform.
Though she seek then their satisfaction,
(Which she must needs, or rest unsatisfied)
Your judgment will esteem her peace thus wrought,
Nothing less dear, than if your self had sought:
And (with another colour, which my Art
Shall teach you to lay on) your self must seem
The only agent, and the first Orb Move,
In this our set, and cunning world of Love.
Give me the colour (my most honoured Father)
And trust my cunning then to lay it on.
Tic this, good son; Lord Barrisor (whom you slew)
Did love her dearly, and with all fit means
Hath urged his acceptance, of all which
She keeps one letter written in his blood:
You must say thus then, That you heard from me
How much her self was touched in conscience
With a Report (which is in truth dispersed)
That your maine quarrel grew about her love,
Lord Barrisor, imagining your Courtship
Of the great Guises Duchess in the Presence,
Was by you made to his elected mistress:
And so made me your mean now to resolve her,
Choosing (by my direction) this nights depth,
For the more clear avoiding of all note,
Of your presumed presence, and with this
(To clear her hands of such a lovers blood)
She will so kindly thank and entertain you,
(Me thinks I see how) I, and ten to one,
Show you the confirmation in his blood,
Lest you should think report and she did fine,
That you shall so have circumstantial means,
To come to the direct, which must be used:
For the direct is crooked; Love comes flying;
The height of love is still won with denying.
Thanks honoured Father.
She must never know
That you know any thing of any love
Sustained on her part: For learn this of me;
In any thing a woman does alone,
If she dissemble, she thinks tic not done;
If not dissemble, nor a little chide,
Give her her wish, she is not satisfied;
To have a man think that she never seeks,
Does her more good than to have all she likes:
This frailty sticks in them beyond their sex;
Which to reform, reason is too perplex:
Urge reason to them, it will doe no good;
Humour (that is the chariot of our food
In every body) must in them be fed,
To carry their affections by it bred.
Stand close.
Alas, I fear my strangeness will retire him:
If he go back, I die; I must prevent it,
And cheer his onset with my sight at least,
And thats the most; though every step he takes
Goes to my heart, Isle rather die than seem
Not to be strange to that I most esteem.
Madam.
Ah.
You will pardon me, I hope,
That, so beyond your expectation,
(And at a time for visitants so unfit)
I (with my noble friend here) visit you:
You know that my access at any time
Hath ever been admitted; and that friend
That my care will presume to bring with me,
Shall have all circumstance of worth in him,
To merit as free welcome as my self.
O father, but at this suspicious hour
You know how apt best men are to suspect vs,
In any cause, that makes suspicious shadow
No greater than the shadow of a hair:
And you're to blame: what though my Lord and husband
Lie forth to night? and since I cannot sleep
When he is absent, I sit up to night,
Though all the doors are sure, &amp; all our servants
As sure bound with their sleeps; yet there is one
That sits aboue, whose eye no sleep can bind:
He sees through doors, and darkness, and our thoughts;
And therefore as we should avoid with fear,
To think amiss our selves before his search;
So should we be as curious to shun
All cause that other think not ill of vs.
Madam, tic far from that: I only heard
By this my honoured father, that your conscience
Was something troubled with a false report;
That Barrisors blood should something touch your hand,
Since he imagined I was courting you,
When I was bold to change words with the Duchess,
(And therefore made his quarrel; which my presence
Presumed on with my father at this season,
For the more care of your so curious honour)
Can well resolve your Conscience, is most false.
And is it therefore that you come good sir?
Then crave I now your pardon and my fathers,
And swear your presence does me so much comfort,
That all I have, it binds to your requital:
Indeed sir, tic most true that a report
Is spread, alleging that his love to me
Was reason of your quarrel, and because
You shall not think I fine it for my glory,
That he importuned me for his Court service,
Isle show you his own hand, set down in blood
To that vain purpose: Good Sir, then come in.
Father I thank you now a thousand fold.
May it be worth it to you honoured daughter.
O My dear servant, in thy close embraces,
I have set open all the doors of danger
To my encompassed honour, and my life:
Before I was secure against death and hell;
But now am subject to the hartlesse fear:
Of every shadow, and of every breath,
And would change firmness with an aspen leaf:
So confident a spotless conscience is;
So weak a guilty: O the daugerous siege
Sin lays about vs? and the tyranny
He exercises when he hath expugn'd:
Like to the horror of a winters thunder,
Mixed with a gushing storm, that suffer nothing
To stir abroad on earth, but their own rages;
Is sin, when it hath gathered head aboue vs:
No roof, no shelter can secure vs so,
But he will drown our cheeks in fear or woe.
Sin is a coward Madam, and insults
But on our weakness, in his truest valour:
And so our ignorance tames vs, that we let
His shadows fright vs: and like empty clouds
In which our faulty apprehensions fordge
The forms of Dragons, Lions, Elephants,
When they hold no proportion: the sly charms
Of the witch policy makes him, like a monster
Kept only to show men for Goddess money:
That false hag often paints him: in her cloth
Ten times more monstrous than he is in troth:
In three of vs, the secret of our meeting,
Is only guarded, and three friends as one
Have ever been esteemed: as our three powers
That in our one soul, are, as one united:
Why should we fear then? for my truth I swear
Sooner shall torture, be the Sire to pleasure,
And health be grievous to men long time sick,
Than the dear jewel of your fame in me,
Be made an outcast to your infamy;
Nor shall my value (sacred to your virtues)
Only give free course to it, from my self:
But make it fly out of the mouths of kings
In golden vapours, and with awful wings.
It rests as all kings seals were set in thee.
It is not I, but urgent destiny,
That (as great states men for their general end
In politic justice, make poor men offend)
Enforces my offence to make it just:
What shall weak Dames doe, when t'whole work of Nature
Hath a strong finger in each one of vs?
Needs must that sweep away the silly cobweb
Of our still-vndone labours; that lays still
Our powers to it: as to the line, the stone,
Not to the stone, the line should be opposed;
We cannot keep our constant course in virtue:
What is alike at all parts? every day
Differs from other: every hour and minute:
I, every thought in our false clock of life,
Oft times inuerts the whole circumference:
We must be sometimes one, sometimes another:
Our bodies are but thick clouds to our souls;
Through which they cannot shine when they desire:
When all the stars, and even the sun himself,
Must stay the vapors times that he exhales
Before he can make good his beams to vs:
O how can we, that are but motes to him,
Wandering at random in his ordered rays,
Disperse our passions fumes, with our weak labours,
That are more thick &amp; black than all earths vapors?
Good day, my love: what up and ready too!
Both, (my dear Lord) not all this night made I
My self unready, or could sleep a wink.
Alas, what troubled my true love? my peace,
From being at peace within her better self?
Or how could sleep forbear to seas thy beauties
When he might challenge them as his just prise?
I am in no power earthly, but in yours;
To what end should I go to bed my Lord,
That wholly mist the comfort of my bed?
Or how should sleep possess my faculties,
Wanting the proper closer of mine eyes?
Then will I never more sleep night from thee:
All mine own Business, all the Kings affairs
Shall take the day to serve them: Every night
Isle ever dedicate to thy delight.
Nay, good my Lord esteem not my desires
Such doters on their humours, that my judgment
Cannot subdue them to your worthier pleasure:
A wives pleased husband must her object be
In all her acts, not her soothed fantasy.
Then come my love, Now pay those Rites to sleep
Thy fair eyes owe him: shall we now to bed?
O no my Lord, your holy Friar says,
All couplings in the day that touch the bed,
Adulterous are, even in the married;
Whose grave and worthy doctrine, well I know,
Your faith in him will liberally allow.
Hoe's a most learned and Religious man;
Come to the Presence then, and see great D'Ambois
(Fortunes proud mushrome shot up in a night)
Stand like an Atlas underneath the King;
Which greatness with him Monsieur now envies
As bitterly and deadly as the Guise.
What, he that was but yesterday his maker?
His raiser and preserver?
Even the same.
Each natural agent works but to this end,
To render that it works on, like it self;
Which since the Monsieur in his act on D'Ambois,
Cannot to his ambitious end effect,
But that (quite opposite) the King hath power
(In his love borne to D'Ambois) to convert
The point of Monsieurs aim on his own breast,
He turns his outward love to inward hate:
A Princes love is like the lightnings fume,
Which no man can embrace, but must consume.
Speak home my Busy, thy impartial words
Are like brave Falcons that dare truss a Foul
Much greater than themselves; Flatterers are Kites
That check at nothing; thou shalt be my Eagle,
And bear my thunder underneath thy wings:
Truths words like jewels hang in th'eares of Kings.
Would I might live to see no Jaws hang there
In steed of jewels; sycophants I mean,
Who use truth like the Devil, his true Foe
Cast by the Angel to the pit of fears,
And bound in chains; truth seldom decks Kings ears:
Slave flattery (like a Rippiers legs rolled up
In boots of haie-ropes) with Kings soothed guts
Swaddled and strappl'd, now lives only free.
O tic a subtle knave; how like the plague
Unfelt, he strikes into the brain of truth,
And rages in his entrails when he can,
Worse than the poison of a red haired man.
Fly at him and his brood, I cast thee off,
And once more give thee surname of mine Eagle.
Isle make you sport enough then, let me have
My lucerns too (or dogs inured to hunt
Beasts of most rapine) but to put them up,
And if I truss not, let me not be trusted:
Show me a great man (by the peoples voice,
Which is the voice of God) that by his greatness
Bumbasts his private roofs, with public riches;
That affects royalty, rising from a clapdish;
That rules so much more than his suffering King,
That he makes kings of his subordinate slaves:
Himself and them graduate like woodmongers
(Piling a stack of billets) from the earth,
Raising each other into steeples heights;
Let him convey this on the turning proppes
Of Protean Law, and (his own counsel keeping)
Keep all upright; let me but Hawlke at him,
Isle play the Vulture, and so thumpe his liver,
That (like a huge unloading Argosea)
He shall confess all, and you then may hang him.
Show me a Clergy man, that is in voice
A Lark of Heaven; in heart a Mowle of earth;
That hath good living, and a wicked life;
A temperate look, and a luxurious gut;
Turning the rents of his superfluous Cures
Into your Pheasants and your Partriches;
Venting their Quintessence as men read Hebrew:
Let me but hawlke at him, and, like the other,
He shall confess all, and you then may hang him.
Show me a Lawyer that turns sacred law
(The equal rendrer of each man his own,
The scourge of Rapine and Extortion,
The Sanctuary and impregnable defence
Of retired learning, and oppressed virtue)
Into a Harpy, that eats all butt's own,
Into the damned sins it punishes;
Into the Synagogue of thieves and Atheists;
Blood into gold, and justice into lust:
Let me but hawlke at him, as at the tother,
He shall confess all, and you then may hang him.
Where will you find such game as you would hawlke at?
Isle hawlke about your house for one of them.
Come, you're a glorious Ruffin, and run proud
Of the Kings headlong graces; hold your breath,
Or by that poisoned vapour not the King
Shall back your murderous valour against me.
I would the King would make his presence free
But for one charge betwixt vs: By the reverence
Due to the sacred space twixt kings and subjects,
Here would I make thee cast that popular purple,
In which thy proud soul sits and braves thy sovereign.
Peace, peace, I pray thee peace.
Let him peace first that made the first war.
Hoe's the better man.
And therefore may doe worst?
He has more titles.
So Hydra had more heads.
Hoe's greater known.
His greatness is the peoples, mine's mine own.
Hoe's nobly borne.
He is not, I am noble.
And nobles in his blood hath no gradation,
But in his merit.
You are not nobly borne,
But bastard to the Cardinal of Ambois.
Thou least proud Guiserd; let me fly (my Lord.)
Not in my face; (my Eagle) violence flies
The Sanctuaries of a Princes eyes.
Still shall we chide? and some upon this bit?
Is the Guise only great in faction?
Stands he not by himself? Proves he th'Opinion
That men's souls are without them? Be a Duke,
And lead me to the field.
Come, follow me.
Stay them, stay D'Ambois; Cousin Guise, I wonder
Your equal disposition brookes so ill
A man so good, that only would uphold
Man in his native nobles, from whose fall
All our dissentions rise; that in himself
(Without the outward patches of our frailty,
Riches and honour) knows he comprehends
Worth with the greatest: Kings had never borne
Such boundless eminence over other men,
Had all maintained the spirit and state of D'Ambois;
Nor had the full impartial hand of nature
That all things gave in her original,
Without these definite terms of Mine and Thine,
Been turned unjustly to the hand of Fortune:
Had all preserved her in her prime, like D'Ambois;
No envy, no disiunction had dissolved,
Or plucked out one stick of the golden faggot,
In which the world of Saturn was comprised,
Had all been held together with the nerues,
The genius and th'ingenuous soul of D'Ambois.
Let my hand therefore be the Hermean rod
To part and reconcile, and so conserve you,
As my combined embracers and supporters.
Tic our Kings motion, and wee shall not seem
(To worst eyes) womanish, though wee change thus soon
Never so great grudge for his greater pleasure.
I seal to that, and so the manly freedom
That you so much profess, hereafter prove not
A bold and glorious licence to deprave:
To me his hand shall prove the Hermean rod
His grace affects, in which submissive sign
On this his sacred right hand, I lay mine.
Tic well my Lord, and so your worthy greatness
Engender not the greater insolence,
Nor make you think it a Prerogative,
To rack men's freedoms with the ruder wrongs;
My hand (stuck full of laurel, in true sign
Tic wholly dedicate to righteous peace)
In all submission kisses the other side.
Thanks to ye both: and kindly I inuit ye
Both to a banquet where weal sacrifice
Full cups to confirmation of yours loves;
At which (fair Ladies) I entreat your presence.
What had my bounty drunk when it raised him?
Y'ane stuck vs up a very proper flag
That takes more wind than we with all our sails.
O so he spreds and flourishes.
He must down,
Upstarts should never perch too near a crown.
Tic true my Lord; and as this doting hand,
Even out of earth, (like Iuno) struck this giant,
So Ioues great ordinance shall be here implide
To strike him under th'Aetna of his pride:
To which work lend your hands and let vs cast
Where we may set snares for his gadding greatness.
I think it best, amongst our greatest women:
For there is no such trap to catch an upstart
As a loose downfall; and indeed their false
Are th'ends of all men's rising: if great men
And wise; make scopes to please advantage
Tic with a woman: women that worst may
Still hold men's candles: they direct and know
All things amiss in all men; and their women
All things amiss in them: through whose charmed mouths
We may see all the close scopes of the Court:
When the most royal beast of chase (being old,
And cunning in his choice of lairs and haunts)
Can never be discovered to the bow
The piece or hound: yet where his custom is
To beat his vault, and he ruts with his hind,
The place is marked, and by his Venery
He still is taken. Shall we then attempt
The chiefest mean to that discovery here,
And court our greatest Ladies greatest women,
With shows of love, and liberal promises?
Tic but our breath. If something given in hand,
Sharpen their hopes of more; twilbe well venterd.
No doubt of that: and tic an excellent point
Of our deuis'd inuestigation.
I have already broke the ice, my Lord,
With the most trusted woman of your Countess,
And hope I shall wade through to our discovery,
Take say of her my Lord, she comes most fitly
And we will to the other.
You're engaged.
Nay pray my Lord forbear.
What skittish, servant?
No my Lord I am not so fit for your service:
Pray pardon me now my Lord? my Lady expects me.
Isle satisfy her expectation, as far as an uncle may.
Well said: a s pert of Courtship of all hands:
Now mine own Pero: hast thou remembered me
For the discovery I entreated thee to make concerning
Thy Mistress? speak boldly, and be sure of all things I have pro???missed.
Building on that you have sworn (my Lord) I may speak: and much the rather, because my Lady hath not trusted me with that I can tell you; for now I cannot be said to betray her.
That's all one: so it bee not to one that will betray thee: forth I beseech thee.
To tell you truth, my Lord, I have made a strange dis???couery.
Excellent Pero thou reuiu'st me: may I sink quick into earth here, if my tongue discover it.
Tic thus then: This last night my Lord lay forth: and I wondering my Ladies sitting up, stole at midnight from my pal???lat: and (having before made a hole both through the wall and arras to her inmost chamber) I saw D'Ambois and she set close at a banquet.
D'Ambois?
Even he my Lord.
Dost thou not dream wench?
No my Lord, he is the man.
The devil he is, and thy Lady his dam: infinite re???gions
betwixt a women's tongue and her heart: is this our God???desse of chastity? I thought I could not be so slighted: if she had not her freight besides: and therefore plotted this with her woman: dear Pero I will advance thee for ever: but tell me now: Gods precious it transforms me with admiration: sweet Pero, whom should she trust with his conveyance? Or, all the doors being made sure, how could his conveyance bee per???formed?
Nay my Lord, that amazes me: I cannot by any study so much as guess at it.
Well, lets favour our apprehensions with forbearing that a little: for if my heart were not hooped with adamant, the conceit of this would have burst it: but hark thee.
I swear to your Grace, all that I can conjecture tou???ching my Lady your Niece, is a strong affection she bears to the English Mylor.
All quote you? tic enough I assure you, but tell me.
I pray thee resolve me: the Duke will never imagine that I am busy about's wife: hath D'Ambois any privy access to her?
No my Lord, D'Ambois neglects her (as she takes it) and is therefore suspicious that either your Lady, or the Coun???tesse Beaupre hath closely entertained him.
Ber lady a likely suspicion, and very near the life, if she marks it; especially of my wife.
Come we will put off all, with seeming only to have courted; away dry palm: sh'as a liver as hard as a biscuit: a man may go a whole voyage with her, and get nothing but tempests at her windpipe.
Heir's one: (I think) has swallowd a porcupine, she casts pricks from her tongue so.
And heir's a peacock seems to have deuourd one of the Alps, she has so swelling a spirit, and is so cold of her kind???ness.
We be no windfals my Lord; ye must gather vs with the ladder of matrimony, or we will hang till we be rotten.
Indeed that's the way to make ye right openarses. But alas ye have no portions fit for such husbands as we wish you.
Portions my Lord, yes and such portions as your prin???cipality cannot purchase.
What woman? what are those portions?
Riddle my riddle my Lord.
I marry wench, I think thy portion is a right riddle, a man shall never find it out: but lets hear it.
You shall my Lord.
What's that, that being most rar's most cheap?
That if you sow, you never reap?
That when it grows most, most you in it?
And still you lose it when you win it:
That when tic commonest, tic dearest,
And when tic farthest off'tis nearest?
Is this your portion?
Even this my Lord.
Believe me I cannot riddle it.
No my Lord, tic my chastity, which you shall neither riddle nor fiddle.
Your chastity? let me begin with the end of you; how is a women's chastity nearest a man, when tic furthest off?
Why my Lord, when you cannot get it, it goes to the heart on you; and that I think comes most near you: and I am sure it shall bee far enough off; and so I leave you to my mercy.
Farewell riddle.
Farewell Meddler.
Farewell winter plum.
Now my Lords, what fruit of our inquisition? feel you nothing budding yet? Speak good my Lord Mountsurry.
Nothing but this: D'Ambois is negligent in obser???uing the Duchess, and therefore she is suspicious that your Niece or my wife closely entertains him.
Your wife, my Lord? Think you that possible?
Alas, I know she flies him like her last hour.
Her last hour? why that comes upon her the more she flies it: Does D'Ambois so think you?
Thats not worth the answering: Tic horrible to think with what monsters women's imaginations engross them
when they are once enamoured, and what wonders they will work for their satisfaction. They will make a sheep valiant, a Lion fearful.
And an Ass confident, my Lord, tic true, and more
will come forth shortly, get you to the banquet.
O the vnfounded Sea of women's bloods,
That when tic calmest, is most dangerous;
Not any wrincle creaming in their faces,
When in their hearts are Scylla and Charibdis,
Which still are hid in monster-formed clouds,
Where never day shines, nothing ever grows,
But weeds and poisons, that no states-man knows;
Not Cerberus ever saw the damned nookes
Hid with the veils of women's virtuous looks:
I will conceal all yet, and give more time
To D'Ambois trial, now upon my hook;
He awes my throat; else like Sybillas Cave
It should breath oracles; I fear him strangely,
And may resemble his advanced valour
Unto a spirit raised without a circle,
Endangering him that ignorantly raised him,
And for whose fury he hath learned no limit.
How now, what leap'st thou at?
O royal object.
Thou dream awake: Object in th'emptie air?
Worthy the head of Titan, worth his chair.
Pray thee what mean thou?
See you not a Crone
Impale the forehead of the great King Monsieur?
O fie upon thee.
Sir, that is the Subject
Of all these your retired and sole discourses.
Wilt thou not leave that wrongful supposition?
This still hath made me doubt thou dost not love me.
Wilt thou doe one thing for me then sincerely?
I, any thing, but killing of the King.
Still in that discord, and ill taken note?
Come, doe not doubt me, and command me all things.
I will not then, and now by all my love
Shown to thy virtues, and by all fruits else
Already sprung from that affection,
I charge thee utter (even with all the freedom
Both of thy noble nature and thy friendship)
The full and plain state of me in thy thoughts.
What, utter plainly what I think of you?
Why this swims quite against the stream of greatness:
Great men would rather hear their flatteries,
And if they be not made fools, are not wise.
I am no such great fool, and therefore charge thee
Even from the root of thy free heart, display me.
Since you affect it in such serious terms,
If your self first will tell me what you think
As freely and as heartily of me,
Isle be as open in my thoughts of you.
A bargain of mine honour; and make this,
That prove wee in our full dissection
Never so foul, live still the sounder friends.
What else Sir? come begin, and speak me simply.
I will I swear. I think thee then a man,
That dares as much as a wilde horse or Tiger;
As headstrong and as bloody; and to feed
The ravenous wolf of thy most Caniball valour,
(Rather than not employ it) thou would turn
Hackster to any whore, slave to a Jew,
Or English usurer, to force possessions,
And cut men's throats of mortgaged estates;
Or thou would 'st tire thee like a Tinkers wife,
And murder market folks, quarrel with sheep,
And run as mad as Aiax; serve a Butcher,
Doe any thing but killing of the King:
That in thy valour you are like other naturals,
That have strange gifts in nature, but no soul
Diffused quite through, to make them of a piece,
But stop at humours, that are more absurd,
Childish and villainous than that hackster, whore,
Slave, cut-throat, Tinkers bitch, compared before:
And in those humours would envy, betray,
Slander, blaspheme, change each hour a religion;
Doe any thing, but killing of the King;
That in that valour (which is still my dunghill,
To which I carry all filth in thy house)
You are more ridiculous and vaine-glorious
Than any Mountebank; and impudent
Than any painted bawd; which, not to sooth
And glorify thee like a Iupiter Hammon,
Thou eat'st thy heart in vinegar; and thy gall
Turns all thy blood to poison, which is cause
Of that Tode-poole that stands in thy complexion;
And makes thee (with a cold and earthy moisture,
Which is the damme of putrefaction,
As plague to thy damned pride) rot as thou liu'st;
To study calumnies and treacheries;
To thy friends slaughters, like a Scrich-owle sing,
And to all mischiefs, but to kill the King.
So: Have you said?
How think thou? Doe I flatter?
Speak I not like a trusty friend to thee?
That ever any man was blessed withal;
So heere's for me. I think you are (at worst)
No devil, since you're like to be no king;
Of which, with any friend of yours Isle lay
This poor Stilladoe here, against all the stars,
I, and against all your treacheries, which are more;
That you did never good, but to doe ill;
But ill of all sorts, free and for it self:
That (like a murdering piece, making lanes in armies
The first man of a rank, the whole rank falling)
If you have once wronged one man, you're so far
From making him amends, that all his race,
Friends and associates fall into your chase:
That you're for perjuries the very prince
Of all intelligencers; and your voice
Is like an Eastern wind, that where it flies,
Knits nets of Caterpillars, with which you catch
The prime of all the fruits the kingdom yields.
That your political head is the cursed fount
Of all the violence, rapine, cruelty,
Tyranny &amp; Atheism flowing through the realm.
That you've a tongue so scandalous, twill cut
A perfect Crystal; and a breath that will
Kill to that wall a spider; you will jest
With God, and your soul to the devil tender
For lust; kiss horror, and with death engender.
That your foul body is a Lernean fen
Of all the maladies breeding in all men.
That you are utterly without a soul:
And (for your life) the thread of that was spun,
When Clotho slept, and let her breathing rock
Fall in the dirt; and Lachesis still draws it,
Dipping her twisting fingers in a boule
Defiled, and croun'd with virtues forced soul.
And lastly (which I must for Gratitude
Ever remember) That of all my height
And dearest life, you are the only spring,
Only in royal hope to kill the king.
Why now I see thou love me, come to the banquet.
LAdies, ye have not done our banquet right,
Nor looked upon it with those cheerful rays
That lately turned your breaths to floods of gold;
Your looks, me thinks, are not drawn out with thoughts,
So clear and free as heretofore, but fare
As if the thick complexions of men
Governed within them.
Tic not like my Lord
That men in women rule; but contrary,
For as the Moon (of all things God created)
Not only is the most appropriate image
Or glass to show them how they wax and wane,
But in her light and motion, likewise bears
Imperial influences that command
In all their powers, and make them wax &amp; wane;
So women, that (of all things made of nothing)
Are the most perfect images of the Moon
(Or still-vnweand sweet Moon-calues with white faces)
Not only are patterns of change to men:
But as the tender Moon-shine of their beauties
Clears, or is cloudy, make men glad or sad.
But here the Moons are changed (as the King notes)
And either men rule in them, or some power
Beyond their voluntary motions:
For nothing can recover their lost faces.
None can be always one: our griefs and joys
Hold several scepters in vs, and have times
For their predominance: which grief now, in them
Doth claim, as proper to his diadem:
And grief's a natural sickness of the blood,
That time to part, asks as his coming had;
Only slight fools grieved, suddenly are glad;
A man may say t'a dead man, be revived,
As well as to one sorrowful, be not grieved.
And therefore (Princely mistress) in all wars
Against these base foes that insult on weakness,
And still fight housed, behind the shield of Nature,
Of tyrannous law, treachery, or beastly need,
Your servant cannot help; authority here
Goes with corruption; something like some States,
That back worst men: valor to them must creep
That (to themselves left) would fear him asleep.
Ye all take that for granted, that doth rest
Yet to be proved; we all are as we were
As merry, and as free in thought as ever.
And why then can ye not disclose your thoughts?
Me thinks the man hath answered for vs well.
The man? why Madam do ye not know his name?
Man is a name of honour for a King:
Additions take away from each chief thing:
The School of Modesty, not to learn, learns Dames:
They sit in high forms there, that know men's names.
Hark sweet heart, hee'rs a bound set to your valor:
It cannot enter here; no, not to notice
Of what your name is; your great Eagles beak
(Should you fly at her) had as good encounter
An Albion cliff, as her more craggy liver.
Isle not attempt her Sir; her sight and name
(By which I only know her) doth deter me.
So do they all men else.
You would say so
If you knew all.
Knew all my Lord? what mean you?
All that I know Madam.
That you know? speak it.
No tic enough I feel it.
But me thinks
Her Courtship is more pure than heretofore:
True Courtiers should be modest, but not nice:
Bold, but not impudent: pleasure love, not vice.
Sweet heart: come hither, what if one should make
Horns at Mountsurry? would it strike him jealous
Through all the proofs of his chaste Ladies virtues?
No I think not.
Not if I named the man
With whom I would make him suspicious
His wife hath armed his forehead?
So, you might
Have your great nose made less indeed: and slit:
Your eyes thrust out.
Peace, peace, I pray thee peace.
Who dares doe that? the brother of his King?
Were your King brother in you: all your powers
(Stretched in the arms of great men and their bawds)
Set close down by you; all your stormy laws
Spouted with Lawyers mouths; and gushing blood,
Like to so many Torrents: all your glories:
(Making you terrible, like enchanted flames
Fed with bare cockescombes: and with crooked hams)
All your prerogatives, your shames and tortures:
All daring heaven, and opening hell about you:
Were I the man, ye wronged so and provoked:
(Though ne'er so much beneath you) like a box tree
I would (out of the toughness of my root)
Ram hardness, in my lowness, and like death
Mounted on earthquakes, I would trot through all
Honours and horrors: through foul and fair,
And from your whole strength toss you into air.
Go, you are a devil; such another spirit
Could not be stilt, from all Th'Armenian dragons.
O my Loves glory: heir to all I have:
That's all I can say, and that all I swear.
If thou outlive me, as I know thou must,
Or else hath nature no proportiond end
To her great labours: she hath breathed a spirit
Into thy entrails, of effect to swell
Into another great Augustus Caesar:
Organes, and faculties fitted to her greatness:
And should that perish like a common spirit,
Nature's a Courtier and regards no merit.
Heir's nought but whispering with vs: like a calm
Before a tempest, when the silent air
Lays her soft ear close to the earth to hearken
For that she fears is coming to afflict her;
Some fate doth join our ears to hear it coming.
Come, my brave eagle, let's to Covert fly:
I see Almighty Ether in the smoke
Of all his clouds descending: and the sky
Hid in the dim oftents of Tragedy.
Now stir the humour, and begin the brawl.
The King and D'Ambois now are grown all one.
Nay, they are two my Lord.
How's that?
No more.
I must have more my Lord.
What more than two?
How monstrous is this?
Why?
You make me Horns.
Not I, it is a work, without my power,
Married men's ensigns are not made with fingers:
Of divine Fabrique they are, Not men's hands;
Your wife, you know, is a Mere Cynthia,
And she must fashion horns out of her Nature.
But doth she? dare you charge her? speak false Prince.
I must not speak my Lord: but if you'll use
The learning of a noble man, and read
Heir's something to those points: soft you must pawn
Your honour having read it to return it.
Not I, I pawn mine Honour, for a paper?
You must not buy it under.
Keep it then!
And keep fire in your bosom.
What says he?
You must make good the rest.
How fares my Lord?
Takes my Love any thing to heart he says?
Come you're a.
What my Lord?
The plague of Herod
Feast in his rotten entrails.
Will you wreak
Your angers just cause given by him, on me?
By him?
By him my Lord, I have admired
You could all this time be at concord with him,
That still hath plaid such discords on your honour.
Perhaps tic with some proud string of my wives.
How's that, my Lord?
Your tongue will still admire,
Till my head be the miracle of the world.
O woe is me.
What does your Lordship mean?
Madam, be comforted; my Lord but tries you.
Madam? Help good my Lord??? are you not moved?
Doe your set looks print in your words, your thoughts?
Sweet Lord, clear up those eyes, for shame of Nobles:
Merciless creature; but it is enough,
You have shot home, your words are in her heart;
She has not lived to bear a trial now.
Look up my love, and by this kiss receive
My soul amongst thy spirits for supply
To thine, chased with my fury.
O my Lord,
I have too long lived to hear this from you.
It was from my troubled blood, and not from me:
I know not how I fare; a sudden night
Flows through my entrails, and a headlong Chaos
Murmurs within me, which I must digest;
And not drown her in my confusions,
That was my lives joy, being best informed:
Sweet, you must needs forgive me, that my love
(Like to a fire disdaining his suppression)
Raged being discouraged; my whole heart is wounded
When any least thought in you is but touched,
And shall be till I know your former merits:
Your name and memory altogether crave
In loathed oblivion their eternal grave;
And then you must hear from me, ther's no mean
In any passion I shall feel for you:
Love is a razor cleansing being well used,
But fetches blood still being the least abused:
To tell you briefly all; The man that left me
When you appeared, did turn me worse than woman,
And stabbed me to the heart thus, with his hand.
O happy woman! Comes my stain from him?
It is my beauty, and that innocence proves,
That slew Chimera, rescued Peleus
From all the savage beasts in Peleon;
And raised the chaste Athenian prince from Hell:
All suffering with me; they for women's lusts,
I for a mans; that the Again stable
Of his foul sin would empty in my lap:
How his guilt shunned me? sacred innocence
That where thou fear, art dreadful; and his face
Turned in flight from thee, that had thee in chase:
Come, bring me to him: I will tell the serpent
Even to his teeth (whence, in mine honours soil,
A pitched field starts up twixt my Lord and me)
That his throat lies, and he shall curse his fingers,
For being so governed by his filthy soul.
I know not, if himself will vaunt t'haue been
The princely author of the slavish sin,
Or any other; he would have resolved me,
Had you not come; not by his word, but writing,
Would I have sworn to give it him again,
And pawned mine honour to him for a paper.
See how he flies me still: Tic a foul heart
That fears his own hand: Good my Lord make haste
To see the dangerous paper: Be not nice
For any trifle, ieweld with your honour,
To pawn your honour; and with it confer
My nearest woman here, in all she knows;
Who (if the sun or Cerberus could have seen
Any stain in me) might as much as they:
And Pero, here I charge thee by my love,
And all proofs of it, (which I might call bounties)
By all that thou hast seem seem good in me,
And all the ill which thou should spit from thee,
By pity of the wound, my Lord hath given me,
Not as thy Mistress now, but a poor woman
(To death given over:) rid me of my pains,
Power on thy powder: clear thy breast of me:
My Lord is only here: here speak thy worst,
Thy best will doe me mischief; If thou spar'st me,
Never shine good thought on thy memory:
Resolve my Lord, and leave me desperate.
My Lord? My Lord hath plaid a prodigals part,
To break his Stock for nothing; and an insolent,
To cut a Gordian when he could not loose it:
What violence is this, to put true fire
To a false train? To blow up long crowned peace
With sudden outrage? and believe a man
Sworn to the shame of women, against a woman,
Borne to their honours: Isle attend your Lordship.
No, I will write (for I shall never more
Speak with the fugitive) where I will defy him,
Were he ten times the brother of my king.
Away, deliver it: O may my lines
(Filled with the poison of a women's hate
When he shall open them) shrink up his eyes
With torturous darkness, such as stands in hell,
Stuck full of inward horrors, never lighted;
With which are all things to be feared, affrighted;
Father?
How is it with my honoured mistress?
O servant help, and save me from the gripes
Of shame and infamy.
What insensate stock,
Or rude inanimate vapour without fashion,
Durst take into his Epimethean breast
A box of such plagues as the danger yields,
Incurd in this discovery? He had better
Ventured his breast in the consuming reach
Of the hot surfeits cast out of the clouds,
Or stood the bullets that (to wreak the sky)
The Cyclops ram in Ioues artillery.
Wee soon will take the darkness from his face
That did that deed of darkness; wee will know
What now the Monsieur and your husband doe;
What is contained within the secret paper
Offered by Monsieur, and your loves events:
To which ends (honoured daughter) at your motion,
I have put on these exorcising Rites,
And, by my power of learned holiness
Vouchsafed me from aboue, I will command
Our resolution of a raised spirit.
Good father raise him in some beauteous form,
That with least terror I may brooke his sight.
Stand sure together then, what ere ye see,
And stir not, as ye tender all our lives.
Occidentalium legionum spiritalium imperator (magnus ille Be???hemoth) veni, veni, comitatus cum Asaroth locotenente envy???cto. Adiuro te per stygis inscrutabilia arcane, per ipsos irre???meabiles anfractus auerni: adesto ?? Behemoth, tu cui peruia sunt Magnatum scrinia; veni, per Noctis &amp; tenebrarum ab???dita profundissima; per labentia la; per ipsos motus ho???rarum furtiuos, Hecates{que} altum silentium: Appear in form spiritali, lucente splendida &amp; amabili.
What would the holy Friar?
I would see
What now the Monsieur and Mountsurrie doe;
And see the secret paper that the Monsieur
Offered to Count Montsurry, longing much
To know on what events the secret loves
Of these two honoured persons shall arrive.
Why called thou me to this accursed light?
To these light purposes? I am Emperor
Of that inscrutable darkness, where are hid
All deepest truths, and secrets never seen,
All which I know, and command Legions
Of knowing spirits that can doe more than these.
Any of this my guard that circle me
In these blew fires, and out of whose dim fumes
Vast murmurs use to break, and from their sounds
Articulate voices; can doe ten parts more
Than open such slight truths, as you require.
From the last nights black depth, I called up one
Of the inferior ablest ministers,
And he could not resolve me; send one then
Out of thine own command, to fetch the paper
That Monsieur hath to show to Count Montsurry.
I will: Cartophylax: thou that properly
Hast in thy power all papers so inscribde:
Glide through all bars to it and fetch that paper.
I will.
Till he returns (great prince of darkness)
Tell me, if Monsieur and the Count Montsurry
Are yet encountered.
Both them and the Guise
Are now together.
Show vs all their persons,
And represent the place, with all their actions.
The spirit will strait return: and then Isle show thee:
See he is come; why broughtst thou not the paper?
He hath prevented me, and got a spirit
Raised by another, great in our command
To take the guard of it before I came.
This is your slackness, not t'nuoke our powers
When first your acts, set forth to their effects;
Yet shall you see it, and themselves: behold
They come here &amp; the Earl now holds the paper.
May we not hear them?
No, be still and see.
I will go fetch the paper.
Do not stir:
Ther's too much distance and too many lockes
Twixt you &amp; them: (how near so ever they seem)
For any man to interrupt their secrets.
O honoured spirit: fly into the fancy
Of my offended Lord: and do not let him
Believe what there the wicked man hath written.
Persuasion hath already entered him
Beyond reflection; peace till their departure.
There is a glass of ink wherein you see
How to make ready black faced Tragedy:
You now discern, I hope through all her paintings
Her gasping wrinkles, and fems sepulchres.
Think you he fains my Lord? what hold you now?
Doe we malign your wife: or honour you?
What stricken dumb? nay fie, Lord be not daunted:
Your case is common: were it ne'er so rare
Bear it as rarely: now to laugh were manly:
A worthy man should imitate the weather
That sings in tempests: and being clear is silent.
Go home my Lord, and force your wife to write
Such loving stuff to D'Ambois as she used
When she desired his presence.
Doe my Lord,
And make her name her concealed messenger:
That close and most inennerable Pander
That passes all our studies to exquire:
By whom convey the letter to her love:
And so you shall be sure to have him come
Within the thirsty reach of your revenge;
Before which, lodge an ambush in her chamber
Behind the arras of your stoutest men
All close and soundly armed: and let them share
A spirit amongst them, that would serve a thousand.
Yet stay a little: see she sends for you.
Poor, loving lady, she'll make all good yet,
Think you not so my Lord?
Alas poor soul.
This was ill done y'faith.
T'was nobly done.
And I forgive his Lordship from my soul.
Then much good do it thee Pero: hast a letter?
I hope it be, at least, if not a volume
Of worthy curses for your perjury.
Now out upon her.
Let me see my Lord.
You shall presently: how fares my Pero?
Whose there? take in this maid sh'as caught a clap:
And fetch my surgeon to her; come my Lord,
We will now peruse our letter.
Furies rise
Out of the black lines, and torment his soul.
Hath my Lord slain my woman?
No, she lives.
What shall become of vs?
All I can say
Being called thus late, is brief, and darkly this:
If D'Ambois mistress, stay not her white hand
With his forced blood he shall remain untouched:
So father, shall your self, but by your self:
To make this Augury plainer: when the voice
Of D'Ambois shall invoke me I will rise,
Shining in greater light: and show him all
That will betide ye all; mean time be wise,
And let him curb his rage, with policy.
Will he appear to me, when I invoke him?
He will: be sure.
It must be shortly then:
For his dark words have tied my thoughts on knots
Till he dissolve, and free them.
In mean time
Dear servant, till your powerful voice revoke him,
Be sure to use the policy he advised:
Lest fury in your too quick knowledge taken
Of our abuse, and your defence of me
Accuse me more than any enemy:
And Father, you must on my Lord impose
Your holiest charges, and the churches power
To temper his hot spirit: and disperse
The cruelty and the blood, I know his hand
Will shower upon our heads, if you put not
Your finger to the storm, and hold it up,
As my dear servant here must do with Monsieur.
Isle sooth his plots: and strew my hate with smiles
Till all at once the close mines of my heart
Rise at full date, and rush into his blood:
Isle bind his arm in silk, and rub his flesh,
To make the vain swell, that his soul may gush
Into some konnell, where it longs to lie,
And policy shall be flanckt with policy.
Yet shall the feeling center where wee meet
Groan with the wait of my approaching feet:
Isle make th'inspired threshals of his Court
Sweat with the weather of my horrid steps
Before I enter: yet will I appear
Like calm security, before a ruin;
A politician, must like lightening melt
The very marrow, and not Print the skin:
His ways must not be seen: the superficies
Of the greene center must not taste his feet:
When hell is plowd up with his wounding tracts:
And all his harvest reap't, from hellish facts.
MY Lord remember that your soul must seek
Her peace, as well as your revengeful blood:
You ever, to this hour have proved your self
A noble, zealous, and obedient son,
T'our holy mother: be not an apostate:
Your wives offence serves not, (were it the worst
You can imagine, without greater proofs)
To sever your eternal bonds, and harts;
Much less to touch her with a bloody hand:
Nor is it manly (much less husbandly)
To expiate any frailty in your wife,
With churlish strokes, or beastly odds of strength:
The stony birth of clouds, will touch no laurel:
Nor any sleeper; your wife is your laurel:
And sweetest sleeper; do not touch her then
Be not more rude than the wild seed of vapor,
To her that is more gentle than it rude;
In whom kind nature suffered one offence
But to set of, her other excellence.
Good father leave vs: interrupt no more
The course I must run for mine honour sake.
Rely on my love to her, which her fault
Cannot extinguish; will she but disclose
Who was the hateful minister of her love,
And through what maze he served it, we are friends.
It is a damned work to pursue those secrets,
That would op more sin, and prove springs of slaughter;
Nor is it a path for Christian feet to touch;
But out of all way to the health of souls,
A sin impossible to be forgiven:
Which he that dares commit;
Good father cease:
Tempt not a man distracted; I am apt
To outrages that I shall ever rue:
I will not pass the verge that bounds a Christian,
Nor break the limits of a man nor husband.
Then God inspire ye both with thoughts and deeds
Worthy his high respect, and your own souls.
Who shall remove the mountain from my heart,
Op the seuentimes-heat furnace of my thoughts,
And set fit outcries for a soul in hell?
O now it nothing fits my cares to speak,
But thunder, or to take into my throat
The trump of Heaven; with whose determinate blasts
The winds shall burst, and the enraged seas
Be drunk up in his sounds; that my hot woes
(Vented enough) I might convert to vapour,
Ascending from my infamy unseen;
Shorten the world, preventing the last breath
That kills the living, and regenerates death.
My Lord, my fault (as you may censure it
With too strong arguments) is past your pardon:
But how the circumstances may excuse me
God knows, and your more temperate mind hereafter
May let my penitent miseries make you know.
Hereafter? Tic a supposed infinite,
That from this point will rise eternally:
Fame grows in going; in the scopes of virtue
Excuses damn her: They be fires in Cities
Enraged with those winds that less lights extinguish.
Come Siren, sing, and dash against my rocks
Thy ruffin Galley, laden for thy lust:
Sing, and put all the nets into thy voice,
With which thou drew into thy strumpets lap
The spawn of Venus; and in which ye danced;
That, in thy laps steed, I may dig his tomb,
And quit his manhood with a women's slight,
Who never is deceived in her deceit.
Sing, (that is, write) and then take from mine eyes
The mists that hide the most inscrutable Pander
That ever lapped up an adulterous vomit:
That I may see the devil, and survive
To be a devil, and then learn to wive:
That I may hang him, and then cut him down,
Then cut him up, and with my souls beams search
The cranks and caverns of his brain, and study
The errant wilderness of a women's face;
Where men cannot get out, for all the Comets
That have been lighted at it; though they know
That Adders lie a sunning in their smiles,
That Basilisks drink their poison from their eyes,
And no way there to coast out to their hearts;
Yet still they wander there, and are not stayed
Till they be fettered, nor secure before
All cares distract them; nor in humane state
Till they embrace within their wives two breasts
All Pelion and Cythaeron with their beasts.
Why write you not?
O good my Lord forbear
In wreak of great sins, to engender greater,
And make my loves corruption generate murder.
It follows needefully as child and parent;
The chaine-shot of thy lust is yet aloft,
And it must murder; tic thine own dear twin:
No man can add height to a women's sin.
Vice never doth her just hate so provoke,
As when she rages under virtues cloak.
Write: For it must be; by this ruthless steel,
By this impartial torture, and the death
Thy tyrannies have invented in my entrails,
To quicken life in dying, and hold up
The spirits in fainting, teaching to preserve
Torments in ashes, that will ever last.
Speak: Will you write?
Sweet Lord enjoin my sin
Some other penance than what makes it worse:
Hide in some gloomy dungeon my loathed face,
And let condemned murderers let me down
(Stopping their noses) my abhorred food.
Hang me in chains, and let me eat these arms
That have offended: Bind me face to face
To some dead woman, taken from the Cart
Of Execution, till death and time
In grains of dust dissolve me; Isle endure:
Or any torture that your wraths invention
Can fright all pity from the world withal:
But to betray a friend with show of friendship,
That is too common, for the rare revenge
Your rage affects; here then are my breasts,
Last night your pillows; here my wretched arms,
As late the wished confines of your life:
Now break them as you please, and all the bounds
Of manhood, nobles, and religion.
Where all these have been broken, they are kept,
In doing their justice there: Thine arms have lost
Their privilege in lust, and in their torture
Thus they must pay it.
O Lord.
Till thou writ'st
Isle write in wounds (my wrongs fit characters)
Thy right of sufferance. Write.
O kill me, kill me:
Dear husband be not crueler than death;
You have beheld some Gorgon: Feel, ?? feel
How you are turned to stone; with my heart blood
Dissolve your self again, or you will grow
Into the image of all Tyranny.
As thou art of adultery, I will still
Prove thee my like in ill, being most a monster:
Thus I express thee yet.
And yet I live.
I, for thy monstrous idol is not done yet:
This tool hath wrought enough: now Torture use
This other engine on th'habituate powers
Of her thrice damned and whorish fortitude.
Use the most matting pains in her that ever
Thy venoms sok'd through, making most of death;
That she may weigh her wrongs with them, and then
Stand vengeance on thy steepest rock, a victor.
O who is turned into my Lord and husband?
Husband? My Lord? None but my Lord and husband.
Heaven, I ask thee remission of my sins,
Not of my pains: husband, ?? help me husband.
What rape of honour and religion?
O wrack of nature.
Poor man: ?? my father,
Father? look up; ?? let me down my Lord,
And I will write.
Author of prodigies!
What new flame breaks out of the firmament,
That turns up counsels never known before?
Now is it true, earth moos, and heaven stands still;
Even Heaven it self must see and suffer ill:
The too huge bias of the world hath swayed
Her backe-part upwards, and with that she braves
This Hemisphere, that long her mouth hath mocked:
The gravity of her religious face:
(Now grown too weighty with her sacrilege
And here discerned sophisticate enough)
Turns to th'Antipodes: and all the forms
That her illusions have impressed in her,
Have eaten through her back: and now all see,
How she is riveted with hypocrisy:
Was this the way? was he the mean betwixt you?
He was, he was, kind innocent man he was.
Write, write a word or two.
I will, I will.
Isle write, but in my blood that he may see,
These lines come from my wounds and not from me.
Well might he die for thought: me thinks the frame
And shaken joints of the whole world should crack
To see her parts so disproportionate;
And that his general beauty cannot stand
Without these staines in the particular man.
Why wander I so far? here here was she
That was a whole world without spot to me:
Though now a world of spots; oh what a lightning
Is mans delight in women? what a bubble,
He builds his state, fame, life on, when he marries?
Since all earths pleasures are so short and small,
The way t'nioy it, is t'abiure it all:
Enough: I must be messenger my self,
Disguised like this strange creature: in, Isle after,
To see what guilty light gives this cave eyes,
And to the world sing new impieties.
Sit up to night, and watch, Isle speak with none
But the old friar, who bring to me.
We will Sir.
What violent heat is this? me thinks the fire
Of twenty lives doth on a sudden flash
Through all my faculties: the air goes high
In this close chamber, and the frighted earth!
Trembles, and shrinks beneath me: the whole house
Cracks with his shaken burden; bless me, heaven.
Note what I want, my son, and be forewarnd:
O there are bloody deeds past and to come,
I cannot stay: a fate doth ravish me:
Isle meet thee in the chamber of thy love.
What dismal change is here? the good old Friar
Is murdered; being made known to serve my love;
Note what he wants? he wants his utmost weed,
He wants his life, and body: which of these
Should be the want he means, and may supply me
With any fit forewarning? this strange vision,
(Together with the dark prediction
Used by the Prince of darkness that was raised
By this embodied shadow) stir my thoughts
With reminiscion of the Spirits promise;
Who told me, that by any invocation
I should have power to raise him; though it wanted
The powerful words, and decent rites of art;
Never had my set brain such need of spirit,
T'instruct and cheer it; now then, I will claim,
Performance of his free and gentle vow,
T'appeare in greater light; and make more plain,
His rugged oracle: I long to know
How my dear mistress fares; and be informd
What hand she now holds on the troubled blood
Of her incensed Lord: me thought the Spirit,
(When he had vtterd his perplexed presage)
Threw his changed countenance headlong into clouds;
His forehead bent, as it would hide his face;
He knocked his chin against his darkened breast,
And struck a churlish silence through his pours;
Terror of darkness: O thou King of flames,
That with thy Musique-footed horse dost strike
The clear light out of crystal, on dark earth;
And hurlst instructive fire about the world:
Wake, wake, the drowsy and enchanted night;
That sleeps with dead eyes in this heavy riddle:
Or thou great Prince of shades where never sun
Sticks his far-darted beams: whose eyes are made,
To see in darkness: and see ever best
Where sense is blindest: open now the heart
Of thy abashed oracle: that for fear,
Of some ill it includes, would fine lie hid,
And rise thou with it in thy greater light.
Thus to observe my vow of apparition,
In greater light: and explicate thy fate:
I come; and tell thee that if thou obey
The summons that thy mistress next will send thee,
Her hand shall be thy death.
When will she send?
Soon as I set again, where late I rose.
Is the old Friar slain?
No, and yet lives not.
Died he a natural death?
He did.
Who then,
Will my dear mistress send?
I must not tell thee.
Who lets thee?
Fate.
Who are fates ministers?
The Guise and Monsieur.
A fit pair of shears
To cut the threads of kings, and kingly spirits,
And consorts fit to sound forth harmony,
Set to the false of kingdoms: shall the hand
Of my kind Mistress kill me?
If thou yield,
To her next summons, you're fair warned: farewell.
I must fare well, how ever: though I die
My death consenting with his augury;
Should not my powers obey, when she commands
My motion must be rebel to my will:
My will: to life, If when I have obaid,
Her hand should so reward me: they must arm it,
Bind me and force it: or I lay my soul
She rather would convert it, many times
On her own bosom: even to many deaths:
But were there danger of such violence,
I know tic far from her intent to send:
And who she should send, is as far from thought
Since he is dead, whose only mean she used
Whose there? look to the door: and let him in,
Though politic Monsieur, or the violent Guise.
Hail to my worthy son.
O lying Spirit: welcome loved father
How fares my dearest mistress?
Well, as ever
Being well as ever thought on by her Lord:
Whereof she sends this witness in her hand
And prays, for urgent cause, your speediest presence.
What? writ in blood?
I, tic the ink of lovers.
O tic a sacred witness of her love.
So much elixir of her blood as this
Dropped in the lightest dame, would make her firm
As heat to fire: and like to all the signs,
Commands the life confined in all my veins;
O how it multiplies my blood with spirit,
And makes me apt t'encounter death and hell:
But, come kind Father; you fetch me to heaven,
And to that end your holy weed was given.
Now shall we see, that nature hath no end,
In her great works, responsiue to their words,
That she who makes so many eyes, and souls,
To see and foresee, is stark blind herself:
And as illiterate men say Latin prayers
By root of heart, and daily iteration;
In whose hot zeal, a man would think they knew
What they ran so away with, and were sure
To have rewards proportioned to their labours;
Yet may implore their own confusions
For any thing they know, which oftentimes
It false out they incur: So nature lays
A mass of stuff together, and by use,
Or by the mere necessity of matter,
Ends such a work, fills it, or leaves it empty,
Of strength, or virtue, error or clear truth;
Not knowing what she does; but usually
Gives that which wee call merit to a man,
And believe should arrive him on huge riches,
Honour, and happiness, that effects his ruin;
Right as in ships of war, whole lasts of powder
Are laid (men think) to make them last, and guard them;
When a disordered spark that powder taking,
Blows up with sudden violence and horror
Ships that kept empty, had sailed long with terror.
He that observes, but like a worldly man,
That which doth oft succeed, and by th'euents
Values the worth of things; will think it true,
That nature works at random just with you:
But with as much decorum she may make
A thing that from the feet up to the throat
Hath all the wondrous fabrike man should have,
And leave it headless for an absolute man,
As give a whole man valour, virtue, learning,
Without an end more excellent than those,
On whom she no such worthy part bestows.
Why you shall see it here, here will be one
Young, learned, valiant, virtuous, and full mand;
One on whom Nature spent so rich a hand,
That, with an ominous eye, she wept to see
So much consumed her virtuous treasury;
Yet, as the winds sing through a hollow tree,
And (since it lets them pass through) let it stand
But a tree solid, since it gives no way
To their wilde rages, they rend up by the root:
So this full creature now shall reel and fall,
Before the frantic pufs of purblind chance
That pipes thorough empty men, and makes them dance:
Not so the Sea raves on the Lybian sands,
Tumbling her billows in each others neck:
Not so the surges of the euxine Sea
(Near to the frosty Pole, where free Boots
From those darke-deepe waives turns his radiant Team)
Swell being enraged, even from their inmost drop,
As Fortune swings about the restless state
Of virtue, now thrown into all men's hate.
Revive those stupid thoughts, and sit not thus,
Gathering the horrors of your servants slaughter,
(So urged by your hand, and so imminent)
Into an idle fancy; but devise
How to prevent it; watch when he shall rise,
And with a sudden outcry of his murder,
Blow his retreat before he be engaged.
O father, have my dumb woes waked your death?
When will our humane griefs be at their height?
Man is a tree, that hath no top in cares;
No root in comforts; all his power to live
Is given to no end, but to have power to grieve.
Tic the just curse of our abused creation,
Which wee must suffer here, and scope hereafter:
He hath the great mind that submits to all,
He sees inevitable; he the small
That carps at earth, and her foundation shaker,
And rather than himself, will mend his maker.
Away, (my love) away, thou wilt be murdered.
Murdered? I know not what that Hebrew means:
That word had ne'er been named had all been D'Ambois.
Murdered? By heaven he is my murderer
That shows me not a murderer; what such bug
Abhors not the very sleep of D'Ambois?
Murdered? Who dares give all the room I see
To D'Ambois reach? or look with any odds
His fight in the face, upon whose hand sits death;
Whose sword hath wings, and every feather pierces?
Let in my politic visitants, let them in,
Though entering like so many moving armours,
Fate is more strong than arms, and sly than treason,
And I at all parts buckled in my Fate:
Dare they not come?
They come.
Come all at once.
Back coward murderers, back.
Defend vs heaven.
Come ye not on?
No, slave, nor goosed thou off.
Stand you so firm? Will it not enter here?
You have a face yet: so in thy lifes flame
I burn the first rites to my mistress fame.
Breath thee brave son against the other charge.
O is it true then that my sense first told me?
Is my kind father dead?
He is my love.
It was the Earl my husband in his weed that brought thee.
That was a speeding slight, and well resembled.
Where is that angry Earl my Lord? Come forth
And show your own face in your own affair;
Take not into your noble veins the blood
Of these base villans, nor the light reports
Of blistered tongues, for clear and weighty truth:
But me against the world, in pure defence
Of your rare Lady, to whose spotless name
I stand here as a bulwark, and project
A life to her renown, that ever yet
Hath been untainted even in envies eye,
And where it would protect a sanctuary.
Brave Earl come forth, and keep your scandal in:
Tic not our fault if you enforce the spot,
Nor the wreak yours if you perform it not.
Cowards, a fiend or spirit beat ye off?
They are your own faint spirits that have forged
The fearful shadows that your eyes deluded:
The fiend was in you; cast him out then thus.
Favour (my Lord) my love, ?? favour him.
I will not touch him: Take your life, my Lord,
And be appeased: O then the coward fates
Have maimed themselves, and ever lost their honour.
What have ye done slaves? irreligious Lord?
Forbear them, father; tic enough for me
That Guise and Monsieur, death and destiny
Come behind D'Ambois: is my body then
But penetrable flesh? And must my mind
Follow my blood? Can my divine part add
No aide to th'earthly in extremity?
Then these divines are but for form, not fact:
Man is of two sweet Courtly friends compact;
A mistress and a servant: let my death
Define life nothing but a Courtiers breath.
Nothing is made of nought, of all things made,
Their abstract being a dream but of a shade.
Isle not complain to earth yet, but to heaven,
And (like a man) look upwards even in death.
Prop me, true sword, as thou hast ever done:
The equal thought I bear of life and death,
Shall make me faint on no side; I am up
Here like a Roman Statue; I will stand
Till death hath made me marble: ?? my fame
Live in despite of murder; take thy wings
And haste thee where the gray-eyd morn perfines,
Her Rosie chariot with Sabaean spices,
Fly, where the evening from th'Iberean vales,
Takes on her swarthy shoulders, Heccate
Cround with a grove of oaks: fly where men feel
The burning axeltree: and those that suffer
Beneath the chariot of the Snowy Bear:
And tell them all that D'Ambois now is hasting
To the eternal dwellers; that a thunder
Of all their sighs together (for their frailties
Beheld in me) may quit my worthless fall
With a fit volley for my funeral.
Forgive thy murderers.
I forgive them all;
And you my Lord, their fautor; for true sign
Of which unfeigned remission, take my sword;
Take it, and only give it motion,
And it shall find the way to victory
By his own brightness, and the inherent valour
My fight hath stilled into it, with charms of spirit.
And let me pray you, that my weighty blood
Laid in one scale of your impartial spline
May sway the forfeit of my worthy love
Waid in the other: and be reconcilde
With all forgiveness to your matchless wife.
Forgive thou me dear servant, and this hand
That lead thy life to this unworthy end,
Forgive it, for the blood with which tic stained
In which I writ the summons of thy death:
The forced summons, by this bleeding wound,
By this here in my bosom: and by this
That makes me hold up both my hands embrewd
For thy dear pardon.
O, my heart is broken
Fate, nor these murderers, Monsieur, nor the Guise.
Have any glory in my death, but this:
This killing spectacle: this prodigy:
My sun is turned to blood against whose red beams
Pintos and Ossa (hid in endless snow
Laid on my heart and liver; from their veins)
Melt like two hungry torrents: eating rocks
Into the Ocean of all humane life,
And make it bitter, only with my blood:
O frail condition of strength, valor; virtue,
????????? (like warning fire upon the top
Of some steep Beakon, on a steeper hill)
Made to express it: like a falling star
Silently glanc't, that like a thunderbolt,
Looked to have stuck and shook the firmament.
Son of the earth, whom my unrested soul,
??????es t'haue begotten in the faith of heaven;
(Since thy revengeful Spirit hath rejected
The charity it commands, and the remission
To serve and worship, the blind rage of blood)
Assay to gratulate and pacify,
The soul fled from this worthy by performing
The Christian reconcilement he besought
Betwixt thee and thy Lady, let her wounds
Manlesly digd in her, be easd and cured
With balm of thine own tears: or be assured
Never to rest free from my haunt and horror.
See how she merits this: still sitting by
And mourning his fall, more than her own fault.
Remove, dear daughter, and content thy husband:
So piety wills thee, and thy servants peace.
O wretched piety, that art so distract
In thine own constancy; and in thy right
Must be unrighteous: if I right my friend
I wrong my husband: if his wrong I shun,
The duty of my friend I leave undone;
Ill plays on both sides; here and there, it rises;
No place: no good so good, but ill comprises;
My soul more scruple breeds, than my blood, sin,
Virtue imposes more than any stepdame:
O had I never married but for form,
Never vowed faith but purposd to deceive:
Never made conscience of any sin,
But clok't it privately and made it common:
Nor never honoured been, in blood, or mind,
Happy had I been then, as others are
Of the like licence; I had then been honoured:
Lived without envy: custom had benumbd
All sense of scruple, and all note of frailty:
My fame had been untouched, my heart vnbroken:
But (shunning all) I strike on all offence,
O husband? dear friend? O my conscience?
I must not yield to pity nor to love
So servile and so traitorous: cease my blood
To wrestle with my honour, fame and judgment:
Away, forsake my house, forbear complaints
Where thou hast bred them: here all things full,
Of their own shame and sorrow, leave my house.
Sweet Lord forgive me, and I will be gone,
And till these wounds, that never balm shall close
Till death hath entered at them (so I love them
Being opened by your hands) by death be cured
I never more will grieve you with my sight:
Never endure that any roof shall part
Mine eyes and heaven: but to the open deserts
(Like to hunted Tigers) I will fly:
Eating my heart, shunning the steps of men,
And look on no side till I be arrived.
I do forgive thee, and upon my knees
With hands (held up to heaven) wish that mine honour
Would suffer reconcilement to my love:
But since it will not, honour, never serve
My Love with flourishing object till it starve:
And as this Taper, though it upwards look,
Downwards must needs consume, so let our love;
As having lost his honey, the sweet taste
Runs into savor, and will needs retain
A spice of his first parents, till (like life)
It sees and dies; so let our love: and lastly,
As when the flame is suffered to look up
It keeps his luster: but, being thus turned down
(His natural course of useful light inuerted)
His own stuff puts it out: so let our love,
Now turn from me, as here I turn from thee,
And may both points of heavens strait axeltree
Conioine in one, before thy self and me.
My terrors are struck inward, and no more
My penance will allow they shall enforce
Earthly afflictions but upon my self:
Farewell brave realists of a complete man:
Look up and see thy spirit made a star,
Join flames with Hercules: and when thou set
Thy radiant forehead in the firmament,
Make the vast continent, crack with thy receipt,
Spread to a world of fire: and th'aged sky,
Chere with new sparks of old humanity.

THow blind imperfect Goddess, that delights
(Like a deepe-reaching Statesman) to converse
Only with Fools: Jealous of knowing spirits;
For fear their piercing Judgements might discover
Thy inward weakness, and despise thy power;
Contemn thee for a Goddess; Thou that lad'st
Th'vnworthy Ass with gold; while worth and merit
Serve thee for nought; (weak Fortune) I renounce
Thy vain dependence, and convert my duty
And sacrifices of my sweetest thoughts,
To a more Noble Deity. Sole friend to worth,
And Patronise of all good Spirits, Confidence.
She be my Guide, and hers the praise of these
My worthy undertakings.
MOrrow Brother; Not ready yet?
No; I have somewhat of the Brother in me;
I dare say, your Wife is many times ready, and you not up. Save you sister; how, are you enamoured of my presence? how like you my aspect?
Faith no worse then I did last week, the weather has nothing changed the grain of your complexion.
A firm proof, it is in grain, and so are not all complexions.
A good Soldiers face Sister.
Made to be worn under a Beaver.
I, and it would show well enough under a mask too.
So much for the face.
But is there no object in this suite to whet your tongue upon?
None, but Fortune send you well to wear it: for she best knows how you got it.
Faith, it is the portion she bestows upon younger Brothers, valour, and good clothes: Marry, if you ask how we come by this new suite, I must take time to answer it: for as the Ballad says, in written Books I find it. Brother these are the blossoms of spirit: and I will have it said for my Fathers honour, that some of his children were truly begotten.
Not all?
Shall I tell you brother that I know will rejoice you? my former suites have been all spenders, this shall be
a speeder.
A thing to bee heartily wished; but brother, take heed you be not gulled, be not too forward.
'T had been well for me, if you had followed that counsel: You were too forward when you stepped into the world before me, and gulled me of the Land, that my spy∣ritz and parts were indeed borne too.
May we not have the blessing to know the aim of your fortunes, what coast, for heavens love?
Nay, tic a project of State: you may see the proper∣ration; but the design lies hidden in the breasts of the wise.
May we not know it?
Not unless you'll promise me to laugh at it, for without your applause, Isle none.
The quality of it may bee such as a laugh will not be ill bestowed upon it; pray heaven I call not Arsace sister.
What? the Pandresse?
Know you (as who knows not) the exquisite La∣die of the Palace? The late Governors admired Widow? The rich and haughty Countess Eudora? Were not she a Jewel worth the wearing, if a man knew how to win her?
How's that? how's that?
Brother, there is a certain Goddess called Confi∣dence, that carries a maine stroke in honourable prefer∣mints. Fortune waits upon her; Cupped is at her beck; she sends them both of errands. This Deity doth promise me much assistance in this business.
But if this Deity should draw you up in a basket to your Countesses window, and there let you hang for all the wits in the Town to shoot at: how then?
If she doe, let them shoot their bolts and spare not: I have a little Bird in a Cage here that sings me better comfort. What should be the bar? you'll say, I was Page to the Count her husband. What of that? I have there by one foot in her favour already; She has taken note of my spirit, and surveyed my good parts, and the picture of them lives in her eye: which sleep, I know, can not close, till she have embraced the substance.
All this savours of the blind Goddess you speak of.
Why should I despair, but that Cupped hath one dart in store for her great Ladyship, as well as for any other huge Lady, whom she hath made stoop Gallant, to kiss their worthy followers. In a word, I am assured of my speed. Such fair attempts led by a brave resolve, are e∣uermore seconded by Fortune.
But brother? have I not heard you say, your own ears have been witness to her vows, made solemnly to your late Lord; in memory of him, to preserve till death,
the unstained honour of a Widows bed. If nothing else, yet that might cool your confidence.
Tush sister, suppose you should protest with so∣limn oath (as perhaps you have done, if ever Heaven hears your prayers, that you may live to see my Brother nobly interred) to feed only upon fish, and not endure the touch of flesh, during the wretched Lent of your mi∣serable life; would you believe it Brother?
I am therein most confident.
Indeed, you had better believe it then try it: but pray Sister tell me, you are a woman: doe not you wives nod your heads, and smile one upon an other when ye meet abroad?
Smile? why so?
As who should say, are not we mad Wenches, that can lead our blind husbands thus by the noses? do you not brag amongst your selves how grossly you abuse their ho∣nest credulities? how they adore you for Saints: and you believe it? while you adhorne their temples, and they be∣leeue it not? how you vow Widowhood in their life time, and they believe you, when even in the sight of their breathless corse, ere they be fully cold, you join embraces with his Groom, or his Physician, and perhaps his poiso∣ner; or at least by the next Moon (if you can expect so long) solemnly plight new Hymeneal bonds, with a wild, confident, untamed Ruffine?
As for example.
And make him the top of his house, and sovereign Lord of the Palace, as for example. Look you Brother, this glass is mine.
What of that?
While I am with it, it takes impression from my face; but can I make it so mine, that it shall bee of no use to any other? will it not doe his office to you or you: and as well to my Groom as to my self? Brother, Monopo∣lies are cried down. Is it not madness for me to believe, when I have conquered that Fort of chastity the great
Countess; that if another man of my making, and mettle, shall assault her: her eyes and ears should lose their fun∣ction, her other parts their use, as if Nature had made her all in vain, unless I only had stumbled into her quar∣ters.
Brother: I fear me in your travail, you have drunk too much of that Italian air, that hath infected the whole mass of your ingenuous Nature; dried up in you all sap of generous disposition, poisond the very Es∣sense of your soul, and so polluted your senses, that what∣soever enters there, takes from them contagion, and is to your fancy represented as foul and tainted, which in it self perhaps is spotless.
No sister, it hath refined my senses, and made me see with clear eyes, and to judge of objects, as they truly are, not as they seem, and through their mask to di∣scorn the true face of things. It tells me how short lived Widows tears are, that their weeping is in truth but laughing under a Mask, that they morn in their Gowns, and laugh in their Sleeves, all which I be∣leeue as a Delphian Oracle: and am resolved to burn in that faith. And in that resolution doe I march to the great Lady.
You lose time Brother in discourse, by this had you bore up with the Lady and clapped her aboard, for I know your confidence will not dwell long in the ser∣vice.
No, I will perform it in the Conquerors stile. Your way is, not to win Penelope by suite, but by surprise. The Castle's carried by a sudden assault, that would perhaps sit out a twelue-moneths siege. It would bee a good breeding to my young Nephew here, if hee could procure a stand at the Palace, to see with what alacrity Isle a-coast her Countesship, in what garb I will woo her, with what facility I will win her.
It shall go hard but weal hear your entertain∣meant for your confidence sake.
And having won her Nephew; This sweet face
Which all the City says, is so like me,
Like me shall be preferred, for I will wed thee
To my great widows Daughter and sole Heir,
The lovely spark, the bright Laodice.
A good pleasant dream.
In this eye I see
That fire that shall in me inflame the Mother,
And that in this shall set on fire the Daughter.
It goes Sir in a blood; believe me brother,
These destinies go ever in a blood.
These diseases doe, brother, take heed of them:
Fare you well; Take heed you be not baffeld.
Now thou that art the third blind Deity
That governs earth in all her happiness,
The life of all endowments, Confidence;
Direct and prosper my intention.
Command thy servant Deities, Love and Fortune
To second my attempts for this great Lady,
Whose Page I lately was; That she, whose board
I might not sit at, I may board a bed
And under bring, who bore so high her head.
It is miraculous that you tell me Sir: he come to woo our Lady Mistress for his wife?
It is a frenzy he is possessed with, and will not be cured but by some violent remedy. And you shall favour me so much to make me a spectator of the Scene. But is she (say you) already accessible for Suitors? I thought she would have stood so stiffly on her Widow vow, that she would not endure the sight of a Suitor.
Faith Sir, Penelope could not bar her gates against
her wooers, but she will still be Mistress of her self. It is as you know, a certain Itch in female blood, they love to be sued to: but sheele hearken to no Suitors.
But by your leave Lycus, Penelope is not so wise as her husband Vlysses, for he fearing the jaws of the Siren, stopped his ears with wax against her voice. They that fear the Adders sting, will not come near her hissing. Is any Suitor with her now?
A Spartan Lord, dating himself our great Viceroys Kinsman, and two or three other of his Country Lords, as spots in his train. He comes armed with his Altitudes letters in grace of his person, with promise to make her a Du∣chess if she embrace the match. This is no mean attra∣ction to her high thoughts; but yet she disdains him.
And how then shall my brother presume of accep∣tance? yet I hold it much more under her contentment, to marry such a Nasty braggart, then under her honour to wed my brother: A Gentleman (though I see it) more ho∣nourably descended than that Lord: who perhaps, for all his Ancestry would bee much troubled to name you the place where his Father was borne.
Nay, I hold no comparison betwixt your brother &amp; him. And the Venerean disease, to which they say, he has been long wedded, shall I hope first rot him, ere she en∣dure the savour of his Sulphurous breath. Well, her Lady∣ship is at hand; you're best take you to your stand.
Thanks good friend Lycus.
I Admire Madame, you can not love whom the Viceroy loves.
And one whose veins swell so with his blood, Ma∣dam, as they doe in his Lordship.
A near and dear Kinsman his Lordship is to his Altitude, the Viceroy; In care of whose good speed here. I know his Altitude hath not slept a sound sleep since his departure.
I thank Venus I have, ever since he came.
You sleep away your Honour, Madam, if you no∣glect me.
Neglect your Lordship? that were a negligence no less than disloyalty.
I much doubt that Sir, It were rather a presumpti∣on to take him, being of the blood Viceroiall.
Not at all, being offered Madame.
But offered ware is not so sweet you know. They are the graces of the Viceroy that woo me, not your Lord∣ships, and I conceive it should be neither Honour nor Plea∣sure to you, to be taken in for an other mans favours.
Taken in Madam? you speak as I had no house to hide my head in.
I have heard so indeed, my Lord, unless it be an∣other mans.
You have heard untruth then; These Lords can well witness I can want no houses.
Nor Palaces neither my Lord.
Nor Courts neither.
Nor Temples I think neither; I believe wee shall have a God of him.
SEe the bold fellow; whether will you Sir?
〈◊〉 way, all honour to you Madam?
How now base companion?
Base Madame: hes not base that fights as high as your lips.
And does that beseem my servant?
Your Court-seruant Madam.
One that waited on my board?
That was only a preparation to my weight on your bed Madam.
How dare thou come to me with such a thought?
Come to you Madam? I dare come to you at mid∣night, and bid defiance to the proudest spirit that haunts these your loved shadows; and would any way make terrible the access of my love to you.
Love me? love my dog.
I am bound to that by the proverb Madam.
Kennel without with him, intrude not here. What is it thou presum'st on?
On your judgment Madam, to choose a Man, and not a By but, as these are that come with Titles, and Au∣thoritie, as they would conquer, or ravish you. But I come to you with the liberal and ingenuous Graces, Love, Youth, and Gentry; which (in no more deformed a per∣son then my self) deserve any Princess.
In your saucy opinion Sir, and sirha too; get gone; and let this malapert humour return thee no more, for a∣fore heaven Isle have thee tossed in blanquets.
In blanquets Madam, you must add your sheets, and you must be the Toffer.
Nay then Sir you're as gross as you are saucy.
And all one Sir, for I am neither.
Thou art both.
Thou least; keep up your smiter Lord Rebus.
Uses thou thus his Altitudes Cousin?
The place thou know protects thee.
Tie up your valour then till an other place turn me loose to you, you are the Lord (I take it) that wooed my great Mistress here with letters from his Altitude; which while she was reading, your Lordship (to entertain time) strodl'd and skal'd your fingers; as you would show what an itching desire you had to get betwixt her sheets.
Slight, why does your Lordship endure him?
The place, the place my Lord.
Be you his Attorney Sir.
What would you doe Sir?
Make thee leap out at window, at which thou came in: Whores-sonne bag-pipe Lords.
What rudeness is this?
What tameness is it in you Madam, to stick at the discarding of such a suitor? A lean Lord, dubbed with the lard of others? A diseased Lord too, that opening certain Magic Characters in an unlawful book, vp-start as ma∣ny aches in's bones, as there are ouches in's skin. Send him (Mistress) to the Widow your Tenant; the virtuous Pandresse Arsace. I perceive he has crowns in's Purse, that make him proud of a string; let her pluck the Goose therefore, and her maids dress him.
Still my Lord suffer him?
The place Sir, believe it the place.
O good Lord Rebus; The place is never like to be yours that you need respect it so much.
Thou wrong'st the noble Gentleman.
Noble Gentleman? A tumor, an impostume hee is Madam; a very hault-boy, a bag-pipe; in whom there is nothing but wind, and that none of the sweetest nei∣there.
Quit the House of him by 'thead and Soul∣ders.
Thanks to your Honour Madame, and my Lord Cousin the Viceroy shall thank you.
So shall he indeed sir.
Will you be gone sir?
Away poor Fellows.
What is he made of? or what Devil sees your i will∣dish, and effeminate spirits in him, that thus ye shun him?
Free vs of thy sight;
Be gone, or I protest thy life shall go.
Yet shall my Ghost stay still; and haunt those beauties, and glories, that have rendered it immor∣tall.
But since I see your blood runs (for the time)
High, in that contradiction that fore-runs
Truest agreements (like the Elements
Fighting before they generate;) and that Time
Must be attended most, in things most worth;
I leave your Honour freely; and commend
That life you threaten, when you please, to be
Adventured in your service; so your Honour
Require it likewise.
Doe not come again.
Isle come again, believe it, and again.
If he shall dare to come again, I charge you shut doors upon him.
You must shut them (Madam)
To all men else then, if it please your Honour,
For it that any enter, heal be one.
I hope, wise Sir, a Guard will keep him out.
Before Heaven, not a Guard (ant please your Honour.)
Thou least base Ass; One man enforce a Guard?
Isle turn ye all away (by our Isles Goddess)
If he but set a foot within my Gates.
Your Honour shall doe well to have him poisoned.
Or begged of your Cousin the Viceroy.
This braving wooer, hath the success expected; The favour I obtained, made me witness to the sport; And let his Confidence bee sure, Isle give it him home. The news by this, is blown through the four quarters of the City. Alas good Confidence: but the happiness is he has a forehead of proof; the stain shall never stick there whatsoever his reproach be.
WHat? in discourse?
Hell and the Furies take this vile encounter.
Who would imagine this Saturnian Peacock
Could be so barbarous to use a spirit
Of my direction, with such loved respect?
Fore heaven it cuts my gall; but Isle dissemble it.
What? my noble Lord?
Well Sir, that may be yet, and means to be.
What means your Lordship then to hang that head that hath been so erected; it knocks Sir at your by∣some to come in and hide it self.
Not a jot.
I hope by this time it needs fear no horns.
Well Sir, but yet that blessing runs not always in a blood.
What blanqueted? O the Gods! spurned out by Grooms like a base Bisogno? thrust out by the head and shoulders?
You doe well Sir to take your pleasure of me, (I may turn tables with you ere long.)
What has thy wits fine engine taken cold? art stuff't inth head? can answer nothing?
Truth is, I took my entertainment the better that it was no better.
Now the Gods forbid that this opinion should run in a blood.
Have not you heard this principle, All things by strife engender.
Dogs and Cats doe.
And men and women too.
Well Brother, in earnest, you have now set your confidence to school, from whence I hope 't has brought home such a lesson as will instruct his master never after to begin such attempts as end in laughter.
What Sir, you lesson my Confidence still; I pray heavens your confidence have not more shallow ground (for that I know) then mine you reprehend so.
My confidence? in what?
May be you trust too much.
Wherein?
In humane frailty.
Why brother know you ought that may impeach my confidence, as this success may yours? hath your obe∣seruation discovered any such frailty in my wife (for that is your aim I know) then let me know it.
Good, good. Nay Brother, I write no books of Observations, let your confidence bear out it self, as mine shall me.
That's scarce a Brothers speech. If there be ought wherein your Brothers good might any way be questioned can you conceal it from his bosom?
So, so. Nay my saying was but general. I glanc't at no particular.
Then must I press you further. You spake (as to your self, but yet I ouer-heard) as if you knew some dispo∣sition of weakness where I most had fixed my trust. I chal∣lenge you to let me know what t'was.
Brother? are you wise?
Why?
Be ignorant. Did you never hear of Actaeon?
What then?
Curiosity was his death. He could not be content to adore Diana in her Temple, but he must needs dog her to her retired pleasures, and see her in her nakedness. Doe you enjoy the sole privilege of your wives bed? have you no pretty Paris for your Page? No mystical Atones to front you there?
I think none: I know not.
Know not still Brother. Ignorance and credulity are your sole means to obtain that blessing. You see your greatest Clerks, your wisest Politicians, are not that way fortunate, your learned Lawyers would lose a dozen poor men's causes to gain a lease ant, but for a Term. Your Physician is jealous of his. Your Sages in general, by seeing too much oversee that happiness. Only your block-headly Tradesman; your honest meaning Citizen; your not-headed
Country Gentleman; your vnapprehending Stinckerd is blessed with the sole prerogative of his Wives chamber. For which he is yet beholding, not to his stars, but to his ignorance. For if he be wise, Brother, I must tell you the case alters.
How doe you relish these things Brother?
Passing ill.
So do sick men solid meates: hark you brother, are you not jealous?
No: doe you know cause to make me?
Hold you there; did your wife never spice your broth with a dram of sublimate? hath she not yielded up the Fort of her Honour to a staring Soldado? and (ta∣king courage from her guilt) plaid open banckrout of all shame, and run the Country with him? Then bless your Stars, bow your knees to Iuno. Look where she appears.
We have sought you long Sir, there's a Mes∣senger within, hath brought you letters from the Court, and desires your speech.
I can discover nothing in her looks. Go, Isle not be long.
Sir, it is of weight the bearer says: and besides, much hastens his departure. Honourable Brother! cry mercy! what, in a Conquerors stile? but come and over∣come?
A fresh course.
Alas you see of how slight mettle Widows vows are made.
And that shall you prove too ere long.
Yet for the honour of our sex, boast not abroad this your easy conquest; another might perhaps have staid longer below stairs, but upon your confidence, that sir∣prised her love.
My uncle hath instructed me how to accoast an ho∣norable Lady; to win her, not by suite, but by surprise.
The Whelp and all.
Good Uncle let not your near Honours change your manners, bee not forgetful of your promise to me, touching your Ladies daughter Laodice. My fancy runs so upon it, that I dream every night of her.
A good chicken, go thy ways, thou hast done well; eat bread with thy meat.
Come Sir, will you in?
Isle follow you.
Isle not stir a foot without you. I can not satisfy the messengers impatience.
Will you not resolve me brother?
Of what?
So, there's venue for venue, I have giuen't him 'ith place speeding for all his confidence. Well out of this per∣haps there may bee moulded matter of more mirth, then my baffling. It shall go hard but Isle make my constant sister act as famous a Scene as Virgil did his Mi∣stress; who cause all the Fire in Rome to fail so; that none could light a torch but at her nose. Nowforth: At this house dwells a virtuous Dame, sometimes of worthy Fame, now like a decayed Merchant turned Broker, and retails refuse commodities for unthrifty Gallants. Her wit I must im∣ploy upon this business to prepare my next encounter, but in such a fashion as shall make all split. Ho? Madam Are∣face? pray heaven the Oister-wiues have not brought the news of my wooing hither amongst their stale Pilchards.
WHat? my Lord of the Palace?
Look you.
Why, this was done like a beaten Soldier.
Hark, I must speak with you. I have a share for you in this rich adventure. You must
bee the Ass chardg'd with Crowns to make way to the Fort, and I the Conqueror to follow, and seize it. See thou this jewel?
Is it come to that? why Tomasin.
Madam.
Did not one of the Countesses Serving-men tell vs that this Gentleman was sped?
That he did, and how her honour graced and enter∣tained him in very familiar manner.
And brought him down stairs her self.
I forsooth, and commanded her men to bear him out of doors.
Slight, pelted with rotten eggs?
Nay more, that he had already possessed her sheets.
No indeed Mistress, it was her blanquets.
Out you young hedge-sparrow, learn to tread a∣fore you be fledge.
Well have you done now Lady.
O my sweet kilbuck.
You now, in your shallow pate, think this a dis∣grace to me, such a disgrace as is a bettered helmet on a soldiers head, it doubles his resolution. Say, shall I use thee?
Use me?
O holy reformation! how art thou fallen down from the vpper-bodies of the Church to the skirts of the City! honesty is stripped out of his true substance into ver∣ball nicety. Common sinners startle at common terms, and they that by whole mountains swallow down the deeds of darkness; A poor mote of a familiar word, makes them turn up the white of the eye. Thou art the La∣dies Tenant.
For term Sir.
A good induction, be successful for me, make me Lord of the Palace, and thou shalt hold thy Tenement to thee and thine ears for ever, in free smockage, as of the manner of Panderage, provided always.
Nay if you take me unprovided.
Provided I say, that thou make thy repair to her presently with a plot I will instruct thee in; and for thy su∣rer access to her greatness, thou shalt present her, as from thy self with this jewel.
So her old grudge, stand not betwixt her and me.
Fear not that.
Presents are present cures for female grudges,
Make bad, seeme-good; alter the case with Judges.
SO now we are our selves. Brother, that ill relished speech you let slip from your tongue, hath taken so deep hold of my thoughts, that they will never give me rest, till I be re∣solved what it was you said, you know, touching my wife.
Tush: I am weary of this subject, I said not so.
By truth it self you did: I ouer-heard you. Come, it shall nothing move me, whatsoever it be; pray thee un∣fold briefly what you know.
Why briefly Brother. I know my sister to be the wonder of the Earth; and the Envy of the Heavens. Ver∣tuous, Loyal, and what not. Briefly, I know she hath vowed, that till death and after death, sheele hold inviolate her bonds to you, &amp; that her black shall take no other hew; all which I firmly believe. In brief Brother, I know her to be a woman. But you know brother, I have other irons on th'anuile.
You shall not leave me so unsatisfied; tell me
what tic you know.
Why Brother; if you be sure of your wives loyalty for term of life: why should you be curious to search the Almanacs for after-times: whether some wandering Ae∣neas should enjoy your reversion; or whether your true Turtle would sit mourning on a withered branch, till A∣tropos cut her throat: Beware of curiosity, for who can re∣solve you? you'll say perhaps her vow.
Perhaps I shall.
Tush, her self knows not what she shall doe, when she is transformed into a Widow. You are now a sober and staid Gentleman. But if Diana for your curiosi∣tie should translate you into a monckey; doe you know what gambolds you should play? your only way to bee re∣solved is to die and make trial of her.
A dear experiment, then I must rise again to bee resolved.
You shall not need. I can send you speedier ad∣uertisement of her constancy, by the next Ripier that rides that way with Mackerel. And so I leave you.
All the Furies in hell attend thee; has given me a
Bone to tire on with a pestilence; slight know?
What can he know? what can his eye observe
More then mine own, or the most piercing sight
That ever viewed her? by this light I think
Her priuat'st thought may dare the eye of heaven,
And challenge th'enuious world to witness it.
I know him for a wild corrupted youth,
Whom profane Ruffians, Squires to Bawds, &amp; Strumpets,
Drunkards, spout out of Taverns, into'th sinks
Of Tap-houses, and Stews, Revolts from manhood;
Debauched perdu's, have by their companies
Turned Devil like themselves, and stuffed his soul
With damned opinions, and unhallowed thoughts
Of womanhood, of all humanity,
Nay Deity it self.
WElcome friend Lycus.
Have you met with your capricious brother?
He parted hence but now.
And has he yet resolved you of that point you brake with me about?
Yes, he bids me die for further trial of her constan∣cie.
That were a strange Physic for a jealous patient; to cure his thirst with a draught of poison. Faith Sir, dis∣charge your thoughts an't; think it was but a Buzz deuis'd by him to set your brains a work, and divert your eye from his disgrace. The world hath written your wife in highest lines of honoured Fame: her virtues so admired in this Isle, as the report thereof sounds in foreign ears; and stran∣gers oft arriving here, (as some rare sight) desire to view her presence, thereby to compare the Picture with the ore∣ginall. Nor think he can turn so far rebel to his blood▪
Or to the Truth it self to misconceive
Her spotless love and loyalty; perhaps
Oft having heard you hold her faith so sacred
As you being dead, no man might stir a spark
Of virtuous love, in way of second bonds;
As if you at your death should carry with you
Both branch and root of all affection.
T'may be, in that point hoe's an Infidel,
And thinks your confidence may overween.
So think not I.
Nor I: if ever any made it good.
I am resolved of all, sheele prove no changeling.
Well, I must yet be further satisfied;
And vent this humour by some strain of wit,
Somewhat Isle doe; but what, I know not yet.
PAssion of Virginity, Ianthe, how shall we quit our selves of this Pandresse, that is so importu∣nate to speak with vs? Is she known to be a Pandresse?
I, as well as we are known to be waiting women.
A shrew take your comparison.
Lets cal out Argus that bold Ass that never weighs what he does or says; but walks and talks like one in a sleep; to relate her attendance to my Lady, and present her.
Who? ant please your Honour? None so fit to set on any dangerous exploit.
Ho? Argus?
WHats the matter Wenches?
You must tell my Lady here's a Gentle-wo∣man called Arsace, her Honours Tenant, attends her, to impart important business to her.
I will presently.
Well, she has a welcome present, to bear out her unwelcome presence: and I never knew but a good gift would welcome a bad person to the purest. Arsace?
I Mistress.
Give me your Present; Isle doe all I can, to make way both for it and your self.
You shall bind me to your service Lady.
Stand unseen.
HEre's a Gentle-woman (ant
Please your Honour) one of your Tenants
Desires access to you.
What Tenant? what's her name?
Arsace, she says Madam.
Arsace? what the Bawd?
The Bawd Madam? she strikes, that's without my privity.
Out Ass, know not thou the Pandresse Arsace?
She present your Honour with this Jewel?
This jewel? how came she by such a jewel?
She has had great Customers.
She had need Madam, she sits at a great Rent.
Alas for your great Rent: Isle keep her jewel, and keep you her out, ye were best: speak to me for a Pan∣dress?
What shall we doe?
Go to; Let vs alone. Arsace?
I Lady.
You must pardon vs, we can not obtain your ac∣cesse.
Mistress Sthenio, tell her Honour, if I get not ac∣cesse to her, and that instantly shoe's undone.
This is some-thing of importance. Madam, she swears your Honour is undone if she speak not with you instantly.
Undone?
Pray her for her Honours sake to give me instant access to her.
She makes her business your Honour Madame, and entreats for the good of that, her instant speech with you.
How comes my Honour in question? Bring her to me.
Our Cypriane Goddess save your good Honour.
Stand you off I pray: How dare you Mistress importune access to me thus, considering the last warning I gave for your absence?
Because, Madam, I have been moved by your Ho∣nurse last most chaste admonition, to leave the offensive life.
I led before.
I? have you left it then?
I, I assure your Honour, unless it be for the pleasure of two or three poor Ladies, that have prodigal Knights to their husbands.
Out on thee Impudent.
Alas Madam, wee would all bee glad to live in our callings.
Is this the reformed life thou talk on?
I beseech your good Honour mistake me not, I boast of nothing but my charity, that's the worst.
You get these jewels with charity, no doubt. But whats the point in which my Honour stands endangered I pray?
In care of that Madam, I have presumed to offend your chasteies with my presence. Hearing it reported for truth and generally, that your Honour will take to husband a young Gentleman of this City called Tharsalio.
I take him to husband?
If your Honour does, you are utterly undone, for hoe's the most incontinent, and insatiate Man of Wo∣men that ever VENVS blessed with ability to please them.
Let him be the Devil; I abhor his thought, and could I be informed particularly of any of these slanderers of mine Honour, he should as dearly dare it, as any thing wherein his life were endangered.
Madam, the report of it is so strongly confident, that I fear the strong destiny of marriage is at work in it. But if it bee Madam: Let your Honours known virtue resist and defy it for him: for not a hundred will serve his one turn. I protest to your Honour, When (VE∣NVS pardon me) I winckt at my vnmaidenly exer∣cise. I have known nine in a Night made mad with his love.
What tell thou me of his love? I tell thee I ab∣whore him; and destiny must have an other mould
for my thoughts, then Nature or mine Honour, and a Witchcraft aboue both, to transform me to an∣other shape, as soon as to an other conceit of him.
Then is your good Honour just as I pray for you, and good Madam, even for your virtues sake, and com∣fort of all your Dignities, and Possessions; fix your whole Woman-hood against him. Hee will so enchant you, as never man did woman: Nay a Goddess (say his light housewives) is not worthy of his sweetness.
Go to, be gone.
Dear Madam, your Honours most perfect admo∣nitions have brought me to such a hate of these imperfe∣ctions, that I could not but attend you with my duty, and urge his unreasonable manhood to the fill.
Man-hood, quoth you?
Nay Beastly-hood, I might say, indeed Ma∣dam, but for saving your Honour; Nine in a night said I?
Go to, no more.
No more Madame? that's enough one would think.
Well be gone I bid thee.
Alas Madam, your Honour is the chief of our Ci∣tie, and to whom shall I complain of these inchastities, (being your Ladyships reformed Tenant) but to you that are chastest?
I pray thee go thy ways, and let me see this refor∣motion you pretend continued.
I humbly thank your good Honour, that was first cause of it.
Here's a complaint as strange as my Suitor.
I beseech your good Honour think upon him, make him an example.
Yet again?
All my duty to your Excellence.
These sorts of licentious persons, when they are
once reclaimed, are most vehement against licence. But it is the course of the world to dispraise faults &amp; use them; that so we may use them the safer. What might a wise Widow resolve upon this point now? Contentment is the end of all wordly beings: Beshrow her; would she had spared her news.
See if she take not a contrary way to free her self of vs.
You must complain to his Altitude.
All this for trial is; you must endure
That will have wives, nought else, with them is sure.
HAst thou been admitted then?
Admitted? I, into her heart, Isle able it; never was man so praised with a dispraise; nor so spoken for in being railed on. Isle give you my word; I have set her hart upon as tickle a pin as the needle of a Dial; that will never let it rest, till it be in the right position.
Why dost thou imagine this?
Because I saw Cupped shoot in my words, and open his wounds in her looks. Her blood went and came of errands betwixt her face and her heart; and these changes I can tell you are shrewd tell-tales.
Thou speak like a Doctrisse in thy faculty; but howsoever, for all this foil, Isle retriue the game once a∣gain, hoe's a shallow gamester that for one displeasing cast gives up so fair a game for lost.
Well, it was a villainous invention of thine, and had a swift operation, it took like sulphur. And yet this ver∣tuous Countess hath to my ear spun out many a tedious lecture of pure sisters thread against concupiscence. But e∣for with such an affected zeal, as my mind gave me, she had a kind of secret titillation to grace my poor house sometimes; but that she feared a spice of the Sciatica, which as you know ever runs in the blood.
And as you know, sokes into the bones. But to say truth, these angry heats that break out at the lips of these straight laced Ladies, are but as symptoms of a lustful fever that boils within them. For wherefore rage wives at their husbands so, when they fly out, for zeal against the sin?
No, but because they did not purge that sin.
You are a notable Siren, and I swear to thee, if I prosper, not only to give thee thy mannor-house gratis, but to marry thee to some one Knight or other, and bury thy trade in thy Ladyship: Go be gone.
WHat news Lycus? whore's the Lady?
Retired into her Orchard.
A pregnant badge of love, shoe's melancholy.
It is with the sight of her Spartan wooer. But how∣soever tic with her, you have practised strangely upon your Brother.
Why so?
You had almost lifted his wit off the hinges. That spark jealousy falling into his dry melancholy brains, had well near set the whole house on fire.
No matter, let it work; I did but pay him in's own coin; Sfoot hee plied me with such a volley of un∣seasoned scoffs, as would have made Patience it self turn Ruffine, attiring it self in wounds and blood: but is his humour better qualified then?
Yes, but with a medicine ten parts more dangerous then the sickness: how know you strange his dotage ever was on his wife; taking special glory to have her love and loyalty to him so renowned abroad. To whom she often∣times hath vowed constancy after life, till her own death had brought forsooth, her widdow-troth to bed. This he ioi'd in strangely, and was therein of infallible belief, till your surmise began to shake it; which hath loosed it so, as now there's nought can settle it, but a trial, which hoe's resolved upon.
As how man? as how?
Hee is resolved to follow your advise, to die, and make trial of her stablenesse, and you must lend your hand to it.
What to cut's throat?
To forge a rumour of his death, to uphold it by cir∣cumstance, maintain a public face of mourning, and all things appertaining.
I, but the means man: what time? what probabi∣litie.
Nay, I think he has not licked his Whelp into full shape yet, but you shall shortly hear ant.
And when shall this strange conception see light?
Forthwith: there's nothing stays him, but some odd business of import, which hee must wind up; least perhaps his absence by occasion of his intended trial bee prolonged aboue his aims.
Thanks for this news in faith. This may perhaps prove happy to my Nephew. Truth is I love my sister well and must acknowledge her more then ordinary virtues. But she hath so possessed my brothers heart with vows, and disauowings, sealed with oaths of second nuptials; as in that confidence, hee hath invested her in all his state, the ancient inheritance of our Family: and left my Nephew and the rest to hang upon her pure devotion; so as he dead, and she matching (as I am resolved she will) with some young Prodigal; what must ensue, but her post-issue beg∣gerd, and our house already sinking, buried quick in ruin. But this trial may remove it, and since tic come to this; mark but the issue Lycus, for all these solemn vows, if I doe not make her prove in the handling as weak as a wa∣fer; say I lost my time in travail. This resolution then has set his wits in joint again, hoe's quiet.
Yes, and talks of you again in the fairest manner, listens after your speed.
Nay hoe's passing kind, but I am glad of this trial for all that.
Which he thinks to be a flight beyond your wing.
But hee will change that thought ere long. My Bird you saw even now, sings me good news, and makes hopeful signs to me.
Somewhat can I say too, since your messengers de∣parture, her Ladyship hath been something altered, more pensive then before, and took occasion to question of you, what your addictions were? of what taste your humour was? of what cut you wore your wit, and all this in a kind of disdainful scorn.
Good Calendars Lycus. Well Isle pawn this ie∣well with thee, my next encounter shall quite alter my bro∣theirs judgment. Come lets in, he shall commend it for a discreet and honourable attempt.
Men's judgments sway on that side fortune leanes,
Thy wishes shall assist me:
And my means.
I Must confess I was ignorant, what it was to court a Lady till now.
And I pray you what is it now?
To court her I perceive, is to woo her with letters from Court, for so this Spartan Lords Court discipline teaches.
His Lordship hath procured a new Packet from his Altitude.
If he bring no better ware then letters in's packet, I shall greatly doubt of his good speed.
If his Lordship did but know how gracious his A∣spect is to my Lady in this solitary humour.
Well these retired walks of hers are not usual; and bode some alteration in her thoughts. What may bee the cause Sthenio.
Nay twould trouble Argus with his hundred eyes to descry the cause.
Venus keep her upright, that she fall not from
the state of her honour; my fear is that some of these Ser∣pentine suitors will tempt her from her constant vow of widowhood. If they doe, good night to our good days.
It were a sin to suspect her; I have been witness to so many of her fearful protestations to our late Lord a∣against that course, to her infinite oaths imprinted on his lips, and sealed in his heart with such imprecations to her bed, if ever it should receive a second impression, to her o∣pen and often detestations of that incestuous life (as she termed it) of widows marriages, as being but a kind of lawful adultery; like usury permitted by the law, not ap∣proved. That to wed a second, was no better then to cuc∣kold the first: That women should entertain wedlock as one body, as one life, beyond which there were no desire, no thought, no repentance from it, no restitution to it. So as if the conscience of her vows should not restrain her, yet the worlds shame to break such a constant resolution, should repress any such motion in her.
Well, for her vows, they are gone to heaven with her husband, they bind not upon earth: And as for Wo∣men's resolutions, I must tell you, The Planets, &amp; (as Ptolo∣my says) the winds have a great stroke in them. Trust not my learning if her late strangeness, and exorbitant solitude, be not hatching some new Monster.
Well applied Argus; Make you husbands Mon∣sters?
I spoke of no husbands, but you Wenches have the pregnant wits, to turn Monsters into husbands, as you turn husbands into monsters.
Well Ianthe, it were high time we made in, to part our Lady and her Spartan wooer.
We shall appear to her like the two fortunate Stars in a tempest, to save the shipwreck of her patience.
I, and to him to, I believe; For by this time he hath spent the last dram of his news.
That is, of his wit.
Just good wittals.
If not, that my Lady be not.
too deep in her new dumps, we shall hear from his Lord∣ship; what such a Lord said of his wife the first night hee embraced her: To what Gentleman such a Count was be∣holding for his five children. What young Lady, such an old Count should marry; what Revels: what present∣mints are towards; and who penned the Pegmas; and so forth: and yet for all this, I know her harsh Suitor hath tired her to the uttermost scruple of her forbearances, and will doe more, unless we two, like a pair of Sheres, cut a-sun∣der the thread of his discourse.
Well then, lets in; But my masters, waite you on your charge at your perils, See that you guard her approach from any more intruders.
Excepting young Tharsalio.
True, excepting him indeed, for a guard of men is not able to keep him out ant please your Honour.
O Wenches, that's the property of true valour, to promise like Pigmy, and perform like a Giant. If hee come, Isle bee sworn Isle doe my Ladies commandment upon him.
What? beat him out?
If hee should, Tharsalio would not take it ill at his hands, for he does but his Ladies commandment.
WEll, by Hercules he comes not here.
By Venus but hee does: or else she hath heard my Ladies prayers, and sent some gracious spirit in his likeness to fright away that Spartan wooer, that hints her.
There stand her Sentinels.
Slight the Ghost appears again.
Save ye my quondam fellows in Arms; save ye; my women.
Your Women Sir?
Twill be so. What no courtesies? No preparation of grace? observe me I advise you for your own sakes.
For your own sake, I advise you to pack hence, lest
your impudent valour cost you dearer then you think.
What senseless boldness is this Tharsalio?
Well said Clinias, talk to him.
I wonder that notwithstanding the shame of your last entertainment, and threatenings of worse; you would yet presume to trouble this place again.
Come you're a widgine; Off with your hat Sir, ac∣knowledge: forecast is better then labour. Are you squint eyed? can you not see before you. A little foresight I can tell you might sted you much as the Stars shine now.
It is well sir, tic not for nothing your brother is a∣shamed on you. But Sir, you must know, wee are chardg'd to bar your entrance.
But Wifler, know you, that who so shall dare to execute that charge, Isle be his Executioner.
By Jove, Clinias, me thinks, the Gentleman speaks very honourably.
Well I see this house needs reformation, here's a fellow stands behind now, of a forwarder insight then ye all. What place hast thou?
What place you please Sir.
Law you Sir. Here's a fellow to make a Gentle∣man Usher Sir, I discharge you of the place, and doe here invest thee into his room, Make much of thy hair, thy wit will suit it rarely. And for the full possession of thine of∣fice; Come, Usher me to thy Lady: and to keep thy hand supple, take this from me.
No bribes Sir, ant please your Worship.
Go to, thou dost well; but pocket it for all that; it's no impair to thee: the greatest do it.
Sir, tic your love only that I respect, but since out of your love you please to bestow it upon me, It were want of Courtship in me to refuse it; Isle acquaint my Lady with your coming. 
How say by this? have not I made a fit choice, that hath so soon attained the deepest mystery of his pro∣fession: Good sooth Wenches, a few curtsies had not
been cast away upon your new Lord.
Weal believe that, when our Lady has a new Son of your getting.
WHats the matter? whose that, you say, is come?
The bold Gentleman, ant please your Honour.
Why thou flering Ass thou.
Ant please your Honour.
Did not I forbid his approach by all the charge and duty of thy service?
Madam, this fellow only is intelligent; for he true∣lie understood your command according to the stile of the Court of Venus; that is, by contraries: when you forbid you bid.
By heaven Isle discharge my house of ye all.
You shall not need Madame, for I have already cashiered your officious Usher here, and chos'd this for his Successor.
O incredible boldness!
Madam, I come not to command your love with enforced letters, nor to woo you with tedious stories of my Pedigree, as hee who draws the thread of his descent from Ledas Distaff; when it is well known his Grandsire cried Coniskins in Sparta.
Whom mean you Sir?
Sir, I name none, but him who first shall name himself.
The place Sir, I tell you still; and this Goddesses fair presence, or else my reply should take a far other form upon it.
If it should Sir, I would make your Lordship an anser.
Anser's Latin for a Goose, ant please your honour.
Well noted Gander; and what of that?
Nothing, ant please your Honour, but that he said he
would make his Lordship an answer.
Thus every fool mocks my poor Suitor. Tell me thou most frontlesse of all me, did thou (when thou had means to note me best) ever observe so base a tem∣per in me, as to give any glance at stooping to my Was∣sall?
Your drudge Madam, to doe your drudgery.
Or am I now so scant of worthy Suitors, that may advance mine honour; advance my estate; strengthen my alliance (if I list to wed) that I must stoop to make my foot my head.
No but your side, to keep you warm a bed. But Madame vouchsafe me your patience to that points serious answer. Though I confess to get higher place in your graces, I could wish my fortunes more honourable; my person more gracious; my mind more adorned with No∣ble and Heroical virtues, yet Madame (that you think not your blood disparadg'd by mixture with mine) deign to know this: howsoever I once, only for your love, dis∣guessed my self in the service of your late Lord and mine, yet my descent is as honourable as the proudest of your Spartan attempters; who by unknown quills or conduits under ground, draws his Pedigree from Lycurgus his great Toe, to the Viceroys little finger, and from thence to his own elbow, where it will never leave itching.
Tic well Sir, presume still of the place.
Sfoot Madame, am I the first great personage that hath stooped to disguises for love? what think you of our Countrymen Hercules; that for love put on Omphales Apron, and sate spinning amongst her Wenches, while his Mistress wore his Lyons skin and Lamb-skin'd him, if he did not his business.
Most fitly thou resembl'st thy self to that violent Atlas, that claimed all other men's possessions as his own by his mere valour. For what less hast thou done? Come into my house, beat away these Honourable persons?
That I will Madam. Hence ye Sparta Velvet.
Hold, she did not mean so.
Away I say, or leave your lives I protest here.
Well Sir, his Altitude shall know you.
Isle doe your errand Sir.
Doe good Cousin Altitude; and beg the reversion of the next Lady: for Dido has betrothed her love to me. By this fair hand Madam, a fair riddance of this Caledonian Bore.
O most prodigious audaciousness!
True Madam; O fie upon am, they are intolerable. And I can not but admire your singular virtue of patience, not common in your sex; and must therefore carry with it some rare endowment of other Masculine and Heroical virtues. To hear á rude Spartan court so ingenuous a Lady, with dull news from Athens, or the Vicerois court; how many dogs were spoiled at the last Bull-baiting; what Ladies dubbed their husbands Knights, and so forth.
But hast thou no shame? No sense of what disdain I showed thee in my last entertainment? chacing thee from my presence, and charging thy duty, not to attempt the like intrusion for thy life; and dare thou yet approach me in this unmannerly manner? No question this desperate boldness can not choose but go accompanied with other infinite rudenesses.
Good Madam, give not the Child an unfit name, term it not boldness, which the Sages call true confidence, founded on the most infallible Rock of a women's con∣stance.
If shame can not restrain thee, tell me yet if any brainless fool would have tempted the danger attending thy approach.
No Madam, that proves I am no Fool: Then had I been here a Fool, and a base low-sprited Spartan, if for a Ladies froune, or a Lords threats, or for a Guard of Grooms, I should have shrunk in the wetting, and suf∣fer'd such a delicious flower to perish in the stalk, or to be sauadgely plucked by a profane finger. No Madam: First
let me be made a Subject for disgrace; let your remorseless Guard seize on my despised body, bind me hand and foot, and hurl me into your Ladyships bed.
O Gods: I protest thou dost more and more make me admire thee.
Madam, ignorance is the mother of admiration: know me better, and you'll admire me less.
What would thou have me know? what seeks thy coming? why dost thou hant me thus?
Only Madam, that the Aetna of my sighs, and No∣lus of my tears, poured forth in your presence, might wit∣ness to your Honour the hot and moist affection of my hart, and work me some measure of favour, from your sweet tongue, or your sweeter lips, or what else your good Lady∣ship shall esteem more conducible, to your divine con∣tentment.
Pen and Inkhorn I thank thee. This you learned when you were a Serving-man.
Madam, I am still the same creature; and I will so tie my whole fortunes to that stile, as were it my happiness (as I know it will be) to mount into my Lords succession, yet vow I never to assume other Title, or State, then your servants: Not approaching your board, but bidden: Not pressing to your bed, but your pleasure shall be first known if you will command me any service.
Thy vows are as vain as a Ruffians oaths; as com∣mon as the air; and as cheap as the dust. How many of the light housewives, thy Muses, hath thy love promised this service besides, I pray thee?
Compare shadows to bodies, Madam; Pictures to the life; and such are they to you, in my valuation.
I see words will never free me of thy boldness, and will therefore now use blows; and those of the more∣tallest enforcement. Let it suffice Sir, that all this time, and to this place, you enjoy your safety; keep back: No one foot follow me further; for I protest to thee, the next threshold past, lets pass a prepared Ambush to thy latest
breath.
This for your Ambush, He draws. Dare my love with death?
Slight; follow ant please your Honour.
Not I by this light.
I hope Gentle-women you will.
Not we Sir, we are no porters of frays.
Faith nor Isle be any breaker of customs.
WOuld any heart of Adamant, for satisfy∣ction of an ungrounded humour, rack a poor Ladies innocence as you intend to doe. It was a strange curiosity in that Emperor, that ripped his Mothers womb to see the place he lay in.
Come do not lode me with volumes of persuasion; I am resolved, if she be gold she may abide the taste, lets away, I wonder where this wild brother is.
SIr.
I pray thee wife show but thy self a woman; and be silent: question no more the reason of my journey, which our great Viceroys charge urged in this letter doth enforce me to.
Let me but see that letter, there is something in this presaging blood of mine, tells me this sudden journey can portend no good, resolve me sweet, have not I given you cause of discontent, by some misprision, or want of fit obe∣seruance, let me know that I may wreak my self upon my self.
of art to cover your buck points; which a blunt and resolute encounter, taken under a fortunate aspect, easily disarms you off; and then alas what are you? poor na∣ked sinners, God wot: weak paper walls thrust down with a finger; this is the way on it, boil their appetites to a full height of lust; and then take them down in the nick.
Is there probability in this; that a Lady so great, so virtuous, standing on so high terms of honour, should so soon stoop?
You would not wonder sister, if you knew the lure she stoo'pt at: greatness? think you that can curb affe∣ction; no, it whets it more; they have the full stream of blood, to bear them: the sweet gale of their sublimed spy∣ritz to drive them: the calm of ease to prepare them: the sun-shine of fortune to allure them: Greatness to waft them safe through all Rocks of infamy: when youth, wit, and person come aboard once, tell me sister, can you choose but hoes sail, and put forward to the maine?
But let me wonder at this frailty yet; would she in so short time wear out his memory, so soon wipe from her eyes, nay, from her heart, whom I my self, and this whole Isle besides, still remember with grief, the impres∣zion of his loss taking worthily such root in vs; howe think you Wife?
I am ashamed ant, and abhor to think,
So great and vowed a pattern of our sex,
Should take into her thoughts, nay to her bed,
(O stain to woman-hood) a second love.
In so short time.
In any time.
No wife.
By Iuno no; sooner a loathsome Tod.
High words believe me, and I think sheele keep them; next turn is yours Nephew; you shall now marry my noblest Ladie-Daughter; the first marriage in Paphos; next my nuptials shall be yours; these are strange occur∣rents
brother, but pretty and pathetic: if you see me in my chair of Honour; and my Countess in mine arms; you will then believe, I hope, I am Lord of the Palace, then shall you try my great Ladies entertainment; see your hands freed of me, and mine taking you to ad∣uancement.
Well, all this rids not my business; wife you shall bee there to partake the unexpected honour of our House. Lycus, and I will make it our recreation by the way, to think of your Revels and Nuptial sports; Brother my stay hath been for you; Wife pray thee bee gone, and soon prepare for the solemnity, a Month returns me.
Heavens guide your journey.
Fare-will.
Fare-well Nephew; prosper•• virility, but doe you hear; keep your hand from your voice, I have a part for you in our Hymencall show.
You speak too late for my voice, but Isle discharge the part.
Occurrents call ye them; soul shame confound them all; that impregnable Fort of chastity and loyalty, that amazement of the world; O ye Deities could no∣thing restrain her? I took her spirit to bee too haughty for such a depression.
But who commonly more short held; then they that are high 'ith in-step.
Me thinks yet shame should have controlled so sudden an appetite.
Tush, shame doth extinguish lust as oil doth fire,
The blood once hot, shame doth inflame the more,
What they before, by art dissembled most
They act more freely; shame once found is lost;
And to say truth Brother; what shame is due to it? or what congruence doth it carry, that a young Lady, Gallant, Vigorous, full of Spirit, and Complexion; her appetite new whetted with Nuptial delights;
to be confined to the speculation of a deaths head, or for the loss of a husband, the world affording flesh enough, make the noone-tide of her years, the sunne-set of her plea∣sures.
And yet there have been such women.
Of the first stamp perhaps, when the metal was pu∣rer then in these degenerate days; of later years, much of that coin hath been counterfeit, and besides so cracked and worn with use, that they are grown light, and in∣deed fit for nothing, but to be turned over in play.
Not all brother.
My matchless sister only excepted: for she, you know is made of an other mettle, then that she borrowed of her mother. But doe you brother sadly intend the pur∣suite of this trial?
Irrevocably.
Its a high project: if it be once raised, the earth is too weak to beat so weighty an accident, it cannot bee con∣iur'd down again, without an earth-quake, therefore be∣leeue she will be constant.
No, I will not.
Then believe she will not be constant.
Neither, I will believe nothing but what trial en∣forces; will you hold your promise for the governing of this project with skill, and secrecy?
If it must needs bee so. But hark you brother; have you no other Capricions in your head to entrap my sister in her frailty, but to prove the firmness of her wid∣dow vows after your supposed death.
None in the world.
Then here's my hand, Isle be as close, as my Ladies shoe to her foot that pinches and pleases her, and will bear on with the plot, till the vessel split again.
Forge any death, so you can force belief. Say I was poisoned, drowned.
Hanged.
Any thing, so you assist it with likely circumstance,
I need not instruct you: that must bee your employment Lycus.
Well Sir.
But brother you must set in to; to countenance truth out, a hearse there must be too; Its strange to think how much the eye prevails in such impressions; I have marckt a Widow, that just before was seen pleasant e∣nough, follow an empty hearse, and weep devoutly.
All those things leave to me.
But brother for the bestowing of this hearse in the monument of our Family, and the marshaling of a Few∣nerall.
Leave that to my care, and if I doe not doe the mourner, as lively as your Heir, and weep as lustily as your Widow, say there's no virtue in Onions; that being done, Isle come to visit the distressed widow; apply old ends of comfort to her grief, but the burden of my song shall be to tell her words are but dead comforts; and therefore counsel her to take a living comfort; that might Ferrit out the thought of her dead husband, and will come pre∣par'd with choice of suitors; either my Spartan Lord for grace at the Viceroys Court, or some great Lawyer that may soder up her cracked estate, and so forth. But what would you say brother, if you should find her married at your arrival.
By this hand split her Wezand.
Well, forget not your wager, a stately chariot with four brave Horses of the Thracian breed, with all appur∣tenances. Isle prepare the like for you, if you prove Vi∣ctor; but well remembered, where will you lurk the whiles?
Mewed up close, some short days journey hence, Lycus shall know the place, write still how all things pass, brother adieu; all joy attend you.
Will you not stay our nuptial now so near.
I should be like a man that hears a tale And heeds it not; one absent from himself, my wife
shall attend the Countess, and my Son.
Whom you shall here at your return call me father, adieu: Jove be your speed.
My Nuptials done, your Funerals succeed.
A Hall, a hall: who's without there?
 Come on, you're proper Grooms, are ye not? Slight I think you're all Bridegrooms, ye take your pleasures so. A company of dormice. Their Honours are upon com∣ming, and the room not ready. Rushes and seats in∣stantly.
Now, alas fellow Argus, how thou art comberd with an office?
Perfume sirrha, the roome's dampish.
Nay you may leave that office to the Ladies, theyle perfume it sufficiently.
Cry mercy Sir, here's a whole Chorus of Syluans at hand, cornetting, &amp; tripping ath' toe, as the ground they trod on were too hot for their feet. The device is rare; and there's your young Nephew too, he hangs in the clouds Deified with Hymens shape.
Is he perfect in's part? has not his tongue learned of the Syluans to trip ath' Toe?
Sir, believe it, he does it pretiously for accent and action, as if hee felt the part he plaid: hee rauishes all the young Wenches in the Palace: Pray Venus my young Lady Laodice have not some little prick of Cupped in her, shoe's so diligent it's rehearsals.
No force, so my next vows be heard, that if Cupped have pricked her, Hymen my cure her.
You mean your Nephew Sir that presents Hymen.
Why so, I can speak nothing but thou art with in me: fie of this wit of thine, twill be thy destruction. But howsoever you please to understand, Hymen send the boy
no worse fortune: And whore's my Ladies honour?
At hand Sir, with your vnparagond sister, please you take your chair of Honour Sir?
Most serviceable Argus, the Gods reward they ser∣vice; for I will not.
COme sister, now we must exchange that name
For stranger Titles, let's dispose our selves
To entertain these Sylvan Revellers.
That come to grace our loved Nuptials,
I fear me we must all turn Nymphs to night,
To side those sprightly wood-Gods in their dances;
Can you do it nimbly sister? slight what ail you, are you not well?
Yes Madam.
But your looks, me thinks, are cloudy; suiting all the Sunne-shine of this clear honour to your husbands house.
Is there ought here that sorts not with your liking?
Blame her not Mistress, if her looks show care.
Excuse the Merchants sadness that hath made
A doubtful venture of his whole estate;
His livelihood, his hopes, in one poor bottom,
To all encounters of the Sea and storms.
Had you a husband that you loved as well,
Would you not take his absent plight as ill?
Cavil at every fancy? Not an object
That could present it self, but it would forge
Some vain objection, that did doubt his safety;
True love is ever full of jealousy.
Jealous? of what? of every little journey?
Mere fancy then is wanton; and doth cast
At those slight dangers there, too doting glances;
Misgiving minds ever provoke mischances:
Shines not the Sun in his way bright as here?
Is not the air as good? what hazard doubt you?
His horse may stumble if it please your Honour;
The rain may wet, the wind may blow on him;
Many shrewd hazards watch poor travellers.
True, and the shrewdest thou hast reckend vs.
Good sister, these cares fit young married wives.
Wives should be still young in their husbands loves.
Time bears no Since should bear down them before him.
Our lives he may cut short, but not our loves.
Sister be wise, and ship not in one Bark,
All your ability: if he miscarry,
Your well tried wisdom should look ont for new.
I wish them happy winds that run that course,
From me tic far; One Temple sealed our troth.
One Tomb, one hour shall end, and shroud vs both.
Well, you're a Phoenix, there be that your cheer
Love, with your husband be, your wisdom here.
Hark, our sports challenge it; Sit dearest Mistress.
Take your place worthiest servant.
Serve me heaven.
As I my heavenly Mistress, Sit rare sister.
Hymen descends; and six Syluanes enter be∣neath, with Torches.
A hall, a hall: let no more Citizens in there.
O, Not my Cousin see; but Hymens self.
He does become it most enflamingly.
Hail honoured Bridegroom, and his Princely bride
With the most famed for virtue, Cynthia;
And this young Lady, bright Laodice,
One rich hope of this noblest Family.
Hark how he courts: he is enamoured too.
O grant it Venus, and be ever honoured.
In grace and love of you, I Hymen searched
The groves and thickets that embrace this Palace
With this clear-stam'd, and good aboding Torch
For summons of these fresh and flowery Syluans,
To this fair presence; with their winding Hays,
Active and Antique dances to delight
Your frolic eyes, and help to celebrate
These noblest nuptials; which great Destiny,
Ordained past custom and all vulgar object
To be the readuancement of a house,
Noble and Princely, and restore this Palace
To that name, that six hunderd Summers since
Was in possession of this Bridegrooms Ancetors,
The ancient and most vertue-fam'd Lysandri.
Syluans! the Courtships you make to your Dryads,
Use to this great Bride, and these other Dames,
And heighten with your sports, my nuptial flames.
O would himself descend, and me command.
Dance; and his heart catch in an others hand.
Now, what the Power and my Torches influence
Hath in the blessings of your Nuptial joys
(Great Bride and Bridegroom) you shall amply part
Betwixt your free loves, and forgo it never.
Thanks to great Hymen, and fair Syluanes ever.
I Hope Sir by this time.
Put on man, by our selves.
The edge of your confidence is well taken off; would you not bee content to with-draw your
wager?
Faith fellow Lycus, if my wager were weakly built, this unexpected accident might stagger it▪ For the truth is, this strain is extraordinary, to follow her husbands body into the Tomb, and there for his company to bury her self quick: it's new and stirring, but for all this, Isle not despair of my wager.
Why Sir, can you think such a passion dissembled?
Ell's one for that, What I think I think; In the mean time forget not to write to my Brother, how the plot hath succeeded, that the news of his death hath ta∣ken; a funeral solemnity performed, his supposed Corse bestowed in the monument of our Family, thou and I whore∣rible mourners: But aboue all that his intolerable virtuous Widow, for his love; (and for her love) Ero her hand-maid, are descend with his Corse into the vault; There wipe their eyes time out of mind, drink nothing but their own tears, and by this time are almost dead with famine. There's a point will sting it (for you say tic true) where left you him?
At Dipolis Sir, some twenty miles hence.
He keeps close.
I sir, by all means; skulks unknown under the name of a strange Knight.
That may carry him without descrying, for there's a number of strange Knights abroad. You left him well.
Well Sir, but for this jealous humour that hints him.
Well, this news will absolutely purge that humour. Write all, forget not to describe her passion at thy disco∣rye of his slaughter: did she perform it well for her hus∣bands wager?
Perform it, call you it? you may jest; men hunt Hares to death for their sports, but the poor beasts die in earnest: you wager of her passions for your pleasure, but she takes little pleasure in those earnest passions. I never saw such an ecstasy of sorrow, since I knew the name of
sorrow. Her hands flew up to her head like Furies, hid all her beauties in her dishevelled hair, &amp; wept as she would turn fountain. I would you and her husband had been behind the Arras but to have heard her. I assure you Sir, I was so transported with the spectacle, that in despite of my discretion, I was forced to turn woman, and bear a part with her. Humanity broke loose from my heart, and streamed through mine eyes.
In prose, thou weptst. So have I seen many a moist Auditor doe at a play; when the story was but a mere fi∣ction: And did act the Nuntius well, would I had heard it: coldest thou dress thy looks in a mournful habit?
Not without preparation Sir; no more then my speech, it was a plain acting of an interlude to me, to pro∣nounce the part.
As how for heavens sake?
Phoebus addressed his chariot towards the West
To change his wearied Coursers, and so forth.
Nay on, and thou love me.
Lysander and my self beguiled the way
With interchanged discourse, but our chief Theme,
Was of your dearest self, his honoured wife;
Your love, your virtue; wondrous constancy.
Then was her Cu to whimper; on.
When suddenly appeared as far as sight
A troop of horse, armed as we might discern,
With Javelins, Spears, and such accoutrements.
He doubted nought (As Innocence ever
Is free from doubting ill.)
There dropped a tear.
My mind misgave me.
They might be mountaners. At their approach
They used no other language but their weapons,
To tell vs what they were; Lysander drew,
And bore himself Achilles like in fight,
And as a Mower sweeps off t'heads of Bents,
So did Lysanders sword shave off the points
Of their assaulting lances.
His horse at last, sore hurt, fell under him;
I seeing I could not rescue, used my spurs
To fly away.
What from thy friend?
I in a good quarrel, why not?
Good; I am answered.
A lance pursued me, brought me back again;
And with these wounds left me t'accompanie
Dying Lysander: Then they rifled vs,
And left vs.
They gone; my breath not yet gone, began to strive
And revive sense: I with my feeble joints
Crawled to Lysander, stirred him, and withal
He gasped; cried Cynthia! and breathed no more.
O then she howled out right.
Passengers came and in a Chariot brought vs
Straight to a Neighbour Town; where I forthwith
Coffind my friend in lead; and so conveyed him
To this sad place.
It was well; and could not show but strangely.
Well Sir, This tale pronounced with terror, suited with action clothed with such likely circumstance; My wounds in show, her husbands hearse in sight, think what effect it wrought: And if you doubt, let the sad conse∣quince of her retreat to his Tomb, bee your woeful in∣structer.
For all this, Isle not despair of my wager: These
Grieves that sound so loud, prove always light,
True sorrow evermore keeps out of sight.
This strain of mourning with Sepulchre, like an ouer-do∣ing Actor, affects grossly, and is indeed so far forced from the life, that it bewrays it self to be altogether artificial.
To set open a shop of mourning! Tic palpable.
Truth, the substance, hunts not after the shadow of popular
Fame. Her officious ostentation of sorrow condemns her sincerity. When did ever woman morn so vnmeasura∣bly,
but she did dissemble?
O Gods! a passion thus borne; thus apparelled with tears, sighs, swownings, and all the badges of true sor∣row, to be dissembled! by Venus I am sorry I ever set foot in it. Could she, if she dissembled, thus dally with hunger, be deaf to the barking of her appetite, not having these four days relieved nature with one dram of su∣stenance.
For this does she look to bee Deified, to have Hymns made of her, nay to her: The Tomb where she is to be no more reputed the ancient monument of our Fami∣lie the Lysandri; but the new erected Altar of Cynthia: To which all the Paphian widows shall after their husbands Funerals, offer their wet muckinders, for monuments of the danger they have past, as Sea-men doe their wet gar∣mints at Neptunes Temple after a ship wrack.
Well, Isle apprehend you, at your pleasure: I for my part will say; that if her faith bee as constant as her love is hearty, and vnaffected, her virtues may justly challenge a Deity to enshrine them.
I, there's an other point too. But one of those ver∣tues is enough at once. All natures are not capable of all gifts. If the brain of the West, were in the heads of the learned; then might Parish-Clerkes be common counsel men, and Poets Aldermens deputies. My sister may turn Niobe for love; but till Niobe bee turned to a Marble, Isle not despair but she may prove a woman. Let the trial run on, if she doe not out-runne it, Isle say Poets are no Prophets, Prognosticators are but Mountebanks, &amp; none tell true but wood-mongers.
A sweet Gentleman you are. I marvel what man? what woman? what name? what action doth his tongue glide over, but it leaves a slime upon it. Well, Isle present∣lie to Dipolis, where Lysander stays; and will not say but she may prove frail: But this Isle say, If she should chance to break, Her tears are true▪ though women's truths are weak.
O Miracle of nature! women's glory;
Men's shame; and envy of the Deities!
Yet must these matchless creatures be suspected;
Accused; condemned!
Now by th'immortall Gods,
They rather merit Altars, Sacrifice,
Then love and courtship.
Yet see the Queen of these lies here interred;
Tearing her hair; and drowned in her tears.
Which Jove should turn to Crystal; and a Mirror
Make of them; wherein men may see and wonder
At women's virtues. Shall she famish then?
Will men (without dissuasions) suffer thus
So bright an Ornament to earth, tomb'd quick.
In Earths dark bosom: Ho!
Who's in the Tomb there?
Who calls? whence are you?
I am a Soldier of the watch and must enter.
Amongst the dead?
Doe the dead speak? op or Isle force it open.
What violence is this? what seek you here
Where nought but death and her attendants dwell.
What wretched souls are you that thus by night lurk here amongst the dead?
Good Soldier doe not stir her, Shoe's weak, and quickly seized with swowning and pas∣sions, and with much trouble shall we both recall her fain∣ting spirits.
Five days thus hath she wasted; and not once seasoned her Palate with the taste of meat; her powers of life are spent; and what remains of her famished spirit, serves not to breath but sigh.
She hath exiled her eyes from steep, or sight, and given them wholly up to ceaseless tears over that ruthful hearse
of her dear Spouse, slain by Bantditos, Nobly borne Lysander.
And hopes she with these heavy notes and cries to call him from the dead? in these five days hath she but made him stir a finger or fetch one gasp of that forsa∣ken life she mourns?
Come, honoured Mistress; I admire your virtues;
But must reprove this vain excess of moan;
Rouse your self Lady, and look up from death,
Well said, tic well; stay by my hand and rise.
This Face hath been maintained with better housewifery.
What are you?
Lady, I am Sentinel,
Set in this hallowed place, to watch and guard
On forfeit of my life, these monuments
From Rape, and spoiled of sacrilegious hands,
And save the bodies, that without you see
Of crucified offenders; that no friends
May bear them hence, to honoured burial.
Thou seem an honest Soldier; pray thee then
Be as thou seem; betake thee to thy charge
And leave this place; add not affliction
To the afflicted.
You misname the children.
For what you term affliction now, in you
Is but selfe-humour; voluntary Penance
Imposed upon your self: and you lament
As did the Satire once, that ran affrighted
From that horns sound that he himself had winded.
Which humour to abate, my counsel tending your termed affliction,
What I for Physic give, you take for poison.
I tell you honoured Mistress, these ingredients
Are wholesome, though perhaps they seem untoothsome.
This Soldier sure, is some decayed apothecary.
Dear Ghost be wise, and pity your fair self
Thus, by your self unnaturally afflicted:
Chide back, heart-breaking groans, clear up those lamps,
Restore them to their first creation:
Windows for light; not sluices made for tears.
Beat not the senseless air with needless cries,
Baneful to life, and bootless to the dead.
This is the Inn, where all Deucalions race
Sooner or later, must take up their lodging;
No privilege can free vs from this prison;
No tears, no prayers, can redeem from hence
A captived soul; Make use of what you see:
Let this affrighting spectacle of death
Teach you to nourish life.
Good hear him: this is a rare Soldier.
Say that with abstinence you should vnlose the knot of life: Suppose that in this Tomb for your dear Spouse, you should entomb your self a living Corse; Say that be∣fore your hour without due Summons from the Fates, you send your hasty soul to hell: can your dear Spouse take notice of your faith and constancy? Shall your dear Spouse revive to give you thanks?
Idle discourser.
No, your moans are idle.
Go to I say, be counselled; raise your self:
Enjoy the fruits of life, there's viands for you,
Now, live for a better husband.
No? will you none?
For love of curtsy, good Mistress, eat,
Doe not reject so kind and sweet an offer,
Who knows but this may be some Mercury
Disguised, and sent from Iuno to relieve vs?
Did ever any lend unwilling ears
To those that came with messages of life?
I pray thee leave thy Rhetoric.
By my soul; to speak plain truth, I could ra∣there wish t'employ my teeth then my tongue, so your ex∣ample would be my warrant.
Thou hast my warrant.
Well then, eat my wench,
Let obstinacy starve.
Fall to.
Persuade my Mistress first.
Slight tell me Lady,
Are you resolved to die? If that be so,
Choose not (for shame) a base, and beggars death:
Die not for hunger, like a Spartan Lady;
Fall valiantly upon a sword, or drink
Noble death, expel your grief with poison.
There it is, seize it.—Tush you dare not die.
Come Wench thou hast not lost a husband;
Thou shalt eat, you are now within
The place where I command.
I protest sir.
Well said; eat, and protest, or Isle protest
And doe thou eat; thou eat'st against thy will,
That's it thou would say.
It is.
And under such a protestation
Thou lost' thy Maiden-head.
For your own sake good Lady forget this husband,
Come you are now become a happy Widow,
A blessedness that many would be glad of.
That and your husbands Inuentorie together,
Will raise you up husbands enough.
What think you of me?
Trifler, pursue this wanton Theme no further;
Lest (which I would be loath) your speech provoke
Uncivil language from me; I must tell you,
One joint of him I lost, was much more worth
Then the racked value of thy entire body.
O know what joint she means.
Well, I have done.
And well done frailty; proface, how lik'st thou it.
Very toothsome Ingrediens surely sir,
Want but some lycor to incorporate them.
There tic, carouse.
I humbly thank you Sir.
Hold pledge me now.
Tic the poison Sir,
That preserves life, I take it.
Doe so, take it.
Sighing has made me something short-winded.
Isle pledge y'at twice.
Tic well done; doe me right.
I pray sir, have you been a Apothecary?
Marry have I wench; A women's Apothecary.
Have you good Ingredients?
I like your Bottle well. Good Mistress taste it.
Try but the operation, twill fetch up
The Roses in your cheeks again.
Doctor Verolles bottles are not like it;
There's no Guaicum here, I can assure you.
This will doe well anon.
Now fie upon it.
O I have lost my tongue in this same limbo.
The spring ants, spoiled me thinks; it goes not off
With the old twang.
Well said wench, oil it well; twill make it slide well.
Aristotle says sir, in his Posterionds.
This wench is learned; And what sales he?
That when a man dies, the last thing that moves is his heart, in a woman her tongue.
Right; and adds further, that you women are a kind of spinners; if their legs be plucked off, yet still they'll wag them; so will you your tongues.
With what an easy change does this same weakness
Of women, slip from one extreme to another?
All these attractions take no hold of her;
No not to take refection; 'T must not be thus.
Well said wench; Tickle that Helicon.
But shall we quit the field with this disgrace
Given to our Oratory? Both not gain
So much ground of her as to make her eat?
Faith the truth is sir; you are no fit Organ
For this business;
Tic quite out of your Element:
Let vs alone, sheele eat I have no fear;
A women's tongue best fits a women's ear.
Jove never did employ Mercury,
But Iris for his Messenger to Iuno.
Come, let me kiss thee wench; wilt undertake
To make thy Mistress eat?
It shall go hard Sir
But I will make her turn flesh and blood,
And learn to live as other mortals doe.
Well said: the morning hastes; next night expect me.
With more provision good Sir.
Very good.
And bring more wine.
What else; shalt have enough:
O Cynthia, heir of her bright purity,
Whose name thou dost inherit; Thow disdain
(Severed from all concretion) to feed
Upon the base food of gross Elements.
Thou all art soul; All immortality.
Thou fasts for Nectar and Ambrosia,
Which till thou find, and eat'st aboue the stars,
To all food here thou bidd'st celestial wars.
So; lets air our dampish spirits, almost stifled in this gross muddy Element.
How sweet a breath the calmness of the night in∣spires the air withal?
Well said; Now you're your self: did not I tell you how sweet an operation the Soldiers bottle had? And if there be such virtue in the bottle; what is there in the Soldier? know, and acknowledge his worth when hee comes in any case Mistress.
So Maid,
Gods my patience? did you look forsooth that In∣no should have sent you meat from her own Trencher, in reward of your widows tears? you might sit and sigh first till your heart-strings broke, Isle able't.
I fear me thy lips have gone so oft to the bottle, that thy tongue-strings are come broken home.
Faith the truth is, my tongue hath been so long tied up, that tic covered with rust, &amp; I rub it against my palate as wee doe suspected coins, to try whether it bee currant or no. But now Mistress for an upshot of this bottle; let's have one carouse to the good speed of my old Master, and the good speed of my new.
So Damsel.
You must pledge it, here's to it. Doe me right I pray.
You say I must.
Must? what else?
How excellent ill this humour suites our habit?
Go to Mistress, do not think but you and I shall have good sport with this jest, when we are in private at home. I would to Venus we had some honest shift or other to get off withal; for Isle no more ant; Isle not turn Salt-peeter in this vault for never a mans company living; much less for a women's. Sure I am the wonder's over, and it was on∣lie for that, that I endured this; and so a my conscience did you. Never deny it.
Nay pray thee take it to thee.
Hark I hear some footing near vs.
Gods me it is the Soldier Mistress, by Venus if you fall to your late black Santus again, Isle discover you.
What's here? The maid hath certainly prevailed with her; me thinks those clouds that last night covered her looks are now dispersed: Isle try this further. Save you Lady.
Honourable Soldier? you're welcome; please you step in sir?
With all my heart sweet heart; by your patience La∣die; why this bears some shape of life yet. Damsel, you have
performed a service of high reckoning, which cannot perish unrewarded.
Faith Sir, you are in the way to doe it once, if you have the heart to hold on.
Your bottle has poisond this wench sir.
A wholesome poison it is Lady, if I may be judge; of which sort here is one better bottle more.
Wine is ordained to raise such hearts as sink,
Whom woeful stars distemper; let him drink.
I am most glad I have been some mean to this part of your recovery, and will drink to the rest of it.
Go to Mistress, pray simper no more; pledge the man of War here.
Come you're too rude.
Good.
Good sooth Lady you're honoured in her service; I would have you live, and she would have you live freely; without which life is but death. To live freely is to feast our appetites freely; without which humanes are stones; to the satisfaction whereof I drink Lady.
Isle pledge you Sir.
Said like a Mistress; and the Mistress of your self; pledge him in love too: I see hee loves you; Shoe's silent, she consents sir.
O happy stars. And now pardon Lady; me thinks these are all of a piece.
Nay if you kiss all of a piece wee shall ne'er have done: Well it was well offered, and as well taken.
If the world should see this.
The world! should one so rare as your self, respect the vulgar world?
The praise I have had, I would continue.
What of the vulgar? Who hates not the vulgar, de∣serves not love of the virtuous. And to affect praise of that we despise, how ridiculous it is?
Comfortable doctrine Mistress, edify, edify.
Me thinks even thus it was when Dido
And Aeneas met in the Cave; And hark
Me thinks I hear some of the hunters.
Tic such an obstinacy in you Sir,
As never was conceited, to run on
With an opinion against all the world,
And what your eyes may witness; to aduēture
The famishment for grief of such a woman
As all men's merits met in any one,
Could not deserve.
I must confess it Lycus,
Weal therefore now prevent it if we may,
And that our curious trial hath not dwelt
Too long on this unnecessary hant:
Grief, and all want of food; not having wrought:
Too mortally on her divine disposure.
I fear they have, and she is past our cure.
I must confess with fear and shame as much.
And that she will not trust in any thing
What you persuade her to.
Then thou shalt hast
And call my brother from his secret shroud,
Where he appointed thee to come and tell him.
How all things have succeeded.
This is well.
If (as I say) the ill be not so grown,
That-all help is denied her. But I fear
The matchless Deem is famished.
Slight, whose here?
A Soldier with my sister? wipe, wipe, see
Kissing by Jove; she, as I lay tic she.
What? is she well Sir?
O no, she is famished;
Shoe's past our comfort, she lies drawing on.
The Gods forbid.
Look thou, shoe's drawing on.
How say thou?
Drawing on? Illustrious witchcrafts.
Lies she not drawing on?
She draws on fairly.
Our sister Sir? This she? can this be she?
She, she, she, and none but she. He dances &amp; sings.
She only Queen of love, and chastity,
O chastity; This women be.
Slight tic prodigious.
Horse, horse, horse,
Four Chariot Horses of the Thracian breed,
Come, bring me brother. O the happiest evening,
That ever drew her veil before the Sun.
Who is it can tell?
The Soldier Sir that watches
The bodies crucified in this hallowed place.
Of which to lose one, it is death to him,
And yet the lustful knave is at his Venery,
While one might steal one.
What a slave was I
That held not out my winds strength constantly,
That she would prove thus? O incredible?
A poor eight-pennie Soldier? She that lately
Was at such height of interiection,
Stoop now to such a base conjunction?
By heaven I wonder now I see it in act,
My brain could ever dream of such a thought.
And yet, tic true: Rare, pereles, is it not Lycus?
I know not what it is; Nor what to say.
O had I held out (villain that I was,)
My blessed confidence but one minute longer,
I should have been eternized. Gods my fortune,
What an unspeakable sweet sight it is?
O eyes Isle sacrifice to your dear sense.
And consecrate a Phone to Confidence.
But this you must at no hand tell your brother.
Twill make him mad: For he that was before
So scurg'd but only with bare jealousy.
What would he be, if he should come to know it?
He would be less mad: for your only way
To clear his jealousy, is to let him know it.
When knowledge comes suspicion vanishes.
The Sunne-beames breaking forth swallow the mists.
But as for you Sir Gallant; howsoever
Your banquet seems sweet in your licorice palate,
It shall be sure to turn gall in your maw.
Thy hand a little Lycus here without.
To what?
No booty serve you sir Soldado
But my poor sister? Come, lend me thy shoulder,
Isle climb the cross; it will be such a cooler
To my Venerean Gentleman's hot liver,
When he shall find one of his crucified bodies
Stolen down, and he to be forthwith made fast
In place thereof, for the sign
Of the lost Sentinel. Come glorify
Firm Confidence in great Inconstancy.
And this believe (for all proved knowledge swears)
He that believes in error, never errs.
Tic late; I must away.
Not yet sweet love.
Tempt not my stay, tic dangerous. The law is strict, and not to bee dispensed with. If any Sentinel be too late in's watch, or that by his neglect one of the crucified by∣dies should be stolen from the cross, his life buys it.
A little stay will not endanger them.
The days proclaimer has not yet given warning.
The Cock yet has not beat his third alarm.
What? shall we ever dwell here amongst the Antipodes?
Shall I not enjoy the honour of my fortune in public? sit in
Lysanders chair? Reign in his wealth?
Thou shalt, thou shalt; though my love to thee
Hath proved thus sudden and for hast leapt over
The complement of wooing, Yet only for the worlds opinion.
Mark that again.
I must maintain a form in parting hence.
Out upon it, Opinion the blind Goddess of Fools, Foe to the virtuous; and only friend to undeserving persons, con∣temne it. Thou know thou hast done virtuously; thou hast strangely sorrowed for thy husband, followed him to death; fur∣there thou coldest not, thou hast buried thy self quick. (O that it were true) spent more tears over his carcase, then would serve a whole City of saddest widows in a plague time; besides sighings, and swownings, not to be credited.
True; but those complements might have their time for fashion sake.
Right, Opinion and Fashion. Sfoot what call you time? to hast wept these four whole days.
Nay byr'lady almost five.
Look you there; ne'er upon five whole days.
Well go and see; Return, weal go home.
Hell be thy home, Huge Monsters damn ye, and your whole creation, O ye Gods; in the height of her mourning in a Tomb, within sight of so many deaths! her husbands be∣leeu'd body in her eye. He dead, a few days before; this mir∣roar of Nuptial chastity; this Votaress of widdow-constan∣cie: to change her faith; exchange kisses, embraces, with a stranger; and but my shame with-stood, to give the utmost earnest of her love, to an eight-pennie Sentinel: in effect, to prostitute her self upon her husbands Coffin! Lust, impiety, hell, womanhood it self, add if you can one step to this.
ONe of the crucified bodies taken down!
Enough.
And the Sentinel not to be heard off?
No sir.
Make out; hast, search about for him; does none of you know him? nor his name?
Hoe's but a stranger here of some four days standing; and we never set eye on him, but at setting the watch.
For whom serves he? you look well to your watch ma∣sters.
For Seigneur Stratio, and whence he is, tic ignorant to vs; we are not correspondent for any, but our own places.
You're eloquent. Abroad I say, let me have him.
This negligence will by the Governor be wholly cast on me, he hereby will suggest to the Viceroy, that the City guards are very caresly attended. He loves me not I know; because of late I knew him but of mean condition; but now by fortunes iniudicious hand, guided by bribing Courtiers, hee is raised to this high seat of honour. Nor blushes he, to see him self ad∣uanc't over the heads of ten times higher words; but takes it all forsooth, to his merits; and looks (as all upstarts doe) for most huge observance. Well, my mind must stoop to his high place, and learn within it self to sever him from that, and to adore Authority the Goddess, how ever borne by an un∣worthy beast; and let the Beasts dull apprehension take the honour done to Ices, done to himself. I must sit fast, and bee sure to give no hold to these fault-hunting enemies.
Pray thee disturb me not; put out the lights.
Faith Isle take a nap again.
Thou shalt not rest before I be resolved
What happy wind hath driven thee back to harbour?
Was it my love?
No.
Yet say so (sweet) that with the thought thereof I may enjoy all that I wish in earth.
I am sought for. A crucified body is stolen while I lo∣ter'd here; and I must die for it,
Die? All the Gods forbid; O this affright torments me ten parts more then the sad loss of my dear husband.
(Damnation) I believe thee.
Yet hear a women's wit.
Take counsel of Necessity and it.
I have a body here which once I loved
And honoured aboue all; but that time's past.
It is, revenge it heaven.
That shall supply at so extreme a need the vacant Gibbet.
Canero. What? thy husbands body?
What hurt is it, being dead it save the living?
O heart hold in, check thy rebellious motion.
Vex not thy self dear love, nor use delay.
Tempt not this danger, set thy hands to work.
I can not do it; my heart will not permit
My hands to execute a second murder.
The truth is I am he that slew thy husband.
The Gods forbid.
It was this hand that bathed my reeking sword
In his life blood, while he cried out for mercy,
But I remorseless, panch't him, cut his throat,
He with his last breath crying, Cynthia.
O thou hast told me news that cleaves my heart;
Would I had never seen thee, or heard sooner
This bloody story; yet see, note my truth
Yet I must love thee.
Out upon the Monster.
Go, tell the Governor; Let me be brought
To die for that most famous villainy;
Not for this meshing base transgression
Of tenant negligence.
I can not do it.
Love must salve any murder: Isle be judge
Of thee dear love, and these shall be thy pains
In steed of iron, to suffer these soft chains.
O I am infinitely obliged.
Arise I say, thou saver of my life.
Doe not with vaine-affrighting conscience
Betray a life, that is not thine but mine:
Rise and preserve it.
Ha? thy husbands body?
Hanged up you say, in steed of that that's stolen;
Yet I his murderer, is that your meaning?
It is my Love.
Thy love amazes me,
The point is yet how we shall get it thither,
Ha? Tie a halter about's neck, and drag him to the Gal∣lowes: shall I my love?
So you may doe indeed,
Or if your own strength will not serve, we'll aide
Our hands to yours, and bear him to the place.
For heavens love come, the night goes off apace.
All the infernal plagues dwell in thy soul;
Isle fetch a crow of iron to break the coffin.
Doe love, be speedy.
As I wish thy damnation.
O I could tear my self into Atoms; off with this Antic, the shirt that Hercules wore for his wife, was not more bane∣full. Is it possible there should be such a latitude in the Sphere of this sex, to entertain such an extention of mischief, and not turn Devil. What is a woman? what are the worst when the best are so past naming? As men like this let them try their wives again. Put women to the test; discover them; paint them, paint them ten parts more then they doe themselves, ra∣there then look on them as they are; Their wits are but pain∣ted that dislike their painting. Thou foolish thirster after idle secrets, And ell's abroad; look home, and store &amp; choke thee; There sticks an Echelons horn of all, Copy enough.
As much as Alison of streams receives,
Or lofty Ilea shows of shady leaves.
Who's that?
I wonder Lycus fails me. Nor can I hear whats be∣come of him. Hee would not certain ride to Dipolis to call my brother back, without my knowledge.
My brothers voice; what makes he here abouts so un∣timely? Isle slip him.
Who goes there?
A friend.
Dear friend, lets know you. A friend least looked for but most welcome, and with many a long look expected here. What sir vnbooted? have you been long arrived?
Not long, some two hours before night.
Well brother, you've the most rare, admirable, vnmatch∣able wife, that ever suffered for the sin of a husband. I cannot blame your confidence indeed now: it is built on such infalli∣ble ground; Lycus I think be gone to call you to the rescue of her life; why she! O incomprehensible!
I have heard all related since my arrival, weal meet to morrow.
What hast brother? But was it related with what un∣tolerable pains, I and my Mistress, her other friends, Matrons and Magistrates, laboured her diuersion from that course?
Yes, yes.
What streams of tears she powered out; what tresses of her hair she tore! and offered on your supposed hearse!
I have heard all.
But aboue all; how since that time, her eyes never har∣bored wink of slumber, these six days; no nor tasted the least dram of any sustenance.
How is that assured?
Not a scruple.
Are you sure there came no Soldier to her nor brought her victuals?
Soldier? what Soldier?
Why some Soldier of the watch, that attends the exe∣cuted bodies: well brother I am in hast; to morrow shall sup∣ply this nights defect of conference; Adieu.
A Soldier? of the watch? bring her victuals? Go to brother I have you in the wind; hoe's vnharnest of all his tra∣uailing accoutrements. I came directly from his house, no word of him there; he knows the whole relation; hoe's passionate: All collections speak he was the Soldier. What should be the riddle of this? that he is stolen hither into a Soldiers disguise? he should have staid at Dipolis to receive news from vs. When∣there he suspected our relation; or had not patience to expect it, or whether that furious, frantic capricious Devil jealousy hath tossed him hither on his horns, I can not conjecture. But the case is clear, hoe's the Soldier. Sister, look to your fame, your chastetie's uncovered. Are they here still? here believe it both most woefully weeping over the bottle.
Who's there.
Tharsalio, open.
Alas Sir, tic no boot to vex your sister, and your self, she is desperate, &amp; will not hear persuasion, she's very weak.
Here's a true-bred chamber-maid. Alas, I am sorry for it; I have brought her meat and Condition wine to strengthen her.
O the very naming an't, will drive her into a swoon; good Sir forbear.
Yet open sweet, that I may bless mine eyes with sight of her fair shrine; and of thy sweetest self (her famous Pan∣dress) open I say. Sister? you hear me well, paint not your Tomb without; wee know too well what rotten carcases are lodged within; open I say. Ero opens, and hee sees her head laid on the coffin, &amp;c. Sister I have brought you tidings to wake you out of this sleeping mummery.
Alas shoe's faint, and speech is painful to her.
Well said frubber, was there no Soldier here lately?
A Soldier? when?
This night, last night, tother night; and I know not how many nights and days.
Whose there?
Your brother Mistress, that asks if there were not a soul∣dier here.
Here was no soldier.
Yes Mistress I think here was such a one though you took no heed of him.
Go to sister; did not you join kisses, embraces, and plight indeed with him, the vt∣most pledge of Nuptial love with him. Done it, done it; but first hear me a short story. The Soldier was your disguised husband, dispute it not. That you see yonder, is but a shadow, an empty chest containing nothing but air. Stand not to gaze at it, tic true. This was a project of his own contriving to put your loyalty &amp; constant vows to the test; you're warned, be armed.
O fie a these perils.
O Ero! we are undone.
Nay, you'd ne'er be warned; I ever wished you to withstand the push of that Soldiers pike, and not enter him too deep in∣to your bosom, but to keep sacred your widows vows made to Lysander.
Thou did, thou did.
Now you may see th'euent. Well our safety lies in our speed: heel doe vs mischief, if we prevent not his coming. Lets to your Mothers: and there cal out your mightiest friends to guard you from his fury. Let them begin the quarrel with him for practising this villainy on your sex to entrap your frailties.
Nay I resolve to sit out one brunt more; to try to what aim heel enforce his project: were he some other man, un∣known to me, his violence might awe me; but knowing him as I doe, I fear him not. Do thou but second me, thy strength and mine shall master his best force, if he should prove outra∣gious. Despair they say makes cowards turn courageous. Shut up the Tomb.
All pains are lost in hunting out this Soldier; his fear (ad∣ding wings to his heals) out-goes vs as far as the fresh Hare the tired hounds. Who goes there?
A friend.
O, your success and mine touching this Sentinel, tells, I suppose, one tale; hoe's far enough I un∣dertake by this time.
I blame him not: the law's se∣uere (though just and can not be dispensed.)
Why should the laws of Paphos, with more rigour, then other City laws pursue offenders? that not appeased with their lives forfeit, exact a justice of them after death? And if a Soul∣dier in his watch forsooth lose one of the dead bodies, he must die for it: It seems the State needed no soldiers when that was made a law.
So we may chide the fire for burning vs; or say the Bee's not good because she stings; Tic not the body the law respects, but the soldiers neglect; when the watch (the guard and safety of the City) is left abandoned to all hazards. But let him go; and tell me if your news sort with mine, for Lycus; apprehended they say, about Lysanders murder.
Tic true; hoe's at the Captains lodge under guard, and tic my charge in the morning to unclose the leaden coffin, and dis∣cover the body; The Captain will assay an old conclusion of∣ten approved; that at the murderers sight the blood revives again, and boils a fresh; and every wound has a condemn∣ning voice to cry out guilty against the murderer.
O world, if this be true; his dearest friend, his bed comp∣neon, whom of all his friends he culled out for his bosom!
Tush man, in this topsy turuy world, friendship and bosom kindness, are but made covers for mischief, means to compass il. Near-allied trust, is but a bridge for treason. The presumptions
cry loud against him; his answers found disiointed; cross∣legedd tripping up one another. He names a Town whether he brought Lysander murdered by Mountainers, thats false, some of the dwellers have been here, and all disclaim it. Besides, the wounds he bears in show, are such as shrews closely give their husbands, that never bleed, and find to be counterfeit.
O that jade falsehood is never sound of all; but halts of one leg still. Truth pace is all upright; sound every where.
And like a die, sets ever on a square.
And how is Lycus his bearing in this condition?
Faith (as the manner of such desperate offenders is till it come to the point) careless, &amp; confident, laughing at all that seem to pity him. But leave it to th'euent. Night fellow Soldier, you'll not meet me in the morning at the Tomb, and lend me your hand to the vnrigging of Lysanders hearse.
I care not if I do, to view heavens power in this vnbottomd seller. Blood, though it sleep a time, yet never dies.
The Gods on murderers fix revengeful eyes.
COme my borrowed disguise, let me once more
Be reconcild to thee, my trustiest friend;
Thou that in truest shape hast let me see
That which my truer self hath hid from me,
Help me to take revenge on a disguise,
Ten times more false and counterfeit then thou.
Thou, false in show, hast been most true to me;
The seeming true; hath proved more false then her.
Assist me to behold this act of lust,
Note with a Scene of strange impiety.
Her husbands murdered corse! O more then horror!
Isle not believe it untried; If she but lift
A hand to act it; by the fates her brains fly out,
Since she has matted me; let her beware my horns.
For though by goring her, no hope be shown
To cure my self, yet Isle not bleed alone.
Who knocks? Lys The soldier; open.
See sweet, here are the engines that must do it,
Which with much fear of my discovery
I have at last procured.
Shall we about this work? I fear the morn
Will ouer-take's; my stay hath been prolonged
With hunting obscure nookes for these emploiments,
The night prepares away; Come, art resolved.
I, you shall find me constant.
I, so I have, most prodigiously constant,
Here's a rare halter to hug him with.
Better you and I join our hands and bear him the∣there, you take his head.
I, for that was always heavier then's whole body besides
You can tell best that loded it.
Isle be at the feet; I am able to bear against you I war∣rant you.
Hast thou prepared weak nature to digest
A sight so much distasteful; hastser'd thy heart
I bleed not at the bloody spectacle?
Hast armed thy fearful eyes against th'affront
Of such a direful object?
Thy murdered husband ghastly staring on thee;
His wounds gaping to affright thee; his body soiled with
Gore? fore heaven my heart shruggs at it.
So does not mine,
Loue's resolute; and stands not to consult
With petty terror; but in full carrier
Runs blind-fold through an Army of misdoubts,
And interposing fears; perhaps Isle weep
Or so, make a forced face and laugh again.
O most valiant love!
I was thinking with my self as I came; how if this
Brake to light; his body known;
(As many notes might make it) would it not fix
Upon thy fame, an vnremoued Brand
Of shame, and hate; they that in former times
Adored thy virtue; would they not abhor
Thy lothest memory?
All this I know.
But yet my love to thee
Swallows all this; or whatsoever doubts
Can come against it.
Shame's but a feather balanced with thy love.
Neither fear nor shame? you are steel to the
Proof (but I shall iron you): Come then lets to work.
Alas poor Corps how many martyrdomes
Must thou endure? mangled by me a villain,
And now exposed to foul shame of the Gibbet?
Fore, piety, there is somewhat in me strives
Against the deed, my very arm relents
To strike a stroke so inhumane,
To wound a hallowed hearse? suppose it were mine,
Would not my Ghost start up and fly upon thee?
No, I'd mall it down again with this.
How now?
Nay, then Isle assay my strength; a Soldier and a raid of a dead man? A soft-r'ode milk-sop? come Isle doot my self.
And I look on? give me the iron.
No, Isle not lose the glory ant. This hand, &amp;c.
Pray thee sweet, let it not bee said the savage act was thine; deliver me the engine.
Content your self, tic in a fitter hand.
Wilt thou first? art not thou the most.
Ill-destin'd wife of a transformed monster;
Who to assure him self of what he knew,
Hath lost the shape of man.
Ha? crosse-capers?
Poor Soldiers case; doe not we know you Sir?
But I have given thee what thou came to seek.
Go Satire, run affrighted with the noise
Of that harsh sounding horn thy self hast blown,
Farewell; I leave thee there my Husbands Corps,
Make much of that.
What have I done? O let me lie and grieve, and speak no more.
BRing him away; you must have patience Sir: If you can say ought to quit you of those presumptions
that lie heavy on you, you shall be heard. If not, tic not your braves, nor your affecting looks can carry it. We must acquit our duties.
You're Captain a the watch Sir.
You take me right.
So were you best doe me; see your presumptions bee strong; or be assured that shall prove a dear presumption, to brand me with the murder of my friend. But you have been suborned by some close villain to defame me.
Twill not be so put off friend Lycus, I could wish your soul as free from taint of this foul fact; as mine from any such unworthy practise.
Conduct me to the Governor him self; to confront before him your shallow accusations.
First Sir, Isle bear you to Lysanders Tomb, to confront the murdered body; and see what evidence the wounds will yield against you.
You're wise Captain. But if the body should chance not to speak; If the wounds should bee tongue-tied Captain; whore's then your evidence Captain? will you not be laughed at for an officious Captain?
You're gallant Sir.
Your Captainship commands my service no further.
Well Sir, perhaps I may, if this conclusion take not; weal try what operation lies in torture, to pull confession from you.
Say you so Captain? but hark you Captain, Might it not concur with the quality of your office, ere this matter grow to the height of a more threatening danger; to wink a little at a by slip, or so?
How's that?
To send a man abroad under guard of one of your sell∣least shack-rags; that be may beat the knave, and run's way. I mean this on good terms Captain; Isle be thankful.
Isle think ont hereafter. Mean time I have other em∣ploiment for you.
Your place is worthily replenished Captain. My duty Sir; Hark Captain, there's a mutiny in your Army; Isle go raise the Governor.
No hast Sir; heel soon be here without your summons.
Bring forth the Knight ath' Tomb; have we meet with you Sir?
Pray thee soldier use thine office with better tem∣per.
Come convey him to the Lord Governor, First before the Captain Sir. Have the heavens nought else to doe, but to stand still, and turn all their malignant Aspects upon one man?
Captain here's the Sentinel wee sought for; hoe's some new pressed Soldier, for none of vs know him.
Where found you him?
My truant was mich't Sir into a blind corner of the Tomb.
Well said, guard him safe, bur for the Corps.
For the Corps Sir? bare misprision, there's no body, no∣thing. A mere blandation; a deceptio visus. Unless this soul∣dier for hunger have eat up Lysanders body.
Why, I could have told you this before Captain; The body was borne away peece-meale by devout Ladies of Ve∣nus order, for the man died one of Venus Martys. And yet I heard since it was seen whole ath' other side the downs up∣pone a Colestafe betwixt two huntsmen, to feed their dogs withal. Which was a miracle Captain.
Mischief in this act hath a deep bottom; and requires more time to sound it. But you Sir, it seems, are a Soldier of the newest stamp. Know you what tic to forsake your stand? There's one of the bodies in your charge stolen away; how answer you that? See here comes the Governor.
STand aside there.
Room for a strange Governor. The perfect draught of a most brainelesse, imperious upstart. O desert! where were thou, when this wooden dagger was gilded o∣for with the Title of Governor?
Peace Masters; hear my Lord.
All wisdom be silent; Now speaks Authority.
I am come in person to discharge Justice.
Of his office.
The cause you shall know hereafter; and it is this. A villain, whose very sight I abhor; where is he? Let me see him.
Is it Lycus you mean my Lord?
Go to sirrha you're too malapert; I have heard of your Sentinels escape; look too't.
My Lord, this is the Sentinel you speak of.
How now Sir? what time a day first?
I can not show you precisely, ant please your Honour.
What? shall we have replications? Reioinders?
Such a creature, Fool is, when hee bestrides the back of Authority.
Sirrha, stand you forth. It is supposed thou hast com∣meted a most inconvenient murder upon the body of Lie∣sander.
My good Lord, I have not.
Peace varlet; dost chop with me? I say it is imagined thou hast murdered Lysander. How it will be proved I know not. Thou shalt therefore presently bee had to execution, as justice in such cases requires. Soldiers take him away: bring forth the Sentinel.
Your Lordship will first let my defence be heard.
Sirrha; Isle no fending nor proving. For my part I am satisfied, it is so: thats enough for thee. I had ever a Sympathy in my mind against him.
Let him be had away.
A most excellent apprehension. Hoe's able ye see to judge of a cause at first sight, and hear but two parties. Here's a second Solon.
Hear him my Lord; presumptions oftentimes,
(Though likely grounded) reach not to the truth.
And Truth is oft abused by likelihood.
Let him be heard my Lord.
Madam, content your self. I will doe justice; I will not hear him. Your late Lord, was my Honourable Prede∣cessour: But your Ladyship must pardon me. In matters of in∣stice I am blind.
Thats true.
I know no persons. If a Court favourite write to me in a case of justice: I will pocket his letter, and proceed. If a Suitor in a case of justice thrusts a bribe into my hand, I will pocket his bribe, and proceed. Therefore Madam, set your heart at rest: I am seated in the Throne of justice; and I will doe justice; I will not hear him.
Not hear him my Lord?
No my Lady: and moreover put you in mind, in whose presence you stand; if you Parrot to me long; go to.
Nay the Vice must snap his Authority at all he meets, how shalt else be known what part he plays?
Your husband was a Noble Gentleman, but Alas hee came short, hee was no Statesman. Hee has left a foul City behind him.
I, and I can tell you twill trouble his Lordship and all his Honourable assistants of Seauingers to sweep it clean.
It's full of vices, and great ones too.
And thou none of the meanest.
But Isle turn all topsy turuie; and set up a new disc∣pline amongst you. Isle cut of all perished members.
Thats the Surgeons office.
Cast out these rotten stinking carcases for infecting the whole City.
Rotten they may be, but their wenches use to pepper them; and their Surgeons to parboil them; and that pre∣serves them from stinking, ant please your Honour.
Peace Sirrha, peace; and yet tic well said too. A good pregnant fellow in faith. But to proceed. I will spew drun∣kennesse out ath' City.
In to the Country.
Shifters shall cheat and starve; And no man shall doe good but where there is no need. Braggarts shall live at the head; and the tumult that hant Taverns. Asses shall bear good qualities, and wise men shall use them. I will whip le∣chief out ath' City, there shall be no more Cuckolds. They that heretofore were errand Cornutos, shall now bee honest shop-keepers, and justice shall take place. I will hunt jealousy
out of my Dominion.
Doe hear Brother?
It shall be the only note of love to the husband, to love the wife: And none shall be more kindly welcome to him then he that cuckolds him.
Believe it a wholesome reformation.
Isle have no more Beggars. Fools shall have wealth, and the learned shall live by their wits. Isle have no more Banckrouts. They that owe money shall pay it at their best leisure: And the rest shall make a virtue of imprisonment; and their wives shall help to pay their debts. Isle have all young widows spaded for marrying again. For the old and wi∣ther'd, they shall be confiscate to unthrifty Gallants, and de∣said Knights. If they bee poor they shall bee burnt to make soap ashes, or given to Surgeons Hall, to bee stamped to salve for the French mesells. To conclude, I will Cart pride out ath' Town.
Ant please your Honour Pride ant be ne'er so beggarly will look for a Coch.
Well said a mine Honour. A good significant fellow in faith: What is he? he talks much; does he follow your La∣diship?
No ant please your Honour, I go before her.
A good undertaking presence; A well-promising fore head, your Gentleman Usher Madam?
Yours if you please my Lord.
Borne in the City?
I ant please your Honour, but begot in the Court.
Tressellegg'd?
I, ant please your Honour.
The better, it bears a breadth; makes room a both sides. Might I not see his pace?
Yes ant please your Honour.
Tic well, tic very well. Give me thy hand: Madame I will accept this property at your hand, and will wear it thread∣bare for your sake. Fall in there, sirrha. And for the matter of Lycus Madam, I must tell you, you are shallow: there's a State point in it? hark you: The Viceroy has given him, and
wee must uphold correspondence. Hee must walk; say one man goes wrongfully out ath' world, there are hundreds to one come wrongfully into the world.
Your Lordship will give me but a word in private.
Come brother; we know you well: what means this habit? why staid you not at Dipolis as you resolved, to take advertisement for vs of your wives bearing?
O brother, this jealous frenzy has borne me head∣long to ruin.
Go to, be comforted; uncase your self; and discharge your friend.
Is that Lysander say you? And is all his story true? Byr'lady Madam this jealousy will cost him dear: he under∣took the person of a Soldier; and as a Soldier must have justice. Madam, his Altitude in this case can not dispense. Lie∣cus, this Soldier hath acquitted you.
And that acquittal Isle for him requite; the body lost, is by this time restored to his place.
It is my Lord.
These are State points, in which your Lordships time has not yet trained your Lordship; please your Lordships graces Nuptial we have now in hand.
Twixt this young Lady and this Gentleman.
Your Lordship there shall care the ample story.
And how the Ass wrapped in a Lyons skin
Fearfully rord, but his large ears appeared
And made him laughed at, that before was feared.
Isle go with you. For my part, I am at a non plus.
Come brother; Thank the Countess: she hath suet to make your peace. Sister give me your hand.
〈◊〉 Brother let your lips compound the strife,
And think you have the only constant Wife.

AWake dark sleep, rouse thee from out thy Cave;
Thy Mother Night, that bred thee in her womb,
And fed thee first with silence and with ease,
Doth here thy shadowed operations crave.
And therefore wake my son, awake and come:
Strike with thy Horny wand, the spirits of their
That here expect some pleasing novelties;
And make their slumber to beget strange sights.
Strange visions and vn-usual properties,
Vn-seene of latter ages, ancient rites;
Of gifts divine, wrapped up in Mysteries,
Make this to seem a Temple in their sight:
Whose maine support, holy religion, frame,
And wisdom, courage, Temperance and right:
Make seem the pillors that sustain the same,
Shadow some Sibill to attend the rites;
And to describe the power that shall resort,
With the interpretation of the benefits
They bring in Clouds, &amp; what they doe import,
Yet make them to protend the true desire
Of those that wish them, waking real things;
Whilst I will hoou'ring here aloof retire,
And cover all things with my sable wings.
Some. Dear Mother Night, I your commandment
Obey, and dreams t'interpret dreams, will make
As waking curiosity is wont.
Though better dreams asleep, the dreams awake
And this White Horny wand shall work the deed:
Whose power, doth figures of the light present,
When from this sable Radius doth proceed
Nought but confused dark shows to no intent:
And therefore go bright visions, entertain
All round about, whilst Isle to sleep again.
I The daughter of wounder, now made the
Messenger of power; here descended, to signify
the coming of a Celestial presence of Goddesses,
determined this fair Temple of peace, with holy
hands and devout desires, have dedicated to unity
and concord: and leaving to themselves in Ouidos Ida
Paphos their ancient delighting places of Greece and
Asia, now made the seats of Barbarism, and spoil,
vouchsafe to take their recreation, here, upon the We∣sterne
Mount of mighty Brittany, the Land of Civil
Music and of rest: And are pleased to appear in
the self-same figures, wherein antiquity hath formor∣lie
clothed them; and as they have been cast in the
imagination of pity, who hath given mortal shapes
to the gifts and effects of an eternal power: For that
those beautiful Characters of sense were easier to be
read, then their mystical Ideas, dispersed in that wide
and incomprehensible volume of Nature. And well
have mortal men apparelled all the virtues, all the
graces, all blessings, with that shape wherewith them∣selves
are most delighted, and which work the best
motions, and best represent the beauty of hey∣uenly
powers. And therefore, reverend Prophe∣tesse,
who hear attendest upon the devotions of this
place, prepare thy self for those rites that pertain to
thy function, and the honour of such deities. And to
the end thou moist have a fore-notion what powers,
and who they are that come; take here this Prospe∣ctiue,
and herein note and tell what thou see: For
well moist thou there observe their shadows, but
their presence will bereave thee of all, save admirati∣on
and amazement. For who can look upon such
powers and speak? And so I leave thee.
WHat have I seen? Where am I? Or doe I see
at all? or am I any where? What? was this
IRIS the Messenger of IVNO, or else, but a fanta∣sma
or imagination? Will the Divine Goddesses
vouchsafe to visit this poor Temple? Shall I be blessed
to entertain so great powers? It can bee but a
dream; yet such great powers have blessed as humble
Roofs, and use it of no other respect, then their
own great favours to shine where they will. But
what Prospective is this? or what shall I herein see?
O admirable powers! what sights are these?
FIrst, here Imperial IVNO in her chair,
With Sceptre of command, for Kingdoms large:
Ascends, all clad in colours of the ayre,
Crowned with bright Stars, to signify her charge.
Next, warlike PALLAS, in her helmet dressed,
With Lance of winning; Target of defence:
In whom both wit and courage are expressed,
To get with glory, hold with providence.
Then lovely VENVS in bright Majesty,
Appears with mild aspect in Doue-like-hewe,
With the isle combining scarf of amity;
T'ingird strange Nations with affections true.
Next, chaste DIANA in her robes of greene,
With weapons of the Wood her self addrests,
To bless the Forest where her power is seen,
T'hold peace with all the World, but with wilde beasts.
Then comely VESTA with her flames of zeal▪
Presents her self, clad in white purity,
Whose book the souls sweet comfort doth reveal,
By th'euer burning lamp of piety.
Next, rich PROSERPINA with flames of gold,
Whose estate, although within the earth, yet she
Comes from aboue, and in her hand doth hold
The Mine of wealth, with cheerful Majesty.
Then al in purple robes, rich Happiness:
Next her appears, bearing in either hand,
Th'ensignes both of wealth and wit; t'expresse,
That by them both, her Majesty doth stand.
Then all in partie-coloured robes appears
In White and Crimson-gracefull Concord, rest
With knots of union; and in hand she bears
The happy joined Roses of our rest.
Cleare-eyde ASTRAY next, with reverend brow,
Clad in Celestial hew, which best she likes:
Comes with her balance, and her sword to show,
That first her judgement weighs before it strikes.
Then cheerful FLORA, all adorned with flowers,
Who clothes the earth with beauty and delight,
In thousand sundry suits, whilst shining hours,
Will scarce afford a darkness to the Night.
Next, plenteous CERES in her harvest weed,
Crowned with the'ncrease of what she gave to keep,
To Gratitude and Faith in whom we need:
Who sows on Virtue, shall with glory reap.
Lastly comes TITHES, ALBIONS dearest Love,
Whom she in faithful arms doth deign to embrace:
And brings the Trident of her power t'approue
Her favour and respect to do him grace.
Thus have I read their shadows, but behold:
In glory where they come as IRIS told.
DEsert, Reward, and Gratitude,
The Graces of Society:
Do here with hand in hand conclude,
The blessed chain of amity.
1. For I deserve. 2. I give. 3. I thank:
All. Thanks, gifts, deserts thus join in rank.
Wee yield the splendent rays of light,
Unto the blessings that descend;
The grace whereof with more delight,
The well disposing doth commend,
Whilst gratitude, rewards, deserts,
Please, win, draw on, and couple hearts.
For worth, and power, and due respect,
Deserves, bestows, returns with grace;
The meed, reward, the kind effect,
That gives the world a cheerful face.
And turning in this course of right,
Makes virtue move with true delight.
O Power of powers, grant to our vows we pray,
That these fair blessings which we here arrest,
In figures left vs here, in substance, may
Be those great proppes of glory and respect.
Let Kingdoms large, let armed Policy,
Mild Love, true Zeal, right shooting at the white,
Of brave designs, let Wealth, Felicity,
Justice, and Concord, Pleasure, Plenty, Might
And power by Sea, with grace proportinate,
Make glorious both this Kingdom and Estate.
whilst worth with honour, make their choice,
For measured motions ordered right:
Now let vs likewise give a voice,
Unto the touch of our delight.
FOr comforts locked up without sound,
Are th'vnborne Children of the thought:
Like unto Treasures never found,
That buried lowe, are left forgot.
Where words or glory do not show,
There like brave actions without Frame,
It seems like plants not set to grow,
Or as a tomb without a name.
AS I was the joyful Messenger, to notify the com∣ming
of these divine powers; so am I now the
same of their departure, who having clothed them∣selves
with these appearances, doe now return back
Spheres of there own being from whence they are.
But yet of my self, this much I must reveal, though
against the warrant of a Messenger, who, I know had
better to fail in obedience, than in presumption,
that these Deities by (the motion of the all-directing
Pallas, the glorious Patronise of this mighty Monar∣chie)
descending in the Majesty of their invisible es∣senses,
upon yonder Mountain; found there the best
and most worthy, the best of Ladies, disporting her
self with the choicest attendants, whose forms they
presently took, as delighting to be in the best built
Temples of beauty and honour, and in them vouch safed
to appear in this manner, being otherwise no
objects for mortal eyes.
And no doubt, but that in respect or the persons,
under whose beautiful coverings they have thus pre∣scented
themselves? these Deities will be pleased, the
rather at their invocation, knowing all their desires
to be such, as evermore to grace this glorious Mo∣narchie,
with the Royal effects of these blessings re∣presented.

AWake dark sleep, rouse thee frō out this Cave;
Thy Mother Night that bred thee in her
And fed thee first with silence &amp; with case, (womb
Doth here thy shadowing operations crave:
And therefore wake my Son, awake, and come
Strike with thy Horny wand, the spirits of these
That here expect some pleasing novelties:
And make their slumber to beget strange sights,
Strange visions and unusual properties.
Unseen of latters Ages, ancient Rytes.
Of gifts divine, wrapped up in mysteries.
Make this to seem a Temple in their sight,
Whose mayne support, holy, Religion frame:
And 1 Wisdom, 2 Courage, 3 Temperance, &amp; 4 Right,
Make seem the Pillars that sustain the same.
Shadow some sybill to attend the Rytes,
And to describe the Powers that shall resort,
With th'interpretation of the benefits
They bring in Clouds, &amp; what they do import.
Yet make them to portend the true desire
Of those that wish them waking real things:
Whilcst I will hoou'ring, here aloof retire
And cover all things with my sable Wings.
Dear Mother Night, I your commandment
Obey, and Dreams t'interpret Dreams will make,
As waking curiosity is wont.
Though better dream a sleep, thē dream awake.
And this white horny Wand shall work the deed;
Whose power doth Figures of the light present:
When from this sable radius doth proceed
Nought but confused shows, to no intent.
Be this a Temple; there Sybisla stand,
Preparing reverent Rytes with holy hand,
And so bright visions go, and entertain
Al round about, whilst I'll to sleep again.
I The daughter of Wonder, (now made the Mes∣senger of Power) am here descend, to signify the cōming of a Celestial presence of Goddesses, determined to visit this fair Temple of Peace, which holy hands &amp; devout desires, have dedica∣ted to unity and concord. And leaving to show themselves any more in Sames, Ida, Paphos, their ancient delighting-places of Greece, &amp; Asia, made
now the seats of Barbarism &amp; spoil, vouchsafe to recreate themselves upon this Western Mount of mighty BRITTANY, the Land of civil Music and of rest, and are pleased to appear in the selfsame Figures, wherein antiquity hath formerly clothed thē, and as they have been cast in the imagination of piety, who hath giuē mortal shapes to the gifts &amp; effects of an eternal power, for that those beau∣tifull Characters of sense were easier to be read then their mystical Ideas, dispersed in that wide, and imcomprehensible volume of Nature.
And well have mortal men apparelled, all the Graces, all the Blessings, all Virtues, with that shape wherein themselves are much delighted, &amp; which work the best Motions, and best represent the beauty of heavenly Powers.
And therefore reverent Prophetess, that here at∣tendest upon the devotions of this Place, prepare thy self for those Rytes that appertain to thy fun∣ction, and the honour of such Deities, and to the end thou may have a fore-notion what Powers, &amp; who they are that come, take here this Prospec∣tiue, and therein note and tell what thou see: for well may thou there observe their shadows, but their presence will bereave thee of all, save ad∣miration and amazement, for who can look upon such Powers and speak? And so I leave thee.
WHAT have I seen? where am I? or do I see at all? or am I any where? was this Iris, (the Messenger of Iuno) or else but a fantas∣me or imagination? will the divine Goddesses vouchsafe to visit this poor Temple? Shall I be blessed, to entertain so great Powers? it can bee but a Dream: yet so great Powers have blessed, as humble roofs, &amp; use, out of no other respect, then their own gracefulness to shine where they will. But what Prospective is this? or what shall I herein see? Oh admirable Powers! what sights are these?
FIRST here Imperial Iuno in her Chair,
With Septer of cōmand for Kingdoms large:
Descends all clad in colours of the Ayre,
Crowned with bright Stars, to signify her charge.
NEXT war-like Pallas, in her Helmet dressed
With Lance of winning, Target of defence:
In whom both Wit and Courage are expressed,
To get with glory, hold with Providence.
THEN lovely Venus in bright Majesty,
Appears with mild aspect, in Doue-like
With th'all combining Skarffe of Amity, (hue:
T'ingird strange Nations with affections true.
NEXT Holy Vesla, with her flames of Zeal
Presents her self, clad in white Purity:
Whose book, the souls sweet comfort, doth re-
By the euer-burning Lamp of Piety. (ueale
THEN chaste Diana, in her Robes of greene,
With weapons of the Wood her self addrests
To bless the Forests, where her power is seen,
In peace with all the world, but Savage beasts.
NEXT rich Proserpina, with flames of gold,
Whose state although within the earth, yet she
Comes from aboue, &amp; in her hand doth hold
The Mine of wealth, with cheerful Majesty.
THEN all in purple Robes, rich Happiness
Next her appears, bearing in either hand,
Th'Ensignes both of wealth, and wits t'expresse,
That by them both, her Majesty doth stand.
NEXT all in partie-coloured Robes appears,
In white and crimson, graceful Concord dressed
With knots of Union, and in hand she bearcs
The happy joined Roses of our rest.
CLeare-eyed Astrea, nix, t with reverent brow
Clad in Celestial hue, (which best she likes)
Comes with her Balance, and her sword to show
That first her judgement weighs before it strikes.
THen cheerful Flora, all adorned with flowers,
Who clothes the earth with beauty &amp; delight
In thousand sundry suits, whilst shining hours
Will scarce afford a darkness to the night.
NExt plenteous Ceres in her Harvest weed,
Crowned with th'increase of what she gave to
To gratitude &amp; faith: in whom we read, (keep:
Who sows on Virtue shall with glory reap.
LAstly comes Tithes, Albious fairest love,
Whō she in faithful Arms deign to embrace
And brings the Trident of her Power, t'approue
The kind respect she hath to do him grace.
Thus have I read their shadows, but behold!
In glory, where they come as Iris told!
DEsert, Reward, and Gratitude,
The Graces of Society;
Do here with hand in hand conclude
The blessed chain of Amity:
For we deserve, we give, we thank,
Thanks, Gifts, Deserts, thus join in rank.
We yield the splendent raijes of light,
Unto these blessings that descend:
The grace whereof with more delight,
The well disposing doth commend;
Whilst Gratitude, Rewards, Deserts,
Please, win, draw on, &amp; couple hearts.
For worth and power and due respect,
Deserves, bestows, returns with Grace:
The meed, reward, the kind effect,
That give the world a cheerful face,
And turning in this course of right,
Make Virtue move with true delight.
OPower of powers, grāt to our vows we pray,
That these fair blessings which we now erect
In Figures left vs here, in substance may
Be those great props of glory and respect.
1 Let kingdoms large, 2 let armed policy, (white
3 Mild love, 4 true Zeal, 5 right shouting at the
Of brave designs: 6 let wealth, 7 felicity,
8 Justice, 9 &amp; cōcord, 10 pleasure, 11 plenty, 12 might
And power by Sea, with Grace proportionate,
Make glorious both the Sovereign &amp; his State.
WHiles worth with honour make their choice
For measured motions ordered right,
Now let vs likewise give a voice,
Unto the touch of our delight.
For comforts locked up without sound,
Are th'vnborne children of the thought:
Like unto Treasures never found
That buried lowe are left forgot.
Where words, our glory doth not show,
(There) like brave Actions without Fame;
It seems as Plants not set to grow,
Ores a Tomb without a Name.
AS I was the joyful Messenger to notify the coming, so am I now the same of the depar∣ture of these divine powers. Who having cloa∣thed themselves with these appearances, doe now return back again to the Spheres of their own being from, whence they came. But yet, of my self, this much I must reveal, though against the warrant of a Messenger; who I know had bet∣la to fail in obedience then in presumption, that these Deities by the motion of the all-direc∣ting Pallas, the glorious Patroncsse of this migh∣tie Monarchy, descending in the Majesty of their invisible essence, upon yonder Mountain, found there, the best, (and most worthily the best) of LADIES, disporting with her choicest Atten∣dants, whose forms they presently undertook, as delighting to be in the best-built-Temples of Beauty and Honour. And in them vouchsafed to appear in this manner, being otherwise no obe∣jests for mortal eyes. And no doubt, but that in respect of the persons under whose beautiful co∣uerings
they have thus presēted themselves, these Deities will be pleased the rather at their inuoca∣tion (knowing all their desires to be such) as ever∣more to grace this glorious Monarchy with the Real effects of these blessings represented.

BEhold, yon Commit shows his head again;
Twice hath he thus at crosse-turnes thrown on vs
Prodigious looks: Twice hath he troubled
The waters of our eyes. See, hoe's turned wilde;
Go on in Gods name.
On before there ho.
Kinsmen and friends, take from your manly sides
Your weapons to keep back the desprate boy
From doing violence to the innocent dead.
I pry thee dear Matheo.
Come, you're mad.
I do arest thee murderer: set down.
Villains set down that sorrow, tic all mine.
I do beseech you all, for my bloods sake
Send hence your milder spirits, and let wrath
Join in confederacy with your weapons points;
If he proceed• •o vex vs, let your swords
Seek out his bowels: funeral grief loathes words.
Set on.
Set down the body.
O my Lord?
You're wrong: in the open street? you see shees dead.
I know she is not dead.
Frantic young man,
Wilt thou believe these gentlemen? pray speak:
Thou dost abuse my child, and mockst the tears
That here are shed for her: If to behold
Those roses withered, that set out her cheeks:
That pair of stars that gave her body light,
Darkened and dim for ever: All those rivers
That fed her veins with warm and crimson streams,
Frozen and dried up: If these be signs of death,
Then is she dead. Thou vnreligious youth,
Art not ashamed to empty all these eyes
Of funeral tears, (a debt due to the dead,)
As mirth is to the living: Sham'st thou not
To have them stare on thee? hark, thou art cursed
Even to thy face, by those that scarce can speak.
My Lord.
What would thou have? is she not dead?
Oh, you ha killed her by your cruelty.
Admit I had, thou killst her now again;
And art more savage then a barbarous Moore.
Let me but kiss her pale and bloodless lip.
O fie, fie, fie.
Or if not touch her, let me look on her.
As you regard your honour.
Honour! smoke.
Or if you loved his living, spare her now.
I, well done sir, you play the gentleman:
Steal hence: tic nobly done: away: Isle join
My force to yours, to stop this violent torment:
Pass on.
Matheo, thou dost wound me more.
I give you physic noble friend, not wounds,
Oh well said, well done, a true gentleman:
Alack, I know the sea of lovers rage
Comes rushing with so strong a tide: it beats
And bears down all respects of life, of honour,
Of friends, of foes, forget her gallant youth.
Forget her?
Na, na, be but patient:
For why deaths hand hath sued a strict divorce
Twixt her and thee: whats beauty but a coarse?
What but fair sand-dust are earths purest forms:
Queens bodies are but trunks to put in worms.
Speak no more sentences, my good lord, but slip hence; you see they are but fits, isle rule him I warrant ye. I, so, tread gingerly, your Grace is here somewhat too long alrea∣die. Sbloud the jest were now, if having tan some knocks of the pate already, he should get loose again, and like a mad Ox, toss my new black cloaks into the kennel. I must hue∣more his lordship: my lord Hipolito, is it in your stomach to go to dinner?
Where is the body?
The body, as the Duke spake very wisely, is gone to be wormd.
I cannot rest, isle meet it at next turn,
Isle see how my love looks,
How your love looks? worse than a scarre-crowe, wrestle not with me: the great fellow gives the fall for a ducats.
I shall forget my self.
Pray do so, leave your self behind your self, and go whither you will. Sfoote, doe you long to have base roags that maintain a saint Anthonies fire in their noses (by nothing but two penny Ale) make ballads of you? if the Duke had but so much mettle in him, as is in a cobblers awl, he would ha been a vexed thing: he and his train had blown you up, but that their powlder haz taken the wet of cowards: you'll bleed three pot∣tles of Elegant, by this light, if you follow em, and then wee shall have a hole made in a wrong place, to have Surgeons roll thee up like a baby in swaddling clouts.
What day is to day, Mathaeo?
Yea mary, this is an easy question: why to day is, let me see, thurseday.
Oh, thurseday.
Hears a coil for a dead commodity, sfoote wo∣men when they are alive are but dead commodities, for you shall have one woman lie upon many men's hands.
She died on monday then.
And thats the most villainous day of all the week to die in: and she was well, and eat a mess of water-grewel on
monday morning.
I, it cannot be,
Such a bright taper should burn out so soon.
O yes my Lord, so soon: why I ha known them, that at dinner have bin as well, and had so much health, that they were glad to pledge it, yet before three a clock have bin found dead drunk.
On thurseday buried! and on monday died,
Quick haste byr'lady: sure her winding sheet
Was laid out fore her body, and the worms
That now must feast with her, were even bespoke,
And solemnly invited like strange guests.
Strange feeders they are indeed my lord, and like your jester or young Courtier, will enter upon any mans tren∣cher without bidding.
Cursed be that day for ever that robbed her
Of breath, and me of bliss, henceforth let it stand
Within the Wizards book (the calendar)
Marked with a marginal finger, to be chosen
By thieves, by villains, and black murderers,
As the best day for them to labour in.
If henceforth this adulterous bawdy world
Be got with child with treason, sacrilege,
Atheism, rapes, treacherous friendship, perjury,
Slander, (the beggars sin) lies, (sin of fools)
Or any other damned impieties,
On Monday let em be delivered:
I swear to thee Mathaeo, by my soul.
Hereafter weekly on that day isle glow
Mine eie-lids down, because they shall not gaze
On any female cheek. And being locked up
In my close chamber, there isle meditate
On nothing but my Infaelices end,
Or on a dead mans scull draw out mine own.
You'll doe all these good works now every mon∣day, because it is so bad: but I hope upon tuesday morning I shall take you with a wench.
If ever whilst frail blood through my veins run,
On women's beams I throw affection,
Save her thats dead: or that I loosely fly
To'th shore of any other wafting eye,
Let me not prosper heaven. I will be true,
Even to her dust and ashes: could her tomb
Stand whilst I lived so long, that it might rot,
That should fall down, but she be ne'er forgot.
If you have this strange monster, Honesty, in your belly, why so Iig-makers and chroniclers shall pick some∣thing out of you: but and I smell not you and a bawdy house out within these ten days, let my nose be as big as an En∣glish bag-pudding: Isle follow your lordship, though it be to the place aforenamed.
How now porter, will she come?
If I may trust a woman sir, she will come.
Theres for thy pains, godamercy, if ever I stand in need of a wench that will come with a wet finger, Porter, thou shalt earn my money before any Clarissimo in Millane; yet so god sa me shees mine own sister body and soul, as I am a christian Gentleman; farewell, isle ponder till she come: thou hast bin no bawd in fetching this woman, I assure thee.
No matter if I had sir, better men than Porters are bawds.
O God sir, many that have borne offices. But Pore∣la, art sure thou went into a true house?
I think so, for I met with no thieves.
Nay but art sure it was my sister Viola.
I am sure by all superscriptions it was the party you ciphered.
Not very tall.
Nor very lowe, a middling woman.
It was she faith, it was she, a pretty plump cheek like mine.
At a blush, a little very much like you.
Gods so, I would not for a ducats she had kicked up his heals, for I ha spent an abomination this voyage, ma•ie I did it amongst sailors and gentlemen: theres a little modicum
more porter for making thee stay, farewell honest porter.
I am in your debt sir, God preserve you.
Not so neither, good porter, gods lid, yonder she coms. Sister Viola, I am glad to see you stirring: its news to have me here, i•t not sister?
Yes trust me: I wondered who should be so bold to send for me, you are welcome to Millan brother.
Troth sister I heard you were married to a very rich chuff, and I was very sorry for it, that I had no better clothes, and that made me send: for you know wee Milliners love to strut upon Spanish leather. And how does all our friends?
Very well; you ha travelled enough now, I trow, to sow your wilde oats.
A pox on em; wilde oats, I ha not an oat to throw at a horse, troth sister I ha sowde my oats, and reaped 200. ducats if I had em, here, mary I must entreat you to lend me some thirty or forty till the ship come, by this hand isle discharge at my day, by this hand.
These are your old oaths.
Why sister, doe you think isle forswear my hand?
Well, well, you shall have them: put your self into better fashion, because I must employ you in a serious matter.
Isle swear like a horse if I like the matter.
You ha cast off all your old swaggering humours.
I had not sailed a league in that great fish-pond (the sea) but I cast up my very gall.
I am the more sorry, for I must employ a true swagge∣rer.
Nay by this iron sister, they shall find I am powlder and touch-box, if they put fire once into me.
Then lend me your ears.
Mine ears are yours dear sister.
I am married to a man that haz wealth enough, and wit enough.
A linen Draper I was told sister.
Very true, a grave Citizen; I want nothing that a wife can wish from a husband: but hears the spite, hee haz
not all things belonging to a man.
Gods my life, hoe's a very mandrake, or else (God bless vs) one a these whiblins, and thats worse, and then all the children that he gets lawfully of your body sister, are bastards by a statute.
O you run over me too fast brother, I have heard it often said, that hee who cannot be angry, is no man. I am sure my husband is a man in pri•t, for all things else, save only in this, no tempest can move him.
Slid, would he had been at sea with vs, hee should ha been moved and moved again, for Isle be sworn la, our drun∣ken ship reeled like a Dutchman.
No loss of goods can increase in him a wrinkle, no crabbed language make his countenance sour, the stubburn∣nes of no servant shake him, he haz no more gall in him than a Dove, no more sting than an Ant: Musician will he never bee, (yet I find much music in him,) but he loves no frets, and is so free from anger, that many times I am ready to bite off my tongue, because it wants that virtue which all women's tongues have (to anger their husbands:) Brother, mine can by no thun∣der: turn him into a sharpness.
Belike his blood sister, is well brewd then.
I protest to thee Fustigo, I love him most affecti∣onately, but I know not — I ha such a tickling with∣in me — such a strange longing; nay, verily I doo long.
Then you're with child sister, by all signs and tokens; nay, I am partly a Physician, and partly something else. I ha read Albertus Magnus, and Aristotles em∣blames.
You're wide ath bow hand still brother: my longings are not wanton, but wayward: I long to have my patient hus∣band eat up a whole Porcupine, to the intent, the bristling quills may stick about his lips like a flemmish, mustacho, and be shot at me: I shall be leaner than the new Moon, un∣less I can make him borne mad.
Sfoote half a quarter of an hour does that: make him a cuckold.
Puh, he would count such a cut no unkindness.
The honester Citizen he, then make him drunk and cut off his beard.
Fie, fie, idle, idle, hoe's no French-man, to fret at the loss of a little scald hair. No brother, thus it shall be, you must be secret.
As your Mid-wife I protest sister, or a Barber-surgeon.
Repair to the Tortoise here in S. Christophers street, I will send you money, turn your self into a brave man: instead of the arms of your mistress, let your sword and your military scarf hang about your neck.
I must have a great Horse-mans French feather too sister.
O, by any means, to show your light head, else your hat will sit like a coxcomb: to be brief, you must bee in all points a most terrible wide-mouth'd swaggerer.
Nay, for swaggering points let me alone.
Resort then to our shop, and (in my husbands presence) kiss me, snatch rings, jewels, or any things so you give it back again brother in secret.
By this hand sister.
Swear as if you came but new from knight∣ing.
Nay, Isle swear after 400. a year.
Swagger worse then a Lieutenant among fresh-wa∣la soldiers, call me your love, your yngle, your cousin, or so; but sister at no hand.
No, no, It shall be cousin, or rather cousin, thats the gulling word between the Citizens wives &amp; their old dames, that man em to the garden; to call you one a mine aunts, sister, were as good as call you arrant whoores no, no, let me alone to cousin you rarely.
Haz heard I have a brother, but never saw him, there∣fore put on a good face.
The best in M••lan I warrant.
Take up wares, but pay nothing, rifle my bosom, my pocket, my purse, the boxes for money to dice with all; but bro∣there, you must give all back again in secret.
By this welkin that he•re roars? I will, 〈◊〉 else let me never know what a secret is: why sister do you think Isle cunni-catch you, when you are my cousin? Gods my life, then I were a stark Ass, if I fret not his guts, beg me for a fool.
Be circumspect, and do so then, farewell.
The Tortoise sister? Isle stay there; forty ducats.
Thither Isle send: this law can none deny,
Women must have their longings, or they die.
Give charge that none do enter, locke the doors;
And fellows, what your eyes and ears receive,
Upon your lives trust not the gadding air
To carry the least part of it: the glass, the houre-glasse.
Here my Lord.
Ah, tic mere spent.
But Doctor Benedict, does your Art speak truth?
Art sure the soporiferous stream will ebb,
And leave the Crystal banks of her white body
(Pure as they were at first) just at the hour▪
Just at the hour my Lord.
Vncurtaine her.
Softly sweet Doctor: what a coltish heate
Spreads over all her body.
Now it works:
The vital spirits that by a sleepy charm
Were bound up fast, and threw an icy rust
On her exterior parts, now gin to break:
Trouble her not my Lord.
Some stools, you called
For music, did you not? Oh ho, it speaks,
It speaks, watch sirs her waking, note those sands,
Doctor sit down: A Dukedom that should way mine
Own down twice, being put into onestale:
And that fond desperate boy Hipolito,
Making the weight up▪ should not (at my hands)
Buy her in the tother, were her 〈…〉
Than hers, who makes a dowry up 〈…〉
Doctor Isle starve her on the Appenine
Ere he shall marry her: I must confess,
Hipolito is nobly by•no, a man;
Did not mine enemies blood boil in his veins,
Whom I would court to be my son in law?
But Princes whose high spleens for empery swell,
Are not with easy art made parallel.
She wakes my Lord.
Look Doctor Benedict.
I charge you on your lives maintain for truth,
What ere the Doctor or my self aver
For you shall bear hes hence to Bargain
Oh God, what fearful dreams?
Lady.
Ha.
Girl.
Why Infaelisha, how first now, ha, speak?
I'm well, what makes this Doctor here? I'm well.
Thou were not so even now, sickness pale hand
Laid hold on thee even in the died offeasting,
And when a cap crowned with thy lovers health
Had touched thy lips, a sensible cold dew
Stood on thy cheeks, as if that death had wept
To see such beauty altered.
I remember
I sate at banquet, but felt no such change.
Thou hast forgot then how a messenger
Came wildely in with this unsavoury news
That he was dead.
What messenger? whose dead?
Hipolito, alack, wring not thy hands.
I saw no messenger, heard no such news,
Trust me you did sweet Lady.
La you now.
Yes indeed Madam.
La you now, tic well God knows.
You ha slain him, and now you'll murder me.
Good Infaelishae vex not thus thy self,
Of this the bad rep••• before did strike
So coldly to the heart▪ that the swift currents
Of life were all frozen up.
It is untrue,
Tic most untrue, O most unnatural father▪
And we had much to do by Are• best cunning,
To fetch life back again.
Most certain Lady.
Why la you now, you'll not believe me, friends,
Sweat we not all; had we not much to do?
Yes indeed my Lord, much▪
Death drew such fearful pictures in thy face,
That were Hipolito alive again,
Isle kneel and woo the noble gentleman
To be thy husband▪ now I 〈◊〉 repent
My sharpness to him▪ and his family▪
Nay, do not weep for him, we all must die:
Doctor, this place where she so oft hath seen
H•• lively presence, haunts her, does it not?
Doubtless my Lord it does▪
It does, it does.
Therefore sweet girl thou shalt to Berg•n•▪
Even where you will, in any place theres woe.
A Coach is ready, Berg••• doth stand
In a most wholesome air, sweet walks, theres deer,
I, thou shalt hunt and send vs venison.
Which like some gods in the 〈◊〉 groves▪
Thine own fair hand shall strike; sirs, you shall teach he•
To stand, and how to shoot, I, she shall hunt:
Cast off this sorrow▪ In girl, and prepare
This night to ride away to Berg•••.
O most unhappy maid.
Follow it close.
No words that she was buried on your lives▪
Or that her ghost walks now after shees dead;
Isle hang you if you name• funeral•
He speaks 〈◊〉 Lord▪ 〈◊〉 I speak 〈◊〉 dead∣lie word.
And Isle speak 〈…〉 Greek.
Away▪ look to 〈…〉
Did you observe how 〈…〉
Upon his name and death, O would it were true.
It may my Lord.
May? how? I wish his death.
And you may have your wish▪ say but the word,
And tic a strong Spell to rip up his grave:
I have good knowledge with Hipolito,
He calls me friend, Isle creep into his bosom,
And sting him there to death•poison can do it.
Perform it; Isle create thee half mine heir.
It shall be done, although the fact be foul.
Greatness hides sin, the guilt upon my soul.
Signior Pioratto, signior 〈◊〉, shall• be merry? shall• play the wags now?
I, any thing that may beget the child of laughter.
Truth I have a pretty sportive conceit new crept into my brain, will move excellent mirth.
Lets have it, lets have it, and where shall the scene of mirth lie?
At signior Candido•s house, the patient man, nay the monstrous patient man; they say his blood is immovable, that he haz taken all patience from a man, and all constancy from a woman.
That makes so many whoores nowadays.
I, and so many knaves too.
Well sir.
To conclude, the report goes, hes so mild, so affy∣ble, so suffering, that nothing indeed can move him: now do but think what sport it will be to make this fellow (the mirror of patience) as angry, as vexed, and as mad as an English cuc∣kolde.
O, it were admirable mirth, that: but how wilt be done signior?
Let me alone, I have a wick, a conceit, a thing, a de∣vice will st••g him in faith, if he have but a thy•blefull of blood i•• belly, or a spleen not so big as a tavern token.
Thou 〈◊〉 him? thou move him▪ thou anger him? alas, I know his approved temper• thou 〈◊〉 him? why hee ha• a patie•ce above 〈…〉 sooner raise a
spleen in an Angel▪ than rough humour in him: why isle give you instance for it. This wonderfully tempered signior Candido upon a time invited home to his house certain No•politane lords of curious taste, and no mean palate, conjuring his wife of all loves, to prepare cheer fitting for such honourable tren∣cher-men. She (just of a women's nature, covetous to try the uttermost of vexation, and thinking at last to get the start of his humour) willingly neglected the preparation, and became vnfurnisht, not only of dainty, but of ordinary dishes. He (ac∣cording to the mildness of his breast) entertained the lords, and with courtly discourse beguiled the time (as much as a Cit∣tizen might doe:) to conclude, they were hungry lords, for there came no meat in; their stomachs were plainly g••lt, and their teeth deluded, and (if anger could have 〈◊〉 a man) there was matter enough in faith to vex any citizen in the world, if hee were not too much made a fool by his wife.
I, Isle swear for it: sfoote, had it been my case, I should ha played mad tricks with my wife and family: first I would ha spitted the men, stewed the maids▪ and baked the mistress, and so served them in.
Why twould ha tempered any blood but his,
And thou to vex him th•• to anger him
With some poor• shallow jest▪
Sbloud signior Pioratto, (you that disparage my con∣ceit) isle wage a hundred ducats upon the head on it, that it moves him, fretts him, and gall• him.
Done, tic a lay, join golls on it: wit• us signior Fl••llo.
Witness: tic do•e▪
Come, follow me: the house is not far off▪
Isle thrust him from his humour, vex his breast,
And win a hundred ducats by one •east.
Come, you put up your wares in good order here, do you not think you, one 〈◊〉 cast this way, another that way? you had need have a patient moister indeed.
I, isle besworn, for we have a 〈…〉.
You mumble, do you mumble? I would your 〈◊〉 or I could be a no•e more angry: for two patient folks in a house spoil all the servants that ever shall come under them.
You patient▪ I, so is the devil when he is horn mad.
Gentlemen, what do you lack? what first you buy? See fine hollands, fine cambrickes, fine lawns.
What first you lack?
What first you buy?
Wheres signior Candido thy moister?
Faith signior, hes a little negotiated, he will appear presently.
Fellow, lets see a lawn, a choice one sitra.
The best in all Mill•n, Gentlemen, and this is the piece. I can •it you Gentlemen with fine calicoes too for dub∣lets, the only sweet fashion now, most delicate and courtly, a meek gentle calico, cut upon two double affable taffataes, ah, most neat, feat, and 〈…〉.
A notable-voluble tongde villain.
I warrant this fellow was never begot without much Pr•ting.
What, and is this she say thou?
I, and the purest she that ever you fingered since you were a gentleman: look how even she is, look how clean she is, ha, as even as the brow of Cynthia, and as clean as your sons and heirs when they ha spent all.
Puh, thou talk, pox on it tic rough.
How? is she rough? but if you bid pox on it sir, twill take away the roughness presently.
Ha signior; haz he fitted your French curse?
Look you Gentleman, hears an other, compare them I pray, compare Virgilium cum Flomero, compare virgins with harlot•.
Puh, I ha seen better, and as you term them, evener and cleaner.
You may see further for your mind, but trust me you shall not find better for your body.
O here he comes, lets make as tho we pass,
Come, come, weal try in some other shop.
How now? what's the matter?
The gentlemen find fault with this lawn, fall out with it, and without a cause too.
Without a cause!
And that makes you to let'em pass away,
Ah, may I crave a word with you gentlemen?
He calls vs.
Makes the better for the jest.
I pray come near,you're very welcome gallants,
Pray pardon my mans rudeness, for I fear me
He's talked aboue a prentice with you,-Lawnes!
Look you kind gentlemen-this! no: I this:
Take this upon my honest-dealing faith,
To be a true weave, not too hard, nor slack,
But even as far from falsehood, as from black.
Well, how doe you rate it?
Very conscionably, 18. s•a yard.
That's too dear: how many yards does the whole piece contain think you?
Why, some 17. yards I think, or there abouts,
How much would serve your turn? I pray.
Why let me see-would it were better too.
Truth, tic the best in Millan at few words.
Well: let me have then-a whole penny-worth.
Ha, ha: you're a merry gentleman.
A pennyworth I say.
Of lawn!
Of lawn? I of lawn, a pennyworth, sblood dost not hear? a whole pennyworth, are you deaffe?
Deaffe? no Sir: but I must tell you,
Our wares doe seldom meet such customers.
Nay, and you and your lawns be so squeamish,
Fare you well.
Pray stay, a word, pray Signior: for what purpose is it I beseech you?
Sblood, whats that to you: Isle have a penny worth.
A penny-worth! why you shall: Isle serve you presently.
Sfoot, a penny-worth mistress!
A penny-worth! call you these Gentlemen?
No, no: not there.
What then kind Gentle-man? what at this corner here?
No nor there neither.
Isle have it just in the middle, or else not.
Just in the middle: -ha-you shall too: what?
Have you a single penny?
Yes, hears one.
Lend it me I pray.
An exlent followed jest.
What will he spoil the Lawn now?
Patience, good wife.
I, that patience makes a fool of you: Gentlemen, you might ha found some other Citizen to have made a kind gull on, besides my husband.
Pray Gentlemen take her to be a woman,
Do not regard her language.—O kind soul:
Such words will drive away my customers,
Customers with a murrē: call you these customers?
Patience, good wife.
Pox, a your patience.
Sfoot mistress, I warrant these are some cheating companions.
Look you Gentleman, theres your ware, I thank you, I have your money; hear, pray know my shop, pray let me have your custom.
Custom quoth a.
Let me take more of your money.
You had need so.
Hark in thine ear, thast lost an hundred ducats.
Well, well, I knew: first possible that Homo,
Should be nor man, nor woman: not once moved;
No not at such an injury, not at all!
Sure hes a pigeon, for he has no gall.
Come, come, you're angry tho you smother it:
Yare vexed in faith,confess.
Why Gentle-men
Should you conceit me to be vexed or moved?
He has my ware, I have his money fort,
And thats no Argument I am angry: no,
The best Logitian can not prove me so.
oh, but the hateful name of a pennyworth of lawn,
And then cut out, ith middle of the piece:
Pah, I guess it by my self, would move a Lamb
Were he a Lynnen-draper -twould in faith.
Well, give me leave to answer you for that,
Were set here to please all customers,
Their humours and their fancies: -•ffend none:
We get by many, if we leese by one.
May be his mind stood to no more then that,
A penworth serves him, and amongst trades tic found,
Deny a pennyworth, it may cross a pound.
Oh, he that means to thrive with patient eye,
Must please the devil, if he come to buy.
O wondrous man, patient above wrong or woe,
How blessed were men, if women could be so.
And to express how well my breast is pleased•,
And satisfied in all: george fill a beaker.
Isle drink unto that Gentleman, who lately
Bestowed his money with me.
Gods my life,
We shall have all our gains drunk out in beakers,
To make amends for pennyworth of lawn.
Here wife, begin you to the Gentleman.
I begin to him.
George, filt up again:
It was my fault, my hand shook.
How strangely this doth show?
A patient man linked with a waspish shrove.
A silver and gilt beaker! I have a trick to work up∣on that beaker, sure twil fret him, it cannot choose but vex him. Siege▪ Castrachio, in pity to thee, I have a cōceit, will save thy 100. Ducats yet, twil doot, &amp; work him to impatience.
Sue•et Fluello, I should be bountiful to that conceit.
Well tic enough.
He•e Gentleman to you,
I wish your custom, yare exceeding welcome.
I pledge you Siege. Candido, -heere you, that must re∣ceiue a 100. Duccats.
Isle pledge them deep in faith Castruchio,
Signior Fluello?
Come: play't off: to me,
I am your last man.
George, supply the cup.
So, so, good honest George,
Here Signior Candido, all this to you.
Oh you must pardon me, I use it not.
Will you not pledge me then?
Yes, but not that:
Great love is shown in little.
Blurt on your sentences, -Sfoot you shall pledge me all.
Indeed I shall not.
Not pledge me? Sblood, Isle cary away the beaker then.
The beaker! Oh! that at your pleasure sir.
Now by this drink I will.
Pledge him, heel do it else.
So: I ha done you right, on my thumble nail,
What will you pledge me now?
You know me sir, I am not of that sin.
Why then farewell:
Isle bear away the beaker by this light.
Thats as you please, tic very good.
Nay it doth please me, &amp; as you say, tic a very good one:
Farewell Signior Candido.
Farewell Candido.
You're welcome gentlemen.
Heart not moved yet?
I think his patience is aboue our wit,
I told you before mistress, they were all cheaters.
Why fool, why husband, why madman, I hope you will not let'em sneak away so with a silver and gilt beaker, the best in the house too: go fellows make hue and cry after them.
Pray let your tongue lye still, all will be well:
Come hither George, hye to the Constable,
And in calm order wish him to attach them,
Make no great stir, because they're gentlemen,
And a thing partly done in merriment.
Tic but a size aboue a jest thou know,
Therefore pursue it mildly, go be gone,
The Constabl's hard by, bring him along, -make hast a∣gain.
O you're a goodly patient Woodcock, are you not now?
See what your patiēce comes too: every one saddles you, and rides you, you'll be shortly the common stone-horse of Myllan: a women's well holp't up with such a meacock, I had rather have a husband that would swaddle me thrice a day, then such a one, that will be gulled twice in half an how∣er, Oh I could burn all the wares in my shop for anger.
Pray wear a peaceful temper, be my wife,
That is, be patient: for a wife and husband
Share but one soul between them: this being known,
Why should not one soul then agree in one?
Hang your agreements: But if my beaker be gone.
Oh, hear they come.
The Constable sir, let'em come along with me, because there should be no wondering, he stays at door.
Constable goodman Abram.
Now Signior Candido, Sblood why doe you attach vs?
Sheart! attach vs!
Nay swear not gallants,
Your oaths may move your souls, but not move me,
You have a silver beaker of my wives.
You say not true: tic gilt.
Then you say true.
And being gilt, the guilt lies more on you.
I hope you're not angry sir.
Then you hope right, for I am not angry.
No, but a little moved.
I moved! it was you were moved, you were brough• hither.
But you (out of your anger &amp; impatience,)
Cause vs to be attached.
Nay you misplace it.
Out of my quiet sufferaence I did that,
And not of any wrath, had I shown anger,
I should have then pursued you with the law,
And hunted you to shame, as many worldlings
Doe build their anger upon feebler grounds,
The mores the pity, many loose their lives
For scarce so much coin as will hide their palm:
Which is most cruel, those have vexed spirits
That pursue lives, in this opinion rest,
The loss of Millions could not move my breast.
Thou art a blessed man, and with peace dost deal,
Such a meek spirit can bless a common weal.
Gentlemen, now tic upon eating time,
Pray part not hence, but dine with me to day.
I never heard a carter yet say nay
To such a motion. Isle not be the first.
Nor I,
Nor I,
The constable shall bear you company,
George call him in, let the world say what it can,
Nothing can drive me from a patient man.
A non forsooth.
What are you playing the rogue about?
About you forsooth: I me drawing up a hole in your white silk stocking.
Is my glass there? and my boxes of complexion?
Yes forsooth: your boxes of complexion are here I think: yes tic here: her's your twe complexi∣once, and if I had all the four complexions. I should ne'er set a good face vpont, some men I see are borne un∣der hard-fauourd planets as well as women: zounds I look
worse now then I did before, &amp; it makes her face glister most damnably, theres knavery in daubing I hold my life, or else this is only female Pomatum.
Wheres my ruff and poker you block-head?
Your ruff, your pocket, are engendering together up∣on the cup-bord of the Court, or the Court-cup-bord.
Fetch i'm: Is the pox in your hames, you can go no faster?
Wood the pox were in your fingers, unless you could leave flinging; catch.
Isle catch you, you dog by and by: do you grumble?
Cupped is a God, as naked as my nail
Isle whip him with a rod, if he my true love fail.
Theirs your ruff, shall I poke it?
Yes honest
no stay: pry thee good boy, hold here,
Down, down, down, down, I fall down and arise, down, I no∣for shall arise.
Troth M. then leave the trade if you shall never rise.
What trade? good-man Abram.
Why that, if down and arise or the falling trade.
Isle fall with you by and by.
If you doe I know who shall smart fort:
Troth Mistress, what do I look like now?
Like as you are: a panderly Sixpenny Rascal.
I may thank you for that: infaith I look like an old Proverb, Hold the Candle before the devil.
Vds life, Isle stick my knife in your Guts and you prate to me so: What?
Well met, pug, the pearl of beauty: vmh, vmh.
How now sir knave, you forget your duty, vmh, vmh.
Marry muff Sir, are you grown so dainty; fa, la, la, &amp;c.
Is it you Sir? the worst of twenty, fa la, la, leera la.
Pox on you, how doest thou hold my glass?
Why, as I hold your door: with my •ingers.
Nay pray thee sweet honey
hold up handsomely
We shall ha guests to day.
I lay my little maidenhead, my nose itches so.
I said so too last night, when our Fleas twinged me.
So Poke my ruff now, my gown, my gown, have I my fall?
Wher's my fall Roger?
Your fall forsooth is behind.
Gods my pittikins, some fool or other knocks.
Shall I open to the fool mistress?
And all these bibles lying thus? away with it quick∣lie, I, I, knock &amp; be dambde, whosoever you be. So: give the fresh Salmon lyne now: let him come a shore, hee shall serve for my breakfast, tho he go against my stomach.
Morrow cos.
How does my sweet acquaintance?
Save thee little Marmoset: how doest thou good pretty rogue?
Well, Godamercy good pretty rascal.
Roger some light I pry thee.
You shall Signior, for we that live here in this vale of misery, are as dark as hell.
Good Tobacco, Fluello?
Smell?
It may be tickling gear: for it plays with my nose already.
Her's another light Angel, Signior.
What? yon pied curtal, whats that you are neighi•g?
I say God send vs the light of heaven, or some more Angels.
Go fetch some wine, and drink half of it.
I must fetch some wine gentlemen and drink half of it.
Here Roger▪
No let me send pry thee.
Hold you canker worm.
You shall send both, if you please Signiors.
Stay, whats best to drink a mornings?
Hypocras sir, for my mistress, if I fetch it, is most dear to her.
Hypocras! there then, her's a teston for you, you snake
Right sir, her's iij.s.vi.d. for a pottle &amp; a manchet-
Her's most herculaniā Tobacco, ha some acquaintāce?
Fah, not I, makes your breath stink, like the peace of a Fox. Acquaintance, where supped you last night?
At a place sweet acquaintance where your health danced the Canaries y'faith: you should ha ben there.
I there among your Punkes, marry fah, hang-em: scorn't: will you never leave sucking of eggs in other folks hens nests.
Why in good troth, if you'll trust me acquaintance, there was not one hen at the board, ask Fluello.
No faith Cos; none but Cocks, signior Malauella drunk to thee.
O, a pure beagle; that horse-leach there?
And the knight, S. Oliuer Lollilo, swore he wold bestow a taffeta petticoat on thee, but to break his fast with thee.
With me! Isle choke him then, hang him Mole-cat∣cher, its the dreamingst snotty-nose.
Well, many took that Lollio for a fool, but he's a subtle fool.
I, and he has fellows: of all filthy dry-fisted knights, I cannot abide that he should touch me.
Why wench, is he scabbed?
Hang him, heel not live to bee so honest, nor to the credit to have scabs about him, his betters have em: but I hate to wear out any of his course knight-hood, because hoe's made like an Aldermans night-gowne, facst all with conny before, and within nothing but Fox: this sweet Oliuer, will eat Mutton till he be ready to burst, but the lean iawde-slaue will not pay for the scraping of his trēcher.
Plague him, set him beneath the salt, and let him not touch a bit, till every one has had his full cut.
Lord Ello, the Gentleman-Vsher came into vs too, marry it was in our cheese, for he had been to borrow money for his Lord, of a Citizen.
What an ass is that Lord, to borrow money of a Citizen.
Nay, Gods my pity, what an ass is that Citizen to lend money of a Lord.
Save you Gallants, signior Fluello, exceedingly well met, as I may say.
Signior Matheo, exceedingly well met too, as I may say.
And how fares my little pretty Mistress?
Even as my little pretty servant; sees three court di∣shes before her, and not one good bit in them: how now? why the devil standst thou so? Art in a trance?
Yes forsooth.
Why dost not fill out their wine?
Forsooth tic filled out already: all the wine that the sig∣nior has bestowed upon you is cast away, a Porter ran a little at me, and so fac'st me down that I had not a drop.
•me a cursed to let such a withered Artichocke faced-Rascall g•ow under my nose: now you look like an old •e ca•, going to the gallows: Isle be hanged if he ha not put up the money to cony-catch vs all.
No truel• forsooth, tic not put up yet.
How many Gentlemen hast thou served thus?
None but five hundred, besides prentices and serving∣men.
Doest think ••e pocket it up at thy hands?
Yes forsooth, I fear you will pocket it up.
Fie, fie, cut my lace good servant, I shall ha the mo∣there presently Im•e so vexed at this horse-pl•mm.
Plague, not for a scald pottle of wine.
Nay, sweet Bellafronte, for a little Pigs wash.
Here Roger, fetch more, a mischance. In faith Ac∣quantance.
Out of my sight, thou ungodly puritanical creature.
For the tother pottle? yes forsooth.
Spill that too: what Gentleman is that servant? your Friend?
Gods so a stool▪ a stool, if you love me Mistress en∣tertaine this Gentleman respectively, &amp; bid him welcome.
Hes very welcome, pray Sir sit.
Thanks Lady.
Count Hypolito, first not? cry you mercy signior, you walk here all this while, and we not heard you? let me be∣stow
a stool vpō you beseech you, you are a stranger here, we know the fashions ath house.
Please you be here my Lord.
No good Castruchio.
You have abandoned the Court I see my lord since the death of your mistress, well she was a delicate piece-be∣seech you sweet, come let vs serve under the colours of your acquaintance still: for all that, please you to meet here at my lodging of my cousin, I shall bestow a banquet upon you.
I never can deserve this kindness sir.
What may this Lady be, whom you call cousin?
Faith sir a poor gentlewoman, of passing good ca∣riage, one that has some suits in law, and lies here in an At∣tourneys house.
Is she married?
Ho, as all your punks are, a captens wife, or so? never saw her before, my Lord.
Never trust me a goodly creature.
By gad when you know her as we do, you'll swear she is the prettiest, kindest, sweetest, most bewitching honest ape under the pole. A skin, your satin is not more soft, nor lawn whiter.
Belike then shees some sale courtesan.
Troth as all your best faces are, a good wench.
Great pity that shees a good wench:
Thou shalt ha in faith mistress: how now signiors? what? whispering? did not I lay a wager I should take you within seven days in a house of vanity.
You did, and I beshrew your heart, you have won.
How do you like my mistress?
Well, for such a mistress: better, if your mistress be not you master.
I must break manners gentlemen, fare you well.
Sfoote you shall not leave vs.
The gentleman likes not the taste of our company,
Beseech you stay.
Trust me my affairs beckon for me, pardon me.
Will you call for me half an hour hence here?
Perhaps I shall.
Perhaps? fah! I know you can swear to me you will,
Since you will press me on my word, I will.
What sullen picture is this servant?
Its Count Hipolito, the brave Count.
As gallant a spirit, as any in Millan you sweet Iewe,
Oh hes a most essential gentleman, cos.
Did you never hear of Count Hipolitos ac∣quaintance?
Marymuffe a your counts, &amp; be no more life in'em.
Hes so malcontent! sir Bellafronta, &amp; you be ho∣nest gallants, lets sup together, and have the count with vs: thou shalt sit at the upper end puncke.
Puncke, you sowcde gurnet?
Kings truce: come, isle bestow the supper to have him but laugh.
He betrays his youth too grossly to that tyrant ma∣lancholy.
All this is for a woman.
A woman! some whore! what sweet Jewel first?
Wot she heard you.
Troth so wud I.
And I by heaven.
Nay good servant, what woman?
Pah.
Pry thee tell me, abuse and tell me: I warrant hes an honest fellow, if hee take on thus for a we•ch: good rogue who:
Byth Lord I will not, must not faith mistress: first a match sirs? his night, at Th'antilop: I, for theirs best wine, and good boys.
Its done at Th'antilop.
I cannot be there to night.
Cannot? bith lord you shall.
By the Lady I will not: shoal!
Why then put it off till friday: wut come then cousin?
Well.
You're the waspishest Ape. Roger, put your mis∣tress in mind to sup with vs on friday next: you're best come like a madwoman without a band in your waistcoat, &amp; the linings of your kirtle outward, like every common hackney that steals out at the back gate of her sweet knights lodging
Go, go, hang your self.
Its dinner time Matheo, shalls hence?
Yes, yes, farewell wench.
Farewell boys: Roger what wine sent they for?
Bastard wine, for if it had bin truly begotten, it wud not ha bin ashamed to come in, her's vi. s. to pay for nursing the bastard.
A company of rooks! O good sweet Roger, run to the Poulters and buy me some fine Larks.
No woodcocks?
Yes faith a couple, if they be not dear.
Isle buy but one, theres one already here.
Is the gentleman (my friend) departed mistress?
His back is but new-turnd sir.
Fare you well.
I can direct you to him.
Can you? pray.
If you please stay, heel not be absent long.
I care not much.
Pray sit forsooth.
I'm hot.
If may use your room, isle rather walk.
At your best pleasure-whew-some rubbers there.
Indeed isle non: indeed I will not: thanks.
Pretty-fine-lodging. I perceive my friend
Is old in your acquaintance.
Troth sir, he comes
As other gentlemen, to spend spare hours;
If your self like our roof• (such as it is)
Your own acquaintance may be as old as his.
Say I did like; what welcome should I find?
Such as my present fortunes can afford.
But would you let me play Mathaeos part?
What part?
Why embrace you: dally with you, kiss:
Faith tell me, will you leave him, and love me?
I am in bonds to no man sir.
Why then,
You're free for any man: if any, me.
But I must tell you Lady, were you mine,
You should be all mine: I could brooke no sharers,
I should be covetous, and sweep up all.
I should be pleasures usurer: faith I should.
O fate!
Why sigh you Lady? may I know?
T'has never bin my fortune yet to single
Out that one man, whose love could fellow mine.
As I have ever wished it: ô my Stars!
Had I but met with one kind gentleman,
That would have purchacde sin alone, to himself,
For his own private use, although sc•rs proper:
Indifferent handsome: meetly legedd and thyed:
And my allowance reasonable-yfaith,
According to my body-by my troth,
I would have bin as true unto his pleasures,
Yea, and as loyal to his afternoons,
As ever a poor gentlewoman could be.
This were well now, to one but newly •lodged•
And scarce a day old in this subtle world:
It were pretty Art, good bird-lime, cunning net:
But come, come, faith-confesse: how many men
Have drunk this selfsame protestation,
From that red tycing lip?
Indeed not any.
Indeed? and blush not!
No, in truth not any.
Indeed! in truth!-how warily you swear?
Tic well: if ill it be not: yet had I
The ruffian in me, and were drawn before you
But in light colours, I doe know indeed,
You could not swear indeed, But thunder oaths
That should shake heaven, drown the harmonious spears,
And pierce a soul (that loved her makers honour)
With horror and amazement.
Shall I swear?
Will you believe me then?
Worst then of all,
Our sins by custom, seem (at last) but small.
Were I but o'er your threshold, a next man,
And after him a next, and then a fourth,
Should have this golden hook, and lascivious bait,
Thrown out to the full length, why let me tell you:
I ha seen letters sent from that white hand,
Tuning such muse•ke to Matheos ear.
Mathaeo! thats true, but believe it, I
No sooner had laid hold upon your presence,
But straight mine eye conveyed you to my heart.
Oh, you cannot fine with me, why, I know Lady,
This is the common passion of you all,
To hook in a kind gentleman, and then
Abuse his coin, conveying it to your lover,
And in the end you show him a french trick,
And so you leave him, that a coach may run
Between his legs for breadth.
O by my soul!
Not I: therein isle prove an honest whore,
In being true to one, and to no more.
If any be disposed to trust your oath,
Let him: isle not be he▪ I know you feine
All that you speak, I: for a mingled harlot,
Is true in nothing but in being false.
What! shall I teach you how to loath your self?
And mildly to•: not without sense or reason.
I am content, I would fine loath my self,
If you not love me.
Then if your gracious blood be not all wasted,
I shall assay to do it.
Lend me your silence, and attention,-you have no soul,
That makes you way so light: heavens treasure bought it,
And half a crown hath sold it: for your body
Is like the common shore, that still receives
All the towns filth. The sin of many men
Is within you, and thus much I suppose,
That if all your committers stood in rank,
Theide make a lane, (in which your shame might dwell)
And with their spaces reach from hence to hell.
Nay, shall I urge it more, there has been known,
As many by one harlot, maimed and dismembered,
As would ha stuffed an Hospital: this I might
Apply to you, and perhaps doe you right:
O you're as base as any beast that bears,
Your body is ee'ne hired, and so are theirs.
For gold and sparkling jewels, (if he can)
You'll let a Iewe get you with christian:
Be he a Moore, a Tartar, tho his face
Look vglier then a dead mans scull,
Could the devil put on a humane shape,
If his purse shake out crowns, up then he gets,
Whores will be rid to hell with golden bits:
So that you're crueler then Turks, for they
Sell Christians only, you sell your selves away.
Why those that love you, hate you: and will term you
Lickerish damnation: wish themselves half sunk
After the sin is laid out, and ee'ne curse
Their fruitless riot, (for what one begets
Another poisons) lust and murder hit,
A tree being often shook, what fruit can knit?
O me unhappy!
I can vex you more;
A harlot is like Dunkirk, true to none,
Swallows both English, Spanish, fulsome Dutch,
Blacke-doord Italian last of all the French,
And he sticks to you faith: gives you your diet,
Brings you acquainted, first with monsier Doctor,
And then you know what follows.
Misery.
Rank, s•nking, and most loathsome misery.
Me thinks a toad is happier then a whore,
That with one poison swells, with thousands more
The other stocks her veins: harlot: fie! fie,
You are the miserablest Creatures breathing,
The very slaves of nature: mark me else,
You put on rich attires, others eyes wear them,
You eat, but to supply your blood with sin,
And this strange curse ee'ne haunts you to your graves.
From fools you get, and spend it upon slaves:
Like Bears and Apes, you're baited and show tricks
For money; but your Bawd the sweetness licks.
Indeed you are their Iourney-women, and doe
All base and damned works they list set you to:
So that you ne'er are rich; for doe but show me,
In present memory, or in ages past,
The fairest and most famous Courtesan,
Whose flesh was dearest; that raised the price of sin,
And held it up; to whose intemperate bosom,
Princes, Earls, Lords, the worst has bin a knight,
The mean a Gentleman, have offred up
Whole Hecatombs of sighs, &amp; raind in showers
Handfuls of gold, yet for all this, at last
Diseases sucked her marrow, then grew so poor,
That she has begged, e'ene at a beggars door.
And (wherein heaven has a singer) when this Idol,
From coast to coast, has leapt on foreign shores,
And had more worship, thē th'outlandish whores:
When several Nations have gone over her,
When for each several City she has seen,
Her Maidenhead has bin new, &amp; bin sold dear:
Did live well there, &amp; might have died unknown,
And vndefam'd; back comes she to her own,
And there both miserably lives and dyes,
Scorned even of those, that once adored her eyes,
As if her fatall-circled life, thus ran,
Her pride should end there, where it first began.
What do you weep to hear your Story read?
Nay, if you spoil your cheeks, Isle read no more.
O yes, I pray proceed:
Indeed twill do me good to weep indeed.
To give those tears a relish, this I add,
You're like the Jaws, scattered, in no place certain,
Your days are tedious, your hours burdensome:
And were it not for full suppers, midnight Revels,
Dancing, wine, riotous meetings, which doe drown,
And bury quite in you all virtuous thoughts,
And on your eye-lids hang so heavily,
They have no power to look so high as heaven,
Your sit and muse on nothing but despair,
Curse that devil Lust, that so burns up your blood,
And in ten thousand shivers break your glass
For his temptation. Say you taste delight,
To have a golden Gull from •ize to See,
To meat you in his hot luxurious arms,
Yet your nights pay for all: I know you dream
Of warrants, whips, &amp; Beadles, and then start
At a doors windy creak: think every Weasel
To be a Constable: and every Rat
A long tailed Officer: Are you now not slaves?
Oh you have damnation without pleasure for it!
Such is the state of Harlots. To conclude,
When you are old, and can well paint no more,
You turn Bawd, and are then worse then before:
Make use of this: farewell.
Oh, I pray stay.
See Matheo comes not: time hath bard me,
Would all the Harlots in the town had heard me.
Stay yet a little longer. no: quite gone!
Cursed be that minute (for it was no more.
So soon a maid is changed into a Whore)
Wherein I first fell, be it for ever black;
Yet why should sweet Hipolito shun mine eyes;
For whose true love I would become pure-honest,
Hate the worlds mixtures, &amp; the smiles of gold:
Am I not fair? Why should he fly me then?
Fair creatures are desired, not scorned of men.
How many Gallants have drunk healths to me,
Out of their daggerd arms, &amp; thought thē blessed,
Enjoying but mine eyes at prodigal feasts!
And does Hipolito detest my love?
Oh, sure their heedless lusts but flattred me,
I am not pleasing, beautiful nor young,
Hipolito hath spied some ugly blemish,
Eclipsing all my beauties: I am foul:
Harlot! I, that's the spot that taints my soul:
What! has he left his weapon here behind him,
And gone forgetful? O fit instrument
To let forth all the poison of my flesh!
Thy M. hates me, cause my blood hath ranged:
But whē tic forth, then heel believe Ime chāg'd.
Mad woman, what art doing?
Either love me,
Or split my heart upon thy Rapiers point:
Yet doe not neither; for thou then destroyst
That which I love thee for (thy virtues) here, here,
You are crueler, and kilst me with disdain:
To die so, sheds no blood, yet tic worse payne.
Not speak to me! not bid farewell! a scorn!
Hated! this must not be, some means Isle try.
Would all Whores were as honest now, as I.
See Gentlemen, what you lack? a fine Holland, a fine Cambric, see what you buy.
Holland for shirts, Cambric for bands, what first you lack?
Sfoot, I lack em all, nay more, I lack money to buy em: let me see, let me look again: mass this is the shop; What Cos! sweet Cos! how dost in faith, since last night after candlelight? we had good sport in faith, had we not? and when shells laugh again?
When you will, Cozen.
Spoke like a kind Lacedemoniā: I see yonders thy husband.
• •her's the sweet youth, God bless him.
And how first Cozen? &amp; how? how first thou squall?
Well, Cozen, how fare you?
How fare I? troth, for sixpence a meal, wench, as well as heart can wish, with Calves chaldron• and chitter∣lings, besides I have a Punch after supper, as good as a to∣acted Apple.
Are you my wives Cozen?
A am, sir, what hast thou to do with that?
O, nothing but you're welcome.
The Devils dung in thy teeth: Isle be welcome when∣there thou wilt or no, I: What Ring's this Cos? very pretty and fantastical in faith, lets see it.
Puh! nay you wrench my finger.
I ha sworn Isle have it, and I hope you will not let my oaths be cracktin the ring, will you? I hope, sir, you are not mallicolly at this for all your great looks: are you angry?
Angry? not I sir, nay, if she can part
So easily with her Ring, tic with my heart.
Suffer this, sir, &amp; suffer all, a whoreson Gull, to—,
Peace, George, whē she has reaped what I have sown,
Sheele say, one grain tastes better of her own,
Then whole sheaves gatherd from another land:
Wit's never good, till bought at a dear hand.
But in the mean time she makes an Ass of some body.
See, see, see, sir, as you turn your back, they doe nothing but kiss.
No matter, let 'em: when I touch her lip,
I shall not feel his kisses, no nor miss
Any of her lip: no harm in kissing is.
Look to your business, pray, make up your wares.
Troth Cos, and well remembered, I would thou would give me five yards of Lawn, to make my Punk some falling bands a the fashiō, three falling one upon ano∣there: for that's the new editiō now: she's out of linen whore∣ribly too, troth, sha's never a good smock to her back ney∣there, but one that has a great many patches in it, &amp; that I'm fine to wear my self for want of shift to: prithee put me into wholesome napery, &amp; bestow some clean commodities vpō vs.
Reach me those Cambrics, &amp; the Lawns hither.
What to doe wife? to lavish out my goods upon a fool?
Fool! Snails eat the fool, or Isle so batter your crown, that it shall scarce go for five shillings.
Do you hear sir? you're best be quiet, &amp; say a fool tells you so.
Nails, I think so, for thou telst me.
Are you angry sir, because I named the fool?
Trust me, you are not wife, in mine own house;
And to my face to play the Antique thus:
If you'll needs play the madman, choose a stage
Of lesser compass, where few eyes may note
Your actions error; but if still you miss,
As here you doe, for one clap, ten will hiss.
Zwounds Cozen, he talks to me, as if I were a scur∣uy Tragedian.
Sir George, I ha thought upon a device, how to break his pate, beat him soundly, and ship him away.
Do it.
Isle go in, pass thorough the house, give some of our fellow Prentices the watch-word when they shall enter, then come &amp; fetch my master in by a wile, and place one in the hall to hold him in conference, whilst we cudgel the Gull out of his coxcomb.
Do it: away, do it.
Must I call twice for these Cambrics &amp; lawns?
Nay see, you anger her, George, prithee dispatch.
Two of the choicest pieces are in the warehouse sir.
Go fetch them presently.
I, do, make haste, sir.
Why were you such a stranger all this while, being my wives Cozen?
Stranger? no sir, I me a natural Milliner borne.
I perceive still it is your natural guise to mistake me, but you are welcome sir, I much wish your acquaintāce.
My acquaintance? I scorn that in faith; I hope my acquaintance goes in chains of gold three and fifty times double: you know who I mean, Cos, the posts of his gate are a painting to.
Signior Pandulfo the Marchāt desires conference with you.
Signior Pandulfo? Isle be with him straight. Attend your mistress and the Gentleman.
When do you show those pieces?
I, when doe you show those pieces?
Presently sir, presently, we are but charging thē.
Come sir, you Flat-cap, where be these whites?
Flat-cap• hark in your ear sir, yare a flat fool, an Ass, a gull, &amp; Isle thrum you: do you see this cambric sir?
Sfoot Cos, a good jest, did you hear him? he told me in my ear, I was a flat fool, an Ass, a Gull, and Isle thrumb you: doe you see this Cambric sir?
What, not my men, I hope?
No, not your men, but one of your men isayth.
I pray sir, come hither, what say you to this? here an excellent good one.
I marry, this likes me well, cut me off some half score yards.
Let your whores cut, yare an impudent cox comb, you get none, &amp; yet Isle thrum you.-A very good Cam∣brick sir.
Again, again, as God judge me: Sfoot, Cos, they stand thrūming here with me all day, &amp; yet I get nothing.
A word I pray sir, you must not be angry, prentices have hot bloods, young fellows,-What say you to this piece? look you, tic so delicate, so soft, so even, so fine a third, that a Lady may wear it.
Sfoot I think so, if a Knight marry my Punk, a Lady shall wear it: cut me off 20. yards: you are an honest lad.
Not without money, gull, &amp; isle thrū you to.
Gull, weal thrum you.
O Lord, sister, did you not hear something cry thrum? zounds your men here make a plain Asle of me.
What, to my face so impudent?
I, in a cause so honest, weal not suffer
Our masters goods to vanish money less.
You will not suffer them.
No, and you may blush,
In going about to vex so mild a breast,
As is our masters.
Take away those pieces.
Cozen, I give them freely.
Mass, and Isle take em as freely.
Weal make you lay em down again more freely.
Help, help, my brother will be murdered.
How now, what coil is here? forbear, I say.
He calls vs Flatcaps, and abuses vs.
Why, sirs? do such examples flow from me?
They are of your keeping sir, alas poor brother.
I faith they hapepperd me, sister: look, dost not spin? call you these Prentices? Isle ne'er play at cards more whē clubs is trump: I have a goodly coxcomb, sister, have I not?
Sister and brother, brother to my wife.
If you have any skill in Heraldry, you may soon know that, break but her pate, and you shall see her blood and mine is all one.
A Surgeon, run, a Surgeon: Why then wore you that forged name of Cozen?
Because its a common thing to call Cos, and min∣glee now adays all the world over.
Cozen! A name of much deceit, folly and sin,
For under that common abused word,
Many an honest tempered Citizen
Is made a monster, and his wife trained out
To foul adulterous action, full of fraud.
I may well call that word, A Cities Bawd.
•roth, brother, my sister would needs ha me take upon me to gull your patience a little: but it has made double Gulls on my coxcomb.
What, playing the woman? blabbing now you fool?
O, my wife did but exercise a jest upon your wit.
Sfoot, my wit bleeds for it, me thinks.
Then let this warning more of sense afford.
The name of Cozen is a bloody word.
Isle ne'er call Cos again whilst I live; to have such a coil about it: this should be a Coronation day; for my head runs Claret lustily.
Go with the Surgeon to have great respect.
How now, my friend, what, do they sit to day?
Yes sir, they expect you at the Senate-house.
I thāk your pains, Isle not be last man there.
My gown, George, go, my gown. A happy land,
Where grave men meet each cause to understand,
Whose consciences are not cut out in bribes,
To gull the poor mans right: but in even scales,
Poise rich &amp; poor, without corruptions veils.
Come, wheres the gown?
I cannot find the key sir.
Request it of your mistress.
Come not to me for any key.
Isle not be troubled to deliver it.
Good wife, kind wife, it is a needful trouble, but for my gown.
Moths swallow down your gown:
you set my teeth an edge with talking on it.
Nay pry thee, sweet, I cannot meet without it,
I should have a great fine set on my head.
Set on your coxcomb: tush, fine me no fi•es.
Believe me (sweet) none greets the Senate-house, without his Robe of reverence, that's his Gown.
Well, then you're like to cross that custom once,
You get nor key, nor gown, and so depart:
This trick will vex him sure, and fret his heart.
Stay, let me see, I must have some device,
My cloke's too short: fie, fie, no cloak will do it:
It must be something fashioned like a gown,
With my arms out: oh George, come hither George,
I pry thee lend me thine advice.
Troth sir, were it any but you, they would break open chest.
O no, break open chest! thats a Thieves office:
Therein you counsel me against my blood:
It would show impatience that, any meek means
I would be glad to embrace. Mass I have got it:
Go, step up, fetch me down one of the Carpets,
The saddest coloured Carpet, honest George,
Cut thou a hole ith middle for my neck,
Two for mine arms, nay prithee look not strange.
I hope you doe not think sir, as you mean.
Prithee about it quickly, the hour chides me:
Warily George, softly, take heed of eyes,
Out of two evils hoe's accounted wise,
That can pick out the least; the Fine imposde
For an vn-gowned Senator, is about
Forty Cruzadoes, the Carpet not'boue four.
Thus have I chosen the lesser evil yet,
Preserved my patience, foiled her desperate wit.
Here, sir, heir's the Carpet.
O well done, George, weal cut it just ith midst:
Tic very well I thank thee, help it on.
It must come over your head, sir, like a wenches pe∣ticoate.
You are in the right, good George, it must indeed.
Fetch me a nightcap: for Isle gyrd it close,
As if my health were queasy: twill show well
For a rude careless night-gowne, will it not think?
Indifferent well, sir, for a night-gowne, being girt &amp; pleated.
I, and a night-cap on my head.
Thats true sir, Isle run &amp; fetch one, &amp; a staff.
For thus they cannot choose but construe it,
One that is out of health, takes no delight,
Wears his apparel without appetite,
And puts on heedles raiment without form.
So so, kind George, be secret now: &amp; prithee do not laugh at me till I me out of sight.
I laugh? not I sir.
Now to the Senate-house:
Methinks, Id rather wear, without a frown,
A patient Carpet, then an angry Gown.
Now looks my M. just like one of our carpet knights, only hoe's somewhat the honester of the two.
What, is your master gone?
Yes forsooth, his back is but new turned.
And in his cloak? did he not vex and swear?
No, but heel make you swear anon: no indeed, hee went away like a lamb.
Key sink to hell: still patient, patient still!
I am with child to vex him: prithee George,
If ere thou look for favour at my hands,
Uphold one Jest for me.
Against my master?
Tic a mere iestin faith: say, wilt thou do it?
Well, what first?
Here, take this key, thou know where all things lie,
Put on thy masters best apparel, Gown,
Chain, Cap, Ruff, every thing, be like himself,
And against his coming home, walk in the shop,
Fain the same carriage, and his patient look,
Twill breed but a jest thou know, speak, wilt thou?
Twill wrong my masters patience.
Prithee George.
Well, if you'll save me harmless, and put me under covert barn, I am content to please you provided it may breed no wrong against him.
No wrong at all: here take the Key, be gone:
If any vex him, this: if not this, none
O Roger, Roger, whore's your mistress, wher's your mistress? there's the finest, neatest Gentleman at my house, but newly come over: O where is she, where is she, where is she?
My mistress is abroad, but not amongst em: my mi∣stress is not the whore now that you take her for.
How? is she not a whore? do you go about to take away her good name, Roger? you are a fine Pander indeed.
I tell you▪ Madonna Finger-locke, I am not sad for nothing, I ha not eaten one good meal this three &amp; their∣tie days: I had wont to get sixteen pence by fetching a pottle of Hypocras: but now those days are past: we had as good doings, Madonna Finger-locke, she within doors and I without, as any poor young couple in Millain.
Gods my life, and is she changed now?
I ha lost by her squeamishness, more then would have builded 12. bawdy houses.
And had she no time to turn honest but now? what a vile woman is this? twenty pound a night, Isle be sworn, Roger, in good gold and no silver: why here was a time, if she should ha picked out a time, it could not be better! gold y∣nough stirring; choice of men, choice of hair, choice of beards, choice of legs, and choice of every, every, every thing: it cannot sink into my head, that she should be such an Ass. Roger, I never believe it.
Here she comes now.
O sweet Madonna, on with your loose gown, your felt &amp; your feather, there's the sweetest, proprest, gallantest Gentleman at my house, he smells all of Musk &amp; Amber greece, his pocket full of Crowns, flame-colourd doublet, red satin hose, Carnation silk stockings, and a leg and a by∣die, oh!
Hence, thou our sexes monster, poisonous Bawd,
Lusts Factor, and damnations Orator,
Gossip of hell, were all the Harlots sins
Which the whole world contains, numbered together,
Thine far exceeds them all; of all the creatures
That ever were created, thou art basest:
What serpent would beguile thee of thy Office?
It is detestable: for thou liu'st
Upon the dregs of Harlots, guard'st the door,
Whilst couples go to dancing: O course devil!
Thou art the bastards curse, thou brandst his birth,
The lechers French disease; for thou dry-suckst him:
The Harlots poison, and thine own confusion.
Mary come up with a pox, have you no body to rail against, but your Bawd now?
And you, Knave Pander, kinsman to a Bawd.
You and I Madonna, are Cozens.
Of the same blood and making, near allied,
Thou, that slave to sixpence, base-mettald villain.
Sixpence? nay that's not so; I never took under two shillings four pence, I hope I know my fee.
I know not against which most to inveigh:
For both of you are damned so equally.
Thou never spar'st for oaths: swearst any thing,
As if thy soul were made of shoe-leather.
God dam me, Gentleman, if she be within,
When in the next room she's found dallying.
If it be my vocation to swear, every man in his vo∣cation: I hope my betters swear and dam themselves, and why should not I?
Roger, you cheat kind gentlemen▪
The more gulls they.
Slave, I cashier thee.
And you do cashier him, he shall be entertained.
Shall I? then blurt a your service.
As hell would have it, entertained by you!
I dare the devil himself to match those two.
Ma•y gup, are you grown so holy, so pure, so ho∣nest with a pox?
Scurvy honest Punk! But stay Madonna, how must our agreement be now? for you know I am to have all the comings in at the hall door, &amp; you at the chamber door.
True Rog. except my veils.
Veils, what veils?
Why as thus, if a couple come in a Coach, &amp; light to lie down a little, then Roger, thats my fee, &amp; you may walk abroad; for the Coach man himself is their Pander.
Is a so? in truth I have almost forgot, for want of ex∣ercise: But how if I fetch this Citizens wife to that Gull, &amp; that Madonna to that Gallant, how then?
Why then, Roger, you are to have sixpence a lane, so many lanes, so many sixpences.
First so? thē I see we two shall agree and live together.
I Roger, so long as there be any Taverns and bow∣die houses in Millain.
THe Courtiers flattering Jewels,
(Temptations only fewels)
The Lawyers ill-got monies,
That suck up poor Bees Honyes:
The Citizens sonne's riot,
The gallant costly diet:
Silks and Veluets, Pearls and Embers,
Shall not draw me to their Chambers.
Silks and Veluets, &amp;c.
Oh, tic in vain to write: it will not please,
Ink on this paper would ha but presented
The foul black spots that stick upon my soul,
And rather make me lothsomer, then wrought
My loves impression in Hipolitoes thought.
No, I must turn the chaste leaves of my breast,
And pick out some sweet means to breed my rest.
Hipolito, believe me I will be
As true unto thy heart, as thy heart to thee,
And hate all men, their gifts and company.
You, goody Punk, subandi Cockatrice, O yare a sweet whore of your promise, are you not think you? how well you came to supper to vs last night: mew, a whore &amp; break her word! nay you may blush, &amp; hold down your head at it well enough: Sfoot, ask these gallants if we staid not till we were as hungry as Seriants.
I, and their Yeoman too.
Nay faith Acquaintance, let me tell you, you forgot your self too much: we had excellēt cheer, rare vintage, and were drunk after supper.
And when wee were in our Woodcocks (sweet Rogue) a brace of Gulles, dwelling here in the City, came in &amp; paid all the shot.
Pox on her, let her alone.
O, I pray doe, if you be Gentlemen:
I pray depart the house; beshrew the door
For being so easily entreated: faith,
I lent but little ear unto your talk,
My mind was busied otherwise in troth,
And so your words did unregarded pass:
Let this suffice, I am not as I was.
I am not what I was! no Isle be sworn thou art not: for thou were honest at five, &amp; now you are a Puncke at fife∣teene: thou were yesterday a simple whore, and now you are a cunning Conny-catching Baggage to day.
Isle say I me worse, I pray forsake me then,
I doe desire you leave me, Gentlemen,
And leave your selves: O be not what you are,
(Spendthrifts of soul and body)
Let me persuade you to forsake all Harlots,
Worse thē the deadliest poisons, they are worse:
For o'er their souls hangs an eternal curse,
In being slaves to slaves, their labours perish,
They are seldom blessed with fruit; for ere it blossoms,
Many a worm confounds it.
They have no issue but foul ugly ones,
That run along with them, e'ene to their graves:
For stead of children, they breed rank diseases,
And all, you Gallants, can bestow on them,
Is that French Infant, which ne'er acts but speaks:
What shallow son &amp; heir then, foolish gallāt,
Would waste all his inheritance, to purchase
A filthy loathd disease? and pawn his body
To a dry evil: that vsurie's worst of all,
When th'interest will eat out the principal.
Sfoot, she gulls em the best: this is always her fashion, when she would be rid of any com∣pany that she cares not for, to enjoy mine alone.
Whats here? instructions, Admonitions, and Cave∣ats? come out, you scabbard of vengeance.
Fluello, spurn your hounds when they fist, you shall not spurn my Punk, I can tell you my blood is vexed.
Pox a your blood: make it a quarrel.
You're a Slave, will that serve turn?
Sbloud, hold, hold.
Matheo, Fluello, for shame put up.
Spurn my sweet Varlet!
O how many thus
Moved with a little folly, have let out
Their souls in Brothel houses, fell down and dyed
Just at their Harlots foot, as it were in pride.
Matheo, we shall meet.
I, I, any where, saving at Church: pray take heed we meet not there.
Adieu, Damnation.
Cockatrice, farewell.
There's more deceit in women, then in hell.
Ha, ha, thou doest gull em so rarely, so naturally: if I did not think thou had bin in earnest: thou art a sweet Rogue for it in faith.
Why are not you gone to, Signior Matheo?
I pray depart my house: you may believe me,
In troth I have no part of Harlot in me.
How's this?
Indeed I love you not: but hate you worse
Then any man, because you were the first
Gave money for my soul; you brake the Ice,
Which after turned a puddle: I was led
By your temptation to be miserable:
I pray seek out some other that will fall,
Or rather (I pray) seek out none at all.
First possible, to be impossible, an honest whore! I have heard many honest wenches turn Stru•npets with a wet finger; but for a Harlot to turn honest, is one of Her∣cules labours: It was more easy for him in one night to make fifty queens, then to make one of them honest a∣gen in fifty years: come, I hope thou dost but jest.
Tic time to leave off jesting, I had almost
Jested away Salvation: I shall love you,
If you will soon forsake me.
God buy thee.
Oh, tempt no more womē: shun their weighty curse,
Women (at best) are bad, make them not worse,
You gladly seek our sexes overthrow:
But not to raise our states for all your wrongs.
Will you vouchsafe me but due recompense,
To mar•y with me?
How, marry with a Punk, a Cockatrice, a Har∣lot? mary foh, Isle be burnt thorough the nose first.
Why la? these are your oaths you love to undo vs,
To put heaven from vs, whilst our best hours waste:
You love to make vs lewd, but never chaste.
Isle hear no more of this: this ground upon,
You are damned for altering thy Religion.
Thy lust and sin speak so much: go thou my ruin,
The first fall my soul took; by my example
I hope few maidens now will put their heads
Under men's girdels: who least trusts, is most wise:
Men's oaths do cast a mist before our eyes.
My best of wit be ready: now I go,
By some device to greet Hipolito.
So, this is Monday morning, and now must I to my housewifery: would I had bin created a Shoemaker; for all the gentle craft are gentlemen every Monday by their Copy, &amp; scorn (then) to work one true stitch. My M. means sure to turn me into a student; for here's my book, here my desk, here my light; this my close chamber, and here my Punk: so that this dull drowsy first day of the week, makes me half a Priest, half a Chandler, half a painter, half a Sexton, I &amp; half a Bawd: for (all this day) my office is to do nothing but keep the door. To prove it, look you, this good-face &amp; yonder gentleman (so soon as ever my back's turned) will be nought together.
Are all the windows shut?
Close sir, as the fist of a Courtier that hath stood in three reigns.
Thou art a faithful servant, and obseru'st
The Calender, both of my solemn vows,
And ceremonious sorrow: Get thee gone,
I charge thee on thy life, let not the sound
Of any women's voice pierce through that door.
If they do, my Lord, Isle pearce some of them.
What will your Lordship have to breakfast?
Sighs.
What to dinner?
Tears.
The one of them, my Lord, will fill you too full of wind, the other wet you too much. What to supper?
That which (now) thou can not get me, the con∣stance of a woman.
Indeed thats harder to come by then ever was Ostend.
Prithee away.
Isle make away my self presently, which few Ser∣uants will doe for their Lords; but rather help to make them away: Now to my dore-keeping, I hope to pick something out of it.
My Infelices face: her brow, her eye,
The dimple on her cheek: and such sweet skill,
Hath from the cunning workman's pencil flown,
These lips look fresh and lively as her own,
Seeming to move and speak. Las• now I see,
The reason why fond women love to buy
Adulterate complexion: here it is read,
False colours last after the true be dead.
Of all the Roses grafted on her cheeks,
Of all the graces dancing in her eyes,
Of all the Music set upon her tongue,
Of all that was past women's excellence,
In her white bosom, look! a painted board,
Circumscribes all: Earth can no bliss afford.
Nothing of her, but this? this cannot speak,
It has no lap for me to rest upon,
No lip worth tasting: here the worms will feed,
As in her coffin: hence then idle Art,
True loue's best pictured in a true-loues heart.
Here art thou drawn sweet maid, till this be dead,
So that thou liu'st twice, twice art buried.
Thou figure of my friend, lye there. Whats here?
Perhaps this shrewd pate was mine enemies:
Las! say it were: I need not fear him now:
For all his braves, his contumelious breath,
His frowns (tho dagger-pointed) all his plot,
(Tho 'nere so mischievous) his Italian pills,
His quarrels, and (that common fence) his law,
See, see, they're all eaten out; here's not left one?
How clean they're picked away! to the bare bone!
How mad are mortals then to rear great names
On tops of swelling houses? or to wear out
Their fingers ends (in dirt,) to scrape up gould!
Not caring so (that Sumpter-horse) the back
Be hung with gaudy trappings, with what course,
Yea rags most beggarly, they cloth the soul:
Yet (after all) their Gay-nes looks thus foul.
What fools are men to build a garish tomb,
Only to save the carcass whilst it rots,
To maintein't long in stinking, make good carrion,
But leave no good deeds to preserve them sound,
For good deeds keep men sweet, long aboue ground,
And must all come to this; fools; wise, all hither,
Must all heads thus at last be laid together:
Draw me my picture then, thou grave neat workman,
After this fashion, not like this; these colours
In time kissing but ayre, will be kissed off,
But here is a fellow; that which he lays on,
Till dooms day, alters not complexion.
Deaths the best Painter then: They that draw shapes,
And live by wicked faces, are but Gods Apes,
They come but near the life, and there they stay,
This fellow draws life to: his Art is fuller,
The pictures which he makes are without colour.
Here is a person would speak with you Sir.
Ho!
A parson sir would speak with you.
Vicar?
Vicar? no sir, has too good a face to be a Vicar yet, a youth, a very youth.
What youth? of man or woman? lock the doors.
If it be a woman, mary-bones and Potato pies keep me for meddling with her, for the thing has got the breeches, tic a male-varlet sure my Lord, for a women's tailor nor measurd him.
Let him give thee his message and be gone.
He says hes signior Mathaeos man, but I know he lies.
How doest thou know it?
Cause has ne'er a beard: tic his boy I think sir, who∣soar paid for his nursing.
Send him and keep the door.
Fata si liceat mihi,
Finger arbitrio meo,
Temperem Zephyro leuivela.
Id sail were I to choose, not in the Ocean,
Cedars are shaken, when shrubs doe feel no bruise▪
How? from Mathaeo.
Yes my Lord.
Art sick?
Not all in health my Lord.
Keep off.
I do:
Hard fate when women are compelled to woo.
This paper does speak nothing.
Yes my Lord,
Matter of life it speaks, and therefore writ
In hidden Character; to me iustruction
My moister gives, And (less you please to stay
Till you both meet) I can the text display.
Doe so: read out.
I am already out:
Look on my face, and read the strangest story!
What villain, ho?
Call you my Lord?
Thou slave, thou hast let in the devil.
Lord bless vs, where? hes not cloven my Lord that I can see: besides the devil goes more like a Gentleman than a Page: good my Lord Boon couragio.
Thou hast let in a woman in mans shape.
And thou art damned for it.
Not damned I hope for putting in a woman to a Lord.
Fetch me my Rapier,—do not: I shall kill thee.
Purge this infected chamber of that plague,
That runs upon me thus: Slave, thrust her hence.
Alas my Lord, I shall never be able to thrust her hence without help: come Mermaid you must to Sea again.
Here me but speak, my words shall be all Music:
Here me but speak.
Another beats the door,
T'other Shee-diuell, look.
Why then hell's broke loose.
Hence, guard the chamber: let no more come on,
One woman serves for mans damnation.
Beshrew thee, thou dost make me violate,
The chastest and most sanctimonious vow,
That ere was entered in the court of heaven:
I was on meditations spotless wings,
upon my journey thither; like a storm
Thou beats my ripened cogitations,
flat to the ground: and like a theife dost stand,
To steal devotion from the holy land.
If woman were thy mother; if thy hart,
Bee not all Marble, (or left Marble be)
Let my tears soften it, to pity me,
I doe beseech the doe not thus with scorn,
Destroy a woman.
Woman I beseech thee,
Get thee some other suite, this fits thee not,
I would not grant it to a kneeling Queen,
I cannot love thee, nor I must not: See,
The copy of that obligation,
Where my solo's bound in heavy penalties.
She's dead you told me, shele let fall her suite.
My vows to her, fled after her to heaven,
Were thine eyes clear as mine, thou might behold her,
Watching upon yon battlements of stars,
How I observe them: should I break my bond,
This board would rive in twain, these wooden lips
Call me most periurde villain, let it suffice,
I ha set thee in the path; First not a sign,
I love thee, when with one so most most dear,
Isle have thee fellows? All are fellows there.
Be greater then a king, save not a body,
But from eternal shipwreck keep a soul,
If not, and that again, sins path I tread,
The grief be mine, the guilt fall on thy head.
Stay and take Physic for it, read this book,
Ask counsel of this head whats to be done,
Heal strike it dead that tic damnation,
If you turn turk again, oh doe it not,
The heaven cannot allure you to doe well
From doing ill let hell fright you: and learn this,
The soul whose bosom lust did never touch,
Is Gods fair bride, and maidens souls are such:
The soul that leaving chastities white shore,
Swims in hot sensual streams, is the devils whore,
How now: who comes.
No more knaves my Lord that wear smocks: here is a letter from doctor Benedict; I would not enter his man, tho he had hairs at his mouth, for fear he should be a woman, for some women have beards, mary they are half witches, Slid you are a sweet youth to wear a codpeece, and have no pins to stick vpont.
Isle meet the doctor, tell him, yet to night
I cannot: but at morrow rising Sun
I will not fail: go: woman fare thee well.
The lowest fall can be but into hell,
It does not move him. I must therefore fly,
From this undoing City, and with tears,
Wash off all anger from my fathers brow,
He cannot sure but joy seeing me new borne,
A woman honest first and then turn whore,
Is (as with me) common to thousands more,
But from a trumphet to turn chaste: that sound,
Has oft bin heard, that woman hardly found.
Hold up your hands gentlemen: here is one, two, three, (nay I warrant they are sound pistols, and without flaws, I had them (of my sister, and I know she uses to put nothing thats cracked,) three, four, five, six, seven, eight and nine, by this hand bring me but a piece of his blood. and you shall have 9. more. Isle lurk in a tavern not far off, &amp; provide sup∣per to close up the end of the Tragedy, the linen drapers re∣mēber-stand toot I beseech you, &amp; play your parts perfectly.
Look you Signior, tic not your gold that we way.
Nay, nay, way it and spare not, if it lack one grain of corn;
Isle give you a bushel of wheat to make it up.
But by your favour Signior, which of the servants
is it, because wele punish justly.
Mary tic the head man; you shall rast him by his tongue a pretty tall prating fellow, with a Tuscalonian beard.
Tuscalonian: very good.
Cods life I was near so thrumbd since I was a gentle∣man: my coxcomb was dry beaten as if my hair had been hemp.
Wele dry beat some of them.
Nay it grew so high, that my sister cried murder out very manfully: I have her consent in a manner to have him pepperd, else isle not doot to win more then ten cheaters do at a rifling: break but his pate or so, only his miser, because isle have his head in a cloth as well as mine, hes a linen dra∣per and may take enough. I could enter mine action of bat∣rye against him, but we may haps be both dead and rotten be∣fore the lawyers would end it.
No more to doe, but ensconce your self in the taueren; provide no great cheat, couple of Capons, some Pheasants, Plouers, an Oringeado-pie or so: but how bloody so ere the day be, sally you not forth.
No, no, nay if I stir, some body shall stink: isle not budge: isle lie like a dog in a manger.
Well, well, to the tavern, let not our supper be raw, for you shall have blood enough-your belly full.
Thats all so god same, I thirst after, blood for blood, bump for bump, nose for nose, head for head, plaster for ply∣ster, and so farewell: what shall I call your names because isle leave word, if any such come to the bar.
My name is Corporal Crambo.
and mine, Lieutenant Poh.
Poli. Is as tall a man as ever opened Oyster: I would not be the devil to meet Poh, farewell.
Nor I by this light, if Poh be such a Poh.
Whats a clock now.
Tic almost 12.
Thats well.
The Senate will leave wording presently:
But is George ready,
Yes forsooth, hes surbusht.
Now as you ever hope to win my favour,
Throw both your duties and respects on him,
With the like awe as if he were your moister,
Let not your looks betray it with a smile,
Or jeering glance to any customer,
Keep a true Settled countenance, and beware,
You laugh not whatsoever you hear or see.
I warrant you mistress, let vs alone for keeping our countenance: for if I list, theres never a fool in all Myllan shall make me laugh, let him play the fool never so like an Ass, whether it be the fat Court fool, or the lean City fool.
enough then, call down George.
I hear him coming.
Be ready with your legs then let me see,
How curtsy would become him: gallantly!
Beshrew my blood a proper seemly man,
Of a choice carriage walks with a good port,
I thank you mistress, my back's broad enough, now my Masters gown's on.
Sure I should think it were the least of sin,
To mistake the moister, and to let him in.
It were a good Comedy of errors that in faith.
whist, whist, my moister.
You all know your tasks: gods my life, whats that hee has got vpon's back? who can tell?
That can I, but I will not.
Girt about him like a mad-man: what: has he lost his cloak too: this is the maddest fashion that ere I saw.
What said he George when he pasde by thee?
Troth Mistress nothing: not so much as a Bee, he did not hum: not so much as a bawd he did not hem: not so much as a Cuekold he did not ha: neither hum, hem, nor ha, only stared me in the face, past along, and made hast in, as if my looks had worked with him, to give him a stool.
Sure hes vexed now, this trick has moved his Spleen,
Hes angered now, because he uttered nothing:
And wordlesse wrath breaks out more violent,
May be heel strive for place, when he comes down,
But if thou love me George, afford him none.
Nay let me alone to play my masters prize, as long as my Mistress warrants me: Ime sure I have his best clothes on, and I scorn to give place to any that is inferior in appa∣rell to me, thats an Axiom, a principle, &amp; is observed as much as the fashion; let that persuade you then, that lie shoulder with him for the upper hand in the shop, as long as this chain will maintain it.
Spoke with the spirit of a Moister, tho with the tongue of a Prentice.
Why how now mad-man? what in your tricksicoates!
O peace good Mistress:
See what you lack, what first you buy? pure Calicoes, fine Hollands, choice Cambrickes, neat Lawns: see what you buy? pray come near, my Moister will use you well, hee can afford you a pennyworth.
I that he can, out of a whole piece of Lawn in faith.
Pray see your choice here Gentlemen.
O fine fool? what a mad-man? a patient mad-man? who ever heard of the like? well sir Isle fit you and your hue∣more presently: what? crosse-points, Isle untie em all in a trice, Isle vex you faith: Boy take your cloak, quick, come.
Be covered George, this chain, and welted gown, Bare to this coat: then the worlds upside down▪
Vmh, vmh, hum.
Thats the shop, and theres the fellow.
I but the Moister is walking in there.
No matter, weal in.
Sbloud doest long to lye in Limbo?
And Limbo be in hell, I care not.
Look you Gentlemen, your choice: Cambrics?
No sir, some shirting.
You shall.
Have you none of this stripped Canvas for doublets.
None stripped sir, but plain.
I think there be one piece stripped within.
Step sir and fetch it, hum, hum hum.
Look you Gentlemen, Isle make but one spread∣ding, here is a piece of cloth, fine, yet shall wear like Iron, tic without fault, take this upon my word, tic without fault.
Then tic better than you sir.
I, and a number more, ô that each soul
Were but as spotless as this Innocent white,
And had as few brakes in it.
Twould have some then: there was a fray here last day in this shop.
There was indeed a little flea-biting.
A Gentleman had his pate broke, call you that but a flea-biting.
He had so.
Zownes doe you stand in it?
Sfoot clubs, clubs, prentices, down with em, ah you rogues, strike a Citizen in's shop.
None of you stir I pray, forbear good George.
I beseech you sir, we mistook our marks, deli•er vs our weapons.
Your head bleeds sir, cry clubs.
I say you shall not, pray be patient,
Give them their weapons, sirs you're best be gone,
I tell you here are boys more tough then Bears:
Hence, least more fists do walk about your ears.
We thank you sir.
You shall not follow them.
Let them alone pray, this did me no harm,
Troth I was cold, and the blow made me warm,
I thank em for it: besides I had decreed
To have a vain pricked, I did mean to bleed,
So that theres money saved: they are honest men,
Pray use em well, when they appear again.
Yes sir, weal use em like honest men.
I well said George, like honest men, tho they be are∣rant knaves, for thats the praise of the city; help to lay up these wares
Yonder he stands.
What in a Prentise-coate?
I, I, mad, mad, pray take heed.
How now? what news with them? what make they with my wife? officers is she attachd? look to your wares.
He talks to himself, oh hes much gone indeed.
Pray pluck up a good heart, be not so fearful,
Sirs hark, weal gather to him by degrees.
I, I, by degrees I pray: oh me! what makes he with the Lawn in his hand, heel tear all the ware in my shop.
Fear not weal catch him on a sudden.
O you had need do so, pray take heed of your warrant
I warrant mistress.—Now Signior Candido?
Now sir, what news with you sir?
What news with you he says: oh hes far gon.
I pray fear nothing, lets alone with him,
Signior, you look not like your self me thinks,
(Steal you a tother side) you're changed, you're altered.
Changed sir, why true sir, is change strange, tic not the fashion unless it alter: Monarchs turn to beggars; beg∣gers creep into the nests of Princes, Masters serve their prentices: Ladies their Serving-men, men turn to women.
And women turn to men.
I, and women turn to men, you say true, ha ha, a mad world, a mad world.
Have we caught you sir?
Caught me: well, well: you have caught: me.
Hee laughs in your faces.
A rescue Prentices, my maister's catch-pold.
I charge you keep the peace, or have your legs gar∣tered with Irons, we have from the Duke a warrant strong enough for what we doe.
I pray rest quiet, I desire no rescue.
La: he desires no rescue, I as poor heart,
He talks against himself.
Well, whats the matter?
Look to that arm,
Pray make sure work, double the cord.
Why, why?
Look how his head goes! should he get but loose,
Oh it were as much as all our lives were worth.
Fear not, weal make all sure for our own safety.
Are you at leisure now? well, whats the matter?
Why do I enter into bonds thus? ha?
Because you're mad, put fear upon your wife.
Oh I, I went in danger of my life, every minute.
What? am I mad say you, and I not know it?
That proves you mad, because you know it not.
Pray talk as little to him as you can,
You see hes too far spent.
Bound with strong corde,
A Cisters thread in faith had been enough,
To lead me any where: Wife do you long?
You are mad too, or else you do me wrong.
But are you mad indeed Moister?
My Wife says so,
And what she says; George, is all truth you know:
And whether now? to Bedlam Monastery? — ha! whether?
Faith even to the mad-mens pound.
A Gods name, still I feel my patience sound.
Come weal see whether he goes, if the moister be mad, we are his servants, and must follow his steps, weal be mad caps too; Farewell mistress, you shall have vs all in Bedlam.
I think, I ha fitted now, you and your clothes,
If this move not his patience, nothing can,
Isle swear then I have a saint, and not a man
give vs a little leave. Doctor your news.
I sent for him my Lord: at last he came,
And did receive all speech that went from me,
As gilded pills made to prolong his health:
My credit with him wrought it: for, some men.
Swallow even empty hooks, like fools. that fear
No drowning where tic deepest, Cause tic clear:
In th'end we sat and eat: a health I drank
To Infaelices sweet departed soul,
(This train I knew would take.)
It was excellent.
He fell with such devotion on his knees,
To pledge the same.
Fond superstitious fool?
That had he been inflamed with zeal of prayer,
He could not power't out with more reverence.
About my neck he hung, wept on my cheek,
Kissed it, and swore, he would adore my lips,
Because they brought forth Infaelices name.
Ha, ha, alack, alack.
The cup he less up high, and thus he said,
Here noble maid: drinks, and was poisoned.
and died?
And died my Lord.
Thou in that word,
Hast pei•d mine aged hours out with more years,
Than thou hast taken from Hipolito,
A noble youth he was, but lesser branches
Hindering the greaters growth, must be lopped off,
And feed the fire: Doctor w'are now all thine,
And use vs so: be bold.
Thanks gracious Lord:
My honoured Lord:
hmh.
I doe beseech your grace to bury deep,
This bloody act of mine.
Nay, nay, for that,
Doctor look you toot: me it shall not move,
Their cursed that ill doe, not that ill do love,
You throw an angry forehead on my face,
But be you pleased, backward thus for to look,
That for your good, this evil I undertook,
I, I, we construe so:
And only for your love.
Confessed: tic true.
Nor let it stand against me as a bar,
To thrust me from your presence: nor believe
(As Princes have quick thoughts,) that now my finger
Being deept in blood, I will not spare the hand,
But that for gold (as what can gold not doe?)
I may be hi'rde to work the like on you,
Which to prevent.
Tic from my hart as far.
No matter Doctor, cause isle fearless sleep,
And that you shall stand clear of that suspicion
I banish thee for ever from my court.
This principle is old but true as fate,
Kings may love treason, but the traitor hate,
First so: nay then Duke, your stale principle
With one as stale, the Doctor thus shall quit,
He false himself that digs another pit,
How now: where is he? will he meet me:
meet you sir, he might have met with three fencers in this time and have received less hurt then by me∣ting one Doctor of Physic: why sir has walked under the old Abbey wall yonder this hour, till hes more cold then a Citizens country house in Ianiuere, you may smell him be∣hind sir; la you: yonder he comes.
leave me.
Itch lurch if you will.
O my most noble friend.
Few but your self,
Could have intied me thus, to trust the Air,
With my close sighs, you send for me: what news?
Come you must doff this black: die that pale cheek,
Into his own colour; go: Attire your self
Fresh as a bridegroom, when he meets his bride,
The Duke has done much treason to thy love,
Tic now revealed, tic now to be revenged,
Be merry honoured friend, thy Lady lives.
What Lady?
Infaelice, Shees reuiude;
Reuiude: alack! death never had the hart,
To take breath from her.
Vmh: I thank you sir,
Physic prolongs life, when it cannot save,
This helps not my hopes. mine are in their grave:
You doe some wrong to mock me.
By that love,
Which I have ever borne you, what I speak
Is truth: the maiden lives: that funeral,
Dukes tears, the morning, was all counterfeit,
A sleepy draught consent the world and you,
I was his minister and then chambred up,
To stop discovery.
O treacherous Duke:
He cannot hope so certainly for bliss:
As he believes that I have poisoned you,
He wode me toot, I yielded, and confirmed him,
In his most bloody thoughts.
A very devil!
Her did he closely coach to Bergamo,
And thither?
Will I ride, stood Bergamo,
In the low countries of black hell, isle to her.
You shall to her, but not to Bergamo,
How passion makes you fly beyond your self.
Much of that weary journey I'ha cut off,
For she by letters hath intelligence,
Of your supposed death, her own interment,
And all those plots, which that false Duke, (her father)
Has wrought against you: And sheele meet you.
O when:
Nay see: how covetous are your desires,
Ea•ely to morrow morn.
O where good father.
At Bedlam monastery: are you pleased now?
At Bedlam monastery: the place well fits,
It is the scoole where those that loose their wits,
Practise again to get them: I am sick
Of that disease, all love is lunatic.
Weal steal away, this night in some disguise,
Father Anselmo, a most •euerend Friar,
Expects our coming, before whom weal lay,
Reasons so strong, that he shall yield, in bonds,
Oh holy wedlock, to tie both your hands.
This is such happiness:
That to believe it▪ tic impossible.
Let all your joys then die in misbeliefe,
I will reveal no more.
O yes good father,
I am so well acquainted with despair,
I know not how to hope: I believe all.
Weal hence this night, much must be done, much said
But if the Doctor fail not in his charms,
Your Lady shall ere morning fill these arms.
heavenly Physician: far thy fame shall sprede,
That make two lovers speak when they be dead.
O watch good George, watch which way the Duke comes.
Here comes one of the butter flies, ask him.
Pray sir, comes the duke this way.
He's upon coming mistress.
I thank you sir: Geroge are there many madfolkes, where thy Moister lies.
O yes, of all countries some, but especially mad greeks they swarm: troth mistress, the world is altered with you, you had not wont to stand thus with a paper humbly com∣plaining: but you're well enough served: provender pricked you, as it does many of our Cittie-wiues besides.
Doest think George we shall get him forth.
Truly mistress I cannot tel, I think you'll hardly get him forth: why tic strange▪ Sfoot I have known many womē that have had mad rascals to their husbāds, whom they would be∣labour by all means possible to keep em in their right wits, but of a woman to long to turn a tame mā into a madman, why the devil himself was never used so by his dam.
How does he talk George! ha! good George tell me.
Why your best go see.
Alas I am afraid.
Afraid! you had more need be ashamed: he may ra∣there be afraid of you.
But George hes not stark mad, is hee? hee does not rave, hes not horne-mad George is he?
Nay I know not that, but he talks like a Justice of peace, of a thousand matters and to no purpose.
Isle to the monastery: I shall be mad till I enjoy him, I shall be sick till I see him, yet when I doe see him, I shall weep out mine eyes.
I, id fine see a woman weep out her eyes; thats as true, as to say, a mans cloak burns; when it hangs in the water: I know you'll weep mistress, but what says the pain∣ted cloth.
Trust not a woman when she cries,
For sheele pump water from her eyes,
With a wet finger, and in faster showers,
Then April when he rains down flowers.
I but George, that painted cloth is worthy to be hanged up for lying, all women have not tears at will, unless they have good cause.
I but mistress how easily will they find a cause, and as one of our Cheese-trenchers says very learnedly:
As out of Wormwood Bees suck Honey,
As from poor clients Lawyers firk money,
As Parsley from a roasted cunny.
So tho the day be ne'er so sunny,
If wives will have it rain, down then it drives,
The calmest husbands make the stormest wives,
Tame George, but I had on storming now.
Why thats well done, good mistress throw aside this fashion of your humour, be not so fantastical in wearing it, storm no more, long no more.—This longing has made you come short of many a good thing that you might have had from my Moister: Here comes the Duke.
Oh I beseech you pardon my offence,
In that I durst abuse your Graces warrant,
Deliver forth my husband good my Lord.
Who is her husband?
Candido my Lord,
Where is he?
Hes among the lunatics,
He was a man made up without a gall,
Nothing could move him, nothing could convert
His meek blood into fury, yet like a monster,
I often beat at the most constant rock
Of his unshaken patience, and did long
To vex him.
Did you so?
And for that purpose,
Had warrant from your Grace, to cary him
To Bedlam Monastery, whence they will not free him,
Without your Graces hand that sent him in.
You have longed fair; tic you are mad I fear,
Its fit to fetch him thence, and keep you there:
If he be mad▪ why would you have him forth?
And please your grace, hes not stark mad, but one∣lie talks like a young Gentleman, somewhat phantastically, thats all: theres a thousand about your court, city and country madder then he.
Provide a warrant, you shall have our hand.
Here is a warrant ready drawn my Lord.
Get pen &amp; Inck, get pen &amp; inck:
Where is my Lord the Duke?
How now? more mad men.
I have strange news my Lord.
Of what? of whom?
Of Infaelice, and a marriage.
Ha! where? with whom.
Hipolito.
Here my Lord.
Hence with that woman, void the room.
Away, the Duke's vexed.
Whoop, come mistress the Duke's mad too.
Who told me that Hipolito was dead?
He that can make any man dead, the Doctor: but my Lord, hes as full of life as wilde-fire, and as quick: Hippo∣lito, the Doctor, and one more rid hence this evening; the Inn at which they light is Bedlam Monastery: Infaeliche comes from Bergamo, and meets them there: Hipolito is mad, for he means this day to be married, the afternoon is the hour, and Friar Anselmo is the knitter.
From Bergamo? first possible? it cannot be,
It cannot be.
I will not swear my Lord,
But this intelligence I took from one,
Whose brains works in the plot.
Whats he?
Mathaeo.
Mathaeo knows all.
Hes Hipolitoes bosom.
How far stands Bedlam hence?
Six or seven miles.
First even so, not married till the afternoon you say?
Stay, stay, lets work out some prevention: how:
This is most strange, can none but mad-men serve
To dress their wedding dinner? All of you,
Get presently to horse; disguise your selves
Like Countrie-Gentlemen,
Or riding citizens, or so: and take
Each man a several path, but let vs meet,
At Bedlam Monastery, some space of time
Being spent between the arrival each of other,
As if we came to see the Lunatics.
To horse, away, be secret on your lives,
Love must be punished that unjustly thrives.
Be secret on your lives! Castruchio
You're but a scurvy Spaniel; honest Lord,
Good Lady: Zounds their love is just, tic good,
And Isle prevent you, tho I swim in blood.
Nay, nay, resolve good father, or deny.
You press me to an act, both full of danger,
And full of happiness, for I behold.
Your fathers frowns, his threats, nay perhaps death,
To him that dare doe this, yet noble Lord,
Such comfortable beams break through these clouds,
By this blessed marriage, that your honoured word
Being pound in my defence) I will tie fast,
The holy wedding Knot.
Tush fear not the Duke.
O son, wisely to fear: Is to be free from fear.
You have our words, and you shall have our lives,
To guard you safe from all ensuing danger.
I, I, chop em up and away.
Stay, when first fit for me, safest for you,
To entertain this business.
Not till the evening.
Be it so, there is a chapel stands hard by,
Upon the West end of the Abbey wall,
Thither convey your selves, and when the sun
Hath turned his back upon this upper world,
Isle mary you, that done, no th•ndring voice,
Can break the sacred bond, yet Lady here you are most safe.
Father your lou's most dear.
I well said locke vs into some little room by our selves that we may be mad for an hour or two.
O good Mathaeo no, lets make no noise.
How! no noise! do you know where you are: sfoot amongst all the mad-caps in Millan: so that to throw the house out at window will be the better, &amp; no man will suspect that we lurk here to steal mutton: the more sober we are, the more scurvy tic. And tho the Friar tell vs, that here we are safest, •'me not of his mind, for if those lay here that had lost there money, none would ever look after them, but hear are none but those that have lost their wits, o that if hue and cry be made, hither theile come, and my reason is, because none
goes to be married till he be stark mad.
Muffle your selves yonders Fluello.
Zounds!
O my Lord these cloaks are not for this rain, the tempest is too great: I come sweating to tell you of it, that you may get out of it.
Why whats the matter.
Whats the matter! you have matterd it fair: the Duk's at hand.
The Duke?
The very Duke.
Then all our plots are turned upon our heads; and we are blown up with our own vnderminings. Sfoot how comes he, what villain durst betray our being here.
Castruchio, Castruchio told the Duke, and Mathaeo here told Castruchio.
Would you betray me to Chastruchio,
Sfoot he damned himself to the pit of hell if he spake ont again.
So did you swear to me, so were you damned.
Pox on em, &amp; there be no faith in men, if a man shall not believe oaths: he took bread and salt by this light, that he would never open his lips.
Oh God, oh God.
Son be not desperate have patience, you shall trip your enemy down, by his own slights, how far is the Duke hēce.
Hes but new set out: Castruchio, Pioratto and Sinezi come along with him: you have time enough yet to prevent them if you have but courage.
You shall steal secretly into the Chapel,
And presently be married; if the duke
Abide here still, spite of ten thousand eyes,
You shall scope hence like Friars.
O blessed disguised: O happy man.
Talk not of happiness till your closed hand,
Have her bit•' forehead, like the lock of time,
Bee not too slow, nor hasty, now you clime,
Up to the tower of bliss, only be wary
And patient, thats all, if you like my plot
Build and dispatch, if not farewell, then not.
O Yes, we doe applaud it, wee•e dispute,
No longer, but will hence and execute.
Fluello you'll •tay here, let vs be gon,
The ground that freighted lovers tread upon,
Is stuke with thorns.
Come then, away: tic meet,
To escape those thorns, to put on winged feet.
No words I pray Fluello, for it stands vs upon.
Oh sir, let that be your lesson.
Alas poor lovers, on what hopes and fears,
Men toss themselves for women. when shees got
The best has in her that which pleases not.
whose there!
My Lord.
Peace, send that Lord away,
A Lordship will spoil all, lets be all fellows.
Whats he.
Fluello, or else Sinezi by his little legs.
All friends, all friends.
What! met upon the very point of time,
Is this the place.
This is the place my Lord.
Dream you on Lordshps! come no more Lords: pray
You have not seen these lovers yet.
Not yet.
Castruchio art thou sure this wedding feat,
Is not till afternoon?
So tic given out my Lord.
Nay, nay, tic like, thieves must observe their hours,
Lovers watch minutes like Astronomers,
How shall the Interim hours by vs be spent,
Lets all go see the madmen.
Mas content.
Oh here comes one, question him, question him.
How now honest fellow dost thou belong to the house.
yes forsooth, I am one of the implements; I swepe the madmens rooms, and fetch straw for em, and buy chains to tie em, and rods to whip em, I was a mad wag my self here once, but I thank father Anselm he lashed me into my right mind again.
Anselmo is the Friar must marry them,
Question him where he is,
And where is father Anselmo now?
Mary hes gon but even now.
I, well done, tell me, whether is he gone?
Why to God a mighty.
Ha, ha, this fellow is a fool, talks idly.
Sir are all the mad folks in Millan brought hither?
How all, theres a wise question indeed: why if al the mad folks in Millan should come hither, there would not be left ten men in the City.
Few gentlemen or Courtiers here, ha.
Oh yes? abundance, abundance, lands no sooner fall into their hands, but straight they run out a their wits: Ci∣tizēs sons &amp; heirs are free of the house by their fathers copy: Farmers sons come hither like geese (in flocks) &amp; when they ha sold all their corn fields, here they sit &amp; pick the straws.
Me thinks you should have women here as well as men.
Oh, I: a plague on em, theres no ho with them, they are madder then march hairs.
Are there no lawyers here amongst you?
Oh no, not one: never any lawyer, we dare not let a lawyer come in, for heel make em mad faster than we can recover em.
And how long first ever you recover any of these.
Why according to the quantity of the Moon thats got into em, an Aldermans son will be mad a great while a very great while, especially if his friends left him well, a whore will hardly come to her wits again: a puritan ther's no hope of him, unless he may pull down the steeple and hang himself it'h bell-ropes.
I perceive all sorts of fish come to your net.
Yes intrude, we have blocks for all heads, we have good store of wilde oats here: for the Courtier is mad at the Citizen, the Citizen is mad at the Country men, the shoemaker is mad at the cobbler, the cobbler at the carman the punk is mad that the Merchants wife is no whore, the Mar∣chants wife is mad that the puncke is so common a whore: gods so, here is father Anselmo. pray say nothing that I tel tales out of the school.
God bless you father.
Thank you gentlemen.
Pray may we see some of those wretched Souls,
That here are in your keeping?
Yes: you shall,
But gentlemen I must disarm you then,
There are of mad men, as there are of tame,
All humoured not alike: we have here some,
So apish and phantastike, play with a feather,
And tho twould grieve a soul, to see Gods image,
So blemished and defaced, yet do they act
Such antique and such pretty lunacies,
That spite of sorrow they will make you smile:
Others again we have like hungry Lions,
Fierce as wilde Bulls, vntameable as flies,
And these have oftentimes from strangers sides
Snatched rapiers suddenly, and done much harm,
Whom if you'll see, you must be weaponless.
With all our harts.
Here: take these weapons in,
Stand of a little pray, so, so, tic well:
Isle show you here a man that was sometimes,
A very grave and wealthy Citizen,
Has served a prentiship to this misfortune,
Bin here seven years, and dwelt in Bergamo.
How fell he from his wits?
By loss at Sea:
Isle stand aside, question him you alone,
For if he spy me, heel not speak a word,
Unless hes thoroughly vexed.
Alas poor soul.
A very old man.
God speed father.
God speed the plough: thou shalt not speed me.
We see you old man, for all you dance in a net.
True, but thou wilt dance in a halter, &amp; I shall not see thee.
O, doe not vex him pray.
Are you a Fisherman father?
No, i'm neither fish nor flesh.
What do you with that net then?
Doest not see fool! theres a fresh Salmon in it: if you step one foot further, you'll be over shoes, for you see ime
over head &amp; ear in the salt-water: &amp; if you fall into this whirl∣poole where I am, you're drowned: you're a drowned rat.—I am fishing here for five ships, but I cannot have a good draught, for my net breaks still, and breaks, but Isle break some of your necks &amp; I catch you in my clutches. Stay, stay, stay, stay—wheres the wind, wheres the wind, wheres the wind: wheres the wind: out you gulls, you goose-caps, you gudgeon eaters! do you look for the wind in the heavens? ha ha ha ha, no no, look there, look there, look there, the wind is always at that door: hark how it blows, pooff pooff, pooff.
Ha ha ha.
Do you laugh at Gods creatures? do you mock old age you rogues? is this gray beard and head counterfeit, that you cry ha ha ha?—Sir, art not thou my eldest son?
Yes indeed father.
Then you are a fool, for my eldest son had a pol• foot, crooked legs, a verges face, &amp; a peare-coullourd beard; I made him a scholar, and he made himself a fool.—Sir! thou there? hold out thy hand.
My hand, well, here tic.
Look, look, look, look: has he not long nails, and short hair?
Yes monstrous short hair, and abho∣minable long nails.
Ten-peny naile's are they not?
Yes ten penny nails.
Such nails had my second boy: kneel down thou varlet, and ask thy father blessing. Such nails had my midlemost son and I made him a Promoter: &amp; he scrapped, &amp; scrapped, &amp; scrapped, till he got the devil and all: but he scrapped thus and thus, &amp; thus, and it went under his legs, till at length a company of Kites taking him for carrion, swept up all, all, all all, all, all, all.—If you love your lives, look to your selves, see, see, see, see, the Turks galleys are fighting with my ships, Bounce goes the guns.—oooh! cry the men: romble romble go the waters—Alas! there! tic sunk—tic sunk: I am un∣don, I am undone, you are the damned Pirates have undone me,—you are bith Lord, you are, you are, stop em, you are.
Why how now Syrra, must I fall to tame you?
Tame me? no: isle be madder than a roasted Cat: see, see, I am burnt with gūpowder, these are our close fights.
Isle whip you, if you grow unruly thus.
Whip me? out you toad:—whip me? what justice is this, to whip me because Ime a beggar?—Alas? I am a poor man: a very poor man: I am starved, and have had no meat by this light, ever since the great sloud, I am a poor man.
Well, well; be quiet and you shall have meat.
I, I, pray do, for look you, here be my guts: these are my ribs,—you may look through my ribs,—see how my guts come out—these are my red guts, my very guts, oh, oh!
Take him in there.
A very piteous sight.
Father I see you have a busy charge.
They must be used like children, pleased with toys,
And anon whipped for their vnrulinesse:
Isle show you now a pair quite different
From him thats gon; he was all words: and these
Unless you urge em, seldom spend their speech,
But save their tongues-la you-this hithermost
Fell from the happy quietness of mind,
About a maiden that he loud, and dyed:
He followed her to church, being full of tears,
And as her body went into the ground,
He fell stark mad. That is a married man,
Was jealous of a fair, but (as some say)
A very virtuous wife, and that spoiled him.
All these are whoremongers &amp; lay with my wife: whore, whore, whore, whore, whore.
Observe him.
Gaffer shoemaker, you pulled on my wives pumps, and then crept into her pantofles: lye there, lye there,—this was her Tailor,-you cut out her loose-bodied gown, and put in a yard more then I allowed her, lye there by the shoemaker: ô, moister Doctor! are you here: you gave me a purgation, and then crept into my wives chamber, to feel her pulses, and you said, and she said, and her maid said, that they went pit a pat-pit a pat-pit a pat,doctor Isle put you anon into my wives urinal: -heigh, come a loft Jack? this was her school-maister, and taught her to play upon the Virginals, and still his Jacks leapt up, up: you pricked her out nothing but bawdy
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
lessons, but Isle prick you all, -Fidler-Doctor-Tayler-Shoo∣maker,-Shoomaker-Fidler-Doctor-Tayler-so! lye with my wife again now.
See how he notes the other now he feeds.
Give me some porridge.
Isle give thee none.
Give me some porridge.
Isle not give thee a bit,
Give me that flap-dragon.
Isle not give thee a spoonful: thou least, its no Dragon tic a Parrot, that I bought for my sweet heart, and isle keep it.
Here is an Almond for Parrot.
Hang thy self.
Here is a rope for Parrot.
Eat it, for isle eat this.
Isle shoot at thee and thow't give me none.
Wut thou?
Isle run a tilt at thee and thow't give me none.
Wut thou? doe and thou dare.
Bounce.
Ooh! I am slaine-murder, murder, murder, I am slain, my brains are beaten out.
How now you villains, bring me whips: isle whip you
I am dead, I am slain, ring out the bell, for I am dead,
How will you do now sir? you ha kilt him.
Isle answer't at Sessions: he was eating of Almond Butter, and I longed for it: the child had never bin delivered out of my belly, if I had not kilt him Isle answer't at sessions, so my wife may be burnt ith hand too.
Take em in both: bury him, for hes dead.
I indeed, I am dead, put me I pray into a good pit hole.
Isle answer't at Sessions.
How now huswife, whether gad you?
A nutting forsooth: how doe you gaffer? how doe you gaffer? theres a French curse for you too.
Tic Bellafronte.
Tic the puncke bith Lord.
Father whats she I pray?
As yet I know not,
She came but in this day, talks little idly
And therefore has the freedom of the house,
Doe not you know me? nor you? nor you, nor you?
No indeed.
Then you are an Ass, and you are an Ass, and you are an Ass, for I know you.
Why, what are they? come: tell me, what are they?
The're fish-wiues: will you buy any gudgeons, gods santy yonder come Friars, I know them too, how doe you Friar?
Nay, nay, away, you must not trouble Friars.
The duke is here speak nothing.
Nay indeed you shall not go: weal run at barlibreak first, and you shall be in hell.
My puncke turned mad whore, as all her fellows are?
Speak nothing, but steal hence, when you spy time.
Isle locke you up if you're unruly fie
fie! mary •o: they shall not go indeed till I ha told• em their fortunes.
Good Father give her leave.
I pray, good father, and Isle give you my blessing.
Well then be brief, but if you are thus unruly,
Isle have you locked up fast.
come, to their fortunes.
Let me see 1.2.3. and 4. isle begin with the little Fri∣er first, here is a fine hand indeed, I never saw Friar have such a dainty hand: here is a hand for a Lady, here is your fortune,
You love a Friar better then a Nun,
Yet long you'll love no Friar, nor no Friars son.
Bow a little, the line of life is out, yet i'm afraid,
For all your holy, you'll not die a maid, God give you joy.
Now to you Friar Tucke.
God send me good luck.
You love one, and one loves you.
You are a false knave, and shees a Jew,
Here is a Dial that false ever goes.
O your wit drops.
Troth so does your nose, nay lets shake hands with you too:
Pray open, here is a fine hand,
Ho Fryer ho, God be here,
So he had need: you'll keep good cheer,
Here is a free table, but a frozen breast,
For you'll starve those that love you best.
Yet you have good fortune, for if I am no liar,
Then you are no Friar, nor you, nor you no Friar
Ha-ha ha-ha.
Are holy habits cloaks for villainy?
Draw all your weapons.
doe, draw all your weapons.
Where are your weapons, draw.
The Friar has gulled vs of em.
O rare trick:
You ha learnt one mad point of Arithmetic.
Why swells your spleen so hie? against what bosom,
Would you your weapons draw? hers! tic your daughters:
Mine! tic your sons.
Son?
Son, by yonder Sun.
You cannot shed blould here, but tic your own,
To spill your own blood were damnation,
Lay smooth that wrinkled brow, and I will throw
My self beneath your feet,
Let it be rugged still and flinted o'er,
What can come forth but sparkles, that will burn,
Your self and vs? Shees mine; my claims most good,
Shees mine by marriage, tho shees yours by blood.
I have a hand dear Lord, deep in this act,
For I foresaw this storm, yet willingly
Put fourth to meet it? Oft have I seen a father
Washing the wounds of his dear son in tears,
A son to curse the sword that struck his father,
Both slain ith quarrel of your families,
Those scars are now tan off: And I beseech you,
To seal our pardon, all was to this end
To turn the ancient hates of your two houses
To fresh greene friendship, that your Loves might look:
Like the springs forehead, comfortably sweet,
And your vexed souls in peaceful union meet,
Their blood will now be yours, yours will be theirs,
And happiness shall crown your silver hairs.
You see my Lord theres now no remedy.
Beseech your Lordship.
You beseech fair, you have me in place fit
To bridle me, rise Friar. you may be glad
You can make madmen tame, and tame men mad,
Since fate hath conquered, I must rest content,
To strive now would but ad new punishment:
I yield unto your happiness, be blessed,
Our families shall henceforth breath in rest.
O happy change.
Yours now is my consent,
I throw upon your joys my full consent.
Am not I a good girl, for finding the Friar in the well? gods so you are a brave man: will not you buy me some Su∣ger plums because I am so good a fortune teller.
Would thou had wit thou pretty soul to ask,
As I have will to give.
Pretty soul, a pretty soul is better than a pretty body: do not you know my pretty soul? I know you: Is not your name Mathaeo.
Yes lamb.
Baa, lamb! there you lie for I am mutton; look fine man, he was mad for me once, and I was mad for him once, and he was mad for her once, and were you never mad? yes I warrant, I had a fine jewel once, a very fine jewel and that naughty man stole it away from me, a very fine jewel.
What jewel pretty maid.
Maid nay thats a lie, O it was a very rich jewel, called
a Maidenhead, and had not you it leerer.
Out you mad Ass away.
Had he thy Maiden-head? he shall make thee a∣mends, and marry thee.
Shall he? ô brave Arthur of Bradly then?
And if he bear the mind of a Gentleman,
I know he will.
I think I rifled her of some such paltry Jewel.
Did you? then mary her, you see the wrong
Has led her spirits into a lunacy.
How, marry her my Lord? sfoot marry a mad-wo∣man: let a man get the tamest wife he can come by, sheele be mad enough afterword, doe what he can.
Nay then, father Anselmo here shall do his best,
To bring her to her wits, and will you then?
I cannot tell, I may choose.
Nay then law shall compel: I tell you sir,
So much her hard fate moves me: you should not breath isle mary her.
Under this ayre, unless you married her.
Well then, when her wits stand in their right place,
I thank your grace, Mathaeo thou art mine,
I am not mad, but put on this disguise,
Only for you my Lord, for you can tell
Much wonder of me, but you are gon: farewell.
Mathaeo thou did first turn my soul black,
Now make it white again▪ I doe protest,
Ime pure as fire now, chaste as Cynthias breast.
I durst be sworn Mathaeo she's indeed.
Cony-catcht, gulled, must I sail in your flie-boate,
Because I helped to rear your maine-mast first:
Plague found you fort, - tic well.
The Cuckolds stamp goes currant in all Nations,
Some men have horns given them at their creations,
If I be one of those, why so: its better
To take a common wench, and make her good,
Than one that simpers and at first, will scarce
Be tempted forth over the threshold door,
Yet in one seven-night •ounds, turns arrant whore,
Come wench, thou shalt be mine, give me thy gols,
Weal talk of legs hereafter: see my Lord,
God give vs joy.
God give you joy.
Come mistress we are in Bedlam now, mas and see, we come in pudding-time, for here is the Duke.
My husband good my Lord.
Have I thy husband?
Its Candido my Lord, he's here among the lunatics: father Anselmo, pray fetch him forth: this mad woman is his wife, and tho she were not with child, yet did she long most spitefully to have her husband mad, and because she would be sure, he should turn Jew, she placed him here in Bedlam, youder he comes.
Come hither Signior—Are you mad.
You are not mad.
Why I know that.
Then may you know, I am not mad, that know
You are not mad, and that you are the duke:
None is mad here but one—How do you wife:
What do you long for now?—pardon my Lord,
She had lost her childes nose else: I did cut out
Pennyworths of Lawn, the Lawn was yet mine own:
A carpet was yet my gown, yet it was mine own,
I wore my mans coat▪ yet the cloth mine own,
Had a cracked crown the crown was yet mine own,
She says for this Ime mad, were her words true,
I should be mad indeed — ô foolish skill,
Is patience madness? Isle be a mad-man still.
Forgive me, and isle vex your spirit no more.
Come, come, weal have you friends, join hearts, join hands.
See my Lord, we are even,
Nay rise, for ill-deeds kneel unto none but heaven.
Signior, me thinks, patience has laid on you
Such heavy weight, that you should loath it.
Loath it.
For he whose breast is tender blood so cool,
That no wrongs heate it, is a patient fool,
What comfort do you find in being so calm.
That which greene wounds receive frō sovereign balm,
Patience my Lord; why tic the soul of peace:
Of all the virtues tic neerst kin to heaven.
It makes men look like Gods; the best of men
That ere wore earth about him, was a sufferer,
A soft, meek, patient, humble, tranquil spirit,
The first true Gentleman that ever breathed;
The stock of Patience then cannot be poor,
All it desires, it has; what Monarch more?
It is the greatest enemy to law
That can be, for it doth embrace all wrongs,
And so chains up, lawyers and women's tongues.
Tic the perpetual prisoners liberty:
His walks and Orchards: it is the bond slaves freedom,
And makes him seem proud of each iron chain.
As tho he wore it more for state then pain:
It is the beggars Music, and thus sings,
Although their bodies beg, their souls are kings:
O my dread liege! It is the sap of bliss,
Reares vs aloft; makes men and Angels kiss,
And (last of all) to end a household strife,
It is the honey against a waspish wife.
Thou giu'ft it lively colours: who dare say
he's mad, whose words march in so good array?
It were sin all women should such husbands have.
For every man must then be his wives slave.
Come therefore you shall teach o•• court to shine,
So calm a spirit is worth a golden Mine,
Wives (with meek husbands) that to vex them long,
In Bedlam must they dwell, else dwell they wrong.

Stay Taylor, This is the House,
pray thee look the gown be not rufled: as
for the Jewels and Precious Stones, I know
where to find them ready presently. She
that must wear this gown if she will receive
it, is Moister Iustinianos wife (the Italian Mar∣chant)
my good old Lord and Moister, that
hath been a Tylter this twenty year, hath sent it. Mum Taylor,
you are a kind of Bawd. Taylor, if this Gentlewoman's Husband
should chance to bee in the way now, you shall tell him that I
keep a Hot-house in Gunpowder Ally (near crouched Fryers)
and that I have brought home his wives foul Linen, and to co∣lore
my knavery the better, I have here three or four kinds of
complexion, which I will make show of to sell unto her: the
young Gentlewoman hath a good City wit, I can tell you, she
hath red in the Italian Courtier, that it is a special ornament to
gentlewomen to have skill in painting.
Is my Lord acquainted with her?
O, I.
Faith Mistress Birdlime I doe not commend my Lords
choice so well: now me thinks he were better to set up a Dairy,
and to keep half a score of lusty wholesome honest Country
Wenches.
Honest Coun•rey Wenches, in what hundred shall a man
find two of that simple virtue?
Or to love some Lady, there were equality and coherence.
Taylor, you talk like an ass, I tel thee there is equality enough
between a Lady and a City dame, if their hair be but of a co∣lore: name
you any one thing that your citizens wi•e coms shoe•t
of to your Lady. They have as pure Linen, as choice painting,
lou• greene Greese in spring, Mallard and Teale in the fall, and
Woodcock in winter. Your Citizens wife learns nothing but
fopperies of your Lady, but your Lady or Iustice-a-peace Ma∣dam,
carries high wit from the City, namely, to receive all and
pay all: to awe their Husbands, to check their Husbands, to con∣troule
their husbands; nay, they have the trick ont to be sick for
a new gown, or a Carcanet, or a Diamond, or so: and I wist this
is better wit, then to l•are•e how to wear a Scotch Farthingale:
nay more.
Here comes one of the servants: you remember Taylor that I
am deaf: observe that.
I thou art in that like one of our young •ull•s, that will
not understand any wrong is done him, because hee dares not an∣swer
it.
By your leave Bachelor: is the gentlewoman your Mi∣•tris
stirring?
Yes she is mooing.
What says he?
She is up.
Wheres the Gentleman your Moister, pray you?
Where many women desire to have their husbands, abroad.
I am very thick of hearing.
Why abroad? you smell of the Bawd.
I pray you tell her here is an old Gentlewoman would
speak with her.
So.
What, will you be deaf to the gentlewoman when she
comes to?
O no, shees acquainted well enough with my kn•very.
She comes.
How do you sweet Lady?
Lady.
By Gods me I hope to call you Lady ear you dye, what
mistress do you sleep well on nights.
Sleep, Ease quietly as a Client having great business
with Lawyers.
Come, I am come to you about the old suit: my good Lord
and moister hath sent you a velvet gown h•are: doe you like the
colour? three p•le, a pretty fantastical trimming, I would God
you would say it by my troth. I dreamt last night, you looked so
prettily, so sweetly, me thought so like the wisest Lady of them al,
in a velvet gown.
Whats the fore-part?
A very pretty stuff, I know not the name of your fore-part,
but tic of a hair colour.
That it was my hard fortune, being so well brought
up, having so great a portion to my marriage, to match so unlucky∣lie?
Why my husband and his whole credit is not worth my ap∣apparel,
well, I shall undergo a strange repo•t in leaving my hus∣band.
Tush, if you respect your credit, never think of that, for
beauty covets tech appatell, •hoise diet, excellent Physic, •o
German Clock no Mathematical Engine: whatsoever requires so
much reparation as a women's face, and what means hath your
Husband to allow sweet Doctor Glister-pipe, his pension. I have
heard that you have threescore Smocks, that co•t three pounds
a Smock, will these smocks ever hold out with your husband?
no, your linen and your apparel must turn over a new•lease▪ I
can tell you.
O admirable Bawd? O excellent Birdline?
I have heard he loved you before you were ma•riot
entirely, what of that? I have ever found it most true in mine
own experience•, that they which are most violent dotards
before their marriage are most voluntary Coucouldes af∣la.
Many are honest, either because they have not wist, or be∣cause
they have▪ not opportunity to be dishonest, and this
Italian your Husbands Countryman, holds it impo••ible any of
their Ladies should be excellent witty, and not make the utter∣most
use of their beauty, will you be a fool then?
Thou dost persuade me to Ill, very well.
You are nice and p•euish, how long will you hold out
think you? not so long as Ostend.
Passion of me, your husband? Remember that I am deaf, and
that I come to sell you complexion: truly Mi•tris I will deal
very reasonably with you.
What are you? Say ye?
I forsooth.
What my most happy wife?
Why your I•aliousie?
Iealiousie: in faith I do not fear to loose
that I have lost already: What are you?
Please your good worship I am a poor Gentlewoman, that
cast away my self upon an unthrifty Captain, that lives now in
Ireland, I am •aine to pick out a poor living with selling com∣plexion,
to keep the frailty (as they say) honest.
Whats he? complexion to? you are a bawd.
I thank your good worship for it.
Do not I know these tricks,
That which thou make a colour for thy sin,
Hath been thy first undoing? painting, painting.
I have of all sorts forsooth? Here is the burned powder
of a Hogs Iaw-bone, to be laid with the Oil of white Poppy,
an excellen• ••cus to kill Morphew, weed out Freckles, and a
most excellent ground-worke for painting; Here is Ginimo•y
likewise burnt, and puluerized, to be mingled with the juice of
Lymmons, sublimate Mercury, and two spoonefuls of the flow∣ers
of Brimstone, a most excellent receipt to cure the flushing in
the face.
Doe you hear, if you have any business to dispatch with
that deaf goodness there, pray you take leave: opportunity, that
which most of you long for (though you never bee with Child)
opportunity? Isle find some idle business in the mean time, I will,
I will in truth, you shall not need fear me, or you may speak
French, most of your kinds can understand French: god buy you.
Being certain thou art false: sleep, sleep my brain,
for doubt was only that, which fed my pain.
You see what a hell I live in, I am resolved to leave
him.
O the most fortunate Gentlewoman, that will be so wise,
and so, so provident, the Caroche shall come.
At what hour?
Just when women &amp; vintners are a cuni•ring at midnight.
O the entertainment my Lord will make you, sweet Wines, lusty
diet, perfumed linen, soft beds, O most fortunate Gentlewo∣man.
Have you done? have you dispatch? tic well, and in troth
what was the motion?
Motion, what motion?
Motion, why like the motion in law, that stays for a day of
hearing, yours for a night of hearing. Come lets not have Apri•l
in your eyes I pray you, it shows a wanton month follows your
weeping? Love a woman for her tea•es? Let a man love Oist•rs
for their water, for women though they should weep •cour
enough to serve a Dyer, or a Brewer, yet they may bee as stale as
Wenches, that travail every second tide between Graves end,
and Billingsga•e.
This madness shows very well.
Why look you, I am wondrous merry, can any man dis∣corn
by my face, that I am a Cuckold? I have known many suss∣pected
for men of this misfortune; when they have walked tho∣row
the streets, wear their hats ore their eye-browes, like polli∣tick
pen•houses, which commonly make the shop of a Mercer, or
a Linen Draper, as dark as a room in Bedlam. His cloak shrove∣ding
his face, as if he were a Neopolitan that had lost his beard in
April, and if he wa'k through the street, or any other narrow read
(as tic rate to meet a Cuckold) hee ducks at the penthouses,
like an Ancient that dares not flourish at the oath taking of the
Praetor, for fear of the signe-posts? Wife, wife, do I any of these?
Come what news from his Lordship? has not his Lordships ver∣tu
once gone against the hair, and coveted corners.
Sir, by my soul I will be plain with you.
Except the forehead dear wife, except the forehead.
The Gentleman you spake of hath often solici∣ted
my love, and hath received from me most chaste denials.
I, I, provoking resistance, tic as if you come to buy wares
in the City, bid money fort, your Mercer, or Gold-smith says,
truly I cannot take it, lets his customer pass his stall; next, nay
perhaps two, or three, but if he find he is not prone to return of
himself, hee calls him back, and back, and takes his money: so
you my dear wife, (O the policy of women, and Tradsmen:
theile bite at any thing.)
What would you have me do? all your plate and most
part of your Jewels are at pawn, besides I hear you have made
over all your esta•e to men in the Town heer? What would you
have me do? would you have me turn common sinner, or sell
my apparel to my waistcoat and become a Laundress?
No Laundress dear wife, though your credit would go
far with Gentlemen for taking up of Linen: no Laundress?
Come, come, I will speak as my misfortune prompts
me, Iealiousie hath undone many a Citizen, it hath undone you,
and me. You married me from the •eruice of an honourable Lady,
and you knew what matches I mought have had, what would
you have me to do? I would I had never seen your eyes, your
eyes.
Very good, very good.
Your prodigality, your diceing, your riding abroad,
your consorting your self with Noble men, your building a sum∣mer
house hath undone vs, hath undone vs? What would you
have me doe?
Any thing: I have sold my House, and the wares int?
I am going for Stoad next tide, what will you do now wife?
Have you indeed?
I by this light else one, I have done as some Citizens at their∣tie,
and most heirs at three and twenty, made all away, why doe
you not ask me now what you shall do?
I have no counsel in your voyage•, neither shall you
have any in mine.
To his Lordship: will you not wife?
Even whether my misfortune leads me.
Go, no longer will I make my care thy prison.
O my fate; well sir, you shall answer for this sin
which you force me to; fare you well, let not the world con∣damn
me, if I seek for mine own maintenance.
So, so.
Do not send me any letters; do not seek any re∣concilement.
By this light Isle receive none, if you will send me
my apparel so, if not choose, I hope we shall neare-meete more.
So, farewell the acquaintance of all the mad Devils that
haunt Iealiousie, why should a man bee such an ass to play the
antic for his wives appetite? Imagine that I, or any other great
man have on a velvet Night-cap, and put case that this night-cap
be to little for my ears or forehead, can any man tell me where
my Night-cap wrings me, except I besuch an ass to proclaim
it; Well, I do play the fool with my misfortune very hand some∣lie.
I am glad that I am certain of my wives dishonesty; for a se∣cret
strumpet, is like mines prepared to ruin goodly buildings.
Farewell my care, I have told my wife I am going for Stoad; thats
not my course, for I resolve to take some shape upon me, and to
live disguised here in the City; they say for one Cuckold to
know that his friend is in the like head-ake, and to give him
counsel, is as if there were two partners, the one to bee arrested,
the other to bail him: my estate is made ove• to. My friends, that
doe verily believe, I mean to leave England. Have amongst you
City dames? You that are indeed the fittest, and most proper
persons for a Comedy, nor let the world lay any imputation up∣on
my disguise, for Court, City, and Country, are merely as
masks one to the other, envied of some, laughed at of others, and
so to my comical business.
Moll.
What would hart?
Wheres my Cashier, are the sums right? Are the
bonds sealed?
Yea sir.
Will you have the bags sealed?
O no sir, I must disburse instantly▪ we that be Courty∣ers
have more plac•s to send money to, then the devil hath to send
his spirits: theres a great deal of light gold.
O sir, twill away in play, and you will stay till to morrow
you shall have it all in new sovereigns.
No, in-troth tic no matter, twill a way in play, let me see
the bond? let me see when this money is to bee paid? the tenth of
August. The first day that I must tender this money, is the first of
Dog-daies.
I fear twill be hot staying for you in London then.
Scrivener, take home the bond with you.
Will you stay to dinner sir? Have you any Partridge Moll?
No in-troth hart, but an excellent pickeld Goose, a new
service: pray you stay.
Sooth I cannot: by this light I am so infinitely, so vnboun∣dably
beholding to you?
Well Signior, Isle leave you; My cloak there?
When will you come home hart?
In truth self I know not, a friend of yours and mine
hath broke.
Who sir?
Moister Iustini•no the Italian.
Broke sir.
Yea sooth, I was offred forty yesterday upon the Exchange,
to assure a hundred.
By my troth I am sorry.
And his wife is gone to the party.
Gone to the party? O wicked creature?
Farewell good moister Monopoly, I pre-thee visit me of∣•n.
Little Moll, send away the fellow?
Phil. Phillip.
Here forsooth.
Go into Bucklers-bury and fetch me two ounces of pre∣served
Melons, look there be no Tobacco taken in the shop
when he weighs it.
I forsooth.
What doe you eat preserved Melons for Moll?
In truth for the shaking of the hart, I have here some∣time
such a shaking, and downwards such a kind of earth-quake
(as it were.)
Doe you hear, let your man carry home my money to
the ordinary, and lay it in my Chamber, but let him not tell my
host that it is money: I owe him but forty pound, and the Rogue is
hasty, he will follow me when he thinks I have money, and pry in∣to
me as Crows perch upon Carrion, and when he hath found it
out, prey upon me as Heralds do upon Funerals.
Come, come, you owe much money in Town: when
you have forfeited your bond, I shall near see you more?
You are a Monkey, Isle pay him for's day: Isle see you to¦morrow
to.
By my troth I love you very honestly, you were never the
gentleman offred any vnciuility to me, which is strange methinks
in one that comes from beyond Seas, would I had given a Thou∣sand
pound I could not love thee so.
Do you hear, you shall fine some scurvy disease or o∣there,
and go to the Bath next spring,
Isle meet you there.
By your leave sweet mistress Tenterhooke.
O, how dost partner?
Gentlewomen I stayed for a most happy wind, and now
the 〈…〉 your sweet, sweet lips, should set me going: good
mistress Honisuckle; good mistress Wafer, good mistress Tenterhooke,
I will pray for you, that neither riuallshippe in loves, pureness of
painting, or riding out of town, not acquainting each other with∣it,
be a cause your sweet beauties do fall out, and rail one upon
another.
Rail sir, we do not use to rail.
Why mistress, railing is your mother tongue as well as
lying.
But, do you think we can fall out?
In troth beauties (as one spake seriously) that there
was no inheritance in the amity of Princes, so think I of Wo∣men,
too often interviews amongst women, as amongst Princes,
breeds envy oft to others fortune, there is only in the amity of wo∣men
an estate for will, and every puny knows that is no certain
inheritance.
You are merry sir.
So may I leave you most fortunate gentlewoman.
Love shoots hear.
Tenterhooke, what Gentleman is that gon out, is he a man?
O God and an excellent Trumpeter,
He came lately from the university, and loves City dames only
for their victuals, he hath an excellent trick to keep Lobsters and
Crabs sweet in summer, and calls it a devise to prolong the days
of shellfish, for which I do suspect he hath been Clarke to some
Nobleman's kitchen. I have heard he never loves any Wench, tell
she bee as stale as Frenchmen eat their wilde foul, I shall anger
her.
How stale good Mistress nimble-wit?
Why as stale as a Country Ostes, an Exchange Sempster,
or a Court Laundress.
He is your cousin, how your tongue runs?
Talk and make a noise, no matter to what purpose, I
have learned that with going to puritan Lectures. I was yesterday
at a banquet, will you discharge my ruffs of some wafers, and how
doth thy husband Wafer?
Faith very well.
He is just like a Torch bearer to Mockers, he wears good
clothes, and is ranked in good company, but he doth nothing: thou
art fine to take al, and pay all.
The more happy she, would I could make such an ass of
my husband to. I hear say he breeds thy child in his teeth every
year.
In faith he doth.
By my troth tic pity but the fool should have the other
two pains incident to the head.
What are they?
Why the head-ake and horne-ake.
I heard say that he would have had thee nursed thy Child thy self
to.
That he would truly.
Why theres the policy of husbands to keep their Wines
in. I doe assure you if a Woman of any markeable face in the
World give her Child suck, look how many wrinkles be in
the Nipple of her breast, so many will bee in her forehead by that
time twelve month: but sir, we are come to acquaint thee with
an excellent secret: we two learn to write.
To write?
Yes believe it, and wee have the finest School moister, a
kind of Precision, and yet an honest knave to: by my troth if thou
be a good wench let him teach thee, thou may send him of a∣ny
arrant, and trust him with any secret; nay, to see how demurely
he will bear himself before our husbands, and how iocand when
their backs are turned.
For Gods love let me see him.
To morrow weal send him to thee: till then sweet Tenter∣hook
we leave thee, wishing thou moist have the fortune to chāge
thy name often.
How? change my name?
I, for thieves and widows love to shift many names, and
make sweet use of it to.
O you are a wag indeed. Good Wafer remember my school
master. Farewell good Hon•suckle.
Farewell Tenterhooke.
Benefice, make an end of my cloak and Cap.
I have dispatch em Sir: both of them lye flat at your mer∣cie.
Fore-god me thinks my joints are nimbler every More∣ning
since I came over then they were before. In France when I
rise, I was so stiff, and so stark, I would ha sworn my Legs had
been wooden pegs: a Constable new chosen kept not such a pe∣ripateticall
gate: But now I'm as Limber as an Ancient that has
flourished in the rain, and as Active as a Norfolk tumbler.
You may see, what change of pasture is able to doe.
It makes fat Calves in Rumny Marsh, and lean knaves
in London: therefore Boniface keep your ground: Gods my pit∣tie,
my forehead has more cromples, then the back part of a coun∣sailors
gown, when another rides upon his neck at the bar:
Boniface take my helmet: give your mistress my night-cap. Are
my Antlers swollen so big that my biggen pinches my brows.
So, request her to make my head-piece a little wider.
How much wider sir.
I can allow her almost an y•ch: go, tell her so, very near
an inch.
If she bee a right Citizens wife, now her Husband has
given her an inch, sheele take an ell, or a yard at least.
Moister Parenthesis! Salve, Salve Domino.
Salve tu quo{que} Iubeo te saluere plurimum.
No more Plurimums if you love me, latin whole-meate•
are now minced, and served in for English Gallimafries: Let
vs therefore cut out our vplandish Neates tongues, and talk like
regenerate Brittains.
Your worship is welcome to England: I poured out Ore∣sons
for your arrival.
Thanks good moister Parenthesis: and Que novels: what
news flutters abroad? doe Iack-dawes dung the top of Paules
Steeple still.
The more is the pity, if any daws do come into the tem∣ple,
as I fear they do.
They say Charing-crosse is falue down, since I went to
Rochell: but thats no such wonder, it was old, and stood awry (as
most part of the world can tel.) And tho it lack vnder-propping,
yet (like great fellows at a wrestling) when their heals are once
flying up, no man will save em; down they fall, and there let
them lye, tho they were bigger then the Guard: Charing-crosse
was old, and old things must shrink as well as new Northern
cloth.
Your worship is in the right way verily: they must so, but
a number of better things between Westminster bridge and tem∣ple
bar both of a worshipful, and honourable erection, are fallen
to decay, and have suffered putrefaction, since Charing fell, that were
not of half so long standing as the poor wry-neckt Monument.
Whose within there? One of you call up your mistress!
tell her hears her writing Schoolmaster. I had not thought ma∣ster
Parenthesis you had bin such an early stirrer.
Sir, your vulgar and foure-peny-pen-men, that like your
London Sempsters keep open shop, and sell learning by retail,
may keep their beds, and lie at their pleasure: But we that edi∣fie
in private, and traffic by whole sale, must be up with the lark,
because like Country Attorneys, wee are to shuffle up many mat∣ters
in a forenoon. Certes moister Honisuckle, I would sing Laus
Deo, so I may but please al those that come under my fingers: for
it is my duty and function, Party, to be fervent in my vocation.
Your hand: I am glad our City has so good, so necessary,
and so laborious a member in it: we lack painful and expert pen∣men
amongst vs. Moister Parenthesis you teach many of our Mer∣chants
sir, do you not?
Both Wives, Maids, and Daughters: and I thank God,
the very worst of them lye by very good men's sides: I pick out a
poor living amongst em, and I am thankful for it.
Trust me I am not sorry: how long have you exercised this
quality?
Come Michaell-tide next, this thirteen year.
And how does my wife profit under you sir? hope you to
do any any good upon her.
Moister Honisuckle I am in great hope she shall fructify: I
will do my best for my part: I can do no more then another man
can.
Pray sir ply her, for she is capable of any thing.
So far as my poor talent can stretch, It shall not be hid∣den
from her.
Does she hold her pen well yet?
She leanes somewhat too hard upon herpen yet sir, but
practise and animaduersion will break her from that.
Then she grubs her pen.
Its but my pains to mend the neb again.
And where abouts is she now moister Parenthesis? She
was talking of you this morning, and commending you in her
bed, and told me she was past h•r letters.
Truly sir she took her letters very suddenly: and is now
in her Minoms.
I would she were in her Crotchets too moister Parenthesis:
ha-ha, I must talk merrily sir.
Sir so long as your mirth bee void of all Squirrility, tic
not unfit for your calling: I trust ere few days bee at an end to
have her fall to her joining: for she has her letters ad vnguem: her
A. her great B. and her great C. very right D. and E. delicate: his
double F. of a good length, but that it straddels a little to wide:
at the G. very cunning.
Her H. is full like mine: a goodly big H.
But her: double LL is well: her O. of a reasonable Size: at
her p. and q. neither Merchants Daughter, Aldermans Wife,
young country Gentlewoman, nor Courtiers Mistress, can match
her.
And how herv.
You sir, She fetches up you best of al: her single you she ca•
fashion two or three ways: but her double you, is as I would
wish it.
And faith who takes it faster; my wife, or mistress Tenterhook?
Oh! Your wife by odds: sheele take more in one hour,
then I can fasten either upon mistress Tenterbooke, or mistress Wafer,
or Mistress Flapdragon (the Brewers wife) in three.
Do not thy cheeks burn sweet chuckaby, for wee are
talking of thee.
No goodness I warrant: you have few Cit∣tizens
speak well of their wives behind their backs: but to their
faces they•e cog worse and be more suppliant, then Clients that
sue in form paper: how does my master? troth I am a very truant:
have you your Ruler about you moister? for look you, I go clean
awry.
A small fault: most of my scholars do so: look you
sir, do not you think your wife will mend: mark her dashes, &amp;
her strokes, and her breakings, and her bindings?
She knows what I have promised her if she doe mend:
•ay by my fey Iude, this is well, if you would not fly out thus, but
keep your line.
I shall in time when my hand is in: have you a new pen for
me Moister, for by my truly, my old one is stark nought, and will
cast no inck: whether are you going lamb?
To the Custom-house: to the Change, to my Ware∣house,
to divers places.
Good Cole tarry not past eleven, for you turn my stomach
then from my dinner.
I will make more hast home, then a Stipendary Swizzer
does after hes paid, fare you well Moister Parenthesis.
I am so troubled with the rheum too: Mouse whats good
fort?
How often have I told you, you must get a patch. I
must hence.
I think when else done I must follow his counsel, and take
a patch, I have had one long ere this, but for disfiguring my face:
yet I had noted that a masticke patch upon some women's Tem∣ples,
hath bin the very the•wme of beauty.
Is he departed? Is old Nestor marched into Troy?
Yes you mad Greek: the Gentleman's gone.
Why then clap up coppy-bookes: down with pens, hang
up inckhornes, and now my sweet Honisuckle, see what golden∣winged
Bee from Hybla, flies humming, with Crura thymo plane,
which he will empty in the Hive of your bosom.
From whom.
At the skirt of that sheet in black work is wrought his
name, break not up the wildfoule, till anon, and then feed upon
him in private: theres other irons in the fire: more sackes are com∣ming
to the Mill, O you sweet temptations of the sons of A∣dam,
I commend you, extol you, magnify you: Were I a Poet
by Hipocrene I swear, (which was a certain Well where all the
Muses watered) and by Pernassus eke I swear, I would •ime you to
death with praises, for that you can bee content to lye with old
men all night for their money, and walk to your gardens with young
men in the day time for your pleasure: Oh you delicate damnations:
you do but as I wud do: were I the proprest, sweetest, plumpest,
Cherry-cheekt, Corrall-lipt woman in a kingdom, I would not
dance after one mans pipe.
And why?
Especially after an old mans.
And why, pray!
Especially after an old Citizens.
Still, and why.
Marry because the Suburbs, and those without the bars,
have more privilege then they within the freedom: what need
one woman do ate upon one Man? Or one man be mad like Or∣london
for one woman.
Troth tic true, considering how much flesh is in every Sham∣bless.
Why should I long to eat of Bakers bread only, when
theres so much Sifting, and bolting, and grinding in every cor∣ner
of the City; men and women are borne, and come running
into the world faster then Coaches doe into Cheap-side upon
Symon and Iudes day: and are eaten up by Death faster, then Mut∣ton
and porridge in a term time. Who would pin their hearts to
any Sleeve: this world is like a Mynt, we are no sooner cast into
the fire, taken out again, hamerd, stamped, and made Currant, but
presently wee are changed: the new Money (like a new Drab) is
caught at by Dutch, Spanish, Welch, French, Scotch, and Eng∣lish:
but the old cracked King Harry groats are shoueld up, feel
bruising, and battring, clipping, and melting, they smoke sort.
The worlds an Arrant naughty-pack I see, and is a very scur∣uy
world.
Scurvy? worse then the conscience of a Broom∣man,
that carries out new ware, and brings home old shoes: a
naughty-packe? Why theres no Minute, no thought of time pas∣ses,
but some villainy or other is a brewing: why, even now, now,
at holding up of this finger, and before the turning down of this,
some are murdering, some lying with their maids, some picking
of pockets, some cutting purses, some cheating, some weighing out
bribes. In this City some wives are Cuckolding some Husbands.
In yonder Village some farmers are now-now grinding the Iaw∣bones
of the poor: therefore sweet Scholar, sugared Mistress Ho∣nisuckle,
take Summer before you, and lay hold of it? why, even
now must you and I hatch an egg of iniquity.
Troth moister I think thou wilt prove a very knave.
Its the fault of many that fight under this band.
I shall love a Puritans face the worse whilst I live for that
Copy of thy countenance.
We are all weathercocks, and must follow the wind of the
present: from the bias.
Change a bowl then.
I will so; and now for a good cast: theres the Knight, sir
Gos•n Glo-worme.
Hes a Knight made out of wax.
He took up Silks upon his bond I confess: nay more,
hes a knight in print: but let his knight-hood be of what stamp
it will, from him come I, to entreat you, and Mistress Wafer, and
mistress Tenterhook, being both my scholars, and your honest pew
fellows, to meet him this afternoon at the Rhenesh-wine-house
ith Stillyard. Captain Whirlepoole will be there, young Lynstock
the Alder-mans Son and Heir, there too, will you steal forth, &amp;
taste of a Dutch Bun, and a Keg of Sturgeon.
What excuse shall I coin now?
Few excuses: You must to the pawn to buy Lawn: to
Saint Martins for Lace; to the Garden: to the Glasse-house; to
your Gossips: to the Powlters: else take out an old ruff, and go
to your Sempsters: excuses? Why, they are more ripe then med∣lers
at Christmas.
Isle come. The hour.
Two: the way-through Paules: every wench take a pillar,
there clap on your Masks: your men will bee behind you, and
before your prayers be half don, be before you, &amp; man you out
at several doors. You'll be there?
If I breath.
Farewell. So: now must I go set the tother Wenches the
self same Copy. A rare Scholemaister, for all kind of hands, I.
Oh: What strange curses are powered down with one blessing?
Do all tread on the heel? Have all the art to hood-winke wise
men thus? And (like those builders of Babels Tower) to speak
unknown tongues. Of all (save by their husbands) understood:
Well, if (as Ivy bout the Elm does twine)
All wives love clipping, theres no fault in mine.
But if the world lay speechless, even the dead
Would rise, and thus cry out from yawning graves,
Women make men, or Fools, or Beasts, or Slaves.
Her answer! talk in music: Will she come?
Oh my sides ache in my loins, in my bones? I ha more need
of a posit of sack, and lie in my bed and sweat, than to talk in
music: no honest woman would run hurrying up &amp; down thus
and undo her self for a man of honour, without reason? I am so
lame, every foot that I set to the ground went to my hart. I thought
I had bin at Mum-chance my bones rattled so with iaunting? had it
not bin for a friend in a corner.
I had kicked up my heals.
Minister comfort to me, Will she come.
All the Castles of comfort that I can put you into is this,
that the jealous wittal her husband, came (like a mad Ox) below∣ing
in whilst I was there. Oh I ha lost my sweet breath with trotting.
Death to my hart? her husband? What saith he?
The freeze-lerkin Rascal out with his purse, and called me
plain Bawd to my face.
Affliction to me, then thouspak'st not to her?
I spake to her, as Clients do to Lawyers without money (to
no purpose) but Isle speak with him, and hamper him to, if eve• he
fall into my clutches: Isle make the yale•ow-hammer her husband
know, (for all hes an Italian) that theres a difference between a
cogging Baud and an honest motherly gentlewoman. Now, what
cold whetstonesly over your stomacher? will you have some of my
Aqua? Why my Lord.
Thou hast kilt me with thy words.
I see bashful lovers and young bullocks are knocked down
at a blow: Come, come▪ drink this draught of Cinnamon water,
and pluck up your spirits: up with em, up with em. Do you hear,
the whiting mop has nibbled.
Ha?
Oh? I thought I should fetch you: you can Ha at that: Isle
make you Hem anon. As I'm a sinner I think you'll find the sue∣test,
sweetest bedfellow of her. Oh! she looks so sugredly, so simon∣pringly,
so gingerly, so amorously, so amiably. Such a red lip,
such a White forehead, such a black eye, such a full cheek,
and such a goodly little nose, now shees in that French gown,
Scotch false, Scotch bum, and Italian head-tire you sent her, and is
such an enticing shee-witch, carrying the charms of your Jewels
about her. O••!
Did she receive them? speak: Here is is golden keys
T'vnlock thy lips. Did she vouchsa•e to take them?
Did she vouchsafe to take them, theirs a question: you shall
find she did vouchsafe: The troth is my Lord, I got her to my
house, there she put off her own cloths my Lord and put on yours
my Lord, provided her a Coach, Searched the middle Isle in Pawles,
and with three Elizabeth twelue-pences pressed three knaves my L.
hired three Liveries in Long-lane, to man her: for al which so God
mend me, I'm to pay this night before Sun-set.
This shower shall fill them al•rain in their laps, what gol∣den
drops thou wilt.
Alas my Lord, I do but receive it with one hand, to pay it
away with another, I'm but your Bailey.
Where is she?
In the greene velvet Chamber; the poor sinneful creature
pants like a pigeon under the hands of a Hawk, therefore use her
like a woman my Lord: use her honestly my Lord, for alas shees
but a Novice, and a very greene thing.
Farewell: Isle in unto her.
Fie vpont, that were not for your honour: you know gen∣tlewomen
use to come to Lords chambers, and not Lords to the
Gentlewoman's; Id not have her think you are such a Rank-ry∣der:
walk you here: Isle beckon, you shall see isle fetch her with a
wet finger?
Do so.
Hist? why sweet heart, mistress Iustiniano, why pretty soul
tread softly, and come into this room: here be rushes, you need
not fear the creaking of your cork shoes.
So, well said, theres his honour. I have business my Lord, very now
the marks are set up: Isle get me 〈◊〉 score off, and give Aim.
Yare welcome: Sweety'are welcome. Bless my hand
With the soft touch of yours: Can you be Cruel
To one so Prostrate to you? Even my Hart,
My Happiness, and State lie at your feet:
My Hopes me flattered that the field was won,
That you had yielded, (tho you Conquer me)
And that all Marble scales that bard your eyes
From throwing light on mine, were quite tan off,
By the Cunning Women's hand, that Works for me,
Why therefore do you wound me now with frowns?
Why do you fly me? Do not exercise
The Art of woman on me? I'm already
Your Captive: Sweet! Are these your hate, or •ears.
I wonder lust can hang at such white hairs.
You give my love ill names, It is not lust:
Lawless desires well tempered may seem Just
A thousand mornings with the early Sun, mine eyes have from
your windows watched to steal brightness from those. As oft up∣on
the days that Consecrated to devotion are, Within the Holy
Temple have I stood disguised, waiting your presence: and when
your hands went up towards heaven to draw some blessing down,
Mine (as if all my Nerues by yours did move,)
Begged in dum Signs some pity for my Love,
And thus being feasted only with your fight,
I went more pleased then sickmen with fresh health,
Rich men with Honour, Beggars do with wealth.
Part now so pleased, for now you more Enjoy me.
O you do wish me Physic to destroy me.
I have already leapt beyond the bounds of modesty,
In piecing out my wings with borrowed feathers: but you sent a
Sorceress so perfect in her trade, that did so lively breath forth your
passionate Accents, and could draw a Lover languishing so pier∣cingly,
that her charms wrought upon me, and in pity of your
sick hart which she did Counterfeit, (Oh shees a subtle Beldam!)
See I clothed my limbs (thus Player-like in Rich Attires, not fit∣ting
mine estate, and am come forth, but why I know not?
Will you Love me?
Yes,
If you can clear me of a debt thats due but to one Man,
Isle pay my hart to thee.
Whose that?
My Husband.
Vmh.
The sums so great
I know a kingdom cannot answer it,
And therefore I beseech you good my Lord,
To take this gilding off, which is your own,
And henceforth cease to throw out golden hooks
To choke mine honour: tho my husbands poor,
Isle rather beg for him, then be your Whore.
Against beauty you plot treason, if you suffer tears to do vio∣lence
to so fair a Cheek. That face was ne'er made to look pale
with want. Dwell here and bee the Sovereign of my fortunes.
Thus shall you go attired.
Till lust be tired. I must take leave my Lord.
Sweet Creature stay,
My Confers shall be yours, my Servants yours,
My self will be your servant, and I swear by that which I hold•
dear in you, your beauty (and which Isle not profane) you shall
live here as free from base wrong, as you are from blackenesse, so
you will deign, but let me enjoy your sight, Answer me will
you.
I will think vpont.
Unless you shall perceive, that al my thoughts, and al my
actions bee to you devoted, and that I very justly earn your love,
Let me not taste it.
I will think upon it.
But when you find my merits of full weight,
will you accept their worth.
Isle think vpont.
Id speak with the old woman.
She shall come,
Joys that are borne unlooked for, are borne dumb.
Po•arty, thou bane of Chastity,
Poison of beauty, Broker of Mayden-heades,
I see when Force, nor Wit can scale the hold, Wealth must. Sheel•
ne'er be won, that defies go•de.
But lives there such a creature: Oh tic rare.
To find a woman chaste, thats poor and fair.
Now lamb! has not his Honour dealt like an honest Noble∣man
with you. I can tel you. you shall not find him a Templer, nor
one of these cogging Cattern pear-coloured-beards, that by their
good 〈◊〉 wou•d have no pretty woman scope them.
Thou art a very bawd: thou art a Devil
Cast in a reverend shape; thou stale damnation!
Why hast thou me intist from mine own Paradise,
To steal fruit in a barren wilderness.
Bawd and devil, and stale damnation! Will women's
tounges (like Bakers legs) never go straight.
Had thy Circean Magic me transformed
Into that sensual shape for which thou Coniurst,
And that I were turned common Veuturer,
I could not love this old man.
This old man, vmh: this old man? doe his hoary hairs
stick in your stomach? yet methinkes his silver hairs should
move you, they may serve to make you Bodkins: Does his age
grieve you? fool? Is not old wine wholesommest, old Pippins
toothsommest, old wood burn brightest, old Linen wash whi∣test,
old soldiers Sweet-hart are surest, and old Lovers are soun∣dest.
I hatried both.
So will not I.
Your have some young perfumed beardless Gallants board
you, that spits al his brains out ats tongues end, wud you not?
N•, none at al, not any.
None at al? what doe you make there then? why are you a
burden to the worlds conscience, and an eie-sore to well given mē,
I dare pawn m• gown and al the beds in my house, and al the
gettings in Michaelmas term next to a Tavern token, that thou
shalt never be an innocent.
Who are so?
Fools? why then are you so precise: your husbands down
the wind and will you like a higglers Arrow, be down the weather,
Strike whilst the iron is hot. A woman when there be roses in her
cheeks, Cherries on her lips, Civet in her breath, Ivory in her
teeth, Lyllyes in her hand, and Lickorish in her heart, why shees
like a play. If new very good company, very good company, but
if stale, like old Ieronimo: go by, go by. Therefore as I said be∣fore,
strike. Besides: you must think that the commodity of
beauty was not made to lye dead upon any young women's hands:
if your husband have given up his Cloak, let another take mea∣sure
of you in his Jerkin: for as the Cobbler, in the night time walks
with his Lantern, the Merchant, and the Lawyer with his Link,
and the Courtier with his Torch: So every lip has his Lattice to
himself: the Lob has his Lass, the Collier his Dowdy, the We∣stern
man his Pug, the Serving-man his Punk, the student his
Nun in white Fryers, the Puritan his Sister, and the Lord his La∣die:
which worshipful vocation may fall upon you, if you'll but
strike whilst the Iron is hot.
Witch: thus I break thy Spells: Were I kept brave,
On a Kings cost, I am but a Kings slave.
I see, that as Frenchmen love to be bold, Flamings to be
drunk, Welshmen to be called Britons, and Irishmen to be Co∣stermongers,
so, Cocknyes, (especially Shee-Cocknies) love not
Iq•a-vite when tis-good for them.
Saw you my uncle?
I saw him even now going the way of all flesh (thats to say)
towards the Kitchen: hears a letter to your worship from the
party.
What party?
The Tenterbook your wanton.
From her? Fewh? pray thee stretch me no more upon
your Tenterhook: pox on her? Are there no Pottecariesith Town
to send her Phisick-bils to, but me: Shees not troubled with the
greene sickness still, Is she?
The yellow I aundis, as the Doctor tells me: troth shees as
good a peat: she is fallen away so, that shees nothing but bare skin
and bone: for the Turtle so mourns for you.
In black?
In black? you shall find both black and blew if you look
under her eyes.
Well: sing over her ditty when I'm in tune,
Nay, but will you send her a Box of Mithridatum and Dra∣gon
water, I mean some restorative words. Good Moister Mono∣poly
yo• know how welcome yare to the City, and will you ma∣ster
Monopoly, keep out of the City; I know you cannot, would
you saw how the poor gentlewoman lies.
Why how lies she?
Troth as the way lies over Gads-hill, very dangerous: you
would pity a women's case if you saw her: write to her some trea∣tise
of pacification.
Isle write to her to morrow.
To morrow; sheele not sleep then but tumble, and if
she might have it to night, it would better please her.
Perhaps Isle doot to night, farewell.
If you doot to night, it would better please her then to more∣row.
Gods so, dost hear, I'm to sup this night at the Lyon
in Sh•redich with certain gallants: cāst thou not draw forth some
delicate face, that I ha not seen, and bring it thither, wut thou?
All the painters in London shall not fit for colour as I can;
but we shall have some swaggering?
All as civil (by this sight) as Lawyers.
But I tell you, shees not so common as Lawyers, that I
mean to betray to your Table: for as I'm a Sinner, shees a
Knights Cozen; a Yorkshire gentlwoman, and only speaks a lit∣tle
broad, but of very good carriage.
Nay thats no matter, we can speak as broad as she? but
wut bring her?
You shall call her Cozen, do you see: two men shall waite
upon her, and Isle come in by chance: but shall not the party bee
there?
Which party?
The writer of that simple hand.
Not for as many Angels as there be letters in her Paper:
Speak not of me to her, nor our meeting if you love me: wut
come?
Mum, Isle come.
Farewell.
Good Moister Monopoly, I hope to see you one day a man
of great credit.
If I be, Isle build Chimneys with Tobacco
but Isle smoke some: and be sure Bird. Isle stick wool upon thy
back.
Thanks sir, I know you will, for all the kindred of the
Monopolies are held to be great Fleecers.
So draw those Curtains; and lets see the pictures under •m.
Welcome to the Stilliard fair Ladies.
Thanks good moister Lynstocke.
Hans: some wine Hans.
Yaw, yaw, you sall hebben it master:
Old vine, or new vine?
Speak women.
New wine good sir Gozlin: wine in the must, good Dutch∣man,
for must is best for vs women.
New vine? vell: two pots of new vine.
An honest Butterbox: for if it be old, theres none of it coms
into my belly.
Why Tenterhooke pray thee lets dance friskin, &amp; be merry.
Thou art so troubled with Monopolies, they so hang at thy
heart strings.
Pox a my hart then.
I and mine too, if any Courtier of them all set up his gal∣lowes
there: wench use him as thou dost thy pantables, scorn to
let him kiss thy heel, for he feeds thee with nothing but Court
holy bread, good words, and cares not for thee: sir Gozlin, will
you taste a Dutch whatch you callum.
Here moister Lynstocke, half mine is yours. Bun, Bun,
Bun, Bun.
Which room? where are they? wo ho, ho, ho, so, ho boys.
Sfoot whose that? lock our room.
Not till I am in: and then lock out the devil tho he come
in the shape of a puritan.
Scholemaister, welcome? well∣come
in troth?
Who would not bee scratched with the briars
and brambles to have such burs sticking on his breeches: Save you
gentlemen: O noble Knight.
More wine Hans.
Am not I (gentlemen) a Ferret of the right hair, that can
make three Cones bolt at a clap into your pursenets? ha? little do
their 3. husbands dream what copies I am setting their wives
now? were not a rare Jest if they should come sneaking upon vs
like a horrible noise of Fiddlers.
Troth Id not care: let em come: Id tell em, weed h•
none of their dull Music.
Here mistress Tenterhooke.
Thanks good mistress Wafer.
Whose there? Peepers: Intelligencers: E•esdroppers.
Vds foot, throw a pot ats head?
Oh Lord? O Gentlemen, Knight, Ladies, that may bee,
Citizens wives that are, shift for your selves, for a pair of your
husbands heads are knocking together with Hans his, and inqui∣ring
for you. Omni. Keep the door locked.
Oh I, do, do: and let sir Gozlin (because he has bin in the low
Countries) swear go•z Sacrament, and drive i'm away with bro∣kē
Dutch.
Here is a wench has simple Sparks in her: shees my
pupil Gallants: Good-god? I see a man is not sure that his wife
is in the Chamber, tho his own fingers hung on the Padlock:
Trap-doores, false Drabs, and Spring-lockes, may cozen a Co∣•y
of Constables. How the silly Husbands might here ha been
gulled with Flemish money: Come: drink up Rhine, Thames and
Meander dry, Theres Nobody.
Ah thou ungodly moister.
I did but make a false fire, to try your valour, because you
cried let em come. By this glass of women's wine, I•would not ha
seen their Spirits walk here, to bee dubbed deputy of a Ward, I,
they would ha Chronicled me for a Fox in a Lambs skin: But
come: Is this merry Midsomer night agreed upon? when shall it
be? where shall it be?
Why faith to morrow at night.
Weal take a Coach and ride to Ham, or so.
O fie vpont: a Coach? I cannot abide to be iolted.
Yet most of your Citizens wives love iolting?
What say you to B•ack-wall, or Lime-house?
Every room there smells to much of Tar.
Lets to mine host Dogbolts at Brainford then, there you
are out of eyes, out of ears▪ private rooms, sweet Lie•nen, wink∣ing
attendance, and what cheer you will?
Content, to Bramford?
I, I, lets go by water, for sir Gozlin I have heard you say
you love to go by water.
But wenches, with what pulls shall wee slide with some
•lenly excuse, out of our husbands suspicion, being gone West∣ward
for smelts all night.
Thats the block now we all stumble at: Wind up that
••ring well, and all the consorts in tune.
Why then goodman scrape• tic wound up, I have it. Sir
Wafer, thy childes at nurse, if you that are the men could provide
some wise ass that could keep his countenance.
Nay if he be an Ass he will keep his countenance.
I, but I mean, one that could set out his tale with audaci∣tie,
and say that the child were sick, and near stagger at it: That
last should serve all our feet.
But where will that wise Ass
be found now?
I see I'm borne still to draw Dun out ath
mire for you: that wise beast will I be. Isle bee that Ass that shall
groan under the burden of that abominable lye. Heaven pardon
me, and pray God the infant be not punished fort. Let me see: Isle
break out in some filthy shape like a Thrasher, or a Thatcher,
or a Sowg•lder, or something: and speak dreamingly, and swear
how the child pukes, and eats nothing (as perhaps it does not)
and lies at the mercy of God, (as all children and old•folks doe)
and then scholar Wafer, play you your part.
Fear not me, for a venue or two?
Where will you meet ith morning?
At some Tavern near the water-side, thats private.
The Grey-hound, the Greyhound in Black-fryers, an ex∣cellent
Rendezvous.
Content the Greyhound by eight?
And then you may whip forth two first, and two next, on
a sudden, and take Boat at Bridewell Dock most privately.
Beet so: a good place?
Isle go make ready my rustical properties: let me see school∣ler
hie you home, for your child shall bee sick within this half
hour.
Tic the vprightest dealing man? Gods my pity, whose
yonder?
I'm bold to press my self under the Colours of
of your company, hearing that Gentlewoman was in the room:
A word mistress?
How now, what says he?
Zounds what she? a Bawd, bith Lord First not?
No indeed, sir Gozlin shees a very honest woman, and
a Mid-wi•e.
At the Lyon in Shoredich? And would he not
read it? nor write to me? Isle poison his Supper?
But no words that I betrayed him.
Gentlemen I must be gone. I cannot stay in faith: pardon
me: Isle meet to morrow: come Nurse, cannot tarry by this eel∣meant.
Mother, you: Grannam drink ere you go. Bird: I am
going to a women's labour, indeed sir, cannot stay.
I hold my life the blacke-beard her husband whissels
for her.
A reckoning: Break one, break all.
Here Hans, draw not, Isle draw for all as Ime true knight.
Let him: amongst women this does stand for law,
the worthiest man (tho he be fool) must draw.
What book is that sweet hart?
Why the book of bonds that are due to you.
Come, what doe you with it? Why do you trouble your
self to take care about my business?
Why sir, doth not that which concerns you, concern
me. You told me Monopoly had discharged his bond, I find by
the book of accounts here, that it is not concealed. Ear I would
suffer such a cheating companion to laugh at me, Id see him hāg∣ed
I▪ Good sweet hart as ever you loved me, as ever my bed
was pleasing to you, arrest the knave, we were never beholding to
him for a pin, but for eating up our victuals. Good Mouse enter an
action against him.
In troth love I may do the gentlemā much
discredit, and besides it may be other actions may fall very heavy
upon him.
Hang him, to see the dishonesty of the
knave.
O wise, good words: A Courtier, A gentleman.
Why may not a Gentleman be a knave, that were
strange in faith: but as I was a saying, to see the dishonesty of him,
that would never come since he received the money to visit vs you
know. Moister Tenterhook he hath hung long upon you. My∣ster
Tenterhooke as I am virtuous you shall arrest him.
Why, I know not when he will come to Town.
Hes in town: this night he sups at the Lyon in Shore∣dich,
good husband enter your action, and make hast to the Lyon
presently, theres an honest fellow (Sergeant Ambush) will doe it
in a trice, he never salutes a man in Courtesy, but he catches him as
if he would arrest him. Good hart let Seriant Ambush lie in waite
for him.
Well at thy entreaty I will doe it. Give me my Cloak
there, buy a link and meet me at the Counter in Woodstreete;
bus me Moll.
Why now you love me. Isle go to bed
sweet hart.
Do not sleep till I come Moll.
No lamb, baa sheep, if a woman will be free in this
intricate labyrinth of a husband, let her marry a man of a melan∣choly
complexion, she shall not be much troubled with him. By
my sooth my Husba•d hath a hand as dry as his brains, and a
breath as strong as six cōmon gardens. Well my husband is gon
to arrest Monopoly. I have dealt with a Sergeant privately, to in∣treat
him, pretending that he is my Aunts Son, by this means
shall I see my young gallant that in this has plaid his part. When
they owe money in the City once, they deal with their Lawyers
by atturny, follow the Court though the Court do them not the
grace to allow them their dyer. O the wit of a woman when she
is put to the pinch.
Come Sergeant Ambush, come yeoman Clutch, yons the
Tavern▪ the Gentleman will come out presently: thou art reason∣lute.
Who I, I carry fire &amp; sword that fight for me, hear,
and hear. I know most of the knaves about London, and most
of the Thieves to, I thank God▪ and good intelligence.
I wonder thou dost not turn Broker then.
Pew; I
have bin a Broker already; for I was first a Puritan, then a Ban∣querout,
then a Broker, then a Fencer, and then Sergeant, were
not these Trades would make a man honest? peace the door
ops, wheel about yeoman Clutch.
And ear I come to sup in this Tavern again. Theres no
more attendance then in a Jail, and there had bin a Punk ot two
in the company then we should not have bin rid of the drawers:
now were I in an excellēt humour to go to a valting house▪ I wold
break down all their Glass-windowes, hew in pieces all their
join stools, tear silk petticotes, ruffle their Periwigs, and
spoil their Painting, O the Gods what I could do: I could un∣dergo
fifteen bawds by this darkness, or if I could meet one of
these Varlets that were Pannier ally on their baks (Sergeants)
I would make them scud so fast from me, that they should think
it a shorter way between this and Ludgate, then a condemned
Cu•purse thinks it between Newgate and Tyburne.
You are for no action to night.
No Isle to bed.
Am not I drunk now: Implentur veteris bacchi, pi•quis{que}
Tobacco.
Faith we are all heated.
Captain Whirlepoole when wilt come to Court and dine
with me?
One of these days Frank, but Isle get me two
Gaunlets for •ear I lose my fingers in the dishes, their bee excel∣lent
shavers I hear in the most of your under offices? I protest I
have often come thither, sat down drawn, my knife, and ear I
could say grace all the meat hath bin gone. I have risen, and de∣parted
thence as hungry, as ever came Country Atturny from
Westminster? Good night honest Frank, doe not swagger with
the watch Frank.
So now they are gone you may take him.
Sir I arrest you?
Arrest me, at whose suite you varlets?
At moister Tenterhookes.
Why you varlets dare you arrest one of the Court.
Come will you be quiet sir?
Pray thee good yeoman call the gentlemen back again.
Theres a Gentleman hath carried a hundred pound of mine home
with him to his lodging, because I dare not carry it over the fields,
Isle discharge it presently.
Thats a trick sir, you would procure a reskue.
Catchpole do you see, I will have the hair of your head
and beard shaved off for this, and ear I catch you at Greys Inn
by this light law.
Come will you march.
Are you Sergeants Christians? Sir thou look like a
good pitiful rascal, and thou art a tall man to it seems, thou
hast backed many a man in thy time I warrant.
I have had many a man by the back sir.
Welsaide
in-troth, I love your quality, las tic needful every man should
come by his own▪ but as God mend m• gentlemen I have not one
cross about me, only you two. Might not you let a Gentlemen
pass out of your hands, and say you saw him not? Is there not
such a kind of mercy in you now and then my Masters, as I
live, if you come to my lodging to morrow morning, Isle
give you five brace of Angles? good yeoman persuade your
graduate here: I know some of you to be honest faithful Drun∣kards,
respect a poor Gentleman in my case.
Come, it will not serve your turn, Officers look to him,
upon your peril.
Do you hear sir, you see I am in the
hands of a couple of Ravens here, as you are a Gentleman lend me
forty shillings, let me not live if I do not pay you the forfeiture of
the whole bond, and never plead Conscience.
Not a penny, not a penny: God night sir.
Well, a man ought not to sweat by any thing in the hands
of Sergeants but by silver, and because my pocket is no lawful In∣stice
to Minister any such oath unto me, I will patiently encounter
the Counter. Which is the dearest ward in Prison Sergeant! the
knights ward?
No sir, the Masters side.
Well the knight is aboue the moister though his Table
be worse furnished: Isle go thither.
Come sir, I must use you kindly the Gentleman's Wife
that hath arrested you.
I what of her.
She says you are her Antes son.
I, am?
She takes on so pitifully for your Arresting, it was much
against her will (good Gentlewomā) that this affliction lighted up∣on
you.
She hath reason, if she respect her poor kindred.
You shall not go to prison.
Honest Sergeant, Conscionable Officer, did I forget my
self even now, a vice that sticks to me always when I am drunk
to abuse my best friends: where did buy this buff? Let me not
live but Isle give thee a good suite of durance, Wilt thou take my
bond Sergeant? Wheres a Scrivener, a Scrivener good Yeoman?
you shall have my sword and hangers to pay him.
Not so Sir: but you shall be prisoner in my house: I do
not think but that your Cousin will visit you there in the morning,
and take order for you.
Well said; wast not a most treacherous part to arrest a
man in the night▪ and when he is almost drunk, when he hath not
his wits about him to remember which of his friends is in the Sub∣sedy:
Come did I abuse you, I recant, you are as necessary in a ci∣tie
as Tumblers in Norfolk, Sumners in Lancashire, or Rake-hels
in an Army▪
Buy any small Coal, buy any small Coal.
Collier, Collier?
What say boy.
Ware the Pillory.
O boy the pillory assures many a man that he is no cukold,
for how impossible wear it a man should thrust his head through
so small a Loope-ho'e if his forehead were branched boy?
Collier: how came the goose to be put upon you, ha?
Isle tell thee, the Term lying at Winchester in Henry the
Thirds days, and many French Women coming out of the Isle
of Wight thither (as it hath always been seen) though the Isle of
Wight could not of long time neither in dure Foxes nor Lawyers.
yet it could brook the more dreadful Cockatrice, there were many
Punkes in the Town (as you know our Term is their Term)
your Farmers that would spend but three pence on his ordinary,
would lavish half a Crown on his Lechery: and many men
(Calves as they were) would ride in a Farmers foul boots before
breakfast, the commonst sinner had more fluttering about her,
then a fresh punk hath when she comes to a Town of Garrison,
or to a university. Captains, Scholars, Serving-men, Jurors, Clerks,
Townsmen, and the Blacke-guarde used all to one Ordinary,
and most of them were called to a pitiful reckoning▪ for before two
returns of Michaelmas, Surgeons were full of business, the care of
most secrecy grew as common as Lice in Ireland, or as scabs in
France. One of my Tribe a Collier carried in his Cart 40. maimed
soldiers to Salsbury, looking as pitifully as Dutchman first made
drunk, then carried to bee-heading. Every one that met him
cried, ware the Goose Collier, and from that day to this, theirs a re∣cord
to be seen at Croiden, howe that pitiful wa•tage which in
deed was virtue in the Collier, that all that time would carry no
Coals, laid this Imputation on all the posterity.
You are full of tricks Collier.
Boy where dwells moister Wafer?
Why hear! what would? I am one of his Iuvinals?
Hath he not a child at nurse at More-clacke?
Yes, dost thou dwell there?
That I do, the Child is wondrous sick: I was wild to ac∣quaint
thy moister and Mistress with it.
Isle up and tel them presently.
So, if al should fail me, I could turn Collier. O the villainy
of this age, how full of secrecy and silence (contrary to the opinion
of the world) have I ever found most women. I have sat a whole af∣ternoone
many times by my wife, and looked upon her eyes, and felt
if her pulses have beat, when I have named a suspected love, yet all
this while have not drawn from her the least scruple of confess∣on.
I have lain awake a thousand nights, thinking she wold have
revealed somewhat in her dreams, and when she has begun to
speak any thing in her sleep, I have iog'd he•, and cried I sweet
heart. But when will your love come, or what did hee say to thee
over the stall? Or what did he do to thee in the Garden-chamber?
Or when will he send to thee any letters, or when wilt thou send to
him any money, what an idle coxcomb jealousy will make a man.
Well, this is my comfort that here
comes a creature of the same head-peece.
O my sweet Child, wheres the Collier?
Here forsooth.
Run into Bucklers bury for two ounces of Draggon
water, so•e Sperm 〈◊〉 and Treakle. What is it sick of Coliar? •
burning Fever?
Faith mistress I do not know the infirmity of it: will you buy
any small Coal, say you?
Prithee go in and empty them, come be not so impatient.
I, I, I, if you had groaned fort as I have done you wold
have bin more natural. Take my riding hat, and my kirtle there:
Isle away presently?
You will not go to night, I am sure.
As I live but I will.
Faith sweet hart I have great business to night, stay till to more∣row
and Isle go with you.
No sir I will not hinder your business. I see how little
you respect the fruits of your own body. I shall find some body
to bear me company.
Well, I will defer my business for once, and go with thee.
By this light but you shall not, you shall not hit me in the
teeth that I was your hindrance, will you to Bucklers bury sir?
Come you are a fool leave yeur weeping.
You shall not go with me as I live.
Puple.
Exc•llent moister.
Admirable Mistress, howe happy be our Englishwomen
that are not troubled with Jealous husbands; why your Italians in
general are so Sun-burnt with these Dog-daies, that your great La∣die
there thinks her husband loves her not if hee bee not •ealious:
what confirms the liberty of our women more in England, then
the Italian Proverb, which says if there were a bridge over the
narrow Seas, all the women in Italy would show their husbands a
Million of light pair of heals, and fly over into England.
The time of our meeting? Come?
Seven.
The place.
In Blacke-Friers, there take Water, keep a aloof from the
shore, on with your Masks, up with your sails, and West-ward Hoe
So.
O the quick apprehension of women, the'ile groape out a
mans meaning presently, well, it rests now that I discover my self
in my true shape to these Gentlewoman's husbands: for though I
have plaid the fool a little to beguile the memory of mine own
misfortune, I would not play the knave, though I be taken for a
Banquerout, but indeed as in other things, so in that, the world is
much deceived in me, for I have yet three thousand pounds in the
hands of a sufficient friend, and all my debts discharged. I have re∣ceiued
here a letter from my wife▪ directed to S•ode, wherein she
most repent•tly entreats my return, with protestation to give
me assured trial of her honesty. I cannot tell what to think of it,
but I will put it to the test, there is a great strife between beauty,
&amp; Chastity, and that which pleases many is never• free from •em∣tation:
as for Jealousy, it makes many Cuckolds, many fools,
and many banquerouts: It may have abused me and not my wives
honesty: Isle try it: but first to my secure and do•ing Company∣on.
I beseech you Mistress Tenterhooke,
Before God Isle be sick if you will not be merry.
You are a sweet Beagle.
Come, because I kept from Town a little, let me not
live if I did not hear the sickness was in Town very hot: In troth
thy hair is of an excellent colour since I saw it. O those bright tres∣ses
like to threads of gold.
Lye, and ashes, suffer much in the city for that com∣parison.
Here is an honest Gentleman will be here by &amp; by,
was borne at Foolham: his name is Gos••ng Gloo-worme.
I know him, what is he?
He is a Knight: what ailed your husband to be so hasty to
arrest me.
Shall I speak truly? shall I speak not like a wo∣man.
Why not like a woman.
Because women's tongues are like to c•ocks, if they go
too fast they never go true, t'was I that got my husband to arrest
thee, I have.
I am beholding to you.
For sooth I could not come to the speech of you, I
think you may be spoken with all now.
I thank you, I hope you'll bail me Cousin?
And yet why should I speak with you, I protest I love
my husband
Tush let not any young woman love a man
in years too well.
Why? Mono Because heel dye be∣fore
he can requi•e it.
I have acquainted Wafer and Honey∣suckle
with it, and they allow my wit for it extremely.
O honest Sergeant
Welcome good mistress Tenterhooke.
Sergeant I must needs have my Cousin go a little Way
out of Town with me and to secure thee, here are two Diamonds,
they are worth two hundred pound, keep them till I return him.
Well tic good security.
Do not come in my husbands sight in the mean time
Welcome Gallants.
How now Monopoly Arrested?
O my little Honysuckle art come to visit a Prisoner?
Yes faith as Gentlemen visit Merchants, to fare well,
or as Poets young quaint R•uellers, to laugh at them. Sirrha if I
were some foolish Justice, if I would not beg thy wit never trust
me.
Why I pray you?
Because it hath bin concealed al this while, but come
shall we to boat, we are furnished for attendants as Ladies are,
We have our fools, and our Ushers.
I thank you Madame, I shall meet your wit in the
close one day.
Sir, thou know my husband keeps
a Kennel of hounds?
Yes.
Doth thy husband love venery?
Venery?
I, hunting, and venery are words of one signification.
Your two husband, and hee have made a match to
go find a Hare about Busty Causy.
Theile keep an
excellent house till we come home again.
O excellent,
a Spanish dinner, a Pilcher, and a Dutch supper, butter and One∣once.
O thou art a mad wench.
Sergeant carry this ell of Cambric to mistress Bird.
tel her but that it is a rough tide, and that she fears the water, she
should have gone with vs.
O thou hast an excellent wit.
To Boat hay?
Sir Gozlin? I doe take it your
legs are married.
Why mistress?
They look so thin upon it.
Ever since I measurd with your husband, I have shrunk
in the cal•e.
And yet you have a sweet tooth in your head.
O well dealt for the Calves head, you may talk what
you will of legs, and rising in the small, and swelling beneath the
garter. But tic certain when lank thighs brought long stockings
out of fashion, the Courtiers Leg, and his slender tilting staff
grew both of a bigness. Come for Brainford.
Good morrow mistress Luce: how did you take your rest
to night? how doth your good worship like your lodging? what
will you have to breakfast?
A pox of the Knight that was
here last night, he promised to have sent me some wilde foul; hee
was drunk Isle bestowed else.
Why do not you think he will
send them?
Hang them: ••s no more in fashion for them to
keep their promises, then tic for men to pay their debts. He will
lie faster then a Dog trow•s: what a filthy knocking was at door
last night; some puny Inn-a-court-men, Isle hold my contribute∣on.
Yes in troth were they, civil gentlemen without beards,
b•t to say the truth, I did take exceptions at their knocking: took
them a side &amp; said to them: Gentlemen this is not well, that you
should come in this habit, Cloaks and Rapiers, Boots and Spurs,
I protest to you, those that be your Ancients in the house would
have come to my house in their Caps and Gowns, civilly, and
modestly. I promise you they might have bin taken for Citizens,
but that they talk more liker fools. Who knocks there? up in∣to
your Chamber.
Who are you, some man of credit? that you come in m•fled thus.
Whose aboue?
Let me see your face first. O moister Honisuckle, why the
old party: the old party.
Pew I will not go up to her: no body else?
As I live will you give me some Sack? wheres Opportu∣nity.
What dost call her?
Her name is Christian, but mistress Luce cannot abide that
name, and so she calls her Opportunity.
Very good, good.
First a shilling, bring the rest in Aqua vit•.
Come shells go to Noddy.
I and thou wilt for half an hour.
Here are the Cards? deal, God send me Dcces and
Aces with a Court Card, and I shall get by it.
That can make thee nothing.
Yes if I have a coat Card turn up.
I show four games?
By my troth I must show all and little enough to, six
games: play your single game, I shall double with you anon.
Pray you lend me some silver to count my games?
How now is it good Sack?
Theres a gentleman at door would speak with you.
Gods so, I will not be seen by any means.
Into that closet then? What another mufler?
How dost thou mistress Birdlime?
Master Tenterhook•
the party is aboue in the dining Chamber.
Aboue.
All alone?
Is he gone up? who wast I pray thee?
By this sack I will not tel you I say that yo• were a country
Gentleman, or a Citizen that hath a young wife, or an Inn of
Chancery Man, should I tell you? Pardon me; this Sack tastes
of Horse flesh, I warrant you the leg of a dead horse hangs in the
But of Sack to keep it quick?
I beseech thee good Mistress Birdlime tel me who it was.
O God sir we are sworn to secrecy as well as Surgeons.
Come drink to me, and lets to our game.
Who am I?
You, pray you vnblind me, Captain Whirlpool, no my∣ster
Lynstock: pray vnblind me, you are not sir Gosling Glo-worme,
for he we•res no Rings of his fingers! Moister Freeze-leather, O
your are George the drawer at the Meter, pray you vnblinde me,
Captain Puckfoist, Moister Counterpaine the Lawyer, what the di∣uel
mean you, beshrew your heart you have a very dry hand, are
you not mine host Dog-bolt of Brainford, Mistress Birdlime, my∣ster
Honysuckle, Moister Wafer.
What the last of al your Clients.
O how dost thou good Cousin.
I you have many Cousins.
Faith I can name many that I do not know, and suppose
I did know them what then? I will suffer one to keep me in diet,
another in apparel; another in Physic; another to pay my house
rent. I am just of the Nature of Alcumy; I will suffer every plod∣ding
fool to spend money upon me, marry none but some worcester∣thie
friend to enjoy my more retired and vse-full faithfulness.
Your love, your love.
O I, tic the curse that is laid upon our quality, what wee
glean from others we lavish upon some trothlesse welfac'd youn∣ger
Brother, that Loves vs only for maintenance.
Hast a good •earme Luce?
A pox on the Term, and n•w I think o•t, says a gen∣tleman
last night let the pox be in the Town seven year, West∣minster
never breeds Cob-webs, &amp; yet tic as catching as the plague,
though not also general, there be a thousand bragging lacks in▪
London, that will protest they can wrest comfort from me when (I
swear) not one of them know whether my palm be moist or
not: In troth I love thee: You promised me seven Else of Cam∣brick.
Wafer knocks and enters, Whose that knocks?
What, more Sacks to the Myl, Isle to my old retiremēt.
How doth your good worship, Passion of my hart, what
shift shall I make. How hath your good worcester. done, a long time?
Very well God ••mercy.
Your good worsh. I think be riding out of town.
Yes believe me, I love to be once a week a horseback,
for methinks nothing sets a man out, better than a Horse.
Tic certain, nothing sets a woman out better than a man.
What, is mist. Luce aboue?
Yes truly.
Not any company with her.
Company? Shall
I say to your good worship and not lie, she hath had no company
(let me see how long it was since your Worcester. was hear) you w•t
to a Butchers feast at Cuckolds-hauen the next day after Saint
Lukes day. Not this fortnight, in good truth.
Alas, good soul.
And why was it? Go to, go
to, I think you know better than I▪ The wench asks every day
when will M. wafer be here: And if Knights ask for her, she
cries out at stayre-hed, As you love my life let em not come up,
Isle do my self violence if they enter: Have not you promised his
somewhat?
Faith, I think she loves me.
Loves: Well, wud you knew what I know, then you wud
say somewhat. In good faith shees very poor, all her gowns are
at pawn: she owes me five pound for her diet, besides 40. sh. I
lent her to redeem two half silk Kirtles from the Brokers, And
do you think she needed be in debt thus, if she thought not of
Some•body.
Good honest Wench.
Nay in troth, shees now entering into bond for 5. pounds
more, the Scrivener is but new gon up to take ber bond.
Come, let her not enter into bond, Isle lend her 5. pound,
isle pay the rest of her debts, Call down the Scrivener?
I pray you when he comes down, stand muffled, and Isle
tell him you are her brother.
If a man have a good honest wench, that lives wholly to
his use, let him not see his want.
O, mist. Luce, mist. Luce, you are the most unfortunate
gentlewoman that ever breathed: your young wild brother came
newly out of the Country, he calls me Bawd, swears I keep a
Bawdy house, says his sister is turned whore, and that he will kill, &amp;
slay any man that he finds in her company.
What conveyance will you make with mistress Birdlime.
O God let him not come up, tic the swaggringst wild-oats.
I have pacified him somewhat, for I told him, that you were
a Scrivener come to take a band of her, now as you go •oorth say
she might have had so much money if she had pleased, and say, she
is an honest Gentlewoman and al will be well.
Enough, farewell good Luce.
Come change your voice, and muffle you.
What trick should this be, I have never a brother, I•e hold
my life some franker customer is come, that she slides him off so
smoothly.
The Gentlewoman is an honest Gentlewoman as any is
in London, and should have had thrice as much money upon her
single bond for the good report I hear of her.
No sir his friends can furnish her with money.
By this light I should know that voice, Wafer, od'sfoote are
you the Gentlewoman's Brother?
Are your turned a Scrivener Tenterhooke?
I am spoiled.
Tricks of mistress Birdlime by this light.
Hoick Covert, hoick covert, why Gentlemen is this your
hunting?
A Consort, what make you here Honysuckle?
Nay what make you two hear, O excellent mistress Bird.
thou hast more tricks in thee then a Punk hath V•ckles, cousins,
Brothers. Sons or Fathers: an infinite Company.
If I did it not to make your good worships merry, never
•el•eve me, I will drink to your worship a glass of Sack.
God save you.
Moister Iustiniano welcome from St•ad.
Why Gentlemen I never came there.
Never there • where have you bin then?
Mary your daily guest I thank you.
Ours.
I yours.
I was the pedant that learnt your wives to write, I was the Collier
that brought you news your child was sick, but the truth is, for
ought I know, the Child is in health, and your wives are gone to
make merry at Brainford.
By my troth good wenches, they little dream where we are
now▪
You little dream what gallants are with them.
Gallants with them! I de laugh at that.
Four Gallants by this light, My▪ Monopoly is one of them.
Monopoly? I de laugh at that in faith.
Would you laugh at that! why do ye laugh at it then, they
are there by this time, I cannot stay to give you more particular in∣telligence:
I have received a letter from my wife hear, if you will
cal me at Putney, Isle bear you company.
Od'sfoot what a Rogue is Sergeant Ambush, Isle undo him
by this light.
I met Sergeant Ambush, and wild him come to this house
to you presently, so Gentlemen I leave you • Bawd I have nothing
to say to you now; do not think to much in so dangerous a matter
for in women's matters tic more dangerous to stand long delibera∣ting▪
then before a battai•e.
This fellows poverty hath made him an arrant knave.
will your worship drink any Aquavitae?
Apox on your Aquavitae. Monopoly, that my wife urged
me to arrest gon to Brainford.
here is comes the var∣let.
I am come si• to know your pleasure.
What hath Monopoly paid the money yet?
No sir, but he sent for money.
You have not carried him to the counter, he is at your house
still.
O Lord I sir as melancholic &amp;c.
You lie like an arrant varlet, by this candle I laugh at the jest
And yet hes ready to cry.
Hes gone with my wife to Brainford, and there bee any
Law in England Isle tickle ye for this.
Do your worst, for I have good security &amp; I care not, be∣sides
it was his cousin your wines pleasure that he should go along
with her.
Hoy day, her cousin, •el sir, your security.
Why sir two Diamonds here.
O my hart: my wives two Diamonds,
Well, you'll go along and instifie this.
That I will sir.
Who am I?
What the Murrion care I who you are, hold off your Fin∣gers,
or Isle cut them with this Diamond.
Isle see em in faith,
So, Isle keep these Diamonds tell I have my silk gown, and six
else of Cambric.
By this light you shall not.
No, what do you think you have Fops in hand, sue me for
them.
As you respect your credit lets go.
Good Luce as you love me let me have them, it stands up∣on
my Credit, thou shalt have any thing, take my purse.
I will not be crossed in my humour sir.
You are a damned filthy punk, what an unfortunate Rogue
was I, that ever I came into this house.
Do not spurn any body in my house you were best.
Well, well.
Excellent Luce, the getting of these two Diamonds my•
chance to save the Gentlewoman's credit; thou heard all.
O I, and by my troth pity them, what a filthy Knave
was that betrayed them.
One that put me into pitiful fear, master I•stiniano here
hath laid lurking like a sheep-biter, and in my knowledge hath
drawn these gentlewomen to this misfortune: but Isle down to
Queene-hiue, and the Watermen which were wont to carry you
to Lambeth Marsh, shall carry me thither: It may bee I may
come before them; I think I shall pray more, what for sear of the
water, and for my good success then I did this tweluemonth.
Have you perfumed this Chamber?
Yes my Lord.
The banquet?
It stands ready.
Go, let music
Charm with her excellent voice an awful silence
Through al this building, that her sphaery soul
May (on the wings of Ayre) in thousand forms
Invisibly fly, yet be enjoyed. Away.
Does my Lord mean to Conjure that hee draws this
strange Characters.
He does: but we shall see neither the Spirit that rises, nor
the Circle it rises in.
Twould make our hair stand up an end if wee should,
come fools come, meddle not with his matters, Lords may do any
thing.
This night shall my desires be amply Crowned,
And al those powers, that taste of man in vs,
Shall now aspire that point of happiness,
Beyond which, sensual eyes never look, (sweet pleasure!)
Delicious pleasure? Earths Supremest good,
The spring of blood, tho it dry up our blood.
Rob me of that, (tho to be drunk with pleasure,
As rank excess even in best things is bad;
Turns man into a beast) yet that being gone,
A horse and this (the goodliest shape) al one.
We feed: wear rich attires: and strive to cleave
The stars with Marble Towers, fight battles: Spend
Our blood to buy vs names: and in Iron hold
Will we eat roots, to imprison fugitive gold:
But to do thus, what Spell can vs excite,
This the strong Magic of our appetite:
To feast which richly, life it self undoes,
Whoo'd not die thus? to see, and then to choose
Why even those that starve in Voluntary wants,
And to advance the mind, keep the flesh poor,
The world Enjoying them, they not the world,
Wud they do this, but that they are proud to suck
A sweetness from such sowrenes; let em so,
The torrent of my appetite shall flow
With happier stream. A woman! Oh, the Spirit
And extract of Creation! This, this night,
The Sun shall envy. What cold checks our blood?
Her body is the Chariot of my soul,
Her eyes my bodies light, which if I want,
Life wants, or if possess, I undo her;
Turn her into a devil, whom I adore,
By scorching her with the hot steam of lust,
Tic but a minutes pleasure: and the sin
Scarce acted is repented. Shun it than:
O he that can Abc•aine, is more than man!
Tush. Resolu'st thou to do ill: be not precise
Who writes of Virtue best, are slaves to vize,
The music sounds all arum to my blood,
Whats bad I follow, yet I see whats good.
Fair! be not doubly maskt: with that and night,
Beauty (like gold) being used becomes more bright.
Will it please your Lordship to •it, I shall receive small plea∣sure
if I see your Lordship stand.
Witch, hag, what art thou proud damnation?
A Merchants wife.
Fury who raised thee up, what come thou for!
For a banquet.
I am abused, deluded: Speak what art thou?
Vds death speak, or isle kill thee: in that habit
I looked to find an Angel, but thy face,
Shows you are a Devil.
My fa•e is as God made it my Lord: I am no devil unless
women be devils, but men find em not so, for they daily hunt for
them.
What art thou that dost cozen me thus?
A Merchants wife I say: Iustinianos wife. She, whom that
long burding piece of yours, I mean that Wicked mother Bird∣lyme
caught for your honour. Why my Lord, has your Lordship
forgot how ye courted me last morning.
The devil I did.
Kissed me last morning.
Succubus▪ not thee.
Gave me this Jewel last morning.
Not to thee Harpy.
To me upon mine honesty, swore you would build me a
lodging by the Thames side with a watergate to it: or else take me
a lodging in Cole-harbor.
I swore so.
Or keep me in a Labyrinth as Harry kept To•amond where
the Minotaure my husband should not enter.
I swear so, but Gypsy not to thee?
To me upon my honour, hard was the siege, which you
laid to the Crystal walls of my chastity, but I held out you know:
but because I cannot bee too stony hearted, I yielded my Lord, by
this token my Lord (which token lies at my heart like lead) but by
this token my Lord, that this night you should commit that sin
which we al know with me.
The•?
Do I look ugly, that you put thee upon me: did I give
you my hand to horn my head, thats to say my husband, and is it
com to thee: is my face a filthy•• face, now it is yours, then when it
was his: or have I two faces under one hood. I confess I have
laid mine eyes in brine, and that may change the copy. But my
Lord I know what I am.
A Sorceress•e, thou shalt witch mine ears no more,
If thou can pray, doot quickly for thou die.
I can pray but I will not die, thou least:
My Lord there drops your Lady; And now know,
Thou unseasonable Lecher, I am her husband
Whom thou would make whore, read: she speaks there thus,
Unless I came to her, her hand shou•d free
Her Chastity from blemish, proud I was
Of her brave mind, I came, and seeing what slavery
Poverty, and the frai•tie of her Sex
H•d, and was like to make her Subject to,
I begged that she would die, my suite was granted,
I poisoned her, thy lust there strikes her dead,
Horns feared, plague worse, than sticking on the head.
Oh God thou hast undone thy self and me,
None live to match this piece, thou art to bloody,
Yet for her sake, whom Isle embalm with tears,
This Act with her I bury, and to quit
Thy loss of such a Jewel, thou shalt share
My living with me, Come embrace.
My Lord.
Vilaine, damned merciless slave, Isle torture thee
To every inch of flesh: what ho: help, whose there?
Come hither: here is a murderer, bind him. How now,
What noise is this.
My Lord there are three Citizens face me down, that
here is one moister Parenthesis a schoolmaster with your Lordship
and desire he may be forth-comming to em.
That borrowed name is mine. Sh•ft for your selves:
Away, shift for your selves; fly, I am taken.
Why should they fly thou Skreech-owle.
I will tel thee,
Those three are partners with me in the murder,
We four comixed the poison, shift for your selves.
Stops mouth, and drag him back: entreat em enter.
O what a conflict feel I in my blood,
I would I were less great to be more good:
You're welcome, wherefore came you! guard the doors;
When I behold that object, al my senses
Revolt from reason, he that offers flight,
Drops down a Coarse.
a Coarse?
I a coarse, do you scorn to be worms meat more then she?
See Gentlemen, the Italian that does scorn,
Beneath the Moon, no baseness like the horn,
Has powered through all the veins of yon chaste bosom,
Strong poison to preserve it from that plague,
This flesh'y Lord: he doted on my wife,
He would have wrought on her and plaid on me.
But to pare off these brims, I cut off her,
And gulled him with this lie, that you had hands
Dipped in her blood with mine, but this I did,
That his stained age and name might not be hid.
My Act (tho wild) the world shall crown a• just,
I shall dye eleere, when he lives soiled with lust:
But come: rise Moll. Awake sweet Moll, you have played
The woman rarely, counterfeited well.
Sure sh'as nine lives.
See, Lucrece is not slain,
Her eyes which lust called Suns, have their first beams,
And all these fr•ghtments are but idle dreams:
Yet (before Jove) she had her knife prepared
To let his blood forth ere it should run black?
Do not these open cuts now, cool your back?
Methinkes they should: when Vice sees with broad eyes
Her ugly form, she does h•rselfe despise.
Mirror of dames, I look upon thee now,
As men long blind, (having recovered sight)
Amazed: scarce able are to endure the leg•t:
Mine own shame strikes me dumb: hence forth the book
Isle read shall be thy mind, and not thy look.
I would either wee were at Braineford to see our wive•,
or our wives here to see this Pageant.
So would I, I stand upon thorns.
The jewels which I gave you: wear: your fortunes,
Isle raise on golden Pillars: fare you well,
Lust in old age like burnt straw, does even choke
The kiudlers, and consumes, in stinking Smoke.
You may follow your Lord by the smoke, Badgers.
If fortune had fauord him, wee might have followed you
by the horns.
Fortune favours fools, your Lords a wise Lord: So: how
now? ha? This is that makes me fat now, first not Rats-bane to you
Gentlemen, as pap was to Nestor, but I know the invisible sins of
your wives hang at your eye-lides, and that makes you so heavy
headed.
If I do take em napping I know what Isle do.
Isle nap some of them.
That villain Monopoly, and that sir Gozlin treads em all.
Wud I might come to that •reading.
Ha ha, sound I: come Moll: the book of the siege of
Oftend, writ by one that dropped in the action, will never sell so well,
as a report of the siege between this Gr••e, this wicked elder and
•hy self, an impression of you two, wold away in a May-morning:
was it e•er heard that such tirings, were brought away from a
Lord by any wench but thee Moll, without paying, unless the
wench connycatcht him? go thy thy ways: if all the great Turks
Concubins were but like thee, the ten-penny-infidell should no∣for
need keep so many geldings to ney ouerem: come shall this
Western voyage hold my harts?
Yes, yes.
Yes, yes: Sfoot you speak as if you had no harts, &amp; look
as if you were going westward indeed: to see how plain dea∣ling
women can pull down men: Moll you'll help vs to catch
Smelts too?
If you be pleased.
Never better since I wore a Smock.
I fear our oars have given vs the bag.
Good, Id laughed at that.
If they have, would wheres might give them the Bottle:
come march whilst the women double their files: Married men
fee, theres comfort: the Moons up: fore Don Pha•us, I doubt
we shall have a Frost this night, her horns are so sharp: doe you
not feel it bite.
I do, Ime sure.
But weal sit upon one another skir••ith Boat, and lye
close in straw, like the hoary Courtier. Set on
to Brainford now: where if you meet frail wi•es, Ne'er swear
against horns, invaine dame Nature strives.
Why Chamberlain? will not these Fiddlers be drawn forth?
are they not in tune yet? Or are the Rogues a afraid ath Statute,
and dare not travel so far without a passe-port?
What Chamberlain?
Wheres mine host? what Chamberlain.
Anon sir, here sir, at hand sir.
Wheres this noise? what a lousy Towns this? Has
Brainford no music int.
They are but rosining sir, and theile scrape themselves
into your company presently.
Plague a their Cats guts, and their scraping: dost not
see women here, and can wethinkst thou be without a noise then?
The troth is sir, one of the poor instruments caught a sore
mischance last night: his most base bridge fell down, and belike
they are making a gathering for the reparations of that.
When they come, lets have em with apox.
Well sir, you shall sir.
Stay Chamberlain: wheres our knight sir Gozlin? wheres sir
Gozlin.
Troth sir, my master, and sir Gozlin are guzzling: they
are dabbling together fathom deep: the Knight hath drunk so
much Health to the Gentleman yonder, on his knees, that hee has
almost lost the use of his legs.
O for love, let none of em enter our room, fie.
I wud not have em cast up their accounts here, for more
then they mean to be drunk this tweluemonth.
Good Chamberlain keep them and their Helthes out of our
company. I warrant you, their Helthes shall not hue•t you.
I, well said: they're none of our giving: let em keep their
own quarter: Nay I told you the man would soak him if hee
were ten Knights: if he were a Knight of Gold theyd fetch him
over.
Out upon him?
Theres a Liefetennant and a Captain amongst em too.
Nay, then look to have some body l•e on the earth fort:
Its ordinary for your Lief tenant to be drunk with your Cap∣taine,
and your Captain to cast with your Knight.
Did you never hear how sir Fabian Scarerow (even such an∣other)
took me up one night before my husband being in wine.
No indeed, how was it?
But I think I took him down with a witness,
How? Good Tenterhooke.
Nay Isle have all your ear•s take part of it.
Come, on then.
Hevsd to freequent me and my Husband diverse times▪
And at last comes he out one morning to my husband, and says,
moister Tenterhooke says he, I must trouble you to lend mee200.
pound about a commodity which I am to deal in, and what was
that comm•ditty but his knighthood.
So.
Why you shall Moister Scarcrow says my good man: So
within a little while after, Moister Fabian was created Knight.
Created a Knight! thats no good heraldry: you must say
dubbed.
And why not Created pray.
I well done, put him down ats own weapon.
Not Created, why al things have their being by creation.
Yes by my faith first.
But to return to my tale.
I mary: mark now.
When he had climbed up this costly ladder of preferment,
he disburses the money back again very honourably: comes home,
and was by my husband invited to supper: There supped with vs
besides, another Gentleman incident to the Court, one that had
bespoke me of my husband to help me into the banqueting house
and see the revelling: a young Gentleman, and that wag (our
schoolmaster) marster Parenthesis, for I remember he said grace,
methinks I see him yet, how he turned up the white a'th eye, when
he came to the last Gasp, and that he was almost past Grace.
Nay he can doot.
All supper time, my New-minted knight, made Wine the
waggon to his meat, for it ran down his throat so fast, that before
my Chamber-maid had taken half up, he was not scarce able to
stand.
A general fault at Citizens tables.
And I thinking to play upon him, asked him, Sir Fabian Scar∣crow
quoth I, what pretty Gentlewoman will you raise up now to
stal her your Lady? but he like a foul-mouthd man, swore zounds
Isle stal never a punk in England. A Lady, theres two many alrea∣die:
O fie Sir Fabian (quoth I) will you cal her that shall bee your
wife such an odious name! and then he sets out a throat &amp; swore
again (like a stinking breathed knight as he was) that women were
like horse.
O filthy knave.
Theyde break over any hedge to change their pasture, th•
it were worse: Fie man fie, (says the Gentlewoman.)
Very good.
And he bristling up his beard to rail at her too, I cut him
over the thumbs thus: why sir Fabian Searcrow did I incese my hus∣band
to lend you so much money upon your bare word, and doe
you backbite my friends, and me so our faces! I thought you had
had more perseverance; if you bore a Knightly and a degenerous
mind you would scorn it: you had wont to be more deformable
amongst women: Fie, that you'll be so humorsome: here was No∣body
so egregious towards you sir Fabian! and thus in good sad∣nes,
I gave him the best words I could pick out to make him a∣shamd
of his doings.
And how took he this Correction.
Very heavily: for he slept presently vpont: &amp; in the more∣ning
was the sorriest Knight, and I warrant is so to this day, that
lives by bread in England.
To fee what wine and women can do, the one makes a man
not to have a word to throw at a Dog, the other makes a man to
eat his own words tho they were never so filthy.
I see these Fiddlers cannot build up their bridge, that some
Music may come over vs.
No faith they are drunk too, what shells do therefore.
Sit up at Cards al night?
Thats Serning mans fashion.
Drink burnt wine and Eggs then?
Thats an exercise for your sub-burbe wenches.
No no, lets set upon our posit and so march to bed, for I
begin to wax light with having my Natural sleep p•lt•out a mine∣eyes.
Agreed: beet so, the sack posit and to bed.
What Chamberlain? I must take a pipe of Tobacco.
Not here, not here, not here.
Isle rather love a man that takes a purse, then him that takes
Tobacco.
By my little finger Isle break al your pipes, and burn the
Case, and the box too, and you draw out your stinking smoakea∣fore
me.
Prithee good mist••• 〈◊〉, Isle ha done in a
trice.
Do you long to ha•e me swoon?
Isle use but half a pipe in truth.
Do you long to see me lie at your feet!
Smell toot: •i• perfumed.
Oh God? Oh God? you anger me: you stir my blood: you
move me: you make me spoil a good face with frowning at you:
this was ever your fashion, so to smoke my Husband when you
come home, that I could not abide him in mine eye: hee was a
moat in it me thought a month after: pray spawle in another
room: fie, fie, fie.
Well, well, come, weal for once feed his humour.
Get two rooms off at least if you love vs.
Three, three, my••er Lynstocke three.
Sfoote weal dance to Norwich, and take it there, if you'll
stay till we return again? Hears a stir, you'll ill abide a fiery face,
that cannot endure a smoky nose.
Come lets satisfy our appetite.
And that will be hard for vs, but weal do our best.
So: are they departed? What string may wee three think
that these three gallants harp upon, by bringing vs to this sinful
town of Brainford? ha?
I know what string they would harp upon, if they could
put vs into the righ tune.
I know what one of em buz'd in mine ear, till like a
These in a Candle, he made mine ears burn, but I swore to say
nothing.
I know as verily they hope, and brag one to another, that
this night theile row westward in our husbands whirries, as wee
hope to bee rowed to London to morrow morning in a pair of
oars. But wenches lets bee wise, and make Rooks of them that I
warrant are now setting pursenets to conycatch vs.
Content.
They shall know that Cit•izens wi•es have wit enough to
out strip twenty such gulls; tho we are me••y, lets not be mad: be
as wanton as new married wives, as fantastic and light headed
to the eye, as fether-makers, but as pure about the heart, as if we
dwelt amongst em in Black Fryers.
Weal eat and drink with em.
Oh yes: eat with em as hungetly as soldiers: drink▪
as if we were Froes: talk as freely as Iestors, but doe as little as
misers. Who (like dry Nurses) have great breasts but give no
milk. It were better we should laugh at their popin-•ayes, then
live in fear of their prating tongues: tho we lye all night out of
the City, they shall not find country wenches of vs: but since we
ha brought em thus far into a fools Paradise, leave em int: the
Jest shall be a stock to maintain vs and our pewfellowes in laugh∣ing
at christnings, cryings out, and vpsittings this 12. month: how
say you wenches, have I set the Saddle on the right horse.
O twill be excellent.
But how shall we shift em off?
Not as ill debtors do their Creditors (with good words)
but as Lawyers do their Clients when their overthrown, by some
new knavish trick: and thus it shall bee: one of vs must dislem∣ble
to be suddenly very sick.
Isle be she.
Nay, tho we can all dissemble well, yet Isle be she: for men
are so jealous, or rather envious of one another happiness (Espe∣cially
in this out of town g•ssipings) that he who shall miss his
hen, if hee be a right Cock •ndeede, will watch the other from
treading.
Thats certain, I know that by my self.
And like Esops Dog, unless himself might eat hay, will lie
in the manger and starve: but heel hinder the horse from eating
any: besides it will be as good as a Welch hook for you to keep
out the other at the Staves end: for you may boldly stand upon
this point, that vnle•se every mans heals may bee tripped up, you
score•e to play at football.
Thats certain• peace I hear them spitting after their To∣basso.
A chair, a chair, one of you keep as great a coil
and calling, and as if you ran for a midwife: tho'ther hold •y
head: whilst I cut my lace.
Passion of me? moister Monopoly, moister Linstock• and
you be men, help to daw mistress Tenterhooke: O quickly, quickly,
shees sick and taken with an Agony.
Sick? How? how now? whats the matter?
Sweet Clare call up thy spirits.
O moister Monop•lie, my spirits will not comet a my cal∣ling,
I am terrible and Ill: Sure, sure, I'm struck with some wic∣ked
planet, for it 〈◊〉 my very hart: Oh I feel my self worse and
worse.
Some burnt Sack for her good wench•: or posit drink,
pox a this Rogue Chamberlain, one of you call him: how her
pulses beat: a draught of Cinnamon water now for her, were
better than two Tankards out of the Thames: how now? Ha.
Ill, ill, ill, ill, ill.
I'm accursed to spend money in this Town of iniquity:
theres no good thing ever comes out of it: and it stands upon
such musty ground, by reason of the River, that I cannot see how a
tender woman can do well int, Sfoot? Sick now? cast down now
tic come to the push.
My mind misgives me that else not sound at London.
Pox on em that be not sound, what need that touch
you?
I fear you'll never carry me thither.
Puh, puh, say not so.
Pray let my clothes be utterly undone, and then lay me
in my bed.
Walk up and down a little.
O moister Lynstock, tic no walking will serve my turn:
have me to bed good sweet Mistress Honisuckle, I doubt that old
Hag Gillian of Braineford has bewitched me.
Look to her good wenches.
I so we will, and to you too: this was excellent.
This is strange.
Villainous spiteful luck: no matter, th, other two hold •yes.
Peace, mark how hes nipped: nothing grieves me so
much as that poor Pyramus here must have a wall this night be∣tweene
him and his Thisbe.
No remedy trusty Troylus: and it grieves me as much,
that you'll want your false Cressida to night, for hears no sir Pan∣darus
to usher you into your Chamber.
Isle somon a parley to one of the Wenches, and see how
all goes.
No whispring with the common enemy by this
Iron: he sees the Devil that sees how all goes amongst the wo∣men
to night: Nay Sfoot? If I stand piping till you dance, damn
me.
Why you'll let me call to em but at the key-hole.
Puh, good moister Lynstocke, Isle not stand by whilst
you give Fire at your Key-holes? Isle hold no Trencher till an
other •eats: no stirrup till another gets up: be no doorkeeper. I
ha not been so often at Court, but I know what the back-side
of the Hangings are made of Isle trust none under a piece of
Tapestry, viz. a Coverlet.
What will you say if the Wenches do this to gull vs?
No matter, Isle not be doubly gulled, by them and by
you: go, will you take the lease of the next chamber and doe
as I do.
And whats that?
Any villainy in your company, but nothing out on it
will you sit up, or lie by it.
Nay lie sure, for lying is most in fashion.
Troth then; Isle have you before me.
It shall be yours.
Yours in faith: Isle play Ianus with two faces &amp; look
a squint both ways for one night.
Well Sir, you shall be our dore-keeper.
Since we must swim, lets leap into one flood,
Weal either be all nought, or else all good.
Come, come, come, follow me, follow me. I wa•∣rant
you ha lost more by not falling into a sound last night,
than ever you got at one Iob since it pleased to make you a
noise: I can tell you, gold is no money with •hem: follow me
and fume, as you go; you shall put something into their ears,
whilst I provide to put something into their bellies. Follow
close and sum—
What kin art thou to Long-Meg of Westminster?
you are like her.
Some-what a like Sir at a blush, nothing a kin Sir, sa∣uing
in height of mind, and that she was a goodly Woman.
Mary Anbree, do not you know me? had not I a •ight
of this sweet Physiognomy at Renish-wine house! ha last day ith
Stilliard ha! whither art bound Galley-foist? whether art
bound? whence come thou female yeoman—a the guard?
From London Sir.
Dost come to keep the door Ascapart.
My reparations hither is to speak with the Gentle∣woman
here that drunk with your worship at the Dutch∣house
of meeting.
Drunk with me, you lie, not drunk with me: but
faith what would with the Women? they are a bed: art not
a mid-wife? one of hem told me thou were a night woman.
I ha brought some women a bed, in my time Sir.
I and some young men too, hast not Pandora? howe
now! whore's this noise.
Isle commit your worship.
To the Stocks? art a Justice? shalt not commit me:
dance first faith, why scrapers, appear under the wenches
Comical Window, byth' Lord! Vds Daggers? cannot sin
be set a shore once in a reign vpō your Country quarters, but
it must have fiddling? what set of Villains are you, you perpe∣tuall
Ragamuffins?
The Town Consort Sir.
Consort with a pox? cannot the shaking of the sheets
be danced without your Town piping? nay then let al hell roar
I beseech you Sir, put up yours, and we'll put up
ours:
Play you lousy Hungarians: see, look the My∣pole
is set up, weal dance about it: keep this circle Ma∣quarrel.
I am no Mackrel, and isle keep no Circles.
Play, life of Pharao play, the Bawd shall teach me
a Scotch Jig.
Bawd! I defy thee and thy Jigs whats•ever thou
art: were I in place where, Id make thee prove thy words.
I wud prove 'hem Mother best be trust: why doe not
I know you Granam? and that Suger-loafe? ha! doe I not
Magar•.
I am none of your Megges, do not nick-name me so:
I will not be nicked.
You will not: you will not: how many of my name
(of the Glowormes) have paid for your furred Gowns, thou
Women's broker.
No Sir, I scorn to bee beholding to any Glo-worme
that lives upon Earth for my fur: I can keep my self
warm without Glowormes.
Can sing Woodpecker? come sing and wake 'hem.
Wud you should well know it, I am no singing Wo∣man.
Howl then! sfoote sing, or howl, or Isle break
your Ostrich Egshell there.
My Egg hurts not you, what doe you mean to fl•∣rich
so.
Sing Madge, Madge, sing Owlet.
How can I sing with such a sour face—I am haunted
with a caugh and cannot sing.
One of your Instruments Mowntibankes, come, here
clutch: clutch.
Alas Sir, I'm an old woman, and know not how to
clutch an instrument.
Look mark too and fro as I 〈◊〉 it: make a noise:
its no matter: any hunts up, to waken vice.
I shall never rub it in tune.
Will you scrape?
So you will let me go into the parties, I will saw, &amp;
make a noise.
Doe then: shatt into the parties, and part 'hem: shat
my lean Lana.
If I must needs play the Fool in my old days, let
me have the biggest instrument, because I can hold that
best: I shall cough like a broken winded horse, if I gape
once to sing once.
No matter cough out thy Lungs.
No Sir, tho Ime old, and worme-eaten Ime not
so rotten—
Will your worship be rid of me now.
Fine, as rich-mens heirs would bee of their gouty
dads: thats the hot-house, where your parties are sweating:
amble: go, tell the Hee parties I have sent 'hem a Mast 〈◊〉
their ship.
Yes forsooth Isle do your errand.
Half musty still by thundering Jove: with what wedge
of villainy might I cleave out an hour or two? Fiddlers, come:
strike up. march before me, the Chamberlain shall put a
Crown for you into his bill of Items: you shall sing bawdy
songs under every window ith Town: up will the Clowns
start, down come the Wenches, we'll set the Men a fighting
the Women a scolding, the Dogs a barking, you shall go on
fiddling, and I follow dancing Lantara: curry your instruments:
play and away.
Sergeant Ambush, as you are an honest fellow, scout
in some back room, till the watch-word be given for fallying
forth.
Duns the Mouse.
—A little low-woman say thou, —in a Veluet-cappe-and
one of 'him in a Beaver? brother Honny-suckle, and bro∣there
Wafer, hark—they are they.
But art sure their husbands are a bed with 'hem?
I think so Sir, I know not, I left 'hem together in one
room: and what division fell amongst 'hem, the fates can
discover not I.
Leave vs good Chamberlain, wee are some of their
friends: leave vs good Chamberlain: be merry a little: leave
vs honest Chamberlain —  Wee are abused, wee are
bought and sold in Brainford Market; never did the sickness
of one belied nurse-child, stick so cold to the hearts of three
Fathers: never were three innocent Citizens so horribly, so
abominably wrung under the withers.
What shall wee do? how shall we help our selves?
How shall we pull this thorne out off our foot be∣fore
it rancle?
Yes, yes, yes, well enough; one of vs stay here to
watch doe you see: to watch: have an eye, have an ear. I
and my brother Wafer, and Moist. Iustiniano, will set the town
in an insurrection, bring hither the Constable, and his Bill∣•••,
break open upon hem, take 'hem in their wickedness,
and put 'hem to their 〈◊〉.
Agreed.
Ha, ha, purgation.
We'll have 'hem before some Country Justice of
Coram (for we scum to be bound to the Peace) and this In∣stice
shall draw his Sword in our defence, if we find 'hem to
be Malefactors we'll tickle 'hem.
Agreed: doe not say, but 〈◊〉 come.
Are you mad? do you know what you doe? whether
will you run?
To set the Town an an uproar.
An uproar • will you make the Town••men think, that
Londoners never come hither but upon Saint 〈◊〉 night?
Say you should rattle up the Constable: thrash all the Coun∣trey
together, hedge in the house with Flails, Pike-staues,
and Pitch-forkes, take your wives napping, these Western
Smelts nibbling, and that like so many 〈◊〉; every Smith
should discover his Venus dancing with Mars, 〈…〉
this plaster cure the head-ake.
I, it wood.
Nay it shut.
Nego, Nego, no no, it shall bee proved unto you, your
heads would ache worse: when women are proclaimed to bee
light, they strive to be more •ight, for who dare disprove a
Proclamation.
I but when light Wives make heavy hus∣bands,
let these husbands play mad Hamlet; and cry revenge,
come, and 〈◊〉 do so.
Pray stay, be not so heady at my entreaty.
My wife 〈◊〉 you, and I entreat you to have mercy
on your 〈◊〉, though you have none over the women. Isle
tell you a tale: this last Christmas a Citizen and his wife (as
it might be one of you) were invited to the Revels one night
at one of the 〈◊〉 a Court: the husband (having business)
trusts his wife thither to take up a room for him before: she
did so: but before she went; doubts a rising, what blocks
her husband would stumble at, to hinder his entrance, It was
consulted upon, by what token, by what trick,, by what ban∣ner,
or brooch he should bee known to bee hee when hee
wrapped at the Gate:
Very good.
The crowd he was told would be greater, their clamours
greater, and able to drone the throats of a shoule of fish wives:
he himself therefore 〈◊〉 an excellent watch-word, and the
segue at which he would hang out himself, should be a horn:
he would wind his horn, and that should give 'hem warning
that he was come.
So.
The torchmen and 〈◊〉 had an Item
to receive him: he comes, rings out his horn with an alla∣rum,
enters with a shout, all the house rises (thinking some
sowgelder pressed in) his wife blushed, the company Jested, the simon∣ple
man like a beggar going to the stocks laughed, as not being
sensible of his own disgrace, &amp; hereupon the punyes set down
this decree that no man shall hereafter come to laugh at their
revels (if his wife be entered before him) unless he cary his horn
about him
Isle not trouble them.
So if you trumpet a broad and preach at the market
cross, you wives shame, tic your own shame.
What shall we doe then!
Take my council, Isle ask no fee sort: bar out host:
banish mine hostess, beat a way the Chamberlain, let the oct•ers
walk, enter you the ch•mbers peaceably, locke the doors gin∣gerly,
look upon your wives woefully, but upon the euill-doers,
most wickedly.
What shall wee reap by this.
An excellent harvest, this, you shall hear the poor
mouse-trapt-guilty-gentlemen call for mercy; your wives you
shall see kneelig at your feet, and weeping, and wringing, and
blushing, and cursing Brainford and crying pardon may pardon∣na
may, pardon may, whilst you have the choice to stand either
as Judges to condemn 'hem, beadles to torment 'hem, or con∣fessors
to absolved 'hem: And what a glory will it be for you 3.
to kiss your wives like forgetful husbands, to exhort and for∣give
the young men like pitiful fathers; then to call for •ares,
then to cry hay for London, then to make a Supper, then to
drown all in Sack and Sugar, then to go to bed, and then to
rise and open shop, where you may ask any man what he lacks
with your cap off, and none shall perceive whether the brims
wring you.
Weal raise no towns.
No, no, lets knock first.
I thats best Isle somon a
parley.—
Whose there? have you stock-fish in hand that you beat
so hard: who are you?
thats my wife; let Instiniano speak
for al they know our Tongues.
What a murren ail these
colts, to keep such a kicking? Monopoly.
Yes.
Is M. Lynstock up too, and the Captain.
Both are in the field: will you open your door?
O you are proper Gamsters to bring false dice with you
fro London to cheat your selves. First possible that 3 shallow
women should gul. 3. such Gallants.
What means this.
Have we defied you upon the walls all night to open our
gates to you ith morning. Our honest husba•ds they (silly mē)
lie praying in their beds now, that the water under vs may not
be rough, the tilt that covers vs may not be rent, &amp; the straw
about our feet may keep our pretty legs warm. I warrant
they walk vpō Queen-hiue (as Lender did for Hero) to watch
for our landing, and should we wrong such kind hearts? wud
we might ever be troubled with the tooth-ach the.
This
thing that makes fools of vs thus, is my wife.
I, I knock your bellies full, we hug one another a bed
and lie laughing till we tickle again to remember how wee
sent you a Bat-fowling.
An Almond Pa••at: that's my
Mobs voice, I know by the sound.
Sfoote you ha spoiled
half already, &amp; you'll spoil al, if you dam not up your 〈◊〉 villainy! nothing but villainy, Ime afraid they have smelt your
breaths at the key hole, &amp; now they set you to catch Floūders,
whilst in the mean• time, the con••piscentious Ma•efactors
make 'em ready &amp; take Lōdō napping.
Isle not be gulled so
Show your selves to be men, and break open doors.
Break open doors, &amp; show your selves to be beasts: if
you break opē doors, your wives may lay flat burglary to your
charge.
Lay a pudding; burglary.
Will you then turn Coridons because you are among
•lowns? shall it be said you have no brains being in Brainford.
Parenthesis we will enter and set upon 'em.
Well do so: but enter not so that all the country may
cry shame of your doings: knock 'hem down, burst opē
Erebus, and bring an old house over your heads if you do.
No matter, weal bear it of with head &amp; shoulders. 〈◊〉
You cānot enter indeed la, gods my pittikin our 3 hus∣bands
somon a parley; let that long old woman either creep
under the bed or else stand upright behind the painted cloth.
Doe you hear: you Mabel:
Lets never
hide our heads now, for we are discovered.
But all this while, my Hony-suckle appears not.
Why then two of them have pitched their tents there &amp;
yours lies in Ambuscado with your enemy there.
Stand upon your guard there, whilst I batter here.
Who's there?
Hold, Isle speak in a small voice
like one of the women; here's a friend: are you up? rise, rise;
stir, stir.
Vds foot, what Weasel are you? are you
going to catch Quails, that you bring your pipes with you. Isle
see what troubled Ghost it is that cannot sleep.
O Moist. Monopoly God save you.
Amen, for the last time I saw you, the Devil was at
mine elbow in Buff, what! 3 merry men, &amp; 3. merry men, &amp; 3.
me•rye men be we too,
How do's my wife M. Monop.
Who? my overthwart neighbour: passing well: this is
kindly don: Sir Gozlin is not far from you: we'll join our
Armi•s presently, here be rare fields to walk in-Captaine rise,
Captain Lynstock bestir your stumps, for the Philestins are up∣on
vs
This Monopoly is an arrant knave, a cog∣ging
knave, for all hes a Courtier, if Monopoly bee suffered to
ride up and down with other men's wi•es, he will vn-do both
City and Country.
Mole, mask thy self, they shall not know thee.
How now sweet hearts, what make you he•.
Not that which you make here.
Mary you make Bulls of your husbands.
Buzzards do we not? out you yellow infirmities: do al
flowers show in your eyes like Columbines.
Wife what says the Collier? is not thy Soul blacker
then his coals? how does the child? howe does my flesh and
blood wife?
Your flesh and blood is very well recoue∣red
now mouse-
I know tic: the Collier has a sack-full
of news to empty.
Clare Where be your two rings with Diamonds?
At hand sir, here with a wet finger.
I dreamt you had lost hem—what a profane varlet
is this shoulder clapper, to lye thus upon my wife &amp; herrings.
Save you gentlemen;
And you and our wives from you.
Your wives have •aude themselves for one.
Moist. Monopoly, tho I meet you in h•e Germany, I hope
you can understand broken English, have you discharged your
debt.
yes Sir: with a duble charge, your Harpy that set his
ten commandemets upon my back had 2. Diamonds to save
him harmless.
of you Sir.
Me Sir, do you think there be no diamond courtiers.
Sergeant Ambush issue forth, Monopoly Isle cut off your
convoy moist, Sargant Amb•sh, I charge you as you hope to
receive comfort f•om the smell of Mace speak not like a Sar∣gent,
but deal honestly, of whom had you the diamonds.
Of your wife Sir if Ime an honest man.
Of me you peuter-buttoned rascal.
Siria you that live by nothing but the carrion of
poled•y.
School Ma•ster hark heither.
Where are my lems and precious stones that were
my bale.
Forth coming Sir tho your money is not, your credi∣la
has hem.
Excellent; peace, why M. Tenterhooke, if the diamonds
be of the reported value, Isle pay your money receive em, keep
'hem till Moist. Monopoly be fatter ith purse: for Moist. Mono∣poly
I know you will not be long empty Mast. Monopoly.
Let him have 'hem good Ten•erhooke, where are they.
At home, I locked hem up.—
No indeed for-sooth, I locked 'hem up, &amp; those are they
your wife has, and those are they your husband (like a bad liver
as he is) would have given to a 〈◊〉 of mine, (that lies in my
house to take physic) to have committed sleshly treason with
her.
I at your house—you old—
You party, and that honest bachelor, never call me
old for the matter.
Motherly woman hes my husband
and no Bachelors buttons are at his doublet
las, I speak Innocently and that lean gentleman set
in his staff there: But as Ime a sinner, both I and the young
woman had an eye to the mayne chance, &amp; tho they brought
more a bout 'hem than captain Candishis voyage came to, they
should not, nor could not (unless I had bin a naughty woman)
have entered the straits.
Have we smelt you out foxes.
Doe you come after vs with hue and cry when you are
the thieves your Selves.
Murder I see cannot be hid, but if this old Sybill of yours
speak oracles, for my part, Isle be like an Almanac that threa∣tens
nothing but foulewether.
That bawd has bin damned. 500 times, and is her word
to be taken.
To be damned once is enough, for any one of her coat.
Why Sir. what is my coat that you fit thus upon my
Scirts.
Thy Coat is an ancient Coat, one of the seven deadly
sins, put thy coat first to making; but do you hear, you mo∣there
of Iniquity, you that can loose and find your ears when
you list go, sail with the rest of your baudie-traffikers to the
place of sixe-penny Sinfulness the suburbs.
I scorn the Sinfulness of any suburbs in Christendom
tic well known I have vp-rizers and downe-lyers within the
City, night by night, like a profane fellow as thou art.
Right, I know thou hast, Isle tell you Gentle-folkes,
theres more resort to this Fortune-teller, then of forlorn wives
married to old husbands, and of Greene-sicknesse Wenches
that can get no husbands to the house of a wise-Woman. She
has tricks to keep a vaulting house under the Laws nose.
Thou dost the Laws nose wrong to belly me so.
For either a cunning woman has a Chāber in her house
or a Physician, or a picture maker, or an Attorney, because all
these are good Cloaks for the rain. And then if the female
party that's cliented aboue-Staires, be young, Shees a Squires
daughter of lowe degree, that lies there for physic, or comes
up tobe placed with a Countess: if of middle age, shees a
Widow, and has suits at the term or so.
O fie upon her, burn the witch out of our company.
Lets hem her out off Brainford, if she get not the fa∣ster
to London.
O no, for Gods sake, rather hem her out off London
and let her keep in Brainford still.
No you cannot hem me out of London; had I known
this your rings should ha bin poxed er—I wud ha touched 'hem:
I will take a pair of Oars, and leave you.
Let that ruin of intemperance bee raked up in dust and
ashes, and now tell me, if you had raised the Town, had not
the tiles tumbled upon your heads: for you see your Wives are
chaste, these Gentlemen civil, all is but a merriment, all but a
May-game; she has her Diamonds, you shall have your mo∣ney
the child is recovered, the false Collier discovered, they
came to Brainford to be merry, you were caught in Bird-lime;
and therefore set the Hares-head against the Goose-giblets,
put all instruments in tune, and every husband play music
upon the lips of his Wife whilst I begin first.
Come wenches be it so,
Mist. Iustiniano first you were ashamed all this while of
showing your face, is she your wife Schoolmaster.
Look you, your Schoolmaster has bin in France, and
lost his hair, no more Parenthesis now, but Iustiniano, I will
now play the Merchant with you. Look not strange at her,
nor at me, the story of vs both, shall bee as good, as an old
wives tale, to cut off our way to London.
How now?
Alas Sir, the Knight yonder Sir Gozlin has almost
his throat cut by Powlterers and Townsmen and rascals, &amp;
all the Noise that went with him poor fellows have their
Fidle-cases pulled over their ears.
Is Sir Gozlin hurt?
Not much hurt Sir, but he bleeds like a Pig, for his
crowne's cracked.
Then has he been twice cut ith head since we landed,
once with a Pottle-po•and now with old iron.
Gentlemen hasten to his rescue some, whilst others call
for Oars.
Away then to London.
Farewell Brainford.
Gold that buys health, can never be ill spent,
Nor hours laid out in harmless merriment.

