MY Master sir, requests your company,
About confirming certain covenants
Touching your last nights conference.
The Sugars.
Believe me, to his credit be it spoke,
Hee is a man of heedful providence,
And one that by innatiue curtsy
VVinnes love from Strangers, be it without offence,
How are his present fortunes reckoned?
Neither to flatter nor detract from him,
He is a Merchant of good estimate,
Care how to get, and fore-cast to increase,
(If so they be accounted) be his faults.
They are especial virtues, being clear
From avarice and base extortion.
But here he comes: Good day, to M. Gresham,
You keep your word.
Else should I ill deserve
The title that I wear, a Merchants tongue
Should not strike false.
What think you of my proffer,
Touching the Sugar?
I be thought my self
Both of the gain and losses incident,
And this I tak't was the whole circumstance:
It was my motion and I think your promise,
To get me a sealed Patent from your king
For all your Barbary Sugar at a price,
During the kings life; and for his princely love,
I am to send him threescore thousand pounds.
T'was so conditioned, and to that effect
His highness promise is already past,
And if you dare give credit to my trust,
Send but your private letters to your Factor,
That deals for your affairs in Barbary,
His Majesty shall either seal your Patent,
Or isle return the money to your Factor.
As much as I desire; pray sir draw near
And taste a cup of wine, whilst I consider
And thoroughly scan such accidental doubts,
As may concern a matter of such moment.
At your best leisure.
Isle resolve you straight.
Bethink thee Gresham, threescore thousand pounds
A good round sum: let not the hope of gain
Draw thee to loss. I am to have a Patent
For all the Barbary Sugars at a rate,
The gain clears half in half, but then the hazard:
My term continues during the kings life,
The King may die before my first return,
Then wheres my Cash? why, so the King may live
These 40. years, then where is Greshams gain:
It stands in this as in all ventures else
Doubtful, no more, isle through what ere it cost.
So much clear gain, or so much coin clear lost.
Within there ho.
At hand sir, did you call?
How thrives our Cash? what is it well increased?
I speak like one that must be forced to borrow.
Your worships merry.
Merry, tell me knave,
Dost not thou think that three score thousand pounds,
Would make an honest Merchant try his friends?
Yes, by my faith sir, but you have a friend
Would not see you stand out for twice the sum.
Praise God for all, but what's the common rumour
Touching my bargain with the King of Barbary?
Tic held your credit, and your Countries honour,
That being but a Merchant of the City,
And taken in a manner unprovided,
You should upon a mere presumption
And naked promise, part with so much Cash,
Which the best Merchants both in Spain and France,
Denied to venture on.
Good: but withal,
What doe they think in general of the Bargain?
That if the King confirm and seal your Patent,
London will yield you partners ynow.
I think no less: Go fit you for the sea,
I mean to send you into Barbary:
You unto Venice, You to Portugal,
Provide you presently: where much is spent,
Some must be got, thrift should be provident:
Come hither Cousin, all the rest depart.
I had as good depart too, for heel ring a peal in mine
T'will sound worse then a passing bell. (care,
I have tan note of your bad husbandry,
Careless respect, and prodigal expense,
And out of my experience counsel you.
And I hope good Uncle, you think, I am as ready to take good counsel, as you to give it, &amp; I doubt not, but to clear, my self of all objections that foule-mouthed envic shall inti∣mate against me.
How can you satisfy the great complaint
Preferred against you by old Mistress Blunt.
A woman of approved honesty.
That's true, her honesty hath been proved ofter then once or twice: but doe you know her Uncle? are you in∣ward with her course of life, shoe's a common midwife for trade∣fallen virginity, there are more maidenheads charged and dis∣charged in her house in a year, then pieces at the Artillery yard.
She bring sin further proof, that you miscal'd her.
I never called her out of name, by this hand Uncle, to my remembrance:
No: she says you called her Bawd.
True; and I have known her answer too't a thousand times; tut Uncle tic her name, and I know who gave it her too, by the same token her Godfather gave her a bowd angel stan∣ding at the doo re which she hath kept time out a mind.
Antonio reports you love his wife.
Love, why alas, Uncle, I hold it parcel of my duty to love my neighbours, and should I hate his wife, no man would hold me a fit member for a common wealth.
He hates you fort.
Why, alas Uncle, that's not my fault, isle love him ne'er∣thelesse, you know we are commanded to love our enemies, and though he would see me hanged, yet will I love his wife.
He told me, you bestowed a gown of a strumpet.
Why, alas Uncle, the poor whore went naked, and you know the text commands vs to cloth the naked, and deeds of mercy be imputed to vs for faults, God help the elect.
Well, if your prodigal expenses be aimed
At any virtuous and religious end,
Tic the more tolerable, and I am proud
You can so probably excuse your self.
Well Uncle to approve my words, as indeed good words without deeds are like your greene fig-tree without fruit. I have sworn my self to a more conformable and strikt course of life.
Well Cousin, hoping you'll prove a new man.
A new man, what else Uncle, Isle be a new man from the top to toe, or isle want of my will: Instead of Tennis-Court, my morning Exercise shall be at Saint Antlms: isle leave Ordina∣ries, and to the end I may forswear Dicing and Drabbing, keep me more short Uncle, only allow me good apparel, good Rags isle stand too't are better then seven years prentiship, sor theyle make a man free of any, nay of all Companies with∣out Indenture, Fathers copy, or any help whatsoever, but I see my error, wilde Youth must be bridled, keep me short good Uncle.
On these presumptions isle apparel thee,
And to confirm this resolution,
I will prefer you unto Master Hobson,
A man of a well known discretion.
Any thing good Uncle, I have served my prentiship al∣ready, but bind me again and I shall be content, and tic but reason neither, send me to the Conduit with the water-tankard, isle beat Linen, Bucks, or any thing to redeem my negligence.
Your education challenge more respect.
The Factor dealt for him in France, is dead.
And you intend to send me in his room,
I doe indeed.
I tic well done Uncle, and t'will not bee amiss in pol∣lice to doe so: the only way to curb a dissolute youth as I am, is to send him from his acquaintancc, and therefore send me far enough good Uncle, send me into France and spare not, and if that reclaim me not, give me ore as one past all goodness.
Now before God my thoughts were much against him,
And my intent was to have chid him roundly,
But his submissive recantation.
Hath made me friends with him, Come follow me,
Isle doe thee good, and that immediately.
Thank you good Uncle, you'll send me into France, all Forboone: and I doe not show you the right trick of a Cousin before I leave England, isle give you leave to call me Cut, and co∣sen me of my patrimony as you have done.
Prithee fellow Goodman, set forth the ware, and
look to the shop a little, Isle but drink a cup of wine with a Customer at the Rose and Crown in the Poultry, and come again presently.
Foot I cannot, I must needs step to the Dagger in Cheap to send a Letter into the Country unto my father, stand by, you are the yougest prentice, look you to the shop.
Where be these varlets, bones a me, at Tavern?
Knaves, villains, spend goods, foot my Customers
Must either serve themselves, or pack vnseru'd.
Now they peep like Italian pantelownes
Hehind an Arras, but isle start you knaves,
I have a shooing-horne to draw on your liquor,
What say you to a piece of a salt Eel?
Come forth you hangdogs, bones a me the knaves
Fleer in my face, they know me to too well,
I talk and prate, and lay it not on their jacks,
And the proud jacks care not a sigge for me:
But bones a me, isle turn another leaf.
Where have you been sir?
An honest Customer
Requested me, to drink a pint of wine.
Bones a me, must your crimson throat
Be scoured with wine? your master's glad of beer:
But you'll die banquerouts, knaves, and ban querouts all.
And where have you been?
At breakfast with a Dagger pie sir.
A Dagger Pie! vd's daggers death, these knaves
Set cock a hope, but Hobson pays for all.
But bones a me, knaves either mend your manners.
Leave Alehouses, taverns, and the tippling mates,
Your Punkes, and cocatrices, or isle clap ye
Close up in Bride well, bones of me isle do it,
Beseech you sir, pardon this first offence.
First, bones a God, why tic your common course,
And you must needs be gusling, go by turns,
One to the Alehouse, and two keep the shop.
It shall be done sir, how much ware yould you have?
Five pounds worth in such Commodities,
as I bespoke last night.
They are ready sorted.
God bless you M. Hobson.
Bones a god, knave, you are welcome what's the news
At bawdy Barnewell, and at Sturbridge Fair?
What, have your London wenches any trading?
After the old sort sir, they visit the Toulebooth, and the
Bulring still. 
Good girls, they doe their kind, what your packs empty?
Good news, a sign you bring your purses full,
And bones a God, full purses must be welcome:
Sort out their wares: welcome's your due:
Pay the old debt, and pen and ink for new.
We have for you sir, as white as Bears teeth.
Bones a god, knaves you are welcome, but what news?
What news in the Country? what Commodities
Are most respected with your country Girls?
Faith sir, our Country girls are a kin to your London Courtiers, every month sick of a new fashion, the horning buck and silken bridelaces are in good request with the Parsons wife, your huge poking stick, and french periwig, with Chamber-maides, and waiting-gentlewomen, now your Puritans poker is not so huge, but somewhat longer, a long slender poking stick is the all in all with your Suffolk Puritan, your silkband, half farthingales, and changeable Fore-parts are common, not a wench of thirteen but wears a changeable fore-part.
An ancient wearing: ther's some changeable stuff
Has been a wear with women, time out of mind.
Besides sir, mauy of our young married men, have tan an order to wear yellow Garters, Points, &amp; Shootyings, and us thought, yellow will grow a custom.
It is been used long at London.
And tic thought t'will come in request in the Country
too, it is a fashion, that three or four young wenches have pro∣missed me their husbands shall wear, or theyle miss of their marks: then your mask, silke-lace, washed Gloves, carnation girdles, and buske-point suitable, as common as Coals from New-castle, you shall not have a Kitchin-maide scrape trenchets without her washed Gloves, a Darie-wench will not ride to mar∣ket to sell her Butter-milke, without her mask and her buck.
Still a good hearing, let the country pay
Well for their pride, tic gratis here at London,
And that's the cause tic grown so general.
But feed their humours, and do not spare,
Bring Countrey-money for our London ware.
Whore's M. Hobson, cry you mercy sir.
No harm good M. Gresham, pray draw near:
Isle but dispatch a few old Customers,
And bend a present ear to your discourse.
At your best leisure.
Nay my task is done:
O M. Gresham t'was a golden world
When we were Boys, an honest Countrey-yeoman,
Such as our fathers were, God rest their souls
Would were white Karfie: bones a me you knaves,
Stools for these Gentlemen, your worships welcome.
You know my business.
About your kinsman,
He shall be welcome: beseech you Gentlemen
Less of your courtesy: when shall we see the Youth?
Why this is he.
Which, bones a me man, which?
Why this.
Which, where, what this young gentleman!
Bones a me man, hoe's not for Hobsons turn.
He looks more like my Master then my servant.
I must confess he is a Gentleman,
And my near kinsman: were he mine own child,
His service should be yours.
I thank you for it,
And for your sake isle give him entertainment?
But Gentleman if you become my man,
You must become more civil: bones a me,
What a curled pate is here? I must ha'te off,
You see my Livery, Hobsons men are known
By their Freeze Coats: and you will dwell with me,
You must be plain, and leave of bravery.
I hope sir to put on such civil conformity, as you shall not repent my entertainment.
Pray God it prove so.
If he doe respect
an Uncles love, let him be diligent.
well, M. Gresham, partly for your love,
And chiefly to supply my present want,
Because you say your kinsman is well seen
Both in languages and factorship,
I doe intend to send him into France,
In trust both with my Marchandzies and my Cash.
And if I take not order to cashier that and myself too, a pox of all French-farthingales.
How stand you minded to your Masters motion?
Somewhat unwilling to leave my acquaintance, but good Uncle, I know you send me out of love, and I hope t'will be a means to call me home the sooner.
Pray God it may.
Isle want of my will else, Isle play a Merchants part with you, isle take up french Commodities, v•luet kirtles, and taffery fore-parts; isle ha that I go for, or isle make half the hot-houses in Deep smoke for this trick.
What are your books made even with your accounts?
I have compared our wares with our receipt,
And, sind sir, ten pounds difference.
Bones a me knave,
Ten pounds in a morning: heir's the fruit
Of Dagger Pies, and Alehouse-guslings:
Make even your Reckonings, or Gods mother knaves,
You shall all smart for it.
Hark you fellow Goodman,
Who took the ten pound of the country Chapman.
That told my master the new fashions?
Fore God not I.
Nor I.
Bones a me, knaves,
I have pa'yd soundly for my Country news:
What was his name?
Now before God, I know not.
I never saw him in the shop till now.
Now bones a me, what carlesse Knaves keep I,
Give me the book, what habit did he were?
As I remember me, a tawny coat.
Art sure: then set him down Iohn Tawnie-coate.
Ten pound in trust unto Iohn Tawnie-coate.
Bones a God man, these knaves will beggar me.
Byr'lady sir, ten pounds is too much to loose,
But ten times ten pound cannot shake your credit.
Thank God for all: when I came first to town,
It would have shook me shrewdly: but M. Gresham.
How stands your difference with Sir Thomas Ramsay?
Are you made friends yet?
He is so obstinate,
That neither Juries, nor Commissions,
Nor the entreaties of his nearest friends,
Can stoop him unto composition.
Tic passing strange: were Hobson in your coat,
Ere i'd consume a penny amongst Lawyers,
Id gived poor people, bones a me I wold.
A good resolve: but sit Thomas Ramsies mind
Is of another temper, and ere Gresham
Will give away a tittle of his right,
The Law shall beggar me.
Bones a me, man, twill doe that quickly.
To prevent which course,
The Lady Ramsay hath by earnest suit,
Procured the reverent Preacher Doctor Novel,
A man well reckoned for his grave respect.
To compromise and end our difference,
The place the Lombard, ten of clock the hour
Appointed for the hearing of our cause.
Shall I request your friendly company,
With all my heart, both company and purse:
Bones a me, knaves, look better to my shop:
Men of our trade must wear good husbands eyes,
Amongst many Chap-men there are few that buys.
My leisure now your business attends,
Time's won not lost, that's spent to make men friends.
Good Master Doctor Novel, let your love
Now show it self unto me: such as they,
Men of the chiefest note within this City
To be at such a jar, doth make me blush
Whom it doth scarce concern: you are a good man,
Take you the course in hand and make them friends,
Twill be a good days work, if so it end.
My Lady Ramsie, I have heard ere this
Of their contentions, their long suite in Law,
How by good friends they have been persuaded both,
Yet both but deaf to fair persuasion:
What good will my word doe with headstrong men?
Breath blown against the wind, retures again.
Although to Gentlemen and Citizens,
They have been so rash, yet to so grave a man,
Of whom none speak but speak with reverence,
Whose words are gathered in by every ear
As flowers receive the dew that comfort them,
They will be more attentive: pray take it in hand,
Tic a good deed, t'will with your virtue stand.
To be a make-peace doth become me well,
The charitable motion good in you,
And in good sooth t'will make me wet mine eyes,
To see them even, have been so long at odds.
And by my means, isle doe the best I can,
But God must bless my words, for mans but man.
I thank you heartily, and by the hour I know.
They will be presently here on the Lumbard,
Whither I drew you for this intent:
And see, sir Thomas is come: pray break with him.
Good day to sir Thomas Ramsie.
M. Deane of Powles, as much to you:
Tic strange to see you here in Lumberstreet,
This place of traffic whereon Merchants meet.
Tic not my custom: but sir Thomas.
Now body a me, I swear not every day,
You are too to much to blame: two Citizens,
Such as your self, and sir Thomas Ramsie are,
To beat your selves in Law six or seven year,
Make Lawyers, Turneyes clarks, and knaves, to spend
Your money in a brabbling controversy,
Even like too fools: see where the other is,
With our Deane of Powles, ne'er better met,
We two as Vmpiers will conclude a strife
Before the Clock strike twelve, that now is eleven:
Lawyers this full seven year have brabled in,
And with a cup or two of merry-godowne,
Make them shake hands: Is it not well said M. Deane?
And I could wish it as well done, M. Hobson.
Isle have you both know though you are my friends,
I scorn my cause should stoop or yeele to him,
Although he be reputed Ramsie the rich.
And Gresham shall perceive that Ramsies purse,
Shall make him spend the wealth of Osterley,
But he shall know.
Know, what shall I know?
That Ramsie is as good a man as Gresham.
And Gresham is as good a man as Ramsie.
Tut, tut, tut, Gresh Tut in thy teeth although thou art
Bones a me, you are both to blame: (a Knight.
We two like friends, come to conclude your strife,
And you like fish-wiues fall a scolding here.
How stands the difference twixt you my good friends?
The impatience both of the one and other,
Will not permit to hear each other speak:
Isle tell the cause for both, and thus it is.
There is a Lordship called Osterley,
That M. Gresham hath both bought and built upon.
And it is a goodly Manor, M. Deane.
Which Osterley before he dealt therein,
Sir Thomas my husband here did think to buy,
And had given earnest for it.
Then Gresham here, deals with the Land-seller,
And buys my bargain most dishonestly.
God for his mercy touch mine honesty,
Away with compromise, with taking up,
The Law shall try my cause and honesty.
T'will prove no better then it should Gresham.
T'will pooue as good as Ramsies, Ramsie.
Do not I know thy rising?
I, and I know thine.
Why mine was honestly.
And so was mine.
Hey day, bones a me
VVas't ever seen two men to scold before?
Here's, I know thy rising, and I know thine,
When as Gods blessing, that hath raised them both.
Am I worse because in Edwards days,
When Poperie went down, I did engross
Most of the Beads that were within the Kingdom,
That when Queen Marie, had renewed that Church,
They that would pray on Beads were forced to me:
I made them stretch their purse-strings, grew rich thereby,
Beads were to me a good commodity.
No matter for your beads, my right's my right.
Yet Gresham shall well know he hath done me wrong.
Ther's law enough to right you, take your course.
Reason being made mans guide, why is it that force
Are violent passions to sweep the soul
Into such head-long mischiefs: tic only this,
Reason would rule, Nature a Rebel is.
You know the fire of your contention,
Hath only cherishing and is maintained
From wild affections, whose strength's but th••
As sultry heat doth make vs shun the fire,
An extreme cold doth alter that desire:
All things that have beginnings, have their ends.
Your hate must have conclusion, then be friends.
Friends, M. Doctor Novel, look you here,
Heir's M. Greshams hand.
Isle bring the tother.
This seven year they have been in law together.
How much such men as they in seven yeares' spend,
Lawyers may laugh at, but let wise men judge.
Friend Hobson.
Wife Lady.
Bones a me, isle hold you fast,
I will not have a couple of such men
Make cackling lawyers rich, and themselves fools,
And for a trifling cause: as I am old Hobson.
Sir Thomas Ramsis.
Master Gresham.
Body of me, both shall be schooled, M. D. Novel,
You know the cause that this contention,
Is only that he bought a piece of land
This had given earnest for, all Adams earth,
And Adams earth is free for Adams sons,
And tic a shame men should contend for it:
What ere you speak shall for a sentence stand,
And being spoke, they shall shake hand in hand.
If I must then decide the difference,
Thus it shall bee: because that Sir Thomas Ramsis,
Had earnest given before you bought the Land,
Though you were not acquainted with so much,
I doe •ward he have a hundred pound
Toward his charges, and for that you
Have both paid for the Land, and built upon it,
It shall continue yours: the money you have spent,
Either account it lost, or badly lent.
Gods precious, I have spent five hundred pound,
And so have I.
No matter.
The judgment stands, only this verdict too,
Had you before the law fore-seene the loss,
You had not now come home by weeping cross.
Strifes may as well have end twixt honest men,
Lawyers set fools to Law, then laugh at them.
Fore God tic true: and now I think upon it,
We might at first have ended it by friends,
And made our selves merry with the money:
But being done, tic done, then sir Thomas Ramsay,
Let's leave both losers, tic but a thousand pound,
And if you be as well content as I,
Here weal shake hands and let our anger dye.
Shake hands, by the Marie god, sir Thomas what else,
You show your selves our friends, to make vs friends,
Then in good sooth isle not be obstinate.
Nay, M. Doctor Novel join their hands,
I know the reverent regard of you
Hath tempered both their hearts.
Madame, tic true: I think to any but so good a man,
We should have both been headstrong: but come.
With all my heart, long may you live together,
As friend should be to friend, brother to brother.
Amen, amen, sir Thomas.
Amen, amen, Master Gresham.
Amen, amen, to you both.
And is not tic better then every Term to trot after Lawyers?
Good sooth tic true, if we could think it so,
But tic mans nature, he desires his woe.
Now passion of me sir Thomas, a cruel storm,
And we stay long we shall be wet to the skin,
I doe not liked, nay and it angers me
That such a famous City as this is,
Wherein so many gallant Merchants are,
Have not a place to meet in, but in this,
Where every shower of rain must trouble' them:
I cannot tell but if I live: lets step into the Popes head,
We shall be dropping dry if stay here:
Isle have a roof built, and such a roof,
That Merchants and their wives, friend and their friends
Shall walk underneath it as now in Powles.
What day of the Month is this?
Day M. Gresham, let me see:
I took a fellows word for twenty pound
The tenth of March, the tenth of March.
The tenth of March, well if I live,
Isle raise a work shall make our Merchants say,
T'was a good shower that fell upon that day. How now Jack?
Sir, my M. here having preferred me to be his Factor into
I am come to take my leave of you. (France
I thank him for his care of thee: M. Hobson,
My kinsman's come to take his leave of me,
He tells me you are sending him for France.
Bones a me knave, art there yet?
I thought thou had been half way there by this.
I did but stay sir, to take my leave of my Uncle.
O M. Hobson, he comes in a very good time,
I was bethinking me whom I might send
To fetch this hundred pound, I am set to pay
To sir Thomas Ramsay: nay, as we are friends
Weal have all Covenants kept before we part.
God grant that I may see it.
Here Iohn take this sealed Ring,
Bid Timothy presently send me a hundred pound.
I sit.
I am sure he hath it ready told for thee,
Weal stay here on the Lumbard till thou come.
Yes Sir.
Nay stay good Iohn, thou know my dwelling Iohn?
In Powles Church-yard Sir.
The hundred pound thou art sent for, bring it thither
Yes marry will I sir.
And my good friends, since that so long a strife
Hath end by my persuasion, isle entreat,
My house may entertain you for this time.
Where with such necessaries weal pass the time,
As God shall best be pleased, and you contented:
I keep no riot, nor you look for none,
Only my table is for every one.
A cup of Sack and welcome M. Deane,
Nature is best contented with a mean.
As I told you Timothy,
You must send my Uncle straight a hundred pound:
A dines at Doctor Novels, and gave me in charge
To hast with the money after him.
You come to me Iohn for a hundred pound, I thank my spiritual maker I have the charge of many hundreds of his now Iohn: I hope Iohn you fear God. (too.
Fear God, S'foot what else, I fear God and the devil
I must tell you Iohn and I know it, you have not fed of the spiritual food, but edified by faith and suffered the tares of the wild affections to be burnt.
Foot thou would not have me make my self a French Martyr, to be burnt at these years would thou?
I have known them Iohn of our Church, have been burnt for other sins before thy years.
I by my faith Timothy it may be you have, for as close as you carry your teeth together, with indeed good brother, I doe not think but once in a year, a man might find you quartered betwixt the Mouth at Bishops-gare, and the preaching place in Spittle.
Now you talk of the Spittle, I must say in very deed I have been in the Spittle.
It is the more like Timothy you have been acquainted with the pox then.
But if you should think Iohn, that I would be there to commit, deal, or to speak more profanely, to venture in the way of all flesh, you doe wrong me being a brother of the faith.
Come right your self and your Master then, and send him this one hundred pound, here's his sealed Ring, I hope a warrant sufficient.
Upon so good security Iohn, isle fit me to deliver it.
Spend it, God send me but once to finger it, and if I doe not make a Flanders reckoning on it, and that is as I have heard mad wags say, receive it hear and revel it away in an o∣there place: let me bee spit out of the room of good fellowship, and never have so much favour to touch the skirt of a Taffeta petticoat.
Tut I am young, mine Vncle's an old chuff,
And isle not want by God, since he hath enough.
I must not let this same wainscot-face, yea &amp; nay, hear me tho.
Here Iohn, accept my duty to my Master, I must tell you Iohn, I would not have trusted you Iohn, without so susficient a discharge.
I am the less beholding unto you, but now I have it, be∣cause you preach't to me upon my demand of it, isle be so bold to lecture to you upon your delivery, Timothy you know the Proverb good Timothy, That the still Sow eats a l the draff: and no question the most smooth tongued fellow, the more are∣rant knave: God forbid I should call you so Timothy, yet I will leave this for your further remembrance.
Under the yea and nay, men often buy
Much cosonage, find many alye:
He that with yea and nay makes all his sayings,
Yet proves a Iudas in his dealings,
Shall have this written o'er his grave,
Thy life seemed pure, yet died a knave.
Doe you hear Iohn, you know the Chapmans word in London, Isle trust you but no further then I see you, you have the hundred pound Iohn, but for that you have wronged vs that love to be edified, I will go with you to my Master, and see the mo∣ney delivered.
Why, a trusted me to come with it.
I care not by yea, and nay, isle go by yea and nay, I will.
Let me but ask thee this question, Whither dost thou go, in any love to thy master, or to me?
Though my master be my master, yet you have stirred my stomach.
I thought there was the fruit of your Puritan pati∣ence, come let's along, and if I doe not show your religion a trick shall be scarce digested with pippins or cheese, let me bee called Cut, Come along.
Fellow Quick, pray thee have a care if thou can see Iohn the Upholster, I must needs airest him.
How much is the debt?
Some 50. li.
Dost thou think he is able to put in bail to the action?
I think scarce enough.
Why then we'll arrest him to the popes-head, call for the best cheer in the house, first feed upon him, and then if he will not come off, carry him to the counter, but if he will stretch some 4. or 5. li. being the sums so great he shall pass, weal make him swear he shall not tell he was arrested, and weal swear to the creditor we cannot meet with him.
Fore God thou say well.
I have served Sent the Perfumer, Tallow the Currier, Quarrel the Glasier, and some three or four more of our poor smelts so this morning.
Hart I have cour'st thorough two or three Lanes, yet the meshing slave follows me so close I can not give him the slip for this hundred pound: as God save me now ti's in my hand i'do rather be hanged then part from it: Foot, t'will make a man merry half a year together in France, command wenches or any thing: part from it quoth you, that were a jest indeed: shall a young man as I am, and though I say it indifferent proper, go in∣to a strange country, and not show himself what mettell hee is made of when a comes there: I protest a very good hundred pound, a hundred pound will go far in France, and when a man hath it not of his own, who should hee make bold withal for it, if he may not with his Uncle; but see if that thin faced rogue be not come again, I must have a trick for him.
For all your fore-long too and fro, by yea and nay, isle follow you.
Will you, there should bee Sergeants here abouts, will you: Lord if it be thy will send me to hit of one, and if I doe not show you a trick, thou should be a Sergeant by thy peering so.
Why M. Iohn so I am. (thy name?
Thou art happily met: I am looking for one, what's
My name M. Iohn, I have been merry at your Uncles many a time, my name's Honesty.
I faith.
Nay, isle assure you his name is Honesty, and I am Quick
Honesty! who the pox gave thee that name? (his Yeoman.
But thou must doe an office for my Uncle:
Hear Quick, run thou before and enter the action,
Ther's money, an action of an hundred pound
Against Timothy Thin-beard, M. Greshams Factor,
I hope I shall teach you to dog me.
An action against Thin-beard, I go.
Here Honesty, there's money for thy arrest,
Be sure to take good Bail or clap him fast:
I hope I shall show you a trick.
Mum for that.
See where he is, God prosper it.
Fasten upon him like a hungry Dog upon a piece of meat:
And if this be not a trick to chaste a fool,
A more knave learn me, and isle go to school.
I arrest you Sir.
Arrest me, thou servant to Satan: at whose suit?
At your Masters, M. Greshams.
O God for thy mercy, M. Iohn, M. Iohn.
Nay, nay, this 100. li, hath other work in hand for me,
You are in the Devils hand, and so agree.
My good friend, now what must become of me?
Unless, wee shall to the Tavern, and drink till you can send for Bail, you must to the Counter.
Is there no difference made betwixt the faithful and the unfaithful.
Faith very little in paying of debts: but if you be so holy, I marvel how you run so far behind hand With your M.
I must confess I owe my M. 500. li. How I came so, it is not fit to lay the sins of our flesh open to every eye, &amp; you know
the saying, Tic bad to do evil, but worse to boast of it: yet hee aboue knows that sometimes as soon as I have come from Bowe-church, I have gone to a Baudie-house. (your knavery.
Nay it appears so, that now your M. hath smelt out
Not to commit in very deed good friend, but only to see fashions or to recreate &amp; stir up our drowsy appetites.
Well here comes my fellow Quick, and unless you will content vs for staying, you must along to the Counter.
I hope you think The Labourer is worthy of his hire: we will stay here at the Tavern, and Quick I will content thee, to carry a letter to my master, wherein I will make him a resti∣tution of his 500. li. by repentance, and show him the way that my frail nature hath run into.
Well, weal be paid by the hour.
It will not be amiss if you buy an houre-glasse.
Come M. D. Novel, now we have done
Our worst to your good cheer, weed fine be gone:
Only we stay my kinsmans long return,
To pay this hundred pound to sir Thomas Ramsie.
Then assure you, he will be hear presently:
In the mean time, I have drawn you to this walk,
A Gallery, wherein I keep the Pictures
Of many charitable Citizens:
That having fully satisfied your bodies,
You may by them learn to refresh your souls.
Are all these Pictures of good Citizens?
They are, and isle describe to you some of their births,
How they bestowed their lives, and did so live
The fruits of this life might a better give.
You shall gain more in showing this to vs,
Then you have shown.
Good M. Deane, I pray you show it vs.
This was the Picture of sir Iohn Philpot sometimes Mayor,
This man at one time, at his own charge,
Levied ten thousand soldiers, guarded the Realm
From the incursions of our enemies:
And in the year a thousand three hundred and eighty,
When Thomas of Woodstocke, Thomas Percie with other noble
Were sent to aid the Duke of Britannia, (men,
This said Iohn Filpot furnished out four ships
At his own charges and did release the armour
That the poor soldiers had for victuals paw'nd.
This man did live when Walworth was Lord Mayor
That provident, valiant, and learned Citizen,
That both attached, and kilt the traitor Tyler,
For which good service Walworth the Lord Mayor,
This Filpot, and four other Aldermen,
Were knighted in the field.
Thus did he live, and yet before he died
Assured relief for thirteen poor for ever.
By the marry God a worthy Citizen:
On good my Dear.
This sir Richard Whitington three times Mayor,
Son to a Knight, and Prentice to a Mercer,
Began the Library of Gray-Friars in London;
And his Executors after him did build
Whittington College, thirteen Almes-houses for poor men,
Repaired S. Bartholmewes in Smithfield,
Glased the Guild-hall, and built Newgate.
Bones of me then I have heard lies,
For I have heard he was a scullion,
And rai'sd himself by venture of a Cat.
They did the more wrong to the gentleman.
This sir Iohn Allen Mercer and Mayor of London,
A man so grave of life that he was made
A privy Counsellor to King Henrie the eight,
He gave this City a rich Collar of gold,
That by the Mayor succeeding should be worn;
Of which sir William Laxton was the first,
And is continued even unto this year,
A number more there are, of whose good deeds
This City flourished.
And we may be ashamed,
For in their deeds we see our own disgrace,
We that are Citizens are rich as they were.
Behold rheir charity in every street,
Churches for prayer, Almes-houses for the poor,
Conduits which bring vs water: all which good
We doe see and are relieved withal,
And yet wee live like beasts, spend time and die,
Leaving no good to be remembered by.
Among the Stories of these blessed men,
So many that enrich your Gallery,
There are two women's Pictures: what were they?
They are two that have deserved a memory,
Worthy the note of our Posterity:
This Agnes Foster, wife to sir A. Foster,
That fre'd a Beggar at the grate of Lud-gate,
Was after Mayor of this most famous City,
And builded the South-side of Lud-gate up,
Upon which wall these Verses I have read.
Devout souls that pass this way,
For M. Foster late Mayor honestly pray,
And Agnes his Wife to God consecrate,
That of pity this house made for Londoners in Lute. gate:
So that for lodging and water here nothing they pay,
As their Keepers shall answer at dreadful Dooms day.
O what a charitable deed was this!
This Aue Gibson who in her husbands life,
Being a Grocer, and a sheriff of London,
Founded a free School at Ratcliffe,
There to instruct three-score poor children,
Built fourteen Almes-houses for fourteen poor
Leaving for Tutors 50. li. a year,
And Quarterly for every one a Noble.
Why should not I live so, that being dead
My name might have a register with theirs.
Why should not all of vs being wealthy men,
And by Gods blessing only raised; but
Cast in our minds how we might them exceed
In godly works, helping of them that need.
Bones a me tic true: why should we live,
To have the poor to curse vs being dead?
Heaven grant that I may live, that when I die,
Although my children laugh, the poor may cry.
If you will follow the religious path,
That these have beat before you, you shall win heaven,
Even in the mid-day walks you shall not walk the street.
But widows orisons, Laysars prayers, Orphans thanks,
Will fly into your ears, and with a joyful blush,
Make you thank God that you have done for them:
When otherwise theil fill you ears with curses,
Crying we feed on woe, you are our Nurses.
O first not better that young couples say,
You raised vs up, then you were our decay:
And mothers tongues teach their first borne to sing,
Of your good deeds, then by the bad to wring.
No more M. D. Novel, no more,
I think these words should make a man of flint.
To mend his life: how say you M Gresham?
Fore-god they have starred tears into my eyes,
And M. D. Novel you shall see
The words that you have spoke, have wrought effect in me.
And from these women I will take a way,
To guide my life for a more blessed stay.
Begin then whilst you live, least being dead,
The good you give in charge be never done,
Make your own hands your executors, your eyes ouer-seers,
And have this saying ever in your mind:
Women be forgetful, children be unkind,
Executors be covetous, and take what they find.
In my time I have seen many of them.
Isle learn then to prevent them whilst I live,
The good I mean to doe; these hands shall give.
The matter you wot of sit is done.
Done knave, what's done?
Is in hucksters handling sir, and hear he commend him unto you.
Mary God knave dost tel me Riddles, what's all this?
A thing will speak his own mind to you,
If you please but to open the lip.
Bee your leave Gentlemen, I am come to smell out my master here: Your kins-man Iohn sir, your kins-man Iohn.
O he has brought the hundred pound, where is he?
It appears by this, the matter is of less weight.
What more paper:!
Fellow, what hast thou brought me here, a recantation?
It may be so for he appears in a white sheet.
Indeed he seems sorry for his bad life..
Bad life, bad life knave, what means all this?
M. D. Novel, pray read it for me,
And Isle read that my kins-man Iohn hath sent:
Where is he knave?
Your worship is no wiser then you should be, to keep any of that cote.
Knave thou mean.
Knave I mean sir, but your kins-man Iohn,
That by this time's well forward on his way.
Hey-day, what have we here, knavery as quick as Isles?
Weal more of this.
You were best let me help you hold it sir.
Why knave, dost think I cannot hold a paper.
Help will do no hurt for if the knavery be as quick as an Ecle, it may chance to deceive you.
I am a Merchant made by chance,
And lacking coin to venture:
Your hundred pond's gone toward France,
Your Eactor's in the Counter.
No sir, he is yet but in the Tavern at counter gate, but he shall soon be in if you please.
Away knave, let me read on.
My father gave me a portion,
You keep away my due:
I have paid my self a part to spend,
Here's a discharge for you.
Precious cole, here's a knave round with me.
Your Factor Timothy Thin beard writes to you,
Who as it seems is arrested at your suit.
How, at my suit!
And hear confesses by using bad company,
He is run behind hand five hundred pound.
And doth entreat you would be good to him.
How, run behind hand five hundred pound,
And by bad company: M. Deane of Powles,
He is a fellow seems so pure of life,
I drust have trusted him with all I had had.
Here is so much under his own hand.
Ha, let me see, who set you to arrest him?
Why your kins-man Iohn sir, your kins-man Iohn.
He, ha, infaith I smell the knavery then:
This knave belike mistrusting of my kinsman,
Would come along to see the money given me:
Mad Jack having no trick to put him off,
Arrests him with a Sergeant at my suit,
There went my hundred pound away: this Thin-beard then
Knowing himself to have played the knave with me,
And thinking I had arrested him indeed,
Confesses all his tricks with yea, and nay:
So her's five hundred pound come, one run away.
Bones a me, M. Gresham, is my man Iohn
Gone away with your hundred pound?
Faith it appears so by the acquittance that I brought.
No matter M. Hobson, the charge you trust him with,
Isle see he shall discharge, I know he is wilde,
Yet I must tell you isle not see him sunk:
And afore-god it hath done my heart more good,
The knave had wit to doe so mad a trick,
Then if he had pofited me twice so much.
He ever had the name of mad Jack Gresham.
Is the more like his Uncle, Sir Thomas Ramsie
When I was young I doe remember well,
I was as very a knave as he is now.
Sir, bring Thin-beard hither to me, and sir Thomas Ramsie,
Your hundred pound isle see you paid my self:
Ha ha, mad Jack, Gramercy for this slight,
This hundred pounds makes me thy Uncle right.
I sure tic in this Lane, I turned on the right hand com∣ming from the Stocks, nay, though there was master carlos, man carels, and all careless, isle still be honest Iohn, and scorn to take any mans ware but isle pay them for it: I warrant they think me an arrant knave, for going away and not paying, and in my con∣science the master cudgeld the men, and the men the master, and all about me, when as God save me I did it innocently. But sure this is the Lane, there's the VVindmill, there's the Dogs head in the pot, and her's the Fryer whipping the Nuns arse: ti's here about sure.
Come fellow Crack, have you sorted up those wares?
Marked them with 54. they must be packed up.
I have don't an hour ago: have you sealed up
My masters Letter to his Factor Iohn Gresham?
It is at Deep in France to send him Matches,
For he must use them at Bristow fair.
I, and the Post received it two hours since.
Sure it is here about, the kennel was on my right hand, and I think in my conscience I shall never have the grace of God and good luck, if I doe not pay it: Gods foot, look here, look here, I know this is the shop by that same stretch-halter, O my masters, by your leave good fellows.
You are welcome sir, you are welcome.
Indeed that's the common saying about London, if men bring money with them.
O sir, money customers to vs are best welcome.
You say well, so they should be. come turn o'er your books, I am come to pay this same ten pound.
And we are ready to receive money: what might we call your name?
Why my name is Iohn Good-fellow, I hope I am not a∣shamed of my name.
Your Kin are the more beholding to you, fellow Crack turn o'er the Calendar, and look for Iohn Good-fellow.
What comes it to?
Ten pound.
You will have no more wares with you, will you sir.
Nay prithee not too fast, let's pay for the old before we talk of any new.
Iohn Good-fellow, fellow Nimble-chaps, here's no such name in all our book.
I think thou art mop-ey'd this morning, give me the book, Letter I, Letter I, Letter I: when had you your ware?
I had it some ten days ago.
Your name's Iohn Good-fellow you say, Letter I, Letter I, Letter I: You doe not come to mock vs, doe you. Letter I, Let∣la I, Letter I. By this hand if I thought you did, I would knock you about the ears before wee parted fellow Crack, get me a Cudgel ready; Letter I, Letter I, Letter I: Foot here's no such name in all our Book. Doe you hear fellow are you drunk this morning, to make vs look for moone-shine in the water?
Foot, art not thou drunk this morning, can not receive the money that's due to thee? I tell thee I had ten pounds worth of ware here.
And I tell thee Iohn Goodfellow, here's no such name in our book, nor no such ware delivered.
Gods precious, there's a jest indeed, so a man may bee sworn out of himself, had not I ten pounds worth of ware here?
No Goodman goose, that you had not.
Hyday, here's excellent fellows, are able to make their masters horns grow through his head in a month, they cannot only carelessly deliver away his ware, but also they will not take money for it when it comes.
Doe you hear Hoyden, and my master were not in the next room, Id knock you about ears for playing the knave with vs, ere you parted.
By the mass I think your master had more need knock you about the ears, for playing the Jacks with him, ther's your ten pounds, tell it out with a wanion, and take it for your pains.
Foot, here's a mad slave indeed will give vs ten pound in spite of our teethes.
Fellow Nimble Chaps, alaslet the poor fellow alone, it ap∣pear's he is besides himself.
By the mass, I think you will sooner make your master stark mad, if you play thus with every body.
Hyday, bones a me, here's lazy knaves.
Past eight a clock, and neither ware sorted,
Not shop swept.
Good morrow to you sir, have you any more stomach to receive money, than your men have this morning?
Money is welcome chaffer, welcome good friend, Welcome good friend.
Here's mounsiermalapart your man, scorns to receive it.
How knaves, think scorn to receive my money?
Bones a me grown proud, proud knaves, proud.
I hope we know sir you doe not use to bring up your ser∣uants to receive money unless it be due unto you.
No bones a me knaves, not for a million:
Friend, come to pay me money, for what, for what,
For what come you to pay me money?
Why Sir, for ware I had some month ago,
Being Pins, Points, and Laces,
Potting sticks for young wives, for young wenches glasses,
Ware of all sorts which I bore at my back
To sell where I come, with what do you lack, what do you lack?
What doe you lack?
Bones a me a merry knave: what's thy name?
My name sir is Iohn Good-fellow,
An honest poor Peddler of Kent.
And had ten pound in ware of me, a month ago:
Bones give me the books, Iohn Good-fellow of Kent.
O sir, Nominee &amp; nature, by name and nature,
I am as well known for a good-fellow in Kent,
As your City Summer's known for a knave,
Come sir will you be ttelling.
Tel me of no 〈◊◊〉 of me here's no such matters
Away knave away, thou owe me none, out of my doors.
How, owe you none say you! this is but a trick to try my honesty now.
There's a great, go drink a pint of Sack,
Comfort thy self thou art not well in thy wits;
God forbid, pay me ten pound not due to me.
Gods dickens here's a jest indeed, master mad, men mad, and all mad, here's a mad household: doe you hear M. Hobson, I doe not greatly care to take your great, and I care as little to spend it, yet you shall know I am Iohn, honest Iohn, and I will not be out faced of my honesty, here I had ten pounds worth of ware, and I w'll pay for it.
Nimble-chaps, call for help Nimble-chaps,
Bones of me the man begins to rave.
Master I have found out one Iohn Tawnie-cote,
Had ten pounds worth of ware a month ago.
Why that's I, that's I: I was Iohn Tawnie-cote then,
Though I am Iohn Gray-cote now.
Iohn Tawnie-cote! welcome Iohn Tawnie-cote.
Foot doe you think isle be out faced of my honesty?
A stool for Iohn Tawnie-cote, sit good Iohn Tawnie-cote.
Honest Iohn Tawnie-cote, welcome Iohn Tawnie-cote.
Nay, isle assure you we are honest all the generation of vs,
There it is to a Doyt I warrant it, you need not tell it after me,
Foot doe you think isle be out sac't of mine honesty?
Thou art honest Iohn, honest Iohn Tawnie-cote:
Having so honestly paid for this,
Sort up his pack straight worth twenty pound,
Isle trust thee honest Iohn, Hobson will trust thee:
And any time, the ware that thou dost lack,
Money or money not, isle stuff thy pack.
I thank you Master Hobson, and this is the fruit of ho∣nestie.
Be your leave M. Hobson, I bring this favour to you,
My royal Mistress Queeno Elizabeth,
Hath sent to borrow a hundred pound of you.
How, bones a me, Queen know Hobson, Queen know
And send but for one hundred pound: Friend come in; (Hobson?
Come in friend, shall have two, Queen shall have two:
If Queen know Hobson, once her Hobsons purse,
Must be free for her she is Englands Nurse:
Come in good friend, ha, Queen know Hobson,
Nay come in Iohn we'll dine together too.
Make up my pack and isle along from you
Singing merrily on the way,
Points, Points, Gloves, and Purses,
Pokingsticks, and black Iet-rings,
Cambrics, lawns, and pretty things:
Come maids and buy my back doth croak,
I have all that you want: what doe you lack?
What doe you lack?
Our Cities Sword-bearer and my very good friend,
What have our honourable Court of Aldermen
Determined yet shall Gresham have a place,
To erect this worthy building to his name,
May make the City speak of him for ever.
They are in earnest counsel sir about it.
Be you my Agent too and fro to them,
I know your place and will be thankful to you:
Tell them I waite here in the Majors Court,
Beneath in the Sheriffs Court my workmen waite
In number full a hundred, my Frame is ready,
All only stay their pleasure, then out of hand
Up goes my work, a credit to the Land.
I shall be dutiful in your request.
Doe good M. Sword-bearer, now when this work is
It shall be in the pleasure of my life, (raised,
To come and meet our Merchants at their hour,
And see them in the greatest storm that is
VValke dry, and in a work I raised for them:
Or fetch a turn within my upper walk,
Within which square I have ordered Shops shall bee
Of neat but necessariest Trades in London.
And in the richest sort being garnish't out,
T'will doe me good to see shops with fair wives
Sit to attend the profit of their husbands:
Young maids brought vpyong men as prentices.
Some shall prove masters and speak in Greshams praise,
In Greshams work we did our fortunes raise.
For I dare say both Country and the Court,
For wares shall be beholding to this work.
M. Gresaam,
Thus sends the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen.
Or rather come to bring the news our self:
We have determined of a place for you
In Corne-hill, the delightful of this City,
Where you shall raise your Frame: the City at their Charge
Hath bought the houses and the ground, (pound;
And paid for both three thousand five hundred three &amp; twenty
Order is given the houses shall be sold,
To any man will buy them and remove them,
Which is already done, being fourscore households,
Were sold for 478. pound.
The plot is also plain'd at the Cities charges,
And wee in name of the whole Citizens,
Doe come to give you full possession
Of this our purchase, whereon to build a Burse,
A place for-Marchants to assemble in,
At your own charges.
M Shnife isle do it, and what I spend therein,
I scorn to lose day, neglect is a sin:
Where be my work men?
Here, here with trowel and tools ready at hand.
Come fellows, come:
We have a Frame made, and we have room
To raise it: but M. D. Novel, and M. Hobson,
We have your presence in a happy time,
This seventh of June we the first stone will lay
Of our new Burse, give vs some Brickes:
Here's a brick, here's a fair Sovereign,
Thus I begin, bee it hereafter told
I laid the first stone with a piece of gold.
Hee that loves Gresham follow him in this,
The gold we lay, due to the workmen is.
O God bless M. Gresham, God bless M. Gresham.
The Mayor of London M. Gresham follows you:
Unto your first this second I doe fit,
And lay this piece of gold a top of it.
So doe the Sheriffs of London after you.
And bones of me, old Hobson will be one,
Here's fellowys there's my gold give me a stone.
God forbid a man of your credit should want stones
Is this the Plot sir of your work in hand?
The whole Plot both of form and fashion.
In sooth it will be a good edifice,
Much Art appears in it: in all my time
I have not seen a work of this neat form:
What is this vaultage for, is fashioned here?
Stowage for Merchants ware and strangers goods,
As either by exchange or otherwise are vendable.
Here is a middle round and a far space,
The round is greater, and the space
Seems open: your conceit for that?
The grates give light unto the Cellerage,
Upon the which isle have my friends to walk,
When heaven gives comfortable rain unto the earth:
For that I will have covered,
So it appears.
This space that hides not heaven from vs,
Shall be so still, my reason is,
Ther's Summers heat, as well as winters cold,
And I allow and here's my reason for it,
Tic better to be bleak't by winters breath,
Then to be stifled up with Summers heat:
In cold weather walk dry and thick together,
And every honest man warm one another:
In Summer then when too much heat offends,
Take air a Gods name Merchants or my friends.
And what of this part that is over head?
M. Deane in this:
There is more ware there then in all the rest,
Here like a parish for good Citizens
And their fair wives to dwell in, isle have shops
Where every day they shall become themselves
In neat attire, that when our Courtiers
Shall come in trains to pace old Greshams Burse,
They shall have such a girdle of chaste eyes,
And such a globe of beauty round about:
Ladies shall blush to turn their vizards off,
And Courtiers swear they lied when they did scoff.
Kind M. Gresham this same work of yours,
Will be a Tomb for you after your death,
A benefit to Tradesmen and a place
Where Matchants meet their traffic to maintain,
Where neithèr could shall hurt them, heat, nor rain.
O M Novel I did not forget
The troublesome storm we had in Lumbar-fleet,
That time Sir Thomas and I were adversaries,
And you and M. Hobson made vs friends.
I then did say, and now isle keep my word,
I saw a want and I would help afford:
Nor is my promise given you when you showed
That rank of charitable men to vs,
That I would follow their good actions
Forgot with me, but that before I die,
The world shall see Isle leave like memory.
Fore-God my Lord, have you beheld the like!
Look how it streakes, what doe you think of it?
Tic a strange Comet M. Hobson,
My time to my remembrance hath not seen
A sight so wonderful. M. D. Novel,
To judge of these things your experience
Exceeds ours, what doe you hold of it?
For I have heard that Meteors in the ayre,
Of lesser form, less wonderful then these,
Rather fore-tell of danger's imminent,
Then flatter vs wish future happiness.
Art may discourse of these things none can judge
Directly of the will of heaven in this,
And by discourse thus far I hold of it.
That this strange star appearing in the North,
And in the constellation of Cassiopey,
Which with three fixed stars comixed to it,
Doth make a Figure Geometrical,
Lozengewise called of the learned Rombus,
Conducted with the hourly Moon of heaven,
And never altered from the fixed sphere,
Fore-tels such alteration that my friends,
Heaven grant with this first sight our sorrow ends.
God, will be done M. Deane, hape what hap will,
Death doth not fear the good man but the ill.
Well said M Hobson.
Lets have a day, that if death come to morrow
Hoe's rather messenger of joy then sorrow.
Now sir what news from Barbary?
Unwelcome news sir, the King of Barbary is slain.
Ha, slain by treason or by war.
By war, in that renowned Battle,
Swift Fame desires to carry through the world:
The Battle of Alcasar, wherein two Kings
Besides this King of Barbary was slain,
Kings of Moroco and of Portugal,
With Srewkeley that renowned Englishman
That had a spirit equal with a King,
Mad fellow with these Kings in war-like strife,
Honoured his Country and concluded life.
Could news byr'lady, the venture Gentlemen
Of threescore thousand pound with that dead King,
Lies in a hazard to be won or lost:
In what estate consists the Kingdom now?
In peace, and the succeeding happy,
Was crowned then King when I took ship from thence.
To that King then be Messenger from vs,
And by the sound of Trumpet summon him?
Say that thy Master and a London Merchant,
Craves due performance of such covenants
Confirmed by the late King unto our self,
That for the sum of three-score thousand pound,
The traffic of his Sugars should be mine.
If he refuse the former bargain made,
Then freely claim our money that we lent:
Say that our coin did sted the former King,
If he be Kind we have as much for him.
By the Marie-god it was a dangerous day,
Three Kings beside young Stewkeley slain:
Isle tell you my Lord Mayor what I have seen
When sword and bucklers were in question,
I have seen that Stewkeley beat a street before him,
He was so familiar grown in every mouth,
That if it happened any fighting were,
The question straight was, was not Stewkely there.
Bones a me he would hew it. Now, what news with you?
Here is a Letter sent you from Iohn Gresham.
O an answer of a Letter that I sent,
To send me Matches against Bristow fair,
If then any were come.
I cannot tell Sir well what to call it, but in steed of mat∣ches of ware, when you read your Letter, I believe you will find your Factor hath matched you.
VVhat's here, what's here.
As near as I could guess at your meaning, I have laboured to fur∣nish you, and have sent you 2. thousand pounds worth of Match.
How, bones knave, 2. thousand pounds worth of Match!
Faith M. never chafe at it, for if you cannot put it away for Match, it may be the hang-man will by some of it for halters.
Bones a me, I sent for matches of ware, fellows of ware.
And Match being a kind of ware, I think your Factor hath matched you.
The blazing Star did not appear for nothing:
I sent to be sorted with matches of ware,
And he hath sent me nought, but a commodity of Match,
And in a time when ther's no vent for it.
What doe you think on it Gentlemen,
I little thought Jack would have served me so.
Nay M. Hebson grieve not at Iack's cross,
My doubt is more and that I laugh at less.
You have travelled sir, how do you like this building?
Trust me it is the goodliest thing that I have seen,
England affords none such.
Nor Christendom:
I might say all the world has not his fellow.
I have been in Turkeys great Constantinople,
The Merchants there meet in a goodly temple,
But have no common Burse in Rome, but Rome's
Built after the manner of Franckeford, and Eniden:
There where the greatest Marts and meeting places
Of merchants are have streets and pent-houses,
And as I might compare them to themselves,
Like Lumber-street before this Buisse was built.
I have seen the like in Bristow.
Good morrow to your honours.
Thanks to my good Lord Major.
We are gazing here of M. Greshams work.
I think you have not seen a goodlier Frame.
Not in my life, yet I have been in Uenice,
In the Realto there called S. Marks,
It is but a babble if compared to this.
The nearest that which most resembles this,
Is the great Burse in Anwerpe, yet not comparable
Either in height or witness: the fair Sellerage,
Or goodly shops aboue: O my Lord Major,
This Gresham hath much graced your City London,
His fame will long out-liue him.
It is reported you sir Thomas Ramsie are as rich as he.
This should incite you to such noble works,
To eternize you.
Your Lordship pleases to be pleasant with me,
I am the meanest of a many men
In this fair City, M Greshams fame
Draws me as a spectator amongst others,
To see his cost, but not compare with it,
And it is cost indeed.
But when to fit these empty rooms about here,
The pictures graven of all the English Kings
Shall be set over and in order plac'st,
How glorious will it then be?
Admirable!
These very Pictures will surmount my wealth.
But how will M. Gresham name this place?
I heard my L. of Lecester to the Queen
Highly commend this work, and she then promised
To come in person and hear christen it,
It cannot have a better God-mother:
This Gresham is a royal Citizen.
He feasts this day the Russian Ambassador,
I am a bidden Guest:
Where if it please you.
Good sir Thomas,
We know what you would say, We are his Guests
Invited two: yet in our way we took
This wonder worth our pains, it is our way
To Bishop-gate to M. Greshams house,
Thither so please you we'll associate you.
Lords all at once welcome, welcome at once,
You come to my new buildings up sitting,
It hath been long in labour now deliver.
anon weal have a health to it.
This Russian Prince the Emberours Ambassador
Doth not our Language understand: Interpreter,
Say that the wee bid him wel-come.
The Prince speaks Latin,
And in that language weal interpret for him:
Salutem tibi optat &amp; adicentum tuum grauissume iste Londinensis.
Istum libens audio, ages illi meo nominee Ex animo gratias, fund quote bibamus.
He gladly thanks you for his royal wel-come
And drinks to you.
We understand that sign.
Come let our full crowned cups o'reflow with wine,
Wel-come again fair Lords.
Thanks M. Gresham.
We have been viewing of your works.
My Burse how doe you like it Lord,
It is a pretty babble.
Tic a fair work.
Her Majesty intends to name the place.
She doth her servant Gresham too much grace,
It will be pretty when my Pictures come
To fill those empty rooms, if that holds,
That ships rich is worth her weight in gold.
It will be rare and famous.
What was it that the Russian whispered?
He ask me what interpreter the Queen
Would in his Embasse employ.
None, tell him none.
For though a woman, she is a rare Linguist,
Where other Princes use Interpreters,
She propria voce, I have some Latin too:
She of her self hears all their Embassies,
And herself answers them without Interpreter,
Both Spanish, Latin, French, and Greek,
Dutch, and Italian, so let him know:
My Lord of Lecester sent me word last night,
And I am prouder on it then on my building,
The Queen to grace me and my works the more,
The several Ambassadors then will hear,
And them in person answer.
It is most true.
The Russian with the France.
What would that Gentleman sir Thomas?
He is a Merchant and a Jeweller:
Amongst other stones he saith he hath a Pearl
Orient and round, weighing so many carets
That it can scarce be valued: the French king,
And many other Dukes have for the riches
And prize refused to buy it: now he comes,
To offer it to this Ambassador.
Show him the Pearl Interpreter:
The Lord Ambassador.
Mercator quidem &amp; aurifex spectandum, tibi profer
Gēmam domino serenissime.
Et la &amp; principe digna, interroga quanti iudicat?
He commends it to be both rich and fair,
And desires to know how you value it.
My prise sir, is fifteen hundred pound.
Quantivalet?
Mill queen gentis minis,
Non, non nimis peceara est ista Gemma.
He saith it is too dear, he will not buy it.
I will peruse your pearl, is that your prise?
I cannot bate one crown and gain by it.
We'll not be accessory to your Loss,
And yet consider all things some may think vs
To be but bare of treasure at this time,
Having disbursed so much about our works:
Yet if our ships and Trade in Barbary
Hold currant we are well: what news from Sea,
How stands my ships?
Your ships in which all the Kings pictures were,
From Brute unto our Queen Elizabeth:
Drawn in white marble, by a storm at sea
Is wrack't and lost.
The Loss, I way not this:
Only it grieves me that my famous building,
Shall want so rich and fair an ornament.
It touches all the City; for those pictures
Had doubly graced this royal edifice.
Me thinks the ships loss most should trouble you.
My ships but wealth, why we have wealth;
The pictures were the grace of my new Burse,
So I might them in their true form behold,
I cared not to have lost their weights in gold.
A noble Citizen.
Our Factor, what good news from Barbary?
What says the King, speak, did thou summon him?
Or hast thou brought my threescore thousand pound?
Or shall I have the Sugars at that rate?
If so, new marble Pictures weal have wrought,
And in a new ship from beyond-sea brought.
The King that in the regal chair succeeds
The King late dead I summoned, and demanded
Either your money tendered, or the Sugars
After the rate proposed, hee denied both
Alleging though he was successive heir,
He was not therefore either tide to pay
The late Kings debts, nor yet to stand unto
Unnecessary bargains: notwithstanding
To gratify your love, the King hath sent you
As presents, not as satisfaction:
A costly dagger, and a pair of slippers,
And there's all for you three-score thousand pound.
Byr'lady a dear bargain.
I fear me this will plague him, a strange cross,
How will he take this news, loss upon loss.
Nay, will it not undo him, doth he not wish his buildings in his purse.
A dagger that's well,
A pair of slippers come unto my shoes,
What 30. thousand pound in sterling money,
And paid me all in slips, then Hoboyes play,
On slippers isle dance all my care away:
Fit, fit, he had the just length of my foot.
You may report Lords when you come to Court,
You Gresham saw a pair of slippers wear
Cost thirty thousand pound.
Somewhat too dear.
Nor yet for all this treasure we have lost,
Repents it vs one penny of our cost.
As royal in his virtues as his buildings.
These losses would have kilt me.
Jeweller,
Let's see thy pearl: go pound it in a Mortar,
Beat it to powder then return it me,
What Dukes, and Lords, and these Ambassadors
Have even before our face refused to purchase
As of too high a price to venture on,
Gresham a London Merchant here will buy.
What is it broken small? fill vs some wine,
Fuller, yet fuller till the brim or'e-flows,
Here 16000. pound at one clap goes,
In stead of Sugar, Gresham drinks this pearl
Unto his Queen and Mistress: pledge it Lords,
Who ever saw a Merchant brauelier fraught,
In dearer slippers or a richer draught?
You are an honour to all English Merchants
As bountiful as rich, as Charitable
As rich as renowned as any of all.
I doe not this as prodigal of my wealth,
Rather to show how I esteem that loss
Which cannot be regained, A London Merchant
Thus tread on a kings present: Jeweller,
My Factor shall deliver you your money.
And Lords so please you but to see my School,
Of the seven learned liberal Sciences,
Which I have founded here near Byshops-gate,
I will conduct you. I will make it Lords
An University within it self,
And gived from my revenues maintenance.
W'are not like those that are not liberal
Till they be dying, what wee mean to give,
Wee will bestow, and see done whilst we live.
Attendance, come, th'ambassadour, guess all,
Your welcom's great, albeit your cheer's but small
Hard world, when men dig living out of stones,
As wretched miserable I am enforced:
And yet there lives more pity in the earth,
Then in the flint-bosomes of her children,
For shoe's content to have her aged breast
Mangled with matrocks, rent and torn with spades,
To give her children and their children bread,
When man more flinty then her stones Ribs
That was their mother, neither by entreats,
Tears, nor complaints will yield them sustenance,
But tic our ages fault the mightier,
Tear living out of vs, we out of her.
Mother a me what a thick mist is here:
I walked abroad to take the mornings ayre,
And I am out of knowledge, bones a me
What Meads, what Enclosures have we here?
How now old Hobson, dote in thine old age?
A fool a threescore, whether wilt thou wit?
I crossed the water in my gown and slippers,
To see my rents and buildings of the Bancke-side,
And I am slipped clean out of ken, fore-god
A wooll-gathering.
Either mine era's deceived,
Or I should know that tongue: tic so indeed,
Each word he speaks makes my torn heart to bleed.
Ha, ha, I smile at my own foolery,
Now I remember mine old Granmother
Would talk of Fairies and Hobgoblins,
That would lead milke-maides over hedge and ditch,
Make them milk their M. neighbours kine,
And ten to one this Robin Godfellow,
Hath led me up and down the mad mans maze.
I hear some company, for shame all whist,
Sit thee down Hobson a right man, in the mist.
Tic he alas, when the rough hand of want
Hath cast vs down, it loads vs with mishaps:
I broke my day with him, O had that fatal hour
Broken me heart: and Villain that I was,
Never so much as write in my excuse,
And he for that default hath sewed my bill.
And with an execution is come down
To seize my household stuff, imprison me,
And turn my wife and children out of doors.
What shall I fly him? no hoe's pitiful:
Then with my tears I will importune him:
God save you M. Hobson.
Hobson, Bones a me,
What voice is that? art thou a man, or friend?
Tell me if thou be that Will of the wisp,
That leadst me this wild Morris: I coniute thee
To leave me to my self.
O M. Hobson,
As ever you have been a poor mans friend,
Continue still so, Insult not over thy fortunes,
I am in the mist, what art thou, speak?
A Debtor of your worships.
A Debtor of mine, mother of me thou lie,
I know thee not, nor doe I know this place:
If thou owe me any thing, pay me with thy love,
And if thou be acquainted in these woods,
Conduct me to some Town, or direct road
That leads to London, and isle here discharge thee
Of debts and duties, and beside impart
Somewhat to cherish thee.
What should I think?
He knows me, and for fear I should escape him,
Hee would entice me to the Officers.
O Master Hobson tho not for mine own,
Yet sor my wife and my poor childrens sakes,
If your intent bee to imprison me,
Upon my knees I doe entreat you spare me:
The goods you trusted me withal, I have not wasted
In royot and excess, but my kind heart,
Seeing my helpless neighbours in distress,
By reason of the long and extreme dearth,
Some I relieved, some trusted with my goods,
Whose poverties not able to repay.
Then bear with me a little, your rich store
Hath saved my life and fed a hundredth more.
Now bones a me another Tawniecote:
What's thy name Knave?
Iohn Roland sir,
Bones a me!
I thought as much: art not thou Tawnicote?
I am the man whom you called Tawniecote.
And I the Hobson that will pity thee:
Now bones a me, what make thou with a spade?
This spade alas, tic all the wealth I have,
When my poor wife and children cry for bread,
They still must cry till these have purchased it:
They must go naked till these hardened hands,
When the cold breath of Winter strikes on them,
Till these have earned it.
Now alas good soul,
It melts my heart to hear him, and mine eyes
Could weep for company, what earn'st a day?
Little God knows:
Though I be stirring earelier then the Lark,
And at my labour later then the Lamb,
Towards my wife and childrens maintenance,
I scarcely earn me three-pence by the day.
Alas the while, poor soul I pity them,
And in thy words as in a looking-glasse,
I see the toil and travel of the country,
And quiet gain of cities blessedness.
Heavens will for all, and should not we respect it
We were unworthy life: but bones of me,
Dost thou think to pay me twenty pound,
And keep thy charge, earning a great a day?
God bless my labours, I hope I shall,
I have this quarter by exceeding thrift,
Bare clothing, and spare diet scrap't together
Five shillings in a purse which I lay up,
Towards your worships debt.
Give it me, somewhat hath some savour,
And yet shall I spend that which the poor laborer got?
No God forbid, old Hobson ne'er will eat,
Rather then surfeit upon poor men's sweat:
Take it again, and by thy children bread.
But soft the mist doth break, what town is this?
Dedford and it like your worship.
Bones a me, to Detford came I to doe charity:
I see t'was Gods appointment,
But who comes here, bones a me honest Tim,
T'was said in London you were bound for France,
And I determined to have write by you.
By yea and nay, M. Hobson tic no untruth, I was bound for France, landed in France, dispatch't some secret business for a sister in France, and from her have french tokens to deliver to the sister hood, whom I shall first encounter in England.
Bones a me Tim, so speedy in your journey,
It seems your business was of much import.
Verily it was, and it stood chiefly between two wo∣men: &amp; as you know women love to have their business dipatch't.
Mother a me Tim, I am glad of it,
But how doo's my factor Iohn Gresham in France?
You gravely may better consider of that then I can dis∣course, but withal I pray you think hee is a wilde youth: there are Taverns in France, yet I doe not think Iohn Gresham is go∣uen to frequent them, &amp; yet I must remember you, he is a youth, and youth may be drawn to expenses, England's on this side France, on it, the Sea betwixt him and his Master, but I doe
not think him guilty, yet I could say.
Mother of me, leave of these Parables,
And tell me plainly, is hee not a wencher?
By yea, and by nay sir without Parable, I am no tel∣tale, I have seen him in company with Madonna such a one, or such a one, it becomes not flesh and blood to reveal: your worcester∣ship knows he is in France, the Sea betwixt him and you, and what a young youth in that case is proone unto: your gravity is wise, Isle not say so much as I saw him drinking with a French Lady, or Lass in a Tavern, because your gravity is wise, but if I had, it had been less then perhaps you imagine on such a wilde youth, as he no question doos deserve.
Mother of me tic so, In a French Tavern
Kissing the Lady, and the Sea betwixt vs:
I am for you M. Iohn: thus in my gown and slippers,
And night-cap and gown isle steppe over to France,
Here Tawnicote, receive thou my sealed ring,
Bear it to my Factor, bid him by that token
Sort thee out forty pounds worth of such wares
As thou shalt think most beneficial:
Thou art a free-man, up with thy Trade again,
Isle raise thee Roland, if God say Amen.
I know not how.
Tut bones a me man peace,
Hobson will do it; Tou owe me but twenty pound,
Isle venture forty more, Timothy here shall be thy witness
To my Factor in this business.
To all our friends in London say, I am gone
Oner to France, I am for your M. Iohn.
Sweet youth thou art too young, and yet scarce ripe
To taste the sweetness of my mellowed love.
That's the reason I set thy teeth an edge thus, but thou know I promised to have about with thee at our last parlay, and I am come to perform my word, name the weapon.
Nothing but kisses, and enticing looks,
Then ward your lips well, or you'll ha the first venney.
I have no ward but this; my tender Sex
Have not the manly skill to break a thrust:
Oh how I dote on thee! I have tried ere now
The sweaty Spaniard, and the carousing Dane,
The foggy Dutch-man, and the fiery French,
The brisk Italian, and indeed what not:
And yet of all and all, the Englishman
Shall go for me: I yo'are the truest Lovers,
The ab est, last night, and the truest men
That breath beneath the Sun.
Why then the Englishman for thy money, God a mercy little rogue, there's no love lost isle assure thee. I am my Ma∣sters Factor, and thou hast a Commodity that I must needs take up, and not en er't into his Cash-booke neither. Little thinks my master in England, what ware I deal withal here in France: but since tic offered me at the best hand, isle venture on it though I be a looser by the bargain.
I would be private, least the tell-tale ayre
VVhisper our love. I prethe let vs in,
To the inner chamber, I am jealous
Of all eyes but mine own to look upon thee,
I would have none to see thee but my self:
In amorous arms to fold thee but my self:
To associate, talk, discourse or dally with thee:
Clip, grasp hands, or kiss thee but my self.
Who would not be a Merchant venturer, and lay out for such a fair return; I shall venture the doubling of my years presently: I think I have met with a better Commodity then Matches, and my Master cannot say but hee hath met with his match: this tic to have the Land &amp; the Sea betwixt me &amp; my ma∣ste, here can I keep my french Revels, and none say so much as blake is mine eye, preach little pinckany bestow this Jewel a me.
This Iewel's a Love: ask my life tic thine:
But this an English factor whom you know
Gave me at his departure out of Rhoane,
And I have vowed to keep it for his sake,
Any thing but this Jewel.
But if I could get his Jewel cleanly, and carry it him
over at my return for a token, it were a jest worth laughing at: but and thou wilt not give me this Jewel, prethe give me this same chain to were for thy sake.
This was another Countrey-mans of yours,
He made me swear to kept till his return:
Ask me aught else, tic thine.
Why then this Ring.
That you of all the favours that I wear
Could find out nothing but this ring? This ring,
A toy not worth the giving: yet I sooner
Would part with life then this, a dying friend
Bequeathed it at his death: But honey Love
What should thou talk of giving, tic a word
Worn out of use, it sounds not well in French:
A man should still say take, take to his Wench.
Then I say take, take this and this, still take heed of me least I show you a slippery trick for this, tic the kindest wench in Christendom, but sheele part with nothing:
Shall we have another wooing Room?
What Rome thou please, dear heart I agree,
Where ere I go, there shall be room for thee.
Any then, I may chance to make you wish rather my room then, my company and you look not the better too't.
I have slipped over into France, and in my slippers
Given all my friends the slip, to see this Gallant
My man, he that hath matched me: bones a me,
The knaue's a Prophet, else it could not be.
Hoe's not at his Lodging; yet by an English Factor,
A fellow knows not me, I was directed
Unto this house, Isle know what business
The knave hath here. Pulsate.
Whose there? whose at the door? (man?
Damsel good day, is there not a fellow here an English-Here's an English-man, but none of your fellow neither: I hope sir we are not all fellows at foote-ball.
Nay bones a me Girl, there's no reason we should he fellows, but prethe my wench is there not one Jack Gresha here?
No goodman look like a Goose, but ther's one M. Iohn Gresham an English Gentleman here: and you know no manners, you would be caught some.
Bones a me goodman Master, Master servant,
Old goodman Hobson keeps Gentlemen to his men
Jack turned to M. Iohn, mary sir reverence,
The french maid taught me manners: well I hope
We shall have a sight of the Gentleman.
As you use your self you may, and you may not.
Thou see this Jewel well becomes mine ear,
This Ring my signger, and this chain mine arm.
Isle be thy Jewel at thy lips isle hang,
And as this Ring thy finger compasses,
So shall these arms thy waste: these are but toys,
Let me displace them.
M. Iobn here's a fellow below would speak with you.
With me, what is he?
A simple Coxcomb, isle call him up to you.
Doe my sweet Buffamacke: some Carrier or base knave that hangs of my liberality: I hope tic not pure Tim, come for the second part of my benevolence:
Admit him in that he may praise our fate,
And see vs in our choicest pomp and state.
Here's the fellow I told you of sir.
Zoones my Master.
Sante amen: Man Iohn, a wenchart Knave, rack and manger knave: bones a me, cannot a snatch and away serve your turn, but you must lie at rack and manger? Is this the ware you deal with servant Iohn?
Chap-mans ware sir.
Sir, Sir, the dealing with such war belongs not to our Trade: bones a me knave, a Prentice must not occupy for himself but for his Master, to any purpose.
And hee cannot occupy for his Master without the consent of his Mistress.
Come you're a knave.
Of your own bringing up sir.
Besides, thou can not keep open shop here, because thou art a foreigner, by the laws of the Realm.
Not within the liberty: but I hope the suburbs tolerates any man or woman to occupy for themselves, they may do it in the City too, and they be naturalised once.
I but sir, Isle have none of my English Prentices Frenchefied; bones a me knave, Isle have thee deal with no such broken Commodities.
Your Worship must have such as the Country yields, or none at all. But I pray ye sir, what's our trade?
What say thou knave?
That your worship is a Haberdasher of all wares.
Bones of me, a Haberdasher of small wares.
And that the worst trade in all Christendom, and espe∣cially for French women: If they know a man to be a Haberda∣sher of small ware, thee'le have no dealing with him, and there∣fore and you will have any good Commodities here, you must change your copy, you never were a traveller: and therefore you know not what belongs too't; but you doe clean mistake this Gentlewoman, and you take her for a light wench, weigh her in equal balance, and you shall find her no such woman, no such woman Isle assure you.
No, what is she then Iohn?
Fore God sir, I would not have you wrong the Gentle∣women's repute, for a world. This Metressa deals for herself and hath many sorts of ware at command, I was now bargai∣ning with her about a certain Country Commodity, and had not your cōming mared the Match, one had gone through for it. And further should you wrong the Ladies reputation here in France, Isle assure you they have the law of their sides, but to confirm your good opinion of her, this is she of whom I took up your Commodity of Matches; be sorry for your offence, and excuse you to her for shame moister.
Bones a me knave I cannot speak a word of French.
Nor she of English, but al's one; upon her Master, and what you cannot doe in words, perform in dumb signs:
What in your slippers come to take me napping!
Isle give you what you come for instantly,
And on the sudden make you so aghast,
You will be glad to pardon what is past.
Madam, I cry you mercy for this wrong
Done to your Ladyship, I did suspect you
For a bad liver, but I see you clear,
For which mistake, I doe remain your servant.
Gramercy Monsieur.
How, would you my gray Mare see? If it like your Ladyship, I came by water, and neither of Mares back, nor horse back.
No, no point parley Francoi.
No indeed Lady, my name is not Frauneis, your ser∣uant and Iohn Hobson.
No point?
No points; yes indeed Lady, I have points at my hose, though I go untrust.
No point parley.
I have no points in my parlour indeed, but I have a hundred pounds worth in my shop.
Tush fear not lads, for he knows none of you,
Doe but buff out a little broken French,
And he will never take you to be Englishmen.
We will second the tother, but manage it.
Be patient I beseech you Gentlemen,
Though you be officers, appointed here
To search suspected places, as this is
A most notorious filthy bawdy house,
And carry all old rusty Fornicators
Aboue the age of fifty unto prison,
Yet know, this is an honest Gentleman.
A search, and this a bawdy house! why Iohn,
Bones a me knave, How comes this to pass?
Measar man a moi.
How, must you have money of me? Isle know where∣fore
first, by your leaves.
Nay Master I would it were but a money matter,
A Cage, or whipping-post, or so, tic worse:
What an old man to chide his Prentice hence,
As if he had some private business,
And then himself get close unto his wench;
Nay whippping's all too good, had you found me so,
There had been work enough, there had been news
For England, and a whole twelve months chiding
Of my good uncle.
Ie vow stre sau Amiss.
How, must I go to prison for doing amiss?
To prison? nay to whipping, I am sorry,
And to my power I will entreat for you: Fie Master, fie.
Bones a me Iohn, is not this a Lady?
No by my troth Master, such as in the Garden-allies, Ioane's as good as this French Lady.
Is not this Gentlewoman a dealer?
And hath she not a good commodity?
Yes by my faith sir, I confess both.
Hath she not ware?
She hath, and at a reasonable reckoning.
And may not then a chapman deal with her?
Marry may ye sir, and Isle send news to your wife of your
The cause of your cōming to France shall be known, (dealing:
And what second hand commodities you took up
Since your coming, my mistress in England shall know
What utterance you have for your small wates in France:
Pen and ink, Isle set it down in black and white,
Bones a me Iohn, what Iohn? why honest Iohn?
Hearty commendations—understand—reverend master Hobson found with a whore in Roan,—place, a common bawdy house,—must be whipped.
No more good Iohn.
You have had none yet,—whipped about the town.
Sue honest Iohn, why bones a me knave Iohn.
In witness whereof, all these honest gentlemen ey-witnesses, have set to their hands, nay my mistress shall know it, that's flat:
are there not Wenches ynow in England, but you must walk over sea in your slippers, and venture (being not shod) to come into France a winching, what an old man too! she shall know what a slippery trick you would have served her in your slippers in France.
Nay, bones a me Iohn, friends, sweet Iohn all friends;
I doe confess tha'st o'reacht thy master.
Ca me, ca thee, conceal this from my wife,
And Isle keep all thy knavery from thine uncle.
Well sir, In hope of amendment, I am content, and yet
Nay, bones a me, Isle take you at your word,
Besides I hope these honest Gentlemen
Will save my credit.
Isle entreat for you.
Tic Logic to me sir, I understand you not.
Marry sir they say, if you will walk with them to their lodgings, for my sake they inuit you to dinner.
God a mercy Gentlemen, God a mercy Iohn, but bones a me knave, where are their lodgings?
Hard by, for why doe you ask?
I hope they'll bring me to no more bawdy houses,
I would not be taken napping again for two and one:
But Gentlemen Isle accept of courtesy, and then Iohn
You shall with me to England, weal show France
Our backs. And you will needs deal for your self,
Before your time, you shall do it in England.
Will you walk Gentlemen?
Adieu Monsieur, and Gresham farewell too,
No more of French love, no more french loss shall doe.
Well said my Masters, see all things be ready,
To give her Majesty such entertain
As may grace London, and become the state
Her highness brings along,
VVher's the Queen now?
She comes along the Strand from Sommerset house,
Through Temple-barre, down fleet-street, and the cheap,
The North side of the Burse to Bishops gate,
And dines at master Greshams, and appoints
To return on the South side through Corne-hill,
And there when she hath viewed the rooms aboue,
And walks below, she'll give name to the Burse.
The streets are fit, and all the Companies
Placed in their liveries against her return.
But my Lord Mayor, shall these ambassadors
This day have audience?
Admittance if not audience was granted,
See therefore Trumpets, and all kinds of Music
Be plac'ct against her royal interview,
The steps with Arras spread where she ascends,
Besides give charge unto the shop-keepers
To make their best shows in the upper rooms,
Because the Queen intends to compass it.
Tic done my Lord.
The Queen hath dined, the Trumpets sound already,
And give note of her coming, bid the Waits
And Hoboyes to be ready at an instant.
Lester and Sussex, are those the Ambassadors?
They are dread Sovereign, he that foremost stands,
The Emperors, the second is the French,
The last is the Florentine.
We will receive them.
Sussex and Lester place the ambassadors,
We at our Court of Greenwich will dilate
Further of these designs, whore's Gresham?
Your humble subject and servant.
Our leasu•e now serves to survey your Burse,
A goodly frame, a rare proportion.
This City our great Chamber cannot show vs
To add unto our same, a monument
Of greater beauty: Lecester what say thou?
That I my Sovereign have not seen the like.
Sussex nor you?
Madam not I: This Greshams work of stone,
Will live to him when I am dead and gone.
God bless thy Grace Queen Bess.
Friend, what are you?
Know thou not me Queen? then thou know no
Bones a me Queen, I am Hobson, and old Hobson (body:
By the Stocks, I am sure you know me.
What is he Lecester, dost thou know this fellow?
Gresham or you?
May it please your Majesty,
He is a rich substantial Citizen.
Bones a me woman send to borrow money
Of one you doe not know, there's a new trick:
Your Grace sent to me by a Pursuivant,
And by a privy Seal to lend your Highness
An hundred pound: I hearing that my Queen
Had need of money, and thinking you had known me,
Would needs upon the bearer, force two hundred:
The Queen should have had three rather then fail,
I by this hand Queen Bess, I am old Hobson
A Haberdasher, and dwelling by the Stocks:
When thou see money with thy Grace is scant,
For twice five hundred pound thou shalt not want.
Upon my bond.
No, no my Sovereign,
Isle take thine own word without skrip or scroll.
Thanks honest Hobson, as I am true maid,
Isle see my self the money back repayd:
Thou without grudging lendest, thy Purse is free,
Honest as plain.
A true well meaning man I warrant him.
Your Majesty promised to give the name
To my new Burse.
Gresham we will. A Herald and a Trumpet.
A Herald and a Trumpet.
Proclaim through every high street of this city,
This place to be no longer called a Burse,
But since the building's stately, fair and strange,
Be it for ever called, the Royal Exchange.
And whilst this voice flies through the city forth-right,
Arise Sir Thomas Gresham now a Knight.
Be our Ambassadors conducted all
Unto their several lodgings: this 23. of January
A thousand, five hundred, and seventy, Elizabeth
Christens this famous work: now to our Court
Of Greenwich; Gresham, thanks for our good cheer:
We to our people, they to vs are dear.
What think you of my Husband master Deane,
As of all men, we are mortal, made of clay,
Now healthful, now crazy; now sick, now well;
Now live, now dead, and then to heaven, or hell.
It cheer's my heart, now in his deep of sickness,
He is so charitable, and so well addicted
Unto the poore's relief.
It joys me too:
Great is the number of the rich in show
About the City, but of the charitable,
There are but few.
Amongst these, I hold old Hobson well deserves
To be ranked equal with the bountiful'st:
He hath raised many falling, but especially
One master Rowland, one called Tawnicote:
But now an able Citizen late chosen
A Moister of the Hospital.
I know him well,
A good sufficient man, and since he purchased
His Freedom in the City God hath blessed
His travail with increase.
I have known old Hobson,
Sit with his neighbour Gunter a good man,
In Christs Church morn by morn, to watch poor couples
That come there to be married, and to be
Their common fathers, and give them in the Church,
And some few Angels for a dower to boot,
Besides they two are called the common Gossops
To witness at the Funt for poor men's Children,
Nor they refuse that on their help doe call,
And to speak truth, they're bountiful to all.
Good morrow Master Doctor; my good Lady!
Bones a me woman, thou look sad to day,
Thou hast not drunk a cup of sack this morning.
We have been dealing of our charity
This morning, to poor soldiers such as want.
Gods blessing of your heart, need must be fed,
Let vs that have it give the hungry bread.
Whore's master Hobson?
My new elected master of the Hospital,
What hasty news with you?
Oh sir, the love I bear you makes me chary
Of your good name, your credit's dear to me;
You never were condemned for any thing,
Since I had first acquaintance with your name;
As now you are, you have done a deed this day,
That hath from you tan all good thoughts away.
Where? bones a me why? speak, why?
This day, you have pursued the law severely
Against one Timothy, that stole from you
A hundred pound, and hoe's condemned for it,
And this day he must die.
Bones man, tic not so.
He is by this, half way to Tyburne gone;
The suit was followed in Iohn Greshams name,
How can you then avow you know it not?
A horse, a horse, cart-horse, malt horse, anything
To save the knaves life, I protest, I swear
This was the first time that I heard the knave
Hath been in any trouble, bones of me,
T'was done without my knowledge.
Young Gresham in his name pursued his life.
They are knaves both, a Horse,
A hundred thousand pound cannot make a man:
A hundred shall not hang one by my means:
Men are more worth then money M. Roland,
Come help me to a horse, the next I meet,
To save the knaue's life galloppes through the street.
Men are more worth then money, a soy's true:
Tic said by many but maintained by few.
He is plain and honest, how many great professors
Live in this populous City, that make show
Of greater zeal, yet will not pay so dear
For a transgressors life: but few are found,
To save a man would loose a hundred pound.
So suddenly returned?
He rid to fast for me he hath been at buffets
With a poor Collier, and upon his horse,
Is without saddle, bridle, boots or spurs,
Galloped toward S. Giles.
They will take him for a mad man.
Else one to him he doo's not stand on bravery
So he may doe men good, good deeds excel:
And though but homely done, may be done well:
Heaven prosper his intent: now M. Doctor,
And M. Roland, let me crave your companies,
To see my crazy husband, who hath made you
One of his executors, and would use your pains
In these extremes of sickness.
I am pleased
Isle give him physic for a soul diseased.
You are an early riser, my good Lord,
The blood of Youth that trafficks in the court
Must not be sluggish, your kind remembrance: (the train
My very good Lord, wee that are stars that weight upon
Of such a Cynthia under which we live
Must not be Tarde.
You have said true, we are starters in one hour,
And our attendance is to weight one such a Queen,
Whose virtue all the world: but to leave that
Which every tongue is glad to commune with,
Since Monsiers first arrival in the land,
The time that he was here, and the time since,
What royalty hath been in Englands Court,
Both princely revelling, and war-like sport.
Such sports doe fitly fit our Nation,
That foreign eyes beholding what we are,
May rather seek our peace, then wish our watery.
Heaven bless our Some reign from her foes intent,
The peace we have; is by her government.
M. Doctor Parry.
Good Morrow M. Doctor.
You are an early riser sir.
My Lord, my Lord, my very good Lord.
This Summer morning makes vs covetous
To take the profit of the pleasant ayre.
Tic healthful to be stirring in a Morning.
It hath pleased the Queen to show him many favours.
You say but right, and since his last disgrace,
The cause so great it had surely touched his life,
Had not the Queen been gracious: he seems at Court
A man more gracious in our Sovereigns eye
Then greater subjects.
She hath given him much pteferment,
In greatest place graced him with conference:
Asked for him in his absence, and indeed
Made known to vs he is one in her regard.
But did you never here the cause of his disgrace?
He did intend the murder of a Gentleman,
One M. Hares here of the Inner Temple,
And so far brought his purpose to effect,
That M. Hare being private in his Chamber,
Hee watching as he thought fit time, broke in upon him:
But he assaulted so, behau'd himself,
That he did guard himself, and attach't him.
From whence he was committed unto New-gare,
And at the Sessions by twelve honest men,
Found guilty of Burglary and condemned to die:
And had died, had her Grace not pardoned him.
She is a gracious Princess unto all,
Many she raises, wishes none should fall.
Fie M. Doctor,
Your face bears not the habit it was wont,
And your discourse is altered, what's the matter?
And if my brow be sad or my face pale,
They doe belie my heart, for I am merry.
Men being as you are, so great in grace
With such a royal Princess, have no reason.
Room Gentlemen for my L. high Steward.
The discontent desire to be alone,
My wishes are made up, for they are gone.
Here are no blabs but this, and this one clock
Isle keep from going with a double locke:
Yet it will strike, this day it must be done.
What must be done? what must this engine doe?
A deed of treason hath prepared me too.
These too, these too, why they had life by her,
And shall these two kill their deliverer?
The life that makes me rise? these once my sin
Had forfeited, her mercy pardoned me:
I had been eaten up with worms ere this,
Had not her mercy given a life to this:
And yet these hands if I perform my oath,
Must kill that life, that gave a life to both.
I have tan the Sacrament to do it, confe'rd
With Cardinal Cemo about it, and received
Full absolution from his Holiness,
Been satisfied by many holy fathers,
During my travels both in France and Italy,
The deed is just and meritorious,
And yet I am troubled when I doe remember
The excellence of her Majesty,
And I would fine desist, but that I know
How many vows of mine are gone to heaven,
My letters and my promises on earth,
To holy fathers and grave Catholikes:
That I would do it for good of Catholics.
Then in the Garden where this day she walks,
Her graces I will cast behind mine eyes,
And by a subjects hand, a Sovereign dyes.
Clear the way Gentlemen for the Queen:
Master Doctor Parry.
O, let me see a difference in this man!
Before this Queen (that I am come to kill)
Showed me the gracious eye of her respect,
And gave me countenance mong'st greatest Earls:
This man was forwarder to thrust me forth,
Then now he is humble to accept me in.
If then her Grace hath honoured me so much,
How can this hand give her a treacherous touch?
The Trumpets speak, heaven what shall I doe?
Even what hell, &amp; my dam 'd heart shall thrust me too.
Fair day my Lords, you are all Larks this morning,
Up with the Sun, you are stirring early.
We are all subjects to your Sovereigns light.
That you call duty we accept as love,
And we doe thank you, nay we thank you all;
Tic not to one, but tic in general.
The Queen would walk apart, forbear my Lords.
Now, what makes me shake?
Doe Angels guard her, or doth heaven partake
Her refuge?
In such a Garden may a Sovereign,
Be taught her loving subjects to maintain;
Each Plant unto his nature and his worth,
Having full cherishing, it springs forth.
Weeds must bee weeded out, yet weeded so,
Till they doe hurt, let them a Gods name grow.
Now Queen.
VVho's there, my kind friend M. Doctor Parry?
My must dread Sovereign.
Why doe you tremble M. Doctor? have you any suit to vs?
Shake not at vs, we doe our Subjects love, 
Or doos thy face show signs of discontent
Through any heavy want oppresses thee?
Though at our Court of Greene-wich thou were crossed
In suing to be Master of Saint Katherines,
To doe thee good seek out a better place,
She'll give thee that, the which hath given thee grace.
I know your love dread Queen: Now.
M. Doctor, about the talk we had together,
Of English Fugitives that seek my life:
You told me of them I am beholding to you.
I did no more then duty: O happy time!
And will they still persist? doe they desire my blood?
That wake when I should sleep to doe them good.
Madam.
O my maker! Parry, Villain, Traitor,
What dost thou with that Dagge?
Pardon dread Sovereign.
Pardon thou villain, shows thou art a Traitor,
Treason my Lords, Treason.
Ha, by the ble'st place of heaven, treason &amp; we so near?
A Traitor with a Dagge, Gods holy mother.
Lords guard the Queen: are you not frighted Madam?
Isle play the Sergeant to arrest the wretch.
Be not so rash good Lecester, hoe's dead already,
Struck with remorse of that he was come to doe:
Pray let me speak with him? Say M. Doctor,
Wherein have I deserved an ill of you,
Unless it were an ill in pardoning you.
What have I done toward you to seek my life,
Unless it were in taking you to grace.
Mercy dread Queen.
I thank my God, I have mercy to remit
A greater sin, if you repent for it.
My Lords what do you mean, take hence that villain,
Let her alone, sheele pardon him again:
Good Queen we know you are too merciful,
To deal with Traitors of this monstrous kind.
Away with him to the tower, then to death,
A Tratours death, shall such a Traitor have,
That seeks his Sovereigns life that did him save.
Good Lecester.
Good Queen you must be ruled.
Nay sfoote Jack, hold on thy resolution: they say, that may happen in one hour that happens not again in 7. year, and I should chance to take her in the right vain, and she kind∣lie bestow her self upon me, why then there's a man made from nothing, for before God I have spent all and am not worth any thing, and indeed unless this same good old Lady Ramsie take some pity upon me &amp; take me for better for worse, God knows in which of the two Counters I shall keep my next Christmas in, but by this hand if she will accept of me in this miserable estate that I am in now, for before God, I have neither money nor credit, as I am an honest man, and thats more I am feared, then any man will believe of me, isle forswear all women but her, &amp; will not kiss any of my neighbours wives for a kingdom. here is the house, Isle knock at the door: what shall I do it in the Caviller humour, with whose within there Ho, or in the Puri∣tan humour, with by your leave good brother: faith in neither, for in the one I shall be taken for a swaggring knave, and in the other to be an hypocritical fool: but honest Jack in thine own honest humour plain dealing's a Jewel, and I have used it so long I am next door to a beggar.
But Gods precious, what a plague make these here? these 2. are two of my Creditors, I must stop their mouths, fleet them from hence, or all the fats in the fire.
M. Gresham, you are well met.
I hope Gentlemen you will say so anon. But you are alone, are you not?
Alone M. Gresham, why doe you ask?
A man hath reason to ask, being as I am, that never sees his Creditors, but is a feared of the Catch-pole. But you are kind my friends, and I thank you, you will bear with me.
I but M. Gresham, a man may bear till his back break.
I, Porters may; but you, that are sustantiall honest Cit∣tizens, there is no fear to be made of your breaking, you know there's no man solow but God can raise him; and though I am now out at heals, or so as you think, I am in the way of pre∣ferment, &amp; hope to be able to pay every man within this hour.
We should be glad to see it.
But how pray Sir?
How? why very easily, if I can compass it: The truth is, though you would little think it, I am a suitor for my L. Ramsay.
But I dare swear she is no suitor to you.
Why that's true too; for if she were a Suitor to me, we should be man and wife straight &amp; you should have your money within this half hour. But look, look where she comes: as you are good-men mum, patience and pray for my proceedings: If I do speed as I am partly persuaded, you shall have your own with the advantage, if I should be crossed you know the worst, for∣bearance is no acquitance: but mum, if it prove a match &amp; any of you should chance to be in the Counter, you know my mar∣riage being spread, my word will be currant, then mum.
Madam you are welcome into Lumber-street.
I thank your courtesy, good M. Deane.
See how fortunately all things chance, if it happen as I hope it will, she taking a liking to me, here is a Priest to marry vs presently Madam.
Would you any business with me sir?
Faith Lady necessary business, &amp; not to go far about the bush, I am come to be a Suitor unto you, &amp; you know the fashion of young men when they come a wooing to ancient widows, the way to speed is to begin thus.
You are very forward sir.
You would say so Lady if you knew how forward I would be: but Madam you are rich, and by my Troth I am very poor, and I have been as a man should say stark nought: but hee goes
far that never turns, and if now I have a desire to mend &amp; be∣ing in so good a way, you know how uncharitable it were in you to put me out of it, you may make an honest man of me, if it, please you, and when thou hast made me one, by my Troth Mall Isle keep my self, for I am a Gentle man both by the fa∣theirs side and mothers side, and though I have not the muck of the world I have a great deal of good Love, and I prithee ac∣cept of it.
M. Deane.
Doe you know this Gentleman's business to me.
Not I, believe me Madam.
I shall have her sure: why isle tell you Sir, my Lady here is a comely, ancient, rich widow, &amp; I am a honest, proper, poor young man, remembering still I am a Gentleman, now what good her riches may doe to her poverty, your gravity may guess: save a soul perhaps M. Deane, look you sir, it is but giving my hand into hers, and hers into mine: M. Deane, I protest before God she hath my heart already, and with some three or four words which I know you have by rote, make vs two my Lady and I, one till death vs depart.
This Gentleman thinks that to be a matter of nothing. But doe you love me as you doe protest?
Love you Madam love you by this hand: I shall have her sure, friends you see how the business goes forward, bring me your bills to morrow morning or upon the hope that I have, you may leave them with me, I shall be able to discharge; Ha, ha, Jack.
How will you maintain me Sir, if I should marry you?
Maintain, what need thou ask that question?
Foot thou hast maintenance enough for thee and I too.
If I should marry you? Friends, you see how it goes now, to more∣row within an hour after I am married, I must take the upper hand of my Uncle, and the next Sunday I that was scarce worthy to fit in the Belferie, the Church-wardens fetch me, and seat me in the Chancel.
M. Deane, I protest, never since I was widow,
Never did man make so much love to me.
Sir for your love, I am much beholding to you.
Doe Mall, prithee doe not think it so, be chosen one of the common Counsel, or one of the Masters of the Hospital, so perhaps I shall never become it, marry if I should bee chosen one of the Masters of Bridewell, for some of my old acquain∣tance; foot, I would take it upon me, vice must be corrected, vice must be corrected.
Fill me a large cup full of Hippocrist,
And bring me hither 20. li. in gold.
And one of your husbands Livery Gowns, so now you trouble your self so much, that gold is to contract vs with∣all: a simple morning: Friends, you cannot beat me down with your bills. M. Deane of Poules I pray you stay and dine with me you shall not say me nay, the oftner you come, the more well∣come.
You are merry sir. (cause,
I thank God, and all the world may see I have no other
That I am likely to be so well bestowed.
Sir, you shall not say the love you showed to me,
Was entertained but with kind courtesy:
This for your love, unto your health I drink.
Pledge me.
I by my Torth Mall will I, wear it as deep as a well.
Now for your pains there is twenty pound in gold.
Nay, take the Cup too sir, thanks for your love:
And were my thought's bent unto marriage,
I rather would with you that seem thus wild,
Then one that hath worse thoughts and seems more mild.
Foot will you not have me then?
Yes, when I mean to marry any one,
And that not whilst I live.
See how a man may bee deceived: I thought I should have been sure by this time well, though I shall not have you, I shall have this with a good will.
Withal my heart, and for the Love you have shown,
Wish it to thrive with you even as mine own.
To Morrow shall we attend your worship.
Sir her's my bill, it comes to twenty pound.
Friends, Ploydens Proverb, The Case is altered and by my troth I have learned you a Lesson, Forbearance is no Acquit∣tance.
What men are these?
Faith Madam, men that have my hand, though not for my honesty, yet for the money that I owe them.
What doth he owe you?
Fifty pound, Madame.
What you?
A hundred Marks.
Isle pay you both: and sir to doe you good,
To all your Creditors Isle doe the like.
That's said like a kind wench,
And though we never meet again,
We will have one Bus more at parting:
And now I faith I have all my wilde oats sown,
And if I can grow rich by the help of this,
Isle say I rose by Lady Ramsies kiss.
A stand there Lords. Whence comes this sound of shot?
Please it your Majesty, it is thought the Fleet
Lately discovered by your Subject Flemming,
Riding along the Coasts of France and Dunkirk,
Is met and fought with by your Admiral.
Heaven prosper his proceedings; hark my Lords,
Still it increases: Oh had God and Nature,
Given vs proportion man-like to our mind,
VVee'd not stand here senc't in a wall of Arms,
But have been present in these Sea a larmes.
Your royal resolution, hath created
New spirits in your soldiers breasts, and made
Of one man three.
Make way there, whats the news,
Your Royal Fleet bids battle to the Spaniards,
Whose number with the advantage of the wind,
Gives them great odds but the undaunted worth,
And well known valour of your Admiral,
Sir Francis Drake, and Martin Furbisher
Gives vs assured hope of victory.
Where did the royal Navies first encounter?
From Dover Cliffs we might discern them join,
But such a cloud of smoke environed them,
We could discover nought of their proceedings:
For the great Spanish Fleet had wind and Tide,
God and good hearts stand on your Graces side.
Ther's for thy news: he that first lent me breath,
Stand in the right of wronged Elizabeth.
God and his Angels, for Elizabeth.
Welcome a Gods name, what's the news my friend,
Alas, good man: his looks speaks for his tongue.
How stands the sea-fight.
Much contrary.
The Spanish Fleet cast in a warlike Rank
Like a half Moon, or to a full bent bow,
Wait for advantage: when amongst the rest
Sir Martin Furbisher blinded with smoke,
And fired in heart with emulating honour,
Gave the proud Spaniard a broad side of shot:
But being within the compass of their danger,
The distant corners of the gripled Fleet
Circled him round: this valiant Furbisher,
With all his brave and gallant followers,
Are folded in deaths arms.
If he Survive,
He shall be nobly ransomed: If he die,
He lives an honour to his Nation.
How fares our Admiral?
Bravely he fights,
Directs with judgment and with heedful care,
Offends the Foc: England ne'er bred
Men that at sea fight better managed.
It cheers my blood and if my God be pleased
For some neclected duty in our self,
To punish vs with loss of them at sea,
His will be done: yet will we pray for them.
If they return, our self will be the first
Will bid them welcome: what saves valiant Lecester?
Thou wilt not leave me wilt thou? dost thou look pale?
What says old Hunsdon? nay isle speak thy part,
Thy hand old Lord, I am sure I have thy heart.
Both hand and hart.
Then let both heart and hand,
Be bravely used in honour of our Land.
Before thou speak take that if he be dead,
A Queen will see his Funeral honoured.
When the foes ships
Had grasp't his ships within a steely girdle,
The valiant Captain overcharged with her,
Having no room for cowardice or fear,
Gave all his ordinance a gallant charge,
Cheered up his soldiers, manned up his fights,
And standing bare-head, bravely on the deck,
When dangerous shot as thick as April hail
Dropped by his ears, he waued his war-like sword,
And with a bold de fiance to the foe.
The watch-word given, his Ordinance let fly
With such a fury, that it broke their ranks,
Shotter'd their sides and made their war-like ships
Like drunkards reel, and tumble side to side:
But to conclude such was the will of heaven,
The true spirit of that Gentle-man,
That being thought hopeless to be preserved,
Yet in wars despite and all the Spaniards scoff,
He brought his ship and soldiers bravely off.
Wars spite indeed, and we to doe him right,
The ship he sailed in, fought in, called Wars spite.
Now noble soldiers rouse your hearts like me,
To noble resolution: if any here
There be that love vs not, or harbour fear;
Wee give him libertid to leave our Camp
Without displeasure.
Our Armies royal so be equal our hearts,
For with the meanest here isle spend my blood,
And so to loose it count my only good.
A March, laed on: we'll meet the worst can fall,
A maiden Queen will be your General.
What mean these Spanish Ensiges in the hands
Of English Subjects?
Honourable Queen,
They show that Spaniards lives are in the hands
Of Englands Sovereign.
Englands God be praised
But prethe Drake, for well I kowne thy name,
And isle not be unmindful of thy worth:
Briefly rehearse the danger of the battle,
Till Furbisher was rescued wee have heard.
The danger after that was worse than then:
Valour a both sides strove to rise with honour,
As is a pair of Balance once made even,
So stood the day, inclined to neither side:
Sometimes we yielded, but like a Ram
That makes returnement to redouble strength;
Then forced them yield when our Lord Admiral
Following the chase: Pedro their Admiral,
With many Knights and Captains of account,
Were by his noble deeds tan prisoners,
And under his Conduct are safely kept:
And are by this time landed at S. Margrets:
From whence they mean to march along by land,
And at S. Iames he will greet your Majesty.
These Spanish Ensigns tokens of our Conquest,
Our Captains took from off their battered ships:
Such as stood out we sunk, such as submitted,
Tasted our English mercy, and mercy
Vassals and prisoners to your Sovereignty.
Next under God, your valors have the praise:
Dismiss our Camp, and tread a royal March
Towards S. Iames, where in martial order
We'll meet and parley our Lord Admiral,
And set a ransom of his Prisoners.
As for those Ensigns see them safely kept,
And give commandment to the Deane of Powles,
He not forget in his next learned Sermon,
To celebrate this conquest at Powles Cross:
And to the Audience in our name declare.
Our thanks to heaven in universal Prayer:
For tho our enemies be overthrown,
Tic by the hand of heaven, and not our own.
On: Sound a call; Now loving Countrymen,
Subjects, and fellow soldiers, that have left
Your weeping wives, your goods and children,
And laid your lives upon the edge of death,
For good of England, and Elizabeth,
We thank you all: those that for vs would bleed,
Shall find vs kind to them and to their seed.
Wee hear dismiss you and dismiss our Camp.
Again we thank you: pleases God we live,
A greater recompense then thanks we'll give.
Our lives, and livings for Elizabeth.
Thanks; general thanks.
Towards London march we to a peaceful throne,
We wish no wars, yet we must guard our own.

Duke Rodorick, and my noble cozen Flaunders,
Are your Battalions ready for the charge?
Ten thousand men of Orleans I com∣maund,
And those are bravely marshald on the plain,
Ready to be commanded by your Highness,
As many of the warlike brood of Mar•
Doe call me General: those, my gracious Lord,
Together with my self I recommend,
To be commanded by your Majesty.
Thanks, Earl of Flaunders, Duke of Orleans, thanks,
What lets vs that we charge not on the Foe?
My Lord of Pembrooke, are your Englishmen
Squadron'd with ours, and ready for the charge?
The French and English make one warlike body,
Whereof your Highness is the moving head:
Or peace or war, as pleases you, direct.
Then war; and give the signal through the Host.
Nauar, Nauar, submission were more meet,
Then to add blood to wrong.
What wrong, King Lewes?
The Kingdom of Nauar we will acknowledge
To hold of none but of the King of Kings.
Three hundred years prescriptions on our sides▪
So long thy Ancestors by ••al•y
Have held thy Kingdom of the Crown of France.
Talk not of years, years limit not a Crown,
There's no prescriptions to enthral a King:
He finds it written in the Rolls of time,
Nauar's a Kingdom solely absolute,
And by collusion of the Kings of France,
Because it lies so fitly upon France,
The people speaking all one mother tongue,
It hath bin wrested for a Royalty,
Untruly due unto the Crown of France.
That Pembrook speaks the truth, behold my sword,
Which shall approve my words substantial.
Pembrooke, you are too plain in your discourse.
I tell thee, Rodoricke, Pembrooke soldier-like
Hath truly opened, what ten thousand lives
Will hardly doe, if war be made the Judge.
If war be Judge? why, shallow-witted Burbon,
Who shall decide this difference, but war?
Hath not the Judge put on his Scarlet Robe?
Is not the field prepared? our men in armour?
The Trumpets ready for the sound of death?
And nothing hinders vs but our own words?
Leave idle parley, my dread sovereign Lord,
And soon resolve the Duke in fire and smoke,
That he maintains a title false and forged,
And that Nauar is a usurping Lord.
On that isle hazard all these valiant lives.
Sound Drums and Trumpets, make King Lewes know,
He makes his best friend prove his greatest foe.
Why pause our drums? our trūpets, speak as loud,
Till the bright ayre be made a purple cloud.
Pause, gracious father.
Noble father, pause.
Let Ferdinand thy son so far prevail,
That peace, not war▪ may end this difference.
For Bellamiraes sake▪ abstain from war.
Philip▪ thy son▪ humbly desires a peace.
Let not my father sheathe his warlike sword
Within the bowels of his Countrymen.
Thy daughter Katherine prays the like.
From whence proceeds this sudden sound of peace?
Comes it from me? what, from my Ferdinand?
From Bellamira my sweet second self?
Or rather comes it (Lewes) from thy soul?
Thy Philip, the true Image of thy self?
Thy Katherine, thy hearts chiefest joy?
Princes, you ask, you know not what your selves.
Rodorick, they ask a sweet and pleasing boon.
Why, they ask peace, and we are set for war.
Tic a bad peace exceeds not a just war.
We will not rise from this submissive ground,
Till we obtain, if not a peace, a truce.
Nor shall our feet bee guilty of new steps,
Till I obtain a truce from murdering war.
Show me some reason (son) for this demand.
Show me some reason (children) for this prayer.
I love the daughter of thine enemy.
Fair Katherine hath inthrald my heart.
I love the daughter of thine enemy,
Fair Bellamira hath inthral'd my heart.
Is love the cause? then wherefore wage we war?
What matter first who wears both Diadems,
When the Succession lives in eiders heir?
If Ferdinand be crowned King of Nauar,
Fair Katherine shall be crowned his Queen:
If Philip wear the Diadem of France,
Fair Bellamira, made his lovely Queen,
Sways half the Sceptre. See what heaven can doe,
Provide for peace, even in the jaws of war!
How sweetly doth the Earl of Pembrooke speak!
Now, trust me, I am ravished with his voice.
What says Nauar? what, first war or peace?
A truce for three months, so it please your Highness;
During which time our children shall have leave,
With Drum and Trumpet to surueigh the Camp,
To Court our daughters, and to feast themselves,
As fits the sons of honourable foes:
And if it prove a match between them both,
There end all difference, Isle bequeath my Crown,
As a rich offering to their nuptial Rites.
Here, strike the truce upon my kingly hand,
Which is as surely ratified in this,
As by the testimonial of a world.
So now, for three months space all wars surcease,
Our thoughts are wholly fixed on love and peace.
Zounds, here's a truce made up by miracle.
Isle cross it by a wi•y stratagem.
What stratagem?
By love to Bellamira.
Oh could I dive into the Princes heart,
By any insinuation ne'er so base,
How easily might I effect my plot,
To make the Kingdom of Navarre mine own.
It were but a dram or so unto the son,
And a small thing would send the old man hence.
What, noble Rodorick, to gain a Crown,
A Duke would doe much.
More then poison two:
But you, my Lord, forget your self too far;
Know you to whom you have disclosed your heart?
Why, to the Duke of Orleans.
The dear friend of Lewes the French King.
King me no Kings,
Although we seem to be of several sides,
Rodorick, we love together like true friends.
This Truce gives aim to our intention:
Assist me (worthy Orleans) to effect,
First, my desired love, and next the Crown.
Peter de Lions is your Lordships servant,
A boon companion, and a lusty Knave:
He is in love with Bellamiraes maid,
And by that love he may bestead your Highness,
More then your best friends in your best designs,
Call him forth.
What Peter.
Here, my Lord.
Why dost thou look so wildly?
Not with drink, nor yet with rage.
His looks are wild with love.
With love surreuerence? can there be a face
In all the world patched up with eyes and lips,
A forehead, and a pair of Crimson cheeks,
To make me dote on, to make me look wild?
Come, come, tic known that you love Thomasin.
Zounds, they that know that, know my heart &amp; all;
I have not the power to deny it, tic most true.
And tic most true that I love Bellamira:
Now if thou art in favour of thy wench,
Many a meeting thou may help me to,
And learn besides what suitors seek her love,
And whom she most affects. These things once known,
It were worth a Dukedom, Peter.
'Sbloud, give me a Dukedom, and isle warrant you
The knowledge of these •••ngs ten times o'er.
Theres Angels f•• thee, Peter, think on them,
And doe thy best to help thy master's ••ue.
Well, howsoever I smooth it to the Duke,
My thoughts are bent on his destruction.
You have my heart in your purse, isle doe any thing for you.
And thou shalt want no gold, &amp; so farewell.
I cannot choose but farewell, and have the good An∣gels to comfort me; yet I am melancholy. Hears gold to make me merry: O but (hey ho) here is love to make me sad. To avoid prolixity, I am crossed with a Suitor, that wants a piece of his tongue, and that makes him come lisping home: they call him Cavalier Bowyer, he will have no nay, but the •••ch. By these hilts, such another swash-Buckler lives not
in the nyne quarters of the world: why, he came over with the Earl of Pembrooke; and he limps, and he limps, &amp; he devours more French ground at two paces, thē will serve Thomasin at nineteen. If ever he speak French, to avoid prolixity, he will murder the tongue. Isle provide for him, theres but small choice, either he shall renounce the wēch, or forsake his lame legs, his lisping tongue, and his life to•for by S. Denis, I had rather dye in a ditch, then be bobbed of my fair Thomasin.
Whither goes royal Philip thus prepared?
On what adventure goes Prince Ferdinand?
To conquer all the world, fair Katherine,
Whose beauty in mine eye surmounts it far.
Virtue and love conducts me to your sister.
On the like voyage are my fortunes bound,
I go to win thy sister.
Some fair Star,
On our great hopes shine fair and debonair.
Amen, saith Pembrooke.
Amen, saith Rodoricke.
This way my Love dwells.
In this ayre breathes mine.
Farewell.
Prince Ferdinand, if these cross loves
Enjoy a wished success, peace here shall dwell.
And we be friendly Brothers.
True.
Farewell.
Pity such true love, which like blessed seed,
Sown in such fertile soil, his princely breast,
By the rough stormy brow and winters hate
Of adverse parents should be timeless nipped,
And dye ever it attain maturity:
For I have heard, the Princess whom he serves,
Is hotly courted by the Duke of Burbon,
Who to effect his choice, hath in these wars
Furnished your father with a gallant power:
His love may happily then disable Philips.
O no, my father doth affect the Prince:
Besides, my sisters heart is so combined
To his in perfect love, that Burbons hate,
Nor all the world that knot can separate.
Then sorrow not for him, but turn the stream
Of gentle pity on thy wretched friend,
Within whose bosom love hath kindled fire,
So ardent, that the flames will bury me.
Philip is throed in my sisters eyes:
But in my love disdain and hatred lies.
Doth she not pay true kindness with the like?
As stepdames, orphans, night, the cleer-fac't day,
So doth she hate me, and return my woes,
Like a steeld Anvil backward on my self.
She is all hate, yet such a lovely foe,
That I must kiss the sword that wounds me so.
Inter these thoughts, this is her fathers tent.
Drum, give a friendly summons to the King.
Forbear a while (dear Pembrooke:) by our vows,
Which in the book of heaven are registered,
By all the rights of friendship, by that love
Thou bear thy native Country, I conjure thee,
This day to be the Trumpet of my worth,
To speak the passions of thy grieved friend,
To Katharines ears, till those pure Ivory gates,
Appears with the volley of thy battring words,
Give way to my laments to touch her heart:
For this have I extracted the from many,
Made thee my fellow Pilgrim to her shrine,
Knowing thy thoughts from loves Religion free,
When my prayers fail, thy tongue may plead for me.
Must I be spokesman? Pembrooke plead for love?
Whose tongue tunde to the Instruments of war,
Never knew strain of fancy on my breath:
Affection never dwelt, but war and death.
But if thou lou'dst to have thy soldiers fight,
Or hearten the spent courages of men,
Pembrooke could use a stile invincible.
Lou'dst thou a town, Id teach thee how to woo her,
With words of thunder-bullets wrapped in fire,
Till with thy Cannon battery she relent,
And humble her proud heart to stoop to thee.
Or if not this, then mount thee on a Steed,
Whose courage never awde an iron Bit,
And thou shalt hear me hollow to the beast,
And with commanding accents master him:
This Courtship Pembrooke knows; but idle love,
The slicke-fac't object of an amorous brain,
Did never clothe mine eye-balls, never taught
This tongue inurde to broils and stratagems,
The passionate language of a troubled heart:
I am too blunt and rude for such nice service.
Yet since my friend inioynes me to this task,
Take courage, isle both speak, plead, woo for thee,
And when I want fit words to move her mind,
Isle draw my sword, and swear she must be kind.
Drummer report our presence to the King.
Prince Ferdinand, and honoured English Pembrooke,
Now by S. Denis, welcome. One run straight,
And give our daughter notice of these ghosts.
What man, we know you come prepared to woo:
To woo, to win; now by our sacred life,
We wish in soul our daughter were your wife.
Our son is with your sister, fair hap wait:
For peace or war lives in your love or hate.
Welcome once more; first, weal go see your love,
After, to banquet, and from thence to woo.
Be merry, then weal share a friendly part,
But you shall triumph in our daughters heart.
See that the Tent be ready furnished.
By this, my father and those Lords are met,
Amongst whom, the noble Pembrooke, like the Sun.
Out-shines the borrowed glory of the rest:
And well I may compare him to the Sun,
That but once looked upon with his fair shape,
Hat dazzled my poor senses, and left me blind.
But sir, whore's the man I bade you bring?
If you can judge of colours (Madam) this is he.
Painter, stand forth.
An earnest cause (my friend) importunes me,
Wherein I am to crave thy cunningest Art.
Such as it is, you may command, fair Princess.
But are thy colours fresh? thy pencil smooth?
Thy hand vnwauering? and thy head dislodged
Of all unquiet harsh encumbrances?
For thou must draw proportion of those parts,
Whose worth to tell, my tongue wants utterance.
Fear you not (Madam) I am well prepared.
Then hither strait with youthful Ferdinand,
Nauars stout son, there comes an English Knight,
Pembrooke they call him, honourably borne:
Him (whilst we are in conference) thou shalt mark,
And to the life set down his counterfeit.
Nor is it needful I should show him thee,
The goodliest person in the train, that's he.
Let me alone to give the Painter destruction, I know him as well as the Beggar knows his dish: he wears a white Scarf in his hat, and an Orange tawny feather up∣on his arm.
Fool, indirectly thou describ'st another:
Thats Prince Nauar, Pembrooke his plume is Azure,
A little intermixed with spotless white,
Prefiguring the temper of the Sky,
With whose hye motion his great mind doth move.
Orange tawny and Azure, ell's one, all is but fea∣there, there is no difference I am sure but in colour.
Why, thats as much as may be, is it not?
Not so, isle prove the contrary: You are fair, and I am foul, is that all the difference between you and I? there's another thing in it, if you mark it well.
I prithee peace, and with thy ignorance
Draw not the Painter likewise into error.
Here take thy stand, thou know him by these marks
I lately spake of: seem to excel thine Art,
And I will study to requite thy pains.
Thus did the Greeks, when they begirt the walls
Of strong built Troy, sometimes with friendly cheek
Entertain peace, and spend their frolic hours,
In courtly feasting of each other foe.
Welcome (young Ferdinand) I promise you,
It cheers my spirit we doe embrace you here,
And welcome too (brave Lord) we cannot say,
As if we were in Paris; we might say,
Your viands shall be costly: but presume,
Such as the Camp affords, weal have the best.
Daughter, I prithee bid▪ them welcome.
My Lord, I doe
That with the Congy of a bended knee:
But this with my true hearts loyalty.
Lords, you are welcome, by my fathers leave.
Why, now thou dost content thy father, Kate,
When wholly unto merriment inclined,
Thou answerst with like sympathy of mind.
But yet her looks are haggard and obscure,
Which makes me doubtful sheele not stoop to lure.
Princes, let's enter: come, Isle lead the way▪
The feast is mine, you are my ghosts this day.
Now Pembrooke, show thy friendships true effect,
Obtain her love, my life thou shalt protect.
He stays behind the rest, O happy hour!
Work on (sweet Painter) to enrich mine eye
With that, which else procures my tragedy.
Fair Madam, in this confluence of sweet joy,
When every one resorts unto the feast,
Me thanks you should not thus retire alone,
As seeming, your best fare were heavy mo•e.
I am not (Sir) alone, nor do I starve
My appetite with any wilful fast,
I have a banquet of sweet pleasing thoughts,
That is more precious then the costliest feast.
But at your fathers board there sits a guest,
To whom the cup of Ganimede will seem
But juice of Hemlock, and the daintiest dish,
As much unsavoury as the Pomice stone,
Unless your presence season his delight.
I am sorry I want skill to serve his diet.
I have not bin instructed to such end.
But I will teach you (Madam) if you please.
Rather the party grieved first should show
Wherein we err, else how can we discern
What is our fault, or how we may amend?
That office he commits unto my tongue.
Is he not able then to speak himself?
Yes, Madam, I have heard when Ferdinand,
With whom in Padua I was conversant,
So spake in the assembly of the learned,
With such a grace and well composed phrase,
As many thought grave Tullies eloquence
Flowed like a honey River from his lips.
He wants then belike sufficient courage.
Never lived Knight less preiudic'd in that,
Then valiant Ferdinand, whom I have seen,
Couch his staff Lance with such dexterity,
As if the god of battle had himself
Entered the Lists, and pressing to the midst
Of steele-composed troops, like lightning fly,
Till he had made a passage with his sword.
So puissant in his fortitude with men,
And daunted with a silly women's looks?
How can that be?
Yes, when you weigh the force
Of your resistless and controlling beauty,
It is your beauty: were his power and spirit
Ten times more haughty venturous then it is,
Compels it stoop in homage to your foot,
As trembling Lambs, when they to Lions couch.
It was well he chose so good an Orator,
To plead the imperfection of his cause.
I should have that opinion of my self,
If for my sake your Grace would favour him.
Yes, for your sake we have endured his name;
And for your sake we tolerate his suite:
But when you cease to speak, then all that praise
You have attributed to his desert,
Seems borrowed from your self, you are the man
Whose eloquence compares with Ciceroes.
You are the man, whose knightly fortitude
Lives in the world vnpreiudic'd of any.
You vanquish beauty, and enthral the mind
Of female weakness, with no lesser awe,
Then Indian vassayles stoop unto their Lords.
The name of Ferdinand you have mista'ne:
Say tic your self, and then your whole discourse
Observes the perfect method that it should▪
Should I be false and treacherous to my friend?
I am entreated but to speak for him.
But for your self would be more acceptable.
Oh pardon me, nor let immodest strain
Cleave to my brow, my love is chastely bred,
Other then Pembrooke, Katherine never vows,
Shall be inthroniz'd in hermayden thoughts.
Mistake me not, I say tic Ferdinand
Dyes in affection to your Deity.
But in affection I survive to none,
But only Pembrooke.
Will you be esteemed
A cruel murdresse of a loyal friend?
Will Pembrooke triumph in a women's fall?
You anger me, respect young Ferdinand.
You please me not, to speak of Ferdinand.
Nay, then tic time to go, or wrong my friend.
Since, Madam, what I would I cannot doe,
Mine honour here bids me leave off to woo.
Stay, Pembrooke, Katherine will sue to thee,
So shalt thou keep thy faith and loyalty.
Tarry, sir, tarry, we want the length of your nose: nay▪ if you will not hear, isle be so bold as follow your nose. Sir, tarry, tarry.
He will not hear, nor (too unkind) look back.
But, Madam, spite his heart you shall see this.
Give me his picture: Image far more kind,
Then is the substance, whence thou art derived!
Which way soever I divert my self,
Thou seem to follow with a loving eye.
Thee will I therefore hold within mine arms,
As some small comfort to increasing harms.
What means my second self by this long stay?
I cannot rest till I be certified,
What good or bad success my suite returns:
But he is gone, and in fair Katharines hand
I see his picture. What may this pretend?
Thou hast done well indeed, in every part
Thou show complete &amp; cunning workmanship:
His eye, his lip, his cheek are rightly framed;
But one thing thou hast grossly ouer-slipt.
Where is his stubborn unrelenting heart,
That lurks in secret as his master doth,
Disdaining to regard or pity me?
Madam, his heart must be imagined
By the description of the outward parts.
O no; for then it would be tractable,
Mild and applausiue as the others be.
No Prince, but Pembrooke dwells in Katharines eye,
Whose that disturbs our pleasing solitude.
Know you not me? my name is Ferdinand,
Whose faithful love Lord Pembrooke late commenced?
Speak then for Pembrooke as he did for you,
Or else your bootless suite will soon be cold.
Why, he was Orator in my behalf:
If I should speak for him, as he for me,
Then should I breathe forth his passions, not mine own.
I, I, tic so, the villain, in my name,
Hath purchased her affection for himself,
And therefore was he absent from the feast:
And therefore shuns my sight, and leaves behind
This counterfeit, to keep him still in mind.
Tic so, tic so, base Traitor, for this wrong
My sword shall cut out thy perfidious tongue.
I have run till I sweat, sweat till my shirt cleaves to my back, cried till I am hoarse, and am hoarse till I
cannot cry, and yet he will not come back.
No matter, fellow, I have here a pledge,
Which I will zealously devote me to▪
There's thy reward, withdraw, my father comes.
Where are these Lords? the one hath sate with me,
And suddenly is risen from the board:
The other came not at all. Daughter, saw you
The Prince or Pembrooke, which way they are gone?
Back to their Tents, my Lord, as I suppose.
Back to their Tents, and take no leave of vs▪
Nay, then I fear their meaning was too smooth,
And some black Treason covered in their smiles,
Which we will seek immediately to prevent.
Stand, give the word along, stand.
Stand there.
Lieutenant.
Captain.
Is the watch set in the Kings quarter yet?
An hour ago.
Zounds, what foolish Canaanits were they, to run in debt to their eyes for an hours sleep, sooner then they needed? Sergeant.
Anon sir.
Anon sir! s'hart, the Rogue answers like a Drawer: but tic the trick of most of these Sergeants, all clincum, clancum. Gods dynes, I am an Onion, if I had not rather serve foremost in the forlorn hoop of a battle, or run point blank against the mouth of a double charged Can∣non, then come under the arrests of some of their pewter passels: zounds, tic hotter a great deal then hell mouth, &amp; Dives burning in Sulphur: but thou art none of the genea∣logy of them. Where must we watch to night?
In the furthest Trenches that confront the enemies Camp.
Thats the next way to have all our throats cut.
That cannot be, you know, Captain, there's a peace toward.
A pox a peace, it keeps our Ancient whole; but s'hart our gabardines go to wrack: but futra: tic well known, since Dick Bowyer came to France, he hath showed himself a gentleman &amp; a Cavalier, and sets fear it's heals: and I could scope (a pox on it) the other thing, I might haps return safe &amp; sound to England; but what remedy? al flesh is grass, and some of vs must needs be scorched in this hot Coun∣trey. Lieutenant Core, prithee lead my Band to their quar∣la, and the Rogues do not as they should, cram thy self, good Core, down their throats, and choke them. Who stand Sentronell to night, sir?
That must I, Captain.
You, Raf Nod? zounds, soldiers, follow my disc∣pline, say your prayers, you are all dead men, all dust and a∣shes, all worms meat.
How so, Captain?
Doe you make him Sentronell? s'hart, he•le nod presently: and he do not sleep sitting upon the point of a Spanish needle, Dicke Bowyer's a very shuttlecock. Nod! zounds, he is one of the nine sleepers, a very Dormoose: &amp; I had a Pageant to present, of the seven deadly sins, hee should play Sloth: and he did not sleep when he should speak his part, I am a Badger.
That's true, you have half the nature of a Badger, for one leg is shorter then another.
Zounds, you Rogue, doe not you know that? Isle tell you: s'hart, and I lye, call me Iebuzite. Once as I was figh∣ting in S. Georges fields, and blind Cupped seeing me, and taking me for some valiant Achilles, he took his shaft, and shot me right into the left heel, and ever since, Dick Bow∣yer hath been lame: but my heart is as sound as a bell, heart of Oak, spirit, spirit. Lieutenant, discharge Nod,
and let Cricket stand Sentronell, till I come.
He shall, Captain.
On before, strike Drum, march soldiers, keep your place▪ Nod: lusty my harts, for the honour of England, &amp; our brave General, the Earl of Pembrooke. So, I have dis∣charged my self of these.
Hot shot! now to my love: some may say, the tale of Ve∣nus loving Mars, is a fable: but he that is a true soldier, and a Gent. as Dick Bowyer is, &amp; he do not love some varlet or other, zounds, he is worse then a gaping Oyster without li∣quor. There's a pretty sweet faced mother that waits on the princess, that I have some mind to; but a whorsō Achitophel, a parasite, a rogue, one whose face looks worse thē a Tailors cushen, of old shreds &amp; colours; zounds, like a weavers leg, in an old ditch feeding horseleaches, &amp; this trotter is my rye∣ual, &amp; loves Thomasin: his name is Peter de Lions; but s'hart (I will not swear neither) if I do not turn Rich. Cor de Lion with him, if I do not tear out his heart and eat it with mus∣tard,
let him say Dick Bowyer's a Mackarell. Yonder hee comes with my Property hād in hand. Zoūds, I say nothing: but isle hear what they say, and determine afterword.
Thomasin, you know me, I hate prolixity: in a word, my humour is thus, I love you.
And I do not spoil that humour, so—
Your answer compendiously, &amp; avoid prolixity.
Mary 〈…〉! by Iesu, I scorn to humble the least part about me, to give answer to such a trotting question: as I live, it ioults mine ears worse in hearing▪ then the princes coach on a broken cawsey.
Thomasin, leave this pace, &amp; take me with you: my Lord loves your Lady, yet I hear say, she is this night betro∣thed to the Prince of France: so I love you, and shall I lose you? No, I hate prolixity: in a word, the end is, isle mary you.
Pretty, as God save me! what will Captain Bowyer say to that, if he should know it?
A good Rogue, by Iesu.
Bowyer a Captain? a Capon, a button mould, a lame gaberdine, a red beard Sprat, a Yellow hammer, a bow case, a very Jackdaw with his tongue slit.
Zounds, what a Philistine is this? what a dictionary of proper names hath the Rogue got together? heart, his tongue crawls as fast as the Cheese doth in Germany, Isle pearce you for this, you Lobster.
Bowyer, mordu futra for him; and that sour crab do but leer at thee, I shall squeeze him to verges.
And you squeeze me, I may haps grow saucy with you, you whoreson burned Pudding pie, you dry Parsnip: kiss me, Thomasin: so, dare you stand to your word now, and squeeze me?
Stumps, I challenge thee for this indignity▪ Bowyer, I will gyrd my self with thy guts, I am a Soldier and a Captain.
Captain? s'hart, and thou hast under thy charge, any other then Pigmies, I am Gogmagog. Dost thou hear (sowgelder?) and I do not with six Cranes (well marshald) overrun thee and thy hundred and fifty, say Dick Bow∣year's a coward.
For that word, draw.
Hold, Gentlemen.
Peace (good Thomasin) silence, sweet socket. Peter, dost see this sword? this sword kilt Sarlaboys, that was one Rogue: now it shall kill thee, that's two Rogues, Whoreson puttock, no garbage serve you but this? have at you.
Who's this at enmity within our Camps?
What, Bowyer, and the servant to great Burbon?
Both sheathe your weapons: by our martial law,
This act is death.
Isle be hanged then. Doest thou hear, noble Gene∣rall? Dick Bowyer knows what belongs to service: we did not draw of any malice, by this element of iron &amp; steel, but to measure which of our swords were longest. Isle save
you for once, you Saracen, because I see you'll hang scurvy∣lie: but the next time—
Good Captain Bowyer, let our English troops
Keep a strong watch to night: my throbbing heart,
Like to a Scritchowle in the midnight hour,
Bodes some black scene of mischief imminent.
Never fear (General) if Iulius Caesar rise up against vs, ever he do my Lord any wrong, zounds, isle be cut smaller then pot-hearbs. Isle to the trenches, come Thomasin. Leer not, Lobster, lest I thum that russetting face of yours with my sword hilt, till that it look as pyde coloured as the Rainbow. By Iesu isle do it, and therefore follow me not.
Why should this load of grief lye on my heart
With such a ponderous weight? I know no cause,
Unless it be by thinking on the wrong
My friend receives in the unmatched love,
Which Katherine bears me: yet my faith is sound,
And like a solid Rock shall check her tears.
Katherine loves me; yet for my friends delight,
Pembrooke will hate her love, and fly her sight.
Nauar, you sprinckle me with foul rep roch,
And dim the lustre of our royal name,
With colours of dishonour.
Hear me, Burbon.
What words can satisfy so great a wrong?
Have you not with consent of all your Lords,
Promised your daughter to this generous prince?
Their true love forced vs to it.
True love? tic fayn'd.
Ha, Burbon.
Gentle Philip.
With my sword,
Isle prove my love unfeigned, thee a false Lord.
This like a Sanctuary frees thy tongue,
And gives thee childish liberty of speech,
Which else would fawn and crouch at Burbons frown.
Now by S. Denis —
Isle not chat with boys.
Nauar, to thee I speak: thy daughters looks,
Like the North Star to the Sea-tost Mariners,
Hath brought me through all dangers, made me turn
Our royal Palace, to this stage of death,
Our state and pleasures, to a bloody Camp,
And with the strength and puissance of our force,
To lift thy falling and decayed state,
Even to her pristine glory, in thy quarrel
Burbon hath set himself against his King,
And foiled his greatness with a Traitors name.
Now when our worth expected rich reward,
Fair Bellamira, wonder of her time,
Must Philip have her?
Burbon, she is mine.
Mordew: isle be revenged, by heaven I will,
Or I will pave these plains with the dead bodies
Of our dear subjects: we have sworn thy fall,
That oaths thy death, our rage thy funeral.
Hear our excuse.
We will not credit ayre.
Peter, watch Rodorick, when the prince is gone,
Tell him, Id speak with him.
Enough, tic done.
Nauar, this setting Sun, which sees our wrong,
Shall ever his morrows beams guide the proud East,
View Himens rites turned to a tragic feast.
His anger bears him hence, young prince of France,
Since to reduce our enmity to love,
And thereby like a fair and lovely Bride,
To mary peace to France, we are content,
To bring the sea-tost bark of your affects,
Half shipwrecked with the tempest of these wars,
To their desired port, as we agreed:
Go to your father, and inform him thus:
If personally heel view our friendly Tents,
And seal these Articles of peace proposde,
This night you shall be troth• plight to our child.
Were it to search the furthest Northern clime,
Where frosty Hymns with an y•ie Mace,
Strikes dead all living things, Id find it out,
And borrowing fire from those fair sunny eyne,
Thaw Winters frost, and warm that dead cold clime:
But this impose i• nothing, honoured King,
Isle to my father, and conduct him hither:
For whilst my soul is parted from her sight,
This earth is hell, this day a tedious night.
Come Rodorick, you shall bear me company.
He shall not, for isle stay him instantly.
It were pity to keep two such loves asunder.
Daughter, you &amp; your Ladies to your tent,
And deck you richly to receive the prince.
My Lord of Pembrooke, happily returned:
How dot• our son? See where he comes himself.
Speak, boy, how spedst thou with fair Katherine?
I know not how: Is trothlesse Pembrooke there?
Be not dismayed, at length sheele pity thee.
Son, bid our Officers adorn our Court
In her chief glory: for this happy night
Shall set a period to this sma•ting war.
Your sister shall be troth-plight to Prince Philip,
And France and we made friends about it then.
Pembrooke, have you the charge to see our Captains
Prepare a martial welcome to the King.
Isle not be idle: since Nauar was crowned,
Our heart with so much joy did ne'er abound.
Nor mine with so much hate. Pembrooke, a word.
What wills your Grace?
That Pembrooke is a villain.
Look not so strange, I speak it not your friend,
But hee that in his soul hath sworn thine end.
A villain? and my death? I am amazed.
Art thou awake? or is all this a dream?
A dream of death: meet me to morrow morning,
As thou art Pembrooke and a Gentleman,
By you fair River side, which parts our Camps.
You know the place, come armed, and so farewell▪
Dear friend.
Push, meet me.
Ferdinand, I will.
Revenge, smile on, thou shalt drink blood thy fill.
This is my waiting night, tic for no good,
That I stand Sentronell. Well good or ill,
I care not greatly, so I get the gold:
Therefore to avoid prolixity, here walk I.
Here comes the men that must reward my pain.
Have you the poison?
And a strong one too.
Heere's a preservative to save your hand.
When Rodoricke fails your Lordship, heaven shall fail,
To illuminate the world with cheerful light.
Then here about should Peter wait for me:
For this is the Pavilion of the Princess.
My Lord.
Peter.
Here is the key that opens to the Tent,
I stole it from my sweet heart Thomasin.
Enter without prolixity, woo and win the Lady:
But give me gold (my Lord) and Isle to Dice▪
Hold, take thy fill.
And it shall go as fast.
Now gentle Peter, get thee unto rest:
My business craves the absence of the world:
None but my self and Rodoricke shall behold
The secret complot that I doe intend.
I go, my Lord.
Now blessed key, open unto my love,
Doe more then loving lines or words can doe:
My letters have bin answered with disdain:
Her father I have moved to gain my •ove,
But he is frosty in my fervent suite,
And now perforce I will obtain my love,
Or ease her puling hatred by revenge.
You stay too long, isle help to turn the key.
What do I see? the majesty of heaven,
Sit in a maiden slumber on the earth?
What, is my Bellamira turned a goddess,
Within the table of her glorious face!
Me thinks, the pure extraction of all beauty
Flows in abundance to my loue-sicke eye.
O, Rodoricke, she is admirably fair:
And sleeping, if her beauty be so rare,
How will her eyes enchant me if she wake!
Here, take the poison, isle not stain that face,
For all the treasure of the Western Island.
I see no such admired perfection.
Waken her, Burbon, and this loving charm,
Which now hath led your senses prisoner,
Will vanish, and her speech full of reproof,
Beget a new phantasm all of hate:
Thou wilt detest her when •he shall deny thee.
Wakē her, Rodorick, for I want the power.
I hope I am disguised sufficiently,
That Bellamira cannot know my face.
Madam, fair Bellamira.
Here I am, who calls on Bellamira?
I, fair love,
The Luke of Burbon that doth honour thee.
The Duke of Burbon in my Tent so late▪
Where is my Guard? what Peter, Thomasin.
Step to her, and restrain her, lest she call:
Isle be a looker on, and be unknown.
What needs your Highness call for any guard,
Since you are guarded with a faithful friend?
Behold me, Madam, humbly on my knee,
Come to renew my suite, vouchsafe me love,
Or with this weapon take away my life:
Much better it were a thousand times to dye,
Then live in torment of your scorching eye.
You have inflamed my heart, oh quench that flame,
Or into cinders turn my haplesse trunk:
Haplesse, in being vnbelou'd of you.
My Lord of Burbon, you presume too much
On th'extremity of passion.
Have I not answered many an idle letter,
With full assurance that I cannot love?
Have I not often, viva voce checked
Your courtly kindness? frowned upon your smiles▪
Used you unkindly, all to wean your love?
And doe you still persevere in your suite?
I tell thee, Burbon, this bold part of thine,
To break into my Tent at dead of night,
Deserves severe correction, and the more,
Because it brings mine honour into question.
I charge thee, as thou art a Gentleman,
Betake thee to thine own Pavilion,
And let this answer satisfy for all:
Burbon, I cannot, nor I will not love thee.
Cannot, nor will not? zoūds, Madam, but you must.
Must I?
And shall.
You will not force me to it?
Or force that sparkling beauty from your face.
Look not so fiercely, nor cry out for help:
For if you doe, this makes you cry your last.
Seeing neither words, kind letters, hearty sighs,
Humble entreaty, nor a world of payne,
Can move you to take pity of my love:
But Tyrant-like, your beauty seeks my life,
I will blot out that beauty with this juice.
Thus, thus I wipe away my passions:
Thus doe I heal the torments of my love:
Thus doe I ransom my enthralled eye,
And by depriving of the cause of life,
Kill th'effect, which was a world of sorrow.
Farewell, foul Bellamira, I am pleased
In this revenge, that no way could be eased.
Zounds, he has don't: now, Rodorick, joy thy fill▪
Burbon is thine, the Dukedom is thine own:
For only he in the Inheritance
Stood as an obstacle, to let my claim.
This deed of his will take away his life:
And then let me alone to enjoy his land.
Isle steal away unseen, cause unsuspected:
I would not for the world be once detected.
Poison my face! oh most inhumane wretch▪
Revenge more vile, then to abridge my life▪
What, Thomasin, what, brother Ferdinand:
My kingly father: is there none that hears?
Then Treason, treason, let that waken you:
For capital is this offence to me.
O Iesu, mistress, what ails your face!
Her face!
Tic spotted like a Panthers skin.
O, were those spots as kindly beautiful,
Then were fair Bellamira vndeform'd.
O, what divine power hath sent this Leprosy?
Say, beauteous sister.
Speak, fair Bellamira.
Speak, my good mistress.
My sweet daughter, speak.
Her silence argues a tormented spirit.
Thy countenance argues a deceitful soul.
Where is Nauar?
Where is fair Bellamira?
My Philip, oh give leave to fly his sight.
Stay, gentle daughter▪ heel not injure thee.
Here are the Articles concluded on,
I could not rest, till I had signed them,
And brought them to your Highness. A month hence
The marriage shall be fully solemnised,
So please your Majesty and your fair daughter:
Are you content?
To live in discontent.
Me thinks, this royal presence hath dim looks:
Is it because they are in the arms of night,
Which sets a leaden lustre on the eye?
Or hath some accident occoasted them,
That troubles their aspect with melancholy?
Is Nauar well? is Ferdinando well?
Is Pembrooke well? Is Bellamira well?
O, where is Bellamira? tell me, Princes,
For now my tongue hath struck upon her name.
I feel a kind of killing ecstasy.
Where is she? in her Tent?
Deny me, father,
I would not see Prince Philip with this face.
Why speak you not? what, have I touched the string,
Whereon the burden of your sorrow lies?
Father, look round about, see you my love?
Rodoricke, look round about, see you my love?
I see her not.
Nor I.
I say not so.
The garments that she wears, mine eye should know.
What Lady's this that hides her heavenly face?
Here are no Basilisks with killing eyes:
You need not hide your beauty: sweet, look up,
Me thinks I have an interest in these looks.
What's here, a Leper amongst Noblemen?
What creatures this? why stays she in this place?
Oh, tic no marvel though she hide her face:
For tic infectuous: let her leave the presence,
Or Leprosy will cleave unto vs all.
O let me leave the presence, gentle father,
When Philip bids his Bellamira go.
My Bellamira!
How? my sons beloved!
Is this my love? was this your beauteous child?
My child.
My sister.
Beauteous Bellamira.
Spotted.
Disfigured.
Made a loathsome Leper.
How came this sudden alteration?
For she was comely, lovely, beautiful,
When the day left his Chariot to the night.
That heaven doth know, and only Bellamira.
Daughter, I charge thee, tell me how it came.
Burbon, oh Burbon.
Did he doe the deed?
He came into my Tent at dead of night,
And rubbed my face with an infectuous herb,
Because I would not grant unto his love.
I cried for help, but none did succour me.
I know he did, and laugh to think on it.
And he shall rue his treason.
Threaten not,
Leave the revenge to me whom it concerns,
Tic I am robbed of a delicious look,
A heavenly sparkling brow, a starry eye,
A countenance fairer then Auroraes looks,
When all the East is gilded with her blush▪
Tic I will be revenged: but not before
I have espousde my lovely Bellamira.
Espoused her!
How! marry a face deformed!
A leprous creature!
An infectuous maid!
One, whose sores are perchance incurable!
Be they incurable, it is my Love,
And for my sake she hath endured this wrong,
And, should I now forsake her thus distressed,
I could not merit a true Lovers name.
To show I love her, I will marry her,
Before the month expire: nay in the morn:
Delays, perchance, may make her think I scorn.
Marry with me? fetch me a looking glass,
That I may see how sweet a Bride I am.
Oh, I detest my self: Dear, hate me too:
I am not to be married but to death.
Though I were Empress of the spacious world,
Id lay my self and Kingdom at thy feet.
Live, noble Philip, ioysome happier match:
Tic my unworthiness makes me deny thee.
Think thou, because thy face is spotted so,
Thou art not worthy of thy Philips love?
Thy face to me was but a Marshall,
To lodge thy sacred person in my mind,
Which long ago is surely chambred there:
And now what needs an outward Harbinger?
I doe affect, not superficially:
My love extended further then the skin.
The inward Bellamira tic I seek,
And unto her will Philip be epousde.
Oh admirable love!
Oh, my dear son,
Thou make me famous by thy loyalty.
I never heard the like.
Pen never writ
A worthier Story to posterity.
Pen never writ of a more treacherous friend,
Then, Pembrooke, thou hast proved to Ferdinand.
Sweet Love, prepare thee to be Philips Bride:
For here I swear, as I am royal borne,
Isle marry thee, before the mornings Sun
Hath run the third part of his glorious course.
Father, good night: dear friends, dear Love, good night:
Marriage, I hope, will make my spirits more light.
Good night, sweet son. King Lewes, stay with me,
Be thou my comforter, isle comfort thee.
Pembrook, remember that thou fail me not.
O God, what may these moody looks intend?
Me thinks, I should have better from my friend.
Now, Bellamira, thou hast time to think
Upon these troublous matters: should I suffer
So brave a Gentleman as Philip is,
To wed himself to my unworthy self,
It would be counted virtue in the Prince;
But I were worthy of a world of blame.
No, Philip, no, thou shalt not wrong thine honour,
Nor be impeached by Bellamiraes spots.
In some disguise isle steal away to night,
And ne'er appear more in my Philips sight.
There is no toil to this walking of the Round: S'hart, I have been stumbling up and down all this night, like a Brewers horse, that has ne'er a good eye in his head: Tic as daarke as Pitch. I can resemble our Camp to nothing better then hell, save that in hell they are always waking, and here the villains are as drow∣sie as swine. Lieutenant Nod! why, you might have shot a double Cannon in his ear, and never have wak•e him:
I jogged, and I jogged; I shouted, and I shouted; and yet the mongrel snorted, you might hear him to Dover: at last, I dragd him by the heals into a ditch of water, and there left the Lobster crawling. A the tother side, Core be∣ing appointed to stand Sentinel upon the Wallounes quarter, s'hart, the Loach gets me into a Sutlers bath, and there sits me drinking for Joins best cap: but by this hand, and as Dicke Bowyer is a Soldier, and a Cavalier, he shall sit in the bolts for it to morrow. My comfort is in these extremities, that I brought Thomasin to her La∣•ies Tent, leaving her new-come Lover to pick straws: but soft, queen v•ula?
My name is Ferdinand.
Stand.
Why, Captain, thou dost know me well enough.
Know, or not know, without the word you pass not.
Soliman.
So, allie, allie, Monseur.
First, tell me, saw thou Pembrooke come this way?
I saw him not.
Farewell.
As much to you. Zounds, these Frenchmen think to out-face vs with a card of ten: but, and his beard were made of brass, Dicke Bowyer will make him know the discipline of war. Here comes another.
Who's there? Dick Bowyer?
Some call me so, what then?
Pembrooke salutes thee.
Oh, good morrow, my Lord, good morrow.
I prithee, Captain, saw thou Ferdinand,
Son to Nauar, as thou did walk the round?
Even now, my Lord, he past along this way.
Himself alone? or had he company?
Nay questionless, he was alone, my Lord.
Could thou discern his face? how did he look?
Faith, scurvily, my Lord, like a greene cheese, or the inside of a rotten Pumpian.
There is Crowns for thee to drink.
I thank your Lordship. To see the difference be∣tweene these French Cures, and our English Cavaliers: there's as much bounty in them, as there's Marchpane in a dish of Almond butter. I might have stood here till my teeth chatter in my head, ever the tother Launceprisado would have said, Here, Captain Bowyer, there's a Car∣di•ue, to wash down melancholy. But had I known as much, I would have basted him, till his bones had rattled in his skin.
Come, sir, you shall answer your walking before our Captain.
Well, sirs, take heed what you doe, I am a Princes man, if you stay me upon the Kings hye way, I can •ay fell∣lowship to your charge.
But sir, wee can lay Treason to thine, for being without the word.
Without the word! O pernicious Frenchman! without the word! why, I have called thee Villain, him Rascal; this, Slave; that, Rogue; and am I still without the word?
I, sir, the word that must serve your turn, the Watch-word.
Faith, you're like to watch this twelvemonth, ere you have any other words at my hands.
How now masters, what calfe are you dragging to the slaughter-house there? ha?
A straggler, and a spy: Captain, I pray exa∣mine him.
So, Lieutenant Core, you are crept from your cups at last, Isle talk with you anon: but, sir, to you: From whence come you?
I came, sir, from the King of France camp.
So, what's your name?
My name, sir, is Bow wow.
S'hart, what a name's that! the Hedge-hog mocks vs: Bow wow, quoth? what kin art thou to the generation of Dogs?
No dog, sir, would you should know it, though I be encompassed with cures.
Zounds, he calls vs cures, hang the hotchpotch up in a fathom or two of match.
Not you, sir, I call not you so: I know you to be a very insufficient ill-spoken Gentleman.
Well, sir, whom do you serve?
My master, sir, is the Lady Katherine, the French Kings daughter: I have bin abroad about some business of hers, and am now going back again.
An honourable Lady, sir: let him go: tic against the law of arms to stay him.
Stand of: but soft, I doe not know your name, sir, that my Lady may give you thanks.
My name's Dick Bowyer.
Then, master Dicke Bowyer, after my hearty commendations, adieu: but as for the rest, I shall, I say no more, I shall —
How now, Core? how can you answer your being a tippling, when you should stand Sentinel?
Believe me, Captain, I had but a whiff or two: for I was passing dry.
Thou art always dry: the whoreson Mault-worm has a throat like the burning Climb, or a Glasse-makers Furnace: But your remove from thence has saved you from the bolts. How now, what Water-Spanyell have we here?
Tic Lieutenant Nod.
Captain, deride me not: I protest, I came by this mischance by good service, by following a spy, that came to discover our army.
O notable Rogue! did not I find thee asleep, and threw thee into a ditch?
Was it you? by this light, I took you for a spy.
Yet saw me not, no more then a Molewarp▪ this is an egregious Rogue.
Yes, I saw you well enough, and I did but try how you would use me.
By this flesh and blood, many one that lies in his grave, was not half so senseless: but the Watch breaks up, every one to his quarter, away.
Tic true, they are gone together, and I am sent to watch Prince Ferdinand, and the Earl of Pembrooke: this way they went; but they are got out of sight. I were very bad to be a Hound, that have no better a sent: if they were hares, as they are men, I should think them squatted: but hushed, here comes one of them.
The morn looks red: red morns doe threat a storm,
That storm shall light on Pembrooke or my self.
This is our meeting place: here runs the stream
That parts our camps: the time consorts the place;
And (Pembrooke) if thy reputation hold,
It is thy q. to enter.
Here comes the tother, this is luck upon luck▪ now will I run and fetch my mistress, the Lady Katherine, to part their fray.
Good end succeed my early heaviness:
Three times my feet, as loath to guide me hither,
Have stumbled in a plain and even way,
My sword forsook his scabbard once or twice,
Blood from my nostrils thrice hath spouted forth,
And such a dimness ouerrunnes my sight,
That I have tan a tree to bee a man,
And questioned with it about serious things▪
This is the place where I must meet my friend.
Yonder he stands▪ Good morrow, Ferdinand.
Good morrow to thy death: draw, Pēbrook, draw,
The ground thou treadst upon, must be thy grave.
Draw upon Ferdinand?
I, upon me.
Dally not, Pembrooke, I am bent to fight,
And that with thee for the best blood thou bear.
You have some reason for this resolution.
My will.
A sorry argument to kill your friend.
I must have better reason then your will,
Or isle not draw upon my Ferdinand:
Our love is older then of one days growth,
A years continuance hath united vs.
Have we not made an interchange of oaths,
Sworn love to one another twenty times,
Confirmed that friendship by society,
Encreasde it with the sympathy of mind,
Making one pleasure, pleasure unto both?
And shall this bond be broken upon will?
Then you'll not draw?
Yes, nearer to thy person,
In friendly sort to embrace thee, Ferdinand.
Thou art a coward, and thou dare not fight.
Thou know the contrary: for we have fought
At every weapon, to approve our skill.
Go to, you are a villain and a coward,
And by the royal blood that gave me life,
Isle kill thee, Pembrooke, though thou do not draw.
Kill me? thou wilt not wrong thine honour so?
Zounds, but I will: &amp; traitor, take thou that.
Wound me so desperately? nay then isle draw,
Not to offend, but to defend my self.
Now I perceive it is my blood thou seekst:
Witness you heavens, and all you gracious powers,
That stand auspicious to this enterprise,
That Pembrooke draws forth an unwilling sword.
Why so, now manfully defend thy self.
Another woūd? then Pembrook, rouse thy spirit,
And bear no longer with this haire-braynd man.
Yet (Ferdinand) resolve me of the cause,
That moves thee to this unkind enterprise:
And if I satisfy thee not in words,
This double wound shall please thee with my blood.
Nay, with my sword Isle make a score of wounds,
Rather then want of blood divorce thy love.
I hate thee deadly, and I seek thy life:
What other reason, Pembrook, would thou have?
Prepare, prepare, in this conflict to •how,
Thou art a Knight, and can o'er come thy foe.
And if I spare thee not, impute the cause
To thine own rashness, and mine eking wounds.
I hope I have slain thee.
Oh, I fear thy life: how fares my Ferdinand?
What, liu'st thou yet? then my fare is ill.
I am marked for death,
I feel a general faintness through my limbs:
Expense of blood will soon expend my life.
The like debility my joints doe feel.
Then we must both dye in the latest of death.
Tell me, oh tell me, whence proceeds this hate?
I fear not (Pembrooke) to discover now.
Thou were my Spokes-man unto Katherine,
And treacherously thou stol'st away her heart.
Oh, I can say no more, my spirits doe faint.
Pembrooke, farewell, I have revenged my wrong.
Oh▪ yet a little longer, gracious time,
Detain his princely spirit to his breast,
That I may tell him he is misse-inform'd,
And purge my self unto my dying friend:
But death hath laid his num-cold hand upon me:
I am arrested to depart this life.
Dear Ferdinand, although thou be my death,
On thee isle friendly breathe my latest breath.
How full of pleasure is this Forest life!
My Park I liken to a Common wealth,
In which, my Bucks and Does are Citizens:
The Hunters Lodge, the Court, from whence is sent
Sentence of life or death, as please the King:
Only our gouernment's a tyranny,
In that wee kill our subjects upon sport.
But stay, what Gentlemen doe here lye slain▪
If any spark of life doe yet remain,
Isle help to fan it with a nimble hand:
The Organ of his arm doth play apace,
He is not so far spent, but that with help,
He may recover to his former state.
How is the other? I doe feel soft breath
Break from between his lips. Oh, for some aid,
To bear them to the Forest, to my Lodge:
But as I am, isle try my utmost strength,
To save their lives: first seen, shall be the first:
Patience, and isle return and fetch the other.
My angle-rod is broke, my sport is done;
But I will fetch my net, to catch some fish:
To lose both fish and pleasure, is too much.
Oh what contentment lives there in the brooke!
What pretty trains are made by cunning hands,
To int•ap the wily watery Citizens!
But what art thou that lie upon the ground?
Sleepst thou? or art thou slain? hath breath his last?
No spark of life appears: yet from his eye,
Me thinks I see a glimmering light break sorth,
Which wanting strength, is like a twilight glimpse.
If there be any hope to save his life,
Isle try my utmost cunning. To my house,
Poor Gentleman, Isle bear thee as a guest,
And either cure thy wounds, or make thy grave.
Just in this circle I left the two Princes ready to draw; for I read the whole discourse of the Combat in their red eyes.
Here lye their weapons, and here flows their blood.
Have they not slain one another, and buried themselves?
Peace, fool, tic too sure, that they are slain.
O Lord, then let me turn my self into a Ballad, and morn for them.
Thou angrest me, with jesting at my sorrow:
Hence from my sight, my heart is full of grief,
And it will break, the burden is so great.
Go from your sight? then let me go out of your company: for I had as leeue leave your sight as your company. Is this my reward for watching and watch∣ing? Oh Mistress, doe not kill me with unkindness: I shall, I shall —
What shall you?
Weep out mine eyes, and fill the holes with salt water.
I prithee leave me, I am not displeased,
But fain would vent my sorrow from my heart.
Hold, take my purse, spend that, and leave my presence:
Go every where, enquire my Pembrooke out:
And if thou bring me to his breathless trunk,
I will reward thee with a treble gift.
Well, I were best bee going, now I am so fairly offred. Mistress, your reward hath stopped my tears, and en∣tic'de my legs to be walking. Farewell, I will go, God knows whither, to seek and to find both, and neither. Farewell, sweet Mistress.
O Pembrooke, let me kneel unto thy blood:
And yet I know not whether't be thy blood,
Save that my soul by a divine instinct,
Tells me it is the treasure of thy veins.
If thou be dead, thou mirror of all men,
I vow to dye with thee: this field, this grove
Shall be my receptacle till my last:
Content with that that feeds the airy souls,
My pillow shall be made a bank of moss,
And what I drink, the silver brooke shall yield.
No other camp nor Court will Katherine have,
Till fates do limit her a common grave.
Our daughter fled! whē? whither? which way? how?
I know not.
Bellamira, my lives joy,
Upon those pinions that support her flight,
Hovers my heart, you bear away my soul.
Turn, turn again, and give this earthly frame
Essential power, which for thine absence dyes:
Thou art the sweet of sweet, the joy of joys:
For thee was Philip borne. O turn again,
And Philip is the blessedest of men.
We are glad she's gone, though we dissemble it.
Son, bridle this affection, cease these laments,
She did not value them.
Lewes, she did,
Till savage hate that shape disfigured.
O, she was worthy to be Queen of heaven.
Her beauty, ever it suffered violence,
Was like the Sun in his Meridian Throne,
Too splendent for weak eyes to gaze upon.
She was too bright before, till being hid
Under that envious cloud, it took the place
Of a dark ground, to show a lovelier face.
That Leprosy in her seem• perfect beauty:
And she did gild her imperfections o'er
With virtue, which no •whole calumnious breath
Could ever soil, true virtues dye is such,
That malice cannot stain, nor envy tush.
Then say not but her worth surmoūts these woes.
She grieved to tie you to a hated bed,
And therefore followed Burbon for revenge.
Burbon? who names him? that same verbal sound
Is like a thunderclap to Philips cares,
Frighting my very •whole. Sure, you said, Burbon,
And to that prodigy you joined revenge:
Revenge, that like a shadow follows him.
It was he that made me bankrupt of all bliss,
Sud the divorce of that pure white and red,
Which decked my Bellamiraes lovely cheeks:
And shall he scope unpunished?
Join your hands,
And all with vs swear vengeance on the Duke.
Not for the world: who prosecutes his hate
On Burbon, iniures me: I am his foe,
And none but I will work his overthrow.
What means our son?
To hunt him for revenge.
The darkest angle of this vniuerse,
Shall not contain him through the bounded world:
Isle prosecute his flight with ceaslesse steps:
And when long travel makes them dull or faint,
Baiting them fresh with Bellamiraes wrongs,
Like Eagles they shall cut the flaxen ayre,
And in an instant bring me where he is.
Where goes our son?
To hell, so that in that kingdom,
Fate would ascertain me to meet with Burbon.
Where ever I confront him, this shall kill him.
Thou shalt have aid to compass thy revenge.
No aid, but this strong arm. Farewell, farewell.
Since Bellamira hath forsook her friend,
I seek destruction (Burbon) and mine end.
Stay him: this fury will betray thy life.
Poor king made wretched by thy daughters loss.
Poor king made wretched by thy desperate son.
Spēd not your woes too fast, but save some tears
To dew the obsequies of your dead son.
What, Ferdinand?
Hoe's slain by Pembrokes hands,
And Pembroke left breathless by Ferdinand.
Their quarrel is uncertain, and their bodies
By some uncivil hands conveyed away,
And no inquiry can discover them.
Our son slain? Bellamira poisoned?
Navarre, tear off these hairs, and raging die.
More Tragedies at hand, what news brings Rodo∣rick?
Such as will make the hearers, senseless trunks.
Why doth your highness in your foe-mens tents
Revel away the time, and yield your person,
To the known malice of your enemies,
Whilst in your own tents, rapine and foul lust,
Grasps your fair daughter to dishonour her?
Our daughter?
She is silly stolen from thence,
Yet none knows whither, save one Sentinel,
Who doth report he heard a wretched Lady
Exclaim, false Ferdinand would ravish her.
That was my child dishonoured by thy son.
You wrong him, France.
Thou hast betrayed vs, king,
And trained vs to a loathed festival,
The marriage of thy stained and leprous child.
Whilst in our absence, Ferdinand unjust,
Hath stained our daughters beauty with wild lust.
If you remember, he &amp; English Pembroke
Last day forsook your Camp, as discontent.
That proved their loves were faynd, and of set ma∣lice,
He came to view our Camp, how he might act
That deed of obloquy, and scope with life.
Tic France hath done the wrong: you have cō∣menst
This deed of death on Pembrook &amp; our son;
And now to cover it, suggest and fain
Our guiltless son a go••tie ravisher:
But render me they• bodies.
Whore's our Child?
Seek her.
Seek Ferdinand.
France.
Petty king,
For this our wrong, look to be vnderling.
What Drum is this?
Are we entrapped, Nauar?
Fear not, on yonder hill, whose lofty head
Orelookes the vnder-valleyes, Royal Burbon,
Attended by ten thousand Soldiers,
Craves peace and fair accord with mighty France▪
Burbon, that was the ruin of my Child?
Summon our forces straight and charge the slave▪
In Burbons rescue draw our forces up.
What means the king of France?
To join with him.
What? with a Traitor and a murderer?
He did a deed of merit and of fame,
Poisoned the Sister of a ravisher,
A Tarquin, an incestuous Tereus,
And our poor Child the wronged Philomell:
Arayne our Battles straight, and join with Burbon.
Hear what we'll urge.
Speak then in war and death:
In other terms, our rage will spend no breath.
And we will speak so loud, that heaven it self
Shall echo with the clangor: both our children
Weal race from our remembrance, and advance
No other thought, but how to plague proud France.
Conjoin with Burbon, ever three Suns shall set,
In the vast Kingdom of Oreanus:
In a pitched field weal meet the King of France,
And that false Traitor Duke.
Nauar, thou dare not.
Now by Saint Denis, and our Grandsires tomb,
Weal meet thee.
Welcome. O, bring valiant men.
Weel think on nought but graves &amp; tōbs till then.
Ha, ha: I laugh to see these Kings at jar.
Now civil discord like a raging flood,
Swelling aboue her banks, shall drown this land,
Whilst Rodorick on her ruins builds his hopes.
The King of France through my suggestion,
Thinks Katherine his daughter ravished,
Who only winged with love, is fled the Camp:
Pembrooke and Ferdinand, in mutual strife,
Slain by eche other, doth confirm my words,
And for reuēge whets keen the two Kings swords.
I thāk thee, Forester, whose rough grown walks,
Wild in aspect, afford more courtesy,
Then places smoother for civility.
My life redeemd by thy industrious hand,
Remains in love and duty bound to thee.
Fair Knight, prevention of sad death, by health,
More joys my soul, then thanks or rich reward.
But is your armour easy? sits it well?
I never in my life was better fitted.
This should be that unlucky fatal place,
Where causeless hate drew blood from Ferdinand.
Behold the grass, a purple register,
Still blushes in remembrance of our fight.
Why wither not these trees? those herbs and plants?
And every neighbour branch droup out their grief?
Poor souls, they do, and have wept out their sap,
Yet I have paid no duty to my friend.
Where is the Tomb I wild you to erect?
See, valiant knight, proportiond and set up,
As well as my poor s•ill would suffer me:
And here his picture hangs.
You have done well:
Your hand I see's a perfect Architect
In sorrows building: once more let suffice
I quite your painful travel but with thanks:
Now leave me to my self, for here I vow
To spend the remnant of my hapless days:
No knight nor Prince shall ever pass this way,
Before his tongue acknowledge Ferdinand
The faithfullest lover and the louingst friend
The world contains: Isle have his Sepulchre
As yet but naked and vngarnished,
Ever many days hang richer with the spoils
And vanquished Trophies of proud passengers,
Then was the Romans wealthy Capitol:
So, gentle Forester, bequeath thy prayers
In my assistance; that is all I crave.
The God of power give power unto your arm,
That you may prove victorious fortunate.
Farewell, kind Host: &amp; now let me embrace
This empty Monument of my lost friend.
Oh! were it so happy to enshrine his bones,
How blessed should Pembrooke be? but they are torn
By the fierce savage Wolf, whose filthy maw
Is made an unfit grave to bury him.
But if (without offence) I may desire it,
I wish his soul from Paradise may see,
How well his name is kept in memory:
These eyes that saw him bleed, have wept for him:
This heart devised his harm, hath sighed for him:
And now, this hand, that with ungentle force
Deprived his life, shall with repentant service,
Make treble satisfaction to his soul.
Fortune, thou dost me wrong, to suffer me
So long vncombatted: I prithee send
Some stubborn Knight, some passenger,
Whose stout controlling stomach will refuse
To yield to my prescription, but by force.
I hate this idle rest of precious time.
How now! derid'st thou my devotion, goddess?
Thou sendst a woman to encounter me.
Henceforth isle hold thee for a feigned name,
And no disposer of my Christian hopes:
But soft, I know that face: oh! I, tic she
Was unjust cause of all this misery.
Long have I wandered with unquiet mind,
To find my Pembrook: that they fought, I hear:
That they were wounded both to death, I hear:
But whether cured or dead, I cannot hear:
Nor lives there any (if deceased) can tell,
Within what place their bodies are interred.
Since therefore all my travel is in vain,
Here will I take a truce with former care.
This cursed nook was that unlucky plot,
Where cursed Ferdinand did kill my Love.
What Knight is this? isle question him, perhaps
He can resolve me where my Pembroke is:
Joy and good fortune, sir, attend your state.
Your wishes come too late.
What seek you, Madam?
Tel me, sir knight, for so you seem to be:
Know you this dismal place you do frequent?
Or have you heard of that unhappy fight,
Was here performed by Pembrook and his foe?
Yes, Madam, I have heard of it long since,
And, to my grief, knew both the Gentlemen.
But can you tell me if they live or no?
Or dead, what hand hath given them burial?
Rest you assured, Madam, they are dead:
The one of them to whom I was allied,
And nearly knit in friendship from my youth,
By me lies buried here: a braver Knight,
And truer Lover never breathed in France.
O tell me, is it Pembrooke? if for him
You have erected this fair monument,
Perpetual honour I will doe your state.
Not only, Madam, have I built this tomb
In his memorial: but my self have sworn
Continual residence within this Wood:
And for the love I bare him, wear these arms,
That whatsoever Knight, aduenturer or other,
Making his journey this way, and refusing
To do Knights homage to my breathless friend,
By this assailing steel may be compelled.
Oh, let me know your name, so kindly moved,
To dignify my Pembrookes high deserts.
You did not hear me say'twas Pēbrook, Madam▪
What is become of him, I doe not know,
Nor greatly care, since he did wrong my friend,
And first in kindled this dissensious brawl.
This buried here, is noble Ferdinand,
His fathers comfort, and his Countries hope.
Oh Madam! had you seen him as I did,
Begirt with wounds, that like so many mouths,
Seemed to complain his timeless overthrow:
And had before bin inward with his virtues,
To think that nature should endure such wrack,
And at one time so many precious gifts
Perish by death, would have dissolved your heart.
He was the very pride of fortitude,
The house of virtue, and true frendships mirror:
Look on his picture, in the arms of death,
When he was ready to give up the ghost,
I caused it to be drawn: if at that time,
In that extremity of bitter pangs,
He looked so lovely, had so fresh a colour,
So quick a moving eye, sored a lip,
What was his beauty when he was in health?
See with what courage he endured the combat,
Smiling at death for all his tyranny.
Had death bin ought but what he was, sterne death▪
He would have bin enamoured with his looks▪
A certain soft remorse
Creeps to my heart, persuades me he was true,
Loving, and virtuous: but my self unkind,
Coyly to scorn the proffer of his mind.
O that in Justice of her former hate,
She now would hopeless dote on Ferdinand!
Isle do the best I can to bring her on:
Despair and madness, fetch her off again.
Madam, how say you? wast not a grievous thing,
So rich a Gem, should lye raked up in dust?
So sweet a flower, be withered in his prime?
Death was a villain for attempting it,
And so was Pembrooke for effecting it.
No bloody Scythian, or inhumane Turk,
But would ha trembled to ha touched his skin,
Or spilt one drop of his Heroic blood.
Had not that Lady then an iron heart?
A rude ungrateful mind? a savage spirit?
That knew this virtuous honourable Knight,
This gracious shape, and unmatched excellence,
To be entangled with her fervent love,
To serve her in all loyalty of heart,
To reverence and adore her very name,
To be content to kiss the lowly earth,
Where she did set her foot: and when he sued
For grace, to scorn him, to deride his sighs,
And hold his tears and torment in contempt?
Of all that ever lived, deserved she not,
The worlds reproach, and times perpetual blot?
Heard you him ever speak of such a one?
Oft times: but chiefly then, when he perceived,
His hurt was mortal, and no way but death.
At every groan, he called upon her name,
As if that sound were present remedy:
And when insulting death drew short his breath,
And now was ready to close up his eyes:
Farewell, quoth he, where ever I find a shrine,
My soul fly thou to beauteous Katherine.
That ruthless mind, that iron savage heart,
So greatly loved, and so little loving,
Breathes in this breast, it was I returned disdain,
For deep affection; scorn for loyalty:
And now compassionlesse shall pine my self.
Oh Ferdinand, forgive me, Ferdinand:
Enjoin me any penance for that wrong;
Say I shall tread a tedious pilgrimage
To furthest Palestine, and I will do it.
But peace, fond womā, these exclaims are vain:
Thy Ferdinand is dead and cannot hear,
As thou wast sometimes deaf, and would not hear.
A just reward. Come, Madam, have you done?
Give me the picture I may hang it up.
Oh take it not away: since I have lost
The substance, suffer me to keep the shadow:
Me thinks, so long as this is in my hand,
I clasp my Ferdinand between mine arms:
So long as I behold this lively form,
So long am I refreshed by his smiles:
So long, me thinks, I hear him speak to me.
Knew I the Painter drew this counterfeit,
I would reward him with a mynt of gold.
If such a pleasure you receive by this,
I tell you, Madam, I shall shortly have
His whole proportion cut in Alabaster,
Armed as he was when he encountered here,
Which kneeling, shall be set upon his tomb.
On that condition I will gather flowers,
And once a day come straw them at his feet:
And once a day pay tribute of choice thanks▪
To you the furtherer of my happiness:
Till then, I place the picture where it was.
Come on, Madam, me thinks now a mask would do well: but I perceive your drift, I smell your policy, you think a bald face hath no need of a black mask. Shall I tel you what you look like? A broyld herring, or a tortured Image made of plaster work.
So, sir, you may scoff my misery.
Still haunted with these women? are men vanished?
Or what occasion leaves the Realm of France,
So void and empty of adventurous Knights?
Out of peradventure, Madam, the ghost of Saint George is come out of England, to see what hospitality S. Denis keeps in France.
Poor Bellamira, I lament thy state;
But I must still suppress my discontent.
What are you so deformd with loathsome spots?
And what that Antique keeps you company?
Antique! thou lie, and thou were a Knight of ginger-bread: I am no Antique, the whole parish where I was borne will swear, that since the reign of Charlemain there was not a better face bred or brought up amongst them.
Away, ye russetting.
Have patience, Knight, how ever thus deformed,
This Lady is the daughter of Nauar.
Madam, it joys me I have met you here,
Though much laments me of your heavy plight.
There needs no repetition of your wrong:
I know, the villain Burbon did the deed,
Whom my incensed brother will revenge.
For Philips sake I have bin martyrd thus,
And for his sake left King and Courtly life,
To entertain a Pilgrims painful habit.
But on what strange adventure stays this Knight,
Within this desolate forsaken wood?
For love of Ferdinand your princely brother,
Whose Hearse he guards in honourable Arms.
Is this my brothers Hearse? is this the place,
Where I was shipwrecked of a brothers name?
Oh, let me spend a loving sigh for him,
And sacrifice a sisters holy rites:
For ever rest, sweet Ferdinand, in peace,
Until thy body glorified from heaven,
Become immortal by thy souls return.
Poor Bellamira, how I pity thee!
Yet must forbear to comfort thy distress.
Is my young Lord buried here? I say no more, but
I pray God send him a joyful insurrection.
Enough, sweet Bellamire,
These leprous spots, tic time they were removed.
Come, go with me. Since I left Aquitayne,
And came acquainted with these private walks,
It was my happy chance to meet an Hermit,
Whose skill in Phisike warrants present cure,
And pure refining of your poisoned blood:
Isle bring you thither: afterword select
Delicious sweets, to deck your brothers tomb.
Come, sir, follow vs.
Doe not think, Madam, that isle forsake you. And so, sir, you that walk in pewter vassal, like one of the worcester∣thyes, will you be ruled by me?
Wherein?
To set a gin for Woodcocks, &amp; catch your self first.
Hence, beetle-head. And Pembrook, now bethink
How great a tide of miseries breaks in.
First, thou art taxed with the loss of him,
Whom equal with thy self thou hold dear:
Next, Bellamira is become a Leper,
Whose absence Philip carefully laments▪
Then treacherous Burbon joins himself with France,
And both the Kings are angrily incensed:
But last, which is some comfort to the rest,
Disdainful Katherine wastes with fruitless love.
Would all so minded like mishap might prove.
But by this signal there are Knights at hand,
I must provide their valours to withstand.
Stay your intended march.
What Peer of France,
Or in the world so haughty resolute,
Dare breathe the word of stay to mighty France?
Or what art thou presum'st to stay my course?
A Knight I am, and to adventures bound:
This monument erected for my friend,
By me is guarded: If you mean to pass,
You must doe homage, or else• ••light with me.
Homage of me! Know • am King of France,
And in subjection to no earthly power.
Thou know not what thou say, to challenge vs,
Of any such inferior privilege.
What homage is it thou requir'st of vs▪
First, to acknowledge him lies buried here,
The faythfulst Lover, and most valiant Knight,
That in this time drew sword, or managed horse.
And what was he? Ascapart, or your Country∣man Gargantua, that stuffed every button of his coat with a load of hay▪ 'Shart, wee have met a fellow; here's all mouth, hee speaks nothing but Monarch. Doest thou hear, King? give me leave to encounter this puckfist: and if I doe not make him cry Peccaui, say Dicke Bowyer's a powdered Mackrel.
My blood begins to boyle, I could be pleased,
To have this fellow by the ears, but that
Theres many of my betters here in place.
King of Navarre, let Flanders cope with him.
Imperial France, give Burbon leave to try
The hazard of a combat with this Boaster.
Dispatch, Navarre, one of you come forth,
To interchange a warlike blow or two.
First let vs know what penalty thou set
Upon thy self, if thou be vanquished.
A recantation of my former words,
A servitude to him that conquers me:
But who so ever is by me subdued,
Must leave his Shield to beautify this shrine.
Let not Nauar, my Lord, rob vs of honour:
Say, Burbon first shall break a Lance with him.
A scribe that privilege, my Lord, to me:
And Rodorick will have death, or victory.
No, noble Rodorick, Burbon shall begin,
And as he speeds, we will employ your power.
Provide thee, Burbon, Isle not favour thee.
Be sure Isle show thee like hostility.
Hold, the advantage is on thy side,
The Duke of Burbon shall hang up his shield.
Id rather have his life, then al your shelds:
Who is next?
Zounds, I think he has a patten to take up all the Shields ith Country, hang me if thou want work, hears for Nauar, the earl of Pembroke &amp; Cavalier Bowier:
A thousand pound to a Taylors bodkin, this fellow has a familiar: but howsoever, thou may thank my lame leg: theres my shield.
Now Rodorick, betake you to your task.
My fortune's answerable to the rest.
Since all miscarry, France will put his chance
Upon the hazard of the Dice for once.
You are an Honourable foe, my Lord:
By law of Arms, you must hang up your shield.
I yield to law and thy approved valour.
King of Nauar, will only you sit out?
No, king of France, my blot's as hot as thine,
And this my weapon shall confirm my words.
Nauar down too! Shart, this fellow hath the trick of it: If he be not a witch or some Devil, let me be stickt into a Carbonado.
Thou son of Chivalry, let me now entreat,
To know his name, for whom thou reapst this honour:
Or what he was, whose bodie's here entered?
A valiant Knight, his name, young Ferdinand,
Slain by misfortune of a friendly hand.
Is it my son thou make thy valours prise,
And striu'st so to eternize with thy sword?
Let me embrace thee. Not alone my shield,
But I will leave my heart upon his shrine.
My dearest Ferdinand, I would my sighs,
Or sad lamenting tears might have the power,
Like Balm to quicken thy benumbed joints,
Then would I drown this marble ever I went,
And heat it hot with vapour of my breath.
Nauar, this now may testify thy wrong,
In false accusing me for his remove.
Thou moist be guilty still for ought I know:
For though I find him dead, I find not yet
The Tragic manner of his hapless end.
Thou may as well have murdered Ferdinand,
As favour him hath poisoned Bellamira.
Injurious king, it was base Ferdinand,
On whom just heavens have shown just vengeance here,
Ravished my Katherine and conveyed her hence,
Where I shall never more behold her face.
Tic false, and we'll maintain it with our swords.
Tic true, and we'll maintain it with our swords.
By heaven, the tongue profaneness the sacred name of Ferdinand with any villainy▪
Isle cut it out, or stop his throat with blood,
And so dam in his blasphemous upbraids.
Content thee, knight, Isle ease thee of that labour.
To morrow is expired the time of truce.
France, on with thy Battalions to the plain
Thou wast prepared before to pitch upon,
Isle meet thee there.
And I will meet with thee.
Sound Drums and Trumpets: honoured knight, farewell:
Who shall survive next morn, strāge news shall tel.
Thus heady rage, blind in her rash resolve
Drew Ferdinand and me into the field,
As now it doth these hot incensed kings.
Were it not my vows prohibit my desire,
To stay the inconvenience of this fight,
I would discover where their Daughters are,
To show the error they are shrouded in:
But Time hath run a desperate course with me,
And desperate let them run to misery:
Here comes a Straggler of their Army. Stand.
What voice is that presumes to bid me stand?
His that can force thee, if thou wilt not stand.
By this bright ayre reflected on my sword,
If the whole Army of Nauar had said
As much to Philip, yet he would not stand.
And thou but one, how dare thou profer it,
Knowing how sharp a Spur doth prick me on,
The death of Burbon for my Bellamire?
Hang up thy shield, as other knights have done,
Upon the Hearse of noble Ferdinand,
And thou may freely pass without control.
The Hearse of Ferdinand! I honour him,
He was the brother of my dearest Love,
What's this I see? my fathers bettered shield!
The shield of France! of Flaunders! Burbons too!
It can not then impeach or prejudice
The name of Philip, to consort with such,
Especially being done for Ferdinand.
There is my shield: and Knight, but for my haste,
I would expostulate of other things:
But after traytrous Burbon I have slain,
Knight, look for me, isle visit thee again.
Now Rodorick, keep thy word, and I am blessed:
But if thou fail, isle forward with the rest.
Successful action sit upon thy sword:
This net of sorrows, I perceive, entangles
Not only Pembrooke, but the Court of France.
Nauar and his associates are all touched.
Time look upon vs, and at last determine,
This heart-disseuering tumults with a peace.
Since▪ Ferdinand, by gracious providence,
Thou art recovered of thy mortal wounds;
With the new life thy body is reuiude,
Revive the ancient passions of thy mind,
Think on thy friend, on Pembrook take remorse,
Whose honoured life, thy hasty hand cut off:
This is the place, as I remember me.
Whats here? a Tomb? who hath prevented me
In my religious duty to my friend?
You, Knight, I doubt not, can resolve me.
What art thou? stand.
A Knight, and fain would know,
What sacred monument and Tomb this is?
His, whilst he lived, that of the worlds increase,
Was the most loyal friend, and valiant Knight:
Which thou must likewise ratify with me,
And hang thy shield up to adorn his Hearse,
Or venture Combat for denying it.
His name, I pray thee.
Ferdinand.
What's he acquainted with my name? belike some one
Loved Pembroke, and supposing (wrongfully)
Me slain by him, to satisfy for that,
Observes this honour in my memory:
Be not thou Ferdinand ungrateful then,
But stand for Pembroke, as this knight for thee.
What answer gives thou? shall I homage have?
Not for his sake thou nam'st, not for Ferdinand:
There lived a knight exceld his petty fame,
As far as costly Pearl the coursest Pebble:
An English knight called Pembroke, were his bones
Interred here, I would confess of him
Much more then thou requir'st, and be content
To hang both shield and sword upon his Hearse.
How comes this stranger by my name? Belike
He was affected unto Ferdinand:
And for his sake (hearing he did me wrong)
Covets to make amends, or means to prove
If I embrace him with unfeigned love.
He shall not doubt of that, once more I say,
It was Ferdinand was the renowned Knight
Of all the world.
But I deny that saying,
Giving to Pembroke that preeminence.
For Ferdinand my valour will I try.
In Pembrooks valour I will fight and die.
Either I dream, or this is Ferdinand.
My sight deludes me, or stout Pembroke lives.
Thrice happy honoured, I do embrace my friend.
Welcome, oh welcome Pembroke, to mine arms,
Whom I imagined, death had tan from me.
The like did I by Princely Ferdinand:
But that he lives, my soul confounds with joy.
Tell me, dear friend, since our unlucky fight,
Have you heard ought of my disdainful Love?
Of her and all the rest: Her father lives:
This is his shield, and this is great Nauars:
This Rodoricks, the Duke of Orleans,
And this malicious Burbons: all the which
I forced from them, to beautify thy shrine.
But tic of Katherine thou desire to hear:
She likewise hath bin here; her flinty heart,
So much before inclined to cruelty,
Now waxes tender: she no sooner saw
Thy picture here; but by heavens providence,
Or how I know not, she so dotes on it,
As I supposed she would a dyed for love.
Has then my shadow and supposed death
Brought that to pass my living substance could not?
It hath, and never Lady more enamoured,
Then now is Katherine of her Ferdinand.
I told her, and no more then truth I told,
A cunning Carver had cut out thy shape
And whole proportion in white Alabaster,
Which I intended here should be set up.
She earnestly entreated she might have
A sight of it, and daily be permitted
To deck thy tomb and statue with sweet flowers.
Shoe's but even now departed to that end.
And will (I know) be quickly here again.
Now for assurance I dissemble not,
Instead of thy resemblance cut in stone,
Kneel here thy self, and hear her piteous moan.
Content, I hold your counsel for the best:
Weal once conclude our sorrows with a jest.
Soft, there's a cushē: nay, you must be bare,
And hold your hands up, as the manner is.
What if I held a book, as if I prayed?
It were best of all; and now I think upon it,
Here is a book: so, keep your countenance,
You must imagine now you are transformed.
Yonder she comes, in any case stir not.
I fear I have detracted time too long.
In my determinde service to my Love:
But Isle redeem my fault with double care.
See where his statue is set up: kind Knight,
For ever Katherine will record thy truth.
How say you, Madam, 1st not very like him?
As like, as if it were himself indeed.
And would to God my prayers might be heard,
That as the Image of Pigmalion once,
Life might descend into this senseless stone:
But that was faynd, as my desire is fond,
Relentless death withholds my Ferdinand;
And no entreaty may recover him.
In token then I doe repent my scorn,
That I was cruel to so kind a friend,
Thou the presenter of his absent person,
Receive these sweets, thy temples be adorned
With this fresh garland; thy white Ivory hand
Boast of this Ring, which if thou were alive,
Should bind our faiths up in a nuptial knot:
But for thou can not be revived again,
Isle dwell with thee in death: and as my spirit
Mounts to the happy mansion of thy spirit:
So to accompany thy shadow here,
Isle turn my body to a shadow too;
And kneeling thus, confront thy silent looks,
With my sad looks: this is the Instrument,
Now Ferdinand, behold thy Katherine comes.
And she is welcome unto Ferdinand.
Isle play the clark for both, and say Amen.
Nay, muse not, Madam, tic no senseless Image,
But the true essence of your wished Love.
I am ashamed to look him in the face.
Hide not those splendāt lights, hereafter be
A constant wife, it shall suffice for me.
Heaven cast her off, if Katherine prove not so.
Of that no more: now let vs haste from hence,
To quiet the dissension lately sprung
Between your parents, Philip likewise gone,
To be revenged on Burbons treachery,
Perhaps may stand in need of friendly aid:
To him and them our vows must next be paid,
What Pembrook counsels, we cōsent unto.
Now whilst our Armies wearied with the heat
That the bright sun casts from his midday throne,
Abstain from bloody intercourse of war,
Isle lead thee Philip unto Burbons Tent.
Rodoricke, thou highly fauourest me in this,
And doubt not, if my complot take effect,
Isle make thee Duke of Burbon.
Stay your speech, here comes king Lewis.
They can not know me, I am so disguised.
Follow my counsel, and immediately begin the Battle.
Why, the heat's great,
It burns in our Armour as we march.
It burns the enemy as well as wee.
It warmes our Soldiers spirits &amp; makes them fire:
I had rather dye, then when my blood is hot,
Be awde by counsel, till it freeze like Ice:
He is no Soldier, that for fear of heat,
Will suffer victory to fly the field.
My Lord of Burbon, ye are more hot then wise.
Rodorick, me thinks you are very peremptory.
It is in zeal of the general good:
Go to your Tent, refresh your vnscorcht limbs:
There draw your battles model: and as soon
As the cool winds have fand the burning Sun,
And made it tractable for travailers:
Arm you, and mount upon your barbed Steed,
Lead forth your Soldiers, and in good array,
Charge bravely on the Army of our foe.
The Duke of Orleans hath counseld well,
Isle in and recreate me in my Tent.
Farewell, my Lord, when you resolve to fight,
Proclaim your meaning by a Canons mouth,
And with a volley I will answer you.
If you will needs retire, farewell my Lord.
Ha Rodoricke, are not we fine Politicians,
That have so quaintly wrought the King of France
Unto our faction, that he threatens war,
Against the almost reconcilde Nauar?
But this is nothing to the acts weal do:
Come, come, my Lord, you trifle time with words:
Sit down, sit down, and make your warlike plot:
But wherefore stand these murdrous Glaues so ny?
Touch them not, Rodorick, prithee let them stand.
Some paper, pen, and ink.
My Lord.
Post to the Master Gunner,
And bid him plant his demi culuerings
Against the kings pavilion.
Presently.
But first, bring pen and ink and paper straight.
Rodoricke, thou shalt assist me in this plot.
Do it your self, my Lord, I have a charge
Of Soldiers, that are very mutinous,
And long I dare not stay, for fear my absence
Be cause of their revolt unto Nauar.
Then to your Soldiers: I will to my plot.
Away my Lord, leave me unto the Duke.
Kill you the Duke, and after Isle kill thee.
This pen is stabbed, and it will not write,
The Ink that's in the Standage doth look black,
This in my pen is turned as red as blood.
The reason that the platform you would make,
Must by this hand be written with thy blood.
Zounds, what art thou that threatens Burbon so?
One that's as desperat-carelesse of his life,
As thou art timorous, and fear to dye.
Come thou to kill me?
If I should say no,
This weapon would condemn me, which I seized
Of purpose, Burbon, to bereave thy life.
Why, fond man, mad man, know thou what thou doest?
I know it, Burbon, and I know besides,
What thou would say, to daunt my resolution.
What would I say?
Why, that this place is death,
As being thy •ent, environed with thy slaves;
Where if I kill thee, tic impossible.
To scope with life: this Burbon, thou would say:
But Philip is not to be moved with words.
Philip!
I Philip, Bellamiraes Love,
Whose beauty, villain, thou hast poisoned:
For which I have vowed thy death, and thou shalt dye.
Therefore betake you to what fence you will,
Amongst this bundle choose one weapon forth,
And like a worthy Duke prepare thy self,
In knightly manner to defend thy life:
For I will fight with thee, and kill thee too,
Or thou shalt give an end unto my life.
But if thou call unto thy slaves for help,
Burbon, my sword shall nail thee to the wall:
And think Prince Philip is a Prince indeed,
To give thee this advantage for thy life.
Boy, I will scourge your insolence with death.
Come on.
Oh, I am slain.
Murder, murder, Burbon the Duke is slain.
Peace, Rodorick, I am Philip thy dear friend.
Thou art a counterfeit, I know thee not.
Did not thou guide me unto Burbons Tent?
I guide thee to the Tent? I know thee not.
What, murder, ho: will no man hear my voice?
Yes, here are those can hear well enough.
Where is the murdered, and the murderer?
Peter, behold thy masters breathless trunk,
And there's Prince Philip that hath murdered him.
To avoid prolixity, Isle kill him:
Yet first give me leave to weep for my master.
First, seize the murderer, and after weep.
He that first ventures to attach my life,
Let him be sure he hath a life to spare:
For I will send one breathless to the grave.
You that have nyne lives, assault the gentleman.
What peasants, dare you not attach the slave?
Isle raise the whole Camp, but isle apprehend him.
Alarm drums: Soldiers, encircle him,
And either apprehend or slay the wretch.
Tic princely Philip, help to rescue him.
What slaves are these that dare oppose thēselues,
In rescue of a murderer against an Host?
Such as will make thee, Rodorick, fly for life.
Zounds, men are mortal; to avoid prolixity, my Lord of Orleans, your best course is flying, and therein I will be your follower.
Fly before three, and be thus strong?
It were madness.
We trifle time, let's drive them from the Tent.
Live, worthy Philip, Pembrooke bids thee live,
That did suspect this complot at the tomb,
When in the honour of Prince Ferdinand,
You did resign your shield.
Th'Earle of Pembrooke!
And Ferdinand that loves thee as his soul.
Two lives I owe my stars, beside mine own,
In sending me two friends of such import.
Durst you adventure thorough the enemies Camp,
And put your lives in danger to save mine?
The rumour of the Duke of Burbons death,
Hath so possessed the Camp with admiration,
That they regardless suffer all to pass:
Only this, Rodorick wakens them a little;
But cannot wean them from their wondering minds.
That Rodorick is a perfect villain turned:
For though he guided me unto his Tent,
And gave his liking that the Duke should dye;
Yet how the villain cried to murder me.
But come, in this confusion let's be gone,
Tic dangerous to abide in Burbons Tent.
Rodoricke, thou art the next must taste of death:
That task once done, we shall with little payne,
Our angry fathers reconcile again.
The Alarm sounded in the enemies Camp.
Now for Nauar and Fame, stand to it, sirs.
Hart, stand to it? heere's some of vs knows how to run away, and they be put to it: Though wee have lost our brave General, the Earl of Pembrooke, yet
here's Cavalier Bowyer, Core and Nod, by Iesu, sound Cards; and Mahound and Termagant come against vs, weal fight with them. Couragio, my hearts, S. George for the honour of England.
The adverse part comes on, fight gallantly.
Is false Nauar so thirsty to drink blood,
That he must join the Squadron of his troops,
Before the signal of the battel's given.
Belike you thought to take vs vnpreparde.
No, king, our wrong hangs like a watch before vs,
And makes vs number every short-lynd minute,
Till your lives answer for our Daughters death;
Charge, brave spirits: Saint Denis now for France.
Saint Denis for Nauar: Alarm Drums.
Nauar and his weak forces make retire:
Pursue them, Sirs, the victory is ours.
Be like starved Lions amongst a heard of Beasts,
Ruthelesse and bloody slaughters all you meet,
Till proud Nauar be slain, or kiss your feet:
Saint Denis, and cry murder through the host.
He that steps forward with a murdering thought,
Marries him self to death. France, cease the fight:
They are Frenchmen you pursue, French men you should save.
Dig not for Traitors love your subjects grave.
What frantic knights are those that dare oppose
Their single force against our multitudes?
Those that wish you and France bright fems en∣crease.
So you would chase hence war, and welcome peace.
That was the Traitor, that slew royal Burbon.
Down with the villains.
Soldiers, seize on him,
And then pursue Nauar with sudden death.
Ever the least hair fall from his kingly head,
Rodorick, thy base trunk shall be butchered.
Will you accept of peace?
Follow Nauar.
Down with that murderer.
Zounds, then inspight,
Weal save Nauar, and chase you hence in fight.
Ha, ha.
Nay, smile not, though our number's few,
Our great hearts tell vs, we shall conquer you.
Alarm, and S. George.
France and his daunted forces gives vs ground:
Charge, charge again, and we are Conquerors.
Stand, or ne'er stir again.
What mean these Knights?
To stop your passage this way, great Nauar▪
I charge thee, by the duty of a King,
Thy love to Justice, and thy subjects lives,
You sound retreat, and make a peace with France.
A peace, and have the vantage of the day?
That's a trick, by Iesu, to mock an Ape: we'll none of that.
We'll have no peace, but what our swords can make.
Follow the chase.
Are you grown insolent?
For one light puff of fortune proves it so▪
Nay, then our swords turn to your overthrow.
That was my father that you fought against.
You did as much to mine.
Princes, agree: force cānot end this war, but policy.
Therefore disperse your selves, and let our Squires,
With Trumpets in their mouths sound loud retreat,
Where you perceive the fight most violent.
The strangeness of which act will straight amaze,
When they shall hear both peace and war denounced,
And one self instant, they will soon retire.
To know the issue, Princes, fall to work:
Tic work of charity, it would doe me good,
If we could end this battle without blood.
I hope we shall: farewell, isle to my charge.
The like will Pembrooke.
Philip is not last.
Yet though I seek the safety of my friends,
Rodorick shall lose his blood, ever this fight ends.
Struggle not, strive not, your sweet heart Bow∣yer cannot save you. Without prolixity, you must go with me.
Help, help.
And the God of war come in thy defence, my humour is to kill him. Come away.
By Iesu, &amp; you go this way, you must pay custom. Zounds, you pickt-hatch Cavalier petticote-monger, can you find time now to be catching Thomasin? come, deliver, or by Zenacrib, &amp; the life of king Charlemain, isle thrash
your coxcomb, as they doe hens at Shrouetyde: no, will you not doe, you Tan-fat? zounds, then have at you.
Are the Kings severed? will they bow to peace?
Peace is a welcome guest unto their hearts:
But Rodoricke, like a greedy envious churl,
Fearing to spend his wealth, still keeps them back,
Tic he exasperates the Princes hate:
And when our Trumpets call them to retire,
He with wars clang or sets them on again.
Unless he be removed, our labour's lost.
It shall not; for isle seek him through the Host,
And with this sword pare off the Traitors head.
Doe, and isle scour these ranks: if Pembroks eye
Encounters his, he meets his Tragedy.
Stay, warlike friends, and aid me in revenge.
That is Rodoricke.
Heere's the Traitor, strike him down.
Who lifts his arm at him, strikes at my breast.
Why have you thus ringed me about with swords?
To show thee thou must dye.
What have I done,
That thus you labour my destruction?
Thou were it a party in all Burbons wrongs.
Falsely termed Ferdinand a Ravisher.
Set discord twixt these Kings.
Practised my death.
Villain, for this, our swords shall stop thy breath.
Stand not to argue, let's all run at him.
Now as you love my love, or prize mine honour,
Touch not the Traitor, he is Philips foe;
And none but I must work his overthrow.
Thrice in the battle he was rescued from me:
But now hoe's fallen into the Lyons paw,
From whence the whole world cannot ransom him.
Preservers of my life, heroic friends,
Be you my safety, keep the Soldiers off,
Whilst in the midst by fair and equal fight,
I send this Traitor to eternal night.
By heaven agreed.
Here Pembrooke takes his stand:
Come France and all the world, I will not start,
Till Philips knightly sword pearce Rodoricks hart.
Accursed, I am betrayed, encompassed round:
Now life and hope and state must kiss the ground.
Rodorick, thou see, all ways are stopped to fly,
Be desperate then, fight bravely, and so die.
Now are his treacheries repaid with death:
Philip and Pembrooke, sound your retreat•
With better hope; in him all hatred ends:
The kings will now love peace, &amp; soon be friends▪
Zounds, never run for the matter, a scratched face can not serve your turn, we must have bloody noses: stād on your guard: &amp; I do not make haggasse puddings of your guts, Isle never domineer in the long Alleyes again.
Cymnell, Isle crack you for this, Isle teach you to deal with Peter de Lions, and that without prolixity.
Do: have at you in earnest: S. George, you rogue.
So, there's for your prolixities: there's for Tho∣masin: the Thornbackly slave, and he were made of any thing but gristles, I am a pumpian: 'Shart, he had no met∣tle in him: yet how the villain crak't and domineered when he was living: ah, sir, never gryn for the matter, tic Captain Bowyer that speaks it. When thou meetst the great Devil, commend me to him, and say, I sent him thee for a new years gift: and there's one Sarlaboys to, as arrant a bloud-sucker, and as notable a coward, as ever drew weapon in a bawdy house: hee carries my mark a∣bout him: if Dicke Bowyer be not writ a bountiful be∣nefactor in hell for my good deeds, in sending thither such Cannibals, I am a Rabbit-sucker: yet I scorn to vaunt of my deeds too. They sound a retreat: farewell, Peter, and learn hereafter what it is to be rival to an English gentle∣man, Cavalier Bowyer, one of the nyne worthyes.
Nauar, why have you sounded a retreat?
Will your proud heart decline and call vs Lord?
We thought by the faint lāguage of your drums,
France would have known his error, and begged peace.
France beg a peace!
Nauar call you his Lord!
Why did you cease the fight, and sound retreat?
Not we, by this beard: not we, by the life of Pharo.
Your Trumpets guided by your fainting breath,
Dehorted vs from war, and sounded peace.
Nauar derides vs.
France, tic you that do it.
Sound war, and bravely let vs once more too't.
Kings of Nauar and France, why doe you thus
With civil butchery wound this blessed land,
Which like a mother, from her melting eyes,
Sheds crimson tears, to see you enemies?
Lewes of France, wherein hath great Nauar
Dangerd your state, that you should prosecute
War with her largest ruin? how hath France
Sowed such inveterate hate within your breast,
That to confound him, you will undergo
The orphants curse, the widows tears &amp; cries,
Whose husbands in these wars have lost their lives?
Ever you contend, discourse your grievances.
False Ferdinand his son, ravished our child.
Now by my Knighthood, honour, and this gage,
France, •le approve you wrong that Ferdinand.
Who can accuse him?
That did Rodorick.
That Traitor, for a deed so false, so foul,
Hath answered it by this, even with his soul.
Our son, and valours bloom, th'English Pem∣brooke,
By Lewes treachery were butchered.
Were the whole world joined in so false a thing,
Alone Id combat all, and clear the King.
France never had design in their two deaths.
He leagued with Burbon, that destroyed my child.
He poisoned her deservedly.
That deed of shame
Cut off his life, and raced out Burbons name.
His death shall be thy death; for thy hand slue him.
This other in the battle twice to day,
Made vs retire, France, shall we join in league,
Till we have veng'd our malice on these knights?
Nauar, agreed. Soldiers, this kyld your Lords.
And this our fame: let's mangle them with swords.
Take truce a while with rage: hear what we'll urges
This knight flew Burbon, this enforced you fly;
Therefore you hate them, and for hate they die.
Since then true virtue is disfigured,
Desert trod down, and their heroic worth,
In justice doomed on Traitors merits, Death:
Behold these two, which thousands could not daunt,
But your ingratitude, on bended knee,
Yield up their swoords to bide your tyranny.
It was he kilt Burbon: if you love him dead,
Show it by paring off this valiant head:
Do you the like: to this revenge apace.
They fear not threats, and scorn to beg for grace.
And they shall find none.
Knights, triumph in death,
We are your headsmen, Kings shall stop your breath.
Philip, my son!
Young Ferdinand my joy!
Call them not sons, whom you would fain de∣stroy.
Hold not our age too long in deep suspect.
Art thou Ferdinand?
And thou Philip?
We are the friendly sons of adverse parents,
Your long lost children, though supposed slain,
We live, and come to joy your age again.
Welcome all earthly bliss.
Welcome, dear child,
Thy presence half our sorrow hath exiled.
How soon this Scene is chāg'd! those that euē now
Were sworn wars servants, now to peace do bow:
Then Pembrooke, strive to make their joys more full.
See, kingly father, to that princely son.
Pembrooke, the hated murderer of his friend:
Pembroke, that did divide thee from his sight,
And cut so many passages of death,
In his endeared bosom, humbly thus
Forgets his honour, and from your hye hand,
Invokes revenge for wounding Ferdinand.
Still he surmounts me in an honoured love.
Rise, friend; or if thou striu'st to have the world,
In me, as in a glass, see a false friend.
Behold, I kneel, and here proclaim to all,
My friendship's broke, but thine substantial.
Model of virtue, honoured Pembroks Earl,
Rise in as dear regard as Ferdinand.
Oh, had I Bellamira once in hold,
Age would turn youth, &amp; I should ne'er be old.
Had I my Katherine once again,
Our joy were then stretched to the highest strain:
But she was ravished, and then murdered▪
Bear not that hard opinion: Rodoricks tongue
Slandered that Prince, and did his virtue wrong.
Lewis of France, hear what an English Earl
Speaks in the front and view of all thy Host:
If ever Ferdinand stained Katharines honour,
I was a party: yet in all your Camp,
Who dares step forth and call me ravisher?
No, France, know Pembroke is an Englishman,
Highly derived, yet higher in my thoughts;
And for to register mine acts in brass,
Which all-deuouring time shall ne'er race out,
Have I through all the Courts of Christendom,
In knightly trial proved my virtue sound,
Raised Englands fame aloft; and shall I now,
In her next continent, her neighbour Realm.
France, on whose bosom I may stand and see
That blessed soil, that bred and fostered me,
Soil all my late got honour, to consent
Unto a royal Princes ravishment?
Id sooner from a mountain cast my self,
Or from a hungry Lyon tear his pray,
Then dare to act a deed so infamous:
But words are ayre: Lewis, behold this face;
This proves our honour clear from all disgrace.
My Katherine!
My dear sister!
My fair Love!
See, Princes, loves effect: she flies your hand,
To live embraced with her dear Ferdinand.
And heaven forbid that we should sunder them.
Nauar, reach me thy hand: grym war is fled,
And peace shall end the same in a nuptial bed.
Son Philip, ratify your sisters choice.
Even with my soul: for ever live you blessed.
Oh Bellamira, had not cursed Burbon,
For beauty robbed thy cheeks with Leprosy:
Had thou but stayed with me, as is their state,
So had bin mine, happy and fortunate.
By your leave, sweet bloods: may a Gentleman or so, deceive two or three ounces of words in this assembly?
You may.
Is there not a young Kings son amongst you, who treading the steps of his father, is called Philip?
I am the man thou seekst.
Then the old saying is verified, He that seeks, shall find. Here is a poor kinswoman of mine would desire some private conference with you, or so.
With me? whom see I? Bellamira!
Daughter!
Do not deride my woes, speak, speak, I pray.
Look not so strange, it is thy lovely Love,
Thus managed, to approve thy constancy.
Embrace her then: and now Nauar and France,
Here end your strife, and let all hatred fall,
And turn this war to Hymens festival.
This Pembrooks counsel we subscribe unto.
The like doth France: Lovers embrace your Loves;
And Captains, join your Bands, mix power with power,
And let those swords, which late were drawn for death,
Sleep in their sheathes. You, worthy Pembrooke,
And all your followers, shall receive our favours,
In plenteous largess: so, set on to Court;
Sound Drums and Trumpets, deaf the ayre with cries,
And fill eche subjects heart with joys increase,
T'applaud our childrens love, and this days peace.

SLight hasty labours in this easy Play,
Present not what you would, but what we may:
For this vouchsafe to know the only end
Of our now study is, not to offend.
Yet think not, but like others rail we could,
(Best art Presents, not what it can, but should)
And if our pen in this seem over slight,
We strive not to instruct, but to delight,
As for some few, we know of purpose here
to tax, and scout: know firm art cannot fear
Vain rage: only the highest grace we pray
Is, you'll not tax, until you judge our Play.
Think and then speak: tic rashness, and not wit
To speak what is in passion, and not judgment fit:
Sit then, with fair exspectance, and survey
Nothing but passionate man in his slight play,
Who hath this only ill: to some deemed worst,
A modest diffidence, and self mistrust.
THe difference betwixt the love of a Courtesan, &amp; a wife, is the full scope of the Play, which intermixed with the de∣ceits of a witty City Easter, fills up the Comedy.
NAy comfort my good host Shark, my good, Mulligrubb.
Advance thy snout, doe not suffer 〈◊〉 〈…〉 to drop on thy spanish leather jerkin, most hardly honest Mulligrub•
What, cogging Cocledemoy is 〈◊〉 with a nest of goblets, true, what then? they will be ha•∣mart out well enough, I warrant you.
Sure, some wise man would find them out presently.
Yes sure, if we could find out some wise man presently▪
How was the pl•te lost? how did it vanish?
In most sincere prose thus: that man of much money, some wit, but less honesty, cogging Cocledemoy, comes this night •ay into mine hostess Mulligrubs Tavern here, calls for •••dome, the house being full, Cocledemoy consorted with hi• 〈◊〉 •r•able 〈◊〉, his instrument of fornication, the bow•• Mrs.
are imparlarde next the street good po••• as
their food, black bird, Lark, woodcock, and mine host here, comes in, cries God bless you, and departes: A blind Harper enters, craves audience, uncased, plays, the Drawer for female priuatnes sake is nodded out, who knowing that whosoever will hit the mark of profit, must like those that shoot in stone-bowes wink with one eye, grows blind a the right side and departs.
He shall answer for that winking with one eye at the last day.
Let him have day till then, and he will wink with both his eyes.
Cocledemoy perceiving none in the room but the blind Harper, (whose eyes heaven had shut up, from beholding wic∣kednesse,) vnclaspes a casement to the street very patiently, pose∣kits up •. bowls unnaturally, thrusts his wench forth the win∣dow, and him self most preposterously with his heals forward follows, the vnseeing Harper plays on, bids the empty dishes and the treacherous candles much good do them. The Draw∣e• returns, but out alas, not on 〈◊〉, but also the beast of goblets were flown away, La•ente are raised.
Which did not pierce the heavens.
The Drawers moan, mine host doth cry, the bowls are gone.
Hic finis Priami.
Nay, be not iaw fallen, my most sharking Mulligrub.
Tic your just affliction 〈…〉 of the fell∣lar, and repent, repent.
I am not iawfalne, but I will hang the contracting Cocledemoy, and theres an end of't. 
Is it a right stone, it shows well by candlelight.
So doe many things that are counterfeit, but I assure you this is a right Diamond.
Might I borrow it of you, it will not a little gre•e 〈◊〉 finger in visitation of my Mistress.
Why use it most sweet Cuqueture, use it.
Thanks good Sir, ti's grown high night: Gentle•, rest to you. 
A torch, found wench, soft sleep, and sanguine• dreams to you both on boy.
Let me bid you good rest.
Not so trust me, I must bring my friend home: I dare not give you up to your own company, I fear the warmth of wine and youth, will draw you to some Common house of las∣ciuious entertainment.
Most necessary buildings Malheureus ever since my intention of Marriage, I doe pray for their continuance.
Loved Sir, your reason?
Marry least my house should be made one: I would have married men love the S•ewes, as Englishmen loved the low Countries: wish war should be maintained there, least it should come home to their own doors: what, suffer a man to have a hole to put his head in, though hee go to the Pillory for it: Youth and Appetite are aboue the Club of Hercules.
This lust is a most deadly sin sure.
Nay, tic a most lively sin sure.
Well I am sure, tic one of the head sins.
Nay, I am sure it is one of the middle sins.
Pity, tic grown a most daily vice.
〈…〉
Well, tic a sin.
I, or else few men would wish to go to Heau•… 〈…〉 to disguise with my friend, I am now giving the way of 〈…〉
Not to a Courtesan.
A courteous one.
What 〈…〉
A 〈◊〉 Publican.
Dear my 〈…〉
〈◊〉 Sir, 〈…〉 the strongest argument that speaks▪
Against the souls eternity is lust.
Th•• Wisemans folly, and the fools wisd•…
But to 〈…〉
〈…〉 to beat, and 〈…〉
Nay to expo•• your health and strength 〈…〉
Your precious time, and 〈…〉
Of due preferment advantage 〈…〉
Of any worthy end to the 〈…〉
The common bosom 〈…〉
〈1 line〉
Alas good 〈…〉 you have
would you have them get their living by the curse of man, the sweat of their brows? so they doe, every man must follow his trade, and every woman her occupation: a poor decayed me∣chanicall mans wife, her husband is laid up, may not she lawfully be laid down, when her husbands only rising, is by his wives falling? a Captains wife wants means, her Commander lies in open field abroad, may not she lye in civil arms at home. A weighting Gentlewoman that had wont to take say to her Lady, miscarries, or so: the Court misfortune throws her down, may not the City courtesy take her up: doe you know no Alderman would pity such a women's case: why is charity grown a flint▪ or relieving the poor and impotent an offence? You will 〈◊〉 beasts take no money for their fleshly entertainment: true, be∣cause they are beasts, therefore beastly, only men give to loose, because they are men, therefore manly: and indeed, where•• should they bestow their money better? In Land, the title may be cracked: In Houses, they may bee burnt: In apparel, will wear: In wine, alas for pity out thr•ate is but short: But em∣ploy your money upon women, and a thousand to not 〈…〉 one of them will bestow that on you, which shall • ti•le by you as long as you hue; they are no ungrateful persons, they with give quite for quo▪ do ye protest, they'•e sweat, doe you they theyle fall doe you fall, they'll rise, do you give them, the 〈◊〉 Crown, they'll give you the french; O iustus just, 〈◊〉 They fell their bodies▪ doe not better persons fell their souls? nay, since all things have been sold, honour, justice, aim: my, even God himself, Aye me, what base ignoblenesse is it 〈◊〉 the pleasure of a wanton bed.
Why doe men scrape, why heap to full heaps join.
But for his Mistress, who would care for coin▪
For this I hold to be denied of no man,
All things are made for man, and man for woman, give 〈◊〉
Of ill you merit well: my hearts good friend, Leave yet at length, at length, for know this ever Tic no such sin to err, but to persevere.
Beauty is women's virtue, love the lifes Musique: and woman the daintiness or second course of heavens curious work∣manship, since then beauty love and woman are good, how can
the love of women's beauty be bad and, Bonum quo communius to melius; will it then go with me?
Whether?
To a house of salvation.
Salvation?
Yes twill make thee repent. will it go• to the family of love▪ I will show thee my creature▪ a pretty nimble eye Dutch T•••kin; An honest soft hearted impropriation, a soft plūpe, round you•• fro, that has beauty enough, for her virtue, virtue enough for a woman, and woman enough for any reasonable man in my knowledge: will it pass a long with me?
What to a Brothel, to behold an impudent 〈◊〉 on•• not shall here the whole 〈◊〉 to see her: the most odious spectacle the earth can present, is an modest vulgar woman.
Good still: my brain shall keep't: you must go as you love me▪
Well: Isle go to make her loath the shame shoe's in, The 〈…〉
The •ight of vi•e 〈◊〉 the •ate o• sin, very •••¦party.
Mary, Mary Faugh.
H•m.
Come any worshipful 〈…〉 any blew toothed Patrones of 〈…〉 wickedness, give me the goblets.
By yea, and by nay, moister Coclod•• I fear you're play the knave and restore them.
No by the Lord A••, 〈◊〉 Catholi••e and 〈◊〉 know we love.
What?
Oracles are seas'd: Tempu• pr•t••••, dost hear my •orshipfull glisterpipe, thou ungodly fire that burnt Diana• 〈◊〉, dost hear Ba•d,
In very good truthnes you are the foulest mou••'d propha•no railing Brother, call a womā the most ungodly 〈◊〉: I 〈◊〉 we all eat of the forbidden fruit, and for mine
own part tho I am one of the family of love and as they say a bawd that covers the multitude of sins, yet I trust I am none of the wicked that eat fish a Fridays.
Hang toastes, I rail at thee my worshipful organ bell∣lowes that fills the pipes, my fine rattling fleamy cough a the lun∣ges and cold with a Po••, I rail at thee what my right precious pandres supportres of Barber Surgeons and inhauntres of lati•••• and diet drink: I rail at thee necessary damnation, Isle make an oration, I, in praise of thy most courtly in fashion, and most plea∣sureable function. I.
I prithee do, I love to hear my self praised, as well as any old Lady, I.
List then, a Band, first for he• profession or ye can •• i• is most worshipful of all the 12. Companies, for as that trade it most honourable that sells the best comōdityes, as the Draper is more worshipful then the poyntmaker, the silkeman more worcester∣shipfull then the Draper, and the Goldsmith more honourable then both, Little Mary so, that 〈◊〉 •hon• all, her shoe•• has the best were, for where these •ell but 〈◊〉 sattens, and 〈…〉 sells divine virtues as virginity, modesty and such rare I•mmes, and those not like a petty chapman, by retail, but like a great merchant hy whole •ale, ••, ha, ho, and who are her customers, not base corn cutters, or sowgelders, but most ra•e wealthy Knights, and most 〈…〉 are her customers 〈…〉 profit, but by the loss and displeasure of another, as the Merchant thrives non but by the licentiousness of giddy, and unsettled youth: the Law∣yer, but by (the vexation of his client, the Physician, but by the maladies of his patient, only my smooth gumbde Bawd hues by others pleasure, and only grows rich by other rising. O merciful gain, O righteous in-come. So much for her voca••• on, trade and life, as for their death, how can it bee 〈…〉 their wickedness is always before their eyes, and a deaths head most commonly on their middle finger. To conclude, ti's most certain they must needs both live well, and d•e well, since 〈◊〉 commonly they live in Clearken-well, and dye in 〈…〉 Dixie Mary.
Come along, yonders the preface or exordium to my wench, the bawd: Fetch, fetch. What M. Cocledemoy, is your knaueshippe yet stirring, look to it, Mulligrub lies for you.
The more fool he, I can lye for my self, worshipful friend, hang toastes, I vanish. Ha my fine boy thou art a school∣ler, and hast read Tullies Offices, my fine knave, hang toastes.
The Vintner will toast you and he catch you.
I will draw the Vintner to the stoop, and when he runs low tilt him, he my fine knave, art going to thy recreation.
Yes my capticeous rascal.
Thou wilt look like a fool then by and by.
Look like a fool why?
Why according to the old saying, A beggar when he is lousing of himself looks like a Philosopher, a hard bound Philosopher, when he is on the stool, looks like a tyrant, and a 〈…〉 when hee is in his be•y 〈◊〉, looks like a fool, God go•e your worship good rest, grace and mercy keep your Syring straight, and your Lotium vnspile.
See, Sir this is she.
This?
This.
A Courtesan? Now cold blood defend me, what a pro∣portion afflicts me?
O mine aderliuer love, vat sall me do to requi• dis your must affection.
Marry salute my friend, clip his neck, and kiss him welcome.
A mine art, Sir you bin very velcome.
Kiss her man with a more familiar affection, so, come what entertainment, go to your Lute. 
And how dost approve my sometimes elected? fees none of your romping Cannibals, that devour mās flesh, nor any of your cur∣teen gulfs, that will never be satisfied, until the best thing 〈◊〉
has be thrown into them. I loved her with my heart, until my soul showed me the imperfection of my body, and placed my affection on a lawful love, my modest Beatrice, which if this short heals knew, there were no being for me with eyes before her face. But faith▪ dost thou not some what excuse my sometimes in∣continence with her enforciue beauties. Speak.
Ho, she is a whore, is she not?
VVhore? fie whore? you may call her a Courtesan, a Co∣citric, or (as that worthy spirit of an eternal happiness said) a Suppository, but whore? fie: tic not in fashion to call things by their right names, is a great merchant, a coockold, you must say, he is one of the livery, is a great Lord, a fool, you must say he is weak, is a gallant pocky, you must say, he has the court 〈◊〉, come shees your mistress or so:
Come Siren your voice.
Will not you stay in mine bosom to night love▪
By no means sweet breast, this Gentleman has vowed to see me chastely laid.
He shall have a bed too, if dat it please him.
Peace you tender him offence, hee is one of a professed abstinence, Siren your voice and away.
The dark is my delight,
So tic the Nightingales.
My Musicke's in the night,
So is the Nightingales.
My body is but little,
So is the Nightingales.
I love to sleep against prickle.
So doth the Nightingale.
Thanks, Bus, so the night grows old good re••.
Rest to mine dear love, rest, and no long absence.
Believe me not long.
Sall Ec not believe you long. 
O yes, come viah, away, boy, on. 
Is she unchaste, can such a one be damde?
O love and beauty, ye two eldest seeds
Of the vast Chaos, what strong right you have,
Even in things divine, our very souls.
When, ha, ho, come bird come, stand peace.
Are strumpets then such things, so delicate,
Can custom spoil, what nature made so good.
Or is their Custom bad? Beauti's for use,
I never saw a sweet face vicious,
It might be proud, inconstant, wanton, nice,
But never tainted with unnatural vice.
Their worst is, their best art is love to win,
O that to love should be or shame, or sin;
By the Lord hoe's caught, Laughter eternal?
Soul I must love her destiny is weak to my affection.
A common love, blush not faint breast
That which is ever loved of most is b•••
Let colder-eld the strongst objections mo••,
No lou's without some lust, •o life without some love.
Nay come on good sir, what though the most odious spectacle the world can present be an imōdest vulgar woman: Yet sir for my sake.
Well sir for your sake Isle think better of them.
Doe good sir and pardon me that have brought you in You know the sight of vice augments the hate of sin.
Ho? will you go home sir it is hye bed time.
Withal my hart sir only do not chide me I must confess.
A wanton lover you have been.
O that to love should be or shame, or sin.
Say ye?
Let colder old the strongst objections move.
Howe's this?
No loue's without some lust,
No life without some love,
go your ways for an Apostate, I believe my cast garment must be let out in the seames for you when all is done,
"Of all the fools that would all man out-thrust,
"He that against Nature would seem wise is worst.
The morn is yet but young: here gentlemen,
This is my Beatrice window, this the chamber
Of my betrothed dearest, whose chaste eyes,
Full of loved sweetness, and clear cherefulnes,
Have gaged my soul to her in ioyings,
Shredding away all those weak vnder-braunches,
Of base affections, and unfruitful heats,
Here bestow your music to my voice. 
Always a virtuous name to my chaste love,
Loved sir the honour of your wish return to you,
I cannot with a mistress complement
Forced discourses, or nice art of wit,
Give entertain to your dear wished presence,
But safely thus, what hearty gratefulness,
Vnsulleine Silence, vnaffected modesty,
And an vnignorant shamefastness can express,
Receive as your protested due. Faith my hart,
I am your servant,
O let not my secure simplicity, breed your mislike,
As one quite void of skill,
Tic Grace enough in vs not to be ill,
I can some good, and faith I mean no hurt,
Do not then sweet wrong sober ignorance,
I judge you all of virtue, and our vows,
Should kill all fears that base distrust can move,
my soul what say you, still you love?
Still? my vow is up aboue me, &amp; like time
Irrevocable. I am sworn all yours,
No beauty shall untwine our arms, no face
In my eyes can or shall seem fair,
And would to God only to me you might
Seem only fair; let others disesteem
Your matchless graces: so might I safer seem,
Envy I covet not: far, far be all ostent
Vain boasts of beauties: soft joys and the rest,
"He that is wise, pants, on a private breast,
So could I live in desert most unknown,
Your self to me enough were Populous,
Your eyes shall be my joys, my wine that still
Shall drown my often cares, your only voice
Shall cast a slumber on my listening sense,
You with soft lip shall only op mine eyes,
And suck their lidds a sunder, only you
Shall make me wish to live, &amp; not fear death,
So on your cheeks I might yield latest breath,
O he that thus may live, and thus shall dye,
May well be envied of a deity.
Dear my loved hart be not so passionate, nothing extreme lives long.
"But not to be extreme, nothing in loue's extreme my love receives no mean.
I give you faith, and pre thee since poor foul I am so easy to believe thee, make it much more pity to deceive me, wear this slight favour in my remēbrance. 
Which when I part from, hope the best of life, ever part from me.
I take you and your word, which may ever live your servant, see day is quite broke up, the best of hours.
Good morrow graceful mistress, our nuptial day holds.
With happy constancy a wished day. 
My self and all content rest with you.
The studious morn with paler cheek draws on,
The days bold light, hark how the free-borne birds
Carol their vnaffected passions, 
Now sing they sonnets, thus they cry, we love
O breath of heaven! thus they harmless souls
Give entertain to mutual affects.
They have no Bawds: no mercenary beds
No politic restraints: no artificial heats
No faint dissemblings, no custom makes them blush,
No shame afflicts their name, O you happy beasts
In whom an inborn heat is not held sin,
How far transcend you wretched, wretched man
Whom national custom, Tyrannous respects
Of slavish order, fetters: lames his power
Calling that sin in vs, which in all thy••• else
Is natures highest virtue. (O misery quer•••ng gaud a crimen haben•
Sure nature against virtue cross doth fall
Or virtues self is oft unnatural,
That I should love a strumpet I a man of Snow
Now shame forsake me whether am I fallen!
A creature of a public use, my friends love to
To live to be a talk to men, a shame
To my professed virtue. "O accursed reason,
"How many eyes hast thou to see thy shame▪
"And yet how blind once to prevent defame?
Diaboli vertus in Lumbis est, morrow my friend; come, I could make a tedious scene of this now but, what, pab, thou art in love with a Courtesan, why sir, should we loath all strumpet a∣sum men should hate their own mothers or sisters, a sin a∣against kind I can tell you.
May it be seem a wise man to be in love?
Let wise men alone, twill beseem thee and me well enough.
Shall I not offend the 〈…〉 of our friendship?
Where to affect that 〈…〉 •rend affected by hey∣•en I resign her freely, the creature and I most grow of, by this time she has assurely heard of my resolved marriage, and no question swears, Gods Sacrament, •en Thousand Devils Isle resign I faith.
I would but embrace her, •ear her speak, and at the most but kiss her.
O friend he that could live with the smoke of roast ••ate might live at a cheap rate.
I shall near prove heartily received,
A kind of flat ungracious modesty,
An insufficient dull•es staines my hauiour.
No matter sir, In-sufficiency and sottishness are much commendable in a most discommendable action, now could I swallow thee, thou had wont to be so ba•sh and cold isle tell thee. Hell and the prodigies of angry love are not so fearful to a thinking mind as a man without affection•, why friend, Phi∣losophie &amp; a •••re are all one, lo••, is the center in which all lines close the common bond of being.
O but a chaste reserved priuatnes, a modest continence,
He tell thee what, take this as firmest sense,
"In Continence will force a Continence,
"Hey•e wastes heate, light defaces light,
"Nothing is spoiled but by his proper might,
This is some thing too weighty for thy floor▪
But how so ere you shade it, the worlds eye
Shines not and open out,
Lying, malice, envy, are held but fidyngs.
〈◊〉 of rage, when custom and the world
Calls lust a crime spotted with blackest terror▪
Where errors are held Crimes, 〈◊〉 are but errors
Along si• to her she is an •rrand strumpet: &amp; a strumpet is.
A Sarpego• Venom de 〈◊〉 to man. 
Things ••tually possessed: yet 〈…〉
And again as good make use of a Statue,
A body without a soul, a carcass three months dead,
Yet since thou art in love.
Death man, my destiny I cannot choose.
Nay I hope so, again they fell but only flesh,
No jot affection, so that even in the enjoying,
Absentem marble amque p•tes, yet since you needs must love,
Unavoidable though folly, worse then madness.
Its true, but since you needs m•st love, you must know this,
He that must love, a fool, and he must kiss,
Cocledemoy vt vales Domino.
Ago tibi gratias, my worshipful friend, how does your friend?
Out you rascal.
Hang toastes, you are an Ass, much a your worships brain lies in your Calves, bread a God boy, I was at supper last night with a new weaned bulchin, bread a God drunk, whore∣ribly drunk, horribly drunk, there was a wench one Frank Frailty, a puncke, an honest pole-cat, of a clean In step, found leg, smooth thigh, and the nimble Devil in her buttock, al• feast a grace, when saw you Tysefew, or M. Caque•ur, that prat∣ling gallant of a good draught common customs, fortunate, impudence and sound fare.
A way Rogue.
Hang toastes, my fine boy, my companion as worship∣full.
Yes I hear you are taken up with scholars and church∣men. 
Qùanquam to Marce fi•• my fine boy, does your worcester∣ship want a Barb• Surgeon.
Farewell knave, beware the Mull•grubs.
Let the Malligrubs beware the knave, what a Bar∣bar Surgeon▪ my delicate boy?
Yes sir an apprentice to surgery.
Ti,s my fine boy, to what bawdy 〈◊〉 doth your Moister be∣long, whats thy name?
Holifernes Rain-scure.
Rainscure? good M. Holifernes I desire your further acquaintance, nay pray ye bee covered my fine boy, kill thy itch and heal thy skabes, is thy Moister rotten?
My father forsooth is dead.
And laid in his grave, alas what comfort shall Peggy then have.
None but me sir, thats my mothers son I assure you.
Mothers son, a good witty boy, would live to read an Homily well, and to whom are you going now?
Marry forsooth to trim M. Mulligrub •he Vintner.
Doe you know M. Mulligrub?
My Godfather Sir.
Good boy hold up thy chops, I pray thee doe one thing for me, my name is Gudgeon.
good M. Gudgeon.
Lend me thy basin, razer, and Apron.
O Lord sir.
Well spokē, good english, but whats thy furniture worth?
O Lord sir I know not.
Well spoken, a boy of a good wit, hold this pawn, where dost dwell.
At the sign of the three razers sir,
A sign of good shaving my carastrophonicall fine boy, I have an odd jest to trim M. Mulligrub for a wager, a jest boy, a humour, Isle return thy things presently, hold.
What mean you good M. Gudgeon?
Nothing faith but a jest boy, drink that, Isle recoil pre∣sently.
You'll not stay long.
As I am an honest man, the 3. razers?
I sir. 
Good, and if I shave not M. Mulligrub, my wit has no edge, and I may go cacke in my pewter, let me see, a Barber, my scurule tongue will discover me, must dissemble, must disguise, for my beard, my false hair, for my tongue Spanish Dutch, or Welsh, no, a Northern Barber, very good, widow Raine-s•uric man well, newly entertained, right, to, hang tostes, a••cards
have white backs, and all knaves would seem to have white breaster, so proceed, now worshipful Cocledemoy.
Nay good sweet daughter, doe not swagger so, you hear your love is to bee married, true, he does cast you off, right he will leave you to the world, what then? tho blew and white, black and greene leave you, may not red and yellow entertain you, is there but one coullor in the Rainbow?
Grand Grincome on your sentences, Gods sacrament, ten thousand devils take you, you ha brought mine love, mine ho∣nor, mine body all to noting.
To nothing! I'll be sworn I have brought them to all the things I could, I ha made as much a your may∣denhead, and you had been mine own daughter, I could not ha sold your Maiden head oftner then I ha done, I ha sworn for you God forgive me, I have made you acquainted with the Spa∣niard Don Skirtoll, with the Italian, M. Beieroane, with the Irish Lord, S. Patrick, with the Dutch Merchant, Hans• Hearken G•ukin Skellam Elappdragon, and specially with the gre∣test French, and now lastly with this English (yet in my consci∣ence) an honest Gentleman: and am I now grown one of the accursed with you for my labour? is this my reward, am I called Bawd? Well Mary Faugh, go thy ways Mary Faugh, thy kind heart will bring thee to the Hospital.
Nay good Naunt, you'll help me to an oder love, vile you not?
Out thou naughty belly, would thou make me thy Bawd? thu'st best make me thy Bawd, I ha kept counsel for thee, who paid the Apothecary, wast not honest Mary Faugh? who redeemde thy petticoat and mantle, wast not honest Mary Faugh? who helped thee to thy custom not of swaggering Ire∣and Captains, nor of 2. s. Innes a court men, but with honest atte-cappes, wealthy flat-caps, that pay for their pleasure the best of any men in Europe, nay, which is more in London, and dost thou defile me vile creature.
Foutra pone you Vetch, Bawd, Pole-catte, Paugh, did not you praise Freeuill to mine love?
I did praise I confess, I did praise him, I sede hee was a fool, an unthrift, a true whoremaister, I confess, a constāt drab keeper I confess, but what the wind is turned.
It is, it is vile woman, reprobate woven, naughty woman it is, vat sal become of mine poor flesh now, mine bod∣die must turn Turk for 2. d. O Diuela, life a mine art, Ec sall be revenged, doe ten thousand Hell damme me, Ec sal have the rouge trot cut, and his love, and his friend, and all his affinity sall smart, sall dye, sal hang, now legion of devil seize him, de gran pest, S. Anthonies fire, and de hot Neopolitan pose rot him.
Francischina.
O mine seete, deerst, kindest, mine loving, O mine tow∣sand, ten thousand, delicated, petty feet art 
a mine a dear leave affection.
Why Monkey, no fashion in you? give entertain to my friend.
Icke sal make de most of you, dat courtesy may: Aunt Mary, Mettre Faugh, stools, stools for des gallants: mine Mettre sing non oder song, frolic, frolic Sir, but still com∣plain me doe her wrong, lighten your heart Sir, for me did but kiss her, for me did but kiss her, and so let go: Your friend is very heavy, ec sall near like such sad company.
No thou delight only in light Company.
By mine trot, he been very sad, vat aisle you sir.
A tooth ache Lady, a paltry rheum.
De diet is very goot for de rheum.
How far of dwells the house surgeon Mary Faugh.
You are a profane fellow I faith, I little thought to hear such ungodly terms come from your lips.
Pre de now, tic but a toy, a very trifle.
I care not for the value, Frank, but I faith
I feet, me must needs have it (dis is Beatrice ring, oh
could I get it,) feet pree de now, as ever you have embraced me with a hearty arm, a warm thought, or a pleasing touch, as e∣for you will profess to love me, as ever you do wish me life, give me dis ring, dis little ring.
Pree thee be not uncivilly importunate, sha not have it, faith I care not for thee, nor thy jealousy, sha not have it in faith.
You doe not love me, I hear of Sir Hubert Subboys daughter Mistress Beatrice, Gods Sacrament, ec could scratch out her eyes, and suck the holes.
Go y' are grown a puncke rampant.
So get thee gone, ne'er more behold min eyes by thee made wretched.
Mary Faugh farewell, farewell Frank.
Sall I not ha de ring?
No by the Lord.
By te Lord?
By the Lord.
Go to your new Blouse, your vnproude sluttery, your modest Mettre forsooth.
Marry will I forsooth.
Will you marry forsooth?
Doe not turn witch before thy time.
With all my hart Sir, you will stay.
I am no whit my self, Ʋideo meliora proboque,
But raging lust my fate all strong doth move:
"The Gods themselves cannot be wise and love.
Your wishes to you. 
Beauty entirely choice:
Pray ye prove a man of fashion, and neglect the nag∣lected.
Can such a rarity bee neglected, can there be measure or sin in loving such a creature▪
O min poor forsaken hart.
I can not contain, he saw thee not that left thee,
If there be wisdom, reason, honour, grace
Of any foolishly esteemed virtue,
In giving o'er possession of such beauty,
Let me be vicious, so I may be loved,
Passion I am thy slave, sweet it shall be my grace,
That I account thy love, my only virtue:
Shall I swear I am thy most vowed servant.
Mine vowed, go, go, go, I can no more of love, no, no, no, you bin all inconstant, O unfaithful men, tyrants, betray∣ers, de very enjoying vs, loses us, and when you only ha made vs hateful, you only hate vs: O mine forsaken hart.
I must not rave, Silence and modesty two custom∣rye virtues: will you be my mistress?
Mettres? ha, ha, ha.
Will you lie with me?
Lie with you, O no, you men will out-lie any woman, f•i• me no more can love.
No matter, let me enjoy your bed.
O vile man, vat do you think on me, doe you take me to be a beast, a creature that for sense only will entertain love, and not only for love, love? O brutish abomination!
Why then I pray thee love, and with thy love enjoy me.
Give me reason to affect you, will you swear you love me.
So seriously, that I protest no office so dangerous, no deed so unreasonable, no cost so heavy, but I vow to the utmost tentation of my best being to effect it.
Sall I, or can I trust again? O fool,
How natural tic for vs to be abused!
Sall ec be sure that no satiety,
No inoying, not time shall languish your affection?
If there be ought in brain, hart or hand,
Can make you doubtless, I am your vowed servant.
Will you doe one ting for me?
Can I doe it?
Yes, yes, but ec doe not love dis same Freeuill.
Well.
Nay I do hate him.
So.
By this kiss I hate him.
I love to feel such oaths, swear again.
No, no, did you ever hear of any that loud at the first sight?
A thing most proper.
Now fai•, I judge it all incredible, until this hour I saw you pretty fair eyed your, would you enjoy me?
Rather then my breath, even as my being.
Vel, had ec not made a vow.
What vow?
O let me forget it, it makes vs both despair.
Dear soul what vow?
Ho, good morrow gentle Sir, endeavour to forget me, as I must be enforced to forget al lmen. Sweet mind rest in you.
Stay, let not my desire burst me, O my impatient heate endures no resistance, no protractiō, there is no being for me but your sudden enjoying.
I doe not love Freeuil.
But what vow, what vow?
So long as Freeuil lives, I must not love.
Then he.
Must.
Die.
I, no there is no such vehemence in your affects,
Would I were any thing, so he were not.
Will you be mine when he is not?
Will I? dear, dear breast, by this most zealous kiss, but I will not persuade you: but if you hate him that I loath most deadly, yet as you please, i'll persuade noting.
Will you be only mine.
Will I? how hard tic for true love to dissemble, I am one∣lie yours.
Tic as irrevocable as breath, he dyes. Your love.
My vow, not until hee be dead,
Which that I may be sure not to infringe,
Dis token of his death, sall satisfy,
He has a ring, as dear as the ayre to him,
His new loves gift: tat got and brought to me.
I shall assured your pofessed rest.
To kill a man?
O done safely, a quarrel sudden picked,
with an advantage strike, then bribe, a little coin,
Al's safe, dear soul, but Isle not set you on,
Nay hee is gone, the ring, well, come, little more lib∣rall of thy love.
Not yet my vow.
O heaven, there is no hell but loves prolongings, dear farewell.
Farewell, Now does my hart swell high, for my re∣avenge,
Has birth and form, first friend •al kill his friend,
He dat survives, i'll hang, besides'de
Chaste Beatrice isle vex▪ only de ring.
Dat got the world sall know the worst of evils.
"Woman corrupted is the 〈◊〉 of devils. 
To kill my friend▪ O •is to kill my self,
Yet mans but mans excrement, 〈◊〉 breeding man,
As he do's worms 〈…〉 this nothing, 
The body of a man is of the self same soul,
A's Ox or horse, no murder 〈◊〉 these,
As for that only part, which makes •• man,
Murder wa•• powe• to 〈◊〉 O wit how vile,
How hellish art thou, when thou •ffect nature
Against sacred faith▪ think mo•e to kill a friend
To gain a woman, to Io•so• 〈◊〉 self,
For appetite and sensual end, whose very having,
Loses all appetite, and gives •a••etie,
That corporal end, remorse and inward blushinges,
Forcing vs loath the steam of our own heats,
Whilst friendship closed in virtue being spiritual,
Tastes no such languishinges and moments pleasure,
With much repentance, but like rivers flow,
And further that they run, they bigger grow,
Lord how was I misgone, how easy ti's to err,
When passion will not give vs leave to think?
"A learned that is an honest man may fear.
"And lust, and rage, and malice, and any thing,
"when he is taken vncollected suddenly:
"Ti's sin of cold blood; mischief will• waked eyes,
"That is the damned and the truly vice,
"Not he that's passionless but he above passion's wise,
My friend shall know it all. 
It is right I assure you, just fifteen pounds.
Well Cocledemoy tic thou putst me to this charge, but and I catch thee, I'll charge thee with as many irons: well, is the Barber come, isle be trimd and then to Cheapside, to buy a fair piece of plate, to furnish the loss, is the Barber come?
Truth husband, surely heaven is not pleased with our vocation; we do wink at the sins of our people, our wines are Protestants, and I speak it to my grief, and to the burthē of my conscience, we fry our fish with salt butter. 
Go look to your business, mend the matter and skore self with a vengeance.
Welcome friend, whose man?
Widow Rain soures man, and shall please your good worship, my nam'es Andrew Shark.
How do's my God son good Andrew.
Very well, hoe's gone to trim M. Quicquid our Parson, hold up your head.
How long have you been a Barber Andrew?
Not long Sir, this two year.
What and a good work man already, I dare scarce trust my head to thee.
O fear not, we ha bold better men then you, we learn the trade very quickly, will your good worship be shave not 〈◊〉
As you will, what trade did live by, before thou turned Barber Andrew.
I was a Peddler in Germany, but my countrymen thrive better by this trade.
Who's the news Barber, thou art sometimes at Court.
Sometimes pole a Page or so sir.
And what's the news? how doe all my good Lords, and all my good Ladies, and all the rest of my acquaintance.
What an arrogant knaue's this, Isle acquaintance ye (tic cash,) say ye sir. 
And what news? what news? good Andrew.
Marry sir you know the Conduit at Greenewich, and the vnder-holes that spouts up water.
Very well, I was washed there one day, and so was my wise, you might have wrung her smock in faith, but what a those holes?
Thus Sir, out of those little holes in the midst of the night crawlde out 24. huge horrible, monstrous, fearful de∣uouring.
Bless vs.
Serpents, which no sooner were beheld, but they turned to massiues which howled, those mastiues instantly turned to Cocks which crowed, those cocks in a moment were changed to Bears which roared, which Bears are at this hour to bee yet scene in Paris Garden, living upon nothing but toasted cheese and greene onions.
By the Lord and this may be: my wife and I will go see them, this portends something.
Yes worshipful Feast, thou'st feel what portendes by and by.
And what more news, you shave the world, especially you Barber Surgeons you know the ground of many things, you are cunning privy searchers, by the mas you skowre all: what more news?
They say Sir that 25, couple of Spanish Jennets are to bee seen hand in hand dance the old measures, whilst fix goodly Flaunders Mares play to them on a noise of flutes.
O monstrous! this is a lie a my word, nay and this bee not a lie, I am no fool I warrant, nay make an Ass of me once?
Shut your eyes close, wink sure sir, this bal will make you smart.
I do wink.
Your head will take cold.
I will put on your good worships night-cap, whilst I shave you, so, much: hang toastes: faugh: viah: sparrows must peck and
Cocledemoy munch.
Ha, ha, ha, 25. couple of Spanish Jennets to dance the old measures. Andrew, makes my worship laugh, in faith, dost take me for an Ass Andrew, dost know one Cocledemoy in town, he made me an Ass last night, but isle ass him, art thou free Andrew, shave me well, I shall bee one of the common Council shortly, and then Andrew, why Andrew, Andrew, doest leave me in the Suddes?  why Andrew I shall be blind with winking. Ha Andrew, wife Andrew, what means this, wife, my money wife.
What's the noise with you? what ail you?
VVheres the Barber?
Gone, I saw him depart long sin, why are not you trimd?
Trimd, O wife, I am shau'd, did you take hence the money?
I touched it not as I am Religious▪
O Lord I have wink fair.
I pray Godfather give me your blessing.
O Holofernes, O wheres thy mothers Andrew•
Blessing Godfather.
The devil choke thee, whore's Andrew thy mo∣theirs man?
My mother hath none such forsooth.
My money, 15. l. plague of all Andrews, who wast trimd me?
I know not Godfather, only one me•… me, as I was coming to you, and borrowed my furniture, as he said for a jest sake.
What kind of fellow?
A thick elderly stub-bearded fellow.
Cocledemoy, Cocledemoy, raise all the Wise men in the street, Isle hang him with mine own hands O wife, some R•sa Solis.
Good husband take comfort in the Lord, Isle play the Devil, but isle recover it, have a good conscience ti's but a
weeks cutting in the Term.
O wife, O wife, O Jack how does thy mother? is there any Fiddlers in the house?
Yes, M. Creakes noise.
Bid 'em play, laugh, make merry, cast up my ac∣counts, for isle go hang my self presently, I will not curse, but a pox on Cocledemoy, he has bold and shaude the, he has trimd me. 
Nay good child, A love once more, M. Freeuils Son∣net, a the kiss you gave him.
Shall it good Nurse,
Purest lips soft banks of blisses,
Self alone, deserving kisses,
O give me leave to &amp;c.
Pish sister Beatrice, 〈◊〉 thee read no more, my sto∣macke alate stands against kissing extremely.
Why good Crispinell••
By the faith, and trust I bear to my face, tic grown one of the most unsavoury Ceremonies▪ Body, a •eat tic one of the most unpleasing in 〈…〉 fellow that 〈◊〉 but one no• on 〈◊〉, and standing co••r and skirts also ••ude with Tastery sarcenet, must salute vs on the lips as ••iliarly▪ Soft skins save yet here was a stubbearded Iohn a stile with a ploydens fa•e saluted me last day, and stroke his bristles through my lips, I •a spent 10. shillings in pom•tum find to •kin them again. Marry it a nobleman or a knight with one ••he visit vs though his unclean goose turned greene teeth, ha¦the palsy his nostrils smell worse then a putrefied maribone, &amp; his loose beard drops into our bosom, yet wee must kiss him with a curtsy, a curse, for my part I had as live they would break wind in my lip•s.
Fie Crispinella you speak too broad.
No •ot sister, lets near be ashamed to speak what we
be not ashamed to think, I dare as boldly speak venery, as think venery.
Faith sister isle begone if you speak so broad.
Will you so? now bashfulness seaz you, we pronoūce boldly Robbery, Murder, treason, which deeds must needs be far more loathsome then an act which is so natural, just and necessary, as that of procreation, you shall have an hipocriticall vestal virgin speak, that with close teeth publicly, which she will receive with open mouth privately, for my own part I con∣cider nature without apparel, without disguising of custom or complement, I give thoughts words, and words truth, and truth boldness, she whose honest freeness makes it her virtue, to speak what she thinks, will make it her necessity to think what is good, I love no prohibited things, and yet I would have no∣thing prohibited by policy but by virtue, for as in the fashion of time, those books that are called in, are most in sale and request; so in nature those actions that are most prohibited, are most desired.
Good quick-sister, stay your pace we are private, but the world would censure you, for truly severe modesty is women's virtue.
Fie, Fie,, virtue is a free pleasant buxom quality: I love a constant countenance well, but this froward ignorant coins, four austere lumpish uncivil priuatenes, that promises nothing but rough skins, and hard stools, ha, fie out good for nothing but for nothing, well nurse, and what do you conceive of all this?
Nay faith my conceiving days be done, marry for kiss∣sing isle defend that, thats within my compass, but for my own part heers mistress Beatrice is to be married with the grace of God, • fine gentleman he is shall have her and I warrant a strong, he has a leg like a post, a nose like a Lion, a brow like a Bull, and a beard of most fair expectation: this week you must marry him, and I now will read a lecture to you both, how you shall behave your selves to your husbands, the first monneth of your nuptial, I ha broke my skull about it, I can tell you and there is much brain in it.
Read it to my sister good nurse, for I assure you isle ne'er marry.
Marry God forfend, what will you doe then?
Faith strive against the flesh, marry? no faith, hus∣bands are like lots in the lottery: you may draw forty blanks before you find one that has any prise in him, A husband gene∣rally is a careless dominering thing that grows like coroll which as long as it is under water is soft and tender, but as soon as it has got his branch aboue the waives is presently hard stiff, not to be bowed but burst, so when your husband is a suitor &amp; under your choice, Lord how suple hee is, how obsequious, how at your service sweet Lady: once married got up his head aboue A stiff crooked knobby inflexible tyrannous creature he grows then they turn like water, more you would embrace the less you hold, isle live my own woman, and if the worst come to the worst, I had rather prove a wag then a fool.
O but a virtuous marriage.
Virtuous marrige? there is no more affiaity betwixt virtue and marriage, then betwixt a man and his horse, indeed virtue girts up upon marriage sometimes, and ma•ageth it in the right way, but marriage is of another piece, for as a horse may be without a man, and a man without a horse, so marriage you know is often without virtue, and virtue I am sure more oft without marriage, but thy match sister, by my troth I think twill do well, hes a well shaped clean lipped gentleman of a handsome, but not affected fineness, a good faithful eye, and a well humord cheek, would he did not stoop in the shoulders for thy sake, see here he is. 
Good day Sweet.
Good morrow brother nay you shall have my lip, good •orrow servant.
Good morrow sweet life.
Life? dost call thy mistress life.
Life, yes why not life?
How many mistresses hast thou?
Some nine.
Why then thou hast nine lives like a Cat.
Mew you would be taken up for that.
Nay good let me still sit, we lowe statures love still to sit, least when we stand we may be supposed to sit.
Dost not wear high cork shoes: choppiness.
Monstrous on's. I am as many other are, pieced aboue and pieced beneath.
Still the best part in the,
And yet all will scarce make me so high as one of the Giants stilts that stalks before my Lord Majors pageant.
By the Lord so I thought it was for some thing Mistress Joyce jested at thy high insteps.
She might well enough, and long enough, before I would be ashamed of my shortness, what I made or can mend my self I may blush at; but what nature put upon me, let her be ashamed for me, I ha nothing to doe with it, I forget my beauty.
Faith Joyce is a foolish bitter creature.
A pretty mildewed wench she is.
And fair.
As my self.
O you forget your beauty now.
Troth I never remember my beauty, but as some men doe religion for controversies sake,
A motion sister.
Niniuie, Iulius Caesar, Ionise, or the destruction of Ie∣rusalem.
My love here.
Pree thee call him not love, it is the drabs phrase, nor sweet honey, nor my cunny, nor dear duckling, it is the Citti∣zen terms, but call me him.
What?
Anithing, whet the motion?
You know this night our parents have intended so∣lemnly to contract vs, and my Love to grace the feast hath pro∣missed a mask.
You'll make one Tysefue, and Caqueture shall fill up a rome.
Fore heaven well remembered he borrowed a diamond of me last night to grace his finger in your visitation: The Lying Creature will swear some strange thing on it now.
Peace, he's here, stand close, lurk.
Good morrow most dear, and worthy to be most wise, how do's my mistress?
Morrow sweet servant, you glister, pree thee let's see that stone.
A toy Lady, I bought to please my finger.
Why I am more precious to you, than your finger:
Yes, or than all my body, I swear.
Why, then let it be bought to please me, come I am no professed beggar.
Troth Mistress; Zoones: Forsooth, I protest.
Nay, if you turn Protestant for such a toy.
In good deed la, another time isle give you a
Is this yours to give.
O God, forsooth mine, quoth you, nay as for that.
Now I remember, I ha seen this on my servant Tise∣•••s finger.
Such another.
Nay, I am sure this is it.
Troth tic forsooth, the poor fellow wanted money to pay for supper last night, and so pound it to me, tic a pawn faith, or else you should have it.
Hark ye, Thou base lying: how dares thy impudence hope to prosper, were it not for the privilege of this respected company, I would so hang thee.
Come hither servant, What's the matter betwixt you two?
Nothing but (hark you) he did me some uncivil dis∣courtesies last night, for which, because I should not call him to account, hee desires to make me any satisfaction: the Coward trembles at my very presence, but I ha him on the hipp, isle take the forfeit on his Ringe.
What's that you whisper to her?
Nothing Sir, but satisfy her, that the Ringe was not pound, but only lent by you to grace my finger, and so told her I craved your pardon, for being too familiar, or indeed over∣•••… with your reputation.
Yes indeed he did, he said you desired to make him a∣ny satisfaction for an uncivil discourtesy you did him last night, but he said he had you a the hyp and would take the forfeit of your ring.
How now ye base Pultrone?
Hold, hold, my mistress speaks by contraries.
Contraries.
She jests, faith only jests.
Sir, Isle no more a your service, you are a child, Isle give you to my nurse.
And he come to me, I can tell you as old as I am, what to doe with him.
I offer my service forsooth.
Why so, now every dog has his bone to knawe on.
The Mask holds, Master Caque••er.
I am ready Sir, Mistress Isle dance with you, near fear, Isle grace you.
I tell you I can my singles and my doubles and my trick a xxtie, my carantapace, my traverse forward, and my falling back yet in faith.
Mine, the provision for the night is ours.
Much must be our care, till night we leave you,
I am your servant be not tyrannous,
Your virtue wan me, faith my loves not lust,
Good wrong me not, my most fault is much trust.
Until night only my heart be with you 〈…〉
Adieu brother, come on sister for these since to 〈…〉
Lets meet and practise presently.
Content, weal but fit our pumps, Count ye 〈◊〉 vermin. 
My friend, wished hours, what news from 〈◊〉 How dos the woman of Sin, and natural 〈…〉
The eldest child of nature ne'er 〈◊〉 So damned a creature.
What, In nova f•x• animus 〈◊〉 decor forms? which way bears the Tide?
Dear loved Sir, I find a mind courageously vicious, may put on a desperate security, but can never bee blessed with a firm enjoying and self satisfaction.
what passion is this, my dear Lindabridis.
Tic well, we both may jest, I ha been tempted to your death.
What is the ramp•t Cocatrice grown mad for the loss of his men?
Devilishly mad.
As most assured of my second love.
Right.
She would have had this ring.
I, and this heart, and in true proof you were slain I should bring her this ring, from which she was assured
You would not part, until from life you parted.
For which deed, and only for which deed, I should possess her sweetness.
O bloody villains, nothing is defamed but by his pro∣per self, Physicians abuse remedies, Lawyers spoil the Law, and women only shame women, you ha vowed my death?
My lust, not I, before my reason would, yet I must use 〈◊〉, that I a man of sense should conceive endelesse pleasure in a body whose soul I know to be so hideously black.
That a man at twenty th••e should cry, O sweet plea∣sure, and at forty three should sigh, O sharpe Pox: but con∣cider man furnished with omnipotence and you overthrow him, thou must cool thy impatient appetite.
Ti's Fate, ti's Fate.
I doe malign my creation that I am subject to passion, I must enjoy her.
I have it mark, I give a mask to night
To my loves kindred, in that thou shalt go:
In that we two make show of falling out,
Give seeming challenge, instantly depart,
With some suspicion to present fight.
We will be seen as going to our swords,
And after meeting, this Ring only lent,
Isle lurk in some obscure place, till rumour
(The common Bawd to loose suspicions)
Have feigned me slain, which (in respect my self
NVill not bee found, and our late seeming quarrel)
Will quickly sound to all as earnest truth:
Then to thy wench, protest me surely dead.
Show her this Ring, enjoy her, and blood cold
VVeele laugh at folly.
O but think of it.
Think of it, come away, virtue let sleep thy passions, "What old times held as crimes, are now but fashions. 
I am not at this time furnished, but ther's my bond for your Plate.
Your bill had ben sufficient you're a good man, a standing cup parcel guilt, of 32. ounces. 11. pound, 7. shillings, the first of July, good plate, good man, good day good all.
Tic my hard fortune, I will hang the knave, no, first he shall half rot in fetters in the Dungeon, his conscience made de∣spairfull, isle hire a Knave a purpose, shall assure him he is damned, and after see him with mine own eyes, hanged without singing any Psalm. Lord that hee has but one neck.
You are too tyrannous, you'll use me no further.
No Sir, lend me your servant, only to carry the plate home, I have occasion of an hours absence.
With easy consent, sir hast and be careful, 
Be very careful I pray thee to my wives own hands.
Secure your self sir.
To her own hand.
Fear not, I have delivered greater things than this, to a women's own hand.
Monsieur, please you to buy a fine delicate b•ll, sweet
ball; a Camphyer ball.
Pre thee away.
One a ball to skower, a skowring ball, a ball to be shaved
For the love of god talk not of shaving, I have been shaved, mischief and 1000. devils cease him, I have been shaved. 
The Fox grows fat when he is cursed, isle shave ye smo∣there yet, turd on a tile stone, my lips have a kind of •hew•e at this bole, isle have it, isle gargalize my throat with this Vintner, and when I have don with him, spit him out, Isle shark, consciēce does not rapine, were I to bite an honest gentleman a poor gro∣garan poet, or a penurious Parson, that had but ten pigs tails in a twelve month &amp; for want of learning had but one good stool in a fortnight, I were damned beyond the works of superarroga∣tion, but to wring the whithers of my gouty barmd spigot ••igging-iumbler of elements. Mulligrub, I hold it as lawful as sheepe-shearing, taking eggs from hens, caudels from Asses, or butterd shrimps from horses, they make no use of them, were not provided for them. And therefore worshipful Cocledemoy, hang toasts, on, in grace and virtue to proceed, only beware be∣ware degrees, there be rounds in a ladder, and knots in a halter, ware carts, hang toasts, the common counsel has decreed it, I must draw a lot for the great Goblet. 
Nay, I pray you stay and drink, and how do's your Mistress, I know her very well, I have ben inward with her, and so has many more, she was ever a good patient creature in faith, with all my hart isle remēber your master an honest man, he knew me before I was married, an honest man hee is, and a crafty, hee comes forward in the world well, I warrant him, and his wife is a proper woman that she is, well, she has ben as proper a woman as any in Cheap, she paints now, and yet she keeps her husbands old Customers to him still. In truth a fine faced wife, in a wainscot carved seat, is a worthy ornament to a Tradesman shop, and an a∣tractiue I warrant, her husband shall find it in the custom of his ware, Isle assure him, God bee with you good youth, I ac∣knowledge the receipt.  I acknowledge all the rece•t sure, tic very well spoken, I acknowledge the receipt, thus tic to
have good education and to bee brought up in a Tavern, I doe keep as gallant and as good company, though I say it, as any she in London, Squires, Gentlemen, and Knights diet at my ta∣ble, and I doe lend some of them money, and full many fine men go upon my score, as simple as I stand here, and I trust them and truly they very knightly and courtly promise fair, give 〈◊〉 very good words, and a piece of flesh when time of year servant, nay, though my husband be a Citizen and's caps made of wool, yet I ha wit, and can see my good as soon as another, for I have all the thanks, my silly husband, a lass, hee knows nothing of it, tic I that bear, tic I that must bear a brain for all.
Fair hour to you Mistress.
Fair hour, fine term, faith isle score it up anon a beautiful thought to you sir.
Your Husband, and my Moister Mr. Garnish has sent you a Iole of fresh Salmon, and they both will come to dinner to season your new cup with the best wine, which cup your hus∣band entreats you to send back by me, that his arms may bee graved a the side, which he forgot before it was sent.
By what token, are you sent by no token? nay, I have wit.
He sent me by the same token, that he was dry shaved this morning.
A fad token, but true, here sir, I pray you commend me to your Master, but especially to your Mistress, tell them they shall be most sincerely welcome. 
Shall be most sincerely welcome, worshipful Coclede∣moi, lurk close, hang toasts, be not ashamed of thy quality, eve∣rye mans turd smells well in's own nose, vanish Foist. 
Come spread these Table Diaper Napkins, and doe you hear, perfume this Parlour do's so smell of profane Ta∣basso, I could never endure this ungodly Tobacco, since one of our Elders, assured me upon his knowledge Tobacco was not used in the Congregation of the family of love: spread, spread handsomely, Lord these boys doe things arse, varsie, you show your bringing up, I was a Gentlewoman by my sisters side, I can
tell ye so methodically: methodically, I wonder where• it go that word O sir Amina dub Ruth had me kiss him methodical∣lie, I had it somewhere, and I had it indeed.
Mind, be not desperate, isle recover all •• things with me, shall seem honest, that can be profitable, He must ne'er winch, that would or thrive, or save, To be cal•• Niggard, cuckold, Cut-throat, Knave.
Are they come husband?
Who? what, how n•w? what feast towards in my pri∣uate Parlour.
Pray leave your foolery, what are they come?
Come, who come?
You need not maked so strange?
Strange?
I strange, you know no man that sent me word, that he and his wife would come to dinner to me, and sent this Iole of fresh Salmon before hand.
Peace, not I, peace, the Messenger hath mistaken the house, let's eat it up quickly, before it be enquired for sit to it, some vineg•r, quick, some good luck yet faith, I never tasted salmon relished better, oh when a man feeds at other men's cost.
Other men's cost? why did not you send this Iole of Salmon.
No.
By Master Garnish man?
No.
Sending me word, that he and his wife would come to dinner to me.
No, no.
To season my now bowl?
Bowl?
And withal wild me to send the bowl back▪
Back?
That you might have your Arms graved on the side?
Ha?
By the same token you were dry shaven this morning before you went forth.
Pah, how this Sammon stinks.
And thereupon sent the bowl back, prepared dinner, nay and I bare not a brain.
Wife, doe not vex, me, is the bowl gone, is it delivered?
Delivered! yes sure, tic delivered.
I will never more say my prayers, doe not make me mad, tic common, let me not cry like a woman, is it gone?
Gone? Good is my witness, I delivered it with no more intention to be consent on it, than the child new borne: and yet
Look to my house, I am haunted with evil spirits, here me, doe; hear me, if I have not my Goblet again, hey∣uen, I'll to the Devil, I'll to a Conjurer, look to my house, I'll raise all the wise men ithe street.
Deliver vs! what words are these, I trust in God, hee is but drunk sure.
I must have the Sammon to worship, Cocledemoy, now for the Master piece, God bless thy neck piece, and Fowtra. Fair Mistress my Master.
Have I caught you, what Roger?
Peace good Mistress, I'll tell you all, a lest, a very mere lest, your husband only took sport to fright you, the bow•s at my Masters, and there is your husband, who sent me in all hast, least you should be over frighted with his feigning, to come to dinner to him.
Praise Heaven, it is no worse.
And desired me, to desire you to send the lose of Sam∣mon before, and your self to come after to them, my Mistress would bee right glad to see you.
I pray carry it: now thank them entirely: bless me, I was never so out of my skin in my life, pray thank your Mis∣tress most entirely.
So now Figo worshipful Mall •ough, and I will monch Cheaters &amp; Bawds go together like washing &amp; wringing. 
Beshrew his heart for his labour, how every thing about above• me quivers, what Christian my hat and aporne, here take my sleeves, and how I tremose, so •e gossope it now for it, thats certain, here has been revolutions, and false hers indeed.
Whether now? Whats the matter with you now? when∣there are you a gadding?
Come, come, play the fool no more: Will you go?
Whether, in the rank name of madness: whether?
Whether, why to master Garnish, to eat the Jowl of Salmon? Lord, how strange you make it?
Why so, why so.
Why for why did not you send the self same fellow for the Iole of Salmon, tha• had the cup?
Tic well, tic very well.
And will• me to come and eat it with you at the Gold∣••••he•.
O, I, I, art in thy right w•s?
Doe you hear, make a fool of some body else, and you make an ass of me, I•e make an Ox of you, do ye see.
Nay wife be pa••ent, for look you, I may be mad, or drunk, or so, for my wise part, though you can bear more then I, yet I can do well: I will not cause nor cary, but heaven knows what I think. Come, lets go near some music, I will never more say my prayers. Lets go hear some doleful music. Nay if Heaven forget •o prosper 〈◊〉. Isle go no more to the Sine∣gogue. Now I am discontented, Isle turn Sectarie that is fashion.
More lights: welcome Sir Lionel Frevile, brother Frevile shortly. Look to your lights.
The Mockers are at hand.
Call down our daughter: Hark they are at hand, rank handsomely.
Know sir, I have the advantage of the place.
You are not safe, I would deal even with you.
So. 
So.
I doe beseech you sweet, do not for me provoke your Fortune.
What sudden flaw is risen?
From whence come this?
An ulcer long time lurking, now is burst.
Good si• the time and your deseigns are soft.
I dear sir, council him, advise him, twill relish well From your carving: Good my sweetnest safe.
As well, else well, this shall be ended straight.
The banquet stays, there weal discourse more 〈◊〉
Marriage must not make m•n Cowards.
Nor rage fools.
"Tic valour not where hey•, but reason rules. 
But do you hear Lady, you proud ape you. What was the lest you brake of 〈…〉
Nothing, I only said you were all mettle, that you had a brazen face, a Leaden brain, and a copperheard.
Quicksiluer, thou little more then a Dwarf, and some∣thing less then a Woman.
A Wisp, a wisp, a wisp, will you go to the banquet.
By the Lord I think thou •ilt marry shortly too, thou growest somewhat foolish already.
O I faith, tic a fair thing to be married, and a necessary, To hear this word must, if our husbands be proud, we must bear his contempt, if noisome we must bear with the Got under his armeholes, if a fool we must bear his babble, and which is worse, If a loose liver, Wee must live upon vnholsome Reversions: Where, on the contrary side, our husbands because they may and we must; care not for vs, things hoped with fear, and got with strugglings, are men's high pleasures, when duty pales and flatres their appetite.
What a tart Monkey is this, by heaven if thou had not so much wit I could find in my hart to my marry thee. Faith bear with me for all this.
Bear with thee, I wonder how thy mother could bear th••ten months in her belly, when I cannot endure thee 2. hours in mine eye.
Alas for you sweet soul, by the Lord you are grown a proud, scurvy, apish, idle, disdainful, scoffing, Gods foot, be∣cause you have read Ephues and his England, Palmerin de Olive, &amp; the Legend of Lies.
Why in faith yet servant, you of all others should bear with my known vnmalicious humours, I have always in my Hart given you your due respect:
And heaven may be sworn, I have privately given fair speech of you, and protested.
Nay look you, for my own part, if I have not as religi∣ously vowed my hart to you, been in drunk to your health, swalowd flap-dragons, eat glasses, drunk urine, stabbed arms, and don all the offices of protested gallon•rye for your sake: and yet you tell me I have a brazen face, a leaden brain▪ and a copper beard, Come yet and it please you.
No, no, you do not love me?
By () but I do now, and whosoever dares say that I do not love you, nay honour you, and if you would vouchsafe to marry.
Nay as for that think out as you will, but Gods my re∣cord, and my sister knows I have taken drink and slept vppont, that if ever I marry it shall be you, and I will marry, and yet I hope I do not say it shall be you neither.
By heaven I shall be as soon wern of health as of your in∣joying: will you cast a smooth cheek upon me?
I cannot tell, I have no crumpt shoulders, my back needs no mantle, and yet marriage is honourable: do you think ye shall prove a Cuckold?
No, by the Lord, not I?
Why, I thank you in faith:
Heigho: I slept on my back this morning
And dreamt the strangest dreams:
Good Lord, how things will come to pass?
Will you go to the banquet?
If you will bee mine, you shall be your own, my purse,
my body, my hart is yours, only bee silent in my house, modest at my table, and wanton in my bed, and the Empress of Europe cannot content, and shall not be contented better.
Can any kind hart speak more discreetly affectionate∣lie: my fathers consent, and as for mine,
Then thus, and thus, so Hymen should begin, Sometimes a falling out, proves falling in. 
As you respect my virtue, give me leave
To satisfy my reason, though not blood:
So, all runs right, our fained rage hath tan
To fullest life, they are much possessed
Of force most, most all quarrel: now my right friend
Resolve me with open breast, free and true hart
Cannot thy virtue having space to think
and fortify her weakened powers with reason,
Discourses, Meditations, Discipline.
Divine eiaculacories, and all those aids against devils:
Cannot all these curb thy lowe appetite
and sensual fury?
"There is no God in blood, no reason in desire:
Shall I but live? Shall I not be forced to act
Some deed, whose very name is hideous?
No.
Then I must enjoy Francischina.
You shall: Isle lend this ring, show it to that fair Devil, It will resolve me dead, which rumour with my artificial absence, will make most firm, enjoy her suddenly.
But if report go strong that you are slain, and that by me. Whereon I may be seizd Where shall I find your being.
At moister Shatewes the Jewellers, to whose breast Isle trust our secret purpose.
I rest your self, each man hath follies.
But those worst of all,
"Who with a willing eye, do seeing fall.
Tic true, but truth seems folly in madness spectacles, I am not now my self, no man: Farewell.
Farewell.
"When womna's in the hart, in the soul hell.
Now repentance the fools whip seize thee,
Nay if there be no means Isle be thy friend,
But not thy Vices; and with greatest sense
Isle force thee feel thy errors, to the worst
The vildest of dangers thou shalt sink into,
No Jeweller shall see me, I will lurk
Where none shall know or think, close Isle withdraw,
and leave thee with two friends: a whore and knave
But is this virtue in me? No, not pure,
Nothing extremely best with vs endures,
No use in simple purities, the elements
are mixed for use, Silver without allay
Is all to eager to be wrought for use:
Nor precise virtues ever purely good
Holds useful size with temper of weak blood:
Then let my course be borne, tho: with side-wind,
The end being good, the means are well assingd, 
Come catafuge Fra•… 〈…〉 hall, who who he,
Excellent, Ha, heers a plmp r•mp wench, with a breast
Softer then a Courtiers tongue, 〈◊〉 Ladies gums,
Or an old mans mentula, my fine ••go.
Pan you poltroon.
Gooddy fist, flump•… 〈◊〉 pum, a my fine Wagtail,
Thou art as false as prostituted and adulcerate
as some translated manuscript Bus sayre whore, bus.
Gods sacrament. Pox.
Hadamoy key dost thou frown medianthou teukey
Nay look heer: Numeron key Silver blithe for cany
Os cany goblet: Ʋs key no moi bl•gef•y 〈◊〉 pox
On you Gosling.
By me feet dis bin very fine languge, Ec sall bush ye now, ha, be garzon var had you dat place?
Hedemoy key, get you gon Punk rampant, key common vp-taile.
O daughter, cozen, niece, servant, mistress.
Humpum, plumpum squat, I am gone. 
There is one M. Malliereux at the door desires to see you: he says he must not be divide, for he hath sent you this ring and withal says tic done.
Vat sall me do now, Gods sacrament: tell him two ho∣wers hence he sall be most affectionately velcome, tell him (vat sal me do) tel him Ec am bin in my bate, and Ec fall perfume my seats, make a mine body so delicate for his arm Two hours hence.
I shall satisfy him two hours hence well.
Now Ec sall revenge, hay, begar me sal tartar de whole generation, mine brain vorke it, Frevile, is dead, Malhareux sall hang, And mine rival Beatrice, Ec sall make run mad.
Hes gone forsooth no• 〈◊〉 caudle of Cock-stones, &amp; will return within this two hours.
Very vel, give mons to some fellow to squire me, Ec sal go abroad.
Theirs a lusty Bravo beneath, a stranger, but a good stale Rascal: he sue•es valiantly, kicks a Bawd right virtuously, and protestes with an empty pocket might desperately, Heel squire you.
Very velcom, mine san, Ec sall re•ome presently, now sal me be revenge ten tousant duel, der sall be no got in me but passion, no tought but rage, no mercy but blood, no spirit but Duel in me, Dere sal noting tought good for me, But dat is mischievous for others. 
Did no one see him since? pray God, nay all is well,
A little heat, what he is but withdrawn? and yet I would to God,
But fear you nothing.
Pray God that all be well or would I were not.
Hes not to be found Sirian• where.
You must not make a heavy face presage an ill event: I like your Sister well, shees quick and lively: would she would marry faith.
〈◊〉, nay •ell would man a 〈…〉 an old mans a ••n∣entering▪
Ha, mass and so 〈◊〉
You are a Widow•.
Than I am I faith fair Crisp, and I can tell you, would you affect me, I have it in me yet I faith.
Troth I am in love, let me see your hand: would you ca•• your self away upon me willingly▪
Will I: I by the
Would you be a Cockould willingly? By my troth us a comely, fine, and handsome sight, for one of my years to marry an old man, truth tic restorative what a comfortable thing it is to think of her husband to 〈◊〉 venerable cough a the ever∣listings, no feel his rough 〈…〉 summer hands, and winter ••gges, his almost no eyes, and assuredly no teeth, and then 〈◊〉 think what she must dream of, when she considers others hap∣pines and her own want: tic a worthy and notorious comfort∣ble match.
Pish, pish, will you have me▪
Will you assure me.
Five hundred pound jointure.
That you will die within this fortnight▪
No, by my faith Cris.
Then Crisp. by her faith assures you sheele have none of you.
Beer leave Gentles and men of night caps, I would I peak,
But that here stands one is able to 〈◊〉 her own tale best.
Sir mine speech is to you, you 〈…〉 ••vile.
Had ha, and have.
No po••, me a•eome to assure you da• on mest• Mal∣heureus hath killed him.
O me, wretched, wretched.
Look to our daughter.
How art thou 〈…〉
If dat it please you to go 〈…〉 bring you ••ere you'll all hear Ma•she••eus 〈◊〉 his own lips confess it, a 〈…〉 may apprehend him and revenge your and mine loves 〈◊〉
Your 〈…〉
He was so sir, let you 〈…〉 it do not 〈…〉 die, de young man dat be flame did 〈◊〉 you 〈…〉 me ten tousant tousant times more dearly.
O my hart I will love you the better 〈…〉 he affected? O passion, O my grief which way will 〈…〉 and consume?
Peace.
Dear woes cannot speak.
For look you Lady as your •ing he gave 〈…〉 〈◊〉 jests at your scorned kin• 〈◊〉
He did not ill not to 〈…〉 did no• will as mock me: Gentle mine 〈…〉 yet 〈…〉 Lie at not to mo•os of so 〈…〉 only love me was joy enough for 〈…〉 only might only love him.
O but to be abused, scorned, scoft at, O ten thousand did • by such a one, and unto such a one.
I think you say not true •ester, shall we know one ano∣there in the other world?
What means my sister?
I would fine see him again: O my torture mind, Frevile is more then dead, he is unkind.
Convey her in, and so sir as you said •et a strong watch.
I sir, and so basse 〈…〉 this •a•e common woman, you must make it good.
Ec sall, or let me pay for his, mine blood.
Come then along all, with quiet speed.
O Fate?
O sir, be wisely sorry, but not passionate. 
I will go and reveal my self: stay: no, no,
Grief end •res Love: Heaven to have such a wife
Is happiness, to breed pale envy in the saints.
Thou worthy Doue-like virgin without gall,
Cannot (that women's evil) Jealousy,
Despite disgrace, nay which is worst, contempt
Once stir thy faith. O Truth, how few sisters hast thou?
Dear memory, with what a suffering sweetness, quiet modesty,
Yet deep affection she received my death,
And then with what a patient, yet oppressed kindness
She took my Ieudlie intimated wrongs. O the derest of heaven?
Were there but three such women in the world, two
Might be saved.
Well, I am great with expectation to what devilish end
This woman of foul soul will drive her plots:
But providence all wicked art ore tops.
"and Impudence must know (tho stiff as Ice,)
"That fortune doth not always dote on Vice. 
Plant a watch there, be very careful Sirs, the rest with vs.
The heavy night grows to her depth of quiet, Tic about mid darkness.
Mine shambre is hard by, Ec sall bring you to it presant meant.
Deep silence. On
within Wa, ha, h•, 
It was his voice, tic he: he suppes with his cupping glass∣ses. Tic late, he must pass this way: Isle ha him, Isle ha my fine
boy, my worshipful Cocledemoy, Isle moi him, he shall be hanged in lousy linen, Isle hire some sectary to make him an heretic before he die? And when he is dead Isle peace on his grave.
Ah my fine puncks, good night, Frank, frailty, frail a Fraile-Hall? •onus noshes my vbiquitari.
Ware polling and shaving Sir.
A Wolf, a wolf, a wolf, 
Heers something yet, a Cloak, a cloak, yet Isle after, he cannot scope the watch, Isle hang him if I have any mercy▪ Isle slice him. 
Who goes there? come before the Constable.
Bread a God Constable, you are a Watch for the devil. Honest men are robbed under your nose, theirs a false knave in the habit of a Vintner, set upon me, he would have had my purse, But I took me to my heals: yet he got my Cloak, a plain stuff cloak poor, yet twill serve to hang him? Tic my loss, poor man that I am.
Masters, we must Watch better, first not strange that knaves, Drunkards, and thieves, should be a broad, and yet we of the Watch, Scriveners, smiths, and Taylors, never stir.
Hark, who goes there?
An honest man and a Cittiezen.
Appear, appear, what are you?
A simple Vintner.
A Vintner ha, and simple, draw nearer, nearer: heers the Cloak.
I Moister Vintner we know you, a plain stuff cloak: tic it.
Right, come: Oh thou varlet, doest not thou know that the Wicked cannot scope the eyes of the Constable?
What means this violence, as I am an honest man I took the cloak.
As you are a knave, you took the cloak, we are your witness∣ses for that.
But hear me, hear me, Isle tell you what I am.
A thief you are.
I tell you my name is Mullegrub.
I will grub you, In with him to the stocks, there let him sit tell to morrow morning that Justice Quodlibet may examine him.
Why but I tell thee.
Why but I tel thee, weal tell thee now.
Am I not mad, am I not an ass,
Why scabs, Gods foot: let me out.
I, I, let him pra•e, he shall find matter in vs scabs I warrant: Gods so, what good members of the common wealth, doe wee prove.
Prithee peace, lets remember our duties, and let go sleep, in the fear of God. 
Who goes there: I lo, ho, ho: zounds shall I run mad, Loose my wits: shall I be hanged, hark: who goes there? Do not fear to be poor Mullegrub, Thou hast a sure stock now.
The night grows old,
And many a cockould is now When, ha, ha, ho,
Maids on their backs,
Dream of sweet smacks, and warm: Wo, ho, ho, ho,
I must go comfort my venerable Mullegrub, I must
Fiddle him till he fist: faugh:
Maids in your Night-railes,
Look well to your light
Keep close your lockes,
and down your smocks,
Keep a broad eye
And a close thigh, excellent, excellent, whose there?
Now Lord, Lord, (moister Mullegrub) deliver vs: what does your Worship in the stocks? I pray come ou• Sir.
Zounds man I tell thee I am locked.
Locked: O world: O men: O time: o night: that can not
Discern virtue, and wisdom, and one of the common Counsel: What is your Worship in for?
For (a plague ont) suspicion of Felony.
Nay, and it be but such a trifle, Lord I could weep, to see your good Worship in this taking: your Worship has been a good friend to me, and tho you have forgot me, yet I knew your wife before she was married, and since I have found your Worsh. door open and I have knocked, and God knows what I have saved: and doe I live to see your Worship stocked?
Honest Belman, I perceive thou know me, I prethe call the Watch. Inform the Constable of my reputation, That I may no longer abide in this shameful habitation, And hold thee, all I have about me.
Tic more then I deserve sir: Let me alone for your Delivery.
Doe, and then let me alone with Cockledemoy, Isle moi him.
Maids in your: Moister Constable, whose that ith'stoks?
One for a robbery: one Mullegrub, he calls himself. Mullegrub? Bel-man, know thou him?
Know him: O moister Constable. what good service have you done. Know him? Hes a strong thief, his house has been suspected for a bawdy Tavern a great while: and a receipt for Cut-purses, tic most certain: He has been long in the black book, and is he tan now?
Byr'lady my masters weal not trust the stocks with him, Weal have him to the Justices, get a Mittimus to Newgate presently. Come sir, come on sir.
Ha: does your Rascalship yet know my Worship In the end?
I, the end of your Worship we know.
Ha, goodman Constable, hears an honest fellow can tell you what I am?
Tic true sir, yare a strong thief hee says on his own know∣ledge: Bind fast, bind fast, we know you: Weal trust no Stocks with you. Away with him to the Jail instantly.
Why but dost hear Bel-man, Rogue, Rascal, Gods
Why but? 
Why but; when ha ha, excellent, excellent, ha my fine Cocledemoy, my Vintner fistes, Isle make him fart crackers be∣fore I ha done with him; to morrow is the day of Judgment.
Before the Lord God my knavery grows vnperegall, Tic time to take a nap, until half an hour hence: God give your Worship Music, content, and rest.
You bin very velcom to mine shambra.
But how know ye, how are ye assured Both of the deed, and of his suit return.
O Myn-here. Ec sall tell you, metre Malhereux
Came all bretlesse running a my shambra
His sword all bloody: he tel a me he had kill Frevile,
And bred a me to conceal him:
Ec flatter him, bid bring monies, he should live and lie vet me,
He went whilst Ec (me hope without sins) out of mine
Mush love to Frevile betray him.
Fear not, tic well: good works get grace for sin.
Dere, peace, rest dere, so softly, all go in:
De net is lay, now sal Ec be revenge.
If dat me knew a dog dat Frevile love,
Me would puisson him, for know de deepest hell
As a revenging Women's, nought so fell.
Ho Cousin Frank, the party you wot of, M. Malhereux.
Bid him come up, I prede.
O min here man, a dere liver Love,
Mine ten tousant times velcom Love,
Ha, by mine trat, you bin de just, vat sall me say:
Vat feet honey name sall I call you?
Any from you is pleasure. Come my loving
Prettiness, wheres thie Chamber?
I long to touch your sheets.
No, no, not yet mine seetest soft-lipped love:
You sall not gulp down all delights at once:
Be min trat, dis all-fles-Louers, dis ravenous Wenches
Dat sallow all down hole, will have all at one bit,
Fie, fie, fie, be min feet they do eat
Comfets vet spoons.
No, no, Isle make you chew your pleasure vit love,
"De more degrees and steps, de more delight,
"De more endeared is de pleasure hight.
What your a learned wanton, and proceed by art?
Go little wig, pleasure should have a
Cranes long neck, to relish de Ambrosia of
Delight.
And Ec pre de tel me, for me loves to hear of manhood
Very mush, Isait: Ec prede (vat was me a saying)
Oh, Ec prede tell a me:
How did you kill a metre Frevile?
Why quarrelled a set purpose, drew him out, Singled him, and having th'advantage of my sword and might, ran him through and through.
Vat did you vet him van he was sticken?
I dragd him by the heals to the next wharffe and spurnd him in the River.
Seize, seize him: O monstrous? O ruthless Villain?
What mean you Gentlemen? by heaven,
Speak not of any thing thats good.
Your errors gives you passion: Frevile lives.
Thie own lips say, thou least.
Let me die if at Shatewes the Jeweller, he lives not safe untouched.
Mean time to stricktest guard, to sharpest prison.
No rudeness Gentlemen: Isle go vndragd.
O wicked, wicked Devil. 
Sir, the day of trial is this morn,
Lets prosecute the sharpest rigour, and severest end:
"Good men are cruel, when the'are vices friend.
Woman we thank thee, with no empty hand,
Strumpets are fit, fit for something. 
I, for Hell: O thou unreprievable, beyond all
Measure of Grace damned immediately:
That things of beauty created for sweet use:
Soft comfort, and as the very music of life,
Custom should make so vnutterablie hellish?
O heaven, what difference is in women, and their life?
What man, but worthy name of Man:
Would leave the modest pleasures of a lawful bed:
The holy union of two equal harts
Mutually holding either dear as health,
The undoubted issues, Joys of chaste sheets,
The unfeigned embrace of sober Ignorance:
To twine the vnhealthfull loins of common Loves,
The prostituted impudence of things.
Senseless like those by Cataracks of Nyle,
"Their use so vile, takes away sense how vile,
"To love a creature, made of blood and hell,
"Whose use makes weak, whose company doth shame,
"Whose bed doth beggar: issue doth defame.
Metre Frevile live: ha, ha, live at mestre Shatewes:
Mush at metre Shatews. Frevile is dead. Malhereux sall hang,
And sweet devil, dat Beatrice would but run mad, dat
she would but run mad, den me would dance and sing,
Metre Don Dubon, me pre ye now go to Mestres
Beatrice, tel her Frevile is sure ded, and dat he
Curse his self especially, for dat he was
Sticked in his quarrel, swearing in his last gasp,
Dat if it had bin in mine quarrels,
Twould never have grieved him.
I will.
Prede do, and say any ting dat vile vex her.
Let me alone to vex her.
Vile you, vile you make a her run mad? here take
Dis ring, sea me scorn to wear any ting dat washers,
Or his: I prede torment her, Ec cannot love her,
She honest and virtuous forsooth.
Is she so? O vile creature? then let me alone with her.
Vat. Vile you make a her mad? feet by min trat,
Be pretty seruan, Bush, Ec sall go to bet now.
Mischief whether wilt thou? O thou tear-lesse woman?
How monstrous is thy Devil,
The end of Hell as thee.
How miserable were it to be virtuous, if thou could prosper?
Isle to my Love, the faithful Beatrice,
She has wept enough, and faith dear soul too much.
But yet how sweet it is to think
How dear ones life was to his Love: how moornd his death.
Tic Joy not to be expressed with breath:
But O let him that would such passion drink,
Be quiet of his speech, and only think. 
Sister, cannot a woman kill her self? Is it not lawful to die when we should not live?
O sister tic a question not for vs, we must do what God will.
What God will? Alas, can torment be his glory, or our grief his pleasure? Does not the Nurses nipple iuic'd over with Wormwood, bid the child it should not suck? And does not Heaven when it hath made our breath bitter unto vs, say we shut not live? O my best sister: to suffer wounds when one may scope this rod, is against nature, that is against God.
Good sister do not make me weep: sure Frevile was not false: Isle gage my life that strumpet out of craft
And some close second end hath malist him.
O sister if he were not false, whom have I lost?
If he were: what grief to such unkindness,
From head to foot I am all misery:
Only in this, some justice I have found
My grief is like my love, beyond all bound. 
My servant, moister Cacature desires to visit you,
For griefs sake keep him out, his discourse is like the long word, Honorificabilitudinitatibus: a great deal
Of sound and no sense: his company is like a parenthesis.
To a discourse you may admit it, or leau it out, it makes no matter.
By your leau• sweet creatures.
Sir, all I can yet say of you, is, you are uncivil.
You must deny it: By your sorrows leave,
I bring some music, to make sweet your grief,
What ere you please: O break my hart
Can thou yet pant? O dost thou yet seruiue,
Thou did not love him, if thou now can live▪
O Love, how strangely sweet
are thy weak Passions,
That love and joy 〈…〉
in self same fashions.
O who can tell
the cause why this should move▪
But only this,
no reason, ask of L••e.
Hold, peace, the ge• 〈…〉 O my best sister.
Ha, get you gone, close the doors: My Beatrice,
Cursed be my indiscreet trials: O my immeasureablie loving.
She stirs, give air, she breathes.
Where am I, ha? how have I slipped off life?
Am I in heaven? O my Lord, though not loving
By our eternal being, yet give me leave
To rest by thie dear side: am I not in heaven?
O eternally much laved, recollect your spirits.
Ha, you do speak, I do see you, I do live,
I would not die now: Let me not burst with wonder.
Call up your blood, I live to honour you,
As the admired glory of your sex.
Nor ever hath my love bin false to you.
Only I presumed to try your faith too much,
For which I most am grieved.
Brother; I must be plain with you, you have wronged vs.
I am not so Covetous to deny it,
But yet when my discourse hath staide your quaking,
You will be smoother leapt: and the delight
And satisfaction which we all have got,
Under these strange disguisings, when you know,
You will be mild and quiet, forget at last,
"It is much joy to think on sorrows past.
Do you then live? and are you not •ntrue?
Let me not die with Joy, pleasure's more extreme:
Then grief, theirs nothing sweet to ma• but mean.
Heaven cannot be too gracious to such goodness, I shall discourse to you the several chances, but hark I must yet rest dis∣guest, the sudden close of many drifts now meet,
"Where pleasure hath some profit, are• is sweet. 
News, news, news, news.
Oysters, Oysters, oysters, oysters.
Why, is not this well now? Is not this better then louring, and pouting, and puling, which is hateful to the living, and vain to the dead? Come, come, you must live by the quick, when all is done, and for my own part, let my wife laugh at me when I am dead, so s•eel smile upon me whilst I live, but to see a woman Whine, and yet keep her eyes 〈◊〉 morn, and yet keep her cheeks fat: nay, to see a woman c•awe her husband by the feet when he is dead, that would have scratched him by the face when• he was living: this now is somewhat ridiculous.
Lord how you prate.
And yet I was afraid in faith that I should ha seen a Gar∣land on this beauties hearse, but time, truth, experience, and vary∣tie, are great doers with women.
But whats the news? the news I pray you?
I pray you? ne'er pray me: for by your leave you may com¦mand me. This tic: the public sessions which this day is past, hath doomed to death ill fortuned Malhereux.
But sir, we heard he offered to make good,
That Freuile lived at Shatews the Jewellers.
And that it was but a plot betwixt them two.
O I, I, he gagd his life with it, but know
When all approached the test, Shatews divide
He saw or heard of any such complot,
Or of Freuill: so that his own defence,
Appeared so false, that like a madmans sword,
He stroke his own hart, he hath the course of law
and instantly must suffer: but the Jest
(If hanging be a jest) as many make it)
Is to take notice of one Mullegrub, a sharking vintner.
What of him Sir.
Nothing but hanging, the Whoresone slave is mad before he hath lost his senses.
Was his fact clear and made apparent Sir?
No faith suspicions, for it was thus protested
a cloak was stolen, that cloak he had, he had it
Himself confessed by force, the rest of his defence
The choler of a Justice wronged in wine,
Joined with malignancy of some hasty Jurors,
Whose wit was lighted by the Justice nose, The knave was cast,
But Lord to hear his moan, his prayers, his wishes,
His zeal ill timde, and his words unpitied,
Would make a dead man rise and smile,
Whilst he observed how fear can make men vile.
Shall we go meet the execution?
I shall be ruled by you.
By my trow•h a rare motion, you must hast,
For male-factors goes like the world upon wheels.
Will you man vs, you shall be our guide to Freuile.
I am your servant.
Ha servant? Zounds I am no companion for Pandors▪ your best make him your love.
So will I Sir, we must live by the quick you say.
Stead a virtue, what a damned things this?
Whole trust fair faces, tears, and vows, Stead not I,
She is a woman, that is, she can lie.
Come, come, turn not a man of time, to make al il,
Whose goodness you conceive 〈◊〉, since the •orst of chance
Is to crave grace for 〈…〉▪
So, I ha lost my Sergeant in an ecliptique mist, drunk, horrible drunk, he is fine: so now will I fit my self, I hope this habit will do me no harm, I am an honest man already: fit, fit, fit as a puncks tail, that serves every body: By this time my Vintner thinks of nothing but hell and sulphur, he farts fire and brimstone already, hang tostes, the execution approaches.
I do not blush, although condemned by laws,
No kind of death is shameful but the cause:
Which I do know is none, and yet my lust
Hath made the one (although not cause) most just.
May I not be reprieved? Freuile is but mislodgd,
Some lethargy hath seazd him, no, much malice,
Do not lay blood upon your souls with good intone••,
Men may do ill and law sometime repents.
Sir, sir, prepare, vain is all lewd defence.
"Conscience was law: but now laws Conscience,
My endless peace is made, and to the poor,
My purse, my purse.
I Sir, and it shall please you the poor has your purse a•.
You are a Welyman,
But now thou source of Devils, Oh how I loathe
The very memory of that I adored,
He thats of fair blood, well meand, of good breeding,
Best famed, of sweet acquaintance and true friends▪
And would with desperate Impudence loose all these,
And hazard landing at this fatal shore,
Ler him ne'er kill, nor steal, but love a Whore,
De man dose rave, think a got, think a got, and bid d••• •lesh, de world, and the dible farewell.
Farewell. 
Farewell.
Vat first you sea, ha?
Sir your pardon, with my this defence,
Do not forget protested violence
Of your low affections no requests,
No arguments of reason, no known dan•er.
No assured wicked bloodines,
Could draw your hart from this damnation.
Why stay.
Vnprosperous Devil, vat sall me do now.
Therefore to force you from the truer danger,
I wrought the fained, suffering this fair Devil,
In shaps of woman to make good her plot,
And knowing that the hook was deeply fast,
I gave her line at will, till with her own vain striuings,
See here shees tired: O thou comely damnation?
Doest think that vice is not to be withstood,
O what is woman merely made of blood.
You maze vs all, let vs not be lost in darkness?
All shall be lighted, but this time and place
Forbids longer speech, only what you can think
Has bin extremely ill is only hers.
To severest prison with her, with what hart can live? What eyes behold a face?
Ec vile not speak, torture, torture your fill,
For me am worse then hanged, me ha lost my will. 
To the extremest whip and Jail.
Frolic, how is it Sirs?
I am my self, how long wast ere I could
Persuade my passion to grow calm to you?
Rich sense makes good bad language, and a friend
Should weigh no action, but the actions end.
I am now worthy yours, when before
The beast of man, loose blood distempered vs,
"He that lust rules cannot be virtuous.
On before there, room for the prisoners?
I pray you do not lead me to execution through cheap∣side, I owe M. Burnish the gold-smith money, and I fear heel set a Seriant on my back for it.
Trouble not your skonce my Christian Brothers, but have an eye unto the maine chance, I will warrant your shouldiers, as for your neck Plinius secundus, or marcus Tullius Cycero, or some∣body it is says, that a three fouled corde is hardly broken.
Well, I am not the first honest man that hath bin cast away, and I hope shall not be the last.
O sir, have a good stomach and mawes, you shall have a joyful supper.
In troth I have no stomach to it, and it please you take my trencher▪ I use to fast at nights.
O husband, I little thought you should have come to think on God thus soon: nay and you had bin hanged deserved¦lie, it would never have greeud me, I have known of many honest innocent men have bin hanged deservedly, but to be cast away for nothing.
Good woman hold your peace, your prittles &amp; your prat¦tles your bibles and your babbles, for I pray you hear me in private, I am a widower, and you are almost a widow, shall I be welcome to your houses, to your tables, and your other things.
I have a piece of mutton and a featherbed for you at all times, I pray make hast.
I do here make my confession, if I owe any man any thing, I do heartily forgive him: if any man owe me any thing, let him pay my wife.
I will look to your wi•es payment I warrant you.
And now good yoke-fellow leave thy poor mulligrub.
Nay then I were unkind ysaith, I will not leave you until I have seen you hang.
But brothers, brothers, you must think of your sins and iniquities, you have bin a brocher of profane vessels, you have made vs drink of the juice of the whore of Babylon, for whereas good ale, Parries, Bragets, Syders, and metheglins, was the true aunti∣ent British and Trojan drinks, you ha brought in Popish wines, Spa∣nish wines, French wines, tam mart quam mercurio, both muscadi•• and malmsey, to the subversion, staggering, and sometimes over∣throw of many a good Christian: You ha bin a great Iumbler, O remember the sins of your nights, for your night works ha bin un∣savoury in the taste of your Customers.
I confess, I confess, and I forgive as I would be forgiuē, Do you know one Cocledemoy?
O very well: know him? an honest man he is and a com∣lie, an upright dealer with his neighbours, and their wives speak good things of him.
Well, whersoere he is, or whatsoere he is, Isle take it on my death hes the cause of my hanging, I heartily forgive him, and if he would come forth he might save me, for he only knows the why, and the wherefore.
You do from your harts, and midrifs, and entrails forgive him then you will not let him rot in rusty Irons, procure him to be hanged in lousy linen without a song, and after he is dead peace on his grave.
That hard hart of mine has procured all this, but I forgive as I would be forgiven.
Hang tosts my Worsh.
behold thy Cocledemoy, my fine vintner, my castrophomicall fine boy: behold and see.
Bliss, a the blessed, who would but look for 2. knaves here?
No knave worsh. friend, no knave, for observe honest C••∣cledemoy restores whatsoever he has got, to make you know, that whatsoere he has don, has bin only Euphoniae gratia, for Wits sake: I acquit this Vintner as he has acquitted me, all has bin done for Emphises of wit my fine boy, my worshipful friends.
Go you are a flattering knave.
I am so, tic a good thriving trade, it coms forward better then the 7. liberal Sciences, or the nine cardinal virtues, which may well appear in this, you shall never have flattering knave turn courtier: and yet I have read of many Courtiers that have turned flattering knaves.
Wast even but so, why then else well?
I could even weep for joy.
I could weep to, but God knows for what.
Hers another tack to be given, your son and daughter.
First possible, hart I, al my hart, will you be joined here?
yes •aith father, marriage and hanging are spun both in one hour.
Why then my worsh. good friends I bid my self most har¦tily welcome to your merry nuptials, and wanton Iigga-ioggies And now my very fine Heliconian Gallants, and you my Worsh. friends in the middle Region:
If with content our hurtles mirth hath bin,
Let your pleased minds as our much care hath bin:
For he shall find that slights such trivial wit,
Tic easier to reprove then better it:
We scorn to fear, and yet we fear to swell,
We do not hope tic best: tic all, 〈…〉 

THe Scene is Lybia, and the subject thus.
Whilst Carthage stood the only awe of Rome,
As most imperial seat of Lybia,
Governed by Statsmen each as great as Kings
(For 17. Kings were Carthage feodars)
Whilst thus she florishd, whilst his Hannibal
Made Rome to tremble, and the Walls yet pale:
Then in this Carthage Sophonisba lived
The far famed daughter of great Asdruball▪
For whom (amongst others) potent Syphax sues
And well graced Massinissa rivals him
Both Princes of proud Scepters: but the lot
Of doubtful favour Massinissa graced
At which Syphax grows black: For now the night
Yields loud resoundings of the nuptial pomp:
Apollo strikes his Harp: Hymen his Torch
Whilst lowering Iuno with ill-boding eye
Sits envious at too forward Venus: Lo
The instant night: And now ye worthier minds
To whom we shall present a female glory
(The wonder of a constancy so fixed
That Fate it self might well grow envious)
Be pleased to sit such as may merit oil
And holy dew styled from diviner heat,
For rest thus knowing, what of this you hear,
The Author lowly hopes, but must not fear.
For just worth never rests on popular frown,
To have done well is fair deeds only crown.
Syphax, Syphax, why wast thou cursed a King?
What angry God made thee so great, so vile?
Contemd, disgraced, think, were thou a slave
Though Sophonisba did reject thy love
Thy low neglected head unpointed at
Thy shame vnrumord and thy suit vnskoffd
Might yet rest quiet: Reputation
Thou awe of fools and greatmen: thou that choakst
Freest addictions, and makst mortals sweat
Blood and cold drops in fear to loose, or hope
To gain thy never certain seldom worthy gracings.
Reputation!
Were not for thee Syphax could bear this scorn
Not spouting up his gall among his blood
In black vexations: Massinissa might
Enjoy the sweets of his preferred graces
Without my dangerous Envy or Revenge
Were not for thy affliction all might sleep
In sweet oblivion: But (O greatness skourge!)
We cannot without Envy keep high name
Nor yet disgraced can have a quiet shame.
Scipio:—
Some light in depth of hell: Vangue what hope?
I have received assured intelligence
That Scipio Romes sole hope hath raised up men
Drawn troupes together for invasion—
Of this same Carthage.
With this policy
To force wild Hannibal from Italy—
And draw the war to Africa.
Right.
And strike
This secure country with unthought of arms
My letters bear he is departed Rome
Directly setting course and sailing up.—
To Carthage, Carthage, O thou eternal youth
Man of large fame great and abounding glory
Renounefull Scipio, spread thy too-necked Eagles,
Fill full thy sails with a revenging wind,
Strike through obedient Neptune, till thy prows
Dash up our Lybian ouse, and thy just arms
Shine with amazfull terror on these walls,
O now record thy Fathers honoured blood
Which Carthage drunk, thy Uncle Publius blood
Which Carthage drunk, 30000. souls
Of choice Italians Carthage set on wing:
Remember Hannibal, yet Hannibal
The consul-queller: O then enlarge thy hart
Be thousand souls in one, let all the breath
The spirit of thy name and nation be mixed strong
In thy great hart: O fall like thunder shaft
The winged vengeance of incensed Jove
Upon this Carthage: for Syphax here flies off
From all allegiance, from all love or service
His (now freed) sceptre once did yield this City
Ye universal Gods, Light, Heate, and Ayre
Prove all vnblessing Syphax if his hands
Once rear them selves for Carthage but to curse it.
It had been better they had changed their faith,
Denied their Gods, then slighted Syphax love
So fearfully will I take vengeance.
I'll interleague with Scipio. Vangue.
Dear Ethiopian Negro, go wing a vessel
And fly to Scipio. say his confederate
Vowed and confirmed is Syphax: bid him hast
To mix our palms and arms: will him make up
Whilst we are in the strength of discontent
Our unsuspected forces well in arms
For Sophonisba, Carthage, Asdruball
Shall feel their weakness in preferring weakness
And one less great then we, to our dear wishes
Haste gentle Negro, that this heap may know strong
Me, and their wrong:
Wrong?
I, tho it were not, yet know while Kings are
What thei'le but think and not what is, is wrong
I am disgraced in, and by that which hath
No reason, Love, and Woman, my revenge
Shall therefore bear no argument of right
Passion is Reason when it speaks from Might
I tell thee, man, nor Kings, nor Gods exempt
But they grow pale if once they find Contempt: haste.
Watch at the dors: and till we be reposed
Let no one enter: Zanthia undo me.
With this motto under your girdle
You had bin undone if you had not bin undone humblest service.
I wonder Zanthia why the custom is
To use such Ceremony such strict shape
About vs women: forsooth the Bride must steal
Before her Lord to bed: and then delays
Long expectations all against known wishes
I hate these figures in locution
These about phrases forced by ceremony
We must still seem to fly what we most seek
And hide our selves from that we fine would find vs
Let those that think and speak and doe just acts
Know form can give no virtue to their acts
Nor detract vice.
alas fair Princes, those that are strongly formed
And truly shaped may naked walk, but we
We things called women, only made for show
And pleasure, created to bear children
And play at shuttle-coke, we imperfect mixtures
without respective ceremony used
And ever complement, alas what are we?
Take from vs formal custom and the courtesies
Which civil fashion hath still used to vs
We fall to all contempt, O women how much
How much are you beholding to Ceremony,
You are familiar. Zanthia my shoe,
Ti's wonder Madam you tread not awry.
Your reason Zanthia.
You go very high.
Hark, Music, Music.
The Bridgrome.
The Bridgrome
Hast good Zanthia, help, keep yet the doors
Fair fall you Lady, so, admit admit.
You powers of joy: Gods of a happy bed
Show you are pleased, sister and wife of Jove
High fronted Iuno and thou Carthage Patron
Smooth chind Appollo, both give modest heat
And temperate graces.
draws a white ribbon forth of the
bed as from the waste of Sopho.
Lo I unloose thy waste
She that is just in love is Godlike chaste:
A modest silence thought be thought
A virgins beauty and his highest honour
Though bashful feignings nicely wrought
Grace his that virtue takes not in, but on his
What I dare think I boldly speak
After my word my well bold action rushes
In open flame then passion break
Where Virtue prompts, thought word, act never blushes.
Revenging Gods whose Marble hands
Crush faithless men with a confounding terror
Give me no mercy if these bands
I covet not with an unfeigned fervor
Which zealous vow when ought can force me t'lame
Load with that plague Atlas would groan at, shame.
Live both high parents of so happy birth
Your stemms may touch the skies and shadow earth
Most great in fame more great in virtue shining
Prosper O powers a just, a strong divining.
To bold harts Fortune, be not you amazed
Carthage O Carthage: be not you amazed.
Jove made vs not to fear, resolve, speak out
The highest misery of man is doubt: Speak Carthalo.
The stooping Sun like to some weaker Prince
Let his shads spread to an unnatural hugeness
When we the camp that lay at Vtica
From Carthage distant but five easy leagues
Discride from of the watch three hundred sail
Upon whose tops the Roman Eagles stretched
Their large spread wings, which fan'd the evening ayre
To vs cold breath, for well we might discern
Rome swam to Carthage.
Hanniball our encore is come back, thy slight
Thy Stratagem to lead war unto Rome
To quite our selves, hath taught now desperate Rome
T'assaile our Carthage, Now the war is here.
He is nor blessed nor honest that can fear.
I but to cast the worst of our distress. - -
To doubt of what shall be is wretchedness
Desire, Fear, and Hope, receive no bond
By whom, we in our selves are never but beyond. On.
Th'allarum beats necessity of fight
Th'vnsober evening draws out reeling forces
Soldiers half men, who to their colours troupe
With fury, not with valour: whilst our ships
Vnrigd, vnusd, fitter for fire then water
We save in our bard haven from surprise.
By this our army marches toward the shore,
Vndisciplind young men most bold to doe
If they knew how, or what, when we descry
A mighty dust beat up with horses houes
Straight Roman ensigns glitter: Scipio.
Scipio.
Scipio advanced like the God of blood
Leads up grim war, that father of foul wounds
Whose finowy feet are steepd in gore, whose hideous voice
Makes turrets tremble, and whole Cities shake
Before whose brows flight and disorder hurry
With whom March Burnings, murder, wrong, waste, rapes
Behind whom a sad train is seen, Woe, Fears
Tortures, Lean, Need, Famine, and helpless tears
Now make we equal stand in mutual view
We judged the Romans 18. thousand foot
5000▪ Horse, we almost doubled them
In number not in virtue: yet in heate
Of youth and wine jolly and full of blood.
We gave the sign of battle: shouts are raised
That shook the heavens: Pell Mell our armies join
Horse, targets, pikes all against each apposd
They give fierce shoke, arms thundered as they closed
Men cover earth which straight are covered
With men and earth: yet doubtful stood the fight
More fair to Carthage; when lo as oft you see
In mines of gold, when laboring slaves delve out
The richest ore, being in sudden hope
With some unlooked for vain to full their buckets
And send huge treasure up, a sudden damp
Stifles them all, their hands yet stuffed with gold
So fell our fortunes for look as ye stood proud
As hopeful victors, thinking to return
With spoils worth triumph, wrathful Syphax lands
With full ten thousand strong Numidian horse
And ions to Scipio, then lo we all were damp't
We fall in glusters and our wearied troops
Quit all: slaughter ran throw vs straight, we fly
Romans pursue, but Scipio sounds retreat
As fearing trains and night: we make amain
For Carthage most, and some for Vtica
All for our lives: new force, fresh arms with speed
You have said truth of all: no more. I bleed.
O wretched fortune.
Old Lord spare thy hay••s
What dost thou think baldness will cure thy grief
What decree the Senate?
Ask old Gelosso who returns from them
Informd with fullest charge strong Asdruball
Great Massinissa Carthage General
So speaks the Senate: Counsel for this war
In Hanno magnus, Bids, Carthalon.
And vs Gelosso rests: Embrace this charge
You never yet dishonord. Asdruball
High Massinissa by your vows to Carthage
By God of great-men Glory, fight for Carthage
Ten thousand strong Massulians ready troupt
Expect their King, double that number waits
The leading of loud Asdruball; beat load
Our Affrike drums, and whilst our o're-toild foe
Snores on his vnlacd cask, all faint though proud
Through his successful fight strike fresh alarms
Gods are not if they grace not bold just arms.
Carthage thou straight shalt know
Thy favours have been done unto a king.
My Lords t,is most unusual such sad haps
Of sudden horror, should intrude mong beds
Of soft and private loves; but strange events
Excuse strāge form's. O you that know our blood
Revenge if I doe fine: I here protest
Though my Lord leave his wife a very maid,
Even this night instead of my soft arms
Clasping his well strong limbs with glossfull steel,
Whats safe to Carthage shall be sweet to me.
I must not, nor I am once ignorant
My choice of love hath given this sudden dāger
To yet strong Carthage: t'was I lost the fight,
My choice vexed Syphax enraged Syphax struk
Arms fate: yet Sophonisba not repents,
O we were Gods if that we knew events.
But let me Lord leave Carthage, quit his virtue
I will not love him, yet must honour him,
As still good Subjects must bad Princes: Lords
From the most ill-grac'd Hymeneal bed
That ever Iuno frowned at, I entreat
That you'll collect from our loose formed speech
This firm resolve: that no lo Appetite
Of my sex weakness, can or shall overcome
Due grateful service unto you, or virtue.
Witness ye Gods I never until now
Repined at my creation; now I wish
I were no woman, that my arms might speak
My hart to Carthage: but in vain, my tongue
Swears I am woman still: I talk to long.
Ye Carthage Lords: know Massinissa knows
Not only terms of honour: but his actions
Nor must I now enlarge how much my cause
Hath dangerd Carthage but how I may show
My self most pressed to satisfaction
The loathsome stain of Kings Ingratitude
From me O much be far, and since this torrent
Wars rage admits no Encore: since the billow
Is risen so high we may not hull but yield
This ample state to stroke of speedy swords
What you with sober hast hath well decreed
Weal put to sudden arms: no not this night
These dainties this first fruits of nuptials
That well might give excuse for feeble lingrings
Shall hinder Massiuissa. Appetite
Kisses, loves, dalliance and what softer joys
The Venus of the pleasingest ease can minister
I quit you all: Virtue perforce is Vice
But he that may, yet holds, is manly wise
Lo then ye Lords of Carthage, to your trust
I leave all Massinissas treasure by the oath
Of right good men stand to my fortune just.
Most hard it is for great harts to mistrust.
We vow by all high powers.
No doe not swear.
I was not borne so small to doubt or fear.
Worthy my Lord.
Peace my ears are steel
I must not hear thy much enticing voice.
By Massinissa, Sophonisba speaks
Worthy his wife: go with as high a hand
As worth can rear, I will not stay my Lord
Fight for our country, vent thy youthful heate
In field not beds, the fruit of honour Fame
Be rather gotten then the oft disgrace
Of haplesse parents, children, go best man
And make me proud to be a soldiers wife
That valews his renoune aboue faint pleasures
Think every honour that doth grace thy sword
Trebles my love: by thee I have no lust
But of thy glory: best lights of heaven with thee
Like wonder stand, or fall, so though thou die
My fortunes may be wretched, but not I.
Wondrous creature, even fit for Gods not men
Nature made all the rest of thy fair sex
As weak essaies, to make thee a pattern
Of what can be in woman. Long Farewell.
Hes sure unconquered in whom thou dost dwell
Carthage Palladium. See that glorious lamp
Whose lifefull presence gives sudden flight
To fancies, togs, fears, sleep, and slothful night
Spreads day upon the world: march swift amain
Fame got with loss of breath is godlike gain.
My hand? my hand? rot first, wither in aged sha••
Will you be so unseasonably wood?
Hold such preposterous zeal as stand against
the full decree of Senate? all think fit.
Nay most vneuitable necessary
For Carthage safety, and the now sole good
Of present state, that wee must break all faith
With Massinissa: whilst he fights abroad
Lets gain back Syphax, making him our own
By giving Sophonisba to his bed.
Syphax is Massinissas greater, and his force
Shall give more side to Cartthage; as force queen
And her wise father, they love Carthage fate,
Profit, and Honesty, are one in state.
And what decrees our very virtuous senate
Of worthy Massinissa that now fights
and (leaving wife and bed) bleeds in good arms
For right old Carthage?
Thus tic thought fit
His father Asdruball on sudden shall take in
Revolted Siphax; so with doubled strength
Before that Massinissa shall suspect,
Slaughter boeth Massinissa and his troupes,
And likewise strike with his deep stratagem
A sudden weakness into Scipios arms,
By drawing such alim from the maine body
Of his yet powerful army: which being don
Dead Massinissas kingdom we decree
To Sophonisba and great Asdruball
For their consent, so this swift plot shall bring
Two crowns to his, make Asdruball a king.
So first faiths breach, adultery, murder, theft,
What else? Gel. Nay all is don no mischeifleft
Pish prosperous success gives blackest actions glory,
The means are unremembered in most story.
Let me not say Gods are not.
This is fit
Conquest by blood is not so sweet as wit,
For how so ere nice virtue censures of it,
He hath the grace of war, that hath wars profit.
But Carthage well advised, that states comes on,
With slow advice, quick execution,
Have here an Engineer long bred for plots,
Called an impoisner, who knows this sound excuse,
The only dew that makes men sprout in Courts, is use,
Be it well or ill, his thrift is to be mute,
Such slaves must act commands, and not dispute.
Knowing foul deeds with danger do begin
But with rewards do end: Sin is no sin
But in respects—
Politic Lord, speak low tho heaven bears
A face far from vs, Gods have most long ears,
Jove has a hundred marble marble hands
O I, in Poetry or Tragic scene.
I fear Gods only know what Poets mean.
Yet hear me: I will speak close truth and cease,
Nothing in Nature is vnseruisable,
No, not even Inutility it selse,
Is then for nought dishonesty in being,
And if it be somtines of forced use,
Wherein more urgent then in saving nations
State shapes are sodderd up, with base, nay faulty
Yet necessary functions; some must lie,
Some must betray, some murder, and some all,
Each hath strong use, as poison in all purges
Yet when some violent chance shall force a state,
To break given faith, or plot some stratagems,
Princes ascribe that vile necessity
Unto Heavens wrath: and sure tho't be no vice,
Yet it is bad chance: states must not stick to nice
For Massinissas death sense bids forgive
Beware to offend great men and let them live
For tic of empires body the mayne arm,
He that will do no good shall doe no harm: you have my mind
Although a stagelike passion &amp; weak heate
Full of an empty wording might suit age
Know Isle speak strongly truth: Lords near mistrust
That he who'le not betray a private man
For his country, will near betray his country
For private men; then give Gelosso faith
If treachery in state be serviceable,
Let hangmen doe it: I am bound to loose
My life but not my honour for my country;
Our vow, our faith, our oath, why they are our selves
And he thats faithless to his proper self,
May be excusd if he break faith with princes:
The Gods assist just hearts, &amp; states that trust,
Plots before Providence are tossed like dust.
For Massinissa: (O let me slake a little
Aust•• discourse and feel Humanity)
Me th•nkes I hear him cry. O fight for Carthage,
Charge home, wounds smart not, for that so just so great
So good a City: me thinks I see him yet
Leave his fair bride even on his nuptial night
To buckle on his arms for Carthage: Hark
Yet, yet, I hear him cry—Ingratitude
Vile stain of man. O over be most far
From Massinissas breast: up, march amain,
Fame got with loss of breath, is godlike gain.
And see by this he bleeds in doubtful fight:
And cries for Carthage, whilst Carthage—Memory
Forsake Gelosso, would I could not think:
Nor hear, nor bee, When Carthage is
So infinitely vile: see see look here,
Who speaks? what mute? fair plot: what? blush to break it?
How lewd to act when so shamed but to speak it.
Is this the Senates firm decrees
It is.
Is this the Senates firm decree?
It is
Hath Syphax entertained the stratagem?
No doubt he hath, or will.
My answers thus,
Whats safe to Carthage, shall be sweet to me
Right worthy
Roialest Ge. O very wo man!
But tic not safe for Carthage to destroy,
Be most unjust, cunningly politic,
Your heads still under Heaven, O trust to fate,
Gods prosper more a just then crafty state.
Tic less disgrace to have a pitied loss
Then shameful victory.
O very Angel!
We all have sworn good Massinissa faith,
Speech makes vs men, and theirs no other bond
Twixt man and man, but words: O equal Gods
Make vs once know the consequence of vows—
And wee shall hate faith-breakers worse then man-eaters
Ha! good Gelosso is thy breath not here?
You doe me wrong as long as I can die,
Doubt you that old Gelasso can be vile?
Statesmay afflict, tax, orture, but ourmindes
Are ōly sworn to Jove: I grieve and yet am proud
That I alone am honest: high powers you know
Virtue is seldom seen with troupes to go.
Excellent man Carthage &amp; Rome shall fall
Before thy fame: our Lords know I the worst.
The Gods foresaw, tic fate we thus are forced.
Gods nought foresee, but see, for to their eyes
Nought is to come, or past, Nor are you vile
Because the Gods foresee: for Gods and We
See as things are things are not, for we see
But since affected wisdom in vs Women
Is our sex highest folly: I am silent,
I cannot speak less well, unless I were
More void of goodness: Lords of Carthage, thus
The ayre and earth of Carthage owes my body,
It is their servant; what decree they of it?
That you remove to Cirta, to the palace
Of well formed Syphax, who with longing eyes
Meets you: he that gives way to Fate is wise.
I go: what power can make me wretched? what evil
Is there in life to him, that knows lifes loss
To be no evil: show, show thy ugliest brow
O most black chance: make me a wretched story
Without misfortune Virtue hath no glory
Opposed trees makes tempests show their power
And waives forced back by rocks makes Neptune tower
Tearelesse O see a miracle of life
A maid, a widow, yet a haplesse wife.
A prodigy! let nature run cross legedd
Ops go upon thy head, let Neptune burn
Cold Saturn crack with heate for now the world
Hath seen a Woman:
Leap nimble lightning from Ioues ample shield
And make at length, an end, the proud hot breath
Of thee contemning Greatness, the huge drought
Of sole self loving vast Ambition.
Th'vnnaturall scorching heate of all those lamps
Thou reard'st to yield a temperate fruitful heat
Relentless rage whose hart hath no one drop
Of humane pity: all all loudly cry
Thy brand O Jove, for know the world is dry
O let A general end save Carthage fame
When worlds doe burn vnseens a Cities flame.
Phoebus in me is great: Carthage must fall
Jove hats all vice but vows breach worst of all.
Mount vs again, give vs another horse
Uncle your blood flows fast, pray ye withdraw
O Iugurth I cannot bleed too fast. too much
For that so great, so just so royal Carthage
My wound smarts not, bloods loss makes me not faint
For that loved City, O Nephew let me tell thee,
How good that Carthage is: it nourished me,
And when full time gave me fit strength for love,
The most adored creature of the city.
To vs before great Syphax did they yield,
Fair, noble, modest, and above all, my,
My Sophonisba, O Iugurth my strength doubles
I know not how to turn a coward, drop
In feeble baseness, I cannot: give me horse,
Know I am Carthage very creature, and I am graced,
That I may bleed for them: give me fresh horse.
He that doth public good for multitude,
Finds few are truly grateful.
O Iugurth, fie you must not say so, Iugurth,
Some common weals may let a noble hart,
Too forward bleeds abroad and bleed bemond,
But not revenged at home, but Carthage, fie
It cannot be vngrate, faithless through fear,
It cannot Iugurth: Sophonisba's there,
Beat a fresh charge.
Sound the retreat, respect your health brave Prince,
The waste of blood throw's paleness on your face,
By light, my harts not pale: O my loved father,
We bleed for Carthage Balsum to my wounds,
We bleed for Carthage: shells restore the fight?
My squadron of Massulians yet stands firm.
The day looks off from Carthage cease all arms
A modest temperance is the life of arms,
Take our best surgeon Gisco, he is sent
From Carthage to attend your chance of war,
We promise sudden ease.
Thy cōforts good
That nothing can secure vs but thy blood:
Infuse it in his wound, t'will work amain,
O Jove,
What Jove? thy God must be thy gain
And as for me.
Thou know, a statist must not be a man.
Forbear, how art thou called?
Gisco my Lord.
Um, Gisco, ha, touch not mine arm, most only man, 
Sirrha, sirrha, art poor?
not poor.
Nephew cōmand 
Our troupes of horse make indisgracde retreat,
Trot easy off: not poor: Iugurth give charge,
My soldiers stand in square battalion, 
Entirely of themselves: Gisco you are old,
Tic time to leave off murder, thy faint breath.
Scarce heaves thy ribs, thy gummy bloud-shut eyes,
Are sunk a great way in thee, thy lank skin,
Slides from thy fleshlesh veins: be good to men,
Judge him ye Gods, I had not life to kill
So base a Creature, hold Gisco () live,
The God-like part of Kings is to forgive,
Command astonished Gisco.
No return.
Haste unto Carthage: quit thy abject fears,
Massinissa knows no use of murderers.
Speak, speak, let terror strike slaves mute.
Much danger makes great hearts most resolute,
Uncle I fear foul arms, my self beheld,
Syphax on high speed run his well breathed horse,
Direct to Cirta that most beauteous City,
Of all his kingdom: whilst his troupes of horse
With careless trot pace gently toward our camp,
As friends to Carthage, stand on guard dear uncle
For Asdrubal with yet his well ranked army,
Bends a deep threatening brow to vs as if,
He waited but to join with Syphax horse
And hew vs all to pieces: O my King
My Uncle, Father, Captain O over All
Stand like thy self or like thy self now fall
Thy troops yet hold good ground: Unworthy wounds
Betray not Massinissa.
Iugurth pluck
Pluck, so, good cousin.
O God doe you not feel?
Not Iugurth no, now all my flesh is steel.
Of base disguise: High lights scorn not to view
A true old man: up Massinissa throw
The lot of battle upon Syphax troops
Before he join with Carthage: then amain
Make through to Scipio, he yields safe abods
Spare treachery, and strike the very Gods.
Why wast thou borne at Carthage, O my fate
Divinest Sophonisba! I am full
Of much complaint, and many passions,
The least of which expressed would sad the Gods
And strike compassion in most ruthless hell
Up vnmaimd hart spend all thy grief and rage
Upon thy foe: the fields a soldiers stage
On which his action shows: If you are just
And hate those that contemn you, O you Gods
Revenge worthy your anger, your anger, O,
Down man, up hart, stop Jove and bend thy chin
To thy large breast, give sign you are pleased, and just
Swear, good men's for heads must not print the dust
What Carthage hath decreed, Hanno is done
Advanced and borne was Asdruball for state
Only with it his faith, his love, his hate
Are of one piece: were it my daughters life
That fate hath song to Carthage safety brings
What deed so red but hath been done by Kings?
•phiginia, he thats a man for men,
Ambitious as a God, must like a God
Live clear from passions, his full aimde attend
Immense to others, sole self to comprehend
Round in's own globe, not to bee clasped but holds
Within him all, his hart being of more folds
Then shield of Telamon not to be pierced tho struck
The God of wisemen is themselves, not luck. 
See him by whom now Massiuissa is not
Gisco i'st done?
Your pardon worthy Lord,
It is not don, my heart sunk in my breast,
His virtue mazd me, faintness seasd me all,
Some Gods in Kings that will not let them fall.
His virtue mazed thee, (um) why now I see
Thart that just man that hath true touch of blood,
Of pity and soft piety: Forgive?
Yes honour thee, wee did it but to try
What sense thou had of blood: go Bids
Take him into our private treasury
And cut his throat, the slave hath all betrayed.
Are you assured? As. A feared for this I know
Who thinks to buy villainy with gold,
Shall ever find such faith so bought so sold.
Reward him thoroughly.
What means this shout?
Hanno tic don: Scyphax revolt by this
Hath securd Carthage: and now his force come in
And ioynde with vs give Massinissa charge,
And assured slaughter: O ye powers forgive,
Through rottenst dung best plāts both sprout &amp; live
By blood vines grow.
But yet think Asdruball
Tic fit at least you bear griefs outward show,
It is your kinsman bleeds: what need men know.
Your hand is in his wounds, tic well in state,
To doe close ill; but void a public hate▪
Tush Hanno let me prosper let routs prate,
My power shall force their silence or my hate.
Shall scorn their idle malice: men of weight
Know, he that fears envy let him cease to reign,
The peoples hate to some hath bin their gain.
For how so ere a Monarch fains his parts,
Steal any thing from Kings but subjects hearts.
Guard, guard the camp, make to the trench stand firm
The Gods of boldness with vs, how runs chance?
Think, think how wretched thou can be, thou art,
Short words shall speak long woes:
mark Asdruball.
Our bloody plot to Massinissas ear
Untimely by this Lord was all betrayed.
By me, it was, by me vile Asdruball,
••oy to speakt.
Down slave.
I cannot fall.
Our trains disclosed, straight to his well used arms
He took himself, rose up with all his force,
On Syphax careless troupes (Syphax being hurried
Before to Cirta fearless of success
impatient Sophonisba to enjoy.)
Gelosso rides to head of all our squadrons
Commands make stand in thy name Asdruball,
In mine, in his, in all: dull rest our men,
Whilst Massinissa now with more then fury,
Charge the loose and much amazed ranks,
Of absent Syphax: who with broken shout,
(In vain expecting Carthage secondings)
Give faint repulse: a second charge is given
Then look as when a Falcon towrs aloe ft
Whole shoals of foul and flocks of lesser birds,
Crouch fearfully and dive some among sedge,
Some crepein brakes: so Massinissas sword
Brandished aloft, tossd'bout his shining cask,
Made stoop whole squadrons, quick as thought he strikes,
Here hurls he darts? and there his rage strong arm,
Fights foot to foot: here cries he strike: they sink
And then grim slaughter follows, for by this
As men betrayed, they curse vs, dye, or fly, or both
Often six thousand fell: Now was I come
And straight perceaud all Bled by his vile plot.
Vile? good plot, my good plot Asdruball.
I forced our army beat a running march,
But Massinissa struck his spurs apace
Upon his speedy horse, leaves slaughtering
All fly to Scipio who with open ranks
In view receives them: Al I could effect
Was but to gain him.
Dye.
Do what thou can,
Thou can but kill a weak old honest man.
scipio and Massinissas by this strike 
Their clasped palms, then vow an endless love,
straight a joint shout they raise, then turn they breasts
Direct on vs march strongly toward our camp
As if they dared vs fight, O Asdruball.
I fear theile force our camp▪
Break up and fly,
This was your plot.
But t'was thy shame to choose it.
He that forbids not offence he dos it.
The curse of women's words go with you: fly,
You are no villains, Gods and men, which way?
Advise vile things.
Vile?
I.
Not?
you did al
Did you not plot?
Yielded not Asdruball?
But you enticed me.
How?
With hope of place.
He that for wealth leaves faith is abject.
base
Do not provoke my sword, I live.
More shame.
T'out live thy virtue and thy once great name.
Up braid ye me?
Hold.
Know that only thou
Art treacherous: thou should have had a crown.
Thou did all, all he for whom mischiefs don
He dos it.
—Broad scorn oppen faind povvers
Make good the camp, no, fly, yes, what? wild rage,
To be a prosperous villainy yet some heate some hold,
But to burn temples and yet freeze, O cold,
Give me some health, now your blood sinks: thus deeds
Ill nourished rot, without I ove nought succeeds.
Must wee entreat? sue to such squeamish ears,
Know Syphax has no knees, his eyes no tears,
Enraged love is senseless of remorse,
Thou shalt, thou must. Kings glory is their force.
Thou art in Cirta, in my Palace Fool
Dost think he pities tears, that knows to rule.
For all thy scornful eyes thy proud disdain,
And late contempt of vs now weal revenge,
Break stubborn silence: look Isle tack thy head
To the low earth, whilst strēgth of too black knaves,
Thy limbs all wide shall strain: prayer fitteth slaves.
Our courtship bee our force: rest calm as sleep,
Else at this quake, hark, hark, wee cannot weep.
Can Sophonisba bee enforced?
Can? see.
Thou majesty enforce my body but not me.
Not?
No.
No?
No off with thy loathed arms
That lye more heavy on me then the chains,
That wear deep wrinkles in the captives limbs
I do beseech thee.
What?
Be but a beast,
Be but a beast.
Do not offend a power
Can make thee more then wretched: yield to him
To whom fate yields: Know Massinissas dead,
dead?
dead.
To Gods of goodman shame
Help vangue my strong blood boils.
O save
thine own (yet) fame.
All appetite is deaf, I will I must.
Achilles armour could not bear out lust.
Hold thy strong arm and hear my Syphax know,
I am thy servant now: I needs must love thee
For (O my sex forgive) I must confess,
Wee not affect protesting feebleness.
Entreats faint blushings, timorous modesty,
We think our lover is but little man,
Who is so full of woman: Know fair Prince
Loves strongest arms not rude: for we still prove
Without some fury theirs no ardent love.
We love our loves impatience of delay,
Our noble sex was only borne to obey
To him that dares command.
Why this is well.
Th'excuse is good: wipe thy fair eyes our Queen,
Make proud thy head now feel: more friendly strēgth
Of thy Lords arm: come touch my rougher skin.
With thy soft lip Zanthia dress our bed,
Forget old loves and clip him that through blood,
And hell acquir's his Wish think not but kiss,
The flourish fore loves fight is Venus bliss.
Great dreadful Lord by thy affection
Grant me one boon, know I have made a vow,
Vow? what vow? speak.
Nay if you take offēce
Let my soul suffer first and yet.
offence?
Not Sophonisba, hold, thy vow is free,
As:—come thy lips.
Alas cross misery
As I do wish to live I long to enjoy,
Your warm embrace, but O my vow tic thus,
If ever my Lord died I vowed to him,
A most, most private sacrifice, before
I touched a second spouse: all I implore.
Is but this liberty:
This go obtain
What time
One hour.
sweet good speed speed adieu
Yet Syphax trust no more then thou moist view.
Vangue shall stay
He stays.
Zanthia, Zanthia
Thou art not foul, go to, some Lords are oft
So much in love with their known Ladies bodies,
That they oft love their veils, hold, hold thou'st find,
To faithful care Kings bounty hath no shore,
You may do much.
But let my gold do more.
I am your creature.
Bee, get, tic no stain
The God of service is however gain.
 Zāthia, where are we now? speak worth my service
Ha wee don well?
Nay in height of best.
I feared a superstitious virtue would spoil all,
But now I find you aboue women rare,
She that can time her goodness hath true care
Of his best good. Nature at home begins
She whose integrity her self hurts sins.
For Massinissa, hee was good and so,
But hee is dead, or worse, distressed, or more
Then dead, or much distressed, O sad, poor
Who ever held such friends: no let him go
Such faith is praisd, then laughed at, for still know,
Those are the living women that reduce,
All that they touch unto their ease and use.
Knowing that wedlock, virtue or good names,
Are courses and varieties of reason
To use or leave as they advantage them
And absolute within themselves reposed,
Only to Greatness Op, to all else closed.
Weak sanguine fools, are to their own good nice
Before I held you virtuous but now wise.
Zanthia victorious Massinissa liu's.
My Massinissa lives: O steady powers
Keep him as safe as heaven keeps the earth.
Which looks upon it with a thousand eyes,
That honest valiant man and Zanthia,
Doe but record the justice of his love,
And my for ever vows, for ever vows.
I true Madam: nay think of his great mind
His most just heart his all of excellence
And such a virtue as the Gods might envy
Again this Syphax is but▪—and you know.
Fame lost what can be got thats good: for:
hence
Take nay with one hand.
My service.
Prepare
Our sacrifice.
But yield you, I or no?
Whē thou dost know.
what thē?
then thou wilt know
Let him that would have counsel void th'aduice 
Of friends made his with weighty benefits
Whose much dependence only strives to fit
Humour not reason, and so still devise
In any thought to make their frieud seem wise
But aboue all O fear a servants tongue,
Like such as only for their gain to serve
Within the vast capacity of place
I know no vileness so most truly base.
Their Lords, their gain: and he that most will give,
With him (they will not dye: but) they will live.
Traitors and these are one: such slaves once trust
Whet swords to make thine own blood lick the dust. 
Withdraw, withdraw All but Zauthia &amp; Vangue depart
I not invoke thy arm thou God of sound
Nor thine, nor thine, although in all abound.
High powers immense: But Jovial Mercury
And thou O brightest female of the sky
Thrice modest Phoebe, you that jointly fit
A worthy chastity and a most chaste wit
To you corruptles Honey, and pure dew
Vpbreathes our holy fire. Words just and few
O deign to hear if in poor wretches cries
You glory not: if drops of withered eyes
Bee not your sport, bee just: all that I crane
Is but chaste life or an untainted grave.
I can no more: yet hath my constant tongue
Let fall no weakness, tho'my heart were wrung
With pangus worth hell: whilst great thoughts stop our tears
Sorrow unseen, unpitied in ward wears.
You see now where I rest, come is my end.
Cannot heaven, virtue, against weak chance defend?
When weakness hath outborne what weakness can,
What should I say tic Ioues, not sin of man.
Some stratagem now let wits God be shown,
Celestial powers by miracles are known.
I have it tic don. Zanthia prepare our bed
Vangue
Your servant.
Vangue we have performed
Due rites unto the dead. 
Now to thy Lord great Syphax healthful cups: which don,
The King is right much welcome.
Were it as deep as thought off it should thns—he drinks
My safety with that draught.
Close the vaults mouth least we do slip in drink,
To what use gentle Negro serves this cave
Whose mouth thus opens so familiarly,
Even in the Kings bedchamber?
O my Queen
This vault with hideous darkness and much length
stretches beneath the earth into a grove
One league from Cirta (I am very sleepy)
Through this when Cirta hath beau strong begirt
With hostile siege the King hath safely scoped
To, to,
The wine is strong.
strong?
Zanthia
What means my princes?
Zanthia rest firm
And scilent, help vs: Nay do not dare refuse.
The Negros dead.
No drunk.
Alas.
Too late,
Her hand is fearful whose minds desperate.
It is but sleepy Opium he hath drunk,
Help Zanthia, They lay Vangue in Syphax bed &amp; draw the cur∣taines, there lye Syphax bride, a naked man is soon undressed;
There bide dishonoured passion they knock within, forth∣with Syphax comes.
Way for the King.
Straight for the King: I fly
Where misery shall see nought but it self.
Dear Zanthia close the vault when I am sunk
And whilst he slips to bed escape be true
I can no more, come to me: Hark Gods, my breath
Scorns to crave life grant but a well famde death she de∣scends
Each man withdraw, let not a creature stay
Within large distance.
Sir?
hence Zanthia,
Not thou shalt hear, all stand without eare-reach
Of the soft cries nice shrinking brides do yield
When—
But Sir—
Hence—stay, take thy delight by steps,
Think of thy joys, and make long thy pleasures,
O silence thou dost swallow pleasure right,
Words take away some sense from our delight;
Musique: be proud my Uenus, Mercury thy tong,
Cupped thy flame, above all O Hercules
Let not thy back be wanting: for now I leap
To catch the fruit none but the Gods should reap 
Ho! can any woman turn to such a Devil?
Or: or: Vangue, Vangue—
Yes, yes.
speak slave,
How came thou here?
Here?
Zanthia, Zanthia,
Wher's Sophonisba? speak at full, at full,
Give me particular faith, or know thou art not—
Your pardon just moved prince &amp; private ear
Ill actions have some grace, that they can fear
How cam I laid? which way was I made drūk?
Where am I? think, or is my state advanced?
O Jove how pleasant is it but to sleep
In a kings bed!
Sleep there thy lasting sleep
Improvident, base, o're-thirsty slave. 
Die pleased a kings couch is thy too proud grave.
Through this vault say thou?
As you give me grace
To live, tic true.
We will be good to Zanthia;
Go cheer thy Lady, and be private to vs.
As to my life.
I'll use this Zanthia,
And trust her as our dogs drink dangerous Nile,
only for thirst, the Fly the Crocodile:
Wise Sophonisba knows loves tricks of art,
Without much hindrance, pleasure hath no hart;
Despite all virtue or weak plots I must
Seven waled Babel cannot bear out lust
Let not the virtue of the world suspect
Sad Massinissas faith: nor once cōdemne
Our just revolt: Carthage first gave me life,
His ground gave food, his air first lent me breath
The Earth was made for men, not men for Earth.
Scipio I do not thank the Gods for life,
Much less vile men, or earth: know best of Lords,
It is a happy being breath well famed,
For which Jove sees these thus; Men be not foold
With piety to place: traditions fear,
A just mans country Jove makes every where.
Well urges Massinissa, but to leave
A City so ingrate, so faithless, so more vile
Then civil speech may name, fear not, such vice
To scourge is heavens most grateful sacrifice.
Thus all confess first they have broke a faith
To the most due, so just to be observed
That barborousnes it self may well blush at them
Where is thy passiō? they have shared thy crown
Thy proper right of birth; contrived thy death.
Where is thy passion? given thy beauteous spouse.
To thy most hated rival: statue, not man,
And last thy friend Gelosso (man worth Gods)
With tortures have they rēt to death.
O Gel.
For thee full eyes
No passion for the rest.
O Scipio my grief for him may be expressed by tears
But for the rest silence &amp; secret anguish
Shall wast: shall wast:—Scipio he that can weep,
Grieves not like me private deep inward drops
Of blood: my heart—for Gods rights give me leave
To be a short time Man.
stay prince.
I cease;
Forgive if I forget thy presence: Scipio
Thy face makes Massinissa more then man,
And here before your steady power a vow
As firm as fate I make: when I desist
To be commanded by thy virtue, (Scipio)
Or fall from friend of Romes, revenging Gods
Aflict me worth your torture: I have given
Of passion and of faith my heart.
To counsel then
Grief fits weak hearts, revenging virtue men.
Thus I think fit, before that Syphax know
How deeply Carthage sinks, lets beat swift march
Up even to Cirta, and whilst Syphax snores
With his, late thine—
With mine? no Scipio,
Libea hath poison, aspes, knives, &amp; to much earth
To make one grave, with mine? not, she can dye,
Scipio, with mine? Jove say it thou dost lie.
Temperance be Scipios honour.
Cease your strife
She is a woman.
But she is my wife.
And yet she is no god.
And yet she's more
I do not praise Gods goodness but adore.
Gods cannot fall, and for their constant goodness
(Which is necessited) they have a crown
Of never ending pleasures: but faint man
(Framed to have his weakness made the heavens glo∣rye
If he with steady virtue holds all siege
That power, that speech, that pleasure, that full sweets
A world of greatness can assail him with,
Having no pay but self wept misery,
And beggars treasure heaped, that man Isle praise
Aboue the Gods.
The Lybian speaks bold sense
By that by which all is, Proportion,
I speak with thought.
No more.
Forgive my admiration
You touched a string to which my sense was quick,
Can you but think? doe, do; my grief! my grief
Would make a Saint blaspheme: give some relief,
As thou art Scipio forgive that I forget,
I am a Soldier; such woes Ioues ribs would burst,
Few speak less ill that feel so much of worst.
My ear attends
Before then Syphax join
With new strength'd Carthage, or can once unwind
His tangled sense from out so wild amaze
Fall we like sudden lightning fore his eyes;
Boldness and spead are all of victories.
Scipio, let Massinissa clip thy knees;
May once these eyes view Syphax? shall this arm
Once make him feel his sinue? O ye Gods
My cause, my cause! Justice is so huge odds
That he who with it fears, Heaven must renounce
In his creatiō.
Beat then a close quick march
Before the morn shall shake cold dews through skies,
Syphax shall tremble at Romes thick alarms.
Ye powers I challenge conquest to just arms.
With a full flourish of Cornets they depart.
Where are wee Zanthia?
Vangue said the cave
Op'ned in Belos forest.
Lord how sweet
I sent the ayre? the huge lunge vaults close vain,
What dumps it breathed? In Belos forest say?
Be valiant Zanthia; how fir's Vtica
From these most heavy shades?
Ten easy leages.
Theirs Massinissa, my true Zanthia
Shells venture nobly to escape, and touch
My Lords just arms: Loves wings so justly heave
The body up, that as our toes shall trip
Over the tender and obedient grass,
Scarce any drop of dew is dashed to ground.
And see the willing shade of friendly night
Makes safe our instant haste: Boldness and speed
Make actions wost impossible succeed.
But Madam know the forest hath no way
But one to pass the which holds strictest guard.
Doe not betray me Zanthia.
I Madam.
No
I not mistrust thee, yet, but,
Here you may
Delay your time.
I Zanthia delay
By which we may yet hope, yet hope, Alas
How all be numd's my sense Chance hath so often
I scarce cā feel: I should now curse the Gods ▪struck
Call on the furies: stamp the patient earth
cleave my stretched cheeks with sound speak from all sense
But loud and full of players eloquence
No, no, What shall we eat.
Madam isle search
For some ripe Nuts which Autumn hath shook down
From the vnleau'd Hazel, then some cooler ayre
Shall lead me to a spring: Or I will try
The courteous pale of some poor forrestres,
For milk.
Do Zanthia, O happiness,
Of those that know not pride or lust of city,
Ther's no man blessed but those that most men pity.
O fortunate poor maids, that are not forced,
To wed for state nor are for state divorced!
Whom policy of kingdoms doth not marry,
But pure affection makes to love or vary,
You feel no love, which you dare not to show,
Nor show a love which doth not truly grow:
O you are surely blessed of the sky,
You live, that know not death before you die, 
You are:
In Syphax arms, thing of false lip,
What God shall now release thee,
Art a man?
Thy limbs shall feel, despite thy virtue know
I'll third thy richest pearl: this forests deaf,
As is my lust: Night and the God of silence,
Swells my full pleasures, no more shalt thou delude,
My easy credence▪ Virgin of fair brow,
Well featured creature, and our utmost wonder,
Queen of our youthful bed be proud, 
Isle use thee,
Look thee, view this, show but one strain of force
Bow but to seas this arm, and by my self,
Or more by Massinissa this good steel,
Shall set my soul on wing▪ thus formed Gods see,
And men with Gods worth envy nought but me.
Doe strike thy breast, know being dead, Isle use,
With highest lust of sense thy senseless flesh,
And even then thy vexed soul shall see,
Without resistance, thy trunk prostitute,
Unto our appetite.
I shame to make thee know,
How vile thou speak: Corruption then as much,
As thou shalt doe: but frame unto thy lusts,
Imaginatious utmost sin: Syphax,
I speak all frightles, know I live or die
To Massinissa, nor the force of fate
Shall make me leave his love, or slake thy hate▪
I will speak no more,
Thou hast amazed vs, Women's forced use,
Like unripe fruits, no sooner got but waste,
They have proportion, colour but no taste,
Think Syphax—Sophonisba rest thine own,
Our Guard, 
Creature of most astonishing virtue,
If with fair usage, love and passionate courtings,
We may obtain, the heaven of thy bed,
We cease, no suit from other force be free.
We dote not on thy body, but love thee,
Wilt thou keep faith?
By thee &amp; by that power
By which thou art thus glorious, trust my vow,
Our guard, convey the roialst excellence
That ever was called Woman, to our Palace,
Observe her with strict care:
Dread Syphax speak
As thou art worthy: is not Zanthia false▪
To thee she is.
As thou art then thy self
Let his not bee.
She is not.
Thus most speed when two foes are grown friends
Partakers bleed.
When Plants must flourish
Their manure must rot.
Syphax bee recompensed.
I hate thee not.
A wasting flame feeds on my amorous blood
Which wee must cool or dye? what way all power,
All speech full Opportunity can make,
We have made fruitless trial. Infernal Jove,
You resolute Angels that delight in flames,
To you all wonder working spirits I fly
Since heaven helps not, deepest hell weal try.
Here in this desert the great soul of Charms,
Dreadful Erictho lives whose dismal brow,
Contemns all roofs or civil coverture.
Forsaken graves and tombs the Ghosts forced out
She joys to inhabit.
A loathsome yellow leanness spreads his face
A heavy hell-like paleness loads his cheeks
Unknown to a clear heaven: but if dark winds.
Or thick black clouds drive back the blinded stars
When her deep magique makes forced heaven quake
And thunder spite of Jove. Erichtho then
Frō naked graves stalks out, heaves proud his head
With lōg vnkēde hair laden, and strives to snatch
The Nights quick sulphur: then she bursts up tombs
From half rot searcloaths then she scrapes dry gums
For his black rites: but when she finds a corse
New graud whose entrails yet not turn
To fly my filth with greedy havoc then
she makes fierce spoil: &amp; swells with wicked triumph
To bury his lean knuckles in his eyes
Then doth she know the pale and or'egrowne nails
From his dry hand: but if she find some life
Yet lurking close she bites his gelled lips,
And sticking her black tongue in his dry throat,
She breathes dire murmurs, which enforce him bear
Her baneful secrets to the spirits of horror.
To her first sound, the Gods yield any harm,
As trembling once to hear a second charm,
She is:
Here Syphax here, quake not, for know
I know thy thoughts, thou would entreat our power,
Nice Sophonisba's passion to enforce
To thy affection be al full of Jove,
Tic done, tic done, to vs heave earth▪ sea, air,
And Fate it self obeys, the beasts of death,
And all the terrors angry Gods invented,
(T'afflict th'ignorance of patient man),
Tremble at vs: the roulde up snake vncurlde,
His twisted knots at our affrighting voice,
Are we incensed? the King of flames grows pale,
Least he be choked with black and earthy fumes,
Which our charms raise: Be ioi'd, make proud thy lust
I doe not pray you Gods, my breathes: You must.
Deep knowing spirit, mother of all high
Mysterious science, what may Syphax yield,
Worthy thy art, by which my solo's thus eased,
The Gods first made me live, but thou live pleased.
Know then our love, hard by the reuerēt ruins
Of a once glorious temple reared to Jove,
Whose very rubbish (like the pitied fall,
Of Virtue much unfortunate) yet bears,
A deathless Majesty though now quite raced,
Hurled down by wrath, and lust of impious Kings
So that where holy Flamins wont to sing,
Sweet Hyms to heaven, there the daw and crow,
The ill voiced Raven, and still chattering Pie:
Send out ungrateful sound, and loathsome filth,
Where statues and Ioues acts were viuely limed
Boys with black coals, draw the veiled parts of nature,
And lecherous actions of imaginde lust,
Where tombs and beauteous vrns of well dead men.
Stood in assured rest, the shepherd now,
Vnloads his belly: Corruption most abhord
Mingling it self with their renowned ashees,
Our self quakes at it.
There once a Charnel house, now a vast cave,
Over whose brow a pale and vnt rod grove
Throws out her heavy shade, the mouth thick arms
Of darksome Ewe, (Sun proof) for ever choke
Within rests barren darkness, fruitless drough
Pines in eternal Night: The steam of Hell
Yields not so lasy ayre: there that's my cell
From thence a charm which Jove dare not here twice•
Shall force her to thy bed: but Syphax know
Love is the highest rebel to our art.
Therefore I charge thee by the fear of all
Which thou know dreadful, or more, by our self▪
As with swift hast she passes to thy bed,
And easy to thy wishes yields: speak not one word▪
Nor dare as▪ thou dost fear thy loss of joys
T'admit one light, one light,
As to my Fate•
I yield my guidance.
Then when I shall force
The ayre to music and the shads of night
To form sweet sounds: make proud thy raised delight.
Mean time behold I go a charm to rear
Whose potent sound will force our self to fear.
Whither is Syphax heaved? at length shalls joy
Hopes more desired then Heaven? Sweet laboring Earth
Let Heaven be vnform'd with mighty charms,
Let Sophonisba only fill these arms.
Ione weal not envy thee: Bloods appetite
Is Syphax God: My wisdom is my sense,
Without a man I hold no excellence.
Give me long breath young beds and sickles ease
For we hold firm thats lawful which doth please 
Hark, hark, now rise jnfernall tones
The deep fetched groans
Of laboring spirits that attend
Erichtho.
Erichtho.
Now crack the trembling earth and send
Shrieks that portend
Affrightment to the Gods which hear
Erichtho.
Erichtho
Hark hark, now softer melody strikes mute
Disquiet nature: O thou power of sound
How thou dost melt me. Hark, now even Heaven
Gives up his soul amongst vs: Now's the time
When greedy expectation strains mine eyes
For their loved object: now Erichtho willed
Prepare my appetite for loves strict gripes
O you dear founts of pleasure Blood and Beauty
Raise active venus worth fruition
Of such provoking sweetness. Hark: she coms▪ 
Now nuptial Hymes enforced Spirits sing
Hark, (Syphax) hark: 
Now Hell and Heaven rings
With Musique spigh of Phoebus: Peace: 
She coms:
Fury of bloods impatient: Erichtho
Above thunder sit; to thee egregious soul
Let all flesh bend. Sophonisba thy flame
But equal mine, and weal joy such delight
That Gods shall not admire, but even spite.
Ha, ha, ha,
Light, light,
Ha, ha,
Thou rotten scum of Hell—
O my abhorred heat! O loathed delusion!
Why fool of kings, could thy weak soul imagine
That it is within the grasp of Heaven or Hell
To enforce love? why know Love dotes the Fates
Jove groans beneath his weight: more ignorant thing,
Know we Erichtho, with athirsty womb
Have coveted full threescore Suns for blood of kings,
We that can make enraged Neptune toss
His huge curled lockes without one breath of wind:
We that can make Heaven slide from Atlas shoulder:
We in the pride and height of covetous lust
Have wished with wo mans gredines to fill
Our longing arms with Syphax well strong limbs:
And dost thou think if Philters or Hells charms
Could have enforced thy use, we would hau'dam'd
Brain slights? no, no, Now are we full
Of our dear wishes: thy proud heat well wasted
Hath made our limbs grow young: our love farewell,
Know he that would force love, thus seeks his Hell.
Can we yet breath? is any plagued like me?
Are we? lets think: O now contempt, my hate
To the, thy thunder, sulphur and scorned name.
He whose lifes loathed, and he who breathes to curse
His very being; let him thus with me 
Fall fore an Aultar sacred to black powers,
And thus dare Heavens: O thou whose blasting flames
Hurl barren droughes upon the patient earth,
And thou gay God of riddles and strange tales
Hot-brained Phebus, all add if you can
Something unto my misery; if ought
Of plagues lurk in your deep trenched brows
Which yet I know not: let them fall like bolts
Which wrathful Jove drives strong in ▪o my bosom,
If any chance of war, or news ill voiced,
Mischief unthought of lurk, come gift vs all,
Heap curse on curse, we can no lower fall.
Lower, lower,
What damned ayre is formed
Into that shape? speak, speak, we cannot quake,
Our flesh knows not ignoble tremblinges, speak,
We dare thy terror: me thinks Hell and fate
Should dread a soul with woes made desperate.
Know me the spirit of great Asdruball
Father to Sophonisba, whose bad heart
Made justly most unfortunate: for know
I turned unfaithful, after which the field
Chanced to our loss, when of thy men there fell
6000 souls next fight of Lybeans ten.
After which loss we unto Carthage flying,
Th'inraged people cried their army fell
Through my base treason: straight my revengeful fury
Makes them pursue me, I with resolute hast▪
Made to the grave of all our Ancestors
Where poisoned, hoped my bones should have long rest.
But see the violent multitude arrives
Tear down our monument, and me now dead
Deny a grave: hurl vs among the rocks
To stanch beasts hunger; therefore thus vngrau'd
I seek slow rest: now doest thou know more woes
And more must feel: Mortals O fear to slight
Your Gods and vows: Ioues arm is of dread might.
Yet speak shall I overcome approaching foes.
Spirits of wrath know nothing but their woes.
My liedge, my liedge, the scouts of Cirta bring intelligēce
Of sudden danger, full ten thousand horse
Fresh and well •id strong Massinissa leads
As wings to Roman legions that march swift
Led by that man of conquest▪ Scipio,
Scipio
Direct to Cirta. 
Hark their march is heard even to the city.
Help, our guard, my arms, bid all our leaders march.
Beat thick alarms, I have seen things which thou
Would quake to hear,
Boldness and strength the shame of slaves bee fear.
Up heart, hold sword: though waives roll thee on shelf,
Though fortune leave thee leave not thou thy self.
Stand▪
Give the word stand.
Part the fyle.
give way
Scipio by thy great name, but greater virtue,
By our eternal love give me the chance
Of this days battle: Let not thy envied fame
Vouchsafe t'appose the Roman legious
Against one weakened Prince of Lybea
This quarrels mine: mine bee the stroke of fight
Let vs and Syphax hurl our well forced darts
Each unto others▪ breast, O (what should I say)
Thou beyond epithet thou whom proud Lords of fortune
May even envy: (alas my joys so vast
Makes me seem lost let vs thunder and lightning
Strike from our brave arms, look, look, seas that hill.
Hark he comes near: From thence discern vs strike
Fire worth Jove, mount up, and not repute
Me very proud tho wondrous resolute.
My cause: my cause, is my bold hartning odds,
That seven fold shield, just arms should fright the Gods
Thy words are full of honour take thy fate,
Which wee do scorn to fear, to Scipio state
Worthy his heart. Now let the forced brass
Sound on. 
Iugurth clasp sure our cask
Arm vs with care, and Iugurth if I fall
Through this days malice, or our fathers sins
If it in thy sword lye, break up my breast
And save my heart that never fell nor's adieu
To ought but Jove and Sophonisba. Sound
Sterne hartners unto wounds and blood, sound loud
For wee have named Sophonisba.
So.
Hark hark, hee comes, stand blood, now multiply
Force more then fury, sound high, sound high, wee strike
For Sophonisba.
For Sophonisba.
Syphax.
Massinissa.
Be twixt vs too
Let single fight try all.
Well urged,
Well granted
Of you my stars as I am worthy you
I implore aide, and O if angels waite
Upon good harts my Genius bee as strong
As I am just.
Kings glory is their wrong.
Hee that may only do just act's a slave
My Gods my arm, my life, my heaven, my grave
To me all end.
Give day Gods, life and death
To him that only fears blaspheming breath
For Sophonisba.
For Sophonisba.
Unto thy fortune not to thee wee yield
Lives Sophonisba yet unstained, speak just
Yet ours vnforcd?
Let my heart fall more low
Then is my body, if only to thy glory
She lives not yet all thine.
Rise, rise, cease strife.
Hear a most deep revenge, from vs take life. 
To you all power of strength: and next to thee
Thou spirit of triumph borne for victory.
I heave these hands: March wee to Cirta straight,
My Sophonisba with swift hast to win
In honour &amp; in love all mean is sin▪ Ex. Ma. &amp; Jug.
As we are Romes great General thus wee press
Thy Captive neck▪ but as still Scipio
And sensible of just humanity
We weep thy bondage: speak thou ill chanced man
What spirit took thee when thou were our friend
(Thy right hand given both to Gods and vs
With such most passionate vows and solemn faith)
Thou fledst with such most foul disloyalty
To now weak Carthage strēgthning their bad arms
Who lately scorned thee with all lothd abuse
Who never entertain for love but use
Scipio my fortune is captiud not I
Therefore Isle speak bold truth▪ nor once mistrust
What I shall say, for now being wholly yours
I must not fine, Sophomsba t'was she
T'was Sophonisba that solicited
My forced revolt, t'was his resistless suit
His love to his dear Carthage'tic'd me break
All faith with men: t'was she made Syphax false
She that lou's Carthage with such violence
And hath such moving graces to allure
That she will turn a man that once hath sworn
Himself on's fathers bones his Carthage foe
To bee that cities Champion and high friend
His Himeneall torch burnt down my house
Then was I captiud when his wanton arms
There moving clasped about my neck, O charms
Able to turn even fate: but this in my true grief
Is some iustioy, that my love sotted foe
Shall seas that plague, that Massinissas breast
His hands shall arm, and that ere long you'll try
She can force him your foe as well as I,
Lelius, Lelius, take a choice troupe of horse
And spur to Cirta. To Massinissa thus
Syphax palace▪ crown, spoil cities sack
Be free to him but if our new laughed friend
Possess that woman of so moving art
Charge him with no less weight then his dear vow
Our love, all faith, that hee resign her thee
As hee shall answer Rome will him give up
A Roman prisoner to the Senates doom
She is a Carthaginian, now our laws
Wise men prevent not actions, but ever cause
Good malice, so, as liberty so dear
Prove my revenge: what I cannot possess
Another shall not: thats some happiness.
Princes O fly, Syphax hath lost the day,
And captived lies, the Roman Legions
Have see the town, and with inveterate hate,
Make slaves or murder all: Fire and steel,
Fury and night hold all: fair Queen O fly,
We bleed for Carthage, all of Carthage die.
March to the Palace. So▪ What ere man thou art
Of Libea, thy fair arms speak: give hart,
To amazed weakness, hear her, that for long time,
Hath seen no wished light. Sophonisba,
A name for misery much known, tic she,
Entreats of thy graced sword, this only boon,
Let me not kneel to Rome, for though no cause,
Of mine deserves their hate, though Massinissa,
Be ours to hart, yet Roman Generals
Make proud their triumphs, with what ever captives
O tic a Nation which from soul I fear,
As one well knowing the much grounded hate,
They bear to Asdrubal and Carthage blood,
Therefore with tears that wash thy feet, with hands
Vnusde to beg I clasp thy manly knees,
O save me from their fetters and contempt,
Their proud insults, and more then insolence,
Or if it rest not in thy grace of breath,
To grant such freedom, give me long wished death,
For tic not much loathde life, that now we crave,
Only an vnshamd death, and silent grave
We will now deign to bend for.
Rarity 
By thee and this right hand thou shalt live free.
We cannot now be wretched.
Stay the sword.
Let slaughter cease, Sounds soft as Ledas breast, Soft Musique.
Slide through all ears, this night be loves high feast,
O'er whelm me not with sweets, let me not drink,
Till my breast burst, O love thy Nectar, think
She is overcome with joy.
Help, help to bear
Some happiness ye powers, I have joy to spare,
Enough to make a God, O Massinissa.
Peace,
A silent thinking makes full joys increase.
Massinissa.
Lelius.
Thine ear.
Stand off
From Scipio thus: by thy late vow of faith,
And mutual league of endless amity,
As thou respects his virtue or Romes force,
Deliver Sophonisba to our hand,
Sophonisba?
Sophonisba.
My Lord,
Looks pale, and from his half burst eyes a flame,
Of deep disquiet breaks, the Gods turn false,
My sad presage.
Sophonisba?
Even she,
She kilde not Scipios father nor his uncle,
Great Cneius.
Carthage did.
to her whats Carthage?
Know it was her father Asdrubal struck off
His fathers head, give place to faith and fate,
Tic cross to honour.
But tic just to state,
So speaks Scipio, doe not thou detain,
A Roman prisoner, due to this great triumph,
As thou shalt answer Rome and him.
Lelius.
We now are in Romes power, Lelius,
View Massinissa do, a loathed act,
Most sinking from that state his hart did keep,
Look Lelius look, see Mas•inissa weep,
Know I have made a vow more dear to me,
Then my souls endless being: she shall rest,
Free from Romes bondage.
But dost thou forget,
Thy vow yet fresh thus breathed: When I desist:
To be commanded by thy virtue: Scipio,
Or fall from friend of Rome, Revenging Gods,
Afflict me with your torture.
Lelius enough:
Salute the Roman, tell him wee will act
What shall amaze him.
Wilt thou yield her then?
She shall arrive there straight.
Best fate of men,
To thee.
and Scipio: Have I lived O Heavens,
To be inforcedly perfidious?
What unjust grief afflicts my worthy Lord,
Thank me ye Gods, with much beholdingness▪
For mark, I doe not curse you:
Tell me sweet
The cause of thy much anguish.
Ha, the cause?
Let's see, wreath back thine arms, bend down thy neck▪
Practise base Prayers, make fit thy self for bondage,
Bondage.
Bondage, Roman bondage.
No, No.
How then have I vowed well to Scipio?
How then to Sophonisba?
Right which way
Run mad impossible distraction,
Dear Lord thy patience; let it maze all power,
And list to her in whose sole heart it rests,
To keep thy faith upright.
Wilt thou be slau'd,
No free.
How then keep I my faith?
My death▪
Giu's help to all: From Rome so rest we free,
So brought to Scipio, faith is kept in thee.
Thou dare not die, some wine, thou dare not die.
How near was I v•to the curse of man, Joy,
How like was I yet once to have been glad:
He that near laughed may with a constant face,
Contemn Ioues frown. Happiness makes vs base. 
Behold me Massinissa, like thy self,
A king and soldier, and I pree thee keep,
My last command,
Speak sweet.
Dear doe not weep
And now with vndismaid resolve behold,
To save You, you, (for honour and just faith.
Are most true Gods, which we should much adore)
With even disdainful vigour I give up,
An abhord life. 
You have been good to me,
And I doe thank thee heaven, O my stars,
I bless your goodness, that with breast unstained,
Faith pure: a Virgin wife, tried to my glory,
I die of female faith, the long lived story,
Secure from bondage, and all servile harms,
But more most happy in my husbands arms.
Massinissa, Massinissa,
Covetous
Fame greedy Lady, could no scope of glory,
No reasonable proportion of goodness
Fill thy great breast, but thou must prove immense
Incomprehence in virtue, what would thou,
Not only be admired, but even adored?
O glory ripe for heaven? Sirs help, help, help,
Let vs to Scipio with what speed you can.
For piety make haste, whilst yet we are man.
What answers Massinissa will he send,
That Sophonisba of so moving tongs
Full of dismayed vnsteddines he stood,
His right hand looked in hers, which hand he gave
As pledge from Rome, she ever should live free
But when I entered, and well urged this vow
And thy command his great hart sunk with shame:
His eyes lost spirit, and his heat of life,
Sank from his face, as one that stood benumbde,
All mazed, t'effect, impossibilities,
For either unto her or Scipio,
He must break vow, long time he tossed his thoughts
And as you see a snow ball being told
At first a handful, yet long bold about,
Infensibly acquires a mighty globe,
So his cold grief through agitation grows,
And more he thinks, the more of grief he knows
At last hee seemed to yield her.
Mark Scipio,
Trust him that breaks a vow?
How thē trust thee?
O misdoubt him not, when hoe's thy slave like me
Scipio,
Massinissa,
General.
King.
Liu's there no mercy for one soul of Carthage
But must see baseness?
Would thou joy thy peace,
Deliver Sophonisba straight and cease,
Do not grasp that which is too hot to hold,
We grace thy grief, and hold it with soft sense.
Enjoy good courage, but void insolence.
I tell thee Rome and Scipio deign to bear,
So low a breast as for her say, we fear.
Do not, doe notilet not the fright of Nations
Know so vile terms. She rests at thy dispose
To my soul joy, shall Sophonisba then
With me go bound and waite on Scipios wheel?
When th'whole worlds giddy one man cānot reel,
Starve thy lean hopes, and Romans now behold
A sight would sad the Gods? make Phoebus cold. 
Look Scipio, see what hard shift we make
To keep our vows; here, take I yield her thee,
And Sophonisba I keep vow thou art still free.
Burst my vexed heart, the torture that most rackes
An enemy, is his foes royal acts.
The glory of thy virtue live for ever,
Brave hearts may be obscured, but extinct never. 
Take from the General of Rome this crown,
This robe of triumph, and this conquests wreath
This sceptre, and this hand for ever breath,
Romes very minion: Live worth thy fame
As far from faintings as from now base name.
Thou whom like sparkling steel the strokes of Chance
Made hard and firm; and like wild fire turned
The more cold fate, more bright thy virtue burned,
And in whole seas of miseries did flame.
On theelou'd creature of a deathless fame 
Rest all my honour: O thou for whom I drink
So deep of grief, that he must only think,
Not dare to speak) that would express my woe,
Small rivers murmur, deep gulfs silent flow,
My grief is here, not here, heave gently then,
Women's right wonder, and just shame of men.
And now with lighter passion, though with most just fear
I change my person, and do hither bear
Another voice, who with a phrase as weak
As his deserts now willed me▪ (thus formed) speak,
If words well sensed, best suiting subject grave,
Noble true story may once boldly crave,
Acceptance gracious, if he whose fierce,
Envy not others nor him self admires.
If scions exempt from ribaldry or rage,
Of taxinges indiscreet, may please the stage,
If such may hope applause, he not commands
Yet craves as due, the justice of your hands
But freely he protests how ere it is,
Or well or ill, or much, not much amiss,
With constant modesty he doth submit,
To all, save those, that have more tongue then wit.
After all, let me entreat my Reader not to tax me, for the fa∣shion of the En••ances and Musique of this Tragedy, for know it is printed only as it was presented by youths, &amp; after the ••shion of the private stage. Nor let some easily amended 〈◊〉 in the Printing afflict thee sinc• thy own discourse• will 〈…〉

ell's gone! still you're a Gentleman, that's all; but a poor one, that's nothing: What Milk brings thy Meadows forth now? where are thy goodly Vp-lands and thy Downe-lands, all sunk into that little pit Lechery? why should a Gallant pay but two shillings for his Ordnary that nourishes him, and twenty times two for his Brothel that consumes him? but whore's Long-acre? in my Uncles conscience, which is 3. years voyage about; he that sets out upon his conscience, ne'er finds the way home again, he is either swallowed in the quick-sands of Law-quillits, or splits vpō the Piles of a Praemunire; yet these old Foxe-braind—and oxe-browde Uncles, have still defences for their Avarice, and Apologies for their practises, and will thus greet our follies.
Hee that doth his youth expose,
To Brothel, drink, and danger,
Let him that is his nearest Kin,
Cheat him before a stranger.
And that's his Uncle, it is a principle in Usury; I dare not visit the City, there I should bee too soon visited, by that whore∣ble plague my Debts, and by that means I loose a Virgins love, her portion and her Virtues, well, how should a man live now, that he's no living; hum? why are there not a million of men in the world, that only sojourn upon their brain, and make their wits their Mercers; and am I but one amongst that Million and cannot thrive upon it; any Trick out of the compass of Law now, would come happily to me.
My love.
My loathing; hast thou been the secret consumption of my purse? and now come to undo my last means, my wits? wilt leave no virtue in me and yet thou ne'er the better? hence Cur∣tizan, round webd Tarantula.
That dryest the Roses in the cheeks of youth.
I have been true unto your pleasure, and all your lands thrice racked, was never worth the Jewel which I prodigally gave you, my virginity;
Lands mortgaged may return and more esteemed,
But honesty once pound, is ne'er redeemd.
For give I do thee wrong,
To make thee sin, and then to chid thee fort.
I know I am your loathing now, farewell.
Stay best invention,—stay.
I that have been the secret consumption of your purse shall I stay now to undo your last means, your wits? hence Currizan away.
I prithee, make me not mad at my own weapon, stay, (a thing few women can do I know that, and therefore they had need wear stays;) be not contrary, dost love me?
Fate has so cast it that all my means I must derive from thee.
From me! be happy then,
What lies within the power of my performance,
Shall be commanded of thee.
Spoke like an honest drab in faith, it may prove something what Trick is not an Embrion at first, until a perfect shape come over it.
Come I must help you where abouts left you,
Isle proceed.
Tho you beget, tic I must help to breed,
Speak what first, Id fine conceive it.
So, so, so, thou shall presently take the name and form upon thee of a rich country widow four hundred a year va∣liant, in Woods, in Bullocks, in Barnes and in Rye-stacks, weal to London▪ and to my covetous Uncle.
I begin to applaud thee, our States being both despe∣rate, they' are soon resolute, but how for horses?
Mass that's true, the Jest will bee of some continue∣ance, let me see, Horses now, a bottes on em; Stay, I have acquaintance with a mad Host, never yet Bawd to thee, I have rinzde the whoresons gums in Mull-sack many a time and often, put but a good Tale into his ear now, so it come off cleanly, and there's Horse and man for vs I dare war∣rant thee.
Arm your wits then speedily, there shall want no∣thing in me, either in behaviour, discourse or fashion, that shall discredit your intended purpose.
I will so art-fully disguise my wants,
And set so good a courage on my state,
That I will be believed.
Why then ell's furnished; I shall go nigh to catch that old Fox mine Uncle, tho hee make but some amends for my undoing, yet there's some comfort in it — hee cannot other∣wise choose (tho it bee but in hope to cousin me again) but supply any hasty want that I bring to town with me, the De∣vice well and cunningly carried, the name of a rich Widow, and four hundred a year in good earth, will so conjure up a kind of Usurers love in him to me, that hee will not only desire my presence, which at first shall scarce bee granted him, Isle keep off a purpose, but I shall find him so officious to de∣serve, so ready to supply, I know the state of an old mans af∣fection so well, if his Nephew bee poor indeed, why hee letts God alone with him, but if hee be once rich, then heel bee the first man that helps him.
Tic right the world, for in these days an old mans love to his kindred, is like his kindness to his wife, it is always done before hee comes at it.
I owe thee for that Jest, bee gone, here's all my wealth; prepare thy self, away? Isle to mine Host withal possible hast, and with the best Art, &amp; most profitable form, power the sweet
circumstance into his ear, which shall have the gift to turn all the wax to honey; how no; oh the right worshipful Seniors of our Country —
Whose that;
Oh the common Rioter, take no note of him.
You will not see me now, the comfort is ere it be long you will scarce see your selves.
I wonder how hee breathes, he's consumed all upon that Courtesan?
We have heard so much.
You have heard all truth, his Uncle and my Brother, have been these three years mortal Adversaries. Two old tough spirits, they seldom meet but fight, or quarrel when tic calmest;
I think their anger bee the very fire
That keeps their age alive:
What was the quarrel sir?
Faith about a purchase, fetching over a young heir; Moister Hoard my brother having wasted much time in beating the bargain, what did me old Lucre▪ but as his conscience moved him, knowing the poor Gentleman▪ stepped in between i'm and cozened him himself.
And was this all sir:
This was even it sir, yet for all this I know no reason but the match might go forward betwixt his wives Son and my Niece, what tho there bee a dissention between the two old men, I see no reason it should put a difference between the two younger, tic as natural for old folks to fall out, as for young to fall in? A scholar comes a wooing to my Niece, well, hoe's wise, but he's poor, her Son comes a wooing to my Niece, well, hes a fool, but hes rich —
I marry sir?
Pray now is not a rich fool better then a poor Philo∣sopher.
One would think so in faith?
She now remains at London with my brother her second
Uncle, to learn fashions, practise Music, the voice between her lips, and the viol between her legs, she'll bee fit for a consort very speedily, a thousand good pound is her portion, if she marry, weal ride up and be merry,—
A match, if it be a match?
Mine Host?
Young moister Wit-good.
I have been laying all the Town for thee.
Why what's the news Bully-Hadland?
What Geldings are in the house of thine own? answer me to that first.
Why man, why?
Mark me what I say, Isle tell thee such a tale in thine ear, that thou shalt trust me spite of thy teeth, furnish me with some money, will, nille, and ride up with me thy self Country voluntatem et profession em.
How: let me see this trick, and Isle say thou hast more
Art then a Conjurer.
Dost thou joy in my advancement?
Do I love Sack and Ginger?
Comes my prosperity desiredly to thee?
Come forfeitures to a Usurer, fees to an officer, punkes to an Host, and Pigs to a Parson desiredly? why then la.
Will the report of a Widow of four hundred a year boy, make thee leap, and sing, and dance, and come to thy place again.
Wilt thou command me now? I am thy spirit, conjure me into any shape.
I ha brought her from her friends, turned back the Horses by a slight, not so much as one amongst her six men, goodly large Yeomanly fellows, will she trust with this her purpose: by this light all vnmand; regardless of her state, nag∣lectfull of vaine-glorious ceremony, all for my love; oh it is a
fine little voluble tongue mine Host, that wins a widow.
No it is a tongue with a great T my boy that wins a widow.
Now sir, the case stands thus, good mine Host, if thou love my happiness assist me.
Command all my beasts ith house.
Nay thats not all neither, prithee take truce with thy joy, and listen to me, thou know I have a wealthy Uncle in the City, some-what the wealthier by my follies; the report of this fortune well and cunningly carried, might be a means to draw some goodness from the Vsuring Rascal, for I have put her in hope already of some estate that I have either in land or money: now if I be found true in neither, what may I expect but a sudden breach of our love, utter dissolution of the match, and confusion of my fortunes for ever.
Wilt thou but trust the managing of thy business with me?
With thee? why will I desire to thrive in my purpose? will I hug four hundred a year? I that know the misery of nothing? will that man wish a rich widow, that has ne'er a hole to put his head in? with thee mine Host, why believe it, sooner with thee then with a Couy of Counsellors?
Thank you for your good report in faith sir, and if I stand you not instead, why then let an Host come off Hic &amp; haec hostess, a deadly enemy to Dice, Drink, and Venery; come whore's this widow?
Hard at Parke-end.
Isle be her Serving-man for once.
Why there wee let off together, keep full time, my thoughts were striking then just the same number.
I know it, shall we then see our merry days again?
Our merry nights—which ne'er shall bee more seen.
Nay good Moister Lucre, and you Moister Hoard▪ anger is the wind which you▪re both too much troubled with all.
Shall my adversary thus daily afront me, ripping up the old wound of our malice, which three Summers could not close up, into which wound the very sight of him, drops scald∣ing Lead instead of Balsamum.
Why Hoard, Hoard, Hoard, Hoard, Hoard; may I not pass in the state of quietness to mine own house, answer me to that▪ before witness, and why? Isle refer the cause to honest euen-minded Gentlemen, or require the mere indifferences of the Law, to decide this matter, I got the purchase, true; was it not any mans case? yes, will a wise-man stand as a Bawd, whilst another wipes his nose of the bargain, no, I answer no in that case.
Nay sweet Moister Lucre.
Was it the part of a friend: no, rather of a Jew, mark what I say, when I had beaten the bush to the last bird, or as I may term it, the price to a pound, then like a cunning Usurer to come in the evening of the bargain, and glean all my hopes in a minute, to enter as it were at the back-doore of the purchase, for thou ne'er came the right way by it.
Hast thou the conscience to tell me so, without any impeachment to thy self?
Thou that can defeat thy own Nephew, Lucre, lap his lands into bonds, and take the extremity of thy kindreds forfeitures because hoe's a rioter, a wast-thrift, a brothell-mai∣ster, and so forth— what may a Stranger expect from thee, but Ʋulnera delacerata, as the Poet says, delacerate dealing?
Vpbraidst thou me with Nephew? is all imputation laid upon me? what acquaintance have I with his follies, if hee riott, it is hee must want it, if hee surfeit, it is hee must feel it:
if he Drab it, it is he must lye by it, what's this to me?
What's all to thee? nothing, nothing; such is the gulf of thy desire, and the Wolf of thy conscience, but be as∣sured old pecunious lucre, if ever fortune so bless me, that I may be at leisure to vex thee, or any means so favour me, that I may have opportunity to mad thee, I will pursue it with that flame of hate, that spirit of malice, vnrepressed wrath, that I will blast thy comforts.
Ha, ha, ha!
Nay moister Hoard you▪re a wise Gentleman.
I will so cross thee,
And I thee.
So without mercy fret thee.
So monstrously oppose thee?
Dost scoff at my just anger? oh that I had as much power as usury he's over thee?
Then thou would have as much power as the devil he's over thee.
Toad!
Aspic.
Serpent.
Viper.
Nay Gentlemen, then we must divide you perforce.
When the fire grows too unreasonable hot, ther's no better way then to take of the wood.
A word good Signior.
How now, what's the news?
It is given me to understand, that you are a rival of mine in the love of Mistress Joyce, moister Hoards Niece: say me I, say me no.
Yes, tic so.
Then look to your self, you cannot live long, Ime practising every morning, a month hence Isle challenge you.
Give me your hand upon it ther's my pledge Isle meet you?
Oh, oh—what reason had you for that sir to strike be∣fore the mouth, you knew I was not ready for you, and that made you so crank, I am not such a coward to strike again I warrant you, my ear has the law of her side for it burns whore∣ribly, I will teach him to strike a naked face, the longest day of his life, slid it shall cost me some money, but Isle bring this box into the Chancery.
Fear you nothing sir, I have lodged her in a house of credit I warrant you.
Hast thou the writings?
Firm sir
Prithee stay, and behold two the most prodigious ras∣calls that ever slipped into the shape of men, Dampit sirrah, and young Gulf, his fellow Cater-piller.
Dampit? sure I have heard of that Dampit.
Heard of him? why man he that he's lost both his ears, may hear of him, a famous infamous Trampler of time; his own phrase: note him well, that Dampit sirrah, hee in the un∣even Beard, and the Serge cloak, is the most notorious, vsu∣ring, blasphemous, Atheistical, Brothel, vomiting rascal, that wee have in these latter times now extant, whose first begin∣ning was the stealing of a mastie Dog from a Farmers house.
Hee looked as if hee would obey the commandment well, when he began first with stealing.
True, the next Town he came at, hee set the Dogs to∣gether by the ears.
A sign he should follow the law by my faith.
So it followed indeed, and being destitute of all fortunes, stakte his Mastie against a Noble, and by great for∣tune his Dog had the day, how hee made it up ten shillings I know not, but his own boast is, that hee came to town but
with ten shillings in his purse, and now is credibly worth ten thousand pound?
How the devil came he by it?
How the devil came he not by it, if you put in the devil once riches come with a vengeance, has been a Trampler of the Law sir, and the devil has a care of his footmen, the Rogue has spied me now, hee nibbled me finely once too; a pox search you, oh moister Dampit, the very Loins of thee; cry you mer∣cie moister Gulf, you walk so lowe I promise you I saw you not sir?
Hee that walks lowe walks safe, the Poets tell vs.
And nyer hell by a foot and a half then the rest of his fellows, but my old Harry.
My sweet Theodorus?
It was a merry world when thou came to town with ten shillings in thy purse.
And now worth ten thousand pound my Boy, re∣port it, Harry Dampit, a trampler of time, say, hee would bee up in a morning, and be here with his Serge Gown, dashed up to the hams in a cause, have his feet stink about VVestminster hall and come home again, see the Galleons, the Galleasses the great Armadoes of the Law, then there bee Hoyes and petty vessels, Owers and Scullers of the time, there bee pick∣locks of the Time too, then would I bee here, I would tram∣ple up and down like a Mule; now to the Judges, may it please your reverend—honourable father-hoods: then to my Counsellor, may it please your worshipful patience, then to the examiners Office, may it please your Maistershippes Gen∣tlenesse, then to one of the Clarks, may it please your worcester∣shipfull Lowzinesse, for I find him scrubbing in his cod∣peace, then to the hall again, then to the Chamber again;
And when to the cellar again?
Even when thou wilt again; Tramplers of time, Mo∣tions of Fleete-streete, and Visions of Holborn, here I have
fees of one, there I have fees of another, my clients come about me, the Fooli-aminy and Cocks-combri of the Country, I still trasht and trotted for other men's causes, thus was poor Har∣rye Dampit made rich by others laziness, who, tho they would not follow their own Suites, I made i'm follow me with their purses.
Did thou so old Harry?
I, and I souc'st i'm with bills of Charges in faith, twen∣tie pound a year have I brought in for boate-hire, and I ne'er stepped into boat in my life.
Tramplers of time.
I, Tramplers of time, Raskalls of time, Bulbeg∣gorse:
Ah you're a mad old Harry? kind Moister Gulf, I am bold to renew my acquaintance.
I embrace it sir.
My Adversary evermore twits me with my No∣phew, forsooth my Nephew: why may not a virtuous uncle have a dissolute Nephew? what tho hee bee a Brotheller, a wast-thrift, a common Surfetter, and to conclude a beggar, must sin in him, call up shame in me: since wee have no part in their follies, why should wee have part in their infamies? for my strict hand toward his mortgage that I deny not, I con∣fesse I had an Uncles penworth: let me see, half in half, true, I saw neither hope of his reclaiming, nor comfort in his being, and was it not then better bestowed upon his Uncle, then upon one of his Aunts, I need not say bawd, for eve∣rye own knows what Aunt stands for in the last Translation now sir.
Ther's a Country Serving-man sir, attends to speak with your worship.
Ime at best leisure now, send him in to me;
Bless your venerable worship.
Welcome good fellow.
Hee calls me thief at first sight, yet he little thinks I am an Host?
What's thy business with me?
Faith sir, I am sent from my Mistress to any sufficient Gentleman indeed, to ask advise upon a doubtful point, it is indifferent sir, to whom I come, for I know none, nor did my Mistress direct me to any particular man, for shoe's as mere a stranger here as my self, only I found your worship within, and tic a thing I ever loved sir to be dispacht as soon as I can:
A good blunt honesty, I like him well what is thy Mistress?
Faith a Country Gentlewoman and a widow sir, yester∣day was the first flight of vs, but now she entends to stay till a little Term business be ended.
Her name I prithee?
It runs there in the writings sir, among her Lands, widow Meddler?
Meddler? mass have I near heard of that widow?
Yes, I wa••ned you, have you sir, not the rich widow in Staffordsheere:
Cuds me, there tic indeed, thou hast put me into mem∣ore, there's a widow indeed, ah that I were a bachelor again.
No doubt your worship might do much then, but she's fairly promised to a bachelor already.
Ah what is he I prithee?
A Country Gentleman too, one whom your worship knows not Ime sure: has spent some few follies in his youth, but marriage by my faith begins to call him home, my Mistress loves him sir, and love covers faults you know, one moister VVit-good if ever you have heard of the Gentleman:
Ha? Wit-good say thou?
Thats his name indeed sir; my Mistress is like to bring him to a goodly seat yonder, four hundred a year by my faith,
But I pray take me with you.
I sir▪
What Countryman might this young Wit-good be?
A Lestershire gentleman sir.
My Nephew, by th▪ mass my Nephew, Isle fetch out more of this in faith, a simple Country fellow, Isle worked out of him, and is that Gentleman say thou presently to marry her?
Faith he brought her up to town sir, has the best card in all the bunch fort, her heart: and I know my Mistress will bee married, ere she go down, nay Isle swear that, for she's none of those widows that will go down first, and bee married af∣la, she hates that I can tell you sir.
By my faith sir, she is like to have a proper Gentleman and a comely, Isle give her that gift?
Why do's your worship know him sir?
I know him! dos not all the world know him, can a man of such exquisite qualities be hid under a bushel?
Then your worship may save me a labour, for I had charge given me to enquire after him.
Enquire of him? if I might counsel thee, thou should ne'er trouble thy self further, enquire of him of no more but of me, Isle fit thee? I grant he has been youthful, but is he not now reclaimde; mark you that sir, has not your Mistress think you been wanton in her youth? if men bee wags, are there not women wagtayles?
No doubt sir:
Do's not he return wisest, that comes home whipped with his own follies.
Why very true sir.
The worst report you can hear of him I can tell you is that hee has been a kind Gentleman, a liberal and a worcester∣thie, who but lusty Wit-good, thrice Noble Wit-good.
Since your worship has so much knowledge in him,
can you resolve me Sir what his living might bee, my duty binds me sir to have a care of my mistress estate, she has been ever a good mistress to me though I say it, many wealthy Sui∣ters has she Nonsuted for his sake, yet tho her Love bee so fixed, a man cannot tell whether his Non-performance may help to remove it sir; hee makes vs believe hee has lands and living.
Who young moister Wit-good! why believe it he has as goodly a fine living out yonder, what do you call the place?
Nay I know not in faith.
Hum, see like a Beast if I have not forgot the name, puh, and out yonder again, goodly grown woods and fair meado ves, pox ont, I can ne'er hit of that place neither, hee; why hes Wit-good of Wit-good-Hall, hee, an unknow thing.
Is he so sir, to see how rumour will alter, trust me sir we heard once he had no lands, but all lay morgagde to an Uncle he has in town here.
Push, tic a tale, tic a tale.
I can assure you sir it was credibly reported to my Mistress.
Why doe you think in faith hee was ever so simple to mortgage his lands to his Uncle? or his uncle so unnatural to take the extremity of such a mortgage.
That was my saying still sir.
Puh, ne'er think it.
Yet that report goes currant.
Nay then you urge me,
Cannot I tell that best that am his Uncle,
How sir! what have I donne.
Why how now in a Sown, man▪
Is your worship his Uncle sir.
Can that be any harm to you sir.
I do beseech your sir do me the favour to conceal it, what a Beast was I to utter so much: pray sir doe me the kindness to keep it in, I shall have my coat pulled ore my
ears, ant should bee known, for the truth is an't please your worship, to prevent much rumour and many suitors, they entend to bee married very suddenly and privately.
And dost thou think it stands with my Judgment to doe them injury, must I needs say the knowledge of this marriage comes from thee? am I a fool at fifty four? doe I lack subtlety now that have got all my wealth by it? there's a leash of Angels for thee, come let me wo thee, speak where lie they?
So I might have no anger sir—
Passion of me not a jot, prethe come.
I would not have it known it came by my means,—
Why am I a man of wisdom?
I dare trust your worship sir, but I'm a stranger to your house, and to avoid al Intelligencers I desire your worships ear.
This fellowe's worth a matter of trust—come sir, why now you're an honest lad: ah sirrah Nephew?
Please you sir now I have begun with your worship when shall I attend, for your advice upon that doubtful point, I must come warily now.
Tut, fear thou nothing, to morrows evening shall re∣solve the doubt.
The time shall cause my attendance.
Fare thee well: there's more true honesty in such a Country Serving-man, then in a hundred of our cloak comp∣nions, I may well call i'm companions, for since blew coats have been turned into cloaks, wee can scarce know the man from the Moister—George—
Anon sir?
List hither,—keep the place secret, commend me to my Nephew, I know no cause tell him but hee might see his Uncle?
I will sir.
And doe you hear sir, take heed you use him with respect and duty.
Here's a strange alteration, one day he must be turned out like a Beggar, and now he must be called in like a Knight!
Ah Sirrah, that rich widow, 400. a year, beside I here she lays Claim to a title of a hundred more, this falls unhap∣pily that he should bear a Grudge to me now being likely to prove so rich, what first trow that hee makes me a Stranger for? hum, I hope he has not so much wit to apprehend that I cos∣ned him, he decaues me then? good heaven, who would have thought, it would ever have come to this pass, —yet hoe's a proper Gentleman in faith, give him his due—marry thats his Mortgage, but that I ne'er mean to give him, isle make him rich enough in words if that be good, and if it come to a piece of money I will not greatly stick fort, there may be hope some of the widows lands too, may one day fall upon me if things be carried wisely: now sir, where is he?
He desires your worship to hold him excusde, he has such weighty Business it commands him wholly from all men.
Were those my Nephews words?
Yes indeed sir.
When men grow rich they grow proud too, I perceive that, he would not have sent me such an answer once within this tweluemonth, see what tic when a mans come to his lands, return to him again sir, tell him his Uncle desires his company for an hour▪ Isle trouble him but an hour say, tic for his own good tell him, and do you hear sir, put worship upon him, go too, doe as I bid you, he's like to be a Gentleman of worship very shortly.
This is good sport in faith.
Troth he uses his Uncle, discourteously now, can he tell what I may do for him, Goodness may come frō me in a minute that comes not in Seven year again, hee knows my humour I am not so usually good, tic no small thing that draws kind∣nes frō me, he may know that, and he will; the chief cause that invites me to do him most good, is the sudden astonishing of
old Hoard my Adversary, how pale his malice will look at my Nephews Advancement, with what a dejected Spirit hee will behold his Fortunes, whom but last day, hee proclaimed Rioter, Penurious Make-shift, despised Brothel Moister; ha, ha, twill doe me more secret Joy then my last purchase, more precious comfott then all these widows Revenues,— Now Sir. —
With much entreaty he's at length come sir,
Oh Nephew, let me salute you sir, your welcome Nephew
Uncle I thank you.
Yaue a salt Nephew, your a Stranger here, well Hey∣uen give you joy.
Of what Sir?
Ho, we can hear.
You might have known your Uncles house in faith, you and your widow, go too, you were too blame; If I may tell you so without offence.
How could you hear of that sir?
Oh pardon me,
It was your will to have it kept from me I perceive now.
Not for any defect of Love I protest Uncle.
Oh it was Unkindness Nephew, fie, fie, fie.
I am sorry you take it in that sense sir.
Puh, you cannot colour it in faith Nephew.
Will you but hear what I can say in my just excuse sir.
Yes faith will I, and welcome.
You that know my danger ith City sir so well, how great my debts are, and how extreme my Creditors could not out of your pure judgment sir, have wished vs hither.
Mass a firm reason indeed,
Else my Uncles house, why tad been the only make— Match.—
Nay and thy credit.
My credit? nay my countenance, push, nay I know uncle you would have wrought it so by your wit you would have made her believe in time the whole house had been mine —
I and most of the goods too —
La you there; well, let i'm al prate what they will ther's nothing like the bringing of a widow to ones Uncles house.
Nay let Nephews be ruled as they list, they shall find their Uncles house, the most natural place when ell's done.
There they may be bold.
Life, they may do any thing there man, and fear neither Beadle nor Somner, an Uncles house! a very coale-harbour? Sir, Isle touch thee near now, hast thou so much interest in thy widow, that by a token thou could presently send for her?
Troth I think I can uncle.
Go too, let me see that?
Pray command one of your men hither Uncle.
George?
Here sir.
Attend my Nephew? I love a life to prattle with a rich widow, tic pretty me thinks when our tongues go together, and then to promise much and perform little; I love that sport a life in faith, yet I am in the mood now to do my Nephew some good, if he take me handsomely: what have you dispacht?
I ha sent sir?
Yet I must condemn you of unkindness Nephew.
Heaven forbid Uncle?
Yes faith must I; say your debts bee many, your credi∣tors importunate, yet the kindness of a thing is all Nephew, you might have sent me close word on it, without the least dan∣ger, or praeiudice to your fortunes.
Troth I confess it Uncle, I was too blame there, but in∣deed my intent was to have clapped it up suddenly, and so have broke forth like a joy to my friends, and a wonder to the world, beside there's a trifle of a forty pound matter toward the setting of me forth, my friends should ne'er have known on it, I meant to make shift for that my self▪
How Nephew? let me not hear such a word again, I be∣seech you,—shall I be beholding to you?
To me alas, what do you mean Uncle?
I charge you upon my love: you trouble no body but my self.
You've no reason for that Uncle.
Troth Isle ne'er bee friends with you while you live and you doe.
Nay and you say so Uncle, here's my hand, I will not doote —
Why well said, there's some hope in thee when thou wilt bee ruled, isle make it up fifty faith, because I see thee so re∣claimed; peace, here comes my wife with Sam her tother hus∣bands Son.
Good Aunt—
Couzē Wit-good? I rejoice in my salute, your most welcome to this Noble City governed with the sword in the Scabbard,
And the wit in the pommel, good Moister Sam freedom I return the salute.
By the mass she's coming wife, let me see now how thou wilt entertain her.
I hope I am not to learn sir, to entertain a widow, tic not so long ago since I was one my self?
Uncle?
Shoe's come indeed?
My Uncle was desirous to see you widow, and I prae∣summed to enuite you.
The praesumption was nothing Moister Wit-good, is this yours Uncle sir?
Marry am I sweet widow, and his good Uncle he shall find me, I by this smack that I give thee, you're welcome, wife, bid the widow welcome the same way again.
I am a Gentleman now too, by my fathers occupation, and I see no reason but I may kiss a widow by my Fathers Copy, truly I think the Charter is not against it, surely these are the words, the Son once a Gentleman, may revel it, tho his father were a dauber, tic about the 15 page,—isle to her—
You're not very busy now, a word with thee sweet widow—
Coades-Nigs, I was never so disgrac'st, since the hour my mother whipped me.
Beside, I have no child of mine own to care for, shoe's my second wife, old, past bearing, clap sure to him widow, he's like to be my heir I can tell you?
Is he so sir?
Hee knows it already and the knaves proud on it, jolly rich widows have been offered him here ith City, great mar∣chants wives, and do you think he would once look upon i'm? forsooth heel none, you are beholding to him ith Coūtry then; ere we could be, nay, isle hold a wager widow if hee were once known to bee in town, hee would bee presently sought after, nay and happy were they, that could catch him first.
I think so?
Oh, there would be such running to and fro widow, hee should not pass the streets for i'm: he'ed bee took up in one great house or other presently, fah, they know he has it &amp; must have it; you see this house here widow, this house and all comes to him, goodly Rooms ready furnished, sealed with plaster of paris, and all hung aboue with cloth of arras. Nephew!
Sir —
Show the widow your house, carry her into all the Rooms, and bid her welcome,—you shall see widow—No∣phew?—strike all sure aboue and thou be a good boy—ah—
Alas sir, I know not how she would take it:
The right way I warrant tee, a pox, art an ass, would I were in thy stead, get you up, I am a shamde of you, so: let i'm agree as they will now? many a match has been struck up in my house a this fashion, let i'm try all manner of ways still there's nothing like an Uncles house to strike the stroke in, —Isle hold my wife in talk a little, now Gin; your son there goes a wooing to a poor Gentlewoman but of a 1000. portion, see my Nephew, a lad of less hope, strikes at four hundred a year in good Rubbish▪
Well we must do as we may sir.
Isle have his money ready told for him, again hee come down, let me see too, by the mass I must present the widow with some Jewel, a good piece a plate or such a device, twill
horton her on well, I have a very fair stranding cup, and a good hie standing cup will please a widow aboue al other pieces.
Do you mock vs with your Nephew, I have a plot in my head son, in faith husband to cross you.
Is it a tragedy plot, or a comedy plot, good mother.
Tic a plot shall vex him, I charge you of my blessing Son Sam, that you presently withdraw the Action of your love from Moister Hoards Niece.
How mother.
Nay I have a plot in my head in faith, here take this chain of gold and this fair diamond, dog me the widow home to her lodging, and at thy best opportunity fasten i'm both upon her—nay I have a Reach, I can tell you thou art known what thou art son among the right worshipful; all the twelve companies.
Truly I thank 'em for it.
He, he's a scab to thee, and so certify her, thou hast two hundred a year of thy self, beside thy good parts— a proper person and a lovely, if I were a widow I could find in my heart to have thee my self, son, I, from em all.
Thank you for your good will mother, but in deed I had rather have a Stranger: and if I wo her not in that Violent fashion, that I will make her bee glad to take these gifts ere I leave her, let me never be called the heir of your body.
Nay I know theres enough in you son if you once come to put it forth.
Isle quickly make a Bolt, or a shaft ont.
Faith Moister Hoard, I have bestowed many months in the Suite of your Niece, such was the dear love I ever bore to her virtues, but since she hath so extremely denied me, I am to lay out for my fortunes else where.
Heaven forbid but you should fir, I ever told you my Niece, stood otherwise affected.
I must confess you did sir, yet in regard of my great loss of time, and the zeal with which I sought your Niece, shall I desire one favour of your worship.
In regard of those two tic hard but you shall sir.
I shall rest grateful, tic not full 3. hours sir, since the happy rumour of a rich Country widow came to my hearing.
How a rich Country widow?
Four hundred a year landed.
Yea?
Most firm sir, and I have learnt her lodging, here my suite begins sir, if I might but entreat your worship to bee a countenance for me, and speak a good word: for your words will pass, I nothing doubt, but I might set fair for the wid∣dow, nor shall your labour sir end altogether in thanks, two hundred Angels—
So, so, what suitors has she?
There lies the comfort sir, the report of her is yet but a whisper, and only solicited by young Riotous Wit-good, No∣phew to your mortal adversary.
Ha? art certain he's her suitor?
Most certain sir, and his Uncle very industrious to beguile the widow, and make up the match!
So? very good?
Now sir you know this young Wit-good is a spend-thrift— dissolute fellow.
A very Rascal:
A mid-night surfetter.
The spume of a Brothel-house.
True sir? which being well told in your worships phrase, may both heave him out of her mind, and drive a fair way for me to the widows affections.
Attend me about 5.
With my best care sir.
Fool thou hast left thy treasure with a thief, to trust a widower with a suite in love, happy revenge I hug thee, I have not only the means laid before me, extremely to cross my adversary, and confound the last hopes of his Nephew, but there∣by to enrich my state; augment my revenues, and build mine own fortunes greater, ha, ha.
Isle mar your phrase, ore-turne your flatteries,
Undo your windings, policies, and plots,
Fall like a secret and dispatchfull plauge on your secured com∣forts, why I am able to buy 3. of Lucer, thrice out-bid him, let my out-monies be reckond and all.
I am glad of this news.
So are we by my faith.
Young Wit-good will be a gallant again now.
Peace?
I promise you Moister Cock-pit she's a mighty rich widow.
Why have you ever heard of her.
Who widow Meddler, she lies open to much rumour.
Four hundred a year they say in very good land.
Nay tak't of my word if you believe that, you believe the least.
And to see how close hee keeps it.
Oh sir there's policy in that to prevent better suitors.
Hee owes me a hundred pound, and I protest I near looked for a penny.
He little dreams of our coming, heel wonder to see his creditors upon him.
Good, his creditors, isle follow, this makes for me, all know the widows wealth &amp; tic well known, I can estate her fairly, I and will.
In this one chance shines a twice happy Fate,
I both deject my foe, and raise my state.
Why alas, my Creditors? could you find no other time to undo me but now, rather your malice appears in this then the justness of the debt.
Moister Wit-good I have forborne my money long.
I pray speak lowe sir, what do you mean?
We hear you are to be married suddenly to a rich Coun∣try widow?
What can bee kept so close but you creditors here on it, well, tic a lamentable state, that our chiefest afflicters should first
hear of our fortunes, why this is no good course in faith sirs, if ever you have hope to bee satisfied, why doe you seek to con∣found the means that should work it, there's neither piety, no nor policy in that, shine favourably now, why I may rise and spread again, to your great comforts.
He says true in faith.
Remove me now, and I consume for ever.
Sweet Gentleman?
How can it thrive which from the Sun you sever.
It cannot indeed?
Oh then show patience, I shall have enough to satisfy you all.
I, if we could be content a shame take vs.
For look you, I am but newly sure yet to the widow, &amp; what a Rend might this discredit make: within these 3. days will I bind you lands for your securities.
No, good Moister Wit-good,
Would it were as much as we dare trust you with?
I know you have been kind, how ever now either by wrong report, or false incitement your gentleness is iniurde, in such a state as this a man cannot want foes.
If on the sudden he begin to rise,
No man that lives can count his enemies.
You had some intelligence I warrant ye, from an ill-willer.
Faith wee heard you brought up a rich widow sir, and were suddenly to marry her.
I, why there it was, I knew it was so, but since you are so well resolude of my faith toward you, let me be so much fauor'd of you, I beseech you all —
Oh, it shall not need in faith sir, —
As to lie still a while, and bury my debts in silence, till I be fully possessed of the widow, for the truth is, I may tell you as my friends —
Oh—o—o—
I am to raise a little money in the City, toward the set∣ting forth of my self, for mine own credit, and your comfort, now if my former debts should be divulged, all hope of my pro∣ceedings were quite extinguished!
Do you hear sir, I may deserve your custom hereafter, pray let my money be accepted before a strangers, here's forty
pound I received as I came to you, if that may stand you in any stead make use on it, nay pray sir, tic at your service —
You doe so ravish me with kindness, that I'm con∣strained, to play the maid and take it?
Let none of them see it I beseech you.
Fah—
I hope I shall be first in your remembrance after the mar∣riage rites.
Believe it firmly.
So, what do you walk sirs?
I go—take no care sir for money to furnish you, within this hour isle send you sufficient: come Moister Cock-pit wee both stay for you.
I ha lost a ring in faith, isle follow you presently—but you shall find it sir, I know your youth and expenses have disfur∣nisht you of all Jewels, ther's a Ruby of twenty pound price sir, bestow it upon your widow, —what man, twill call up her blood to you, beside if I might so much work with you, I would not have you beholding to those bloud-suckers for any money.
Not I believe it.
The'ar a brace of cut-throates?
I know i'm.
Send a note of all your wants to my shop and isle sup∣lie you instantly.
Say you so, why here's my hand then no man living shall do it but thy self.
Shall I carry it away from i'm both then.
I faith shalt thou?
Troth then I thank you sir.
Welcome good moister Cock-pit!
ha, ha, ha? why is not this better now, then lying a bed, I per∣ceiue there's nothing conjures up wit sooner then poverty, and nothing lays it down sooner then wealth and lechery? this has some savour yet, oh that I had the mortgage from mine Un∣cle as sure in possession as these trifles, I would forswear Brothel at noon day, and Muscadine and eggs at midnight.
Moister Wit-good? where are you?
Holla.
Rich News!
Would it were all in Plate,
There's some in chains and Jewels, I am so haunted with shutters Moister Wit-good, I know not which to dispatch first.
You have the better term by my faith
Among the number, one Moister Hoard an Ancient Gentleman.
Upon my life my Uncles adversary.
It may well hold so, for he rails on you,
Speaks shamefully of him.
As I could wish it.
I first denied him, but so cunningly,
It rather promised him assured hopes,
Then any loss of labour.
Excellent,
I expect him every hour, with Gentlemen,
With whom he labours to make good his words,
To approve you Riotous, your state consumed, your Uncle,—
Wench, make up thy own fortunes now, do thy self a good turn once in thy Days, hes rich in money, movables, and lands, —marry him, he's an old doting fool, and thats worth all, marry him, twould bee a great comfort to me to see thee do well in faith, —marry him, twould ease my conscience well to see thee well destowd, I have a care of thee in faith.
Thanks sweet moister Wit-good.
I reach at farther happiness; first I am sure it can be no harm to thee, and there may happen goodness to me by it, prosecute it well, lets send up for out wits, now we require their best and most pregnant Assistance!
Step in, I think I hear i'm.
Art thou the widows man, by my faith she as a com∣pany of proper men then.
I am the worst of six sir, good enough for blew-coates.
Hark hither, I hear say thou art in most credit with her.
Not so sir.
Come, come, you're modest, theres a Brace of royals, prithee help me to'th speech of her.
Isle do what I may sir always saving my self harmless.
Go too do it I say, thou shalt hear better from me.
Is not this a better place then 5. Mark a year standing wages; say a man had but 3. such clients in a day, me thinks he might make a poor living ont, beside I was never brought up with so little honesty, to refuse any mans money never; what g•lles there are a this side the world, now know I the wid∣dowes mind, none but my young master comes in her clutches, ha, ha, ha.
Now my dear Gentlemen stand firmly to me, you know his follies, and my worth.
Wee doo sir.
But Moister Hoard, are you sure he is not ith house now?
upon my honesty▪ I chose this time,
A purpose, fit, the spend-thrift is abroad,
Assist me: here she comes▪ now my sweet widow,
Y are welcome Moister Hoard.
Dispatch, sweet Gentlemen, dispatch,
I am come widow, to prove those my words,
Neither of envy Sprung nor of false tongs,
But such as their desar•s and Actions,
Doe merit and bring forth, all which these Gentlemen well known and better reputed will confess.
I cannot tell,
How my affections may dispose of me,
But surely if they find him so desartlesse,
Theyle have that reason to with-draw them-selues.
And therefore Gentlemen I doe entreat you,
As you are fair in Reputation,
And in appearing form so shine in truth;
I am a widow and alas you know,
Soon ouerthowen, tic a very small thing,
That we with-stand, our weakness is so great,
Be partial unto neither, but deliver,
Without affection your opinion,
And that will drive it home,
Nay I besecch your silence Moister Hoard,
You are a party.
Widow? not a word!
The better first to work you to belief,
Know neither of vs owe him flattery,
Nor tother malice, but vnbribed censure,
So help vs our best fortunes.
It suffizes?
That Wit-good is a riotous undone man,
Imperfect both in fame and in estate:
His debts wealthier then he, and executions
In waite for his due body, we'ele maintain
With our best credit, and our dearest blood.
Nor land, nor living say you, pray take heed you do not wrong the Gentleman?
What we speak,
Our lives and means are ready to make good.
Alas, how soon are wee poor souls beguiled!
And for his Uncle.—
Let that come to me,
His Uncle a severe extortioner,
A Tyrant at a forfeiture, greedy of others miseries,
One that would undo his brother; nay swallow
Up his father, if he can
Within the fadomes of his conscience.
Nay believe it widow,
You had not only matched your self to wants,
But in an evil and unnatural stock.
Follow hard, Gentlemen, follow hard?
Is my love so deceived, before you all
I do renounce him, on my knees I vow
He ne'er shall marry me,—
Heaven knows hee never meant it?
There, take her at the bound,—
Then with a new and pure affection,
Behold you Gentleman, grave, kind and rich:
A match worthy your self, esteeming him,
You do regard your state.
Isle make her a jointure say.
Hee can join land to land, and will possess you of what you can desire.
Come widow come.
The world is so deceitful?
There tic deceitful,
Where flattery, want, and imperfection lies:
But none of these in him? push —
Pray sir.
Come you widows are ever most back-ward, when you should doe your selves most good, but were it to marry a chin not worth a hair now, then you would bee forward enough? come, clap hands, a match.
Withal my heart widow, thanks Gentlemen,
I will deserve your labour, and thy love.
Alas, you love not widows but for wealth,
I promise you I ha nothing sir,
Well said, widow, well said, thy Love is all I seek, before these Gentlemen.
Now I must hope the best,
My joys are such they want to be expressed,
But Moister Hoard, one thing I mus• remember you of before these gentlemen your friends, how shall I suddenly avoid the loathed Soliciting of that periurd Wit-good, and his Tedious—dissembling Uncle, who this very very day hath appointed a meeting for the same purpose too, where had not truth come forth I had been undone, utterly undone.
What think you of that Gentlemen.
It was well devised.
Hark thee widow, train out young Wit-good single, hasten him thither with thee, somewhat before the hour where at the place appointed these Gentlemen and my self will waite the opportunty, when by some slight removing him from thee we will suddenly enter and surprise thee, carry thee away by boat to Coale-harbour, have a Priest ready and there Clap it up instantly, how lik'st it widow?
In that it pleases you, it likes me well.
Isle kiss thee for those words, come▪ Gentlemen,
Still must I live a Suitor to your favours,
Still to your aide beholding.
We're engade sir.
Tic for our credits now to see it well ended.
Tic for your honours Gentlemen; nay look toote,
Not only in joy, but I in wealth excel,
No more sweet widow, but sweet wife, farewell.
Farewell sir.—
Oh for more scope, I could laugh eternally,
Give you joy Mistress Hoard, I promise your fortune was good forsooth, you've fell upon wealth enough, and there's young Gentlemen enough can help you to the rest; now it requires our wits: carry thy self but heedfully now, and wee are both—
Moister Wit-good your Uncle—
Cuds me, remove thy self a while, isle serve for him?
Nephew, good morrow, Nephew?
The same to you kind Uncle.
How fares the widow, do's the meeting hold?
Oh no question of that sir?
Isle strike the stroke then for thee, no more days.
The sooner the better Uncle, oh shoe's mightily foal∣lowed, —
And yet so little rumourd.
Mightily? here comes one old Gentleman, and heel make her a jointure of three hundred a year forsooth, another wealthy suitor will estate his son in his life time, and make him weigh down the widow, here a Merchants son will possess, her with no less then three goodly Lordships at once, which were all pawns to his Father.
Peace Nephew let me hear no more of i'm, it mads me, thou shalt prevent i'm all, no words to the widow of my coming hither, let me see, tic now upon nine, before twelve. Nephew we will have the bargain struck, wee will faith boy.
Oh my precious Uncle.
Niece, sweet Niece, prithee have a care to my house, I leave al to thy discretion, be content to dream a while, isle have a husband for thee shortly, put that care upon me wench, for in choosing wives and husbands I am only fortunate, I have that gift given me.
But tic not likely you should choose for me,
Since Nephew to your chiefest enemy:
Is he whom I affect, but oh forgetful,
Why dost thou flatter thy affections so:
With name of him, that for a widows bed,
Neglects thy purer love, can in be so?
Or do's report dissemble: how now sir?
A letter with which came a private charge.
Therein I thank your care—I know this hard,
Dearer then sight, what the world reports of me yet believe not, rumour will alter shortly, be thou constant, I am still the same that I was in love, and I hope to be the same in fortunes.
I am resolude, no more shall fear or doubt,
Raise their pale powers to keep affection out.
You're very welcome Gentlemen, Dick show those Gentlemen the Pomegranate there,—
Hist—
Up those stairs Gentlemen.
Pissed Drawer,—
Anon sir?
Prethe ask at the Bar, if a gentlewomā came not in lately?
William at the Bar did you see any Gentlewoman come in lately, speak you I, speak you no.
No, none came in yet but mistress Florence.
Hee says none came in yet sir, but one Mistress Florence.
What is that Florence? a widow!
Yes a duch widow.
How?
Thats an English drab sir, give your worship good more∣row.
A merry knave in faith, I shall remember a dutch widow the longest day of my life.
Did not I use most art to win the widow.
You shall pardon me for that sir, Moister Hoard knows I took her at best vantage.
What's that sweet Gentlemen, what's that?
He will needs bear me down that his art only, wrought with the widow most.
Oh you did both well Gentlemen, you did both well, I thank you.
I was the first that moved her.
You were in faith.
But it was I that took her at the bound.
I, that was you, faith Gentlemen, tic right.
I boasted least, but it was I joined their hands,
By the mass I think hee did, you did all well gentlemen, you did al well, contend no more:
Come you rooms fittest:
True tic next the door?
Your very welcome, please you to walk up stai•s cloths laid sir.
Up stairs! troth I am weary Moister Wit-good
Rest your self here a while widow, we'll have a cup of Muscadine in this little Room.
A cup of Muscadine, you shall have the best sir.
But do you hear sirrah.
Do you call, anon sir.
What is there provided for dinner
I cannot readily tell you sir, if you please, you may go into the kitchen and see your self sir, many Gentlemen of worcester∣ship do use to do it, I assure you sir?
A pretty familiar Priggin rascal, hee has his part with∣out book?
Against you are ready to drink to me, widow, isle bee present to pledge you.
Nay I commend your care, tic donne well of you? ass what have I forgot.
What Mistress?
I slipped my wedding Ring off when I washed, and left it at my lodging, prithee run, I shall be sad without it, so, hoe's gon!—boy?
Anon forsooth?
Come hither sirrah, learn secretly if one Moister Hoard an ancient Gentleman be about house?
I heard such a one named.
Commend me to him.
I bee do thy commendations?
Oh you come well: away, to boat, be gon.
Thus wisemen are revenged give two for one.
I must request you sir, to show extraordinary care, my Un∣cle comes with Gentlemen his friends, and tic upon a making?
Is it so?
Isle give a spetiall charge good Moister Wit-good, may I be bold to see her?
Who he widow?
Withal my heart in faith, isle bring you to her?
If she bee a Staffordsheere Gentlewoman, tic much if I know her not, —
How now, boy, drawer.
Hie?
Do you ca•l sir?
Went the Gentlewoman up that was here?
Up sir? she went out sir.
Out sir?
Out sir: one Moister Hoard with a guard of Gentlemen carried her out at backdoor, a pretty while since sir.
Hoard, death and darkness, Hoard.
The devil of ring I can find?
How now, what news, whore's the widow?
My Mistress? is she not here sir?
More madness yet.
She sent me for a Ring.
A plot, a plot: to Boat shoe's stole away.
What?
Follow, enquire, old Hoard my Uncles Adversary—
Nephew, what's that?
Thrice miserable wretch.
Why what's the matter?
The widdow's borne away sir?
Ha, passion of me, a heavy welcome Gentlemen.
The widow gon?
Who durst attempt it?
Who but old Hoard, my Uncles adversary?
How?
With his confederates.
Hoard, my deadly enemy, Gentlemen stand to me,
I will not bear it, it is in hate of me,
That villain seeks my shame, nay thrifts my blood, hee owes me mortal malice,
Isle spend my wealth on this despiteful plot,
Ere he shall cross me and my Nephew thus.
So maliciously.
How now you treacherous Rascal?
That's none of my name sir.
Poor soul he knew not on it.
Ime sorry, I see then it was a mere plot.
I traced i'm nearly.—
Well.
And hear for certain, they have took Cole-harbor.
The Devils Sanctuary,
They shall not rest, Isle pluck her from his arms,
Kind &amp; dear Gentlemen, if ever I had seat within your breasts—
No more good sir, it is a wrong to vs,
To see you injured in a cause so just:
Weal spend our lives, but we will right our friends,
Honest, and kind, come, we have delayed to long,
Nephew take comfort; a Just cause is strong.
Thats all my comfort Uncle, ha, ha, ha.
Now may events fall luckily, and well,
He that ne'er strives, says wit shall ne'er excel.
When did I say my prayers? In Anno 88. when the great Armado was coming, and In Anno. 99. when the great Thundering and Lighting was I prayed heartily then in faith, to overthrow Poouyes new buildings, I kneeled by my great iron chest I remember.
Moister Dampit, one may hear you, before they see you, you keep sweet hours Moister Dampit, we were all a bed 3 hours ago.
Audrey.
Oh yare a fine Gentleman.
So I am in faith, and a fine Scholar, do you use to go to bed Bed, so early Audrey?
Call you this early Moister Dampit.
Why first not one of Clock ith morning is not that early enough? fetch me a glass of fresh-Beere.
Here, I have warmd your Nightcap for you moister Dampit.
Draw it on then—I am very weak truly, I have not eaten so much as the bulk of an Egg these 3. days.
You have drunk the more Moister Dampit,
Whats that?
You mought, and you would Moister Dampit.
I answer you I cannot, hold your prating, you prat too much, and understand too little, are you answered, —give me a glass of bear.
May I ask you how you doe Moister Dampit?
How do I? in faith nought.
I ne'er knenw you do otherwise,
I eat not one pennort of bread these 2. years, give me a glass of fresh beer,—I am not sick, nor I am not well.—
Take ths warm Napkin about your neck sir, whilst I help to make you unready.
How now Audrie-prater, with your skiruy devices, what say you now?
What say I Moister Dampit? I say nothing but that you are very weak,
Faith thou hast more cunny catching devices then all London?
Why Moister Dampit I never deceive▪d you in al my life?
Why was that? because I never did trust thee.
I care not what you say Moister Dampit?
Hold thy prating, I answer thee, thou art a beggar, a queen, and a bawd: are you answered.
Fie Moister Dampit, a Gentleman and have such words.
Why thou base drudge of infortunity, thou kitchen stuff drab of Beggary, Roguery &amp; cockscombre, thou Cavern∣sed queen of foolery, knavery and baudreaminy, isle tell thee what, I will not give a louse for thy fortunes:
No, moister Dampit, and there's a Gentleman comes a wooing to me, and he doubts nothing but that you will get me from him:
I, if I would either have thee or lie with thee for two thousand pound, would I might bee damned, why thou base im∣pudent queen of foolery, flattery, and cockscombry, are you an∣swerd?
Come will you rise and go to bed sir?
Rise, and go to bed too Audrey? how do's Misters Pro∣serpine?
Fooh—
She's as fine a Philosipher of a stinkards wife, as any within the liberties,—fah, fah Audrey:
How now Moister Dampit?
Fie upon it, what a choice of stinks here is, what hast thou don Audrey fie vppon't, here's a choice of stinks indeed; give me a glass of fresh Beer, and then I will to bed:
It waits for you aboue sir?
Foh, I think they burn horns in Barnards Inn, if e∣for I smelt such an abominable stink, usury forsake me:
They be the stinking nails of his trampling feet, and he talks of burning of horns:
Join hearts, join hands, In wedlocks bands,
Never to part, till death cleave your heart,
You shall forsake all other women,
You Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and Yeomen.
What my tongue slips, make up with your lips.
Give you joy Mistress Hoard, let the kiss come about,
Who knocks? convey my little Pig-eater out.
Hoard?
Upon my life, my adversary, Gentlemen.
Hoard, open the door, or we will force it op,
Give vs the widow.
Gentlemen keepe'm out.
Hee comes upon his death that enters here.
My friends assist me.
Hee has assistants, Gentlemen.
Tut, nor him, nor them, we in this action fear.
Shall I in peace, speak one word with the widow?
Husband and Gentlemen, hear me but a word.
Freely sweet wife.
Let him in peaceably, you know we're sure, from any act of his.
Most true,
You may stand by and smile at his old weakness, let me alone to answer him.
Content,
Twill be good mirth in faith, how think you Gentlemen?
Good gullery?
Upon calm conditions let him in.
All spite and malice—
Hear me Moister Lucre, so you will vow a peaceful en∣trance with those your friends and only exercise
Calm conference with the widow, without fury,
The passage shall receive you.
I do vow it.
Then enter and talk freely, here she stands.
Oh Moister Hoard, your spite has wacht the hour, your excellent at vengeance Moister Hoard.
Ha, ha, ha.
I am the fool you laugh at, you are wise sir and know the seasons, well, come hither widow, why is it thus!
Oh you have done me infinite disgrace,
And your own credit no small Injury,
Suffer mine enemy so despitefully
To bear you from my Nephew, oh,
I had rather half my substance had been forfet, and begged by some starve▪d Rascal.
Why what would you wish me do sir?
I must not overthrow my state for love,
We have too many presidents for that,
From thousands of our wealthy undone widows
One may derive some wit; I do confess,
I lou▪d your Nephew, nay I did affect him,
Against the mind and liking of my friend:
Believed his promises, lay here in hope,
Of fla•terd living and the boast of lands,
Coming to touch his wealth and state indeed,
It appears dross, I find him not the man,
Imperfect, mean, scarce furnished of his needs:
In words, fair Lordships, in performance Hovels,
Can any woman love the thing that is not?
Broke you for this?
Was it not cause too much?
Send to enquire his state, most part of it,
Lay two years mortgaged in his Uncles hands:
Why say it did, you might have known my mind; I could have soon restored it.
I had I but seen any such thing performed why twould have tied my affection and contained me in my first desires, doe you think in faith, that I could twine such a dry, oak as this, had promise in your Nephew took effect:
Why and there's no time past, and rather then my ad∣uersary should thus thw'art my hopes, I would —
•ut you've been ever full of golden •peech,
If words were lands, your Nephew would bee rich.
Widow, believe it I vow by my best bliss,
Before these Gentlemen I will give in
The mortgage to my Nephew instantly,
Before I sleep or eat.
Weal pawn our credits widow, what he speaks shall
be performed in fullness.
Nay more I will estate him
In farther blessings, he shall be my heir▪
I have no Son,
Isle bind my self to that condition.
When I shall hear this done, I shall soon yield, to reasonable terms.
In the mean season,
Will you protest before these Gentlemen,
To keep your self, as you are, now at this present.
I do protest before these Gentlemen,
I will be as clear then, as I am now.
I do believe you, here's your own honest servant,
Isle take him along wi•h me.
I, with all my heart.
He shall see all performed and bring you word.
Thats all I waite for.
What have you finished Moister Lucre? ha, ha, ha, ha!
So, laugh Hoard, laugh at your poor enemy, do, the wind may turn you may be laughed at too, yes marry may you sir—ha, ha, ha?
Ha, ha ha, if every man that swells in malice,
Could be revenged as happily as I:
He would choose hate, and forswear amity.
What did he say wife, prithee?
Faith spoke to ease his mind,—
Oh—o—o—
You know now, little to any purpose.
True, true, true.
He would do mountains now.
I, I, I, I.
You've struck him dead Master Hoard.
I and his Nephew desperate:
I knowte sirs I,
Never did man so crush his enemy?
My son in law,
Sam Freedom? whore's my Nephew?
O man in lamentation father?
How!
He thumps his breast like a gallant Decor that has lost his
doublet, and stands in's shirt to do penance:
Alas poor gentleman.
I warrant, you may hear him sigh in a still evening to your house at Hyegate.
I prethe send him in.
Were it to do a greater matter, I will not stick with you sir, in regard you married my Mother?
Sweet Gentlemen cheer him up, I will but fetch the mortgage, and return to you instantly.
Weal do our best sir?—see where he comes,
Even ioylesse and regardless of all form.
Why how Moister Wit-good, fie, you a firm scholar, and an understanding Gentleman, and give your best parts to passion.
Come fie?
Oh Gentlemen!—
Sorrow of me what a sigh was there sir, nine such wid∣dowes are not worth it.
To be borne from me by that lecher Hoard.
That vengeance is your Uncles, being done
More in despite to him, then wrong to you,
But we bring comfort now,—
I beseech you Gentlemen.
Cheer thy self man, there's hope of her in faith?
To gladsome, to be true.
Nephew what cheer? alas poor Gentleman how art thou changed? call thy fresh blood into thy cheeks again, she comes—
Nothing afflicts me so much,
But that it is your Adversary, Uncle,
And merely plotted in despite of you.
I thats it mads me, spites me? isle spend my wealth, ever he shall carry her so, because I know tic only to spite me, I this is it,—here Nephew, before these kind Gentlemen I deliver in your mortgage, my promise to the widow, see tic done, be wise your once more Moister of your own, the widow shall per∣ceiue now, you are not altogether such a beggar as the world re∣putes you, you can make shift to bring her to 300. a year sir.
Byr'lady and thats no toy sir:
A word Nephew?
Now you may certify the widow?
You must conceive it a right Nephew now, to doe you good, I am content to do this.
I know it sir?
But your own conscience can tell I had it dearly enough of you?
I thats most certain.
Much money laid out, beside maney a journey to fetch the rent, I hope you'll think on it Nephew.
I were worse then a beast else in faith.
Although to blind the widow and the world I out of policy doote, yet there's a conscience Nephew.
Heaven forbid else.
When you are full possessed,
Tic nothing to return it:
Alas a thing quickly done Uncle.
Well said,—you know I give it you but in trust.
Pray let me understand you rightly, Uncle,
You give it me but in trust.
No.
That is, you trust me with it.
True, true:
But if ever I trust you with it again, would I might bee trust up for my labour.
You can all witness Gentlemen, and you sir yeoman?
My life for yours sir now, I know my Mistresses mind to well toward your Nephew, let things be in preparation, and isle train her hither in most excellent fashion:
A good old boy,—wife Girnne?
Whats the news sir?
The wedding days at hand, prithee sweet wife, ex∣press thy houswifery, you're a fine Cooke I knowte, thy first husband married thee out of an Aldermans kitchen, go too, he raised thee for raising of paste, what, here's none but friends, most of our beginnings must bee winckt at, Gentlemen I enuite you all to my Nephews wedding against Thursday morning:
Withal our hearts, and wee shall joy to see your enemy so mocked:
He laughed at me, gentlemen, ha, ha, ha:
Hee has no conscience, faith would laugh at them, they laugh at one another?
Who then can be so cruel, troth, not I,
I rather pity now, then ought envy,
I do conceive such joy in mine own happiness, I have no ley∣sure yet, to laugh at their follies.
Thou soul of my estate I kiss thee,
I miss lifes Comfort when I miss thee.
Oh never will we part again,
Ʋntill I leave the Sight of men,
We will ne'er trust conscience of our kin,
Since Cozenage brings that title in.
Isle wait these 7. hours but Isle see him caught,
Faith so will I.
Hang him prodigal, he's stripped of the Widow.
A my Troth shees the wiser, she has made the happier choice, and I wonder of what Stuff those widows hearts are made of, that will marry vnfledgd Boys, before comely thrumb∣chind Gentlemen.
News, news news,
What boy?
The Rioter is caught.
So, so, so, so, it warmes me at the heart, I love a life to see Dogs upon men; oh here hee comes.
My last joy was so great it took away the sense of all future afflictions, what a day is here orecast? how soon a black tempest rises?
Oh wee may speak with you now sir, whats become of your rich widow, I think you may cast your cap at the wid∣dow, may you not sir.
He a rich widow? who a prodigal, a daily Rioter, and a nightly vomiter, he a widow of account? he a hole ith counter.
You do well my masters, to tiranize over misery to af∣flect the affl•cted, tic a custom you have here amongst you, I would wish you never leave it and I hope you'll do as I bid you
Come, come sir, what say you extempore now to your bill of a hundred pound: a sweet debt, for froating your doublets.
Here's mine of forty,
Here's mine of fifty.
Pray sirs▪ you'll give me Breath.
No sir, wel'e keep you out of breath still, then we shall be sure you will not run away from vs.
Will you but here me speak?
You shall pardon vs for that sir, we know you have too fair a tong of your own, you ouer-came vs to lately, a shame take you, we are like to loose all that for want of witnesses, wee dealt in policy then, always when we strive to bee most politi∣que we prove most cocskcombs, Non plus ultra. I perceive by vs, were not ordained to thrive by wisdom, and therefore wee must be content to be Trades-men.
Give me but reasonable time, and I protest Isle make you ample Satisfaction.
Do you talk of Reasonable time to vs?
Tic true, beasts know no reasonable time,
Wee must have either money or carcass.
Alas what good will my carcass do you?
Oh tic a Secret delight we have amongst vs, we that are used to keep birds in cages, have the heart to keep men in prison, I warrant you.
I perceive I must crave a little more Aid from my wits, do but make shift for me this once, and Isle forswear ever to trouble you in the like fashion hereafter, Isle have better em∣ployment for you, and I live. You'll give me leave my masters to make Trial of my friends and raise all means I can.
Thats our desires sir.
Moister Wit-good.
Oh art thou come!
May I speak one word with you in private sir?
No by my faith can thou. I am in hell here and the Devils will not let me Come to thee.
Do you call vs diuuills, you shall find vs Puritans bear him away, let em talk as they go, we will not stand to hear 'em, ah sir, am I a devil, I shall think the better of my self as long as I live, a Devil in faith.
What a Sweet blessing hast thou Moister Hoard aboue a multitude, wilt thou never be thankeful? how dost thou think to be blessed another time? or dost thou count this the full measure of thy happiness by my troth I think thou doest▪ not only a wife large in possessions, but spacious in content, she's rich, she's young, she's fair, she's wife, when I wake I think of her lands that revives me, when I go to bed, I dream of her beauty, and
thats enough for me, she's worth 4. hundred a year in her very smock, if a man knew how to use it, but the journey will bee all in truth into the Country, to ride to her Lands in state and order following my Brother &amp; other worshipful Gentlemen whose companies I ha sent down for already, to ride along with vs, in their goodly Decorum beards, their broad Velvet chashocks, and chains of gold twice or thrice double; against which time, isle entertain some ten men of mine own, into Liveries, all of oc∣cupations or qualities, I will not keep an idle man about me, the sight of which will so vex my Adversary Lucre, for weal pass by his door of purpose, make a little stand for nonce, &amp; have our horses Curuet before the window, certainly he will never endure it, but run up &amp; hang himself presently? how now sir? what news? any that offer their service to me yet.
Yes sir, there are some ith hall, that waite for your worcester∣ships liking, and desire to be entertained.
Are they of occupation?
They are men fit for your worship sir.
Say so? send i'm all in!—to see ten men ride after me in watchet liveries with Orenge-tawny capes, twill cut his comb in faith, how now? of what occupation are you sir.
A Taylor, an't please your worship.
A taylor, oh very good, you shall serve to make all the Liveries—what are you sir?
A Barber sir.
A Barber very needful, you shall shave all the house, and if need require stand for a Reaper ith Summer time,— You sir?
A Perfumer?
I smelt you before, Persumers of all men had need carry themselves uprightly, for if they were once knaves they would be smelt out quickly, —to you sir?
A Fawlkner an't please your worship—
Sa ho, sa ho, sa ho—and you sir?
A Huntsman sir.
There boy, there boy, there boy? I am not so old but I have pleasant days to come, I promise you my Masters I take such a good liking to you, that I entertain you all, I put you already into my countenance, and you shall be shortly in my livery? but especially you two my •olly Fawlkner, and
my bonny huntsman, wee shall have most need of you at my wives Mannor-houses ith Country, there's goodly parks and Champion-grounds for you, we shall have all our sports within our selves, all the Gentlemen ath Country shall bee beholding to vs and our pastimes:
And weal make you worship admire sir:
Say thou •o do but make me admire, and thou shalt want for nothing,—my Taylor?
Anon sir.
Go presently in hand with the liveries.
I will sir.
My Barber.
Here sir.
Make i'm all trim fellows, louse i'm well, especially my huntsman, and cut all their beards of the Polonian fashion: my perfumer:
Under your nose sir:
Cast a better savour upon the knaves, to take away the sent of my Taylors feet, and my Barbers Lotium-water:
It shall be carefully performed sir.
But you my Faulkner and Huntsman, the welcomst men alive in faith:
And weal show you that sir, shall deserve your worcester∣ships favour?
I prithee show me that: go you knaves all, and wash your lungs ith Buttery, go—byth mass, and well remembered, isle ask my wife that question, wife, Mistrs Iane Hoard!
Sir? would you with me.
I would but know sweet wife, which might stād best to thy liking, to have the wedding dinner kept here or ith Country?
Hum? faith sir twould like me better here, here you were married, here let all rites be ended.
Could a Marquess give a better answer? Hoard bear thy head aloft, thou'st a wife will advance it, what haste comes here now? ye a letter: some drag of my Adversaries malice: come hither, whats the news!
A thing that concerns my Mistress sir.
Why then it concerns me knave?
I and you knave too, (cry your worship mercy) you are both like to come into trouble I promise you sir, a praecon∣tract
How a praecontract say thou?
I fear they have too much proof on it sir, old Lucre he runs mad up and down and will to law as fast as he can, young Wit-good laid hold on by his creditors, hee exclaims upon you a tother side, says you have wrought his undoing, by the in∣iurious detaining of his contract.
Body a me?
He will have utmost satisfaction.
The law shall give him recompense he says.
Alas his creditors so merciless, my state being yet uncertain, I deem it not unconscionable to further him.
True sir—
Wife, what says that letter let me construe it.
Cursed be my rash and unadvised words,
Isle set my foot upon my tongue,
And tread my inconsiderate grant to dust.
Wife—
A pretty shift in faith, I commend a woman when she can make away a letter from her husband handsomely, and this was cleanly done by my troth.
I did sir?
Some foolish words I must confess did pass,
Which, now letigiously he fastens on me.
Of what force? let me ezamine i'm.
Too strong I fear, would I were well freed of him.
Shall I compound?
No sir, id have it done some Nobler way
Of your side; id have you come off with honour,
Let baseness keep with them: why have you not the means sir, the occasions offered you.
Where? how? dear wife.
Hee is now caught by his creditors, the slaue's needy, his debts petty, he will rather bind himself, to all inconvenient∣ces then rot in prison, by this only means you may get a re∣lease from him, it is not yet come to his Uncles hearing, send speedily for the creditors, by this time hoe's desperate, he will set his hand to any thing, take order for his debts, or discharge i'm quite, a pox on him, lets be rid of a rascal.
Excellent, thou dost astonish me, go, run, make hast,
bring both the creditors and Wit-good hither.
This will be some revenge yet.
In the mean space Isle have a release drawne-within there.
Sir.
Sirrah, come take directions, go to my Scrivener.
Ime yet like those, whose riches lie in dreams,
If I be waked the're false, such is my fate,
Who ventures deeper then the desperate state.
Though I have find yet could I become new,
For where I once vow, I am ever true.
Away, Dispatch, on my Displeasure, quickly, happy oc∣cession, pray heaven hee bee in the right Vain now to set his hand toot, that nothing alter him; grant that al his follies may meet in him at once, to besot him enough.
I pray for him in faith, and here he comes;
What would you with me now, my Uncles spiteful adversary.
Nay I am friends,
I when your mischiefs spent.
I heard you were arrested.
Well, what then? you will pay none of my debts I am sure.
A wiseman cannot tell,
There may be those Conditions greed upon,
May move me to do much,
I when Tic thou perjured Woman, O no name
Is wild enough to match thy treachery,
That art the cause of my confusion.
Out you penurious slave.
Nay wife you are too froward,
Let him alone, give losers leave to talk.
Shall I remember thee of an other promise far stronger then the first.
Id fine know that.
Twould call shame to thy cheeks.
Shame.
Hark in your ear.—will hee come of think thou, and pay my Debts roundly.
Doubt nothing, theres a Release a drawing and all to which you must set your hand.
Excellent.
But me thinks in faith you might have made some
shift to discharge this your self, having in the mortgage, and no∣for have burdened my conscience with it.
A my troth I could not, for my creditors cruelties ex∣tend to the present.
No more,—why do your worst for that, I defy you.
You're impudent, isle call up witnesses.
Call up thy wits for thou hast been devoted to follies a long time.
Wife, you're too bitter? Moister Wit-good, and you my Masters, you shall hear a mild speech come from me now, and this it is, tas been my fortune, Gentlemen, to have an extraordi∣nary blessing powered upon me alate, and here she stands, I have wedded her and bedded her, &amp; yet she is little the worse, some foolish words she hath past to you in the Country, and some peevish debts you owe here in the City, set the Hares head to the Goose—giblet, release you her of her words, and isle release you of your debts sir:
Would you so, I thank you for that sir, I cannot blame you in faith.
Why are not debts better then words sir?
Are not words promises, and are not promises debts sir.
He plays at back-Racket with me.
Come hither Moister Wit-good come hither, be ruled by fools once:
We are Citizens and know what belong toote.
Take hold of his offer pox on her, let her go, if your debts were once discharged, I would help you to a widow my self worth ten of her.
Mass partner and now you remember me on it, there's Moister Muligrubs sister newly fallen a widow.
Cuds me, as pat as can be, there's a widow left for you, ten thousand in money, beside Plate, Jewels et caetera I warrant it a match, wee can do all in all with her, prithee dispatch weal carry thee to her presently.
My Uncle wi•l ne'er endure me, when he shall hear I set my hand to a release:
Hark, isle tell thee a Trick for that, I have spent five hun∣dred pound in suites in my time, I should be wise, thou it now a
prisoner, make a release, takte of my word, whatsoever a man makes as long as he is in durance, tic nothing in law, not thus much.
Say you so sir?
I have paid for it I know it.
Proceed then, I consent.
Why well said:
How now my Masters, what have you done with him?
With much a doe sir, we have got him to consent.
Ah—a—a,— and what came his debts to now?
Some eight score od pounds sir.
Nau, nau, nau, nau, naw, tell me the second time, give me a lighter sum, they are but desperate debts you know, near called in but upon such an accident, a poor needy knave hee would starve and rot in prison, come, come, you shall have ten shillings in the pound and the sum down roundly—
You must make it a mark sir,—
Go too then, tell your money in the mean time, you shall find little less there,—come Moister Wit-good you are so vnwil∣ling to do your self good now, welcome honest Scrivener, now you shall hear the release read,—
Be it known, to al men by these presents, that I Theodorus Wit-good, Gentleman, sole Nephew to Pecunious Lucre, having unjustly made title and claim, to one Iane Meddler, late widow of Anthory Meddler, and now wife to Walkadine Hoard, in con∣sideration of a competent some of money to discharge my debts, do for ever hereafter disclaim any title, right, estate, or interest in or to the said widow late in the occupation of the said An∣thony Meddler, and now in the occupation of Walkadine Hoard, as also neither to lay claim, by virtue of any former contract, grant, promise or demise, to any of her Manor, Mannorhouses, Parks, Groves, Meadow-grounds, arable lands, Barnes, stacks, Stables, Doue-holes, and Cunny-borrowes, together with al her cattle, money, plate, jewels, borders, chains, bracelets, furni∣tures, hangings, movables, or immouerables in witness where∣of I the said Theodorus Wit-good, have interchangeably set to my hand and seal before these presents, the day, &amp; date aboue written.
What a precious fortune hast thou slipped here like a beast as thou art?
Come, unwilling heart come.
well Moister Hoard, give me the pen, I see
Tic vain to quarrel with our destiny.
Oh as vain a thing as can bee, you cannot commit a greater absurdity sir,—so, so, give me that hand now, before al these presents I am friends for ever with thee.
Troth, and it were pit•y of my heart now, if I should bear you any grudge in faith.
Content, isle send for thy Uncle against the wedding dinner, we will be friends once again.
I hope to bring it to pass my self sir?
How now? first right my masters?
Tic something wanting sir, yet it shall be sufficient.
Why well said, a good conscience makes a fine show now a days, come my Masters you shall all—taste of my wine ere you depart.
We follow you sir?
Isle try these fellows now, —a word sir, what will you carry me to that widow now?
Why do you think we were in earnest in faith? carry you to a rich widow, wee should get much credit by that; a noted Rioter a contemptible prodigal, it was a Trick we have amongst vs, to get in our money, fare you well sir.
Farewell and be hanged, you short-pig-hayrde Ram-head∣ed raskalls, he that believes in you, shall ne'er be saved I warrant him, by this new league, I shall have some access unto my love —
Moister Wit-good?
My life.
Meet me presently, that note directs you, I would not be suspected our happiness attends vs, farewell?
A words enough.
Let the Usurer cram him, in interest that excel,
There's pits enough to dam him, before he comes to hell.
In Holborn, some: in Fleete-street some,
ƲƲhere ere he come, there's some there's some.
Trahe, traheto, draw the Curtain, give me a sip of Sack more.
Look you, did not I tell you he lay like the devil in chains, when he was bound for a thousand year.
But I think the devil had no steel Bedstaffes, he goes beyond him for that.
Nay doe but mark the conceit of his drincking, one must wipe his mouth for him with a muckinder, do you see sir.
Is this the sick trampler, why he is only bed-red with drincking.
True sir, he spies vs.
What? sir Tristram? you come and see a weak man here, a very weak man,—
If you be weak in body, you should be strong in prayer sir.
Oh, I have prayed too much poor man.
There's a taste of his soul for you.
Fah, loathsome?
I come to borrow a hundred pound of you sir.
Alas you come at an ill time, I cannot spare it in faith,
I ha but two thousand ith house.
Ha, ha, ha.
Out you gernatiue queen, the mullipood of villainy, the Spinner of concupiscency.
Ye gentlemen are you here before vs? how is hee now?
Faith the same man still, the Tavern bitch has bit him ith head.
Wee shall have the better sport with him, peace, and how cheers Moister Dampit now?
Oh, my bosom sir Lancelot, how cheer I? thy pre∣sense is restorative:
But I hear a great complaint of you Moister Dampit, among gallants.
I am glad of that in faith; —prithee what?
They say you are waxed proud alate, and if a friend visit you in the afternoon, you'll scarce know him.
Fie, fie, proud? I cannot remember any such thing, sure I was drunk then.
Think you so sir?
There it was in faith, nothing but the pride of the Sack and so certify i'm, fetch Sack sirrah.
A vengeance Sack you once.
Why Moister Dampit if you hold on as you begin, and lie a little longer, you need not take care how to dispose your wealth, you'll make the Vintner your heir.
Out you babliaminy, you vnfetherd cremitoryed queen, you cullisance of scabiofity.
Good words Moister Dampit, to speak before a maid and a virgin.
Hang thy virginity, upon the pole of carnality.
Sweet terms, my Mistress shall know i'm.
Note but the misery of this vsuring slave, here hee lies like a noisome dunghill, full of the poison of his druncken blasphemies, and they to whom he bequeaths all, grudge him the very meat that feeds him, the very pillow that eases him, here may a usurer behold his end, what profits it to be a slave in this world, and a devil ith next.
Sir Lancelot? let me bus thee sir Lancelot, thou art the only friend that I honour and respect.
I thank you for that Moister Dampit.
Farewell my bosom sir Lancelot.
Gentlemen, and you love me, let me step behind you, and one of you fall a talking of me to him.
Content—Moister Dampit.
So sir.
Here came sir Lancelot to see you even now.
Hang him rascal.
Who sir Lancelot.
Pythagoricall rascal.
Pythagoricall?
I he changes his cloak when he meets a Sergeant.
What a rogues this?
I wonder you can rail at him sir, he comes in love to see you.
A louse for his love, his father was a Combe-maker, I have no need of his crawling love, hee comes to have longer day, the superlative rascal:
Sfoote I can no longer endure the rogue, Moister Dampit, I come to take my leave once again sir?
Who? my dear and kind Sir Lancelot? the only Gen∣tleman of England, let me hug thee, farewell and a thousand.
Composde of wrongs and slavish flatteries.
Nay Gentlemen, he shall show you more Tricks yet, isle give you another taste of him:
I'st possible?
His memory is upon departing.
Another cup of Sack.
Mass then twill be quite gon: before he drink that, tell him theres a country client come up, and here attends for his Learned advice,
Enough.
One Cup more, and then let the Bell toale, I hope I shall be weak enough by that time.
Moister Dampit.
Is the Sack spouting.
Tic coming forward sir,—here is a countryman a cli∣ent of yours, waits for your deep and profound advice sir.
A cockscombry? where is he? let him approach, set me up a pig higher.
You must draw ne'er sir.
Now good-man fooleaminy, what say you to me now
Please your good worship, I am a poor man sir.—
What make you in my Chamber then?
I would entreat your worships device in a just and honest cause sir.—
I meddle with no such matters, I refer i'm, to Moister No-mans Office.
I had but one house left me in all the world sir which was my fathers, my Grand-fathers, my great Grandfathers, and now a Villain has unjustly wrung me out, and took possess∣on out.
Has he such feats? thy best course is to bring thy eyes∣tione firm, and in Seven year thou may shove him out by the Law.
Alas, ant please your worship, I have small friends and less money.
Hoyda, this gear will fadge well, hast no money, why then my advice is thou must set fire ath house &amp; so get him out.
That will break strife indeed,
I thank your worship for your hot Counsel sir.— altering but my voice alitlle, you see he knew me not, you may observe by this that a drunkards memory, holds longer in the voice then in the person, but Gentlemen shall I show you a sight, behold the little diue-dapper of Damnation, Gulf the usurer, for his time worse then tother.
What's he comes with him?
Why Hoard, that married lately the widow meddler.
Oh, I cry you mercy sir.
Now gentlemen visitants? how dos moister Dampit?
faith here hee lies even drawing—in sir, good canary as fast as hee can sir, a very weak creature truly, hee is almost past memory.
Fie Moister Dampit: you lie lazing a bed here, and I come to enuite you to my wedding dinner, up, up, up.
Whose this moister Hoard! who hast thou married in the name of foolery.
A rich widow.
A Duch widow.
A rich widow,—one widow meddler.
Meddler she keeps open house.
She did I can tell you in her tother husbands days, open house for all comers, horse and man was welcome, and Room enough for em all.
Theres to much for thee then, thou may let out some to thy Neighbours.
What? hung a live in chains O Spectacle, bed staffs of steel, O monstrum, horrendum, Inform, Engines cui Lumen ademptum, O Dampit, Dampit, here is a Just judgment, shown upon usury, extortion, and trampling Villainy.
This exlent, thief rails upon the Thief.
Is this the end of cut throat Usury, Brothel, and blasphemy? now moist thou see what Race a Vsu∣rer runs.
Why thou Rogue of universality, do not I know thee? thy Sound is like the cuckoo, the welch Ambassador, thou cowardly slave that offers to fight with a sick man when his weapons down: rail upon me in my naked bed? why thou great Lucifers little vicar, I am not so weak but I know a knave at first sight, thou Inconscionable Rascal, thou that goosed upon middlesex Juries, and will make hast to give up thy verdict, be∣cause thou wilt not loose thy dinner, are you answered?
Ant it were not for shame.—
Thou would be hanged then.
Nay you must exercise patience Moister Gulf, always in a sick-mans Chamber.
'Heele quarrel with none I warrant you, but those that are bedred.
Let him come Gentlemen, I am armed, reach my close stool hither.
Here will be a sweet fray anon, Isle leave you gentlemen.
Nay wel'e a long with you, Moister Gulf.
Hang him vsuring rascal.
Push, set your Strenght to his, your wit to his.
Pray Gentlemen depart, his hours come upon him, sleep in my bosom, sleep.
Nay we have enough of him in faith, keep him for the house.—Now▪ make your best.
For thrice his wealth, I would not have his breast.
A little thing would make me beat him, now he's asleep.
Mass then twilbe a pitiful day when he wakes.
I would be loath to see that day, come.
You ouer-rule me gentlemen in faith.
Nay uncle, let me prevail with you so much,
In faith go, now he has invited you,
I shall have great joy there, when he has borne away the widow.
Why la, I thought where I should find you presently;
Uncle, a my troth, tic nothing so.
Whats nothing so sir, is not he married to the widow.
No by my troth is he not Uncle.
How?
Will you have the truth out, he is married to a whore in faith.
I should laugh at that.
Uncle, let me perish in your favour if you find it not so and that tic I that have married the honest woman.
Ha? Id walk ten mile a foot to see that in faith.
And see it you shall, or Isle ne'er see you again.
A Queen in faith? ha, ha, ha.
Pup, pup, pup, pup, I like not this wine, is there never a better Tiers in the house.
Yes sir, there are as good Tiers in the house, as any are in England.
Desire your mistress you knave, to taste i'm all over, she• has better Skill.
Has she so, the better for her▪ and the worse for you.
Arthur, is the cupbard of plate set out,
Al's inorder sir.
I am in love with my Liveries every time I think on i'm, they make a gallant show by my troth.—Niece.
Do you call sir?
Prithee show a little diligence, and ouer-looke the knaves a little, theile filtch and steal to day and send whole pas∣ties home to their wives, and thou be a good Niece, do not see me purloynd.
Fear it not sir, I have cause, tho the feast bee prepared for you, yet it serves fit for my wedding dinner too.
Moister Lamprey, and Moister Spichcocke two the most welcome gentlemen alive, your fathers and mine were all free a•h Fishmongers.
They were indeed sir, you see bold guests sir, soon entreated
And thats best sir—how now sirrah?
Ther's a coach come to'th door sir.
My Lady Foxestone a my life. Mistress Iane Hoard, wife, mass tic her Ladyship indeed, Madame you are welcome to an vnfurnisht house, dearth of cheer, scarcsity of attendance.
You are pleased to make the worst sir.
Wife.
Is this your Bride.
Yes Madam salute my Lady Foxtone.
Please you Madam a while to taste the ayre in the garden?
Twill please vs well.
Who would not wed the most delicious life,
No Joys are like the comforts of a wife.
So we bachelors think that are not troubled with them
Your worships brother with an other ancient Gentle∣man, are newly alighted Sir.
Moister Onesiphorus Hoard, why now our company be∣gins to come in: my dear and kind brother welcome in faith.
You see we are men at an hour brother.
I, Isle say that for you brother you keep as good an hour to come to a feast, as any Gentleman in the Sheer▪ what old Moister Limber and Moister Kicks, doe wee meet in faith Jolly Gentlemen?
We hope you lack guess sir?
Oh welcome, welcome, wee lack still such guess as your worships.
Ah sirrah brother, have you caught up widow Meddler.
From i'm all brother, and I may tell you, I had mighty enemies, those that stuck sore, old Lucre is a sore fox I can tell you brother.
Where is she, isle go seek her out, I long to have a smack at her lips.
And most wishfully brother see where she comes, give her a smirk now we may hear it all the house over.
Oh heaven, I am betrayed, I know that face.
Ha, ha, ha, why how now? are you both a shamde? come Gentlemen, weal look another way—
Nay Brother, hark you, come you're disposed to be mer∣rye?
Why do we meet else man?
That's another matter, I was ne'er so fread in my life but that you had been in earnest.
How mean you brother?
You said she was your wife?
Did I so? by my troth and so she is.
By your troth Brother?
What reason have I to dissemble with my friends, bro∣there, if marriage can make her mine, she is mine? why?
Troth I am not well of a sudden? I must crave pardon brother, I came to see you, but I cannot stay dinner in faith.
I hope you will not serve me so brother.
By your leave Moister Hoard.
What now? what now? pray Gentlemen, you were wont to show your selves wisemen.
But you have shown your folly too much here.
How?
Fie, fie, a man of your repute and name,
You'll feast your friends but cloy i'm first with shame.
This grows too deep pray let vs reach the sense.
In your old age dote on a Courtesan—
Ha?
Marry a Srumpet?
Gentlemen!
And Wit-goods queen:
Oh, nor Lands, nor living?
Living?
Speak?
Alas you know at first sir,
I told you I had nothing:
Out, out, I am cheated, infinitely cozened.
Nay Master Hoard:
A dutch widow, a dutch widow, a dutch widow:
Why Nephew shall I trace thee still a lier? wilt make me mad is not yon thing the widow.
Why la, you are so hard a belief Uncle, by my troth she's a whore.
Then you're a knave:
Negatur Argumentum Uncle.
Probo tibi, Nephew: Hee that knows a woman to bee a queen must needs bee a knave, thou say thou know her to bee one, ergo if she bee a queen you're a knave:
Negatur, sequel maioris, Uncle, hee that knows a wo∣man to be a queen, must needs be a knave, I deny that.
Lucre, and Wit-good, you're both villains, get you out of my house:
Why did not inuit me to thy wedding dinner?
And are not you and I sworn perpetual friends before witness sir, and were both drunk upon it.
Daintily abused you've put a Iunt upon me:
Ha, ha, ha:
A common strumpet?
Nay now you wrong her sir▪ if I were she id have the law on you for that, I durst depose for her, she ne'er had com∣mon use, nor common thought.
Despise me, publish me I am your wife,
What shame can I have now but you'll have part,
If in disgrace you share, I sought not you:
You pursued me, nay force me,
Had I friends would follow it,
Less then your action has been proved a rape.
Brother?
Nor did I ever boast of lands unto you,
Money or goods: I took a plainer course:
And told you true id nothing,
If error were committed it was by you.
thank your own folly, nor has my sin been so odious but worse has bin for given, nor am I so deformd but I may challing the utmost power of any old mans love, she that tastes not sin before, twenty to one but sheele taste it after: most of you old men are content to mary young Virgins and take that which follows, where marrying one of vs, you both save a sinner, and are quit from a cuckold for ever,
"And more in brief let this your best thoughts win,
"She that knows sin, knows best how to hate sin.
Cursed be all Malice, black are the fruits of spite,
And poison first their owners: O my friends,
I must embrace shame, to be rid of shame,
Concealed disgrace prevents a public name.
Ah Wit-good ah Theodorus,
Alas sir, I was prick tin conscience to see her well bestowed▪ and where could I bestow her better then upon your pitiful worship: excepting but my self, I dare swear shees a Virgin, and now by marrying your Niece I have banished my self for ever from her, she's mine Aunt now by my faith, and theres no Meddling with mine Aunt you know, a sin against my Nuncle.
Lo, Gentlemen, before you all.
In true reclaimed form I fall,
Hence-forth for ever I defy,
The Glances of a sinful eye,
Waving of Fans, which some suppose,
Tricks of Fancy, Treading of Toes,
Wringing of Fingers, biting the Lip,
The wanton gate the alluring Trip,
All secret friends and private meetings,
Close borne letters, and Bawds greetings,
Feigning excuse to weomens Labours,
When we are sent for to'th next Neighbours,
Taking false Physic, and ne'er start,
To be let blood, tho sign be at heart,
Removing chambers, shifting beds,
To welcome Friends in husbands steads,
Them to enjoy, and you to marry,
They first served, while you must tarry,
They to spend and you to gather,
They to get and you to father,
These and thousand thousand more,
New reclaimed I now abhor.
A, here is a lesson Rioter for you.
I must confess my follies, Isle down to
And Here for ever I disclaim,
The cause of youths undoing. Game:
Chiefly dice, those true outlanders,
That shake out Beggars, Thieves and Panders,
Soul wasting Surfeits, sinful Riots,
Queens Evils, Doctors diets.
Apothecaries Drugs, Surgeons Glisters,
Stabbing of arms for a common Mistress,
Rebind favours▪ Ribald Speeches,
Dear perfumde Jackets, penniless breeches,
Dutch Flapdragons, healths in Urine,
Drabs that keep a man to sure in:
I do defy you all.
Lend me each honest hand, for here I rise,
A reclaymde man loathing the general vice.
So, so, all friends, the wedding dinner cools,
Who seem most crafty prove oft times most fools.

BEcause our present conceit,
reaches unto the antiquity
of Britain, which (in many
•ends) hath carried as ma∣ny
and variable opinions: I
thought it not unnecessary,
(being thereto earnestly so∣licited)
to speak somewhat
concerning the estate of this our Country, even
from the very first original, until her honourable
attaining the name of Britannia, and then lastly
how she became to be called England. Most Wri∣ters
do agree, that after the Deluge, Noah was the
sole Monarch of all the World, and that hee deui∣ded
the dominion of the whole earth to his three
sons: all Europe with the Isles thereto belonging
(wherein this our Isle of Britain was one among
the rest) fell to the lot and possession of Iaphet his
third son. Samothes the sixth son of Iaphet, cal∣led
by Moses Mesech, by others Dys, had for his pore¦tion
the whole country lying between the Ryner of
Rhine and the Pyrenian mountains, where he foun∣ded
his kingdom of Celtica over his people cal¦led
Celtae, which name, by the opinion of Bale our
Country man, was indifferent to them of Galley,
and vs of this Isle of Britain. This Samothes being
the first King over these people, of him came line∣ally
these kings following: Magus, Sarron, Bruise
and Bardus, all ruling severally over the Celts and
Britons, who were not then so called, but Samothe∣ans,
after the name of Samothes. Of Bardus, who,
according to Berosus, was very famous for inuen∣ting
of Music and Duties, came an order of phi∣losophicall Poets or Heralds, called Bardi, after his
own name, whose excellent qualities were of such
power, as they could enforce armies of Enemies
ready to fight fierce battle, to stand at a gaze, and
forbear their cruel intent, until these Bardes left
singing, and went out of the battle: According to
Lucane. lib. 1.
Vos quoque quifortes enemas belloque peremptas,
Laudius in longum vates dimittitis aeuum,
Plurima secure fudistis carmine Bardi.
Many of these Bards lined among the Britons, be∣fore
the birth of Christ, as Planed•us and Oronius.
Since then, Thalestine, the two Marlins, Melkin,
Elaskirion and others. Among the Welshman now
of late days, Dauid Die, Iollo Gough, Dauid ap-Wil∣liams,
and divers others remaining yet amongst
them, and called in their own language Births.
Thus continued the name of Samothes the space
of 310. years, ti'l Neptune put his son Albion the
Giant in possession of this land, who subduing the
Samotheans, called this Island Albion after his own
name. Concerning the coming hither of Da∣nous
50. daughters, and that one of them should
be called Albino, and so the land to bee named by
her: First, not any one of them was so named, nei∣there
do I think the story so authentical, but doe
hold Albions name for the truest.
The Country thus peopled with Giantes, and
continuing after the name of Albion for 600. years:
Brute, (being directed by a vision in his sleep, to
find out a country situated in the West) with the
remains of his Trojan folowers, arrived and Lan∣ded
at the haven now called Totnes, the year of the
world, 2850. after the destruction of Troy, 66. be∣fore
the building of Rome 368. and 1116. before
Christs nativity. He, searching the land over from
side to side, found it to be very fertile, and inhabited
by uncivil, monstrous huge men of stature, tear∣med
Grants, whom he with his bold and resolved
companions slew and destroyed. One of them na∣med
Goemagot or Gogmagog, exceeding the rest in
strength and courage, Brute caused Corineus, one
of his confederates, to wrestle with the said Go∣magot
at a place beside Dover, where the Grant
happened to break a tib in the side of Corineus, which
so sharply incensed him, that redoubling his power
to win the victory, he threw him headlong down
from off one of the Rocks, which place was after
called Gogmagogs leap The Giant being thus dis∣patched,
in reward of this honourable piece of ser∣vice,
Brute gave unto Corineus a part of his land,
which according to his name, was, and yet is unto
this day, caled Cornwall.
Brute thus having the whole Land in his own
quiet possession, began to build a city, near to the
side of the River Thamesis, in the second year of
his reign, which he named Troynouant, or as Hum∣frey
Lhoyd saith, Troinewith; which is, new Troy:
in remembrance of that famous city Troy, whence
hee and his people (for the greater part) were des∣cended.
Now began he to aiter the name of the
Island, and according to his own name, called it
Britain, and caused all the inhabitants to bee na∣med
Britons, for a perpetual memory, that he was
the first bringer of them into this land. In this time
he had by his wife fair Innogen, daughter to King
Pandrasus king of the Greeks, three worthy sons,
the first named Locrine, the second Camber, and the
third Albanact, to which three (not long before his
death) he divided his whole kingdom in several
partitions, giving to Locrine all that part which we
know best by the name of England, then termed
by him Loegria or Logres. To Camber he limited
the Country of Wales, called Cambria after his
name, and demded from Loegria by the river of Sa∣uerne.
To Albanact his third son, he appointed
al the North part of the Isle, lying beyond the Ri∣for
of Humber, then called Albany, now Scotland;
and to that River then Albany did reach. But since
that time, the limits of Loegria were enlarged, first
by the prowess of the Romans, then by our own
conquests, that the Tvvede on the one side, and
the Solve on the other, were taken for the principal
bounds between vs and Scotland.
After Brute, I find not any other alteration of
our Countries name, until the reign of King Ec∣bert,
who about the year of Grace 800. and the
first of his reign, gave forth an especial Edict,
dated at Winchester: that it should be named An∣gles
Land, or Angellandt, for which (in our time)
we do pronounce it England. Nor can Hengyst the
Saxon be the Father of this latter name, for Ecbert,
because his ancestors descended from the Angles,
one of the six Nations that came with the Saxons
into Britain, (for they were not all of one, but of
divers Countries, viz: Angles, Saxons, Germains,
Switzers, Norvvegians, Iutes, otherwise termed
Iutons, Vites, Gothes, or Getes and Vandales, and all
comprehended under the name of Saxons, base〈…〉
of Hengist the Saxon and his company, that first
arrived here before any of the other) and thereto
having now the Monarchy and pre-eminence, in
manner of this whole Island, called the same after
the name of the country, from whence he derived
his original. So that neither Hengist, nor any
Qu. named Angla, or derivation ab Angulo, is to
be allowed before this sound and sure authority.
Thus much briefly concerning the names of our
Country, now come wee to discourse the whole
frame and body of our devise, in this solemn tri∣umph
of re-vnited Britannia.
All hail fair London, to behold thy Towers,
After our voyage long and dangerous:
Is Seamens comfort, thanks unto those powers.
That in all perils have preserved vs.
Our Royal Exchange hath made a rich return,
Laden with Spices, Silks, and Indico,
Our wines that for our absence long did morn,
Now find release from all their former woe.
Moister good news, our Owner, as I hear,
Is this day sworn in Londons Maioralty:
Moister tic true, for, see what troupes appear,
Of Citizens, to bear him company.
Hark how the Drums and Trumpets cheerely sound,
To solemnise the triumph of this day,
Shall we do nothing, but be idle found,
On such a general mirthful Holiday?
Take of our Pepper, of our Cloves and Mace,
And liberally bestow them round about,
Tic our ships luggage, and in such a case,
I know our Owner means to bear vs out.
Then, in his honour: And that company,
Whose love and bounty this day doth declare,
Hurl Boy, hurl Mate. And Gunner, see you ply
Your Ordinance, and of fireworks make no spare,
To add the very uttermost we may,
To make this up a cheerful Holi-day.
ON the Lyon and Camel, we doe figuratively
personate Neptune and his Queen Amphi∣trita,
who first seated their son Albion in
this land. And in them we figure Poetically, that
as they then triumphed in their sons happy for∣tune,
so now they cannot choose but do the like, see∣ing
what happy success hath thereon ensued, to re∣noun
this Country from time to time. And as
times have altered former harsh inciuilities, brine∣ging
the state to more perfect shape of Majesty,
so (as occasion serves) do they likewise lay their
borrowed forms aside, and speak according to the
nature of the present business in hand, without any
imputation of grossness or error, considering the
laws of Poesy grants such allowance and liberty.
Corineus and Goemagot, appearing in the shape and
proportion of huge Giants, for the more grace &amp;
beauty of the show, we place as guides to Britani∣aes
mount, and being fetterd unto it in chains of
gold, they s•eme (as it were) to draw the whole
frame, showing much envy and contention, who
shall exceed most in duty and service.
ON a Mount triangular, as the Island of Bri∣tayne
it self is described to bee, we seat in
the Supreme place, under the shape
of a fair and beautiful Nymph, Britania his self
accosted with Brutes divided kingdoms, in the like
female representations, Loegria, Cambria, and Al∣bania.
Brytania speaking to Brute her Conqueror,
(who is seated somewhat lower, in the habit of an
adventurous warlike Trojan) tells him, that she had
still continued her name of Albion, but for his con∣quest
of her virgin honour, which since it was by
heaven so appointed, she reckons it to be the very
best of her fortunes. Brute shows her, what height
of happiness she hath attained unto by his victo∣rye,
being before a vast Wilderness, inhabited by
Giantes, and a mere den of Monsters: Goemagot
and his barbarous brood, being quite subdued, his
civil followers, first taught her modest manners,
and the means how to reign as an Imperial lady,
building his Troya nova by the river Thamesis, and
beautifieng his land with other Cities beside. But
then the three Virgin kingdoms seem to reprove
him, for his overmuch fond love to his sons, and
dividing her (who was one sole Monarchy) into
three several estates, the hurt and inconvenience
whereon ensuing, each one of them modestly de∣liuered
unto him. He stays their further progress
in reproof, by his and their now present revived
condition, being raised again by the powerful
virtue of Poesy (after such length of time) to be∣hold
Britaniaes former Felicity again, and that
the same Albany, where Humber slew his son Al∣banact,
had bred a second Brute, by the blessed ma∣riage
of Margaret, eldest daughter to king Henrie
the seventh, to Iames the fourth king of Scotland,
of whom our second Brute (Royal king Iames) is
truly and rightfully descended: by whose happy
coming to the Crown, England, Wales, &amp; Scot∣land,
by the first Brute severed and divided, is in our
second Brute re-united, and made one happy Bri∣tania
again: Peace and quietness bringing that to
pass, which war nor any other means could at∣taine
unto. For joy of which sacred Union and com¦bination,
L•crine, Camber, and Albanact, figured
there also in their antique estates, deliver up their
Crowns and Scepters, applauding the day of this
long-wisht conjunction, and Troya-noua (now Lone∣don)
incites fair Thamesis, and the rivers that boun∣ded
the severed kingdoms, (personated in fair and
beautiful Nymphs) to sing Paeans and songs of try∣umph,
in honour of our second Brute, Royal King
Iames. Thamesis, as Queen of all Britains rivers,
begins the triumphal course of solemn rejoicing.
Next her, Sauerne, that took her name of Sabrina,
begotten by Locrine on fair Elstrid, and both mo∣there
and daughter were drowned in that river, by
Guendolenaes command, the wife to Locrine, doth
the like. Lastly, Humber, whose name was derived
from Humber king of the Scythians, who being pur¦sued
by Locrine and Camber, in revenge of their
Brothers death, was enforced to leap into that Rye∣for,
and there drowned himself, of whom I find
these verses written.
Dum fugit obstat ei flumen submergitur illic,
Deque suo tribuit nominee aqua.
What further may be required, to express Brita∣niaes
triumph more perfectly to the life, with al the
other personages her servants and attendants, is
more at large let down in the several speeches,
which I have hereto annexed as most meet &amp; con∣uenient.
I that sometime was termed Albion,
After the name of Neptunes valiant Son:
Albion the Giant, and so had still held on,
But that my conquest, first by thee begun,
Hath in fems Chronicle such honour won,
That thy first setting from Albany,
Crowned me thy virgin Queen Britania.
Wherein, recount thy height of happiness,
Thou that before my honoured victory,
Were as a base and oregrowne wilderness,
Peopled With men of incivility,
Huge and stern Giants, keeping company
With savage monsters, thus was Albion then,
Till I first furnished thee with civil men.
Goentagot, and all his barbarous brood,
(When he was foiled by Corineus hand,)
Were quite subdued, and not one withstood
My quiet prograce over all thy land,
But, as sole Conqueror, I did command:
And then from Albion did I change thy name,
To Brutes Britania, still to hold the same.
Then built I my New Troy, in memory
Of whence I came, by Thanesis fair side,
And nature giving me posterity,
Three worthy sons, not long before I died,
My kingdom to them three I did divide.
And as in three parts I had set it down,
Each named his seat, and each did wear a Crown.
But she whom thou had made one Monarchy
To be so severed, to thy sons might show
Some sign of love, to her small curtsy,
When three possess what one did sole owe,
It makes more ways to harm then many know.
And so proved that division of the land,
It brought in wary that hellish fierbrand.
The king of Hunnes entered Albany,
Slew Albanact thy Son, and there bare sway,
Till Locrine rose with valiant Cambria,
And to reuendge their Brothers death made way,
Which instantly they did without delay,
And made that River bear the proud kings name,
That thus intruded, drowned him in the same.
Fair Elstrid taken in that fatal fight,
And Locrines love to her, wrong to his wife,
Duke Corineus daughter, dear delight,
That •left both her and Locrine of his life,
Opened a gap to much more dismal strife,
Of all which heavy haps there had bin none,
Had Brute left me one governor alone.
See, after so long slumbering in our tombs
Such multitudes of years, rich poesy
That does revive vs to fill up these rooms
And tell our former ages History,
(The better to record Brutes memory,)
Turns now our accents to another key,
To tell old Britains new borne happy day.
That separation of her sinewed strength,
Weeping so many hundred years of woes
Whereto that learned Bard dated long length
Before those vlcerd wounds again could close,
And reach unto their former first dispose.
Hath run his course thorough times •andie glass,
And brought the former happiness that was.
Albany, Scotland, where my son was slain
And where my follies wretchedness began,
Hath bred another Brute, that gives again
to Britain her first name, he is the man
On whose fair birth our elder wits did scan,
Which Prophet-like seventh Henry did foresee,
Of whose fair child comes Britains unity.
And what fierce war by no means could effect,
To re-vnite those sundried lands in one,
The hand of heaven did peacefully elect
By mildest grace, to seat on Britains throne
This second Brute, then whom there else was none.
Wales, England, Scotland, severed first by me:
To knit again in blessed unity.
For this Britannia tides in triumph thus,
For this these Sister-kingdomes now shake hands,
Brutes Troy, (now London) looks most amorous
And stands on tiptoe, telling foreign lands,
So long as Seas bear ships, or shores have sands:
So long shall we in true devotion pray,
And praise high heaven for that most happy day.
England, that first was called Loegria,
After my name, when I commanded here:
Gives back his due unto Britannia,
And doth her true borne son in right prefer,
Before divided rule, irregular.
Wishing my brethren in like sort resign,
A sacred union once more to combine.
I yielded long ago, and did in heart,
Allow Britanniaes first created name,
My true borne Brutes have ever took her part
And to their last hour will maintain the same.
It is no marvel though you gladly yield,
When the all-ruling power doth so command,
I bring that Monarch now into the field,
With peace and plenty in his sacred hand,
To make Britannia one united land:
And when I brought him, after times will say
It was Britanniaes happy Holi-day.
Then you fair Swans in Thamesis that swim,
And you c〈…〉o•se N•mphes that do delight to play
On Humber and 〈…〉e Save•no, welcome him
In Canz〈…〉 〈…〉gges and many a Roun-delay
that from the North brought you this blessed day.
And in one tuneful, harmony lets sing,
Welcome King Iames, welcome bright Britains King.
I that am Queen of all Britanniaes streams,
The Oceans darling and entered delight,
that want on daily with the Suns guilt beams
and ore my bosom suffer day and night,
Fair flotes of ships to sail in goodly sight:
Unto my second Brute shall homely sing,
Welcome King Iames, welcome great Britains King.
Fair Elstrids and Sabrinaes fatal grave,
(Whereby the name of Sauerne fell to me:)
When Locrines Quendoline in anger gave,
My womb to be their dismal tragedy,
Whereof my Nymphs (as yet) talk mournfully,
Unto my second Brute do likewise sing,
Welcome King Iames, welcome great Britains King.
Proud Scithians Humber that slew Albanact,
Whose brethren forest him to a shameful flight,
When in my watery arms his lite I wrecked,
I took his name, and kept it as my right,
For which my Nymphs still dancing in delight,
With me these Peans and sweet Canzoni sing,
Welcome King Iames, our second Brute and king.
FAME that attends on Britains Monarchy,
Thus revnited to one state again,
Ushers this Chariot of true dignity,
Wherein seven kings that did in England reign,
These Royal virtues in their shields contain,
Expressing what great grace each Majesty,
Gave to the Marchant-Taylors Company
When they were first a Guilde, and bare the stile
Of Tayiors, and of Armourers beside
Of the Linen armoury: for no little while
Were they so known, and daily did provide,
Those coats of arms that quaild our soe-mens pride
When Englands bent-Bow, and the gray-goos wing
Our many victories abroad did sing.
From this employment for the States defence,
Their ancient title first unto them came,
and then their following care and diligence,
Squarde them the way to order well and frame,
all means to keep their Guilde in honest fame.
Now gracious virtues unto you I leave,
What further fortunes Time did them bequeath.
EDward the third, whose Noble name I bear,
Hearing the Love and royal amity,
That good report gave of them every where,
Preserving peace and kind socitie,
In his first year unto this Company,
He gave this Charter to confirm their Guilde:
And they 〈…〉oyd it, as his Highness wilde.
To build this body on a stronger frame,
Richard the second gave authority,
A Master and four keepers they should name,
and full elect to sway their mystery,
Granting them power to have a Livery,
and hold a Feast on saint Iohn Baptist day,
Yearly for ever, as they do and may.
To fortify a work so well begun,
Henrie the fourth did liberally create:
(Beside the former fouours to them done,)
Their Guilde a Brother-hood incorporate,
And thought it no disgrace to his high state,
To wear the Clothing of the Company,
A most Maiestike royal curtsy.
Henry the fifth my war-like Lord maintained
His fathers love to this society,
Of my sixth Henry they as freely gained,
all former grants in self-same quality,
He wore their clothing, mild and graciously:
For Princes loose no part of dignity,
In being affable, it adds to Majesty.
Thus long a Master and four keepers stood.
Till my fourth Edward changed the keepers name
To Wardens: for the strength of Brother-hood,
And thus at first Master and Wardens came.
And for they traded, as no men did more,
With foreign Realms, by clothes and Merchandise,
Returning hither other Countries store,
Of what might best be our commodities,
Henry the seventh a gracious king, and wise,
To Merchant-Taylors did exchange their name:
Since when, with credit they have kept the same.
But sacred Lady, deign me so much grace,
As tell me, why that seat is vnsupplied▪
Being the most eminent and chiefest place,
With State, with Crown and Sceptre dignified?
Have our discourses (Pheme) let thee know,
That seven Kings have borne free brethrens name,
Of this Society, and may not time bestow
an eight, when Heaven shall so appoint the same?
I find recorded in my Register,
Seven Kings have honoured this Society:
Fourteen great Dukes did willingly prefer,
Their love and kindness to this Company,
Threescore eight Lords declared like amity,
terming themselves all brethren of this band,
The very worthiest Lords in all the Land.
Three Dukes, three Earls, four Lords of Noble name
all in one year did join in Brother-hood:
IN the year 1390. Edward Duke of York. Tho∣mas,
Duke of Gloucester. Henry Duke of Hereford
and Earl of Derby, who afterword was K. Henry
the fourth. Edvvard, Earl of Rutlande. Thomas
Earl of Warvvick. Iohn Holland, Earl of Hunting¦don. Iohn, Lord Ros•. Raf Lord Nevill. Thomas L.
Furniuall. Reignald, Lord Gray of Rithin.
I find beside great Lords from France there came
To hold like league, and do them any good:
Gaylard, Lord Danuers. Barard, Lord Delamote, Barard, Lord Montferrant, &amp;c.
Yet no imbasing to their height in blood:
For they accounted honour then most hie,
When it was held up by community.
Of Bishops, Knights and Deanes, to those before,
(Not spoke in vaunt▪ or any spirit of pride)
My Records could afford as many more▪
All Brethren, Marchant-Taylors signified
That lived in love with them, and when they did
Left me their names, to aftertimes to tell,
Thus then they did, and thought it good and well.
MY borrowed name of Neptune now I leave,
the like doth Amphitrita my fair Queen,
And worthy Lord, grant favour to receive
What in these mysteries we seem to mean,
Britanniaes glory hath been heard and seen,
Revived from her old Chaos of distress,
and now united in firm happiness.
Blessed be that second Brute Iames our dread king,
that set this wreath of Union on her head,
Whose very name did heavenly comfort bring,
When in despair our hopes lay drooping dead,
When comfort from most harts was gon and fled,
Immediately the trumpets tongue did say,
God save king Iames: Oh it was a happy day.
Our latest Phoenix whose dead cinders shine,
In Angels spheres, she, like a mother mild,
yielding to Nature, did her right resign
To times true heir, her God-son, and loved child,
When giddy expectation was beguiled:
And Scotland yielded out of Teudors race,
a true borne bud, to sit in Teudors place.
Which seat to him and his, heaven ever bless,
that we ne'er want a Rose of Teudors tree,
to maintain Britains future happiness,
to the worlds end in true tranquillity.
Sir Leonard Holiday, now unto thee,
My love in some mean measure let me show,
S•nce heaven hath called thee to this dignity,
Which (then my self) far better thou d〈…〉est know,
I make no doubt thou wilt thy time bestow,
A〈…〉s so great a Subjects place as this,
To govern justly, and amend each miss.
Bethink thee how on that high Holiday,
Which bears Gods Champion, th'Arch-angels name,
When conquering Satan in a glorious fray,
Michael Hels-monster nobly overcame,
And now a sacred Saboath being the same,
A free and full election on all parts,
Made choice of thee, both with their hands and harts.
Albeit this day is usual every year,
For new election of a Magistrate,
Yet, now to me some instance doth appear,
Worth note, which to my self I thus relate,
Holiday, called on Holiday to state,
Requiers methinks a year of Holidays,
To be disposed in good and virtuous ways.
For I account tic a Lords Holiday,
When Justice shines in perfect Majesty,
When as the poor can to the rich man say,
The Maiestrate hath given vs equity,
And lent no ear to partiality,
When sin is punished, lewdness bears no sway:
All that day long, each day is Holiday.
When good provision for the poor is made,
Sloth set to labour, vice curbed every where,
When through the City every honest trade,
Stands not of might or insolence in fear,
But Justice in their goodness does them bear:
then, as before, in safety I may say:
All that year long, each day is Holiday.
Now in behalf of that Society,
Whereof thou bear a loving brothers name,
What hath bin done this day to dignify,
they pray thee kindly to accept the same,
More circumstance I shall not need to frame:
But from the Marchant-Taylors this I say,
They wish all good to Leonard Holiday.

A subject, of no subject, we present, for No-body, is Nothing:
Who of nothing can something make?
•t is a work beyond the power of wit,
And yet invention is ripe:
A moral meaning you must then expect, grounded on lesser then a shadows shadow:
Promising nothing where there wants a tongue;
And deeds as few, be done by No-bodie:
Yet something, out of nothing, we will show,
To gain your loves, to whom our selves we owe.
MY Lord Martianus.
My Lord of Cornwall.
Morrow.
Morrow,
You are sad my Lord.
You melancholy.
So,
The state it self mourns in a robe of Wo.
For the decease of Archigalloes virtues,
I understand you Noble minded Cornwall,
What generous spirit draws this British ayre,
But droops at Archigalloes government.
And reason Martianus, when the Sun
Struggles to be delivered from the womb
Of an obscure Eclipse, doth not the earth
Morn to behold his shine enveloped,
O Corbonon when I did close thine eyes,
I gave release to Britains miseries.
Good morrow to Prince Elydure.
The same to you, and you, you are sad my Lords,
your harts I think are frosty, for your blood
Seems crvsted in your faces, like the dew
In a September morn, how fares the king,
Have you yet bid good morrow to his highness.
The kings not stirring yet.
Yonders old Cornwall, come Vïgenius,
Weal have some sport with him:
Brother content.
Good morrow to you brother Elydure.
God morrow to Cornwall.
Morrow old gray-beard.
My beards not so gray as your wits greene.
And why so.
We shall ha you come out now with some reason that was borne in my great grand sires time.
Would you would prove as honest princes as your great grandsire was, or half so wise as your elder brother was, theres a Couple of you, Sfoote I am ashamed you should be of the blood royal.
And why father winter.
You doe not know your state, theres Elydure
Your elder brother next unto the King,
He plies his book, when shall you see him trace
Lascivious Archigallo through the streets,
And fight with common hacksters hand to hand,
To wrest from them their goods and dignities.
You are to saucy Cornwall.
Bridle your spirit.
Your words are dangerous, good honest subject
Old reverent states-man, faithful servitor,
Doe not traduce the King, hes virtuous
Or say he tread somewhat besides the line
Of virtuous government, his regality
Brookes not taxation, kings greatest royalties
Are that their subjects must applaud their deeds,
As well as bear them their prerogatives.
Are mural interponents twixt the world,
And their proceedings.
Well, well, I have served four kings,
And none of all those four but would have ventured
Their safeties on old Cornwels constancy,
But thats all one, now I am called a dotard,
Go to, though now my limbs be stark and stiff,
When Cornwels dead Britain I know will want
So strong a prop, Alas I needs must weep,
And shed tears in abundance, when I think
How Archigallo wrongs his government.
Nay, now you'll fall into your techy humour.
My Lords, Princes I should have said, and after
Lords, I am the Usher and Harbinger unto the kings most
Excellent person and his Majesty.
Is fourth coming.
Or coming fourth, hard by or at hand, will you Put your gestures of attendance on, to give his Majesty the Bon-ioure.
Good morrow to our sovereign Archigallo.
Morrow.
Why do you frown upon your servants king,
We love you, and you ought to favour vs:
Will you to Counsel. Hears petitions,
Complaints and controversies twixt your subjects,
Appealing all to you.
Lets see those papers. A controversy betwixt the Lord Morgan and the Lord Malgo, concerning their Tie∣tles to the Southern Island. We know this cause and what their titles be. You claim it by inheritance.
My liege I do.
You by the marriage of Lord Morgans mother,
To whom it was left jointure.
True gracious Sovereign.
Whose evidence is strongest, to which part
Inclines the censures of our learned Judges.
We come not heer to plead before your grace,
But humbly to entreat your Majesty,
Peruse our evidence and censure it,
According to your wisdom.
What I determine then you'll yield unto.
We will my Sovereign.
Then that Southern Isle
we take to our protection, and make you
Lord governor thereof.
I humbly thank your highness.
I hope your Majesty.
Reply not, I but take it to my self
Because I would not have dissention
betwixt two peers, I love to see you friends,
And now the Islands mine, your quarrel ends.
Whats next. A poor Nothern mans humble petition.
Which is the plaintive?
I if it please your Majesty I was betrothed to this maid.
Is this true my Wench.
Tic very true and like your majesty, but this tempting fellow after that, most feloniously stole my hart away fro me, carried it into the church, and I running after him to get my hart again, was there married to this other man.
Tic very true and like your majesty, though Raphe were once look for a proper man, yet when I came in place it appeared otherwise: if your highness note his leg and mine, there is odds, and for a foot, I dare compare, I have a wast to, and though I say it, that should not say it there are faces in place of Gods making.
Thou art a proper fellow, and this wench is thine by lawful marriage.
Raf you have your answer, you may be gon, your only way to save charges, is to buy a halpenniwoorth of Hob-nailes for your shoes: Alas you might have looked into this before, go silly Raf go, away, vanish.
Is not this Lass a pretty Neat browne Wrench?
She is my liege, and mettell I dare warrant.
Fellow, how long hast thou been married?
I was as they say coupled the same day that my country man Raphe begun the law: for to tell your Majesty the truth, we are yet both virgins, it did never freeze betwixt vs two in a bed I as∣sure your grace.
Did never lie with thy wife?
Never yet, but now your Majesty hath ended the matter Isle be so bold as take possession.
Hark my wench, wilt leave these rustic fellows &amp; stay with me?
What will your highness doe with me?
Why Isle make thee a Lady.
And shall I go in fine clothes like a Lady.
Thou shalt.
Isle be a Lady then, thats flat, sweet heart farewell, I must be a Lady, so I must.
How now, how now, but hear you Si•.
Away you Clown, away.
But will your highness rob me of my spouse.
What we will, we will, away with those slaves.
Zounds, if ever I take you in Yorkshire for this.
Away you slaves.
My Lord, these general wrongs will draw your highness into the common hatred of your subjects.
Whats that to thee, old doting Lord forbear.
Whats here? complaints against one Nobody,
For overmuch relieving of the poor,
Helping distressed prisoners, entertaining
Extrauagants and vagabonds, what fellows this?
My liedge I know him, he's an honest subject
That hates extortion, usury, and such sins
As are too common in this Land of Britain.
Isle have none such as he within my kingdom,
Hee shall be banished.
Hear my advise my liedge: I know a fellow
Thats opposite to Nobody in all things:
As he affects the poor, this other hates them,
Loves usury and extortion. Send him straight
Into the Country, and upon my life,
Ere many months he will devise some means
To make that Nobody bankrupt, make him fly
His Country, and be never heard of more.
What dost thou call his name.
His name is Sombody my liedge.
Seek out that Sombody, wele send him straight,
What other matters stay to be decided
Determine you, and you, the rest may follow
To give attendance.
Alls nought already, yet these unripe ills
Have not their full growth, and their next degree
Must needs be worse then nought, and by what name
Doe you call that?
I know none bad enough:
Base, wild, notorious, ugly monstrous, slavish,
Intolerable, abhorred, damnable;
Tic worse then bad, Isle be no longer vassal
To such a tyrannous rule, nor accessory
To the base sufferance of such out-rages.
You'll not endure it, how can you remedy
A maim so dangerous and incurable?
There is a way; but walls have ears and eyes,
Your ear my Lord, and counsel.
I have ears
Open to such discourse, and counsel apt:
And to the full recovery of these wounds
Made in the sick state, most effectual,
A word in private.
Come brother, I am tired with revelling,
My last Caranta made me almost breathless,
Doth not the Kings last wench foot it with art?
Oh rarely, rarely, and beyond opinion.
I like this state where all are Libertines
But by ambitions pleasure and large will:
See, see, two of our strict lived Counsellors
In secret conference; they cannot endure
This freedom.
Nor the rule of Archigallo,
Because tic subject to his liberty.
Are they not plotting now for some installement
And change of state: old gallants if you be
Twill cost your heads.
Bodies and all for me.
List them, such strict reproouers should not live,
Their austere censures on their kings to give.
He must be then deposd.
Ey, are you there, that word sounds treason.
Nay, but farther hear.
The King deposd, how must it be effected,
What strengths and powers can suddenly be levied,
Who will assist this business, to reduce
The state to better form and government?
Ey mary, more of that.
All Cornwells at my beck, Devonshire our neighbour
Is one with vs, you in the North command.
The oppressed, wronged, dejected and suppressed,
Will flock on all sides to this innovation:
The Clergy late despised, the Nobles scorned,
The Commons trod on, and the Law contemnd,
Will lend a mutual and combined power
Unto this happy change.
Oh monstrous treason!
My Lord, we are betrayed, and ouer-heard
By the two princes.
How, betrayed.
Our plots discovered.
Isle help it all; doe you but sooth me up,
Wele catch them in the trap they lay for vs.
Isle doot.
Now sir, the king deposd
Who shall succeed?
Some would say Elidure.
Tush, he's too mild to rule.
But there are two young princes, hopeful youths
And of rare expectation in the Land,
Oh would they deign to bear this weighty charge
Betwixt them, and support the regal sceptre
With joint assistance, all our hopes were full.
A Sceptre.
And a Crown.
What if we made the motion? we have wills
To effect it, we have power to compass it.
And if I make refusal, heaven refuse me.
These Counsellors are wise, and see in vs
More virtue then we in our selves discern.
Would it were come to such election.
My honoured Lord, wele break it to those princes,
Those hopeful youths, at our convenient leisure.
With all my hart.
You that our footsteps watched,
Shall in the depth of your own wiles be caught.
A King.
And were a crown, a crown imperial.
And sit in state.
Command.
And be obeyed.
Our Nobles kneeling.
Servants homaging, and crying Aue.
Oh brother, shall we through nice folly
Despise the proffered bounty of these Lords?
Not for the world, I long to sit in state,
To purse the bounty of our gracious fate.
To entertain foreign Ambassadors.
And have our names ranked in the course of kings.
Shadow vs State with thy majestic wings.
Now sir, my brother Archigall deposde
Deposd! did you hear that my Lord.
For his licentious rule, and such abuses
As wele pretend against him in parliament.
Oh monstrous brothers.
Oh ambitious youths.
Thus wele divide the Land, all beyond Trent
And Humber, shall suffice one moitie:
The southport of the Land shall make the tother,
Where we will keep two Courts, and reign divided,
Yet as dear loving brothers.
As wild traitors.
Then Archigall, thou that hast sat in pomp
And seen me vassal, shalt behold me crowned,
Whilst thou with humble knees vail•t to my state.
And when must this be done, when shall my crown
Be parted and divided into halfes.
You reign on this side Humber, you beyond
The river Trent, when doe you take your states,
Sit crowned and scepterd to receive our homage,
Our duty, and our humble vassalage.
I know not when.
Nor you?
Nor I.
But I know when you shall repent your pride.
Nor will we use delays in our revenge,
Ambitious boys, we doom you prisonment,
Your Palace royal shall a Jail be made,
Your thrones a dungeon, and your scepters Irons,
In which wele bound your proud aspiring thoughts:
A way with them, we will not mount our chair
Ti•l their best hopes be changed to black despair.
Hear vs excuse our selves.
Or lets discover
Who drew vs to this hope of sovereignty.
That shall our further leisures arbitrate,
Our ears are deaf to all excusiue pleas,
Come vnambitious brother Elidurus,
Help vs to lavish our abundant treasures,
In masks, sports, revels, riots, and strange pleasures.
But is it true the fame of Nobody,
For virtue, almes-deedes, and for charity,
Is so renownd and famous in the Country?
Oh Lord sir ey, hes talked of far and near,
Fills all the boundless country with applause,
There lives not in all Britain one so spoke of,
For pity, good mind, and true charity.
Which Sombody shall alter ert be long.
You may my Lord being in grace at Court,
And the high favours of King Archigallo
Exile this petty fellow from the Land,
That so obscures the beauty of your deeds.
What doth this Nobody?
You shall hear my Lord,
Come twenty poor men to his gate at once,
Nobody gives them money, meat and drink,
If they be naked, clothes, then come poor soldiers,
Sick, maymd, and shot, from any foreign wars,
Nobody takes them in, provides them harbour,
Maintains their ruined fortunes at his charge,
He gives to orphants, and for widows builds
Almes-houses, Spittles, and large Hospitals,
And when it comes in question, who is apt
For such good deeds, tic answered Nobody.
Now Nobody hath entertained again
Long banished Hospitality, and at his board
A hundred lusty yeomen daily waits,
Whose long backs bend with weighty chynes of beef,
And choice of cheer, whose fragments at his gate
Suffice the general poor of the whole shire.
Nobodies table's free for travellers,
His buttry and his seller op to all
That starve with drought, or thirst upon the way,
His fame is great, how should we help it?
My Lord, tic past my reach, tic you must doe it,
Or't must be left undone.
What deeds of note is he else famous for?
My Lord Isle tell you.
His Barnes are full, and when the Cormorants
And wealthy Farmers hoard up all the grain,
He empties all his Garners to the poor
Under the stretched prise that the Market yields,
Nobody racks no rents, doth not oppress
His tenants with extortions. When the King
Knighted the lusty gallants of the Land,
Nobody then made dainty to be knighted,
And indeed kept him in his known estate.
The slaves ambitious▪ and his life I hate.
How shall we bring his name in public scandal?
Thus it shall be, use my direction.
In Court and country I am Sombody,
And therefore apt and fit to be employed:
Go thou in secrete being a subtle knave.
And sow seditious slanders through the Land,
Oppress the poor, suppress the fatherless,
Deny the widows food, the starved relief,
And when the wretches shall complain their wrongs,
Being called in question, swear it was Nobody,
Rack rents, raise prises,
Buy up the best and choice commodities
At the best hand, then keep them till their prises
Be lifted to their height, and double rate,
And when the raisers of this dearth are sought
Though Sombody doe this, protest and swear
It was Nobody fore Judge and Magistrate:
Bring scandals on the rich, raise mutinous lies
Upon the state, and rumours in the Court,
Backbite and sow dissention amongst friends,
Quarrels amongst neighbours, &amp; debate amongst strangers,
Set man and wife at odds, kindred at strife,
And when it comes in question, to clear vs,
Let every one protest and swear for one,
And so the blame will fall on Nobody.
About it then, if these things well succeed,
You shall prevail, and we applaud your speed.
See where he comes, I will withdraw and see,
The event and fortunes of our last policy.
Come on mine own servant, some news, some news, what report have I in the country? how am I talked on in the City, and what fame bear I in the Court?
Oh Moister you are half hanged.
Hanged, why man?
Because you have an ill name: a man had as good almost serve no Moister as serve you, I was carried before the Constable but yesterday, and they took me up for a strauagant; they asked me whom I served, I told them Nobody, they presently drew me to the post, and there gave me the law of arms.
The law of arms.
Ey, as much law as their arms were able to lay on, they tickled my Collifodium, I rid post for a quarter of an hour, with switch though not with spur.
Sure Sombody was the cause of all.
Isle be sworn of that, Sombody tickled me a heate, and that I felt, but Moister, why doe you go thus out of fashion; you are even a very hoddy doddy, all breech,
And no body. But if my breeches had as much cloth in them, as ever was drawn betwixt Kendall and Canning street, they were scarce great enough to hold all the wrongs that I must pocke•:
Fie, fie, how I am slandered through the world.
Nobody keeps tall fellows at his heals,
Yet if you meet a crew of rogues and beggars,
Ask who they serve, theile answer Nobody.
Your Cavaliers and swaggerers bout the town,
That dominere in Taverns, swear and stare,
Urge them upon some terms, theile turn their malice
To me, and say theile fight with Nobody,
Or if they fight, and Nobody by chance
Come in to part them, I am sure to pay for it,
And Nobody be hurt when they scope scotfree:
And not the dastardst coward in the world
But dares about with me. What shall I doe?
Doe what thou wilt, before we end this strife,
Isle make thee ten times weary of thy life.
But doe you hear Moister, when I have served you a year or two, who shall pay me my wages?
Why Nobody.
Indeed if I serve Nobody, Nobody must pay me my wa∣ges, therefore Isle even seek out Sombody or other, to get me a new service; but the best is Moister if you run away, you are easy to be found again.
Why so sir?
Mary ask a deaf man whom hee hears, heel straight say Nobody, ask the blindest beetle that is whom hee sees, and heel answer, Nobody, hee that never saw in his life can see you, though you were as little as a moat, and hee that never heard, can hear you, though you tread as soft∣lie as a Mouse, therefore I shall be sure never to loose you. Besides, you have one commodity Moister, which none hath besides you, if you should love the most fickle &amp; in∣constants wench that is in the world, sheele be true to No∣body, therefore constant to you.
And thou say true in that my honest servant,
Besides, I am in great especial grace
With the King Archigallo that now reigns
In tyranny, and strange misgouerment,
Nobody loves him, and he loves Nobody.
But that which most torments my troubled soul,
My name is made mere opposite to virtue,
For he is only held peaceful and quiet,
That quarrels, brawls, and fights with Nobody,
He's honest held that lies with Nobodies wife,
And he that hurts and iniures Nobody,
All the world says, ey thats a virtuous man.
And though a man have done a thousand mischiefs,
And come to prove the forfeit made to law,
If he can prove he hath wronged Nobody,
No man can touch his life. This makes me mad,
This makes me leave the place where I was bred,
And thousand times a day to wish me dead.
And Isle pursue thee where so ere thou fliest,
Nor shalt thou rest in England till thou die.
Moister, I would wish you to leave the Country, and see what good entertainment you will have in the City, I do not think but there you will be most kindly respected, I have been there in my youth, there's Hospitality, &amp; you talk of Hospitality, and they talk of you bomination to see: for there Moister come to them as often as you will, four times a day, and theyle make Nobody drink, they love to have Nobody trouble them, and without good se∣curitie they will lend Nobody money. Come into Birchin Lane, theyle give Nobody a suit, choose where hee list; go into Cheapside, and Nobody may take up as much plate as he can carry.
Then Isle to London, for the Country tires me
With exclamations, and with open wrongs,
Sith in the City they affect me so.
O Moister, there I am sure Nobody may have any thing without money, Nobody may come out of the Tavern without pay∣ing his reckoning at his pleasure.
Thats better then the Country. Who comes here?
Minion, where have you been all this night?
Why doe you ask husband?
Because I would know wife.
I have been with Nobody.
Tic a lie good man, believe her not, she was not with me.
And who hath lain with you to night?
Lye with me, why Nobody.
Oh monstrous, they would make me a whore-maister.
Well, I doe not think but Sombody hath been with you.
Sombody was indeed.
Gods life husband, you doe me wrong, I lay with Nobody.
Well minion, though Nobody bear the blame,
Use it no more, least Sombody bide the shame.
I will endure no longer in this Climate
It is so full of slanders, Isle to the City,
And there perform the deeds of charity.
Now you rascal, who have you been withal at the ale-house?
Sooth I was with Nobody.
Not with me.
And who was drunk there with you?
Sooth Nobody was drunk with me.
O intolerable! they would make me a drunkard to,
I cannot endure any longer, I must hence,
No patience with such scandals can dispense.
Well sir, if I take you so again, Isle so belabour you:
O neighbour good morrow.
Good morrow,
You are sad me thinks,
Faith sir I have cause, I have lent a friend of mine a hun∣dred pound, and have Nobodies word for the payment, bill, nor bond, nor any thing to show.
Have you Nobodies word, Isle assure you that Nobo∣die is a good man, a good man I assure you neighbor, Nobo∣die will keep his word, Nobodies word is as good as his bond.
Ey, say you so, nay then lets drink down sorrow,
If none would lend, then Nobody should borrow.
Yet there's one keeps a good tongue in his head,
That can give Nobody a good report,
I am beholding to him for his praise:
But since my man so much commends the City,
Isle thither, and to purchase me a name,
Take a large house of infinite receipt,
There keep a table for all good spirits,
And all the chimneys shall cast smoke at once:
There Isle give scholars pensions, Poets gold,
Arts their deserts, Philosophy due praise,
Learning his merit, and all worth his mead.
There Isle release poor prisoners from their dungeons.
Pay Creditors the debts of other men,
And get my self a name amongst Citizens,
That after times partakers of all bliss,
May thus record, Nobody did all this.
Country farewell, whose slanderous tongues I sly,
The City now shall lift my name on hie.
Whether Isle follow thee with Swallows wings,
And nimble expedition, there to raise
New brawls and rumours to eclipse thy praise.
Those subtle, sly insinuating fellows
Whom Sombody hath sent into the country,
To rack, transport, extort, and to oppress,
Will I call home, and all their wits employ
Against this public Benefactor, known
Honest, for all the rumours by vs sown.
But howsoever, I am sworn his foe,
And opposite to all his meriting deeds,
This way must doe, though my divining thoughts
This augury amidsts their changes have,
That Sombody will at length be proved a knave.
Good day to you both fair Ladies,
But fairest of them both my gracious Queen,
Good day to your high Majesty, and madam
The royal Lady of great Elidure,
My Sovereigns brother, unto you I wish
This morning prove as gracious and as good.
Those greetings from the Lady Elidure
Would pleasingly sound in our princely ears.
Such greetings from great Archigalloes queen
Would be most gracious to our princely ear.
What no good morrow and our grace so near.
Reach me my glove.
Whom speaks this woman to?
Why to my subject, to my waiting maid,
Am not I mighty Archigalloes queen?
Is not my Lord the royal English King,
Thy husband and thy self my servitors?
Is my Coach ready, where are all my men
That should attend upon our awful frown,
What not one near?
Minion, my glove.
Madam, her highness glove.
My scarf is fallen, one of you reach it up.
You hear me.
Painted Majesty be gone,
I am not to be countercheckt by any.
Shall I bear this?
Be patient, I will school her.
Your excellence greatly forgets your self
To be so dutilesse unto the Queen,
I have seen the world, I know what tic to obey,
And to command. What if it please the Queen
That you her subject should attend on her,
And take her glove up, is it meet that I
Should stoop for yours? You're proud, fie, fie, you're proud.
This must not be twixt such two royal sisters
As you by marriage are; go to submit,
Her Majesty is easy to forgive.
Saucy Lord forbear, there's for your exhortation.
I cannot bear this, tic insufferable,
Isle to the King, and if he save thy life
He shall have mine: madness and wrath attend,
My thoughts are leveled at a bloody end.
Shoe's shadow,
We the true substance are: follow her those
That to our greatness dare themselves oppose.
Health to your Ladyship, I would say Queen
If I might have my mind, bear lady Lady.
I had a suit unto the King with this Lord
For the great office of high Seneshall,
Because of our good service to the state,
But he in scorn, as he doth every thing,
Hath tan it from vs both, and gin't a fool.
To a Sicophant, a courtly parasite.
Bear witness Madam, Isle go tell the King
That they speak treason.
Pass upon our swords,
You old exchecker of all flattery,
I tell thee Archigallo shall be deposd,
And thou disroab'd of all thy dignity.
I hope not so.
See here the Counsels hands,
Subscribed to Archigallos overthrow.
The names of sixteen royal English Peers,
Joined in a league that is inviolate,
And nothing wants but Elidurus grant
To accept the kingdom when the deed is done.
Nay then Isle take your parts, and join with you▪
We will not have a Clawbacks hand comixt
With such heroic peers.
I hope my Lady
Is not of their minds. My most gracious Queen,
What I did speak in reprehensiue sort,
Was more because her Majesty was present
Then any offence of yours, and so esteem it,
God knows I love your highness, and these Lords.
Which of you will persuade my Elidure
To take upon him Englands royalty.
Madam, we all have so importund him,
Laying unto his judgment every thing
That might attract his senses to the crown,
But he frost brained will not be obtained
To take upon him this Realms government.
Hee is the very soul of lenity,
If ever moderation lived in any,
Your Lord with that rich virtue is possessed.
This mildness in him makes me so despised
By the proud Queen, and by her favourites.
See madam where he comes reading a book.
My Lord and husband, with your leave this book
Is fitter for an University
Then to be looked on, and the Crown so near:
You know these Lords for tyranny have sworn
To banish Archigallo from the throne,
And to invest you in the royalty:
Will you not thank them, and with bounteous hands
Sprinckle their greatness with the names of Earls,
Dukes, Marquesses, and other higher terms.
My dearest love, the essence of my soul,
And you my honoured Lords, the suit you make,
Though it be just for many wrongs imposd,
Yet unto me it seems an injury.
What is my greatness by my brothers fall,
But like a starved body nourished
With the destruction of the other limbs.
Innumerable are the griefs that waite
On horded treasures, then much more on Crowns:
The middle path, the golden mean for me,
Leave me obedience, take you Majesty.
Why this is worser to my lofty mind,
Then the late checks given by the angry Queen.
If you refuse it, know we are determined
To lay it else where.
On your younger brother,
And then no doubt we shall be awde indeed,
When the ambition of the elders wife,
Can scarcely give our patience any bounds:
England is sick of pride and tirrany,
And in thy goodness only to be curd.
Thou art called forth amongst a thousand men,
To minister this sovereign Ancidote,
To amend thy brothers cruelty with love,
And if thou wilt not from oppression free
Thy native Country, thou art wild as he.
I had rather stay his leisure to amend.
Men, heaven, gods, devils, what power should I invoke,
To fashion him a new: thunder come down,
Crown me with ruin, since not with a Crown.
Long life unto the Kingly Elidure,
Trumpets proclaim it whether he will or no.
For that conceit Lords, you have won my hart,
In his despite let him be straight ways Crowned,
That I may triumph whilst the trumpets sound.
Carry me to my grave, not to a Throne.
Help Lords to seat him, nay help every one:
So should the Majesty of England sit,
Whilst we in like state doe associate him.
Never did any less desire to reign
Then I, heaven knows this greatness is my pain.
Pain me in this sort great Lords every day,
Tic sweet to rule.
Tic sweeter to obey.
Live King of England long and happily,
As long and happily your Highness live.
We thank you Lords, now call in the deposd,
Him and his proud Queen, bring unto our sight,
That in her wrongs we may have our delight.
Betrayed, tan prisoner, and by those that owe
To me their duty, and allegiance:
My brother the usurper of the Crown,
Oh this is monstrous, most insufferable.
Good brother grieve not, tic against my will,
That I am made a King, pray take my place,
I had rather be your subject then your Lord.
So had not I, sit still my gracious Lord,
Whilst I look through this Tyrant with a frown,
Minion reach up my glove.
Think thou because
Thy husband can dissemble piety,
And therein hath deposd my royal Lord,
That I am lesser in estate then Queen?
No thine own answer lately given to me,
I thus reuet, stoop thou proud Queen for me.
Nay, then as I did lately to her Highness,
I must admonish you, diected Lady
You doe forget your self, and where you are,
Duty is debt, and it is fit since now
You are a subject, to bear humble thoughts:
Follow my counsel Lady and submit,
Her Majesty no doubt will pardon it.
Theres for your pains.
Which way so ere I go,
I have it here, whether it ebb or flow.
That pride of thine shall be thy overthrow.
And thus I sentence them.
Leave that to me?
No you are too mild, judgment belongs to me:
Thou Archigallo for thy tirranie,
For ever be excluded from all rule,
And from thy life.
Not from his life I pray.
He unto whom the greatest wrongs are done,
Dispatch him quickly.
That will I.
Or I.
And therein Lords effect my tragedy.
Why strike you not, oh tic a dangerous thing,
To have a living subject of a King:
Much treason may be wrought, when in his death,
Our safety is secured.
Banish him rather, oh sweet spare his life,
He is my brother.
Crowned, and pray thy wife.
Oh brother, if you roughly speak, I know
There is no hope but your sure overthrow,
Pray be not angry with me for my love:
To banishment since it must needs be so,
His life I give him whosoere says no.
What and his Ladies to.
I hers and all.
But Isle not have you banished with the King,
No Minion no, since you must live, be assured
Isle make thee meanest of my waiting Maids.
I scorn thy pride.
Farewell deceiving state,
Pride making Crown, my dearest wife farewell:
I have been a Tyrant, and Isle be so still.
Alas my brother.
Dry up childish tears,
And to these Lords that have invested you,
Give gracious looks, and honourable deeds.
Give them my Crown, oh give them all I have,
Thy Throne I reckon but a glorious grave.
Then from my self these dignities receive,
The Island wrested from you I restore,
See it be given them back Lord Sicophant.
The office of hie Seneschall bereft you,
My Lord of Cornwall to your grace we give.
You Martianus be our Treasurer,
And if we find you faithful, be assured
You shall not want preferment at our hands.
Mean time this office we impose on you,
Be Tutor to this Lady, and her pride
With your learned principles whereof you are full
Turn to humility, or vex her soul,
Torment on torment, tutored by a fool.
Madam, it is her Highness will be pleased.
Young Peridurus and Vigenius, Lords
Release from prison, and because your King,
Is mightily affected unto York,
Thither dismiss the Court incontinent.
Shall it be so my Liedge.
Are not we King.
His silence says it, and what we ordain,
Who dares make question of: this day for ever
Thorough our reign beheld a festival:
And triumph Lords that England is set free,
From a wild tyrant and his cruelty:
On to our funeral, tic no matter where,
I sin I know in suffering pride so near.
Ahem boy, Nobody is sound yet for all his troubles.
And so is Nobodies man for all his whipping, but Moister we are now in the City, wald about from slander, there can∣not a lie come in but it must run thorough brick, or get the goodwill of the warders, whose browne bills look blew upon
all passengers.
O this City, if Nobody live to be as old again, be it spoken in secret, Isle have fenced about with a wall of brass.
Of Nobodies making, that will be rare.
Isle bring the Tems through the middle of it, empty Moore-ditch at my own charge, and build up Paules-steple without a collection. I see not what becomes of these collctions.
Why Nobody receives them.
I knave?
You knave: or as the world goes, Somebody receives all, and Nobody is blamed for it.
But is it rumord so thorough out the City.
Doe not you know that? theres not an orphants pore∣tion lost out of the Chamber, but Nobody has got it, no Corn transported without warrant, but Nobody has donne it, no goods stolen but by Nobody, no extortion without Nobody: and but that truth will come to light, few wenches got with child, but with Nobody.
Nay thats by Somebody.
I think Somebody had a hand in it, but Nobody some∣times pays for the nursing of it.
Indeed I have taken into my charge many a poor infant left to the alms of the wideworld, I have helped many a ver∣tuous maid to a good husband, &amp; ne'er desired her maiden-head: redeemed many Gentlemen's lands, that have thanked Nobody for it, built Pest-houses, and other places of retirement in the sickness time for the good of the City, and yet Nobody cannot get a good word for his labour.
Tic a mad world Moister.
Yet this mad world shall not make me mad, I am
All spirit, Nobody let them grieve,
That scrape for wealth I will the poor relieve,
Where are the Masters of the several prisons:
Within and near adjoining to the City,
That I may spread my charity abroad.
Here they be Sir.
Welcome Gentlemen:
You are they that make poor men householders
Against their wills, and yet doe them no wrong:
You have the actions, and the cases of your sides,
Whilst your Tenants in common, want money to fill them.
How many Gentlemen of less revenues then Nobody,
Lie in your Knights ward, for want of maintenance.
I am Sir a Keeper of the Counter, and there are in our wards aboue a hundred poor prisoners, that are like ne'er to come forth without satisfaction.
But Nobody will be their benefactor. What in yours.
As many as in the other prison.
Theres to release them. What in yours.
Double the number, and in the Gail.
Talk not of the Gail, tic full of limetwigs, lifts, and pickpockets.
Is it your pleasure Sir to free them all.
All that he in for debt.
Ten thousand pound, and ten to that will not doe it.
Nobody Sir will give a hundred thousand,
Ten hundred thousand, Nobody will not have a prisoner,
Because they all shall pray for Nobody.
Tic great pity my Moister has Nobody, and so kind a hart.
What outcries that?
That is the gallant, apprehend him straight,
Tic he that sows sedition in the Land,
Under the colour of being charitable,
When search is made for such in every Inn,
Though I have seen them housd, the Chamberlain
For gold will answer there is Nobody:
He •or all bankrouts is a common bail•,
And when the execution should be served
Upon the sureties, they find Nobody:
In private houses who so apt to lie,
As those that have been taught by Nobody,
Servants forgetful of their Masters friends,
Being asked how many were to speak with him
Whilst he was absent, they say Nobody,
Nobody breaks more glasses in a house,
Then all his wealth hath power to satisfy:
If you will free this City then from shame,
Seas Nobody, and let him bear the blame.
Lay hold upon him.
What on Nobody, give me my sword, my morglay,
My friends, you that doe know how innocent I am,
Draw in my quarrel, succour Nobody,
What Nobody, but Nobody remaining.
Yes Moister, I Nobodies man.
Stand to me nobly then, and fear them not,
Thy Moister Nobody, can take no wounds,
Nobody is no coward, Nobody
Dares fight withal the world.
Upon them then.
What has he escaped vs.
He is gone my Lord.
It shall be thus, now you have seen his shape,
Let him be straight imprinted to the life:
His picture shall be set on every stall,
And proclamation made, that he that takes him,
Shall have a hundred pounds of Sombody,
Country and City, I shall thus set free,
And have more room to work my villainy.
What are they gone, then City now adieu,
Since I have taken such great injury,
For my good life within thy government:
No more will Nobody be charitable,
No mote will Nobody relieve the poor,
Honour your Lord, and Moister Somebody,
For Somebody is he that wrongs you all.
Isle to the Court the changing of the ayre,
May peradventure change my injuries,
And if I speed no better being there,
Yet say that Nobody lived every where.
I was a King, but now I am slave,
How happy were I in this base estate,
If I had never tasted royalty:
But the remembrance that I was a King,
Vnseasons the Content of poverty,
I hear the hunters music, here Isle lie,
To keep me out of sight till they pass by.
The stag is hearded, come my Lord
Shall we to horse and single him again.
Content, the King will chase, the day is spent
And we have kilt no game, to horse, away.
Hearded, go single him, or couple straight,
He will not fall to day, what fellows this.
I am a man.
A banished man I think,
My brother Archigallo, first not so.
Tic so, I am thy brother Elidure,
All that thou hast is mine, the Crown is mine,
Thy royalty is mine; these hunting pleasures
Thou dost usurp: ambitious Elidure
I was a King.
And I may be a wretch: poor Archigallo,
The sight of thee that were my Sovereign,
In this estate, draws rivers from mine eyes.
Will you be king again? if they agree
Isle redeliver all my royalty,
Save what a second brother and a subject
Keeps in an humble bosom, for I swear
The Crown is yours that Elidure doth wear.
Then give it me; use not the common sleights,
To pity one, and keep away his right.
See thou these rags, doe they become my person?
O Elidure, take pity on my state,
Let me not still live thus unfortunate.
Alas, if pity could procure your good,
Instead of water, Id weep tears of blood
To express both love and pity: say dear brother
I should vncrowne my self, the angry Peers
Will never let me reach the imperial wreathe
To Archigalloes head. There's ancient Cornwall,
Stout Martianus, Morgan, and bold Malgo,
From whom you took the pleasant Southern Isle,
Will never kneel to you: what should I say,
Your tyranny was cause of your decay.
What shall I die then? welcome be that fate
Rather then still live in this wretched state.
Yonders the King; my sovereign you have lost
The fall of a brave stag, he's dead my liedge.
What fellows this?
Know him not Cornwall?
No my liedge not I.
I am thy King.
Tic Archigallo man.
Thou art no king of mine, thou art a traitor,
Thy life is forfeit by thy stay in Britain.
VVert thou not banished?
Noble Cornwall speak
More gently, or my piteous hart will break,
Lord Martianus, Morgan, and the rest,
I am a weary of my government,
And willingly resign it to my brother.
Your brother was a tyrant, and my knee
Shall never bow to wrong and tyranny.
Yet look upon his misery, his tears
Argue repentance; think not honoured Lords
The fear of dangers waiting on my Crown
Makes me so willing to resign the same,
For I am loved I know, but justice bids
I make a resignation, tic his right,
My calls but usurpation.
Elidure,
If you are weary of your government,
Wele set the Crown upon a strangers head
Rather then Archigallo. Hark ye Lords,
Shall we make him our King we did depose,
So might our heads be chopped of, Isle loose mine
Ere my poor Country shall endure such wrongs,
As that injurious tyrant plagues her with,
Keep still your Crown my Liedge, happy is Britain
Under the government of Elidure.
Let it be so,
Death is the happy period of all woe.
The wretch thats torn upon the torturing wrack,
Feels not more de••••sh torment then my hart.
When I but call to mind my tyranny,
I record heaven my Lords, my brothers fight,
The pity that he takes of my distress,
Your love and true allegiance unto him,
Hath wrought in me a reconciled spirit,
I doe confess my sin, and freely say,
I did deserve to be deposd.
Alas good Prince, my honourable Lords,
Be not flint-harted, pity Archigallo,
I know his penitential words proceed
From a remorseful spirit, Isle engage
My life upon his righteous government.
Good Cornwall, gentle Martianus, speak,
Shall Archigallo be your king again?
By heaven I not desire it.
See my Lords,
Hoe's not ambitious, as thou love me Cornwall,
As thou did love our Father, let his son
Be righted, give him back the government
You took from him.
What should I say? faith I shall fall a weeping:
Therefore speak you.
Lord Martianus speak.
What say these Lords that have been wronged by him.
Morgan and Malgo, all I have in Britain
Shall be engaged to you, that Archigallo
Will never more oppress you, nor impose
Wrong on the meanest subject in the Land.
Then weal embrace his government.
Says Malgo so?
I doe my Lord.
What says Martianus?
Faith as my Lord of Cornwall.
I say that I am sorry he was bad.
And now am glad hoe's changed; his wickedness
We punished, and his goodness there's great reason
Should be rewarded; therefore Lords set on
To York then, to his Coronation.
Then happy Elidurus, happy day
That takes from me a kingdoms cares away.
And happy Archigallo that have rangd
From sin, to sin, and now at last am changed.
My Lords and friends, the wrongs that you have seen
In me, my future virtues shall redeem.
Come gentle brother, pity that should rest
In women most, is harboured in thy breast.
Come have you done your task, now doe you see
What tic to be so proud of Majesty,
We must take up your glove, and not be thought
Worthy the name of Sister, thus you minx
Isle teach you ply your work, and thank me to,
This pains will be your own another day.
Insulting, ouer-proude, ambitious woman▪
Queen I disdain to call thee, thou dost wrong
Thy brothers wife, indeed thy Kings espousd,
And manger all thy tyranny I swear,
Rather then still live thus, Isle perrish here.
You are not wise, dejected as you are
To bandy braves against her Majesty,
You must consider you are now her subject,
Your tongue is bounded by the awe of duty,
Fie, fie, I needs must chide you, since I see
You are so saucy with her sovereignty.
Time was base spaniel thou did fawn as much
On me, as now thou strive to flatter her:
O God, that one borne noble should be so base,
His generous blood to scandal all his race.
My Lord, if she continue these proud terms,
I give you liberty to punish her.
Isle not maintain my prisoner and my slave
To rail against any one that honours me.
Health to the Queen, and happiness to her
That must change states with you, and once more reign
Queen of this Land.
Speak that again, ô I will bless my fate,
If once more I supply my former state.
Long may your highness live, your banished Lord
Is by his brother Elidurus seated
Once more in Britains throne.
O I could tear my hair, base Elidure
To wrong himself, and make a slave of me.
Now minion, Isle cry quittance with your pride,
And make you stoop at our imperial side▪
But tell me Morgan by what accident
You met with my beloved Archigallo?
Even in the woods where we did hunt the stag,
There did the tender hearted Elidure
Meet his distressed Brother, and so wrought
By his importunate speech with all his Peers,
That after much denial, yet at last
They yielded their allegiance to your Lord,
Whom now we must acknowledge our dread King,
And you our princely Queen.
Thou Screchowle, Raven, ugly throated slave▪
Theres for thy news.
Restrain her good my Lord.
Fie madam fie, fore God you are too blame
In presence of my sovereign lady Queen
To be thus rude, it would become you better
To show more duty to her Majesty.
O monstrous, was not I thy Queen but now.
Yes, when your husband was my King you were.
But now the stream is turned, and the States currant,
Runs all to Archigallo, blame not me,
Wisdom ne'er loved declined Majesty.
Welcome from banishment my loving Lord,
Your kingly presence wraps my soul to heaven.
To heaven, and my kind brother Elidure,
Fair Queen we owe chief thanks for this our greatness,
Next them, these honourable Lords.
Great Queen,
Once more the tribute of our bended knees
We pay to you, and humbly kiss your hand.
So doth Martianus.
And I.
And I.
Our brothers, by how much that name exceeds
The name of Lord, so much the more this duty
Deserves requital, thanks both, and thanks to all.
Set on there.
Madam, you are not wise to grieve at that
Heaven hath decreed, and the state yielded to,
No doubt her Majesty will use you well.
Well says thou: no I look that she should treble
All the disgraces I have laid on her.
I shall turn Laundress now, and learn to starch,
And set and poke, and pocket up such baseness
As never princess did: did you observe
What looks I cast at Elidure my husband?
Your looks declared the passion of your hart,
They were all fire.
Would they had burnt his eyes out
That hath eclipsed our state and Majesty.
Bring hither the proud wife of Elidure,
It shall be done.
Our shoe string is untied, stoop minion, stoop.
Isle rather stoop to death thou moone-like Queen,
New changed, and yet so proud: theres those are made
For flexure, let them stoop, thus much Isle doe,
You are my Queen, tic but a debt I owe.
Bring me the work there, I will task you to,
That by the hour spin it, I charge you doe.
A distaff and a spindle, so indeed
I told you this, Diana be my speed.
Yet for his Princely worth that made you Queen
Respect her as the wife of Elidure.
VVheres the Queen?
What news with Cornwall, why so sad my Lord?
Your husband on the sudden is fallen sick.
How; sick.
Now if it be thy will, sweet blessed heaven
Take him to mercy.
Doe not hear her prayers heaven I beseech thee.
Madam, his highness.
Is he alive, or dead.
Dead madam.
O my hart.
Look to the Queen, let vs not loose her to,
She breathes, stand of, where be those women there,
Good Queen that shall be, lends a helping hand,
Help to unlace her.
Isle see her burst first.
Now as you love me let no helping hand
Preserve life in me, I had rather die
Then loose the title of my sovereignty.
Take back your Distaff yet, wele stay our rage,
We will forbear our spleen for charity
And love unto the dead, till you have hearsd
Your husbands bones, conduct her Lords away,
Our pride though eager, yet for food shall stay.
Wilt please your high imperial Majesty
Command my service, I am humbly yours.
We doe command what we well know you'll doe,
Follow the stronger part, and cleave thereto.
Once more our royal temples are ingirt
With Britains golden wreath, all seeing heaven
Witness I not desire this sovereignty,
But since this kingdoms good, and your Decrees,
Have laid this heaven load of common care
On Elidure, we shall discharge the same
To your content, I hope, and this Lands fame:
Our brother once entered, we will not stay,
But then to Troynovant weal speed, away.
Come fellow Porter, now the Court is here
Our gains will fly upon vs like a tide,
Let vs make use of time, and whilst theres plenty
Stirring in Court, still labour to increase
The wealth which by our office we have got.
Out of our large alowance we must save
Of thousands that pass by vs, and our office,
we will give entertainment to No-body.
My name is No-body,
You are welcome sir, ere you peruse the court,
Taste the kings beer, here at the Porters lodge,
A dish of beer for moister No-body.
I thank you sir.
Here moister No-body, withal my hart,
A full Carouse, and welcome to our Office.
I thank you sir, and were your beer tems water,
Yet No-body would pledge you, to you sir.
You are a stranger here, how in the City,
Have you bin long in town.
I sir, too long, unless my entertain
Had bin more pleasing, for my life is sought,
I am a harmless well disposed plain man,
That injure none, yet what so ere is done
Amiss in London, is imposed on me,
Be it lying, secret theft, or any thing
They call abuse, tic done by No-body,
I am pursued by all, and now am come,
To see what safety is within the Court
For a plain fellow.
You are welcome hither sir.
Methinkes you do look wilde, as if you wanted sufficient Sleep.
O do not blame me sir,
Being pursued I fled, coming though Poules,
There No-body kneeled down to say his prayers,
And was devout I wis, coming through Fleetstreet,
There at a tavern door two swaggerers
Were fighting, being attached, it was asked who gave
The first occasion, it was answered nobody,
The guilt was laid on me, which made me fly
To the Thems side, desired a Waterman,
To row me thence away to Charing-crosse,
He asked me for his fare, I answered him
I had no money, whats your name quoth he,
I told him No-body, then he bad me welcome,
Said he would carry No-body for nothing.
From thence I went
To see the law Courts held at Westminster,
There meeting with a friend, I straight was asked
If I had any suit, I answered, yes,
Marry I wanted money, sir quoth he,
For you, because your name is No-body
I will solicit law, and no-body
Assure your self, shall thrive by suits in Law,
I thanked him, and so came to see the court,
Where I am very much beholding to your kindness.
And Moister no-body you are very welcome,
Good fellow lead him to the Hall,
Will you vvalke near the court.
I thank you sir.
Fie what a toil it is to find out nobody,
I have dogd him very close, yet he is got into the court be∣fore me.
Sir you have sworn to fight with nobody,
Do you stay here, and watch at the court gate,
And when you meet him challenge him the field,
Whilst I set Lime-twigs for him in all Offices,
If either you or I, but prosper right,
He needs must fall by policy or slight.
I would this roundman nobody would come,
I that profess much valour yet have none,
Cannot but be too hard for nobody,
For what can be in nobody, unless
He be so called because he is al spirit,
Or say he be all spirit, wanting limbs,
How can this spirit hurt me, sure he dies,
And by his death, my fame shall mount the skies.
By thy leave my sweet friend,
Theres for thy farewell.
Stay.
Thats but one word, let two go to the bargain if it please you, why should I stay.
I challenge thee.
I may choose whither isle answer your challenge by your leave.
Isle have thee pictured as thy picture, unless thou answer me
For what sir, pray why wold you have me printed.
For cowardice.
Methinkes your picture would doe better for the picture of cowardice then mine sir, but pray whats your will with me.
Thou hast abused one Some-body,
So have my betters abused Som-body in their time
Isle fight with thee for that.
Alas sir I am nobody at fighting, yet thus much let me tell you, nobody cannot run away, I cannot budge.
Prepare thee then, for I will spit thy body upon this weapon.
nay by faith that you cannot, for I have no body.
Thy bowels then.
They are the fairer mark a great deal, com on sir, come on
Have at thy belly.
You must either hit that or nothing.
Isle kill and quarter thee.
You'll hardly find my joints I think to quarter me,
I am so well fed, come on sir.
now thou art at my mercy.
What are you the better to have nobody at your mercy
Isle kill thee now.
I think you'll sooner kill me then any body,
But let me rise again.
No I will let No-body rise.
Why then let me sir, I am No-body,
How now, O fates, O heavens, is not that my M.
what shall I do, be valiant▪ and reskue my sweet moister,
Avaunt thou Pagan, Pug, what ere thou be,
Behold I come to set thy prisoner free.
Fortune that giddy Goddess hath turned her wheel,
I shall be matched, thus will I gore you both. Hold captains,
not Hercules himself would fight with two, I yield.
It was yoor best course, down vassal dawn, and kiss
My pump.
Tic base, O base.
Zounds, isle nail thy lips to limbo unless thou kiss.
Tic done.
Thanks honest servant.
Zounds if I say isle doet, isle doet indeed.
For this isle carry thee into the Court,
Where thou shalt see thy Moister No-body
Hath friends will bid him welcome, so farewell,
Farewell moister Braggart, farewell, farewell.
Isle follow, I shall meet with Some-body,
That will revenge, isle plot and ert be long
Isle be revenged on No-body for this wrong.
Your hopes are great fair brothers, and your names, shall if in this you be advised by vs,
Be ranked in scroll of all the British kings,
Oh take upon you this so weighty charge,
To great to be discharged by Elidure.
Dear sister Q. how are we bound to you,
In nearer bonds then a fraternal league,
For this your royal practise to raise vs,
Unto the height of honour and estate,
Let me no longer breath a prince on earth,
Or think me worthy of your regal blood,
If we embrace not this high motion.
Embrace it brother, we are all on speed,
My princely thought inflamed with Ardency
Of this imperial state, and Scepterd rule,
My kingly brows, itch for a stately Crown,
This hand to bear a round Monarchal Globe,
This the bright sword of Justice, and stern awe,
Dear sister you have made me all on fire,
My kingly thoughts, beyond their bounds aspire.
How shall we quit your love, when we ascend
The state of Elydure.
All that I crave,
Is but to make the imperious Queen my slave,
That she that aboue Justice now commands,
May taste new thraldom at our royal hands.
The Queen is yours, the king shall be deposed,
And she disgraded from all Sovereignty.
That I might live to see that happy hour,
To have that sterne commandress in my power.
Shees doomed already, and at your dispose•,
And we prepared for speedy execution,
Of any plot that may avail our pomp,
Or throne vs in the state of Brittany.
Here comes the Lords of this pretended league,
How goes our hope, speak valiant English Peers,
Are we in way of Sovereignty, or still stand we
Subjects unto the awe of Elidure.
Long live the valiant brothers of the King,
With mutual love to wear the British Crown,
Two thousand Soldiers have I brought from Wales,
to wait upon the princely Perydure.
As many of my bold confederates
Have I drawn from the South to swear allegiance,
to young Vigenius.
Do but call me king,
the charming Spheres so sweetly cannot sing.
To king Vigenius.
Oh but wheres our Crown,
that make knees humble, when their sovereigns frown.
King Eliduras shall his state resign.
Say Morgan so, and Britains rule is mine.
king Peridure shall reign.
And sit in sty•e.
And thousand subjects on his glory waite.
Then they that lifts vs to the imperial seat,
Our powers and will shall study to make great.
And thou that raisest vs, as our best friend,
Shall as we mount the like degrees ascend.
When will you give the attempt.
Now royal sister.
Before the king have notice of our plot,
Before the Lords that love his government,
Prepare their opposition.
Well determined,
And like a king in Esse, now this night,
Lets make a hostile uproar in the Court,
Surprise the king, make ceazure of the Crown,
Lay hands upon the Counsel, least they scope
to levy forces, those Lords
that serve the king, and with austere reproofs,
punish the hateful vices of the Land,
Must not awe vs, they shall not reign, we will,
those that applaud vs, raise, despise vs, kill,
I see a kind of state appear already
In thy majestic brow, cal in the soldiers,
Man the Court gates, barricade al the streets,
Defend the ways, the lands and passages,
And go•t the palace with a treble wall
Of armed soldiers, and in dead of night,
When all the peeresly drowned in golden sleep,
Sound out a sudden and a shrill Alarm,
to maze them in the midst of horrid dreams.
The king and Crown is ours.
The Queen I claim.
It shall go hard, but I the shrew will tame,
trumpets and drums, your dreadful clamours sound.
Proclaim me captive, or a king new crowned,
Treason, treason.
thou art mine what ere thou be.
Prince Peridure.
I Cornwall and thy king.
He discords taught, that taught thee so to sing.
Who stops this passage.
Martianus we.
Vigenius.
Un•o whom thou owe thy knee.
My knee to none▪ but Elidure shall bend.
Our reign beginning hath when his lines end.
What traitrous hand dares interdict our way?
Why that dare ours, tic we command thee stale.
Are we not Queen?
First you, then happily met,
I have owed you long, and now Isle pay that dept.
Wild traitress, dare, thou lay a violent hand on vs thy Queen?
We dare command thee stand,
Thou wast a Queen, but now thou art a slave.
Before such bondage, grant me heaven a grave.
What seek ye Lords? What mean these loud
Alarms, in the still silence of this hunnied night?
King we seek thee.
And more we seek thy Crown.
Why Princely brothers is it not our own,
That tic ours we plead the law of kings,
The gift of heaven, and the antiquity on earth,
Election from them both.
We plead our powers &amp; strength, we two must reign.
We were borne to rule, and homage we disdain.
Doe not resign, good King.
How saucy Lord?
Isle keep still thy Crown.
I say that word shall cost old Cornwels life.
Tush this for care.
Tyrants good subjects kills and traitors spare.
Wilt thou submit thy Crown?
Dread sovereign, no.
He hates his own life that advises so.
I hate all traitors, and had rather die,
Then see such wrong done to his sovereignty.
Give up thy state to these two princely youths, and thy resigment shall preserve thy life.
Wilt thou so much wrong both thy self and wife?
Hast lived a king, and can thou die a slave,
A royal seat, doth ask a royal grave,
Though thousand swords thy present safety ring,
Thou that hast bin a Monarch, dye a king.
Whether he live or dye, thou sure shalt be no longer Queen, but Vassal unto me, Isle make ye now my drudge.
How minion, thine?
Thart no more Queen, thy husband must resign.
Resign, to whom?
I am one.
And I another.
Can be so base to see a younger brother,
Nay two young Boys placed in thy throne of state,
And thou their sudden in their trains to waite,
Isle dye before I endure it.
So shall all,
that doe not prostrate to our homage fall.
Shall they not brother king?
They shall by heaven.
Come kill me first.
Nay make the number even,
And kill me to, for I am pleased to dye,
Rather then this endure.
The third am I.
Nay strike her first.
Rage give my fury way.
Strike valiant brother king.
Yet he are me, stay.
Be brief for Gods sake then,
O heaven, that men so much should covet care,
Septers are golden baits, the outsides fair:
But he that swallows this sweet sugared pill,
Twill make him sick with troubles that grow still:
Alas you seek to ease me being wearied
And lay my burden on your able loins,
My vnambitious thoughts have bin long tired,
With this great charge, and now they rest desired,
And see the kind youths coveting my peace,
Bring me of all these turmoils free release.
Here take my Crown.
Wilt thou be made a stale,
Shall this proud Woman, and these boys prevail?
Shall I for them be made a public scorn,
Oh had thou buried bin, as soon as borne,
How happy had I bin.
Patience sweet wife,
Think thou I praise my Crown aboue thy life,
No take it Lords, it hath my trouble bin,
And for this Crown, oh give me back my Queen.
Nay shes bestowed on me.
Then what you please,
Here take my trouble, and resign your ease.
My Lords receive the crown of Elydure,
Fair hopeful blossoms of our future peace,
Happy am I, that I but live to see,
the Land ruled by your double Sovereignty.
Now let the king descend to be disposed of
At our high pleasure, come give me the Crown.
Why you the Crown, good brother more then we.
Weal prove it how it fits our kingly temples,
And how our brow becomes a wreath so fair.
Shall I see you crowned, and my self stand bare,
Rather this wreath majestic let me try,
And sit inthrond, in pompious Majesty.
And I attend, whilst you ascend the throne,
Where had we right, we should sit crowned alone.
Alone, dare thou usurp upon my right.
I durst do much, had I but power and might,
But wanting that, come let vs reign together,
both kings, and yet the rich crown worn by neither.
Content, the king doth on our sentence waite,
To doom him, come lets take our double state,
What shall he live, or dye?
I know not how I should deserve to dye.
Yes to let two such usurpers live.
Nay Madam, now I needs must tell your grace,
You wrong these kings, forget both time and place,
It is not as it was, now you must bow,
Unto this double state isle show you how.
Base flattering groom slavish parasite,
Shall I pronounce his sentence.
Brother doe.
Thy life we grant thee and that Women's to,
But live divided you within the tower,
You prisoner to that princess.
In her power,
Oh double slavery.
Convey both hence.
My dooms severer then my small offence.
Come Minion, will you go.
To death, to hell,
Rather then in thy base subjection dwell.
Cornwall and Martianus you both see,
We are possessed of this imperial seat,
And you that were sworn liedgemen to the Crown,
Should now submit to vs that owe the same,
We know without your grave directions,
We cannot with experience guide the land,
Therefore weal study to deserve your loves.
It was not ambition, or the love of state,
that drew vs to this business, but the fear,
Of Elidurus weakness whom in zeal,
To the whole land we have deposd this day,
speak, shall we have your loves?
My lords, and Kings,
Tic bootless to contend against heaven and you,
Since without our consent the kings disposed,
And we unable to support his fall,
Rather then the whole land should shrink,
You shall have my assistance in the state.
Cornwall and I will bear the self same state.
We now are Kings indeed and Britain sway,
When Cornwall and his brother Viue say
Receive our grace, keep still your offices,
Embrace these peers that raised vs to the throne,
Britain rejoice, and Crown this happy year,
Two sons at once thine in thy royal sphere.
And thats prodigious, I but waite the time
To see their sudden fall that swiftly clime.
My Lord much honour might you win your land
To give release unto your sister Queen,
Being a Lady in the land beloud.
You have advised vs well, it shall be so.
Should you set free the Princess might not she
Make vprors in the land, and raise the Commons.
In the releasement of the Captive King.
Well counseld Cornwall, she shall live in bondage.
Renown your self by being kind to her.
Secure your state by her imprisonment.
Weal have the Queen set free.
Weal have her guarded,
With stricter keeping and severer charge.
Will you be braved by one thats but your equal,
Having no more then party government.
Or you be scorned by one to you inferior,
In general estimation of the land.
Set free the Princess, say the king commands.
Keep her in thraldom still, and captive bands.
Weal not be contermaunded.
Sir nor we.
Before Isle be half a king and controlled
In any regality, isle hazard all,
Isle be complete or none.
Before isle stand,
Thus for a Cipher with my half command,
Isle venture all my fortunes, how now pride,
Percht on my vpperhand.
By heaven well spied.
Tic ours by right, and right we will enjoy.
Claimst thou pre-eminence, com down proud boy
Then lets try masters, and one conquer all,
We climbed at once, and we at once will fall.
They that love Peridure divide themselves upon their part.
That am I.
and I.
They that love vs on this side.
I.
And I.
Then to the field, to set our sister free.
By all my hopes with her isle captive thee.
Trumpets and Drums, triumphant music sing.
this day a captive, or a complete king.
Sir you have sworn to manage these affairs,
Even with your best of judgment.
I have provided, you will let me share,
Of the Grand-benefit you get by dice,
Deceitful Cards, and other cozening games
you bring into the Court.
 O rare, now shall I find out crab, some notable knavery
You shall have equal share with Somebody,
Provided, you will help to apprehend that Nobody,
On whom the guilt shall lye,
Of all those cheting tricks I have devised.
 O the fates, treason against my m. person, but I believe
Somb. will pay fort, isle tickle your long wast for this in faith,
Give me some bales of dice. What are these?
Those are called high Fulloms.
Isle Fullom you for this.
Those low Fulloms▪
They may chance bring you as hie as the Gallows.
Those Demi-bars.
Great reason you should come to the bar before the gallows.
Those bar Sizeaces.
A couple of Asses indeed.
Those Bristle dice.
Tic like they bristle, for I am sure theile breed anger
Now sir, as you have compassed all the Dice,
So I for cards. These for the game at maw,
All saving one, are Cut next under that,
Lay me the Ace of Harts, then cut the Cards,
O your fellow must needs have it in his first trick.
Isle teach you a trick for this in faith.
these for Premero cut upon the sides,
As thr other on the ends.
Mark the end of all this.
these are for post and pair, these for saunt,
these for new cut.
theile make you cut a feather one day,
Well, these dispersed, and No-body
Attached for all these crimes, shall be hanged.
I or else you shall hang for him,
Come, shells about our business.
Content, lets straight about it.
O my hart, that it was my fortune to hear all this,
but beware a lucky man whllst you live, Alas if I had not rescued my moister, the swaggering fellow would have made No-body of him. Again if I had not overheard this treason to his person, these Cunnicatching knaves, would have made less then Nobody of him. For indeed they wold have hanged him, but hears my moister, O sweet moister how cheer you?
O excellent, admirable, and beyond comparison, I think my shape enchants them.
I think not so, for if I were a Lady, I should never abide you: but Moister, I can tell you rare news you must be ap∣prehended, for a Cheater, a Cozener, a Libeller, and I know not what.
Not I, I am an innocent, no Cheater, no Cozener, but a simple honest man, hunted from place to place by some-body.
tic true sir, it is one some. that would attach you, therefore
Look to your self, but My. if you be took never fear,
I heard all their knavery, and I can clear you I warrant.
O have I found you, this is he my friends,
We have long sought, you know when it was inquird,
Who brought the false Dice, and the cheating cards
Into the court, it was answered No-body.
(quoth tha) I am afraid you'll prove the knave some.
Lay hold upon him, bear him to the prison.
To prison, say you well, if I be guilty this fellow is my partner take him to.
Are you confederate in this treason sir?
If I be not sir some-body is, but if I be guilty I must bear
If off with head and shoulders.
To prison with them, now the bird is caught,
For whom so long, through Briton have I sought.
I believe I have a bird in a box, shall caught you for all this.
Away with them I say.
In Arms well met, ambitious Peridure,
Vigenius thou salutes me with a title,
Most proper to thy self,
Art thou not proud.
Only to meet thee on this bed of death,
Wherein the Title to the English Crown,
Shall perish with thy self.
Fair is the end
Of such as die in honourable war,
Oh far more fair, then on a bed of down.
War is the soldiers harvest it cuts down.
The lives of such as hinder our renown.
Such as are apt for tumult.
Such as you,
That to our lawful Sovereign are untrue.
Blushes not Peridure to brave vs so.
Blushes Vigenius at thy overthrow,
Who wast that told me he would submit.
It was I my Lord.
Peace fool thou doest forget,
Tic not an hour since, to our princely ear,
Thou said thou did desire vs to forbear.
True my good Lord.
True that I sought to stay.
That I would basely my retched hopes betray.
I did it of mine own head to make you friends.
Still playing of the Sicophant.
What still.
A gloss I see to insinuate our good will.
That whosoever conquered, he might gain.
the favour of vs both, that was his train.
But henceforth we cashier thee from the filed.
Never hereafter bear a soldiers shield,
A soldiers sword, nor any other grace,
But what is like thine own, a double face.
Now I beseech Jove hear my prayer, let them bee both slain in the battle.
If there be any other of his hart,
We give them free licence to depart.
Cornwall hates flattery.
So does Martianus.
Malgo is resolute for all affairs.
And so is Morgan, for he scorns delays.
then where the field consists of such a spirit,
He that subdues conquers the Crown by merit.
thats I.
tic I.
Rivers in blood declare it.
Grass turn to Crimson if vigenius spare it.
Air be made purple with our reeking gore.
Follow my friends.
Conquer or near give ore.
this way I saw vigenius on the spur.
I periduras, this way.
A strange fight, my Lord is breathless.
My dear Lord is dead.
True Brothers in ambition, and in death.
Yet we are enemies, why fight we not
With one another, for our generals loss.
To much blood already hath been spent,
Now therefore since the difference in themselves,
Is reconciled in eiders overthrow,
Let vs be as we were before this Jar,
And joining hands like honourable friends,
Inter their bodies as becomes their state,
And which is rare once more to Elidure,
Who now in prison leads a wearied life,
With true submission offer Englands Crown.
Of all the charges of tumultuous fate,
This is most strange three times to flow in state.
Madam.
You are welcome, what new flatteries,
Are a coining in the mint of that smooth face?
Where is the Lady Elidor I pray.
Amongst my other waiting maids at work.
Tic well, yet Madam with your gracious leave
I wish it better.
What in love with her,
Can thou affect such a dejected wretch,
Then I perceive thy flattery is folly,
Or thought prove honest, loving one so poor.
I know not Madam what your highness gathers
Out of my troubled words, I love you well,
And though the time should alter, as I am sure,
It is impossible, yet I would follow
All your misfortunes with a patient hart.
I have seen too much of thee to credit thee.
Now in your height of glory use your servant,
now Madam, whilst the noble Peridure
That loves you dearer then the British Crown,
Whilst hes conqueror, use me to destroy
Your greatest enemy, and I will doe it.
Thou wilt not.
Be it Elidure the king,
The prisoner I should say, Id murder him,
To show how much I love your majesty.
Thou would not poison for me his base Queen,
Whom I so often have triumphed ore,
That torment now is her beatitude,
And tedious unto me.
no more, shes dead.
See where she comes, dispatch her presently,
For though the Princely Peridure be king,
His brothers death in time will make him odious
Unto his subjects, and they may restore
Mild Elidure again, and then I dye,
Withdraw, shes dead, as surely as you live.
What shall I never from this servitude
Receive releasant evermore be plagued,
With this insulting Queen? Is there no change,
no other alteration in the state
I know there is not, I am borne to be
a slave, to one baser then slavery
I will release you by a speedy death.
By death, alas, what tongue pronounced that word?
What my Lord weather-cocke? nay then I see,
Death in thy mouth is but base flattery.
By heaven I am sent to kill you.
By whose means.
By one that will avouch it when tic done.
not the proud queen.
Yes, but I am determined
in full amends for all my flattery,
to save your life, and kill her instantly.
Oh if a Devil would undertake that deed,
I card not though she heard me, I would say,
He were a star more glorious then the day.
And would you for that good deed pardon me.
And quite all former injury.
But let me tell your highness by the way,
the Queen is not so hasty of your death.
no, for she had rather have my life prolongd.
I do assure your highness on mine honour,
When I did say she sent me to destroy you,
I slandered her great mercy towards you,
For she had given me order to release you.
Oh monstrous lie.
believe it, for tic true:
And this moreover, she so much repents
Her former pride and hardness towards you,
that she could wish it never had bin done.
then I repent me of my wrongs towards her,
And in the stead of a reward proposd
to him that should destroy her, I do wish,
Death be his death, that undertakes the deed.
but will you not forget these princely words,
if any alteration should ensue.
not I, I in my oths am true.
Except once more the Lords crown Elydure.
though that should chance, isle hold my promise sure.
And you too Madam.
So thou muderst his.
Know that Lord periduras and his
brother, are in the battle slain, and by the nobles,
her husband Elidure raised to the state,
setting aside all jesting, Queen believe it.
And truce with her, least she triumph again.
For Gods sake make vs friends.
Good Lord how strange this reconciled foes be∣hold each other.
Sister.
Kind sister.
Then make me your brother, say are you friends.
We are.
Then chance what can,
in this I have prooud my self an honest man.
The king your husband, madam new releast,
Desires your presence at his Coronation.
My Elydure a third time to be crowned.
True Madam, and expects your company.
And you knew this before.
No on mine honour.
Neither you Sister.
neither.
If you did My oath is past, and what I have lately sworn isle hold envy∣olate, here all strife ends, thy wit has made two proud shrews perfect friends.
A third time live our gracious sovereign
Monarch of England, crowned by these hands.
A third time Lords, I do return your love,
And wish it with my soul, so heaven were pleased,
My ambitious Brothers had not died for this,
But we have given them honourable graves.
And mournd their most untimely funeral,
My loved Queen, come seat thee by my side,
Partner in all my sorrows and my joys,
And you her reconciled Sister sit,
By her in second place of majesty,
It joys me that you have outworn your pride.
Methinks my gracious husband and my King,
I never took more pleasure in my glass,
Then I receive in her society.
Nor I in all my state as in her love.
My Lord of Cornwall, whose that whispers to you?
Or whats the news?
My liege, he tells me hears a great contention
betwixt two noted persons of the Land
much spoke of by all states, one some-body
Hath brought before your highness and this presence,
An infamous and strange opiniond fellow,
Called No-body, they would entreat your highness,
To hear their matters scand.
Weal sit in person on their controversies,
Admit them Cornwall.
Is that strange monster took, so much renownd,
In City, Court, and Country, for lewd pranks.
Tic well, weel hear how he can purge himself.
now sirrha we have brought you before the king,
Wheres your hart now?
My harts in my hose, but my face was never asha∣med to show it self, yet before king or Kaiser.
And wheres your hart sirrha?
My harts lower then my hofe, for mine it at my heel, but wheresoever it is, it is a true hart, and so is not somb.
Health to your Majesty, and to the Queen,
With a hart lower then this humble earth
whereon I kneel. I beg against this fellow,
Justice my liege.
Against whom.
Against No-body.
My liege, his words well suit unto his thoughts,
He wishes no man Justice, being composed
Of all deceit, of subtlety and slight,
For mine own part, if in this royal presence,
And before all these true judicial Lords,
I cannot with sincerenes clear my self,
Of all suggestions falsely kind against me,
Let me be hanged up sunning in the ayre,
And made a scar-crow.
Lets hear his accusations,
And then how well thou can aquit thy self.
First, when this monster made his residence
Within the country, and dispersed his shape
Through every shire and country of the Land,
Where plenty had before a quiet seat,
And the poor commons of the Land were full,
With rich abundance and society,
At his arrive, great dearths and scarcity,
By engrossing come, and racking poor men's rents.
This makes so many poor and honest Farmers,
to sell their leases, and to beg their bread,
this makes so many beggars in the Land.
I but what proof or lawful evidence
Can you bring forth, that this was done by him.
My Lord I tras't him, and so found him out,
But should your Lordship not believe my proof,
Examine all the rich and wealthy chuffs,
Whose full cramd Garners to the roofs are filled,
In every dearth who makes this scarcity,
And every man will clearly quit himself,
Then consequently, it must be No-body.
Base copper money is stamped, the mint disgraced,
Make search who doth this, every man clears one,
So consequently it must be No-body.
Besides, whereas the nobles of the land,
And Gentlemen built goodly manner houses,
Fit to receive a King, and all his train,
And there kept royal hospitality,
Since this intestine monster No-body,
Dwells in these goodly houses keeps no train,
A hundred Chimneys, and not one cast smoke,
And now the cause of these, mock-begger Hal,
Is this they, are dwelt in by No-body,
For this out of the country he was chaste.
My royal liedge why am I thus disgraced,
Isle prove that slanderous wretch hath this al done.
Tic good you can acquit you, such abuses,
Grow in the country, and unknown to vs:
nay then no marvel that so many poor,
starve in the streets and beg from door, to door.
Then sirha purge you from this country blame,
Or we will make thee the worlds public shame.
now No-body, what can you say to this.
My M. hath good cards, on his side Isle warrant him.
my Lord, you know that slanders are no proofs,
nor words without their present evidence,
If things were done, they must be done by some-body,
Else could they have no being. Is corn hoarded,
some-body hoards it, else it would be dealt,
In mutual plenty throughout all the land,
Are their rents raised, if No-body should doe it,
then should it be undone. Is
Base money stamped, and the kings letters forgd,
Some-body needs must doe it, therefore not I,
And where he says, great houses long since built,
Lye destitute, and wast because inhabited,
By No-body my liedge, I answer thus,
If Some-body dwelt therein, I would give place.
Or wold he but allow those chimneys fire,
They would cast clouds to heaven, the Kitchin-foode
It would relieve the poor, the sellers beer,
It would make strangers d•ink, but he commits
These outrages then lays the blame on me,
And for my good deed, I am made a scorn.
I only give the tired a refuge seat,
The vnclothd garments, and the starved meat.
How say you by this moister Some-body. I believe
you will be found out by and by.
If this be true my liedge, as true it is,
Some-body will be found an arrant cheater,
Unless he better can acquit himself.
Touch him with the city, since you have taken the foil in the Country.
Sirha, what can you say to this?
What should I say my Lord, see hear complaints,
Made in the city against no-body,
As well as in the country. See their bills,
Hears one complains his wife hath bin abroad,
And asking where she revels night, by night,
She answers she hath bin with no-body.
Hears queens maintained in every suburb street,
Ask who maintains them, and tic no-body.
Watches are, beaten, and Constables are scoft,
In dead of night men are made drunk in taverns,
Girls loose their maiden heads at thirteen years,
Pockets picked, and purses cut in throngs.
Enough, enough, doth no-body all this?
Though he hath cleared himself from country crimes,
He cannot scope the city.
Yes dread Queen,
I must confess these things are daily done,
For which I here accuse this Some-body,
That every where with slanders dogs my steps,
And cunningly assumes my borrowed shape,
Women lie out, if they be took and found
with somebody, then No-body goes clear,
Else the blames mine, he doth these faults unknown,
then slanders my chaste innocence for proof.
somebody doth maintain a common strumpet
ith Garden-allies, and undid himself.
somebody swaggered with the watch last night,
was carried to the counter.
somebody once picked a pocket in this Play-house yard,
Was hoisted on the stage, and shamd about it.
Ha, ha, hath my moister met with you.
Alas my liege, your honest No-bodie
Builds Churches in these days, and Hospitals,
Relieves the several prisons in the City,
Redeems the needy debtor from the hole,
And when this somebody brings infant children,
And leaves them in the night at strangers doors,
Nobody fathers them, provides them nurses,
What should I say, your highness love I crave,
That am all just.
Then somebodies a knave.
If neither city nor country will prevail to him, with the court ma. somebody, and there you will match him.
Then touching his abuses in the court.
I marry Nobody what say you to this,
See, here are dangerous Libels against the state,
And no name to them, therefore nobodies.
Besides strange rumours and false buzzing tales,
Of mutinous losings raised by No-body.
False dice and Cheating brought even to the pre∣sense, and who dares be so impudently knavish,
Unless some fellow of your name and garb.
Cards of advantage with such cheating tricks,
Brought even amongst the noblest of the land,
And when these cozening shifts are once discovered,
There is no cheater found save No-body.
How can thou answer these.
Even as the rest,
Are libels cast, if nobody did make them,
And no-bodies name to them, they are no libels,
For he that sets his name to any slander,
Makes it by that no libel, this approves
He forgd those slanderous writs to scandal me.
And for false cards, and dice, let my great slops
And his big bellied doublet both be searched,
And see which harbors most hypocrisy.
Let them both be searched.
Isle take my leave of the presence.
nay M. sicophant weal have the inside of your pose∣kits translated to, weal see what stuffyng they have, Isle take a little pains with you.
What have you there in nobodies pockets.
Here are my liedge bonds forfei• by poor men,
Which he releast out of the usurers hands,
And concealed. Leases likewise forfeited,
By him repurchast. These petitions,
Of many poor men to prefer their suits.
Unto your highness.
Thou art Just we know,
All great men's pockets should be lined so.
What bombast bears his gorge.
False Cards, false Dice;
The kings hand counterfeit,
Bonds put in suit to gain the forfitures,
forgd deeds to cheat men of their ancient land,
And thousand such like trash.
Nay look you here, hears one that for his bones is prettily stuffed. Hears fulloms and gourds: hears tall-men &amp; low-men Here tray duce ace, passedge comes a pace.
Mercy great King.
Mercy my Sovereign.
My liedge you cannot to be severe in punishing,
Those monstrous crimes, the only stain and blemish
To the weale-publike.
Villains hear your doom,
Thou that hast bin the oppression of the poor,
Shalt bee more poor then penury it s•lfe,
All that thou hast is forfit to the Law,
For thy extortion I will have thee branded,
Upon the forehead with the letter F.
For Cheating whipped, for forging loose thine ears,
Last for a basing of thy Sovereigns Coin,
And traitrous impress of our kingly seal,
Suffer the death of traitors. Bear him hence.
Since I must needs be martird grant me this,
That No-body may whip, or torture me,
Or hang me for a traitor.
Away with him.
Or if needs I must dye a traitors death,
That No-body may see me when I dye.
Hence with the traitor.
I know by your complexion you were ripe for the hang∣m•n, but now to this lean Gentleman.
Let me doom him, smooth spaniel, soothing grome
Slick Oily knave, egregious parasite,
Thou turning vane, and changing Weather-cocke,
My sentence is thou shalt be naked stripped,
And by the city beadles soundly whipped.
Isle make bold to see thexecution.
Well hath the King decreed, now by your highness patience let No-body borrow a word or two of Euery-bo∣die.
Heer if you wonder why the king Elidurus bestows no∣thing on me for all my good services in his land, if the multitude should say he hath preferred No-body, Some-body or other would say it were not well done, for in doing good to No-body he should but get himself an il name. There∣fore I will leave my suit to him, and turn to you. Kind Gentleman if any-body here dislike No-body, then I hope Euery-body have pleased you, for being offended with no-body, nor Any-body can find himself aggrieved, Gentle∣men they have a cold suit that have no-body to speak in their cause, and therefore blame vs not to fear, yet our comfort is this, if no-body have offended you cannot blame No-bo∣die for it, or rather we will find Some-body hereafter shall make good the fault that no-body hath done, and so I crave the general grace of Euery-body.
now forward Lords, long may our glories stand,
Three sundry times Crowned king of this fair land.

GEntlemen give leave: you great ambassadors,
From Francis the most christian king of France:
My Lord of Paris, and Lord Boneuet,
Welcome to England: since the king your maistes
Entreats our furtherance to advance his peace;
Giving vs titles of high dignity,
As next elect to Romes Suprenacie.
Tell him we have so wrought with English Henry
(Who, as his right hand loves the Cardinal)
That vn-delaid, you shall have audience:
And this day will the king in person sit
To hear your message, and to answer it.
Your grace hath done vs double courtesy:
For so much doth the king our moister long,
To have an answer of this emba••age.
As minutes are thought months till we return.
And that is the cause his highness moves your grace,
To quick dispatch betwixt the king and him:
And for a quittance of your forwardness,
And hopeful kindness to the crown of France,
Twelve reverent Bishops are sent post to Rome,
Both from his highness and the Emperor,
To move Campeus and the Cardinals,
For your election to the papal throne,
That Woolsies head may year the tripall Crown.
We thank his highness for remembering vs.
And so salute my Lord the Emperor,
Both which (if Woolsie be made Pope of Rome)
Shall be made famous through all Christendom.
How now 〈◊〉.
Sir William Cumpton from his highness comes,
To do a message to your excellence,
Delay him a while, and tell him we are busy,
Mean time my Lords you shall with draw your selves,
Our private conference must not be known,
Let all your gentlemen in their best array,
Attend you bravely to king Henries cot,
Where we in person presently will meet you:
And doubt not wele prevail succ•sfully.
But hath your grace yet moved his highness sister,
For kind acceptance of our Sovereigns love.
I have, and by the kings means finished it,
And yet it was a task, I tell ye Lords,
That might have be•e imposed to Hercules,
To win a Lady of her spirit and years.
To see her first love cround with silver hairs,
As old king Lewes is, that bedrid lies,
Unfit for love, or worldly vanities.
But tic is countries peace the king respects,
We think no less, &amp; we have fully wrought it,
The Emperors for•es that were levied,
To invade the frontiers of lo Burgondy,
Are staid in Brabant by the kings command,
The Admiral Hayward that was lately sent,
With threescore •ail of ships and pinnaces,
To Batter down the towns in Normandy,
I• by our care for him, called home again:
Then doubt not of a fair success•full end;
Since VVoolsie is esteemed your Soueraines friend.
We thank your excellence, and take our leaves,
Hast ye to court, lie meet ye presently.
God morrow to your grace.
God morrow Lords, go cal Sir VVilliam Cump∣t•n in,
We must have narrow eyes, and quick conceit,
To look into these dangero is stratagems,
I will effect for France, as they for me:
If Woolsie to the Popes high state attain,
The league is kept, or else he•e brooked again,
Now good Sir William
The king my Lord entreats your reverent grace,
There may be had some private conference,
Betwixt his highness and your excellence,
Before he hear the French Ambassadors,
And wills you hasten your repair to him,
We will attend his highness presently,
Boner, see all our train be set in readiness,
That in our state and pomp pontificiall,
We may pass on to grace king Henries court,
I have a message from the Queen my Lord,
Who much commends, &amp; humbly thanks your grace,
For your exceeding love, and zealous prayers,
By your directions through all England sent:
To invoke for her sound prosperous help,
By heavens fair hand in child-bed passions.
We thank her highness that accepts our love,
In all Cathedral Churches through the land,
Are Masses, Dirges, and Processions sung:
With prayers to heaven to bless her Majesty,
And send her joy, and quick delivery:
And so Sir William do my duty to her,
Queen Iane was ever kind and courteous,
And always of her subjects honoured.
I take my leave my Lord.
Adieu good knight weal follow presently,
Now Woolsie work thy wits like gaddes of steel,
And make them pliable to all impressions,
That King and Queen and all may honour thee:
So toild not Caesar in the state of Room,
As Woolsie labours in the affairs of Kings:
As Hanniball with oil did melt the Alps:
To make a passage into Itali•:
So must we bear our high pitched Eminence
To dig for glory in the hearts of men.
Till we have got the papal diadem:
And to this end have I composed this plot,
And made a League between the French and v•
And match their Aged King in holy Marriage,
With Lady Mary Royal Henries sister:
That he in peace complotting with the Emperor
May plea• for vs within the Courts of Rome:
Wherefore was Alexanders fame so great,
But that he conquered and deposed Kings,
And where doth Woolsie fail to follow him,
That thus comman death Kings and Emperors,
Great Englands Lord have I so won with words:
That under colour of ad•sing him,
I overrule both Counsel, Court, and King:
Let him command, but we will execute.
Making our glory to out-shine his •am
Till we have purchased an eternal name.
Now Boner, are those proclamations sent
As we directed to the Shriffes of London,
Of certain new devised Articles,
For ordering those brothels called the Stews?
They are ready my Lord, and the Shrive attends for them,
Dispatch him quickly, and haste after me;
We must attend the Kings high Majesty.
Charles Brandon, Dudly, and my good Lord Gray,
Prepare your selves, and be in readiness•e,
To entertain these French Ambassadors,
Meet them before our royal Palace Gate:
And so conduct them to our Majesty.
We mean this day to give them Audience.
Gray, We will my Lord.
Le tone attend without.
And bring vs word when they are coming on:
How now Queen Iane (Mother of God) my love
Thou wilt never be able to sit half this time:
Ladies, I fear shele wake ye, yerbe long,
Me thinks she bears her burden veric heavily,
And yet good sister and my honoured Lords,
If this fair hour exceed not her expect.
And pass the calendar of her accounts,
She will hear this Embassage, Iane wilt thou nor
Yes my dear Lord, I cannot leave your sight.
So long as life retains this Mention?
In whose sweet looks bright soueraigntyes in Thronde,
That make all Nations love and honour thee,
Within thy frame sits Awful Malestie,
Wrethed in the curled •urrowes of thy front:
Admired and feared even of thine enemies;
To be with thee, is my silence•e.
Not to behold the state of all the world,
Could win thy Queen, thy sick unwildy Queen,
To leave her Chamber, in this mothers state.
But sight of thee unequal potent ate,
God a-mercie Iane, reach me thy princely hand.
Thou art now a right woman, goodly, chief of thy sex;
Me thinks thou art a Queen superlative,
Mother, a God this is a women's glory,
Like good September Vines laden with fruit.
How ill did they define the name of women,
Adding so soul a preposition:
To call it woe to man, tic woe from man.
If woe it be, and then who dus not know,
That women still from men receive their woe.
Yes, hey love men for it, but whats their gain,
Poor souls no more but travail for their pain;
Come, love thou art sad, call Will Summers in, to
Make her merry, where is the fool to day,
He was met my Liege they say at London
Early this morning with Doctor Skeleton,
Hes never from him, go let a grome be sent,
And fetch him home, my good Lord Cardinal:
Who are the chief of these Ambassadors?
Lord Boneue• the French high Admiral,
And Iohn de Mazo reverent Bishop of Paris.
Let their welcome be thy care good Woolsie.
It shall my Liege.
Spare for no cost, Compton, what news?
Ambassadors my Liege.
Enough, go give them entertainment Lords,
Charles Brandon, hearst thou, give them curtsy
Enough, and state enough, go conduct them.
I go my Lord.
How now William, what? post, post, where
have you been riding.
Out of my way old Harry, I am all on the spur,
I can tell ye, I have tidings worth telling.
Why, where hast thou bin:
Marry I rise •early, and ride post to London, to
know what news was here at Court.
Was that your nearest way William?
O I, the very foot path, but yet Irid the horse▪
way to here it, I warrant there is ne'er a Cundhead kee∣perin
Londō, but knows what is done in all the Courts
in Cristendome
And what is the best news there William?
Good news for you my Lord Cardinal, for
one of the old women Waterbearers told me for certain,
that last Friday all the belles in Rome Rang backward,
there was a thousand Dirges sung, six hundred aue∣maries
said, every man washed his face in holy water, the
peopel crossing and blessing themselves to send them a
new Pope, for the old is gon to purgatory.
Ha, ha, ha,
Nay, my Lord you'd laugh, if it were so indeed, for
every body thinks if the Pope were dead; you gape for
a benefice, but this news my Lord is called too good to
be true.
But this news came a pace Will, that came
from Rome to London since Friday last,
For, it was at Billings-gate by Saturday More∣ning,
it was a full Moon, and it came up in a spring tide.
Then you here of the Ambassadors that are come.
I, I, &amp; that was the cause of my riding to know
what they came for, I was told it all at a Barbers.
Ha, ha, what a fools this, Iane, and what
doe they say he comes for, Will:
Marry they say he comes to crave thy aide against the
great Turk that vows to overrun all France within this fortnight,
he's in a terrible rage belik, &amp; they say, the reason is, his old god Ma∣met
that was buried ith top on's Church at Meca, his Tomb fell
down, and kilde a Sow and seven Pigs, whereupon they think
all swines flesh is new sanctified, and now it is thought the Jaws will
fall to eating of pork extremely after it.
This is strange indeed, but is this all.
No there is other news that was told me, among the we∣men
at a back house, and that is this, they say, the great Bell in gla∣ssenberie.
Tor has told twice, and that king Arthur, and his Knights
of the round Table that were buried in Armour, are alive again, cry∣ing
Saint Gorge for England, and mean shortly to conquer Rome,
marry this is thought to be but a moral,
The Ambassadors are coming, and hear William see that
you be silent, when you see them hear.
Isle be wise and say little I warrant thee, and therefore till I
see •m come, Isle go talk with the Queen; how dost thou lane, sir∣ra.
Harry, she looks very big upon me, but I care not, and she
bring thee a young Prince, Will summers may hap's be his fool, whē
you two are both dead and 〈◊〉:
Go to William, how now Iane what groaning,
Gods me th'hast an Angry soldiers frown:
I think to Harry, thou hast pressed her often:
I am sure this two years she has sern'd under thy stādard.
Good faith my Lord I must entreat your grace
That with your favour I may leave the presence:
I cannot stay to hear this Embassage,
Gods holy mother, Ladies leau her to her chāber,
Go bid the Midwives, and the Nurses v. eight,
Make hole some fierce and take her from the Air,
Now Iane God bring me but a chopping boy,
Be but the Mother to a Prince of Wales
Ad a ninth Henrie to the English Crown,
And thou make full my hopes, fair Queen adieu:
And may heavens helping hand our joys renew:
God make your Majesty a happy Mother,
And help you in your weakelt passions,
With zealous prayer we all will invoke:
The powers divine for your delivery:
We thank you all, and in fair interchange
We will pray for you: now on my my humble knees,
I take my leave of your high Majesty,
God send your highness long and happy Reign,
And bless this king dome, and your subjects lives:
And to your gracious heart all joy restore,
I fear I shall never behold you more,
Doe not think so fair Queen, go to thy bed,
Let not my love be so discomforted.
No. no, I warrāt thee Iane, make hast &amp; dispatch this
That thou moist have another against next Christmas
Ladies attend her, Countess of Salisbury, sister Mary
Who first brings word that Hare• hath a Son
Shall be rewarded well:
I, Isle bee his suertie: but doe you hear wenches, she that
brings the first tidings how soever it fall out lot her be sure to say the
Child• like the father or else she shall have no•hinge.
Welcome Lord Bonneuet, welcome Bishop
What from our brother brings this Embassage.
Most fair cōmends great &amp; renowned Hen.
We in the person of our Lord and King,
Here of your highness, doe entreat a League
And to reed•i• the former peace:
Held betwixt the Realms of England and of France,
Of late disordered for some petty wrongs:
And pray your Majesty to stay your powers;
Already levied in low Burgandie,
Which to maintain our oaths, shall be ingadge,
And to confirm it with more surety,
He craves your 〈◊〉 consent unto his love,
And give the Lady A•arie for his Queen,
The second sister to your Royal self.
So may an heir springing from both your bloods.
Make both Realms happy by a lasting I eague,
Wee kindly doe receive your Masters love,
And yet our grant stands strong unto his suit,
If that no following censure •able it:
For we herein must take our Counsels aide.
But howsoever our answer shall be swift,
Mean time we grant you fair access to woe,
And win her (if you can) to be his Queen.
Our self will second you. Right welcome both,
Lord Cardinal, these Lords shall be your Guests,
But let our Treasure wast to welcome them:
Banquet them, how they will, what cheer, what sport,
Let them see Harry keeps a kingly Court:
I shall my Sovereign.
Ki With draw a while our selves will follow ye.
Now will are you not deceived in this Embassage,
You heard they came for aide against the Turk•.
Well then, now I see there is loud lies told in London
But else on for their comming's to as much purpose as the other:
And why I pray,
Why dost thou think thy sister such a fool, to marry such
an o•d d•es veneris, he get her with Prince? I, when either I, or the
Cardinal prove Pope, and that will never be, I hope:
How know thou him to be old, thou never 〈◊〉 him?
No, nor he me, but I saw his picture with nerve tooth • the
head out, and all his beard as well favoured as a white •roast, but it is
no matter, if he have her, he will dye shortly, and then she may help
to bu•y him,
Run, Run, good Madam, call the Ladies in.
Call for more Women's help, the Queen is sick.
For Gods love go back again, and wa•me more clothes,
O let the wine be well burned I charge ye.
I, In any case, or I cannot drink it, dost thou hear Harry,
what a coil they keep: I warrant, these women will drink thee up
more wine, with their gossipping, then was spent in all the Condu∣its
at thy Coronation.
I is no matter •ill, How now Ladies,
I beseech your grace command the fool
forth of the pesence,
Away William you must be goue, her's women's matters in hand
Let them speak lo then, Isle not out of the room, sure,
Come, come let's thrust him out, he'll not stir•e else:
Thrust me, nay and ye go to thrusting, isle thrust some of you
down I warrant ye:
Nay, go good William:
Isle out of their company Harry, they will scratch worse then
cats, if they catch me, therefore Isle hence and leave them, God boy
Ladies do you hear Madam Mary, you had need to be wary,
my news is worth a white-cake, you must play at tennis with old
Saint Dennis, and your maiden-heade mustlye at the stake.
Ha, ha, the fool tells you true (my gentle sister)
But to our business, how fares my Queen?
How fares my Iane, has she a son for me?
To raise again our kingdoms sovereignty
That yet rests doubtful, O my princely Lord.
Your poor distressed Queen lies weak and sick,
And be it son or daughter, dear she buys it,
Even with her dearest life, for one must dye:
All Women's help is past. Then good my Liege,
Resolve it quickly, if the Queen shall live,
The Child 〈◊〉 die, or if it life resolves,
You must your hopeless Queen of life bereave,
You pierce me with your news, run, send for help.
Spend the revenues of my Crown for aide,
To save the life of my beloved Queen:
How hoped she is so ill attended on.
That we are put to this extremity,
To save the Mother or the child to dye.
I beseech your grace resolve immediately,
Immediately (say thou) O, tic no quick resolve
Can give good verdict in so sad a choice:
To loose my Queen, that is my some of bli••e,
More virtuous than a thousand Kingdoms be;
And should I lose my Son (if Son it be)
That all my subjects to desire to see.
I loose the hope of this great Monarchy.
What shall I doe?
Remember the Queen my Lord:
I not forget her (Sister) O poor soul,
But I forget thy pain and misery,
let the Child die; let the Mother li•e,
Heavens powerful hand may more children give:
Away, and comfort her with our reply,
Harry will have his Queen though thousands die.
I know no issue of her princely womb:
Why then should I preferre't before her life.
Whose death ends all my hopeful loyes on earth.
God's will be done, for suer it is his will,
For secret reasons to himself best known:
Perhaps he did •old forth a Son for me,
And seeing (that sees all) in his creation,
To be some impotent and coward spirit,
Unlike the figure of his Royal Father:
Has thus decrede, least he should blur out fame,
As Meanwhile did the sixth king of my name
Loose all his Father (the first Henrie) won.
Isle thank the Heavens for taking such a Son.
Whose within there?
Go Compton, bid Lord Seimer come to me,
The honoured Father of my woeful Queen
Now now what news?
We did deliver what your highness wild,
Which was no sooner by her grace received:
But with the sad report, she seemed as dead,
Which caused vs stay, after reuouerie.
She sent vs back tintreate your Majesty,
As ever you did take delight in her,
As you prefer the quiet of her soul,
That now is ready to forsake this life,
As you desire to have the life of one,
She doth entreat your grace that she may dye,
Least both doth perish in this ag•no:
For to behold the insant suffer death,
Were endless tortures, made to stop her breath,
Then to my Lord (quoth she) thus gently say,
The child is fair, the mother earth and clay,
Sad messenger of woe; oh my poor Queen,
Can thou so soon consent to leave this life,
So precious to our soul, so dear to all,
To yield the hopeful issue of thy loins,
To raise our second comfort, well, be it so:
Ill, be it so: stay, I revoke my word,
But that you say helps not, for she must dye:
Yet if ye can save both, isle give my crown:
Nay, all I have, and enter bonds for more,
Which with my conque•ing sword with fury bent,
Isle purchase in the farthest continent,
Use all your chiefest skill, make hast away,
Whilst we for your success devoutly pray.
All joy and happiness betide my Sovereign.
Joy be it good Lord Seymer noble father,
Or joy, or grief, thou hast a part in it,
Thou commit to greet vs in a doubtful hour,
Thy daughter and my Queen lies now in pain,
And if I loose, Seymer thou can not gain.
Yet comfort, good my Liege, this women's woe,
Why? tic as certain to her as her death,
Both given her in her first creation:
It is a sower to sweet, given them at first,
By their first mother, then put sorrow hence:
Your grace, erc long shall see a gallant Prince,
Be thou a Prophet Seymer in thy words,
Thy love some comfort to our hopes affords,
How now.
My gracious Lord, here I present to you,
A goodly son: see here your flesh, your bone,
Look here royal Lord, I warrant tic your own.
See here my Liege, by the rood a gallant Prince,
Ha little cakebread, foregod a chopping boy.
Even now I wept with sorrow, now with joy,
Take that for thy good news, how fares my Queen.
O my good Lord, the woeful.
Tell no more of woe, speak, doth she live?
What? weep ye all, nay, then my heart misgives,
Resolve me sister, is the news worth hearing.
Nor worth the telling, royal Sovereign.
Now, by my crown, thou dimst my royalty,
And with thy cloudy looks eclipsed my joys,
Thy silent eye betrays a ruthful sound,
Stopped in the organs of thy troubled spirit:
Say, is she dead.
Without offen•e she is.
Without offence, •ailt thou, heaven take my soul,
What can be more offensive to my life:
Then sad remembrance of my fair Queens death,
Thou woeful man, that came to comfort me:
How shall I ease thy hearts calamity?
That cannot help thy self, how one sad minute
Hath raised a fount of sorrows in his eyes,
And bleared his aged cheeks, yet Seymer see,
She hath left part of her self, a son to me:
To thee a graund-child, unto the land a Prince,
The perfect substance of his royal mother,
In whom her memory shall ever live:
Phoenix Iana obit veto Phaenice,
Dolendum secula phaenices nulla •nlisse duas.
One Phoenix dying, gives another life,
Thus must we flatter our extremest grief.
What day is this.
Saint Edwards even my Lord.
Prepare for christening, Edward shall be his name,
My Lords of France you have had small cheer with vs,
But you must pardon vs, the times are sad,
And focits not now for mirth and banqueting:
Therefore I pray make your swift return,
Commend me to your king, and kindly tell him,
The English Cardinal will remain his friend,
The Lady Mary shall be forthwith sent,
And overtake ye ere you reach to Dover:
And for the business that concerns the league,
Urge it no more, but leave it to my care,
We thank your grace, my good Lord Cardinal,
And so with thankfulness we take our leaves.
Happily speed my honourable Lords,
My heart, I swear, still keeps you company,
Farewell to both, pray your king remember,
My suit betwixt him and the Emperor,
We shall be thankful, if they think on vs.
We will be earnest in your cause my Lord,
So of your grace we once more take our leaves.
Again farewell, Boner conduct them forth,
Now Gardner, what think thou of these times.
Well, that the leagues confirmed, my gracious Lord,
Ill, that I fear the death of good Queen Iane,
Will caute new troubles in our state again.
Why think thou so?
I fear false Luther; doctrins spread so far,
I cast that his highness now unmarried,
Should match amongst that sect of Lutherans,
You saw how soon his majesty was won,
To scorn the Pope, and Romes religion,
When Queen Anne Bullen wore the diadem.
Gardner tic true, so was the rumour spread:
But Woolsie wrought such means she lost her head,
Tush fear not thou whilst Haries life doth stand,
He shall be king, but we will rule the land.
Boner come hither, you are our trusty friend:
See that the treasure we have gathered,
The Copes, the Vestments, and the Chalices,
The smoke pence, and the tributary fees,
That English chimneys pay the Church of Rome:
Be barreld close within the inner seller,
Wele send it over shortly to prepare,
Our swift advancement to Saint Peters chair,
Be trusty, and be sure of honours speedily,
The king hath promised at the next election,
Boner shall have the Bishopric of London.
I humbly thank your grace.
And Gardner shall be Lord of Winchester:
Had we our hopes, what shall you not be then,
When we have got the Papal diadem.
How now Sir William Cumpton, where is the king.
His grace is walking in the gallery,
As sad and passionate as ere he was.
It were good your grace went in to comfort him.
Not I Lord Dudley, by my George I swear,
Unless his Highness first had sent for me,
I will not put my head in such a hazard,
I know his anger, and his spleen too well.
Tic strange, this humour hath his highness held,
Ever since the death of good Queen Iane,
That none dares venture to confer with him.
Here comes the Cardinal.
I, and two fools after him, his Lordship is well
attended still
Lets win this prelate to salute the king,
It may perhaps work his disgrace with him,
How now William, what? are you here to,
I my Lord, all the fools follow you, I come to
bid my cousin Patch welcome to the court, and when I
come to York house, heal do as much for me, will ye
not Patch?
Yes cousin, hey, da, tere, dedell, they, day.
What, are you singing sir.
Isle make 〈◊〉 cry as fast anon I hold a penny.
God morrow to your grace my good Lord Car∣dmall.
We thank your honour.
What Cumpton, Carew.
Hark, the king ca•s.
Mother of God, how are we attended on: who
weights without.
Go in Sir William, and if you find his grace
In any milder temper then he was last night,
Let vs have word, and we will visit him.
I Will my Lord.
What is the occasion, that the kings so moved.
His grace hath taken such an inward gre•e,
With sad remembrance of the Queen that's dead:
That much his highness wrongs his state and person,
Besides in Ireland, do the Burkes rebel,
And stout Pearsie that disclod the plot,
Was by the Earl of Kildare late put to death.
And Martin Luther out of Germanie.
Has writ a book against his Majesty,
For taking part with proud Pope Iulius,
Which being spread by him through Christendom,
Hath thus incensed his royal majesty.
Tush, I have news, my Lord, to salve that •ore,
And make the king more feared through christendom,
Then ever was his famous ancestors:
Nor can base Luther with his heresies,
Backed by the proudest germaine potentate,
Heretically blur king Henries •am:
For honour that he did Pope Iuli••,
Who in high favour of his Majesty,
Hath sent Campeus with a bull from Rome,
To add unto his title this high stile:
That he and his fair posterity,
Proclaimed defenders of the faith shall be:
For which intent the holy Cardinals come,
As Legates from the Imperial court of Rome.
This news, my Lord, may something ease his mind,
It were good your grace would go and visit him.
I will, and doubt not but to please him well.
So, I am glad he's in, and the king be no better pleased then
he was at our last parting, heal make him repent his sauciness.
How now old William, how chance you go not to the king,
and comfort him.
No byr'lady, my Lord, I was with him too lately already, his
fist is too heavy for a fool to stand under, I went to him last night,
after you had left him, seeing him chase so at Charles, here to make
him merry; and he gave me such a box on the ear, that stroke me
clean through three chambers, down four pair of stairs, fell
ore five barrels, into the bottom of the seller, and if I had not well
lickard my self there, I had never lived after it.
Faith Will, isle give thee a velvet coat, and thou can but
make him merry.
Will ye my Lord, and isle venture another box on the ear but
isle do it.
Clear the presence there, the king is com•ing,
Gods me, my Lords, what meant the Cardinal,
So unexpected thus to trouble him.
Is the king moved at it.
Judge by his countenance, see he comes.
Isle not endure the storm.
Nor I.
Run fool your moister will be field else.
Did we not charge that none should trouble vs,
Presumptuous priest, proud prelate as thou art,
How comes it you are grown so •aucie sir,
Thus to presume upon our patience,
And cross our royal thought disturbed and vexed,
By all your negligence in our estate,
Of vs and of our countries happiness.
My gracious Lord.
Fawning beast stand back:
Or by my crown, isle foot thee to the earth,
Wheres Brandon, Surrey, Seymer, Gray,
Where is your counsel now, O now ye crooch,
And stand like pictures at our presence door,
Call in our guard, and bear them to the Tower,
Mother of God, isle have the traitors heads,
Go hale them to the block, up, up, stand up,
Isle make you know your duties to our state,
Am I a cipher, is my sight grown stale,
Am I not Harry, am I not Englands king, Ha.
So la, now the watch words given, nay and hee
once cry ha, near a man in the court dare for his head
speak again, lye close cousin P•tch.
Isle not come near him cousin, has almost kilt
me with his countenance.
We have been too familiar, now I see,
And you may dally with our majesty:
Where are my pages there.
My Lord.
Truss sir, none to put my garter on,
Give me some wine, here stuff a the tother side,
Proud Cardinal who followed our affairs in Italy,
That we that honoured so Pope Iulius,
By dedicating books at thy request,
Against that upstart sect of Lutheraus,
Should by that heretic be banded thus,
But by my George, I swear, if Henry live,
Isle hunt base Luther through all Germany,
And pull those seven electors on their knees:
If they but back him against our dignities.
Base slave tie soft, thou hurst my leg,
And now in Ireland the Burkes rebel,
And with his stubborn kernes makes hourly rodes,
To burn the borders of the English pale,
And which of all your counsels helps vs now.
Here is wine, my Lord.
Drink, and be damned, I cry thee mercy Cumpton,
What the devil mentst thou to come behind me so,
I did mistake, isle make thee amends for it,
By holy Paule, I am so cro•t and vexed,
I knew not what I did, and here at home,
Such careful statsemen do attend vs,
And looks so wisely to our common weal,
That we have ill May-dayes, and riots made:
For lawless rebels do disturb our state,
Twelve times this term, have we in person sate,
Both in the star chamber, and Chancery courts,
To hear our subjects suits determined:
Yet tic your office Woolfie, but all of you
May make a packehorse of king Henry now:
Well, what would ye say.
Nothing that might displease your majesty,
I have a message from the Pope to you.
Then keep it still, we will not hear it yet,
Get all of you away, avoid our presence
We cannot yet command our patience,
Reach me a chair.
Now will, or never, make the king but smile,
And with thy mirthful toys allay his spleen,
That we his counsel, may confer with him,
And by my Honour, isle reward thee well,
Too him good Will.
Not too fast, I pray, least will Summers here bee
seen again, I know his qualities as well as the best
an ye: for ever when he's angry, and no body dare
speak to him, ye thrust me in by the head and should∣ders,
and then wee fall to buffets, but I know who has
the worst ant: but go, my Lord, stand aside, and stir
not till I call ye, let my cousin Patch and I alone, and
hee go to boxing, wele fall both upon him, thats cer∣tain:
but and the worst come, bee sure the Cardinals
fool shall pay fort.
Use your best skill, good william, isle not be seen,
Unless I see him smile.
Where art thou cousin, alas poor fool, he's crept
under the table, up cousin, fear nothing, the storms
past, I warrant thee.
Is the king gon, cousin?
No, no, 〈◊〉 he sits, we are all friends now,
The Lords are gone to dinner, and thou and I must
waite at the kings table.
Not I byr'lady, I would not waite upon such a
Lord, for all the livings in the land, I thought he would
have kilt my Lord Cardinal, he looked so terribly.
Foe, he did but jest with him, but isle tell the cousin
the rarest trick to bee revenged ast passes, and isle give
thee this fine silk point and thou'lt do it.
Obraue, obtaue, give me it cousin, and isle doe
what so ere tic.
Isle stand behind the post here, and thou shalt go
softly stealing behind him, as hee sits reading yonder,
and when thou come 〈◊〉 to him, cryboh, and wele
scarre him so, he shall not tell where to rest him.
But will he not be angry?
No, no, for then isle show my self, and after he sees who tic heal
la•e and be as merry as a maggie pie, and thow't bee a 〈◊〉 man
by it, for all the house shall see him hug thee in his arms, •
dandle thee up and down with hand &amp; foot an thou were a footebal,
O fine come cousin, give me the pynt first, &amp; isle roar so loud
that isle make him believe that the d•else come.
So doe and fear nothing, for an thou were the devil himself,
heal conjure thee I warrant thee, I would not have such a conjuring
for twenty crowns: but whē he has made way, isle make him merry
enough, I doubt it not, so so now cousin look to your Coxcomb:
Bow.
Mother of God whats that.
Bow.
Out ass take that and tumble at my •eete.
For thus Isle spurn thee up an down the house:
Help cousin help:
No cousin now he's conjure•ng. I dare not come near him.
Who set this nat'rall •eere to trouble me.
Whose that stands laffing there, the fool, ha, ha,
Wheres Comptō. Mother a God I have found his dri•t, tic the cra•teased
old villain in christendom, mark good Sir William, because the
fool durst not come near himself, seeing our anger, sent this silly
Ass, that we might wreak our royal spleen on him: whilst hee
stāds laffing to behold the left, bith blessed La (Copto•) Isle not leave
the fool, to gain a million, he contents me so, come hither Will,
Isle know whether ye have donne knocking first, my cousin
posh looks pitifully, ye had best bee friends with vs I can tell you,
weal scare ye out of your skin else
Alas, poor posh hold 〈◊〉 ther's an Angel to buy you points.
Law Cousin, did not I say he'll make much on ye,
I cousin but has made such a singing in my head
I cannot see where I am.
All the better cousin and your head fall a singing,
your feet may fall a dancing &amp; so save charges to the
piper:
Will Summers, prithee tell me why did thou send him first.
Because isle have him have the first fruits of thy fury. I know
how the matter stood with the next that disturbed thee, therefore I
kept ith rereward, that if the battle grew too hot, I might run presently,
But wherefore came ye.
To make thee leave thy melancholy and turn merry man a∣gain,
thou hast made all the Court in such a pitiful case as passes,
the Lords has attended here this •our days, and none
dares speak to thee, but thou art ready to chop of
their heads sort: and now I seeing what a fretting fury
thou continue in, and every one said twol'd kill thee if
thou keepst it, pulled even up my heart, and vowed to
loose my head, but isle make thee leave it,
Well William I am beholding to ye.
Ye shall have a new Coat and a cap for this.
Nay then, I shall have two new coats and cap pes,
for Charles Brandon promised me one before, to per∣form
this enterprise:
He shall keep his word will, go call him in,
Call in the Lords tell them our spleen is calmbd:
Mother a God we must give way to warth.
That cha•es our Royal blood with anger thus:
And use some mirth I see to comfort vs.
Draw near vs Lords, Charles Brandon lift to me:
Will Summers here must have a Coat of you,
But Patch has earned it dearest whirs the fool?
Hes enne creeping as ne'er the door as he can,
Heel fine begone I see, and he could get out,
Wo•ldest thou not cousin?
Yes cousin Will. Eld fine be walking, I am afraid,
I am not as I should be:
Come, isle help thee out then, dost thou hear my
Lord Cardinal, your fool is in a pitiful taking, hee
smells terriblie.
You are too cra•tie for him William,
So is he Woolsey credit me.
I think so my Lord, as long as will live, the Card∣nils
fool must give way to the kings fool:
Well sir bequiet, and my reverent Lords,
I thank you for your patient suffering,
We were disturbed in our thoughts we swear,
We now entreat you speak and we will hear,
Then may it please your sacred Majesty,
Legate to his holiness,
Attends with letters from the Court of Rome.
Let him draw near, weal give him Audience,
and Gray Attend the Cardinal,
And bring
to our presence here:
Gray, We go my Lord:
Brandon and Seymer, place your selves by vs,
To hear this message from his holiness,
You reverent princes pillars of the Church:
Legates, Apostolicke, how fares the Pope,
In health great King and from his sacred lips:
I bring a blessing Appostolicall.
To English Henrie and his subjects all:
And more to mani•cst his love to thee,
The prop and pillar of the Churches peace:
And gratify thy love made plain to him,
In learned books against Luthers heresy,
He sends me thus to gr•et thy Malestie:
With stile and titles of high dignitle,
Gommand the Heralds and the Trumpets forth:
Gentlemen dispatch and call them in:
Lord bless vs, whats here to doe now,
Receive this Bull sent from his holiness.
For confirmation of his dignity
To thee, and to thy fair posterity.
Tic well the Kings a widower, and he had put
forrh your Bull with his horns forward, Id have mart
your message. I can tell ye.
Peace
Heralds attend him:
Trumpets prepare whilst we allowed prouounce
This sacred message from his Holiness,
And in his reverent name I hear proclaim
Henric the Eight by the grace of God,
King of England, France and I•eland▪
And to this title, from the Pope we give:
Defender of the faith, in peace to live:
Sound Trumpets, and God save the King.
We thank his holiness for this princely •auour,
Receiving it with thanks and reverence:
In which whilst we have life, his grace shall see,
Our sword de•ender of the faith shall be,
Go one of you salute the Mayor of London,
Bid him with Heralds and with Trumpets sound,
Proclaim our Titles through his government,
Go Gray, see it donne, attend him fellows:
I go my Lord, Trumpets follow me,
What more Lord Legate doth his holiness will?
That Henry Joining with the Christian Kings
Of France and Spain, Denmark and Portugal
would send an Arms to assail the Turk,
That now invades with War the Isle of Rhodes,
Or send twelve thousand pound to be disposed,
As his holiness thinks best for their rel eife.
I thought so, I knew twoold be a money •matter,
when else done, now thart desēder of the •aith, the Pope
will have thee defend •ucrie thing himself and all.
Take hence the fool.
I, when cony tel? dost thou think any oath Lords
will take the fool, none here, I warrant, except the
Cardinals.
What a knavish fools this, Lords you must bear
with him come hither Will, what saift thou to this
new tytell given vs by the Pope, speak, first not
rare?
I know not how rare it is, but I know how deer
twill bee, for I perceive twill cost thee twelve thow∣sand
'pounds, at least, besides the Cardinals cost in com∣ring.
All these nothing; the title of defender of
the faith is worth ye, twice as much, say, is it
not.
No by my troth, dost hear old Harie; I am suer,
the true faith is able to defend it self without thee, and
as for the Popes faith (good faith's) not worth a •are∣thing,
and therefore give• him not a penny.
Go too 〈◊〉 meddle not you with the Popes
matters:
Let him not meddle with thy matters then, for,
and he meddle withthee, He middle with him thats cer∣taine
and so farewell, Isle go and meet my little young
Master Prince Edward, they say hee comes to Court
to night, Isle to horseback, Prithee Harie send one to
hold my sturrup: shall I tell the Prince what the Pope
has donne.
I and thou wilt Will, hee shall be defender of the faith too• one day.
No, and he and I can defend our selves we care not,
For we are sure the faith can.
Lord Legate, so we reverence Rome and you,
As nothing you demand, shall be den•ed:
The Turk will we expel from Ch••tendome,
Sending stout soldiers to his holiness,
And mon• to relecue diftressed R ho•des:
So if you please, pass in to banqueting,
Go Lords attend them, Brandon and Compton stay,
We have some business to confer upon.
We take our leave.
Most hearty welcome to my reverent Lords.
So, now to our business, 〈◊〉,
Hear ye no tidings from our sister Mary,
Since her arrival in the Reahme of France?
Thus much we heard my Lord, at Cales met her
The youthful Dolphin, and the Pecres of France:
And bravely brought her to the King at Towers,
Where he both married her, and crowned her Queen
Tic well, but Brandon and
Compion list to me,
I must employ your aide and secrecy,
This night we mean in some disguised shape;
To visit London, and to walk the round,
Pass through their watches, and observe the care
And special diligence to keep our peace.
They say night-walkers, hourly pass the streets,
Committing the•, and hated sacriliege:
And flightly pass unstaid, or unpunished,
Go Compton, go, and get me some disguise,
This night weal see our Cities government:
Brandon, doe you attend at Baynard. Castio,
Compton shall go disguised along with me,
Our swords and bucklers shall conduct vs safe,
But if we catch a knock to quit our pain,
Weal put it up, and bye vs home again.
Come neighbours, we have a straight command.
Our watches be scuerely looked into:
Much theft and murder was committed latelv,
There are two strangers, merchants of the Stillyard
Cruelly slain, found floating on the Temmes:
And greatly are Stews had in suspect,
As places fitting for no better use,
Therefore be careful and examine all,
Perhaps we may attach the murderer.
Nay I assure ye moister Constable, those stew
houses are places of much slaughter and redemption and ma∣ny
crew•ll deeds of equity and wickedness are committed
there, for divers good men loose both their money and their
computation by them, I abi•re ye; how say you neighbor
Prichall?
Neighbour Capcase, I know
you're a man of cour∣rage,
and for the merry cobbler of Lune street, tho I sit as lowe as
Saint Faiths, I can look as high as Pa•les: I have in my
days walked to the stews as well as my neighbours, but if the
mad wenches fall to burdering once, and cast men into the
Thames, I have done with them, theres no dealing, if they car∣•i•
fire in one hand, and water ith tother.
Well masters we are now plac'st about the King •busi∣ness.
And I know ye all sufficient in the knowledge of it,
I need not to rep•ate your charge again:
Good neighbours, use your greatest care I pray,
And if unruly persons trouble ye,
Call and isle come: so •yrs goodnight.
Godyegodnight and twenty sir, I warrant ye, ye
need not reconcile to our charge, for some on vs has dischar∣general
the place this forty year I am sure. Neighbours what
think you best to be done?
Every man according to his calling neighbour, if the
enomic come, here Eyes my town of Garrison, I set on him as
I set on a patch, if he tread on this side, I underlay him on this
side, or prick him through both sides, I yerk him, and trick
him, pare him and piece him, then hang him up beth heals
till Sunday.
How say ye, by my faith neighbour Prichall ye
speak to the purpose, for indeed neighbours, every sensible
watch-man is to seek the best reformation to his own de∣struction.
But what think ye neighbours, if every man take
a nap now, eth fore hand eth night, and go to bed afterword.
That were not a miss neither, but and you'll take but
every man his pot first, you'll sleep like the man eth Moon
in faith.
Doe ye think neighbour, there is a man eth Moon?
I assure ye in a clear day, I have seente at mid∣night.
Of what occupation is he trow•
Some thinks he's a shepherd, because once dog, some
says he's a baker going to heate his oven with a bavin ats
back, but the plain truth is, I think he was a cobbler, for ye
know what the song says, I see a man eth Moon, fie man, fie,
I see a man eth Moon, clouting Saint Peters shoon, and so
by this reason, he should be a cobbler.
By my fekins he saith true, alas, alas, goodman Dor∣•o•se
hath even given up the gost already, us an honest quiet
soul I warrant ye.
It behooves vs all to be so how doe ye neighbour Dar∣mons?
Godspeed ye, Godspeed ye, nay and ye go a gods∣sleepy,
name, I have nothing to say to ye.
Law ye, his minds once business, though he be ne'er so
Come lets all join with him and steal a nap, every
man masters to his s•u•rall stall.
Agreed, Godnight good neighbours.
Nay, lets take no leave, isle but wink a while, and see
you again. •ward•
Come sir William,
We may now stand upon our gaurd you see,
The watch has given vz leave to arm our selves,
They fear no danger, for they sleep secure:
Go carry those bills we took to Baynard Castle,
And bid Charles Brandon to disguise himself,
And meet me presently at Grace Church Corner,
We will attempt to pass through all the watches,
And so I take's will be an easy task,
Therefore make haste.
I will my Liege.
The watch-word if I chance to send to ye,
Is the great Stag of Baydon, so my name shall bee.
Enough, weal think on it.
So, now weal forward, soft yonder's light,
I and a watch, and all asleep burlady:
These are good peaceable subjects, here is none
Beckons to any, all may pass in peace: Ho sirrha.
Stand, who goes there?
good fellow. Stands a heinous word ethe Kings
High way you have been at Noddy, I see.
I, and the first card comes to my hand's a Knave.
I am a Coatercard indeed.
Then thou must needs be a Knave, for art neither King nor Queen, (I am sure) But whether goosed thou?.
About a little business that I have in hand.
Then good night, prethy trouble me no longer.
Why this is easy enough, here is passage at pleasure,
What wertch so wicked, would not give fair words
After the foulest fact of V•llainie?
That may escape vaseene so easily,
Or what should let him that is so resolved
To murder, rapine, theft, or sacrilege:
I see the City are the sleepy heads,
To do it, and pass thus unexamined.
Fond heedless men, what boots it for a King,
To toil hithselfe in this lugh state affairs,
To summon Parhaments, and call together
The wise•• heads of all his Provinces:
Making statutes for his subjects peace,
That thus neglecting them, their woes increase.
Well, weal further on, soft here comes one,
Isle stay and see, how he escapes the watch.
So, how I am got within the City, I am as
safe as in a Sanctuarieat is a hard world, when Black Will, for
a venture of •iue pound, must commit •uch petty robberies
at Mile-ende, but the plain truth is, the Stews from whence
I had my quartaridgeas now grown too •ote for me: theres
some suspection of a murder lately done upon two Mar∣chants
of the Stilliard, which indeed as far as some five or
six stabs comes too, I confess I had a hand in. But mum∣budget,
all the Dogs in the town must not bark at it.
I must withdraw awhile till the heate •ee ore, remove my
lodging, and live upon dark nights and 〈◊〉 mornings.
Now let me them see, the strongest watch in London inter∣cept
my passage.
Such a Fellow would I fine meet withal:
Well overtaken sir.
Sblood 〈◊〉 before me sir:
What a D•ell art thou?
A man atleast.
And art thou valiant?
I carry a sword and a bucklerye see.
A sword and a buckler, and know not me, Not Black Will?
No trust me.
Slave, then thou art neither Traveller, nor
Purse-taker: for I tell thee, Black will is known and fea∣red
though the seventeen 〈◊〉 theres not a sword
and Buckler man in England nor Europe, but has had a taste
of my manhood. I am tole-free in all Cities, &amp; the Suburbs
about them: this is my Sconce, my Castle, my Citadel, and
but King Harry, God bless his Majesty, I fear not the
proudest.
O ves, some of his guard.
Let his guard eats beef and be thankful, give
me a man will cover himself with his buckler, and not boogie
and the devil come.
Me thinks thou were better live at Court as I doe,
King Harry loves a man, I can tell ye.
Would thou and all the men hee keeps were
hanged, and ye love not him then: but I will not change my
revenues for all his guards wages.
Hast thou such store of •ruing?
Art thou a good fellow?
May I speak freely, and wilt not tel the king ont?
Keep thine own counsel, and fear not,
For of my faith the King shall know no more for me, then
thou telst him.
And I tell him any thing let him hang me: but for
thy self, I think if a fat purse come ith way, thou would
not refuse it. Therefore leave the Court and shark with me,
I tell thee, I am chief commander of all the Stews, theres
not a whore shifts a smock but by my privilege, nor o∣pens
her shop before I have my weekly tribute: And to
assure thee my valour carries credit with it, doe but walk
with me through the streets of London, and let me see the
proudest watch disturb vs.
I shall be glad of your conduct sir.
Follow me then, and isle tell thee more.
Stand, who goes there?
A good fellow: come close, regard them not.
How shall wee know thee to be a good fellow?
My names Black Will.
Oh, God give ye good night, good Moister
Black William.
God boy sir, God boy,
I am glad we are so well rid on him.
Law sir, you see here is egress enough,
Now follow me, &amp; you shall see weal have regress back again,
Hoe comes there?
Come before the Constable.
Will What have ye forgot me so soon? tic I.
O, tic M. Black VVilliam,
God bless ye sir, God bless ye.
How likst thou now?
Faith excellent: but prethe tell me, doest thou face
the world with thy man-hood, that thus they fear thee, or
art thou truly valiant?
Sfoote, doest thou doubt of my man-hood?
Nay then defend your self, isle give you a try all presently, be∣take
ye to your tools sir, isle teach ye to stand upon Interga∣tories.
I am for ye, theres near a man the King keeps shall
refuse ye: but tell me, wilt thou keep the Kings Act for
fighting.
As ye please sir: yet because you are his man, isle obe∣serve
it, and neither thrust nor strike beneath the knee.
I am pleased, have at you sir.
Help neighbours, O take ye to your browne
Bills, call up the Constable, here is a piece of chance-meddle
ready to be committed: set on good-man Sprichall.
Isle ferke them a both sides, lye close neighbour Dor∣••use,
keep the kings peace, I charge ye, help M. Constable.
Keep the peace, or strike them down.
Sownes, I am hurt, hold I say.
Let them not pass neighbours, here is bloodshed
drawn upon one of the Kings Officers.
Take away their weapons, and since you are so hot,
Isle set you where you shall be cool enough.
Sownes the Moons a waning harlot, with
the glimpse of her light I lost his point, &amp; mistook my ward,
had near broached my blood else.
pray sir what are you?
I am the Kings man sir, and of his Guard.
More shame you should so much forget your self▪
For as I takte, tic parcel of your oath,
As well to keep his peace, as guard his person:
And if a Constable be not present by,
You may as well as he, his place supply:
And seeing ye so neglect your oath and duty,
Go bare them to the Counter presently,
There shall ye answer for these misdemeanours.
Has broke my head sir, and furthermore it bleeds.
Away with them both, they shall pay thee well ere
they come forth, I wa•rant thee.
I beesech ye sir.
Never entreat man, we shall have bail I doubt it not,
But moister Constable, I hope you'll doe me this favour, to let
one of your watchmen go of an arrant for me, if I pay him?
With all my heart sir, here is one shall go.
Hold thee good fellow, here is an angel for thee, go
thy way to Baynard Castle, &amp; ask for one Brandon, he serves
the Duke of Suffolk, and tell him his bedfellow, or the great
stag of Baydo• this night is clapteth Counter, and bid him
come speak with me. Come Constable lets go, sirrah make
hast.
I warrant you sir, and this be all, id have done it for
half the money: well, I must enquire for one Brandon, and tell
him the great stag of B•yd•• i• eth Coun•er, burlady I doubt
they be both cra•tie knaves, and this is some watch-word be∣tweene
them: beth mass I doubt hee ne'er come well by his
money, hes so liberal, well isle forward.
Sir William, are you sure it was at Graces-Church
His Majesty appointed we should meet him?
We have bin there and mist him, what think ye sir?
Good faith I know not.
His Highness is too vnterous bold, my Lord
I know he will forsake himself in this,
Opposing still against a world of odds.
Good faith tic true: but soft here comes one,
How now good fellow, whether goosed thou?
It lies in my authority sir,
To ask you that question.
For I am one of the kings watch, I can tell ye.
Then perhaps thou can tel vs some tidings:
Did thou not see a good lusty tall big set man, pass
through your watch to night?
Yes sir, there was such a man came to our watch to
to night, but none that past through, for he behaved himself
so, that he was laid hold on quickly, and now he is forth com∣ming
in the Counter.
And whether art thou going?
Faith sir, has given me an Angel, to doe an arrande
for him at Baynard Castle, to one Brandon, that serves the
Duke of Suffolk: he says he is his Bed-fellow, and I must tell
him, the great Stag of Baydon, is eth Counter.
If thine errand bee to Brandon, I can save thee a l•∣bore,
for I am the man thou look•• for, wee have been see∣king
him almost all this night: hold thee theres an Angel for
thy news, isle bail him I warrant thee.
I thank you sir: but hes not so soon baylde, as you
think for, theres two of the Kings watch has their heads
broke, and that must bee answered for, but alls won to me,
let them shuffle as they will, the Angels has flown about to
night, and two gulls are light into my hands, and these isle
keep, let him get out as he can.
Hoe Porter, whose without there?
Whats the matter now? will ye not go to bed to night?
No trust me, twill be morning presently,
And I have hope I shall be bailed ere then:
I prethe if thou can, entreat some of the prisoners to keep•
me company a pair of hours, or so: and weal spend them:
ethe rouse of healths, and all shall be my cost.
Say wilt thou pleasure me?
If that will pleasure ye sir, ye shall not want for com∣pany,
here is I now that can tend it, they have hunger and ease
enough at all times.
The•es a couple of Gentlemen in the next room, I
prethe let them come in, and theirs an Harry Sovereign for
thee.
I thank you sir, I am as much beholding to you, as
to King Harry for it.
I, I assure thee thou art.
Well M. Constable, you have made the Counter
This night, the royal Court of Englands King:
And by my crown I swear, I would not for▪
A thousand pound it were otherwise.
The Officers in Cities, now I see,
Are like an Orchard set with several Trees,
Where one must cherish one, rebuke the other:
And in this wretched Counters I perceive,
Money plays fast and loose, purchases favour,
And without that, nought but misery.
A poor Gentleman hath made complaint to me,,
I am undone (quoth he) and kept in prison,
For one of your fellows that serves the King,
Being bound for him, and he neglecting me.
Hath brought me to this woe and misery.
Another Citizen there is, complains
Of one belonging to the Cardinal•,
That in his M•esters name hath taken up
Commodity•, valued at a thousand pound:
The payment being deferde hath caused him break,
And so is quite undone. Thus kings &amp; Lords I see,
Are oft abused by •eruants treachery.
But whist a while, here comes my fellow prisoners.
Wheres this bullie Greg, this lad of life, that will
scour the counter with right rhenish to night? Oh Sir you are
welcome.
I thank ye sir, nay weal be as great as our word, I
assure ye. Here Porter, theirs money, fetch wine I prethe:
Gentlemen you cannot bee merry in this melancholy place;
but here is a Lad has his heart as light as his purse. Sir, thou
art some mad slave I think, a regular companion: won that
that uses to walk a nights, or so. Art thou not?
Hark eden ear, thart a good fellow.
I am right borne I ass•re thee.
King Harry loves a man, and thou a woman:
Shall I teach thee some wi•?
And tell thee why I met thee here?
I went and set my limbe-twigs, and I think
I got some hundred pound,
B• a crooked measure at Coo•e Park:
And now seeing there was watch laid,
And much search for suspicious persons:
I got won as honest as my self to arrest me,
By a contrary name, and lay me eth counter,
And here I know thayle ne'er seek me,
And so when the heats ore, I am at liberty,
And mean to spend my crowns lustily:
How likst thou this my Bullie?
An excellent policy.
But mum, no words: use it for your self, or so.
O sir, fear it not, be merry Gentlemen: Is not this
wine come yet? Gods me, forget our chief ge•st, wheres my
sword and buckler-man? wheres Black will? how now man,
melancholy? let not a little wipe make vs enemies, clap hands,
and be friends.
My bloods up still.
When tic at highest twill fall again, come hands, hands.
Isle shake hands with thee, because thou carry
a Sword and Buckler, yet thart not right Cauelere, thou
know not how to use them, thaste a heavy arm.
I a good smart stroke.
Thou cutst my head indeed, but it was no play, thou
lay open enough, I could have entered at my pleasure.
Nay I have stout guard I assure ye.
Childish to a man of valour, when thou should
have borne thy Buckler here, thou latest it fall to thy knee,
thou gave me a wipe, but it was mere chance: but had
we not been parted, I had taught ye a little School play I
warrant ye.
What hoe, porter: who keeps the gates there?
Who knocks so fast?
Stand by sir•ah.
Keep back I say, whither will ye press amongst
the prisoners?
Sirrah to the Court, and we must in.
Why sir, the courts not kept eth Counter to day.
Yes when the king is there▪
All happiness betide our Sovereign.
Sownes king Harry.
Lord I beseech thee no.
We all •ntreat your grace to pardon vs.
Stand up good men: beshrew ye Brandon for disco∣•oaring
vs, we shall not spend our time so well this month:
but theres no remedy now, the worst is this,
The court good fellows must be removed the sooner,
Ye all are cour•iers yet. Nay, nay, come forward,
Even now you know we were more familiar:
You see policies holds not always currant,
I am found out, and so I think will you be:
Go Porter let him be removed to Newga••
This place I see is too secure for him:
Weal send you further word for his bestowin.
I beseech your Grace.
Theres no grace in thee, nor •one for thee:
Go, away with him.
Sownes I shall to Tyb•rne presently.
Gentlemen, you that have been wronged by my
servants and the Cardinals, shall give me nearer notes of it,
Both what they are, and how much debt they owe ye:
Send your pe•••ions to the Court to me.
And doubt not but you shall have remedy:
Theres forty Angels, drink to King Harries health,
And think withal, much wrong Kings men may do:
The which their masters ne'er consent unto.
God bless• your Majesty with happy life;
That thus respect; your woeful subjects grief,
Where 〈◊〉 Will, nay come nearer man,
I came nearer you, though ye mislikte my play.
Beth Lord, your Majesties the best sword and buckler
man in Europe, ye lye as close to your wards, carry your point
as fair, that no Fencer comes near• ye for gallant Fence-play.
Nay now ye •latter me.
Foregod ye broke my head most gallantly.
I But it was but by chance ye know, but now your heads
broke, you look for a plaster I am sure.
And your grace will give me leave, I•e put it up and
go my wai•s presently.
Nay soft sir, the Keeper will deny ye that privilege,
Come hither sirrah, because ye shall know King Harry loves
a man, &amp; I perceive theres some mettle in thee, theres 〈…〉
Angels for thee, marry it shall be to keep ye in prison• still,
till we have further use for ye. If ye can break through wat∣ches
with eg•es and regress so valiantly, ye shall doote amongst
your countries enemies.
The wars sweet King, tic my delight, my desire, my
chair of state▪ create me but a •attord Corporal, and give me
s•me prehemine•e over the vulgar hot-shots, and I beat them
not forward to as brave attempts, and march my self I th
Vanguard▪ as ere carried against a Castle wall, break my head
in two places more, and consume me with the mouth of a dou∣ble
c•luering, I•e live and dye with thee sweet King.
Twill be your best course sir, go take him in,
When we have need of men, weal send for him.
God ble•se your majesty, isle go drink to your health.
Begone: sir, keeper I thank you for our lodging,
Nay indeed I doe, I know had ye known vs, it had bin better,
Pray tell the Constable that brought vs hither,
We thank him, and commend his faithful service,
Gentlemen lets hear from you, &amp; so God morrow,
Keeper, theres for my fees, discharge the offices:
And give them charge that none discover vs,
Till we are past the city: in this disguise we came.
Weal keep vs still, and so depart again.
Once more God morrow, you may now report,
Your connter was one night king He•ries court.
Away and leave vs, Brandon what further news?
The old king of France is dead my Liege,
And left your sister Mary a young widow.
God forbid man, what not so soon I hope,
She has not yet bin married forty days:
Is this news certain?
Most true my Lord.
Alas poor Mary, so soon a widow,
Before thy wedding robes be half worn out:
We must then prepare black funeral garments too,
Well, weal have her home, the league i• broke:
And weal not trust her safety with the French.
Charles Brandon▪ you shall go to France for her,
See that your train be richly furnished,
And if the daring French, brave thee in attempts
Of honour, Barriers, Tilt, and &amp; T•ornament:
So to retain her, bare thee like thy self,
An English man, dreadlesse of the proudest:
And highly scorning lowly hardiness
I shall my Sovereign, and in her honour,
Isle cast a challenge through all the court:
And dare the pro•dest Peer in France for her.
Commend me to the Lady Cat•erine Parry,
Give her this Ring, tell her on sunday next
She shall be Queen, and crowned at W•stminster:
And A••e of Clea•e shall be sent home again:
Come sirs, weal leave the city, and the counter now,
The day begins to break, le•s hye to court.
And once a quar•er we desire such sport.
My reverent Lord of Land••,
Ou• trusty friend, the king of France is dead,
And in his death, our hopes are hindered:
The Emperor too, mislikes his praises,
But we shall cross him fort I doubt it not:
And tread upon his pomp imperial,
That thus hath wronged the English Cardinal.
Your graces letters by Campeans sent,
I doubt not but shall work your full content.
I that must be our safest way to work,
Money will make vs men, when men stand out:
The Bastard Fredericks to attain the place,
Hath made an offer to the Cardinals,
Of threescore thousand pound, which we will pay,
Three times thrice double, ere we lose the day.
Come cousin Willian, Isle bring ye to my Lord
Cardinal presently.
I thank ye cousin, and when you come to the court,
Isle bring you to the King again, ye know cousin, he gave
ye an angel.
I but he gave me such a blow oath ear for it, as I care
not for coming Ins sight again while I live.
How now Patch, who have you got there? what Will
S•mmers welcome good William.
I thank your grace, I hard say your Lordship had
made two new Lords here, and so the two old fools are come
to waite on them.
We thank ye 〈◊〉.
Your Lordship will be well guarded, we follow •e,
The Kings fool, and the Cardinals, and we are no small
fools I ass••e ye.
No indeed, my cousin Patch here is something too
square to be set on your shoe, marry and you'll wear him
on your shoulder, the fool shall ride ye.
A shrewd fool Boner, come hither William, I have a
quarrel to you since our last ryming.
About your fair Lemon at Charlt•n my Lord, I re∣member.
You speak plain William.
Ye never knew fool a flatterer I warrant ye.
Well Will, Isle try your ryming wits once more,
What say you to this?
The bells hang high, and loud they cry, what do they speak?
If you should dye, theres none would cry, though
your neck should break.
You are something bitter William: But come on, once
more I am for ye. A rod in school, a whip for a fool, is al∣ways
in season.
A halter and a rope, for him that would be pope,
Against all right and reason.
He•s too hard for me still, Isle give him over, come
tell me Wul, whats the n•was at Court?
Marry my Lord, they say the King must be married
this morning.
Married Will, to whom I prithee?
Why to my Lady Catherine Parry, I was once by, when
he was wooing on her, and then I doubted they would go to∣gether
shortly.
Holy Saint Peter shield his Majesty,
She is t•e hope of 〈◊〉 heresy:
If she be Queen, the Protestants will swell,
And Cranmer, Tutor to the Prince of Wales,
Will boldly speak against Romes Religion▪
But Bishops weal to Court immediately,
And plot the downfall of these Lutherans:
You two are Tutors to the Princes Mary,
Still ply her to the 〈◊〉 obedience,
And make her hate the name of Protestant;
I doe suspect that Latimer and 〈◊〉
Chief teachers of the fair 〈◊〉,
Are not sound Catholickes, nor friends to 〈◊〉
It it be so, weal soon remove them all▪
T is better they should dye, then thousands fall.
Come follow vs. Ma•it, W•l, and Patch.
Your Lords mad, till he be at the wedding, it was mar∣uell
the King stole it so secretly and ner• told him ont, but alls
one, if he be married, let him play with his Queen to night,
and then to morrow heel call for me, th•res no fool toth will∣full
still. What shall we doe cousin?
Isle go get the key of the wine-seller, and thou and
Isle keep a passage there to night.
We have but a little wit between vs already cousin,
and so we should have none at all.
When our wits be gone, weal sleep eth sellor, and
lye without our wits for one night.
Content, and then eth morning weal but wet them
with an other cup more, and thaile shave like a razor all day
after. Come close good cuzze, let no body go with vs, least
they be drunk before vs, for fools are innocents, and must be
accessory to no mans overthrow.
Welcome Queen Katherine, seat thee by our side,
Thy sight fair Queen, by vs thus dignified,
Earls, flarro•, Knights, and Gentlemen,
Against ye all, weal be chief challenger,
To fight at Barriours, Tilt, and Tournament,
In honour of the fair Queen Katherine,
We thank your highness, and beseech your
grace,
Forbear such hazard of your royal person,
Without such honours is your handmaid pleased,
Obediently to yield all love and duty,
That may beseem your sacred Majesty.
God a mercy, but where are our children?
Prince Edward, Mary, and Elizabeth,
The royal Issue of three famous Queens,
How haps we have not seen them here to day?
They all my Liege attend your majesty,
And your fair queen, so within the presence here.
Tic well, Dudh• call Cranmer in,
He is chief Tutor to our Princely son,
For precepts that concern divinity.
And here he comes, Cranmer, you must ply the Prince,
Let his wast hours be spent in getting learning:
And let those linguists for choice languages,
Be careful for him in their best endeavours,
Bid Doctor Tie, ply him to Music hard,
Hes apt to learn, therefore be diligent,
He may requite your love when we are gone.
Our care and duty shall be had my Lord.
We thank ye.
I tell thee Cranmer he is all our hopes,
That what our age shall leave unfinished,
In his fair reign shall be accomplished.
Go and attend him, how now Will Summers, whats the news
with you?
I come to bid thee and thy new Queen Godmorrow.
Look to him Kate least he cozen thee, provide civil Oren∣ges
enough, or heel have a Lemon shortly.
Godamercie Will, thought tell me then, wilt thou not?
I and watch him too, or let him ne'er trust me: but doest
hear Harry, because Id have thee have the poores prayers, I
have brought thee some petitions, the F•years and Priests pray
too, but I think us as children say grace, more for fashion
then 〈…〉
heard, because they beg for Godsake, therefore I prithee
dispatch them.
Read them Semer.
The humble petition of the Lady Seaton, •or her
distressed son, that in his own defence, unhappily hath slain a man.
The Lady Seaton, Gods holy mother,
Her son has had our pardon •wise already,
For two stout subjects that his hand hath slain.
And •y had said so but thou Harry, Id have told
him a lyde, hee ne'er kilt but one, thou kildst the tothe•: for
and thou had hanged him for the first, the two last had bin
alive still.
The fool tells true, they wrong our Majesty
That seek our pardon for such cruelty:
A way with it.
Give me i• again, It shall ne'er be seen more I assure
ye• and I had known tad come for that purpose, It should ne'er
have bin brought for W•l I warrant ye.
This other comes from two poor prisoners eth coun∣la.
We know the inside then, come give them me,
Lord Cardinal, here is one is dedicated to you.
How! read it: whose there? Compto• enquire for Rookesbie a
Groom of the wardrobe, and bring him hither.
I will.
Cardinal, what find ye written there?
Mine own discredit, and the undoing of an honest city∣zen,
by a false servant.
Tic not your fool my Lord I warrant ye.
No will?
I thought so, I knew it was one of your k•aves, for
your fools are harmless.
Welsed Will thou love thy masters credit I know.
I Kate, as well as any Cou•tier he keeps:
I had rather hee should have the poor• prayers, then the
Popes.
Faith I am of thy mind Will, I think so too.
Take heed what ye say Kate, what a Lutheran?
Tic Heresy saire Queen, to think such thoughts.
And much vncharity to wrong the poor?
Well, and when the Pope is at best, hee is but Saint
Peters debutie, but the poor, present Christ, and therefore
should be something better regarded.
Go too fool.
Sirrah, you'll be whipped for this.
Would the King wood whip thee and all the Popes
whelps out of England once, for between ye, ye have racked
and pulled it so, we shall be all poor shortly, you have had four
hundred threescore pound within this three year for smoke∣pence,
you have smoked it in faith: dost hear Harry, next time
they gather them, let them take the chimneys, and leave the
coin behind them, wee have clay enough to make brick,
though we want silver mines to make money.
Well William your tongue is priuiledgde.
But my good Liege, I fear theres shroder heads
Although kept close, has set this •oole a work,
Thus to exstirpe against his holiness.
Doe not you think so my Lord, nor stomach no by∣die
about it: ye know what the old Pro•orb sai•s, therefore
be patient great quarrellers small credit wins:
When fools set stools, and wise men break their shins:
therefore think not on it, for Isle sit down by thee Kate and
say nothing, for here comes one to be examined.
O sir, you're welcome, Is your name 〈◊〉?
your poor servant is so ealde my Lord.
Our servant we geffe ye by the clo•th ye wea•e, but
for Your pouertic tic doubtful, your credit is so good. Lets see
whats the mans name, ha! Hopki••, doe you know the man?
〈…〉? No my Lord.
Had you never no dealings with such a man?
No, if it like your Majesty.
No, if it like our Mays•ie, saucy varlet:
It likes not our Majesty, thou should say no:
It likes vs not thou lie, for that we know.
You know him not, but he too well knows you,
And lies imprisoned slave, for whats thy due.
Sure some envious man hath misinformd.
Dare thou deny it still, out-facing knave,
Mother a God, isle hang thee presently.
Sir ye lie: and though ye wear the kings cloth,
Yet we dare tell ye so before the king:
Slave thou doest know him.
He here complains he is undone by thee,
And the kings man hath caused his misery.
Yet you'll out-face it still, deny, forswear, and lie fir, ha▪
Not a word more, if thou love thy life, unless•e thou•
confess all, and speak fair.
I doe befeech your Grace.
Out periurde knave, what doest thou serve the King.
And dare thou thus abuse our Majesty•:
And wrong my subjects by thy treachery?
Think thou false thief, thou shalt be privileged
Because thart my man, to hurt my people:
Villain, those that guard me, shall regard mine ho∣nor:
Put off that coat of proof, that strong security:
Under which ye march like a halbertere,
Passing through purgatory, and none dare strike:
A Seriants mace must not presume to touch
Your sacred shoulders with the kings own wri•▪
Gods dear Lady, does the cloth ye wear,
Such privilege and strong prevention bear.
Ha, first Rookesby?
My royal Lord.
Take that, and know your time to tell your
Message: Sir, I am busy.
So, theres one served: I think you would take two
more with all your heart, so you were well rid on him.
Your pardon good my Liege.
Ha, pardon thees I tell thee did it touch thy life in
ou •ht, more then mine own di•pleasure, not the world
should purchase it, wild •aus•e: had thou neglected this
thy dut e to our persons danger: Had thou thy self against
me ought attempted, I might bee sooner won to pardon
thee, then for a subjects hate•ull injury.
Let me entreat your Grace to pardon him.
Away Kate speak not for him,
Out of my le•itie I let him live,
Discharge him from my cloth and countenance,
To the Counter to redeem his creditor,
Where he shall satisfy the •most mi•e
Of any debt, default or hindrance:
Isle keep no man to blur my credit so,
My cloth shall not pay what my servants owe.
Away with him.
Now my Lord Cardinal, speaks not your paper so?
Yes my good Lord, your Grace hath shown a pat∣terne,
to draw forth mine by, I assure your Highness,
The punishment inflicted on your man,
Is meant for mine servants that bears such minds,
Their Masters thus but serves them in their kinds.
Wheres this fellow now that brings this news?
He is gone with a fl•a in his ear: But has left his Mes∣sage
behind with my Lord Dudley, here.
And whats the now••.
Duke Brand•• my Liege.
Oh, hes returned from France:
And who comes with him?
His royal wife, my Lord.
Ha• royal wife: whose that?
Your Highness sister, the late Q. of France.
Ou• sister Q. his 〈◊〉: who gave him her?
Tic sed they were married at Doner, my liege.
I were better he had ne'er seen the Town.
Dares any Subject mix his blood with ours, without our leave•
He comes himself my Liege, to answer it.
Health to my Sovereign.
And our brother king, your Message is before ye sir:
off with his head.
I beseech your Grace give me leave.
Nay you have taken leave, away with him, bid the
Captain of our Guard, convey him to the Tower.
Hear me my Lord.
Audatious Brandon, think thou excuse shall serve.
Right gracious Lord.
Go too, your prayers will scarce save your self,
Durst ye contract your self without our knowledge?
Hence with that hare-braine, Duke to the Tower I say,
And bear our careless sister to the Fleet:
I know sir, you broke a Lance for her,
And bravely did unhorse the Challengers:
Yet was there no such prize set on her head,
That you without our leave should marry her.
Oh my Lord, let me entreat for them.
Tut Kate, though thus I seem
A while to threaten them,
•mean not to disgrace my sister so:
A way with them. What say ye Lords,
Is he not worthy death for his misdeed?
Unless your Grace shall please to pardon him.
He deserves it then?
He does my Liege.
You are knaves and fools, and ye •latter me:
Gods holy Mother, Isle not have him hue•t, for all your heads:
Dear Brandon, I embrace thee in mine arms:
Kind sister, I love you both so well.
I cannot dart another angry fro •no
To gain a kingdom: here take him Mar•e,
I hold the happier in this English choice,
Then to be Q. of France: Charles, love her well.
And tell on Brandon, whats the news in France.
The league is broke betwixt the Emperor
And the young king of France: Forces are mustering
On ether part my Lord, for horse and foot.
Hot variance is expected speedily.
The Emperor is marching now to La•dersey,
There to invade the towns of Burgondie.
God and S. George, weal meet his Majesty,
And strike a league of Christian ami•ie.
Lord Cardinal, you shall to France with speed,
And in our name salute the Emperor,
Weal give direction for your Embassage.
The next fair wind, shall make vs France to gre•t,
Where Charles the Emperor, and king shall meet.
How now young Browne, what have you there?
The Princes cloak and hat, my Lord.
Where is his Grace?
At Tennis, with the Marquess D•rset.
You and the M•rquesse, draw the Princes mind
To follow pleasure, &amp; neglect his book:
For which the King blames vs. But credit me,
You shall be soundly paid immediately.
I pray ye good my I. isle go call the Prince away.
Nay, now ye shall not, whose within there ho? stray•e
My Lord.
Go bear this yongster to the Chapel,
And bid the M. of the Children whip him well:
The Prince will not learn sir, and you shall smart for it.
O good my L. Isle make him ply his book to morrow.
That shall not serve your turn, away I say.
So sir, this policy was well devised: Since he was whipped thus
for the Princes faults,
His Grace hath got more knowledge in a month,
Than he attained in a year before,
For still the fearful boy to save his breech,
Doth hourly haunt him whereso ere he goes.
Tic true my Lord, and now the Prince perceives it,
As •oath to see him punished for his faults,
Plays it of purpose to redeem the boy,
But pray my Lord, lets stand aside awhile,
And note the greeting twixt the Prince and him,
See where the boy comes and the Kings Fool with him;
Lets not be seen, but list their conference.
Nay boy, and ye cry you'll spoil your eye sight,
come, co•e truss up your hose, you must hold fast your
wind, both before and behind, and blow your nose.
For what Fool?
Why for the mote in thine eye, is there not won
in it, wherefore dost thou cry else?
I prethy Will go cal the Prince from the Tenniscourt.
Dost thou cry for that? nay then I smell a Ratte, the
Prince has played the Truant to day, and his Tutors has
drawn blood of thy buttocks fort: why boy tic honour∣ble
to be whipped for a Prince.
I would he would either leave the Tenniscourt and
ply his Book, or give me leave to be no Courtier.
I, for isle be sworn thy breech lies ith Hazard a∣bout
it, but look little Ned, yonder he comes.
Some Rubbers for the Prince.
Here my good Lord.
One take our Rackets, and reach my Cloak,
By my faith Marks, you are too hard for me.
Your Grace will say so, though ye o•er ma•ch 〈◊〉.
Why 〈…〉?
〈…〉 loiters, and will not ply your book,
and your Tutors has whipped me for it.
Alas poor Ned, I am sorry for it, I'll take the more
pains, and entreat my Tutors for thee: yet in troth, the
lectors they read me last night out of Virgil and O•id, I am
perfect in: only I confess I am something behind in my
Greek Authors.
And for that speech, they have declined it upon his
breech.
And for my logic, thou shalt witness thy self I
am perfect: for now will I prove▪ that though thou we••
whipped for me, yet this whipping was good for thee.
Isle hardly belccue you my Lord, though Ramu•
himself should prove it: well, probe.
Mark my Problem.
Bone virga facet bonum puerum:
Bonum est, te esse bonum puerum:
Ergo bone vorga, res bone est: And that's this, Ned.
A good rod makes a good boy: it is good that thou
should be a good boy: (ergo) therefore a good rodis good.
Nay byr'lady, the better the rod is, it's the worse
for him, that's certain: but do 'st hear me, boy; since hee
can prove a r•dti to bee so good, let him tak't himself
next time.
In truth, I pit•ie thee▪ and inwardly I feel the
stripes thou barest, and for thy sa•e, Ned, isle ply• my book
the factor; in the mean time, thou shalt not say, but the
Prince of Wales will honourably reward thy serve••c•come,
Browne, kneel down.
What, wilt thou knight him, Ned?
I will; my father he's knighted many a o•e, that
never shed drop of blood for him; but hee he's often for
me.
O brave! hee looks like the mirror of knight∣hood
already.
Clear the presence, Gentlemen, the
King is coming.
The King? gods me, reach 〈…〉 book•s call my
Tutors in: come •rowne, Isle confirm thy knighthood before
the King.
Here bee your Tutors, my Lord•, and yonder the
King comes.
Health to your▪ Majesty.
Godamercy Ned; I, at your book so hard, it is
well, it is well; now Bishop Cran•are, and good doctor Tie,
I was going to the gallory, and thought to have had your
Scholar with me, but seeing you're so busy, Isle not trouble
him, come on Will, come, go you along with me, what
make you among the scholars here?
I come to learn my quy que quote to keep me
from the rod: mar here's one was whipped in pudding time
for he he's gotten a knighthood about it: look old Harry,
doe's he not look more furious then he was wont.
Who W•, young Browne, Gods Mary mother,
his father is a gallant Knight, as any these south parts of
England holds.
He cannot compare with his son tho, if hee were
right donsal delphebus, or the very knight of the Sun him∣self,
yet this knight shall unhorse him.
When was he made a knight Will.
Marry i•he last action, I can assure you, there was hot
service, and some on um came so near him, they had like
to smelt ont: but when all was done, the poor gentleman
was pittifuly wounded in the back parts, as may appear
by the scarre, if his k•ightship would but vnt•usse there.
But who knighted him, William?
That did Ned here: and he has earnd it too, for I
am sure, this two year he has bin lashed, for his learning.
Ha, how, come hither Ned, is this true?
It is, my Lord, and I hope your highness will con∣firm
my deed.
Confirm it, Gods holy mother, what shrode
boys are these? Cranmar and Tie, do ye observe the
Prince, now by my Crown young Ned thou hast ho∣nord
me.
I like thy kingly spirit that loves to s•e
Thy friends advanced to types of dignity.
Young Knight come hither, what the Prince hath done
We here confirm, be still Sir Edward Browne:
But hear ye Ned, now you have made him Knight,
You must give him some living, or else tic nothing.
I by my troth, he is now but a Knight under For∣ma
papris, for a Knight without living is no better than an
ordinary Gallant.
Well, what will ye give him Ned?
When I have heard of something that may doe
him good, I will entreat your Majesty for him, and ith
mean time from mine own allowance Isle maintain
him.
Tic well said: but for your sake Son Ed∣ward,
wele provide for him; Cranmar, see presently a
Patent drawn, wherein were will confirm to him
from our Exchequor a Thousand Marks a year.
I thank your Majesty.
And as I am true Knight, Isle fight and die for ye.
Now if your Tutors come to whip ye, you may
choose whether you'll untruss byth order of arms.
Well Ned, •ee ye ply your learning, and lets
have no more Knights made in this Action, look to
him Browne, if hee loiter, his Tutors will have you up
for it.
I hope my Lord, they dare not whip me now.
Be•lady Sir, thats doubtful.
If they doe, he shall make thee a Lord, and then
they dare not.
Well Cranmar wele leave ye, when your pupil
has done his task ye set him now, let him come and visit
vs: on Gentlemen into the Gallery.
Heaven keep your Majesty.
Gentlemen draw near.
God morrow to your Grace.
God morrow Tutors at noon, tic God even, is
it not?
We saw not your Grace to day.
O ye quip me cunningly for my Trewantship▪
that I was not at my Book to day, but I have thought o•
that ye read last n•light, I assure ye.
We doubt it not fair Prince: Lords, Gentlemen
give leave.
All void the room, theres but Scholars and
Fools.
I hope your excellence can answer me in that axiom
of Philosophy, I propound to ye.
I promise ye Tutor, tic a Problem to me, for the
difference of your Authors opinions, makes me differ in
mine own: some say, Omne animalest, aut homo, aut bestia,
that cu•rye living creature is, or man, or beast.
Then a women's a beast, for shees no man.
Peace William you'll be expul'st else: And again
some Authors affirm, that every beast is foure-footed.
Then a Fools no beast, for he has but two.
Yet again Will.
Mum Ned, no words, Isle be as still as a small bag∣pipe.
Omne Animal est, aut homo, aut bestia: And thus tic
proved my Lord, Omne Animal, est rationalis, vel irratio∣nalis,
homo est rationalis, Bestia irrationalis,
Ergo omne Animal homo est, vel Bestis:
Amongst all the creatures in this Vniuerse,
Or on the earth, or flying in the ayre,
Man only reason hath, others only sense,
So what is only sensual, in not man, but beast:
For man both sense and reason hath:
So every creature, having one of these, is sure or man, or
best: and though all beasts are not foure-footed.
Thats certain a louse has six.
I beseech your Grace.
A way William.
Not a word more as I am William.
For many beasts have wings serving in stead of feet,
and some have horn's, of which we thus esteem, Animal
cornutum non habit dentes supremas, No horned beast hath
teeth aboue the roof.
Thats a lye, a Cuckold has.
Thrust the Fool out of the presence there.
Well, Cedant arma toge, The scholars shall have the
fools place.
Well Cranmar, you have made me able to prove a
man no beast, if he prove not himself so, wele now leave
this: And now resolve me for Diuinitic, Cranmar I love
ye, and I love your Learning, speak and wele hear ye:
God give ye truth that you may give it me,
This Land ye know stands wavering in her Faith,
Betwixt the Papists and the Protestants,
You know we all must die, and this flesh
Part, with her part of immortality,
Tutor, I doe believe both Heaven and Hell:
Doe you know any third place for the souls abode
Cald'd Purgatory, as some would have me think,
For from my Sister Marie and her Tutors,
I have oft received Letters to that purpose:
I love ye Cranmar, and shall believe what ere ye speak,
Therefore I charge ye tell the truth.
How thinks your Grace, is there a place of Pur∣gatorie or no?
P. Truly I think none, yet must I urge to you whats laid
To me, this world you know hath ben five Thousand years
Still increasing, still decreasing, still repleni•h't,
How long it will be, none know's but he that made it,
We al do cal our selves Gods children, yet sure some are not,
But think ye Tutor that the compasle of that heaven &amp; hell,
Is able to contain those souls so numberless,
That ever breathed since the first breath was given,
Without a Tertium, or a third place.
Who puts these doubts within your Graceshead
Are like their own belief, slite, and unregarded,
And is as easily answered and confuted:
Quote est inf••itum, non habit finem,
Calum est opus Dei, opus Dei est infinitum:
E•go Calum, est infinitum.
That which is infinite hath no end at all,
For that eternity•, that everlasting essence,
That did concord heaven, earth, and hell to be
Is of himself all infinite, that heaven and hell are so,
His power, his works, and words doe witness it,
For what is infinite, hath in it sell no-end,
Then must the heavens which is his glorious seat,
Be incomprehensible containing him,
Then what should need a third place to contain,
A world of Infinites so vast and mayne.
I thank ye Cranmar, and doe believe ye
What other proofs have been maintained to me
Or shall be, you shall know and aid me in them:
Enough for this time, who's there? Doctor Tie
Our Musics Lecturer• pray draw ne'er: Indeed I take much
In Music may your Grace ever delight, (delight in ye Though not in me, Music is fit for Kings,
And not for those knows not the chime of st•ings.
Truly I love it yet there are a sort
Seeming more pure than wise, that will upbraid at it,
Calling it idle, vain, and frivolous.
Your Grace hath said, indeed they doe upbraid
That term it so, and those that doe are such
As in themselves no haps consorts hold,
All Music jars with them, but sounds of good.
But would your Grace a while be patient,
In Musickes praise, thus will I better it.
Music is heavenly, for in Heaven is Music,
For there the Seraphins doe sing continually,
And when the best was borne, that ever was man,
A Quir• of Angels sang for joy of it,
What of Celestial was reueald to man,
Was much of Music, •is said the beasts did worship
And sang before the Deity supernal,
The kingly Prophet sang before the Arc,
And with his Music charmed the heart of Saule,
And if the Poet sail vs not my Lord,
The dulcet tongue of Mus••ke made the stones
To move, irrational beast, and birds to dance
And last, the Trumpets Music shall awake the dead,
And cloth their naked bones in coats of flesh,
T'appeare in that high house of Parliament,
When those that gn•sh their Teeth at Music sound,
Shall make that place where Music ne'er was found.
Thou gives it perfect life, skilful Doctor
I thank thee for the honoured praise thou gives it,
I pray thee lets hear it too.
Tic ready for your Grace, give breath to your loud tuned instruments.
Tic well, me thinks in this sound I prove a come∣pleat age,
As Music, so is man governed by stops,
Awed by dividing notes, sometimes aloft,
Sometime below, and when he hath attained,
His high and loftic pitch, breathed his sharpest and most
Shrillest ayre, yet at length tic gone,
And false down flat to his conclusion,
Another sweetness, and harmonious sound,
A mildel strain, another kind agreement,
Yet mong'st these many strings, be one untuned
Or jarred low, or hyer than his course
Not keeping steady mean amongst the rest,
Corrupts them all, so doth bad men the best.
Enough; let voices now delight his princely care.
Doctor, I thank you and commend your cunning.
I est have heard my Father merrily speak,
In your hye praise, and thus his Highness saith,
England, one God, one truth, one Doctor hath
For Musics Art, and that is Doctor Tie,
Admir'rd for skill in Musickes harmony.
Your Grace doth honour me with kind acceptance,
Yet one thing more, I doebeseech your Excellence
To deign, to Patronise this homely work,
Which I unto your Grace have dedicate•.
What is the Title?
The Acts of the holy Apostles turned into verse,
Which I have set in several 〈◊〉 to sing,
Worthy Acts, and worthily in you remembered.
Isle peruse them, and satisfy your p••nes,
And have them sung within my fathers Chapel.
I thank ye both. Now Isle crave leave a while
To be a little id•e: pray let our lingguistes,
French and Italians, to morrow morn be ready,
I must confer with them, or I shall le•se
My little practise. so God-den good •utors.
Heal•h to your Highness, God increase your days:
The hope of England, and of learnings praise.
What have ye here my Lord of Winchester?
Heretical and damned he•easies,
Precepts that Crammers wisdom taught the Prince,
The Pope and we are held as heretics,
What think thou Boner of this wouering age?
As Sea-men do of storms, yet hope for fair whether,
Byr'lady Gardiner we must look about,
The Protestants begin to gather head,
Luther hath sown well, and Englands ground
Is fat and fertile to increase his seed,
Here is lofue plants, what, bishops and Prelats,
I nobility temporal, but we shall temper all
At the return of our high Cardinal.
Boner tic true, but in mean time we must
Prevent this ranckor that now swells so big,
That it must out or break, they have a dangerous head,
And much I fear.
What not the King I hope?
Tic doubtful he will bend, but sure
Queen Katherens a strong Lutheran hard ye not
How in presence of the King an• Cardinal,
She did exsterp against his Holiness.
But had our English Cardinal once attained,
The high possession of Saint Peters Chair,
Heed bar some tongs than now have scope too much,
Tic he must do it Gardiner, '〈◊〉 perilous thing,
Queen Katherine can do much with Englands King.
I Boner, thats the sum of all,
There must be no Queen, or the Abbeys fall,
See where she comes with the Kings Sister,
And from the Princes lodging, lets salute her.
God morrow to your Majesty.
God morrow to my reave•ent Lords of London and
of Winchester, saw ye the King to day?
His Highness was not yet abroad this morning.
But here we will attend his excellence.
Come sister weal go see his Majesty.
We will attend ye Madam.
Gentlemen set forward, God morrow Lords.
Ill morrow must it be to you or vs,
Conspirators against men religious,
Boner, these Lutherans do conspi•e I see,
And scoff the Pope and his supremacy.
Lets strike in time then, and incense the King,
And suddenly their stares to ruin bring:
The Trumpets sounds, it seems the Queen is coming.
Weal watch and take advantage cunningly.
Wheres Brandon?
My Leedge.
Come hither Kate.
Did your grace call?
Isle speak we anon, Isle speak we anon: Come Kate
lets walk a little, whose there? my Lords of London and of
Winchester, welcome, welcome: by this your moister the
Cardinal I trow, has parted with the Emperor, &amp; set a league
between the French and him, Mother of God,
I would our self in person had been there,
But Wolseys diligence we need not fear,
Ha think ye he will not.
No doubt he will my Lord.
I Gardner twill be his best policy,
Their friendship must advance his dignity.
If ere he get the Papal governance.
And that will never be I hope.
It were pity it should.
Hoe's proud enough already.
Haw, whats that ye talk there.
They say my Lord hoe's gone with such a train,
As if he should be elected presently.
Fore-god tic a gallant Priest, come hither Charlcs
prithee let me lean a thy shoulder, by Saint George, Kate •
grow stiff me thinks.
Wilt please your Highness sit and rest your self?
No, no Kate, Isle walk still, Brandon shall stay mine
arm, I me fat and purse, and twill get me a stomach: Saw the
Prince to day Kate?
I my good Lord.
God blenn him, and make him fortunate, I tell ye
Lords, the hope that England hath, is now in him, fore-god I
think old Harry must leave ye shortly; well, Gods will be
done, heerle be old shuffling then, ha will there not; well, you
say nothing, pray God there be not, I like not this difference
in religion I, Gods dear Lady, and I live but seven year
longer, weal take order thoroughly.
We hear that Luther out of Germanic
Hath with a book unto your Majesty,
Wherein he much repents his former deeds,
Craving your Highness pardon, and withal,
Submits himself unto your Graces pleasure.
Boner tic true, and we have answered it,
Blaming at first his haughty insolence,
And now his lightnesle and inconstancy,
That writ he knew not what so childisbly.
Much bloodshed there is now in Germanie,
About this difference in religion,
With Lutherans, Arians, and Anabaptis••
As half the Province of Heluetia,
Is with their tumults almost quite destroyed.
Me thinks it were well my royal Sovereign,
Your Grace, the Emperor, and the Christian kings,
Would call a Counsel and p••use the books,
That Luther writ against the Catholickes,
And superstitions of the Church of Rome:
And if they teach a truer way to heaven,
Agreeing with the Hebrew Testament,
Why should they not be red and followed?
Thou say well Kate, so they agree with the scriptures,
I think tic lawful to peruse and read them, speak Bishops?
Most unlawful my dear Sovereign,
Unless permitted by his Holiness.
How prove ye that my Lord?
Well sed Kate, to them again good wench, Lords
give vs leave awhile, avoid the Presence there, we•l hear
the Bishops and my Queen dispute.
I am a weak Scholar my Lord,
But on conditiō that your Highness, not these reverent Lords,
Will take no exceptions at my women's wit,
I am content to hold them Argument:
And first with reverence to his Majesty.
Pray tell me, why would ye make the King believe.
His Highness and the people under him,
Are tide so st•ictly to obey the Pope?
Because fair Queen he is Gods Deputy.
So are all Kings; and God himself commands
The King to rule, and people to obey.
And both to love and honour him:
But you that are sworn servants unto Rome,
How are ye faithful s•biects to the King,
When first ye scrue the Pope then after him?
Madame these are that sectes of Lutherans,
That makes your Highness so mistake the Scriptures,
Your slender arguments thus answered
Before the King, God 〈…〉.
Tic true, but pray ye answer this:
Suppose, the King by Proclamation,
Commanded you and 〈…〉,
To spurn against the Popes authority:
Ye know the Scripture binds ye to obey him,
But this I think, if that his Grace did so,
Your slight obedience all the world should know.
Gods-mother Kate, thoust touched them there,
What say ye to that Boner?
Were it to any but her Majesty,
These questions were confuted easily.
Pray tell the King then, what Scripture have ye,
To teach religion in an unknown language?
Instruct the ignorant to kneel to Saints,
By barefoot pilgrimage to visit shrines,
For money to release from Purgatory,
The vildest villain, thief, or murderer,
All this the people must believe you can,
Such is the dregs of Romes religion.
I, those are the speeches of those heretics,
Cranmer, Ridley, and blunt Lattimer,
That daily rail against his Holiness,
Filling the land with hateful herefies.
Nay be not angry, nor mistake them Lords,
What they have said or done, was mildly followed,
As by their Articles are evident.
Where are those Articles Kate?
Isle go and fetch them to your Majesty,
And pray your Highness view them graciously.
Go fetch them Kate: a sirta, we have womē doctors,
Now I see, Mother a God, here's a fine world the whilst,
That twixt so many men's opinions,
The holy Scriptures must be banded thus.
God grant it breed no farther detriment,
Unto your crown and sacred dignity:
They that would alter thus Religion,
I fear they scarcely love your toyall person.
Ha▪ take heed what you say Gardiner.
My love and duty to your Majesty,
Bids me be bold to speak my conscience,
Unless your safety and your life they hate,
Why should they daily thus disturb the state.
To smooth the face of false rebellion,
Proud traitors will pretend religion.
For under colour of reformation
The upstart followers of Wickcliffes doctrine,
In the fifth Henries days arise in arms:
And had nor diligent care prevented them,
Their powers had suddenly surprised the King.
And good my Liege who knows their proud intent,
That thus rebel against your government.
Shrode proofs byr'lady and by saint Peter,
I swcare we will not trust their gentleness,
Speak Gardner and resolve vs speedily,
Whose the ring-leader of this Iusty crew?
Unless your highness please to pardon vs,
We dare not speak nor urge your majesty.
We pardon what ye speak, resolve vs speedily.
Then if your royal person• will be safe,
Your life preserved and this fair Realm in peace.
And all these troubles smoothly pacifide,
The Queen dear Lord must be removed from you.
Haw, the Queen, bold Sir advise ye well,
Take heed ye do not wrong her loyalty.
See here my lee ge are proofs too manifest,
Her highness with a sect of Lutherans:
Have private meetings, secret conuentickells,
To wrest the grounds of all religion:
Seeking by tumults to subvert the state,
The which with out your majesties consent,
Is treason capital against the Crown.
And seeing without the knowledge of your grace,
They dare attempt these dangerous stratagems,
Tic to befearde, which heaven we pray prevent,
They do conspire against your sacred life.
Why else, should all these private meetings be
without the knowledge of your majesty.
Mother a god these proofs are probabell,
And strong presumptions doe 〈◊〉 your words,
within there, ho?
Sir William Compton see the doors made fast▪
Double our guard let none come ne'er our person▪
Summon the counsel to confer with vs,
Bid them attend vs in the pri•tie chamber,
Here is a letter for your majesty,
From Martin Luther out of Germany.
Da•bt Scysmatick still will he trouble vs
with books and letters, leave it and be gone▪
The villain thinks to smooth his treachery,
By swooning speeches to our majesty,
But by my George Lord Bishops if I live,
Isle root his fauorits from Englands bounds
What writes his worship?
Now Boner stir, the game is set a foot,
The king is now incensed, lets follow close
To have Queen Katherne shorter by a head,
These heresies will cease when she is dead.
Holy sain: Peter what a known is this,
Ere while he writ submissively to vs;
And now again repents his humbleness,
Bishops it seems being touched with our reply
He wrights thus boldly to our majesty,
Gardner look here he was deceived he says
When he thought to find Iohn Baptist in the
Courts of princes, or resident with those that are
Clothed in purple, Mother a god, First not a dangerous knave.
False luther knaves he has great friends in England:
Else durst he not thus move your Majesty.
Weal cut his friends off, ere they grow too strong
And sweep these vypets from our state ere long,
No marvel though Queen Katherne plead for him,
That is I see the greatest Lutherin,
How is your counsels we proceed in these?
it were best your grace did send her to the Tower.
Before they further doe consit with her.
Let it be so, go get a warrant drawn,
And with a strong guard bear her to the Tower.
Our hand shall sign your large commission,
Let Cranmer from the Prince be straight removed,
And come not near the Court on pain of death,
Mother a God, shall I be basseld thus,
By traitors, rebels and false he••ickes:
Get Articles for her arraignment ready,
If she of treason be convict, I swear,
Her head goes off, were she my kingdoms air.
Cranmer.
My Lord.
Where is Francisco our Italian Tutor?
He does attend your Grace without my Lord.
Tell him anon we will confer with him,
Weal ply our learning Browne least you be beaten,
We will not have your Knighthood so disgraced.
I thank ye good my Lord,
And your Grace would but a little ply your learning,
I warrant ye Isle keep my Knighthood from breaching.
Faith Ned I will: how now what letter's that?
From your Graces sister the Lady Mary.
Come give it me, we guess at the contents.
Cranmer, my sister oft hath writ to me,
That you and Bishop Boner might conserre,
About these points of new Religion,
Tell me Tutor will ye dispute with him.
Withal my hart my Lord, and wish the king,
Would deign to here our disputarion.
What hast thou there?
A Letter from your royal sister, young Elizabeth.
Another Letter ere we open this,
Well we will view them both immediately,
I pray ye attend vs in the next Chamber,
And Tutors if I call ye not before,
Give me some notice, if the king my Father
Be walked abroad, I must go visit him.
We will fair Prince.
What says my sister Mary? she is eldest,
And by due c•urse must first be answered,
Alas good sister still in this opinion,
These are thy blinded Tutors, Boner, Gardner,
That w•ong thy thoughts with foolish heresies,
He read no farther: to him will Edward pray
For 〈◊〉, that can him self preserve me,
Without the help of Saint or ceremony.
W•at writes 〈◊〉 sweet sister thou hast my hart.
And of Prince Edwards love hast greatest part.
〈…〉 with a Sisters love,
Be 〈◊〉 in thy such, and let thy prayers
〈…〉 to God o•lie for tic he alone
〈…〉 thee, and confound thine enemies,
〈…〉 assurance of thy hopes in heaven,
〈…〉 thee in all temptations,
〈…〉 grace to sh•• Idolatry,
〈…〉 life to inherit thy election,
To God I commend thee, who still I pray preserve thee.
Loving thou art, and of me best beloved.
Thy lines shall be my contemplations cures,
And in thy virtues will I meditate,
To Christ Isle only pray for me and thee:
This I embrace, away Idolatry,
How now Cranmer, whore's the King?
Conferring with his counsel gracious Prince,
There is some earnest business troubles him:
The Guards are doubled, and commandment given,
That none be suffered to come near the presence,
God keep his Majesty from traitors hands.
Amen good Cranmer, what should disturb him thus?
Is Cardinal Wolsey yet returned from France?
I my good Lord, and this day comes to court.
Perhaps this hasty business of the King,
Is touching Wolsey and his Embassage.
Pray God it be no worse my Lord.
Here comes sir William Compton from his highness.
Health to your excellence.
What news sir William?
The King expects your Graces company,
And wills vote Highness come and speak with him,
And doctor Cranmer, from his Majesty,
I charge ye speedily to leave the Court,
And come not near the Prince on pain of death,
Without direction from the K••g and Peers.
Sir I obey ye God so deal with me,
As I have wished unto his Majesty.
Cranmer banished the Court for what I pray?
I know not gracious Lord, pray pardon me,
Tic the Kings pleasure; and trust me I am sorry
It was my hap to bring this heavy message.
Nay good sir William, your message moves not me,
My service to his royal Majesty
Was always true and just, so help me heaven:
Only I pray your Grace to move the King,
That I may come to trial speedily,
And if in ought I have deserved death,
Let me not draw another minutes breath.
Will ye go my Lord.
Not yet, we are not your prisoner, are we sir?
No my dear Lord.
Then go before, and we will follow ye,
Your worship will forget your self I see,
My tutor thrust from court so suddenly, this is strange.
The Queen my Lord is come to speak with you.
Avoid the presence then, and conduct her in,
Isle speak with her, and after see the King,
Leave vs alone I pray ye.
Your grace is welcome, how fares your Majesty.
Never so ill dear Prince, for now I fear,
Even as a wretched caitiff kilt with care,
I am accused of treason, and the king
Is now in counsel to dispose of me,
I know his frown is death, and I shall dye.
Who are your accusers.
I know not.
How know ye then his Grace is so incensed.
One of my Gentlemen passing by the presence,
Took up this bill of accusations,
Wherein twe•ue Articles are drawn against me,
It seems my false ac•users lost it there,
Here they accuse me of conspiracy,
That I with Cranmer, Lutimer and Ridley,
Doo seek to raise rebellion in the state,
Alter religion, and bring Luther in,
And to new government enforce the king,
Then thats the cause that Cranmer was removed,
But did your Highness •re confer with them?
As they have here accused ye to the king.
Never nor cuer had I one such thought,
As I have hope in him my soul hath bought.
Then fear not gracious Madam, Isle to the king,
And doubt not but Isle make your peace with him.
O plead for me, tell him my soul is clear,
Never did thought of treason harbour here,
As I intended to his sacred life,
So be it to my soul or joy or greese.
Stay here till I return, Isle move his majesty,
That you may answer your accusers presently.
O I shall never come to speak with him,
The Lion in his rage is not to sterne,
As Royal Harry in his wrathful spleen,
And they that have accused me to his grace,
Will work such means I near shall see his face,
Wretched Queen Katherine, would thou had been
Kate Parre still, and not great Englands Queen,
Health to your Majesty.
Wish me good Compton woe and misery,
This giddy flattering world I hate and •coffe,
Ere long I know Queen Katherins head must off.
Came ye from the King?
I did fair Queen, and much sad tidings bring,
His grace in secret hath reueild to me
What is intended to your Majesty,
Which I in love and duty to your highness,
Am come to tell ye and to counsel ye
The best I can in this ex•remine.
Then on my knees I dare entreat your grace,
Not to reuaile what I shall say to you,
For then I am assured that dea••s my due.
I will not on my faith, good Compton speak,
That with thy sad repor•s my heart may break.
Thus then at your sayre feet my life I lay,
In hope to drive your hig•nes cares away:
You are accu•de of high conspiracy
And treason against his royal ma•esty.
So much they have incensed his excellence,
That he hath granted fi••e commssion
To attach your person and convey ye hence,
Close prisoner to the Tower, Articles are drawn,
And time appointed for arrainement there.
Good madam be advised by this I know,
The officers are sent to arest your person:
Prevent their malice, hast ye to the King.
Isle use such means that you shall speak with him,
There plead your Innocence, I know his grace
Will hear ye mildly therefore delay not,
If you be taken ere you see the king,
I fear ye never more shall speak to him.
Oh Compton twixt thy love and my sage fear,
I feel ten thousand sad vexations here,
Lead on I pray, Isle be advised by thee,
The King is angry and the Queen must dye.
Come Boner now strike sure the irons hot.
Urge all thou can, let nothing be forgot.
We have the Kings hand here to warrant vs,
It was well the Cardinal came and so luckily.
Who urged, the sty•e would quite be ruined,
If that religion thus were altered.
Which made his highness with a fiery spleen,
Direct out warrants to attach the Queen.
It was excellent, that Cedar once orethrowne,
To crop the lower shrubs let vs alone.
Those Articles of accusations,
We •r•md against her being lost by you
Had like to overthrow our policy,
Had we not stou•lie urged his majesty.
Well well, what's now to be done.
A guard must be provided speedily,
To bear her prisoner unto London Tower,
And watch convenient place to arest her person.
Tush any place shall serve for who dare contradict
His highness hand, even from his side wele hale her,
And bear her quic•lie, to her longest home,
Lest we and ours by her to ruin come.
About it then, let them untimely dye,
that scorn the Pope and Romes supremacy.
Guard, watch the doors and let none come ne'er vs,
But such as are attendant on our person
Mother a God tic•ime to stir, I see,
When tra••ors creeps so ne'er our majesty:
Must English 〈◊〉 walk with armed Guards,
Now in his old age, must I fear my life,
By hateful t•eason of my Queen and wife.
I do beseech your royal majesty,
To here her speak ere ye condemue her thus.
Go too Ned, I charge ye speak not for her,
shes a dangerous travtor how now, who knocks so loud there.
Tic Card•all Wol•ye my Lord.
And it be the Devil tell him he comes not here.
Bid him attend vs t•ll our be•er lea•ur:
Come hither Ned let me con•err with you.
Did ever hear the disputation
Twixt Cranmer and the Queen about Religion.
Never my Lord, I think they never yet,
At any time had speech concerning it.
O thou art deceived Ned, It is too certain,
Hoyday more knocking, knock irons an his heals,
And bear him hence what ere he be disturb vs, who first?
S. William Compton my Leedge.
First he, well let him in, Gods holy mother, heere's a stir
indeed, Compton ye knock too load for entrance here.
You care not though the king be near so near, say ye sir
haw.
I do beseech you pardon for my boldness.
Well what's your business.
The Queen my Lord entreats to speak with you,
Body a me, is she not rested yet.
Why doe they not convey her to the Tower,
We gave commission to attach her presently.
Where is she?
At the door my Sovereign.
So ne'er our presence, keep her out I charge ye.
Bend all your Holbeards points against the door,
If she presume to enter strike her through,
Dare she presume again to look on vs.
Upon my knees, I do beseech your highness
To hear her speak.
Up Ned, stand up I will not look on her,
Mother a god, stand close and guard it sure,
If she come in, isle hang ye all I swear.
I doe beseech your Grace.
Sir boy no more isle here no more of her,
Proud slut, bold traitress, and forgetful beast,
Yet dare she further move our patience.
Isle pawn my princely word, right royal father,
She shall not speak a word to anger ye.
Will you pawn your word for her mother a god
The Prince of Wales his word is warrant for a king,
And we will take it Ned, go call her in.
Sir William let the guard attend without,
Reach me a chair, all but the prince depart.
How now, what doe you weep and kneel,
Dus your black soul the gilt of conscience feel,
Out, out, your a traitor.
A traitor, O you all seeing powers,
Here witness to my Lord my loyalty
A traitor. O then you are too merciful,
If I have treason in me, why rip ye not
My ugly hart out with your weapons point,
O my good Lord, If it have traitors blood,
It will be black, deformd, and tenibrous,
If not, from it will spring a scarlet fountain,
And spit defiance in their periurde throats
That have accused me to your majesty,
Making my state thus full of misery.
Can thou deny it.
Else should I wrongfully accuse my self,
Of my dear Lord I do beseech your highness
To satisfy your wronged Queen in this,
Upon what ground grows this suspicion,
Or who thus wrongfully accuses me.
Of cursed treason against your majesty.
Some probable effects my self can witness,
Others our faithful subjects, can testify:
Have you not oft maintained arguments,
Even to our face against religion:
Which joined with other complots show it self,
As it is gathered by our loyal subjects,
For treason Cappitall against our person,
Gods holy mother you'll •emoue vs quickly,
And turn me out, old Harry must away,
Now in mine age, lame and half bed-rid,
Or else you'll keep me fast enough in prison,
Haw, mistress, these are no hateful treasons these.
Heaven on my fore-head write my worst intent,
And let your hate against my li•e be bent,
If ever thought of ill against your majesty,
Was harbord here refuse me gracious God,
To your face, my ledge, if to your face I speak it.
It mani•acts no complot, nor no treason,
Nor are they loyal that so injure 〈◊〉;
What I did speak, was as my women's wit,
To hold out Argument could compass it,
My puny scholarship is held too weak
To maintain proofs about religion,
Alas I did it but to wast the time,
K•ow•ug as then your grace was wea•e and sickly,
So to expel part of your pain and griese:
And for my good intent they seek my life,
O God, how am I wronged.
Ha, •jest thou so, was it no otherwise.
What should I say, that you might credit me,
If I am false, heaven strike me suddenly.
Body a me, what ever•acting knaves are these that
wrong thee thus, alas poor Kate, come stand up stand up,
wipe thine eyes, wipe thine eyes, foregod it was told me
that thou were a traitor: I could hardly think it, but that
it was apple•de so hard to me, Godsmother Kate I •ear my
life I tell ye, King Harry would be loath to die by treason
now, that has bid so many bru•ts vublemished, yet I con∣fe••e
that now I grow stifte, my legs fail me first but they
stand furthiest from my hart, and thats still sound, I thank my
God, give me thy hand, come kiss me Kate, so now ••e
friends again, hurson knaves, craf•y varlets, make thee a tray∣tor
to old Harries life, well, well, isle meet with some on
them, Sfou•e come sit on my knee Kate. Mother a god he that
says you are false to me by Englands crown isle hang him pre∣sently.
When I have thought of ill against your state,
Let me be made the vildest reprobate.
Thats my good Kat•, but byth mary God, Queen Call∣there•e
you must thank prince Edward here.
For but for him th'adst gone toth tower I swear,
I shall be ever thankful to his highness.
And pray for him and for your majesty,
Come K•te weell walk a while eth garden here, who
keeps the dote there?
My Lord.
Sir William Compton, here take my ring,
Bid Doctor Cranmer haste to Cou•t again,
Give him that token of king Henries love,
Discharge our guards, we fear no tray•ors hand.
Our State, beloved of all doth firmly stand:
Go Compton.
I go my Lord.
Bid Wo•sey haste him to our royal presence,
Great Charles the mighty Roman Emperor,
Our Nephew, and the hope of Christendom
Is landed in our fair Dominion,
To see his Uncle and the English Court;
We'll entertain him with imperial port:
Come hither Ned.
Felows, stay there, and when I cal, come forward,
The service you pursue, is for the kings
Therefore I charge you to perform it boldly,
We have his hand and seal to warrant it.
We'll fellow you with resolution sir,
The Church is on our side, what should we fear?
See yonder, shees talking with his Majesty,
Think you we may attempt to take her h••re?
Why should we not, have we not firm cōmission
To attach his any where? be bold, and fear not:
Fellows come forward.
How now, whats here to do?
The Bishops it seems my Lord would speak
with you.
With bills and holberds, well, tarry there Kate,
Isle go my self; Now wherefore come you?
As loyal subjects to your state and person,
We come to apprehend that traitorous wo••an.
Y are a couple of 〈…〉
Gods holy mother, she is more true and just,
Then any Prelate that Suborns the Pops:
Thus to vsu•pe upon our gove•nment?
Call you her traitor? you're lying beasts and false
conspirators.
Your Majesty hath seen what proofs we had.
Here you Boner, you are a whoreson coxcomb,
What proofs had ye, but treasons of your own inven∣t•once?
O my dear Lord, respect the reverend
Bishoppes.
Boner and Gardner loves your Majesty.
Alas poor Kate, thou think full little what
they come for;
Thou hast small reason to commend their loves,
That falsely have accused thy harmless life.
O God, are these mine enemies?
We have your highness hand to warrant it.
Lets see it then.
Tic here my Liege.
So, now ye have both my hand to contradict
what one hand did: and now out word •g•in shall serve
as warrant to bear you both as prisoners to the Fleet,
Where you shall answer this conspiracy.
You fellows that came to atta•h the Queens,
Lay hands on them, and bear them to the Fleet.
O I beseech your highness on my knees,
Re••t the doo•e of their imprisonment.
Stand up good Kate, thou wrongst thy Majesty,
To plead for them that thus have iniurde thee
I have forgotten it, and do still entreat
Then humble pardons at your gracious ••et.
Mother of God, what a foolish woman's this,
Well, for her sake we rovoke our doom,
But come not near vs as you love your lives:
Away and leave vs, you are knaves and miscreants,
Whoreson Cai•ifs, come to attach my Queen!
Vex not my Lord it will distemper you.
Mother a God, Isle temper some on them for it
How now Branden?
The Emperor my Lord.
Get a train ready there, Charles Branden, co •c
Weal me•te the Mon•rke of imperial Rome:
Go Ned, prepare your self to meet the Emperor,
Weal send you further notice of our pleasure.
Attend the Prince there: Welcome Lord Cardinal,
Hath not our tedious journey into France,
Disturbed your Graces hey•th and reverent person?
No, no, ne'er fear hun Harry, he haz got
More by the journey, heel be Pope shortly.
What, W••liam, how chance I have not seen
you to day? I thought you would not have bin the hind∣most
man to salute me.
No more I am not Harry, for yonder is Patch
behind me, I could never get him before me, since thou
coniurst him in the great chamber, all the horse in the town
cannot hawle him into thy presence I warrant thee.
Will hee not come in?
Not for the world, he stand• watching at the door.
He will not stir while the Cardinal come;
Then the fool will follow him every where.
I thank you William, I am beholding to you still.
Namy Lord, I am more beholding unto you,
I thank your fool for it, we have ransakled your wine∣sellers
since you went into France: Doe you blush my
Lord? na, thats nothing, you have wine there, is able to
set a colour in any mans face I warrant it.
Why William, is the Cardinals wine so good?
Better then thine Isle be sworn, Isle take but
two handfuls of his wine, and it shall fill four hogs∣heads
of thine (look here else)
Mordie•.
More devil; first not? for without co•••ing, you
could never do it: But I pray you my Lord call upon•
More dieu no longer, but speak plain English, you have
deceived the king in French and Latin long enough a
conscience.
Is his wine turned into gold, Will?
The fool mistakes, my gracious Sovereign.
I, I my Lord, ne'er set your wit to the fools,
Will Su•mers will be secret now, and say nothing, if I
would be a blab of my tongue, I could tell the King
how many barrels full of gold and silver there was six
times filled with plate and jewels, twenty great t•uncks
with Crosses, Crosiers, Copes, Meters, Maces, golden
Crucifixes, besides the four hundredth and twelve thou∣sand
pound that poor Chi•neys paid for Peeter pence.
But this is nothing, for when you are Pope, you may
pardon your self for more •n•very ••en this comes to.
Go too fool, you wrong th• Cardinal,
But grieve not Woolsey, Will•am will be bold:
I pray you set on to meet the Empe•our,
The Mayor and Cit•izens are gone before,
The Prince of Wales shall follow presently,
And with our George and collar of esta•e,
Present him with the order of the Ga•la:
Great Maximilian his progenitor,
Upon his breast did wear the English Cross,
And vnd•rneath our Standard marched in arms,
Receiving pay for all his warlike hos•e;
And Cha•les with knighthood shall• be honoured:
Begin Lord Cardinal, greet his Majesty,
And we our self will follow presently.
I go my Sovereign.
Fair weather after ye:
Well, and ere he come to be Pope, I shall bee plunged
for this.
Queen William, you have angered the Cardinal I can
tell you.
It is no matter Kate, Isle anger him worse are long,
Though for a while I smooth it to his face:
I did suspect what here the fool hath found,
He keeps forsooth; a high Court Legantine,
Taxing our subjects, gathering sums of gold,
Which he belike hath hid to make him Pope;
A Gods name let him, that shall be our own.
But to our business, come Queen Katherine,
You shall with vs to meet the Emperor,
Let all your Ladies be in readiness:
Go, let our guard attend the Prince of Wales,
Upon our self, the Lords and Pensioners
Shall give attendance in their best array,
Let all estates be ready▪ come fair Kate,
The Emperor shall see our English state.
Your Majesty is welcome into England,
Theking our Master, will rejoice to see
Great Charles the royal Emperors Majesty.
We thank your pains my good L. Cardinal,
And much our longing eyes desires to see
Our kingly un•kle and his princely son,
And therefore, when you please I pray set on.
On gentlemen, and me•e the Prince of Wales.
That comes forerunner to his royal father,
To entertain the Christian Emperor:
Mean while, your Majesty may here behold
This warlike kingdom fair Metropolis,
The City London, and the river Thames,
And note the situation of the place.
We do my Lord, and count it admirable:
But see Lord Admiral, the Prince is coming.
Well met young cousin.
I kiss your highness hand.
And bid you welcome to my fathers lands
I shall not need infer comparisons,
Welcome beyond compare, for so your excellence
Hath honoured England, in containing you,
As with all princely pomp and state we can,
Weal entertain great Charles the Austrian:
And first, in sign of honour to your grace,
I here present this collar of estate,
This golden garter of the knighthoods order,
An honour to renown the Emperor:
Thus as my father hath commanded me,
I entertain your royal My•sty.
True honoured off-spring of a famous King
Thou dost amaze me, and dost •ache me wish
I were a second son to Englan• Lord,
In interchange of my imperial seats
To live with thee 〈◊〉 hope of Majesty,
So well our welcome we accept of thee,
And with such p••ncely spirit pronounce the word,
Thy fathers state, can no more state afford.
Yes my good Lord, in him theres Majesty,
In me theres love with tender infancy.
The trumpets found my Lord, the King is
coming.
Go all of you attend his royal person,
Whilst we observe the Emperors Majesty.
Hold, stand I say.
Stand gen•lemon.
Cease those trumpets there.
Is the Emperor yet come in sight of vs?
His Majesty is hard at hand my Lord.
Then 〈◊〉, shea•the Sword and bear
our Maces down,
In honour of my Lord, the Emperor:
Forward ag••no.
On Gentlemen before, sound trumpets and
set forward•.
Behold my father, gracious Emperor.
Weal meet him Cousin:
Uncle of England, King of France and Ireland, defen∣der
of the ancient Christian faith;
With greater joy I do embrace thy breast,
Then when the seven Electors crow•ed me,
Great Emperor of the Christian Mona•chy.
Great Ch••les, the first Emperor of Al•own,
King of the Rome•s, Semper Angustus, warlike king of
Spain and Cicily, both Naples, Never and Arrag••, king
of Create and great lerusalem, Arch-duke of Austria,
Duke of Millaine, Brabant, Burg•ndy, Tyrrell and Flan∣ders,
with this great title I embrace thy breast,
And how thy sight doth please, suppose the rest,
Sound trumpets, while my fair Queen Katre•e
Gives entertainment to the Emperor.
Welcome again to England princely Cousin,
We dwell here, but in an ou•ward continent,
Where winters ice-•ckles hangs on our beards,
Bordring upon the frozen Orcades,
Our mother-point, compassed with the Artike sea,
Where raging Bores styes from winters mouth,
Yet are our bloods as hot, as where the Sun doth rise,
We have no golden mines to lead you to,
But hearts of proof, and what we speak, weal do.
We thank you Uncle &amp; now must chide you;
If we be welcome to your Country,
Why is the ancient league now broke betwixt vs?
Why have your Heralds in the French kings cause.
Breathed defiance against our dignity,
When face to face, we met at Lander sey?
My Heroalds to desire your Majesty?
Your grace mistakes, we sent Ambassadors
To treat a peace between the French and you,
Not to defy you as an enemy.
Yet Uncle in king Henries name he came,
And boldly to our face did give the same.
Hell stop that fatal boding Emperors throat▪
That sings against vs this dismal Ravens note.
Mother of God, if this be true, we see,
There are more kings in England now then wee:
Wheres Cardinal Woolsey?
Heard you this news in France?
I did my Liege, and by my means it was done,
Isle not deny it; I had Commission
To join a league between the Fre•ch and him▪
Which he withstanding as an enemy••.
I did defy him from your Majesty.
Durst thou presume so, base-borne Cardinal,
Without our knowledge to abuse our name;
Presumptuous t•aitor, under what pretence
Did thou attempt to brave the Emperor?
Belike thou meantst to level at a crown▪
But thy ambitious crown shall hue•le thee down.
With reverence to your Majesty, I did no more
Then I can answer to the holy sea.
Vilaine, thou can not answer it to me,
Nor shadow thy insulting treachery:
How durst ye sir, in your embassage,
Unknown to vs stamp in our royal coin
The base impression of your Cardinal hat.
As if you were copartner in the Crown?
Ego &amp; Rexme•s: you and your king must be
In equal state, and pomp, and Majesty:
Out of my presence hateful impudence.
Remember my Liege, that I am Cardinal
And deputy unto his holiness.
Be the devils Deputy, I care not I,
Isle not be baffeld by your treachery;
You're false abusers of religion,
You can corrupt it and forbid the King,
Upon the penalty of the Popes black curse.
If he 〈…〉,
Not to suppress an old 〈◊〉 Abbey▪
Yet you at pleasure have subver•ed foot,
Seizing their lands, tunning up heaps of gold,
Secret conveyance of our royal Seal,
To raise Collections to in••ch thy state,
For which sir, we command you leave the Court.
We he•re discharge you of your offices:
You that are Cat•••as, or great Cardinal,
Haste ye with 〈◊〉 unto your Bishopric,
There keep you till you hear further from vs:
Away and speak not.
Yet will I proudly pass as Cardinal,
Although this day define my heavy fall.
I fear king Henry, and my royal Uncle,
The Cardinal will curse my progress hither.
No matter 〈◊〉, bes•few his trash•rous hart.
Haz moved my blood to much impatience.
When•es will summer•• come on wise, William,
We must use your little w•t•, to thase this
Anger from our blood again:
What art 〈◊〉 doing?
I am looking round about the Emperor, me
thinks ti• a 〈◊〉 for though he have seen more
fools then I, yet I never saw no more Emperors but
him.
Is this Will 〈◊〉▪ I have heard of him in all
the Princes Courts in Christendom.
Law 〈…〉 fool of me,
〈◊〉 tell ye. 〈…〉
Will summers is known far and near ye see.
〈…〉 I am for ye,
I have not rymed with ye a great while, and now Isle
challenge yes, and the Emperor shall bee judge bee∣tweene vs.
Content my Lord, I am for ye all, come but one
〈…〉
Say ye 〈…〉
Weal put you to an 〈◊〉 presently.
To him Will.
I war•ned you Madam.
Answer this sir,
The bud is spread the 〈…〉
A wench 〈◊〉, was found in you• bed, besides
the Q•even.
Godamarcy for that Will•
Theres two angels for th•e:
I 〈◊〉 my Lord I am glad I know it.
God mother Kate▪ wilt thou believe the fool?
he lies, he •ies, a sir William, I perceive and't had been
so, you would have• shamed me before the Emperor,
•et William have at you once more,
In yonder Tower▪ theres a flower, that hath my hart.
Within this hour, she pi•t full sower, &amp; let a fart.
Hee, too h•rd for you my Lord, •le try him
one venue my self, what say you to this William?
An Emperor is gre•te, high is his fea•e, who is his foe•?
The 〈◊〉 that shall 〈◊〉, his carcass for 〈◊〉
whether he will o• no.
Well ensue•ed will, yet 〈…〉
A •uddy lip, 〈…〉
〈…〉
〈…〉
Who comes next then?
The Queen 〈◊〉, took to your self,
To hi• Kate.
Come on 〈◊〉, answer to this,
What could I take, my head doth ache, what 〈◊〉
good?
Hears 〈◊〉 will 〈…〉 and
warn your blood.
I am not repulsed at first William, 〈◊〉 sir,
Women and their wills, are dangerous ills, as 〈◊〉
suppose.
She that puddings fills, when 〈…〉
must keep• 〈◊〉 her nos•.
Enough good William, you're too hard for all:
My Lord the Emperor, we delay too long,
Your promised welcome to the English Court,
The honourable order of the garter,
Your Majesty shall take immediately,
And sit instalde t•erewith in Winds•r Castle,
I tell ye there are lads girt with that order,
That will vngirt 〈◊〉 proudest Champion:
Set forwards there •egard the Emperors state,
First in our Court weal banquet merrily,
Then mount on steeds, and girt in complete steel,
Weal tug at Barriers, Tilt and tournament:
Then shall ye see the Yeomen of my guard
Wrestle, shoot, throw the sledge, or pitch the bar,
Or any other active exercise:
Those triumphs past, weal forthwith haste to Windsor,
S. Gorges knight shall be the Christian Emperor

I Wonder how the King escaped our hands?
While we pursued the Horsemen of ye North,
He slyly stole away, and left his men:
Whereat the great Lord of Northumberland,
Whose Warlike ears could never brooke retreat,
Cheered up the drooping Army, and himself.
Lord Clifford and Lord Stafford all abreast
Charged our maine Battles Front: and breaking in,
Were by the Swords of common Soldiers slain.
Lord Staffords Father, Duke of Buckingham,
Is either slain or wounded dangerous.
I cleft his Beaver with a down-right blow:
That this is true (Father) behold his blood.
And Brother, here's the Earl of Wiltshires blood,
Whom I encountered as the Battles joined.
Speak thou for me, and tell them what I did.
Richard hath best deserved of all my sons:
But is your Grace dead, my Lord of Somerset?
Such hope have all the line of Iohn of Gaunt.
Thus do I hope to shake King Henries head.
And so doe I, victorious Prince of York.
Before I see thee seated in that Throne,
Which now the House of Lancaster usurps,
I vow by Heaven, these eyes shall never close.
This is the Palace of the fearful King,
And this the Regal Seat: possess it York,
For this is thine, and not King Henries Heirs.
Assist me then, sweet Warwick, and I will,
For hither we have broken in by force.
We'll all assist you: he that flies, shall dye:
Thanks gentle Norfolk, stay by me my Lords,
And Soldiers stay and lodge by me this Night.
And when the King comes, offer him no violence,
Unless he seek to thrust you out perforce.
The Queen this day here holds her Parliament,
But little thinks we shall be of her counsel,
By words or blows here let vs win our right.
Armed as we are, let's stay within this House.
The bloody Parliament shall this be called,
Unless Plantagenet, Duke of York, be King,
And bashful Henry deposed, whose Cowardice
Hath made vs by-words to our enemies.
Then leave me not, my Lords be resolute,
I mean to take possession of my Right.
Neither the King, nor he that loves him best,
The proudest hee that holds up Lancaster,
Dares stir a Wing, if Warwick shake his Bells.
Isle plant Plantagenet, root him up who dares:
Resolve thee Richard, claim the English Crown.
My Lords, look where the sturdy Rebel sits,
Even in the Chair of State: belike he means,
Backed by the power of Warwick, that false Peer,
To aspire unto the Crown, and reign as King.
Earl of Northumberland, he slew thy Father,
And thine, Lord Clifford, &amp; you both have vowed revenge
On him, his sons, his favourites, and his friends.
If I be not, Heavens be revenged on me.
The hope thereof, makes Clifford morn in Steel.
What, shall we suffer this? lets pluck him down,
My heart for anger burns, I cannot brooke it.
Be patient, gentle Earl of Westmerland.
Patience is for Poltroons, such as he:
He durst not sit there, had your Father lived.
My gracious Lord, here in the Parliament
Let vs assail the Family of York.
Well hast thou spoken, Cousin be it so.
Ah, know you not the City favours them,
And they have troupes of Soldiers at their beck?
But when the Duke is slain, they'll quickly fly.
Far be the thought of this from Henries heart,
To make a Shambles of the Parliament House.
Cousin of Exeter, frowns, words, and threats,
Shall be the War that Henry means to use.
Thou factious Duke of York descend my Throne,
And kneel for grace and mercy at my feet,
I am thy Sovereign.
I am thine.
For shame come down, he made thee Duke of York.
It was my Inheritance, as the Earldom was.
Thy Father was a Traitor to the Crown.
Exeter thou art a Traitor to the Crown,
In following this usurping Henry.
Whom should hee follow, but his natural King?
True Clifford, that's Richard Duke of York.
And shall I stand, and thou sit in my Throne?
It must and shall be so, content thy self.
Be Duke of Lancaster, let him be King.
He is both King, and Duke of Lancaster,
And that the Lord of Westmerland shall maintain.
And Warwick shall disprove it. You forget,
That we are those which chased you from the field,
And slew your Fathers, and with Colours spread
Marched through the City to the Palace Gates.
Yes Warwick, I remember it to my grief,
And by his Soul, thou and thy House shall rue it.
Plantagenet, of thee and these thy Sons,
Thy Kinsmen, and thy Friends, Isle have more lives
Then drops of blood were in my Fathers Veins.
Urge it no more, left that in stead of words,
I send thee, Warwick, such a Messenger,
As shall revenge his death, before I stir.
Poor Clifford, how I scorn his worthless Threats.
Will you we show our Title to the Crown?
If not, our Swords shall plead it in the field.
What Title hast thou Traitor to the Crown?
My Father was as thou art, Duke of York,
Thy Grandfather Roger Mortimer, Earl of March.
I am the Son of Henry the Fifth,
Who made the Dolphin and the French to stoup,
And seized upon their Towns and Provinces.
Talk not of France, sith thou hast lost it all.
The Lord Protector lost it, and not I:
When I was crowned, I was but nine months old.
You are old enough now,
And yet me thinks you loose:
Father tear the Crown from the Usurpers Head.
Sweet Father doe so, set it on your Head.
Good Brother,
As thou love and honour Arms,
Let's fight it out, and not stand cavilling thus.
Sound Drums and Trumpets, and the King will fly.
Sons peace.
Peace thou, and give King Henry leave to speak.
Plantagenet shall speak first: Hear him Lords,
And be you silent and attentive too,
For he that interrupts him, shall not live.
Think thou, that I will leave my Kingly Throne,
Wherein my Grandsire and my Father sat?
No: first shall War vnpeople this my Realm;
I, and their Colours often borne in France,
And now in England, to our hearts great sorrow,
Shall be my Winding-sheet. Why faint you Lords?
My Title's good, and better far then his.
Prove it Henry, and thou shalt be King.
Henry the Fourth by Conquest got the Crown.
It was by Rebellion against his King.
I know not what to say, my Titles weak:
Tell me, may not a King adopt an Heir?
What then?
And if he may, then am I lawful King:
For Richard, in the view of many Lords,
Resigned the Crown to Henry the Fourth,
Whose Heir my Father was, and I am his.
He rose against him, being his Sovereign,
And made him to resign his Crown perforce.
Suppose, my Lords, he did it unconstrained,
Think you it were prejudicial to his Crown?
No: for he could not so resign his Crown,
But that the next Heir should succeed and reign.
Art thou against vs, Duke of Exeter?
His is the right, and therefore pardon me.
Why whisper you, my Lords, and answer not?
My Conscience tells me he is lawful King.
All will revolt from me, and turn to him.
Plantagenet, for all the Claim thou lay,
Think not, that Henry shall be so deposed.
Deposed he shall be, in despite of all.
Thou art deceived:
It is not thy Southern power
Of Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk, nor of Kent,
Which makes thee thus presumptuous and proud,
Can set the Duke up in despite of me.
King Henry, be thy Title right or wrong,
Lord Clifford vows to fight in thy defence:
May that ground gape, and swallow me alive,
Where I shall kneel to him that slew my Father.
Oh Clifford, how thy words revive my heart.
Henry of Lancaster, resign thy Crown:
What mutter you, or what conspire you Lords?
Doe right unto this Princely Duke of York,
Or I will fill the House with armed men,
And over the Chair of State, where now he sits,
Write up his Title with usurping blood.
My Lord of Warwick, hear but one word,
Let me for this my life time reign as King.
Confirm the Crown to me and to mine Heirs,
And thou shalt reign in quiet while thou liu'st.
I am content: Richard Plantagenet
Enjoy the Kingdom after my decease.
What wrong is this unto the Prince, your Son?
What good is this to England, and himself?
Base, fearful, and despairing Henry.
How hast thou injured both thy self and vs?
I cannot stay to hear these Articles.
Nor I.
Come Cousin, let vs tell the Queen these News.
Farewell faint-hearted and degenerate King,
In whose cold blood no spark of Honour bides.
Be thou a prey unto the House of York,
And dye in Bands, for this unmanly deed.
In dreadful War may thou be overcome,
Or live in peace abandoned and despised.
Turn this way Henry, and regard them not.
They seek revenge, and therefore will not yield.
Ah Exeter.
Why should you sigh, my Lord?
Not for my self Lord Warwick, but my Son,
Whom I unnaturally shall dis-inherite.
But be it as it may: I here entail
The Crown to thee and to thine Heirs for ever,
Conditionally, that here thou take an Oath,
To cease this Civil War: and whilst I live,
To honour me as thy King, and Sovereign:
And neither by Treason nor Hostility,
To seek to put me down, and reign thy self.
This Oath I willingly take, and will perform.
Long live King Henry: Plantagenet embrace him.
And long live thou, and these thy forward Sons.
Now York and Lancaster are reconciled.
Accursed be he that seeks to make them foes.
Farewell my gracious Lord, Isle to my Castle.
And Isle keep London with my Soldiers.
And I to Norfolk with my follower???.
And I unto the Sea, from whence I came.
And I with grief and sorrow to the Court.
Here comes the Queen,
Whose Looks be wray her anger:
Isle steal away.
Exeter so will I.
Nay, go not from me, I will follow thee.
Be patient gentle Queen, and I will stay.
Who can be patient in such extremes?
Ah wretched man, would I had dyed a Maid?
And never seen thee, never borne thee Son,
Seeing thou hast proved so unnatural a Father.
Hath he deserved to loose his Birth-right thus?
Had thou but loved him half so well as I,
Or felt that pain which I did for him once,
Or nourished him, as I did with my blood;
Thou would have left thy dearest heart-blood there,
Rather then have made that savage Duke thine Heir,
And dis-inherited thine only Son.
Father, you cannot dis-inherite me:
If you be King, why should not I succeed?
Pardon me Margaret, pardon me sweet Son,
The Earl of Warwick and the Duke enforced me.
Enforced thee? Art thou King, and wilt be forced?
I shame to hear thee speak: ah timorous Wretch,
Thou hast undone thy self, thy Son, and me,
And given unto the House of York such head,
As thou shalt reign but by their sufferance.
To entail him and his Heirs unto the Crown,
What is it, but to make thy Sepulchre,
And creep into it far before thy time?
Warwick is Chancellor, and the Lord of Callice,
Sterne Falconbridge commands the Narrow Seas,
The Duke is made Protector of the Realm,
And yet shalt thou be safe? Such safety finds
The trembling Lamb, environed with Wolves.
Had I been there, which am a silly Woman,
The Soldiers should have tossed me on their Pikes,
Before I would have granted to that Act.
But thou prefer thy Life, before thine Honour.
And seeing thou dost, I here divorce my self,
Both from thy Table Henry, and thy Bed,
Until that Act of Parliament be repealed,
Whereby my Son is dis-inherited.
The Northern Lords, that have forsworn thy Colours,
Will follow mine, if once they see them spread:
And spread they shall be, to thy foul disgrace,
And utter ruin of the House of York???
Thus doe I leave thee: Come Son, let's away,
Our Army is ready; come, we'll after them.
Stay gentle Margaret, and hear me speak.
Thou hast spoke too much already: get thee gone.
Gentle Son Edward, thou wilt stay me?
I, to be murdered by his Enemies.
When I return with victory to the field,
Isle see your Grace: till then, Isle follow her.
Come Son away, we may not linger thus.
Poor Queen,
How love to me, and to her Son,
Hath made her break out into terms of Rage.
Revenged may she be on that hateful Duke,
Whose haughty spirit, winged with desire,
Will cost my Crown, and like an empty Eagle,
Tyre on the flesh of me, and of my Son.
The loss of those three Lords torments my heart:
Isle write unto them, and entreat them fair;
Come Cousin, you shall be the Messenger.
And I, I hope, shall reconcile them all.
Brother, though I bee youngest, give me leave.
No, I can better play the Orator.
But I have reasons strong and forcibly.
Why how now Sons, and Brother, at a strife?
What is your Quarrel? how began it first?
No Quarrel, but a slight Contention.
About what?
About that which concerns your Grace and vs,
The Crown of England, Father, which is yours.
Mine Boy? not till King Henry be dead.
Your Right depends not on his life, or death.
Now you are Heir, therefore enjoy it now:
By giving the House of Lancaster leave to breathe,
It will out-runne you, Father, in the end.
I took an Oath, that hee should quietly reign.
But for a Kingdom any Oath may be broken:
I would break a thousand Oaths, to reign one year.
No: God forbid your Grace should be for???sworn.
I shall be, if I claim by open War.
Isle prove the contrary, if you'll hear me speak.
Thou can not, Son: it is impossible.
An Oath is of no moment, being not took
Before a true and lawful Magistrate,
That hath authority over him that swears.
Henry had none, but did usurp the place.
Then seeing it was he that made you to depose,
Your Oath, my Lord, is vain and frivolous.
Therefore to Arms: and Father doe but think,
How sweet a thing it is to wear a Crown,
Within whose Circuit is Elizium,
And all that Poets fine of Bliss and Joy.
Why doe we linger thus? I cannot rest,
Until the White Rose that I wear, be dyed
Even in the luke-warme blood of Henries heart.
Richard enough: I will be King, or dye.
Brother, thou shalt to London presently,
And whet on Warwick to this Enterprise.
Thou Richard shalt to the Duke of Norfolk,
And tell him privily of our intent.
You Edward shall unto my Lord Cobham,
With whom the Kentishmen will willingly rise.
In them I trust: for they are Soldiers,
Witty, courteous, liberal, full of spirit.
While you are thus employed, what rests more?
But that I seek occasion how to rise,
And yet the King not privy to my Drift,
Nor any of the House of Lancaster.
But stay, what News? Why come thou in such post?
The Queen,
With all the Northern Earls and Lords,
Intend here to besiege you in your Castle.
She is hard by, with twenty thousand men:
And therefore fortify your Hold, my Lord.
I, with my Sword.
What? think thou, that we fear them?
Edward and Richard, you shall stay with me,
My Brother Mountague shall post to London.
Let Noble Warwick, Cobham, and the rest,
Whom we have left Protectors of the King,
With powerful Policy strengthen themselves,
And trust not simple Henry, nor his Oaths.
Brother, I go: Isle win them, fear it not.
And thus most humbly I doe take my leave.
Sir Iohn, and Sir Hugh Mortimer, mine Uncles,
You are come to Sandal in a happy hour.
The Army of the Queen mean to besiege vs.
She shall not need, we'll meet her in the field.
What, with five thousand men?
I, with five hundred, Father, for a need.
A Woman's general: what should we fear?
I hear their Drums:
Let's set our men in order,
And issue forth, and bid them Battle straight.
Five men to twenty: though the odds be great,
I doubt not, Uncle, of our Victory???
Many a Battle have I won in France,
When as the Enemy hath been ten to one:
Why should I not now have the like success?
Ah, whither shall I fly, to scope their hands?
Ah Tutor, look where bloody Clifford comes.
Chaplain away, thy Priesthood saves thy life.
As for the Brat of this accursed Duke,
Whose Father slew my Father, he shall dye.
And I, my Lord, will bear him company.
Soldiers, away with him.
Ah Clifford, murder not this innocent Child,
Least thou be hated both of God and Man.
How now? is he dead already?
Or is it fear, that makes him close his eyes?
Isle open them.
So looks the pent-vp Lyon o'er the Wretch,
That trembles under his devouring Paws:
And so he walks, insulting o'er his Prey,
And so be comes, to rend his Limbs asunder.
Ah gentle Clifford, kill me with thy Sword,
And not with such a cruel threatening Look.
Sweet Clifford hear me speak, before I dye:
I am too mean a subject for thy Wrath,
Be thou revenged on men, and let me live.
In vain thou speak, poor Boy:
My Fathers blood hath stopped the passage
Where thy words should enter.
Then let my Fathers blood open it again,
He is a man, and Clifford cope with him.
Had I thy Brethren here, their lives and thine
Were not revenge sufficient for me:
No, if I dug up thy fore-fathers Graves,
And hung their rotten Coffins up in Chains,
It could not slake mine ire, nor ease my heart.
The sight of any of the House of York,
Is as a fury to torment my Soul:
And till I root out their accursed Line,
And leave not one alive, I live in Hell.
Therefore???
Oh let me pray, before I take my death:
To thee I pray; sweet Clifford pity me.
Such pity as my Rapiers point affords.
I never did thee harm: why wilt thou slay me?
Thy Father hath.
But it was ere I was borne.
Thou hast one Son, for his sake pity me,
Least in revenge thereof, sith God is just,
He be as miserably slain as I.
Ah, let me live in Prison all my days,
And when I give occasion of offence,
Then let me dye, for now thou hast no cause.
No cause? thy Father slew my Father: there???fore dye.
Dij faciant laudis sum sit ista tu.
Plantagenet, I come Plantagenet:
And this thy Sons blood cleaving to my Blade,
Shall rust upon my Weapon, till thy blood
Congealed with this, doe make me wipe off both.
The Army of the Queen hath got the field:
My Uncles both are slain, in rescuing me;
And all my followers, to the eager foe
Turn back, and fly, like Ships before the Wind,
Or Lambs pursued by hunger-starued Wolves.
My Sons, God knows what hath bechanced them:
But this I know, they have demeaned themselves
Like men borne to Renown, by Life or Death.
Three times did Richard make a Lane to me,
And thrice cried, Courage Father, fight it out:
And full as oft came Edward to my side,
With Purple Falchion, painted to the Hilt,
In blood of those that had encountered him:
And when the hardiest Warriors did retire,
Richard cried, Charge, and give no foot of ground,
And cried, A Crown, or else a glorious Tomb,
A Sceptre, or an Earthly Sepulchre.
With this we charged again: but out alas,
We bodg'd again, as I have seen a Swan
With bootless labour swim against the Tide,
And spend her strength with ouer-matching Waives.
Ah hark, the fatal followers doe pursue,
And I am faint, and cannot fly their fury:
And were I strong, I would not shun their fury.
The Sands are numbered, that makes up my Life,
Here must I stay, and here my Life must end.
Come bloody Clifford, rough Northumberland,
I dare your quenchless fury to more rage:
I am your Butt, and I abide your Shot.
Yield to our mercy, proud Plantagenet.
I, to such mercy, as his ruthless Arm
With downright payment, showed unto my Father.
Now Phaeton hath tumbled from his Carre,
And made an Evening at the Noone-tide Prick.
My ashes, as the Phoenix, may bring forth
A Bird, that will revenge upon you all:
And in that hope, I throw mine eyes to Heaven,
Scorning what ere you can afflict me with.
Why come you not? what, multitudes, and fear?
So Cowards fight, when they can fly no further,
So Doves doe peck the Falcons piercing Talons,
So desperate Thieves, all hopeless of their Lives,
Breathe out Invectives against the Officers.
Oh Clifford, but bethink thee once again,
And in thy thought ore-run my former time:
And if thou can, for blushing, view this face,
And bite thy tongue, that slanders him with Cowardice,
Whose frown hath made thee faint and fly ere this.
I will not bandy with thee word for word,
But buckler with thee blows twice two for one.
Hold valiant Clifford, for a thousand causes
I would prolong a while the Traitors Life:
Wrath makes him deaf; speak thou Northumberland.
Hold Clifford, doe not honour him so much,
To prick thy finger, though to wound his heart.
What valour were it, when a Cur doth grin,
For one to thrust his Hand between his Teeth,
When he might spurn him with his Foot away?
It is Wars prize, to take all Vantages,
And ten to one, is no impeach of Valour.
I, I, so strives the Woodcock with the Gin.
So doth the Connie struggle in the Net.
So triumph Thieves upon their conquered Booty,
So True men yield with Robbers, so o're-matcht.
What would your Grace have done unto him now?
Brave Warriors, Clifford and Northumberland,
Come make him stand upon this Mole-hill here,
That roughed at Mountains with out-stretched Arms,
Yet parted but the shadow with his Hand.
What, was it you that would be Englands King?
Was it you that reuell'd in our Parliament,
And made a Preachment of your high Descent?
Where are your Mess of Sons, to back you now?
The wanton Edward, and the lusty George?
And whore's that valiant Crook-back Prodigy,
Dickie, your Boy, that with his grumbling voice
Was wont to cheer his Dad in Mutinies?
Or with the rest, where is your Darling, Rutland?
Look York, I stained this Napkin with the blood
That valiant Clifford, with his Rapiers point,
Made issue from the Bosom of the Boy:
And if thine eyes can water for his death,
I give thee this to dry thy Cheeks withal.
Alas poor York, but that I hate thee deadly,
I should lament thy miserable state.
I prithee grieve, to make me merry, York.
What, hath thy fiery heart so parcht thine entrails,
That not a Tear can fall, for Rutlands death?
Why art thou patient, man? thou should be mad:
And I, to make thee mad, doe mock thee thus.
Stamp, rave, and fret, that I may sing and dance.
Thou would be feed, I see, to make me sport:
York cannot speak, unless he wear a Crown.
A Crown for York; and Lords, bow lowe to him:
Hold you his hands, whilst I doe set it on.
I marry Sir, now looks he like a King:
I, this is he that took King Henries Chair,
And this is he was his adopted Heir.
But how is it, that great Plantagenet
Is crowned so soon, and broke his solemn Oath?
As I bethink me, you should not be King,
Till our King Henry had shook hands with Death.
And will you pale your head in Henries Glory,
And rob his Temples of the Diadem,
Now in his Life, against your holy Oath?
Oh it is a fault too too unpardonable.
Off with the Cro???no; and with the Crown, his Head,
And whilst we breathe, take time to doe him dead.
That is my Office, for my Fathers sake.
Nay stay, let's hear the Orisons hee makes.
Shee-Wolfe of France,
But worse then Wolves of France,
Whose Tongue more poisons then the Adders Tooth:
How ill-beseeming is it in thy Sex,
To triumph like an Amazonian Trull,
Upon their Woes, whom Fortune captivates?
But that thy Face is Vizard-like, vnchanging,
Made impudent with use of evil deeds.
I would assay, proud Queen, to make thee blush.
To tell thee whence thou came, of whom derived,
Were shame enough, to shame thee,
Were thou not shameless.
Thy Father bears the type of King of Naples,
Of both the Sicils, and Jerusalem,
Yet not so wealthy as an English Yeoman.
Hath that poor Monarch taught thee to insult?
It needs not, nor it boots thee not, proud Queen,
Unless the Adage must be verified,
That Beggars mounted, run their Horse to death.
It is Beauty that doth oft make Women proud,
But God he knows, thy share thereof is small.
It is Virtue, that doth make them most admired,
The contrary, doth make thee wondered at.
It is Government that makes them seem Divine,
The want thereof, makes thee abominable.
Thou art as opposite to every good,
As the Antipodes are unto vs,
Or as the South to the Septentrion.
Oh Tigers Heart, wrapped in a Women's Hide,
How coldest thou drayne the Life-blood of the Child,
To bid the Father wipe his eyes withal,
And yet be seen to bear a Women's face?
Women are soft, mild, pitiful, and flexible;
Thou??? sterne, obdurate, flinty, rough, remorseless.
Bid thou me rage? why now thou hast thy wish.
Would have me weep? why now thou hast thy will.
For raging Wind blows up incessant showers,
And when the Rage allayes, the Rain begins.
These Tears are my sweet Rutlands Obsequies,
And every drop cries vengeance for his death,
Against thee fell Clifford, and thee false French-woman.
Beshrew me, but his passions moves me so,
That hardly can I check my eyes from Tears.
That Face of his,
The hungry Cannibals would not have touched,
Would not have stained with blood:
But you are more inhumane, more inexorable,
Oh, ten times more then Tigers of Hyrcania.
See, ruthless Queen, a haplesse Fathers Tears:
This Cloth thou dipd'st in blood of my sweet Boy,
And I with Tears doe wash the blood away.
Keep thou the Napkin, and go boast of this,
And if thou tell the heavy story right,
Upon my Soul, the hearers will shed Tears:
Yea, even my Foes will shed fast-falling Tears,
And say, Alas, it was a piteous deed.
There, take the Crown, and with the Crown, my Curse,
And in thy need, such comfort come to thee,
As now I reap at thy too cruel hand.
Hard-hearted Clifford, take me from the World,
My Soul to Heaven, my Blood upon your Heads.
Had he been slaughter-man to all my Kin,
I should not for my Life but weep with him,
To see how inly Sorrow gripes his Soul.
What, weeping ripe, my Lord Northumberland?
Think but upon the wrong he did vs all,
And that will quickly dry thy melting Tears.
Heere's for my Oath, heere's for my Fathers Death.
And heere's to right our gentle-hearted King.
Open thy Gate of Mercy, gracious God,
My Soul flies through these wounds, to seek out thee.
Off with his Head, and set it on York Gates,
So York may ouer-looke the Town of York.
I wonder how our Princely Father escaped:
Or whether he be escaped away, or no,
From Cliffords and Northumberlands pursuit?
Had he been taken, we should have heard the news;
Had he been slain, we should have heard the news:
Or had he escaped??? me thinks we should have heard
The happy tidings of his good escape.
How fares my Brother? why is he so sad?
I cannot joy, until I be resolved
Where our right valiant Father is become.
I saw him in the Battle range about,
And watched him how he singled Clifford forth???
Me thought he bore him in the thickest troupe,
As doth a Lyon in a Heard of Neat,
Or as a Bear encompassed round with Dogs:
Who having pinched a few, and made them cry,
The rest stand all aloof, and bark at him.
So fared our Father with his Enemies,
So fled his Enemies my Warlike Father:
Me thinks it is prize enough to be his Son.
See how the Morning ops her golden Gates,
And takes her farewell of the glorious Sun???
How well resembles it the prime of Youth,
Trimmed like a Yonker, prancing to his Love?
Dazzle mine eyes, or doe I see three Suns?
Three glorious Suns, each one a perfect Sun,
Not separated with the racking Clouds,
But severed in a pale cleare-shining Sky.
See, see, they join, embrace, and seem to kiss,
As if they vowed some League inviolable.
Now are they but one Lamp, one Light, one Sun:
In this, the Heaven figures some event.
It is wondrous strange,
The like yet never heard of.
I think it cites vs (Brother) to the field,
That wee, the Sons of brave Plantagenet,
Each one already blazing by our meedes,
Should notwithstanding join our Lights together,
And ouer-shine the Earth, as this the World.
What ere it bodes, hence-forward will I bear
Upon my Targuet three fair shining Suns.
Nay, bear three Daughters:
By your leave, I speak it,
You love the Breeder better then the Male.
But what art thou, whose heavy Looks fore-tell
Some dreadful story hanging on thy Tongue?
Ah, one that was a woeful looker on,
When as the Noble Duke of York was slain,
Your Princely Father, and my loving Lord.
Oh speak no more, for I have heard too much.
Say how he dyed, for I will hear it all.
Environed he was with many foes,
And stood against them, as the hope of Troy
Against the Greeks, that would have entered Troy.
But Hercules himself must yield to odds:
And many strokes, though with a little Axe,
Hues down and fells the hardest-tymber'd Oak.
By many hands your Father was subdued,
But only slaughtered by the ireful Arm
Of unrelenting Clifford, and the Queen:
Who crowned the gracious Duke in high despite,
Laughed in his face: and when with grief he wept,
The ruthless Queen gave him, to dry his Cheeks,
A Napkin, steeped in the harmless blood
Of sweet young Rutland, by rough Clifford slain:
And after many scorns, many foul taunts,
They took his Head, and on the Gates of York
They set the same, and there it doth remain,
The saddest spectacle that ere I viewed.
Sweet Duke of York, our Prop to lean upon,
Now thou art gone??? wee have no Staff, no Stay.
Oh Clifford, boisterous Clifford thou hast slain
The flower of Europe, for his Chivalry,
And treacherously hast thou vanquished him,
For hand to hand he would have vanquished thee.
Now my Souls Palace is become a Prison:
Ah, would she break from hence, that this my body
Might in the ground be closed up in rest:
For never henceforth shall I joy again:
Never, oh never shall I see more joy.
I cannot weep: for all my bodies moisture
Scarce serves to quench my Furnace-burning hart:
Nor can my tongue unload my hearts great burden,
For selfsame wind that I should speak withal,
Is kindling coals that fires all my breast,
And burns me up with flames, that tears would quench???
To weep, is to make less the depth of grief:
Tears then for Babes; Blows, and Revenge for me.
Richard, I bear thy name, Isle avenge thy death,
Or dye renowned by attempting it.
His name that valiant Duke hath left with thee:
His Dukedom, and his Chair with me is left.
Nay, if thou be that Princely Eagles Bird,
Show thy descent by gazing against the Sun:
For Chair and Dukedom, Throne and Kingdom say,
Either that is thine, or else thou were it not his.
How now fair Lords? What fair? What news abroad?
Great Lord of Warwick, if we should recompt
Our baleful news, and at each words deliverance
Stab Poniards in our flesh, till all were told,
The words would add more anguish then the wounds.
O valiant Lord, the Duke of York is slain.
O Warwick, Warwick, that Plantagenet
Which held thee dearly, as his Souls Redemption,
Is by the sterne Lord Clifford done to death.
Ten days ago, I drowned these news in tears,
And now to add more measure to your woes,
I come to tell you things sith then befallen.
After the bloody Fray at Wakefield fought,
Where your brave Father breathed his latest gasp,
Tidings, as swiftly as the Posts could run,
Were brought me of your Loss, and his Depart.
I then in London, keeper of the King,
Mustered my Soldiers, gathered flocks of Friends,
Marched toward S. Albons, to intercept the Queen,
Bearing the King in my behalf along:
For by my Scouts, I was advertised
That she was coming with a full intent
To dash our late Decree in Parliament,
Touching King Henries Oath, and your Succession:
Short Tale to make, we at S. Albons met,
Our Battles joined, and both sides fiercely fought:
But whether it was the coldness of the King,
Who looked full gently on his warlike Queen,
That robbed my Soldiers of their heated Spleen.
Or whether it was report of her success,
Or more then common fear of Cliffords Rigour,
Who thunders to his Captives, Blood and Death,
I cannot judge: but to conclude with truth,
Their Weapons like to Lightning, came and went:
Our Soldiers like the Night-Owles lazy flight,
Or like a lazy Thresher with a Flail,
Fell gently down, as if they struck their Friends.
I cheered them up with justice of our Cause,
With promise of high pay, and great Rewards:
But all in vain, they had no heart to fight,
And we (in them) no hope to win the day,
So that we fled: the King unto the Queen,
Lord George, your Brother, Norfolk, and my Self,
In haste, post haste, are come to join with you:
For in the Marches here we heard you were,
Making another Head, to fight again.
Where is the Duke of Norfolk, gentle Warwick?
And when came George from Burgundy to England?
Some six miles off the Duke is with the Soldiers,
And for your Brother he was lately sent
From your kind Aunt Duchess of Burgundy,
With aid of Soldiers to this needful War.
It was odds belike, when valiant Warwick fled;
Oft have I heard his praises in Pursuit,
But ne'er till now, his Scandal of Retire.
Nor now my Scandal Richard, dost thou hear:
For thou shalt know this strong right hand of mine,
Can pluck the Diadem from faint Henries head,
And wring the awful Sceptre from his Fist,
Were he as famous, and as bold in War,
As he is famed for Mildness, Peace, and Prayer.
I know it well Lord Warwick, blame me not,
It is love I bear thy glories make me speak:
But in this troublous time, what's to be done?
Shall we go throw away our Coats of Steel,
And wrap our bodies in black mourning Gowns,
Numb'ring our Aue-Maries with our Beads?
Or shall we on the Helmets of our Foes
Tell our Devotion with revengeful Arms?
If for the last, say I, and to it Lords.
Why therefore Warwick came to seek you out,
And therefore comes my Brother Mountague:
Attend me Lords, the proud insulting Queen,
With Clifford, and the haught Northumberland,
And of their Feather, many more proud Birds,
Have wrought the easie-melting King, like Wax.
He swore consent to your Succession,
His Oath enrolled in the Parliament.
And now to London all the crew are gone,
To frustrate both his Oath, and what beside
May make against the house of Lancaster.
Their power (I think) is thirty thousand strong:
Now, if the help of Norfolk, and my self,
With all the Friends that thou brave Earl of March,
Amongst the loving Welshman can procure,
Will but amount to five and twenty thousand,
Why Via, to London will we march,
And once again, bestride our foaming Steeds,
And once again cry Charge upon our Foes,
But never once again turn back and fly.
I, now me thinks I hear great Warwick speak;
Ne'er may he live to see a Sun-shine day,
That cries Retire, if Warwick bid him stay.
Lord Warwick, on thy shoulder will I lean,
And when thou failst (as God forbid the hour)
Must Edward fall, which peril heaven forefend.
No longer Earl of March, but Duke of York:
The next degree, is Englands Royal Throne:
For King of England shalt thou be proclaimed
In every Borough as we pass along,
And he that throws not up his cap for joy,
Shall for the Fault make forfeit of his head.
King Edward, valiant Richard Mountague:
Stay we no longer, dreaming of Renown,
But sound the Trumpets, and about our Task.
Then Clifford, were thy heart as hard as Steel,
As thou hast shown it flinty by thy deeds,
I come to pierce it, or to give thee mine.
Then strike up Drums, God and S. George for vs.
How now? what news?
The Duke of Norfolk sends you word by me,
The Queen is coming with a puissant Host,
And craves your company, for speedy counsel.
Why then it sorts, brave Warriors, let's away.
Welcome my Lord, to this brave town of York,
Yonders the head of that Arch-enemy,
That sought to be encompassed with your Crown.
Doth not the object cheer your heart, my Lord.
I, as the rocks cheer them that fear their wrack,
To see this sight, it irkes my very soul:
With-hold revenge (dear God) it is not my fault,
Nor wittingly have I infringed my Vow.
My gracious Liege, this too much lenity
And harmful pity must be laid aside:
To whom do Lyons cast their gentle Looks?
Not to the Beast, that would usurp their Den.
Whose hand is that the Forest Bear doth like?
Not his that spoils her young before her face.
Who scopes the lurking Serpents mortal sting?
Not he that sets his foot upon her back.
The smallest Worm will turn, being trodden on,
And Doves will peck in safeguard of their Brood.
Ambitious York, did level at thy Crown,
Thou smiling, while he knit his angry brows.
He but a Duke, would have his Son a King,
And raise his issue like a loving Sire.
Thou being a King, blessed with a goodly son,
Did yield consent to disinherit him:
Which argued thee a most unloving Father.
Unreasonable Creatures feed their young,
And though mans face be fearful to their eyes,
Yet in protection of their tender ones,
Who hath not seen them even with those wings,
Which sometime they have used with fearful flight,
Make war with him that climbed unto their nest,
Offering their own lives in their yongs defence?
For shame, my Liege, make them your President:
Were it not pity that this goodly Boy
Should loose his Birth-right by his Fathers fault,
And long hereafter say unto his child,
What my great Grandfather, and Grandsire got,
My careless Father fondly gave away.
Ah, what a shame were this? Look on the Boy,
And let his manly face, which promises
Successful Fortune steel thy melting heart,
To hold thine own, and leave thine own with him.
Full well hath Clifford plaid the Orator,
Inferring arguments of mighty force:
But Clifford tell me, did thou never hear,
That things ill got, had ever bad success.
And happy always was it for that Son,
Whose Father for his hoording went to hell:
Isle leave my Son my Virtuous deeds behind,
And would my Father had left me no more:
For all the rest is held at such a Rate,
As brings a thousand fold more care to keep,
Then in possession any jot of pleasure.
Ah Cousin York, would thy best Friends did know,
How it doth grieve me that thy head is here.
My Lord cheer up your spirits, our foes are ny,
And this soft courage makes your Followers faint:
You promised Knighthood to our forward son,
Unsheathe your sword, and dub him presently.
Edward, kneel down.
Edward Plantagenet, arise a Knight,
And learn this Lesson; Draw thy Sword in right.
My gracious Father, by your Kingly leave,
Isle draw it as Apparent to the Crown,
And in that quarrel, use it to the death.
Why that is spoken like a toward Prince.
Royal Commanders, be in readiness,
For with a Band of thirty thousand men,
Comes Warwick backing of the Duke of York,
And in the Towns as they do march along,
Proclaims him King, and many fly to him,
Darraigne your battle, for they are at hand.
I would your Highness would depart the field,
The Queen hath best success when you are absent.
I good my Lord, and leave vs to our Fortune.
Why, that's my fortune too, therefore Isle stay.
Be it with resolution then to fight.
My Royal Father, cheer these Noble Lords,
And hearten those that fight in your defence:
Unsheathe your Sword, good Father: Cry S. George.
Now perjured Henry, wilt thou kneel for grace?
And set thy Diadem upon my head?
Or bide the mortal Fortune of the field.
Go rate thy Minions, proud insulting Boy,
Becomes it thee to be thus bold in terms,
Before thy Sovereign, and thy lawful King?
I am his King, and he should bow his knee:
I was adopted Heir by his consent.
Since when, his Oath is broke: for as I hear,
You that are King, though he do wear the Crown,
Have cause him by new Act of Parliament,
To blot out me, and put his own Son in.
And reason too,
Who should succeed the Father, but the Son.
Are you there Butcher? O, I cannot speak.
I Crooke-back, here I stand to answer thee,
Or any he, the proudest of thy sort.
It was you that killed young Rutland, was it not?
I, and old York, and yet not satisfied.
For Gods sake Lords give signal to the fight.
What say thou Henry,
Wilt thou yield the Crown?
Why how now long-tongu'd Warwick, dare you speak?
When you and I, met at S. Albons last,
Your legs did better service then your hands.
Then it was my turn to fly, and now it is thine:
You said so much before, and yet you fled.
It was not your valour Clifford drove me thence.
No, nor your manhood that durst make you stay.
Northumberland, I hold thee reverently,
Break off the parley, for scarce I can refrain
The execution of my big-swolne heart
Upon that Clifford, that cruel Child-killer.
I slew thy Father, call thou him a Child?
I like a Dastard, and a treacherous Coward,
As thou did kill our tender Brother Rutland,
But ere Sunset, Isle make thee curse the deed.
Have done with words (my Lords) and hear me speak.
Defy them then, or else hold close thy lips.
I prithee give no limits to my Tongue,
I am a King, and privileged to speak.
My Liege, the wound that bred this meeting here,
Cannot be cured by Words, therefore be still.
Then Executioner unsheathe thy sword:
By him that made vs all, I am resolved,
That Cliffords Manhood, lies upon his tongue.
Say Henry, shall I have my right, or no:
A thousand men have broke their Fasts to day,
That ne'er shall dine, unless thou-yeeld the Crown.
If thou deny, their Blood upon thy head,
For York in justice putt's his Armour on.
If that be right, which Warwick says is right,
There is no wrong, but every thing is right.
Who ever got thee, there thy Mother stands,
For well I wot, thou hast thy Mothers tongue.
But thou art neither like thy Sire nor Damme,
But like a foul misshapen Stygmaticke,
Marked by the Destinies to be avoided,
As venom Toads, or Lizards dreadful stings.
Iron of Naples, hid with English gilt,
Whose Father bears the Title of a King,
(As if a Channel should be called the Sea)
Sham'st thou not, knowing whence thou art extraught,
To let thy tongue detect thy base-borne heart.
A wisp of straw were worth a thousand Crowns,
To make this shameless Callet know her self:
Helen of Greece was fairer far then thou,
Although thy Husband may be Menelaus;
And ne'er was Agamemnons Brother wronged
By that false Woman, as this King by thee.
His Father reuel'd in the heart of France,
And tamed the King, and made the Dolphin stoop:
And had he matched according to his State,
He might have kept that glory to this day.
But when he took a beggar to his bed,
And graced thy poor Sire with his Bridal day,
Even then that Sun-shine brewed a shower for him,
That washed his Fathers fortunes forth of France,
And heaped sedition on his Crown at home:
For what hath broached this tumult but thy Pride?
Had thou been meek, our Title still had slept,
And we in pity of the Gentle King,
Had slipped our Claim, until another Age.
But when we saw, our Sunshine made thy Spring,
And that thy Summer bred vs no increase,
We set the Axe to thy usurping Root:
And though the edge hath something hit our selves,
Yet know thou, since we have begun to strike,
We'll never leave, till we have hewn thee down,
Or bathed thy growing, with our heated bloods.
And in this resolution, I defy thee,
Not willing any longer Conference,
Since thou denied'st the gentle King to speak.
Sound Trumpets, let our bloody Colours wave,
And either Victory, or else a Grave.
Stay Edward.
No wrangling Woman, we'll no longer stay,
These words will cost ten thousand lives this day.
Fore-spent with Toil, as Runners with a Race,
I lay me down a little while to breath:
For strokes received, and many blows repaid,
Have robbed my strong knit sinews of their strength,
And spite of spite, needs must I rest awhile.
Smile gentle heaven, or strike ungentle death,
For this world frowns, and Edwards Sun is clouded.
How now my Lord, what hap? what hope of good?
Out hap is loss, our hope but sad despair,
Our ranks are broke, and ruin follows vs.
What counsel give you? whether shall we fly?
Bootless is flight, they follow vs with Wings,
And weak we are, and cannot shun pursuit.
Ah Warwick, why hast you withdrawn thy self?
Thy Brothers blood the thirsty earth hath drunk,
Broached with the Steely point of Cliffords Lance:
And in the very pangs of death, he cried,
Like to a dismal Clangor heard from far,
Warwick, revenge; Brother, revenge my death.
So underneath the belly of their Steeds,
That stained their Fetlockes in his smoking blood,
The Noble Gentleman gave up the ghost.
Then let the earth be drunken with our blood:
Isle kill my Horse, because I will not fly:
Why stand we like soft-hearted women here,
Wailing our losses, whiles the Foe doth Rage,
And look upon, as if the Tragedy
Were plaid in lest, by counterfeiting Actors.
Here on my knee, I vow to God aboue,
Isle never pause again, never stand still,
Till either death hath closed these eyes of mine,
Or Fortune given me measure of Revenge.
Oh Warwick, I do bend my knee with thine,
And in this vow do chain my soul to thine:
And ere my knee rise from the Earths cold face???
I throw my hands, mine eyes, my heart to thee,
Thou setter up, and plucker down of Kings:
Beseeching thee (if with thy will it stands)
That to my Foes this body must be prey,
Yet that thy brazen gates of heaven may op,
And give sweet passage to my sinful soul.
Now Lords, take leave until we meet again,
Where ere it be, in heaven, or in earth.
Brother,
Give me thy hand, and gentle Warwick,
Let me embrace thee in my weary arms:
I that did never weep, now melt with wo,
That Winter should cut off our Spring-time so.
Away, away:
Once more sweet Lords farewell.
Yet let vs altogether to our Troops,
And give them leave to fly, that will not stay:
And call them Pillars that will stand to vs:
And if we thrive, promise them such rewards
As Victors wear at the Olympian Games.
This may plant courage in their quailing breasts,
For yet is hope of Life and Victory:
Foreslow no longer, make we hence amain.
Now Clifford, I have singled thee alone,
Suppose this arm is for the Duke of York,
And this for Rutland, both bound to revenge,
Were it thou environed with a Brazen wall.
Now Richard, I am with thee here alone,
This is the hand that stabbed thy Father York,
And this the hand, that slew thy Brother Rutland,
And here's the heart, that triumphs in their death,
And cheers these hands, that slew thy Sire and Brother,
To execute the like upon thy self,
And so have at thee.
Nay Warwick, single out some other Chase,
For I my self will hunt this Wolf to death.
This battle fares like to the mornings War,
When dying clouds contend, with growing light,
What time the Shepherd blowing of his nails,
Can neither call it perfect day, nor night.
Now sways it this way, like a Mighty Sea,
Forced by the Tide, to combat with the Wind:
Now sways it that way, like the selfsame Sea,
Forced to retire by fury of the Wind.
Sometime, the Flood prevails; and than the Wind:
Now, one the better: then, another best;
Both tugging to be Victors, breast to breast:
Yet neither Conqueror, nor Conquered.
So is the equal poise of this fell War.
Here on this Mole-hill will I sit me down,
To whom God will, there be the Victory:
For Margaret my Queen, and Clifford too
Have chid me from the Battle: Swearing both,
They prosper best of all when I am thence.
Would I were dead, if Gods good will were so;
For what is in this world, but Grief and Woe.
Oh God! me thinks it were a happy life,
To be no better then a homely Swain,
To sit upon a hill, as I do now,
To carve out Dialls quaintly, point by point,
Thereby to see the Minutes how they run:
How many makes the Hour full complete,
How many Hours brings about the Day,
How many Days will finish up the Year,
How many Years, a Mortal man may live.
When this is known, then to divide the Times:
So many Hours, must I tend my Flock;
So many Hours, must I take my Rest:
So many Hours, must I Contemplate:
So many Hours, must I Sport my self:
So many Days, my Ewes have been with young:
So many weeks, ere the poor Fools will Eane:
So many years, ere I shall sheer the Fleece:
So Minutes, Hours, Days, Months, and Years,
Past over to the end they were created,
Would bring white hairs, unto a Quiet grave.
Ah! what a life were this? How sweet? how lovely?
Gives not the Hawthorn bush a sweeter shade
To Shepherds??? looking on their silly Sheep,
Then doth a rich Embroidered Canopy
To Kings, that fear their Subjects treachery?
Oh yes, it doth; a thousand fold it doth.
And to conclude, the Shepherds homely Curds,
His cold thin drink out of his Leather Bottle,
His wonted sleep, under a fresh trees shade,
All which secure, and sweetly he enjoys,
Is far beyond a Princes Delicates:
His Viands sparkling in a Golden Cup,
His body couched in a curious bed,
When Care, Mistrust, and Treason waits on him.
Ill blows the wind that profits no body,
This man whom hand to hand I slew in fight,
May be possessed with some store of Crowns,
And I that (happily) take them from him now,
May yet (ere night) yield both my Life and them
To some man else, as this dead man doth me.
Who's this? Oh God! It is my Fathers face,
Whom in this Conflict, I (unawares) have killed:
Oh heavy times! begetting such Events.
From London, by the King was I pressed forth,
My Father being the Earl of Warwickes man,
Came on the part of York, pressed by his Master:
And I, who at his hands received my life,
Have by my hands, of Life bereaved him.
Pardon me God, I knew not what I did:
And pardon Father, for I knew not thee.
My Tears shall wipe away these bloody marks:
And no more words, till they have flowed their fill.
O piteous spectacle! O bloody Times!
Whiles Lyons War, and battle for their Dens,
Poor harmless Lambs abide their enmity.
Weep wretched man: Isle aid thee Tear for Tear,
And let our hearts and eyes, like Civil War,
Be blind with tears, and break ore-charg'd with grief
Thou that so stoutly hath resisted me,
Give me thy Gold, if thou hast any Gold:
For I have bought it with an hundred blows.
But let me see: Is this our Foe-mans face?
Ah, no, no, no, it is mine only Son.
Ah Boy, if any life be left in thee,
Throw up thine eye: see, see, what showers arise,
Blown with the windy Tempest of my heart,
Upon thy wounds, that kills mine Eye, and Heart,
O pity God, this miserable Age!
What Stragems? how fell? how Butcherly?
Erreoneous, mutinous, and unnatural,
This deadly quarrel daily doth beget?
O Boy! thy Father gave thee life too soon,
And hath bereft thee of thy life too late.
Wo aboue wo: grief, more the?? common grief
O that my death would stay these ruthful deeds:
O pity, pity, gentle heaven pity:
The Red Rose and the White are on his face,
The fatal Colours of our striving Houses:
The one, his purple Blood right well resembles,
The other his pale Cheeks (me thinks) presents:
Wither one Rose, and let the other flourish:
If you contend, a thousand lives must wither.
How will my Mother, for a Fathers death
Take on with me, and ne'er be satisfied?
How will my Wife, for slaughter of my Son,
Shed seas of Tears, and ne'er be satisfied?
How will the Country, for these woeful chances,
Mis-thinke the King, and not be satisfied?
Was ever son, so rew'd a Fathers death?
Was ever Father so bemoaned his Son?
Was ever King so grieved for Subjects woe?
Much is your sorrow; Mine, ten times so much.
Isle bear thee hence, where I may weep my fill.
These arms of mine shall be thy winding sheet:
My heart (sweet Boy) shall be thy Sepulchre,
For from my heart, thine Image ne'er shall go.
My sighing breast, shall be thy Funeral bell;
And so obsequious will thy Father be,
Men for the loss of thee, having no more,
As Priam was for all his Valiant Sons,
Isle bear thee hence, and let them fight that will,
For I have murdered where I should not kill.
Sad-hearted-men, much overgone with Care;
Here sits a King, more woeful then you are.
Fly Father, fly: for all your Friends are fled.
And Warwick rages like a chafed Bull:
Away, for death doth hold vs in pursuit.
Mount you my Lord, towards Berwick post a???maine:
Edward and Richard like a brace of Grey-hounds,
Having the fearful flying Hare in sight,
With fiery eyes, sparkling for very wrath,
And bloody steel grasped in their ireful hands
Are at our backs, and therefore hence amain.
Away: for vengeance comes along with them.
Nay, stay not to expostulate, make speed,
Or else come after, Isle away before.
Nay take me with thee, good sweet Exeter:
Not that I fear to stay, but love to go
Whether the Queen intends. Forward, away.
Here burns my Candle out; I, here it dies,
Which whiles it lasted, gave King Henry light.
O Lancaster! I fear thy overthrow,
More then my Bodies parting with my Soul:
My Love and Fear, glued many Friends to thee,
And now I fall. Thy tough Commixtures melts,
Impairing Henry, strength'ning misproud York;
And whether fly the Gnats, but to the Sun?
And who shines now, but Henries Enemies?
O Phoebus! had thou never given consent,
That Phaeton should check thy fiery Steeds,
Thy burning Carre never had scorched the earth.
And Henry, had thou swayed as Kings should do,
Or as thy Father, and his Father did,
Giving no ground unto the house of York,
They never then had sprung like Summer Flies:
I, and ten thousand in this luckless Realm,
Head left no mourning Widows for our death,
And thou this day, had kept thy Chair in peace.
For what doth cherish Weeds, but gentle ayre?
And what makes Robbers bold, but too much lenity?
Bootless are Plaints, and Cureless are my Wounds:
No way to fly, nor strength to hold out flight:
The Foe is merciless, and will not pity:
For at their hands I have deserved no pity.
The ayre hath got into my deadly Wounds,
And much effuse of blood, doth make me faint:
Come York, and Richard, Warwick, and the rest,
I stabbed your Fathers bosoms; Split my breast.
Now breath we Lords, good fortune bids vs pause,
And smooth the frowns of War, with peaceful looks:
Some Troops pursue the bloody-minded Queen,
That led calm Henry, though he were a King,
As doth a Sail, filled with a fretting Gust
Command an Argosy to stem the Waives.
But think you (Lords) that Clifford fled with them?
No, it is impossible he should escape:
(For though before his face I speak the words)
Your Brother Richard marked him for the Grave.
And wheresoever he is, hoe's surely dead.
Whose soul is that which takes his heavy leave?
A deadly groan, like life and deaths departing.
See who it is.
And now the Battles ended,
If Friend or Foe, let him be gently used.
Revoke that doom of mercy, for it is Clifford,
Who not contented that he lopped the Branch
In hewing Rutland, when his leaves put forth,
But set his murth'ring knife unto the Root,
From whence that tender spray did sweetly spring,
I mean our Princely Father, Duke of York.
From off the gates of York, fetch down ye head,
Your Fathers head, which Clifford placed there:
In stead whereof, let this supply the room,
Measure for measure, must be answered.
Bring forth that fatal Schreechowle to our house,
That nothing sung but death, to vs and ours:
Now death shall stop his dismal threatening sound,
And his ill-boading tongue, no more shall speak.
I think is understanding is bereft:
Speak Clifford, dost thou know who speaks to thee?
Dark cloudy death ore-shades his beams of life,
And he nor sees, nor hears vs, what we say.
O would he did, and so (perhaps) he doth,
It is but his policy to counterfeit,
Because he would avoid such bitter taunts
Which in the time of death he gave our Father.
If so thou think,
Vex him with eager Words.
Clifford, ask mercy, and obtain no grace.
Clifford, repent in bootless penitence.
Clifford, devise excuses for thy faults,
While we devise fell Tortures for thy faults.
Thou did love York, and I am son to York.
Thou pity Rutland, I will pity thee.
Whore's Captain Margaret, to fence you now?
They mock thee Clifford,
Swear as thou was it wont.
What, not an Oath? Nay then the world go's hard
When Clifford cannot spare his Friends an oath:
I know by that he's dead, and by my Soul,
If this right hand would buy two hours life,
That I (in all despite) might rail at him,
This hand should chop it off: &amp; with the issuing Blood
Stifle the Villain, whose vnstanched thirst
York, and young Rutland could not satisfy
I, but he's dead. Of with the Traitors head,
And rear it in the place your Fathers stands.
And now to London with Triumphant march,
There to be crowned Englands Royal King:
From whence, shall Warwick cut the Sea to France,
And ask the Lady Bone for thy Queen:
So shalt thou sinow both these Lands together,
And having France thy Friend, thou shalt not dread
The scattred Foe, that hopes to rise again:
For though they cannot greatly sting to hurt,
Yet look to have them buzz to offend thine ears:
First, will I see the Coronation,
And then to Brittany Isle cross the Sea,
To effect this marriage, so it please my Lord.
Even as thou wilt sweet Warwick, let it bee:
For in thy shoulder do I build my Seat;
And never will I undertake the thing
Wherein thy counsel and consent is wanting:
Richard, I will create thee Duke of Gloucester,
And George of Clarence; Warwick as our Self,
Shall do, and undo as him pleases best.
Let me be Duke of Clarence, George of Gloster,
For Glosters Dukedom is too ominous.
Tut, that's a foolish observation:
Richard??? be Duke of Gloster: Now to London,
To see these Honours in possession.
Under this thick grown brake, we'll shroud our selves:
For through this Land anon the Dear will come,
And in this covert will we make our Stand,
Culling the principal of all the Dear.
Isle stay aboue the hill, so both may shoot.
That cannot be, the noise of thy Crosse-bow
Will scarre the Heard, and so my shoot is lost:
Here stand we both, and aim we at the best:
And for the time shall not seem tedious,
Isle tell thee what befell me on a day,
In this selfe-place, where now we mean to stand.
Here comes a man, let's stay till he be past:
From Scotland am I stolen even of pure love,
To greet mine own Land with my wishful sight:
No Harry, Harry, it is no Land of thine,
Thy place is filled, thy Sceptre wrung from thee,
Thy Balm washed off, wherewith thou was Anointed:
No bending knee will call thee Caesar now,
No humble suitors press to speak for right:
No, not a man comes for redress of thee:
For how can I help them, and not my self?
I, heere's a Dear, whose skin's a Keepers Fee:
This is the quondam King; Let's seize upon him.
Let me embrace the sower Adversaries,
For Wise men say, it is the wisest course.
Why linger we? Let vs lay hands upon him.
Forbear awhile, we'll hear a little more.
My Queen and Son are gone to France for aid:
And (as I hear) the great Commanding Warwick
I: thither gone, to crave the French Kings Sister
To wife for Edward. If this news be true,
Poor Queen, and Son, your labour is but lost:
For Warwick is a subtle Orator:
And Lewis a Prince soon won with moving words:
By this account then, Margaret may win him,
For she's a woman to be pitied much:
Her sighs will make a battery in his breast,
Her tears will pierce into a Marble heart:
The Tiger will be mild, whiles she doth morn;
And Narrow will be tainted with remorse,
To hear and see her plaints, her Brinish Tears.
I, but shoe's come to beg, Warwick to give:
She on his left side, craving aid for Henrie;
He on his right, asking a wife for Edward.
She Weeps, and says, her Henry is deposed:
He Smiles, and says, his Edward is instaul'd;
That she (poor Wretch) for grief can speak no more:
Whiles Warwick tells his Title, smooths the Wrong,
Inferred arguments of mighty strength,
And in conclusion wins the King from her,
With promise of his Sister, and what else,
To strengthen and support King Edwards place.
O Margaret, thus twill be, and thou (poor soul)
Art then forsaken, as thou went forlorn.
Say, what art thou talk of Kings &amp; Queens?
More then I seem, and less then I was born to:
A man at least, for less I should not be:
And men may talk of Kings, and why not I?
I, but thou talk, as if thou were it a King.
Why so I am (in Mind) and that's enough.
But if thou be a King, where is thy Crown?
My Crown is in my heart, not on my head:
Not decked with Diamonds, and Indian stones:
Nor to be seen: my Crown, is called Content,
A Crown it is, that seldom Kings enjoy.
Well, if you be a King crowned with Content,
Your Crown Content, and you, must be contented
To go along with vs. For (as we think)
You are the king King Edward hath deposed:
And we his subjects, sworn in all Allegiance,
Will apprehend you, as his Enemy.
But did you never swear, and break an Oath.
No, never such an Oath, nor will not now.
Where did you dwell when I was K. of England?
Here in this Country, where we now remain.
I was anointed King at nine months old,
My Father, and my Grandfather were Kings:
And you were sworn true Subjects unto me:
And tell me then, have you not broke your Oaths?
No, for we were Subjects, but while you were king
Why? Am I dead? Do I not breath a Man?
Ah simple men, you know not what you swear:
Look, as I blow this Feather from my Face,
And as the Ayre blows it to me again,
Obeying with my wind when I do blow,
And yielding to another, when it blows,
Commanded always by the greater gust:
Such is the lightness of you, common men.
But do not break your Oaths, for of that sin,
My mild entreaty shall not make you guilty.
Go where you will, the king shall be commanded,
And be you kings, command, and Isle obey.
We are true Subjects to the king, King Edward.
So would you be again to Henrie,
If he were seated as king Edward is.
We charge you in Gods name &amp; the Kings,
To go with vs unto the Officers.
In Gods name lead, your Kings name be obeyed,
And what God will, that let your King perform???
And what he will, I humbly yield unto.
Brother of Gloster, at S. Albons field
This Ladies Husband, Sir Richard Grey, was slain,
His Land then seized on by the Conqueror,
Her suit is now, to repossess those Lands,
Which wee in Justice cannot well deny,
Because in Quarrel of the House of York,
The worthy Gentleman did lose his Life.
Your Highness shall doe well to grant her suit:
It were dishonour to deny it her.
It were no less, but yet Isle make a pause.
Yea, is it so:
I see the Lady hath a thing to grant,
Before the King will grant her humble suit.
Hee knows the Game, how true hee keeps the wind?
Silence.
Widow, we will consider of your suit,
And come some other time to know our mind.
Right gracious Lord, I cannot brooke delay:
May it please your Highness to resolve me now,
And what your pleasure is, shall satisfy me.
I Widow? then Isle warrant you all your Lands,
And if what pleases him, shall pleasure you:
Fight closer, or good faith you'll catch a Blow.
I fear her not, unless she chance to fall.
God forbid that, for he will take vantages.
How many Children hast thou, Widow? tell me.
I think he means to beg a Child of her.
Nay then whip me: he will rather give her two.
Three, my most gracious Lord.
You shall have four, if you'll be ruled by him.
It were pity they should lose their Fathers Lands.
Be pitiful, dread Lord, and grant it then.
Lords give vs leave, Isle try this Widows wit.
I, good leave have you, for you will have leave,
Till Youth take leave, and leave you to the Crutch.
Now tell me, Madame, doe you love your Children?
I, full as dearly as I love my self.
And would you not doe much to doe them good?
To doe them good, I would sustain some harm.
Then get your Husbands Lands, to doe them good.
Therefore I came unto your Majesty.
Isle tell you how these Lands are to be got.
So shall you bind me to your Highness service.
What service wilt thou doe me, if I give them?
What you command, that rests in me to doe.
But you will take exceptions to my Boon.
No, gracious Lord, except I cannot doe it.
I, but thou can doe what I mean to ask.
Why then I will doe what your Grace com???mands.
Hee plies her hard, and much Rain wears the Marble.
As red as fire? nay then, her Wax must melt.
Why stoppes my Lord? shall I not hear my Task?
An easy Task, it is but to love a King.
That's soon performed, because I am a Subject.
Why then, thy Husbands Lands I freely give thee.
I take my leave with many thousand thanks.
The Match is made, she seals it with a Curse.
But stay thee, it is the fruits of love I mean.
The fruits of Love, I mean, my loving Liege.
I, but I fear me in another sense.
What Love, think thou, I sue so much to get?
My love till death, my humble thanks, my prayers,
That love which Virtue begs, and Virtue grants.
No, by my troth, I did not mean such love.
Why then you mean not, as I thought you did.
But now you partly may perceive my mind.
My mind will never grant what I perceive
Your Highness aims at, if I aim aright.
To tell thee plain, I aim to lye with thee.
To tell you plain, I had rather lye in Prison.
Why then thou shalt not have thy Husbands Lands.
Why then mine Honesty shall be my Dower,
For by that loss, I will not purchase them.
Therein thou wrong'st thy Children mightily.
Herein your Highness wrongs both them &amp; me:
But mighty Lord, this merry inclination
Accords not with the sadness of my suit:
Please you dismiss me, either with I, or no.
I, if thou wilt say I to my request:
No, if thou dost say No to my demand.
Then No, my Lord: my suit is at an end.
The Widow likes him not, she knits her Brows.
Hee is the bluntest Wooer in Christen???dome.
Her Looks doth argue her replete with Modesty,
Her Words doth show her Wit incomparable,
All her perfections challenge Sovereignty,
One way, or other, she is for a King,
And she shall be my Love, or else my Queen.
Say, that King Edward take thee for his Queen?
It is better said then done, my gracious Lord:
I am a subject fit to jest withal,
But far unfit to be a Sovereign.
Sweet Widow, by my State I swear to thee,
I speak no more then what my Soul intends,
And that is, to enjoy thee for my Love.
And that is more then I will yield unto:
I know, I am too mean to be your Queen,
And yet too good to be your Concubine.
You cavil, Widow, I did mean my Queen.
Twill grieve your Grace, my Sons should call you Father.
No more, then when my Daughters
Call thee Mother.
Thou art a Widow, and thou hast some Children,
And by Gods Mother, I being but a Bachelor,
Have other-some. Why, it is a happy thing,
To be the Father unto many Sons:
Answer no more, for thou shalt be my Queen.
The Ghostly Father now hath done his Shrift.
When hee was made a Shriuer, it was for shift.
Brothers, you muse what Chat wee two have had.
The Widow likes it not, for she looks very sad.
You'd think it strange, if I should marry her.
To who, my Lord?
Why Clarence, to my self.
That would be ten days wonder at the least.
That's a day longer then a Wonder lasts.
By so much is the Wonder in extremes.
Well, jest on Brothers: I can tell you both,
Her suit is granted for her Husbands Lands.
My gracious Lord, Henry your Foe is taken,
And brought your Prisoner to your Palace Gate.
See that he be conveyed unto the Tower:
And go wee Brothers to the man that took him,
To question of his apprehension.
Widow go you along: Lords use her honourable.
I, Edward will use Women honourably:
Would he were wasted, Marrow, Bones, and all,
That from his Loins no hopeful Branch may spring,
To cross me from the Golden time I look for:
And yet, between my Souls desire, and me,
The lustful Edwards Title buried,
Is Clarence, Henry, and his Son young Edward,
And all the vnlook'd-for Issue of their Bodies,
To take their Rooms, ere I can place my self:
A cold premeditation for my purpose.
Why then I doe but dream on Sovereignty,
Like one that stands upon a Promontory,
And spies a farre-off shore, where hee would tread,
Wishing his foot were equal with his eye,
And chides the Sea, that sunders him from thence,
Saying he will lade it dry, to have his way:
So doe I wish the Crown, being so far off,
And so I chide the means that keeps me from it,
And so (I say) Isle cut the Causes off,
Flattering me with impossibilities:
My Eyes too quick, my Heart o're-weenes too much,
Unless my Hand and Strength could equal them.
Well, say there is no Kingdom then for Richard:
What other Pleasure can the World afford?
Isle make my Heaven in a Ladies Lap,
And deck my Body in gay Ornaments,
And witch sweet Ladies with my Words and Looks.
Oh miserable Thought! and more unlikely???
Then to accomplish twenty Golden Crowns.
Why Love forswore me in my Mothers Womb:
And for I should not deal in her soft Laws,
She did corrupt frail Nature with some Bribe,
To shrink mine Arm up like a withered Shrub,
To make an envious Mountain on my Back,
Where sits Deformity to mock my Body;
To shape my Legs of an unequal size,
To dis-proportion me in every part:
Like to a Chaos, or an vn-lick'd Beare-whelpe,
That carries no impression like the Damme.
And am I then a man to be beloved?
Oh monstrous fault, to harbour such a thought.
Then since this Earth affords no Joy to me,
But to command, to check, to o're-beare such,
As are of better Person then my self:
Isle make my Heaven, to dream upon the Crown,
And whiles I live, t'account this World but Hell,
Until my mis-shap'd Trunk, that bears this Head,
Be round impaled with a glorious Crown.
And yet I know not how to get the Crown,
For many Lives stand between me and home:
And I, like one lost in a Thorny Wood,
That rents the Thorns, and is rent with the Thorns,
Seeking a way, and straying from the way,
Not knowing how to find the open Ayre,
But toiling desperately to find it out,
Torment my self, to catch the English Crown:
And from that torment I will free my self,
Or hew my way out with a bloody Axe.
Why I can smile, and murder whiles I smile,
And cry, Content, to that which grieves my Heart,
And wet my Cheeks with artificial Tears,
And frame my Face to all occasions.
Isle drown more Sailors then the Mermaid shall,
Isle slay more gazers then the Basilisk,
Isle play the Orator as well as Nestor,
Deceive more slyly then Vlisses could,
And like a Synon, take another Troy.
I can add Colours to the Chameleon,
Change shapes with Proteus, for advantages,
And set the murderous Macheuill to School.
Can I doe this, and cannot get a Crown?
Tut, were it farther off, Isle pluck it down.
Fair Queen of England, worthy Margaret,
Sit down with vs: it ill befits thy State,
And Birth, that thou should stand, while Lewis doth sit.
No, mighty King of France: now Margaret
Must strike her sail, and learn a while to serve,
Where Kings command. I was (I must confess)
Great Albions Queen, in former Golden days:
But now mischance hath trod my Title down,
And with dishonour laid me on the ground,
Where I must take like Seat unto my fortune,
And to my humble Seat conform my self.
Why say, fair Queen, whence springs this deep despair?
From such a cause, as fills mine eyes with tears,
And stops my tongue, while heart is drowned in cares.
What ere it be, be thou still like thy self,
And sit thee by our side.
Yield not thy neck to Fortunes yoke,
But let thy dauntless mind still ride in triumph,
Over all mischance.
Be plain, Queen Margaret, and tell thy grief,
It shall be eased, if France can yield relief.
Those gracious words
Revive my drooping thoughts,
And give my tongue-tied sorrows leave to speak.
Now therefore be it known to Noble Lewis,
That Henry, sole possessor of my Love,
Is, of a King, become a banished man,
And forced to live in Scotland a Forlorn;
While proud ambitious Edward, Duke of York,
Usurps the Regal Title, and the Seat
Of Englands true anointed lawful King.
This is the cause that I, poor Margaret,
With this my Son, Prince Edward, Henries Heir,
Am come to crave thy just and lawful aid:
And if thou fail vs, all our hope is done.
Scotland hath will to help, but cannot help:
Our People, and our Peers, are both mis-led,
Our Treasure seized, our Soldiers put to flight,
And (as thou see) our selves in heavy plight.
Renowned Queen,
With patience calm the Storm,
While we bethink a means to break it off.
The more wee stay, the stronger grows our Foe.
The more I stay, the more Isle succour thee.
O, but impatience waits on true sorrow.
And see where comes the breeder of my sorrow.
What's hee approaches boldly to our pre???sense?
Our Earl of Warwick, Edwards greatest Friend.
Welcome brave Warwick, what brings thee to France?
I now begins a second Storm to rise,
For this is hee that moves both Wind and Tide.
From worthy Edward, King of Albion,
My Lord and Sovereign, and thy vowed Friend,
I come (in Kindness, and unfeigned Love)
First, to doe greetings to thy Royal Person,
And then to crave a League of Amity:
And lastly, to confirm that Amity
With Nuptial Knot, if thou vouchsafe to grant
That virtuous Lady Bone, thy fair Sister,
To Englands King, in lawful Marriage.
If that go forward, Henries hope is done.
And gracious Madame,
In our Kings behalf,
I am commanded, with your leave and favour,
Humbly to kiss your Hand, and with my Tongue
To tell the passion of my Sovereigns Heart;
Where Fame, late entering at his heedful Ears,
Hath placed thy Beauties Image, and thy Virtue.
King Lewis, and Lady Bone, hear me speak,
Before you answer Warwick. His demand
Springs not from Edwards well-meant honest Love,
But from Deceit, bred by Necessity:
For how can Tyrants safely govern home,
Unless abroad they purchase great alliance?
To prove him Tyrant, this reason may suffice,
That Henry lives still: but were hee dead,
Yet here Prince Edward stands, King Henries Son.
Look therefore Lewis, that by this League and Marriage
Thou draw not on thy Danger, and Dishonour:
For though Usurpers sway the rule a while,
Yet Heavens are just, and Time suppresses Wrongs.
Injurious Margaret.
And why not Queen?
Because thy Father Henry did usurp,
And thou no more art Prince, then she is Queen.
Then Warwick disanulls great Iohn of Gaunt,
Which did subdue the greatest part of Spain;
And after Iohn of Gaunt, Henry the Fourth,
Whose Wisdom was a Mirror to the wisest:
And after that wise Prince, Henry the Fifth,
Who by his Prowess conquered all France:
From th???se, our Henry lineally descends.
Oxford, how haps it in this smooth discourse,
You told not, how Henry the Sixth hath lost
All that, which Henry the Fifth had gotten:
Me thinks these Peers of France should smile at that.
But for the rest: you tell a Pedigree
Of threescore and two years, a silly time
To make prescription for a Kingdoms worth.
Why Warwick, can thou speak against thy Liege,
Whom thou obeyd'st thirty and six years,
And not bewray thy Treason with a Blush?
Can Oxford, that did ever fence the right,
Now buckler Falsehood with a Pedigree?
For shame leave Henry, and call Edward King.
Call him my King, by whose injurious doom
My elder Brother, the Lord Aubrey Vere
Was done to death? and more then so, my Father,
Even in the downfall of his mellowed years,
When Nature brought him to the door of Death?
No Warwick, no: while Life upholds this Arm,
This Arm upholds the House of Lancaster.
And I the House of York.
Queen Margaret, Prince Edward, and Oxford,
Vouchsafe at our request, to stand aside,
While I use further conference with Warwick.
Heavens grant, that Warwickes words be???witch him not.
Now Warwick, tell me even upon thy conscience
Is Edward your true King? for I were loath
To link with him, that were not lawful chosen.
Thereon I pawn my Credit, and mine Ho???nor.
But is hee gracious in the Peoples eye?
The more, that Henry was unfortunate.
Then further: all dissembling set aside,
Tell me for truth, the measure of his Love
Unto our Sister Bone.
Such it seems,
As may beseem a Monarch like himself.
My self have often heard him say, and swear,
That this his Love was an external Plant,
Whereof the Root was fixed in Virtues ground,
The Leaves and Fruit maintained with Beauties Sun,
Exempt from Envy, but not from Disdain,
Unless the Lady Bone quit his pain.
Now Sister, let vs hear your firm resolve.
Your grant, or your denial, shall be mine.
Yet I confess, that often ere this day,
When I have heard your Kings desert recounted,
Mine ear hath tempted judgment to desire.
Then Warwick, thus:
Our Sister shall be Edwards.
And now forthwith shall Articles be drawn,
Touching the Jointure that your King must make,
Which with her Dowry shall be counter-poys'd:
Draw near, Queen Margaret, and be a witness,
That Bone shall be Wife to the English King.
To Edward, but not to the English King.
Deceitful Warwick, it was thy device,
By this alliance to make void my suit:
Before thy coming, Lewis was Henries friend.
And still is friend to him, and Margaret.
But if your Title to the Crown be weak,
As may appear by Edwards good success:
Then it is but reason, that I be released
From giving aid, which late I promised.
Yet shall you have all kindness at my hand,
That your Estate requires, and mine can yield.
Henry now lives in Scotland, at his ease;
Where having nothing, nothing can he lose.
And as for you your self (our quondam Queen)
You have a Father able to maintain you,
And better it were, you troubled him, then France.
Peace impudent, and shameless Warwick,
Proud setter up, and puller down of Kings,
I will not hence, till with my Talk and Tears
(Both full of Truth) I make King Lewis behold
Thy sly conveyance, and thy Lords false love,
For both of you are Birds of selfsame Feather.
Warwick, this is some post to vs, or thee.
My Lord Ambassador,
These Letters are for you.
Sent from your Brother Marquess Montague.
These from our King, unto your Majesty.
And Madam, these for you:
From whom, I know not.
I like it well, that our fair Queen and Mistress Smiles at her news, while Warwick frowns at his.
Nay mark how Lewis stamps as he were nettled. I hope, ell's for the best.
Warwick, what are thy News?
And yours, fair Queen.
Mine such, as fill my heart with unhoped joys.
Mine full of sorrow, and hearts discontent.
What? has your King married the Lady Grey?
And now to sooth your Forgery, and his,
Sends me a Paper to persuade me Patience?
Is this the Alliance that he seeks with France?
Dare he presume to scorn vs in this manner?
I told your Majesty as much before:
This proves Edwards Love, and Warwickes honesty.
King Lewis, I here protest in sight of heaven,
And by the hope I have of heavenly bliss,
That I am clear from this misdeed of Edwards;
No more my King, for he dishonours me,
But most himself, if he could see his shame.
Did I forget, that by the House of York
My Father came untimely to his death?
Did I let pass the abuse done to my Niece?
Did I impale him with the Regal Crown?
Did I put Henry from his Native Right?
And am I guerdon'd at the last, with Shame?
Shame on himself, for my Desert is Honour.
And to repair my Honour lost for him,
I here renounce him, and return to Henry.
My Noble Queen, let former grudges pass,
And henceforth, I am thy true Servitor:
I will revenge his wrong to Lady Bone,
And replant Henry in his former state.
Warwick,
These words have turned my Hate, to Love,
And I forgive, and quite forget old faults,
And joy that thou become King Henries Friend.
So much his Friend, I, his unfeigned Friend,
That if King Lewis vouchsafe to furnish vs
With some few Bands of chosen Soldiers,
Isle undertake to Land them on our Coast,
And force the Tyrant from his seat by War.
It is not his new-made Bride shall succour him,
And as for Clarence, as my Letters tell me,
Hoe's very likely now to fall from him,
For matching more for wanton Lust, then Honour,
Or then for strength and safety of our Country.
Dear Brother, how shall Bone be revenged,
But by thy help to this distressed Queen?
Renowned Prince, how shall Poor Henry live,
Unless thou rescue him from foul despair?
My quarrel, and this English Queens, are one.
And mine fair Lady Bone, joins with yours.
And mine, with hers, and thine, and Margarets.
Therefore, at last, I firmly am resolved
You shall have aid.
Let me give humble thanks for all, at once.
Then Englands Messenger, return in Post,
And tell false Edward, thy supposed King,
That Lewis of France, is sending over Mockers
To revel it with him, and his new Bride.
Thou see what's past, go fear thy King withal.
Tell him, in hope he will prove a widower shortly,
I wear the Willow Garland for his sake.
Tell him, my mourning weeds are laid aside,
And I am ready to put Armour on.
Tell him from me, that he hath done me wrong,
And therefore Isle vn-Crowne him, er't be long.
There's thy reward, be gone.
But Warwick,
Thou and Oxford, with five thousand men
Shall cross the Seas, and bid false Edward battle:
And as occasion serves, this Noble Queen
And Prince, shall follow with a fresh Supply.
Yet ere thou go, but answer me one doubt:
What Pledge have we of thy firm Loyalty?
This shall assure my constant Loyalty,
That if our Queen, and this young Prince agree,
Isle join mine eldest daughter, and my Joy,
To him forthwith, in holy Wedlock bands.
Yes, I agree, and thank you for your Motion.
Son Edward, she is Fair and Virtuous,
Therefore delay not, give thy hand to Warwick,
And with thy hand, thy faith irrevocable,
That only Warwickes daughter shall be thine.
Yes, I accept her, for she well deserves it,
And here to pledge my Vow, I give my hand.
Why stay we now? These soldiers shall be levied,
And thou Lord Bourbon, our High Admiral
Shall waft them over with our Royal Fleet.
I long till Edward fall by Wars mischance,
For mocking Marriage with a Dame of France.
I came from Edward as Ambassador,
But I return his sworn and mortal Foe:
Matter of Marriage was the charge he gave me,
But dreadful War shall answer his demand.
Had he none else to make a stale but me?
Then none but I, shall turn his Jest to Sorrow.
I was the Chief that raised him to the Crown,
And Isle be Chief to bring him down again:
Not that I pity Henries misery,
But seek Revenge on Edwards mockery.
Now tell me Brother Clarence, what think you
Of this new Marriage with the Lady Gray?
Hath not our Brother made a worthy choice?
Alas, you know, tic far from hence to France,
How could he stay till Warwick made return?
My Lords, forbear this talk: here comes the King.
And his well-chosen Bride.
I mind to tell him plainly what I think.
Now Brother of Clarence,
How like you our Choice,
That you stand pensive, as half malecontent?
As well as Lewis of France,
Or the Earl of Warwick,
Which are so weak of courage, and in judgment,
That they'll take no offence at our abuse.
Suppose they take offence without a cause:
They are but Lewis and Warwick, I am Edward,
Your King and Warwickes, and must have my will.
And shall have your will, because our King:
Yet hasty Marriage seldom proves well.
Yea, Brother Richard, are you offended too?
Not I: no:
God forbid, that I should wish them severed,
Whom God hath joined together:
I, and it were pity, to sunder them,
That yoke so well together.
Setting your skornes, and your mislike aside,
Tell me some reason, why the Lady Grey
Should not become my Wife, and Englands Queen?
And you too, Somerset, and Mountague,
Speak freely what you think.
Then this is mine opinion:
That King Lewis becomes your Enemy,
For mocking him about the Marriage
Of the Lady Bone.
And Warwick, doing what you gave in charge,
Is now dishonoured by this new Marriage.
What, if both Lewis and Warwick be appeased,
By such invention as I can devise?
Yet, to have joined with France in such alliance,
Would more have strengthened this our Commonwealth
Against foreign storms, then any home-bred Marriage.
Why, knows not Mountague, that of it self,
England is safe, if true within it self?
But the safer, when it is backed with France.
It is better using France, then trusting France:
Let vs be backed with God, and with the Seas,
Which he hath given for fence impregnable,
And with their helps, only defend our selves:
In them, and in our selves, our safety lies.
For this one speech, Lord Hastings well deserves
To have the Heir of the Lord Hungerford.
I, what of that? it was my will, and grant,
And for this once, my Will shall stand for Law.
And yet me thinks, your Grace hath not done well,
To give the Heir and Daughter of Lord Scales
Unto the Brother of your loving Bride;
She better would have fitted me, or Clarence:
But in your Bride you bury Brotherhood.
Or else you would not have bestowed the Heir
Of the Lord Bonuill on your new Wives Son,
And leave your Brothers to go speed elsewhere.
Alas, poor Clarence: is it for a Wife
That thou art malecontent? I will provide thee.
In choosing for your self,
You showed your judgment:
Which being shallow, you shall give me leave
To play the Broker in mine own behalf;
And to that end, I shortly mind to leave you.
Leave me, or tarry, Edward will be King,
And not be tied unto his Brothers will.
My Lords, before it pleased his Majesty
To raise my State to Title of a Queen,
Doe me but right, and you must all confess,
That I was not ignoble of Descent,
And meaner then my self have had like fortune,
But as this Title honours me and mine,
So your dislikes, to whom I would be pleasing,
Doth cloud my joys with danger, and with sorrow.
My Love, forbear to fawn upon their frowns:
What danger, or what sorrow can befall thee,
So long as Edward is thy constant friend,
And their true Sovereign, whom they must obey?
Nay, whom they shall obey, and love thee too,
Unless they seek for hatred at my hands:
Which if they doe, yet will I keep thee safe,
And they shall feel the vengeance of my wrath.
I hear, yet say not much, but think the more.
Now Messenger, what Letters, or what News from France?
My Sovereign Liege, no Letters, &amp; few words,
But such, as I (without your special pardon)
Dare not relate.
Go too, wee pardon thee:
Therefore, in brief, tell me their words,
As near as thou can guess them.
What answer makes King Lewis unto our Letters?
At my depart, these were his very words:
Go tell false Edward, the supposed King,
That Lewis of France is sending over Mockers,
To revel it with him, and his new Bride.
Is Lewis so brave? belike he thinks me Henry.
But what said Lady Bone to my Marriage?
These were her words, vtt'red with mild disdain:
Tell him, in hope he will prove a Widower shortly,
Isle wear the Willow Garland for his sake.
I blame not her; she could say little less:
She had the wrong. But what said Henries Queen?
For I have heard, that she was there in place.
Tell him (quoth she)
My mourning Weeds are done,
And I am ready to put Armour on.
Belike she minds to play the Amazon.
But what said Warwick to these injuries?
He, more incensed against your Majesty,
Then all the rest, discharged me with these words:
Tell him from me, that he hath done me wrong,
And therefore Isle vncrowne him, er't be long.
Ha? durst the Traitor breath out so proud words?
Well, I will arm me, being thus fore-warn'd:
They shall have Wars, and pay for their presumption.
But say, is Warwick friends with Margaret?
I, gracious Sovereign,
They are so linked in friendship,
That young Prince Edward marries Warwicks Daughter.
Belike, the elder;
Clarence will have the younger.
Now Brother King farewell, and sit you fast,
For I will hence to Warwickes other Daughter,
That though I want a Kingdom, yet in Marriage
I may not prove inferior to your self.
You that love me, and Warwick, follow me.
Not I:
My thoughts aim at a further matter:
I stay not for the love of Edward, but the Crown.
Clarence and Somerset both gone to Warwick?
Yet am I armed against the worst can happen:
And haste is needful in this desperate case.
Pembrooke and Stafford, you in our behalf
Go levy men, and make prepare for War;
They are already, or quickly will be landed:
My self in person will straight follow you.
But ere I go, Hastings and Mountague
Resolve my doubt: you twain, of all the rest,
Are near to Warwick, by blood, and by alliance:
Tell me, if you love Warwick more then me;
If it be so, then both depart to him:
I rather wish you foes, then hollow friends.
But if you mind to hold your true obedience,
Give me assurance with some friendly Vow,
That I may never have you in suspect.
So God help Mountague, as hee proves true.
And Hastings, as hee favours Edwards cause.
Now, Brother Richard, will you stand by vs?
I, in despite of all that shall withstand you.
Why so: then am I sure of Victory.
Now therefore let vs hence, and lose no hour,
Till wee meet Warwick, with his foreign power.
Trust me, my Lord, all hitherto goes well,
The common people by numbers swarm to vs.
But see where Somerset and Clarence comes:
Speak suddenly, my Lords, are wee all friends?
Fear not that, my Lord.
Then gentle Clarence, welcome unto Warwick,
And welcome Somerset: I hold it cowardice,
To rest mistrustful, where a Noble Heart
Hath pawned an open Hand, in sign of Love;
Else might I think, that Clarence, Edwards Brother,
Were but a fained friend to our proceedings:
But welcome sweet Clarence, my Daughter shall be thine.
And now, what rests? but in Nights Coverture,
Thy Brother being carelessly encamped,
His Soldiers lurking in the Town about,
And but attended by a simple Guard,
Wee may surprise and take him at our pleasure,
Our Scouts have found the adventure very easy:
That as Vlysses, and stout Diomede,
With slight and manhood stole to Rhesus Tents,
And brought from thence the Thracian fatal Steeds;
So wee, well covered with the Nights black Mantle,
At unawares may beat down Edwards Guard,
And seize himself: I say not, slaughter him,
For I intend but only to surprise him.
You that will follow me to this attempt,
Applaud the Name of Henry, with your Leader.
Why then, let's on our way in silent sort,
For Warwick and his friends, God and Saint George.
Come on my Masters, each man take his stand,
The King by this, is set him down to sleep.
What, will he not to Bed?
Why, no: for he hath made a solemn Vow,
Never to lye and take his natural Rest,
Till Warwick, or himself, be quite suppressed.
To morrow then belike shall be the day,
If Warwick be so near as men report.
But say, I pray, what Noble man??? is that,
That with the King here rests in his Tent?
It is the Lord Hastings, the Kings chiefest friend.
O, is it so? but why commands the King,
That his chief followers lodge in Towns about him,
While he himself keeps in the cold field?
It is the more honour, because more dange???rous.
I, but give me worship, and quietness,
I like it better then a dangerous honour.
If Warwick knew in what estate he stands,
It is to be doubted he would waken him.
Unless our Halberds did shut up his pas???sage.
I: wherefore else guard we his Royal Tent,
But to defend his Person from Night-foes?
This is his Tent, and see where stand his Guard:
Courage my Masters: Honour now, or never:
But follow me, and Edward shall be ours.
Who goes there?
Stay, or thou die.
What are they that fly there?
Richard and Hastings: let them go, here is the Duke.
The Duke?
Why Warwick, when wee parted,
Thou called me King.
I, but the case is altered.
When you disgraced me in my Embassade,
Then I degraded you from being King,
And come now to create you Duke of York.
Alas, how should you govern any Kingdom,
That know not how to use Ambassadors,
Nor how to be contented with one Wife,
Nor how to use your Brothers Brotherly,
Nor how to study for the Peoples Welfare,
Nor how to shroud your self from Enemies?
Yea, Brother of Clarence,
Art thou here too?
Nay then I see, that Edward needs must down.
Yet Warwick, in despite of all mischance,
Of thee thy self, and all thy Accomplices,
Edward will always bear himself as King:
Though Fortunes malice overthrow my State,
My mind exceeds the compass of her Wheel.
Then for his mind, be Edward Englands King;
But Henry now shall wear the English Crown,
And be true King indeed: thou but the shadow.
My Lord of Somerset, at my request,
See that forthwith Duke Edward be conveyed
Unto my Brother Arch-Bishop of York:
When I have fought with Pembrooke, and his fellows,
Isle follow you, and tell what answer
Lewis and the Lady Bone send to him.
Now for awhile farewell good Duke of York.
What Fates impose, that men must needs abide;
It boots not to resist both wind and tide.
What now remains my Lords for vs to do,
But march to London with our Soldiers?
I, that's the first thing that we have to do,
To free King Henry from imprisonment,
And see him seated in the Regal Throne.
Madam, what makes you in this sudden change?
Why Brother Rivers, are you yet to learn
What late misfortune is befallen King Edward?
What loss of some pitched battle
Against Warwick?
No, but the loss of his own Royal person.
Then is my Sovereign slain?
I almost slain, for he is taken prisoner,
Either betrayed by falsehood of his Guard,
Or by his Foe surprised at unawares:
And as I further have to understand,
Is new committed to the Bishop of York,
Fell Warwickes Brother, and by that our Foe.
These News I must confess are full of grief,
Yet gracious Madam, bear it as you may,
Warwick may loose, that now hath won the day.
Till then, fair hope must hinder lives decay:
And I the rather wane me from despair
For love of Edwards Off-spring in my womb:
This is it that makes me bridle passion,
And bear with Mildness my misfortunes cross:
I, I, for this I draw in many a tear,
And stop the rising of blood-sucking sighs,
Least with my sighs or tears, I blast or drown
King Edwards Fruit, true heir to the English Crown.
But Madam,
Where is Warwick then become?
I am informed that he comes towards London,
To set the Crown once more on Henries head,
Guess thou the rest, King Edwards Friends must down.
But to prevent the Tyrants violence,
(For trust not him that hath once broken Faith)
Isle hence forthwith unto the Sanctuary,
To save (at least) the heir of Edwards right:
There shall I rest secure from force and fraud:
Come therefore let vs fly, while we may fly,
If Warwick take vs, we are sure to dye.
Now my Lord Hastings, and Sir William Stanley
Leave off to wonder why I drew you hither,
Into this chiefest Thicket of the Park.
Thus stand the case: you know our King, my Brother,
Is prisoner to the Bishop here, at whose hands
He hath good usage, and great liberty,
And often but attended with weak guard,
Come hunting this way to disport himself.
I have advertised him by secret means,
That if about this hour he make this way,
Under the colour of his usual game,
He shall here find his Friends with Horse and Men,
To set him free from his Captivity.
This way my Lord,
For this way lies the Game.
Nay this way man,
See where the Huntsmen stand.
Now Brother of Gloster, Lord Hastings, and the rest,
Stand you thus close to steal the Bishops Dear?
Brother, the time and case, requires hast,
Your horse stands ready at the Parke-corner.
But whether shall we then?
To Lyn my Lord,
And shipped from thence to Flanders.
Well guest believe me, for that was my meaning
Stanley, I will requite thy forwardness.
But wherefore stay we? it is no time to talk.
Huntsman, what say thou?
Wilt thou go along?
Better do so, then tarry and be hanged.
Come then away, lets ha no more ado.
Bishop farewell,
Shield thee from Warwickes frown,
And pray that I may re-possesse the Crown.
M. Lieutenant, now that God and Friends
Have shaken Edward from the Regal seat,
And turned my captive state to liberty,
My fear to hope, my sorrows unto joys,
At our enlargement what are thy due Fees?
Subjects may challenge nothing of their Sou'rains
But, if an humble prayer may prevail,
I then crave pardon of your Majesty.
For what, Lieutenant? For well using me?
Nay, be thou sure, Isle well requite thy kindness.
For that it made my imprisonment, a pleasure:
I, such a pleasure, as incaged Birds
Conceive; when after many moody Thoughts,
At last, by Notes of Household harmony,
They quite forget their loss of Liberty.
But Warwick, after God, thou set me free,
And chiefly therefore, I thank God, and thee,
He was the Author, thou the Instrument.
Therefore that I may conquer Fortunes spite,
By living low, where Fortune cannot hurt me,
And that the people of this blessed Land
May not be punished with my thwarting stars,
Warwick, although my Head still wear the Crown,
I here resign my Government to thee,
For thou art fortunate in all thy deeds.
Your Grace hath still been famed for virtuous,
And now may seem as wise as virtuous,
By spying and avoiding Fortunes malice,
For few men rightly temper with the Stars:
Yet in this one thing let me blame your Grace,
For choosing me, when Clarence is in place.
No Warwick, thou art worthy of the sway,
To whom the Heavens in thy Nativity,
Adjudged an Olive Branch, and Laurel Crown,
As likely to be blessed in Peace and War:
And therefore I yield thee my free consent.
And I choose Clarence only for Protector.
Warwick and Clarence, give me both your Hands:
Now join your Hands, &amp; with your Hands your Hearts,
That no dissention hinder Government.
I make you both Protectors of this Land,
While I my self will lead a private Life,
And in devotion spend my latter days,
To sins rebuke, and my Creators praise.
What answers Clarence to his Sovereigns will?
That he consents, if Warwick yield consent,
For on thy fortune I repose my self.
Why then, though loath, yet must I be content:
We'll yoke together, like a double shadow
To Henries Body, and supply his place;
I mean, in bearing weight of Government,
While he enjoys the Honour, and his ease.
And Clarence, now then it is more then needful,
Forthwith that Edward be pronounced a Traitor,
And all his Lands and Goods confiscate.
What else? and that Succession be determined.
I, therein Clarence shall not want his part.
But with the first, of all your chief affairs,
Let me entreat (for I command no more)
That Margaret your Queen, and my Son Edward,
Be sent for, to return from France with speed:
For till I see them here, by doubtful fear,
My joy of liberty is half eclipsed.
It shall bee done, my Sovereign, with all speed.
My Lord of Somerset, what Youth is that,
Of whom you seem to have so tender care?
My Liege, it is young Henry, Earl of Rich???monte.
Come hither, Englands Hope:
If secret Powers suggest but truth
To my divining thoughts,
This pretty Lad will prove our Countries bliss.
His Looks are full of peaceful Majesty,
His Head by nature framed to wear a Crown,
His Hand to wield a Sceptre, and himself
Likely in time to bless a Regal Throne:
Make much of him, my Lords; for this is hee
Must help you more, then you are hurt by me.
What news, my friend?
That Edward is escaped from your Brother,
And fled (as hee hears since) to Burgundy.
Unsavoury news: but how made he escape?
He was conveyed by Richard, Duke of Gloster,
And the Lord Hastings, who attended him
In secret ambush, on the Forest side,
And from the Bishops Huntsmen rescued him:
For Hunting was his daily Exercise.
My Brother was too careless of his charge.
But let vs hence, my Sovereign, to provide
A salve for any sore, that may betide.
My Lord, I like not of this flight of Edwards:
For doubtless, Burgundy will yield him help,
And we shall have more Wars befor't be long.
As Henries late presaging Prophecy
Did glad my heart, with hope of this young Richmond:
So doth my heart mis-giue me, in these Conflicts,
What may befall him, to his harm and ours.
Therefore, Lord Oxford, to prevent the worst,
Forthwith we'll send him hence to Brittany,
Till storms be past of Civil Enmity.
I: for if Edward re-possesse the Crown,
It is like that Richmond, with the rest, shall down.
It shall be so: he shall to Brittany.
Come therefore, let's about it speedily.
Now Brother Richard, Lord Hastings, and the rest,
Yet thus far Fortune makes vs amends,
And says, that once more I shall interchange
My waned state, for Henries Regal Crown.
Well have we passed, and now re-pass'd the Seas,
And brought desired help from Burgundy.
What then remains, we being thus arrived
From Rauenspurre Haven, before the Gates of York,
But that we enter, as into our Dukedom?
The Gates made fast?
Brother, I like not this.
For many men that stumble at the Threshold,
Are well fore-told, that danger lurks within.
Tush man, aboadments must not now affright vs:
By fair or foul means we must enter in,
For hither will our friends repair to vs.
My Liege, Isle knock once more, to summon them.
My Lords,
We were fore-warned of your coming,
And shut the Gates, for safety of our selves;
For now we owe allegiance unto Henry.
But, Master Mayor, if Henry be your King,
Yet Edward, at the least, is Duke of York.
True, my good Lord, I know you for no less.
Why, and I challenge nothing but my Dukedom,
As being well content with that alone.
But when the Fox hath once got in his Nose,
He will soon find means to make the Body follow.
Why, Master Mayor, why stand you in a doubt?
Open the Gates, we are King Henries friends.
I, say you so? the Gates shall then be opened.
A wise stout Captain, and soon persuaded.
The good old man would fine that all were well,
So it were not long of him: but being entered,
I doubt not I, but we shall soon persuade
Both him, and all his Brothers, unto reason.
So, Master Mayor: these Gates must not be shut,
But in the Night, or in the time of War.
What, fear not man, but yield me up the Keys,
For Edward will defend the Town, and thee,
And all those friends, that deign to follow me.
Brother, this is Sir Iohn Montgomery,
Our trusty friend, unless I be deceived.
Welcome Sir Iohn: but why come you in Arms?
To help King Edward in his time of storm,
As every loyal Subject ought to doe.
Thanks good Montgomery:
But we now forget our Title to the Crown,
And only claim our Dukedom,
Till God please to send the rest.
Then fare you well, for I will hence again,
I came to serve a King, and not a Duke:
Drummer strike up, and let vs march away.
Nay stay, Sir Iohn, a while, and we'll debate
By what safe means the Crown may be recovered.
What talk you of debating? in few words,
If you'll not here proclaim your self our King,
Isle leave you to your fortune, and be gone,
To keep them back, that come to succour you.
Why shall we fight, if you pretend no Title?
Why Brother, wherefore stand you on nice points?
When wee grow stronger,
Then we'll make our Claim:
Till then, it is wisdom to conceal our meaning.
Away with scrupulous Wit, now Arms must rule.
And fearless minds climb soonest unto Crowns.
Brother, we will proclaim you out of hand,
The bruit thereof will bring you many friends.
Then be it as you will: for it is my right,
And Henry but usurps the Diadem.
I, now my Sovereign speaks like himself,
And now will I be Edwards Champion.
Sound Trumpet, Edward shall be here proclaimed:
Come, fellow Soldier, make thou proclamation.
Edward the Fourth, by the Grace of God, King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, &amp;c.
And whosoe're gain says King Edwards right,
By this I challenge him to single fight.
Long live Edward the Fourth.
Thanks brave Montgomery,
And thanks unto you all:
If fortune serve me, Isle requite this kindness.
Now for this Night, let's harbour here in York:
And when the Morning Sun shall raise his Carre
Aboue the Border of this Horizon,
We'll forward towards Warwick, and his Mates;
For well I wot, that Henry is no Soldier.
Ah froward Clarence, how evil it beseems thee,
To flatter Henry, and forsake thy Brother?
Yet as wee may, we'll meet both thee and Warwick.
Come on brave Soldiers: doubt not of the Day,
And that once gotten, doubt not of large Pay.
What counsel, Lords? Edward from Belgia,
With hasty Germanes, and blunt Hollanders,
Hath passed in safety through the Narrow Seas,
And with his troupes doth march amain to London,
And many giddy people flock to him.
Let's levy men, and beat him back again,
A little fire is quickly trodden out,
Which being suffered, Rivers cannot quench.
In Warwickshire I have true-hearted friends,
Not mutinous in peace, yet bold in War,
Those will I muster up: and thou Son Clarence
Shalt stir up in Suffolk, Norfolk, and in Kent,
The Knights and Gentlemen, to come with thee.
Thou Brother Mountague, in Buckingham,
Northampton, and in Leicestershire, shalt find
Men well inclined to hear what thou command.
And thou, brave Oxford, wondrous well beloved,
In Oxfordshire shalt muster up thy friends.
My Sovereign, with the loving Citizens,
Like to his Island, girt in with the Ocean,
Or modest Diane, circled with her Nymphs,
Shall rest in London, till we come to him:
Fair Lords take leave, and stand not to reply.
Farewell my Sovereign.
Farewell my Hector, and my Troys true hope.
In sign of truth, I kiss your Highness Hand.
Well-minded Clarence, be thou fortunate.
Comfort, my Lord, and so I take my leave.
And thus I seal my truth, and bid adieu.
Sweet Oxford, and my loving Mountague,
And all at once, once more a happy farewell.
Farewell, sweet Lords, let's meet at Coventry.
Here at the Palace will I rest a while.
Cousin of Exeter, what thinks your Lordship?
Me thinks, the Power that Edward hath in field,
Should not be able to encounter mine.
The doubt is, that he will seduce the rest.
That's not my fear, my meed hath got me fame:
I have not stopped mine ears to their demands,
Nor posted off their suites with slow delays,
My pity hath been balm to heal their wounds,
My mildness hath allayed their swelling griefs,
My mercy dried their water-flowing tears.
I have not been desirous of their wealth,
Nor much oppressed them with great Subsidies,
Nor forward of revenge, though they much erred.
Then why should they love Edward more then me?
No Exeter, these Graces challenge Grace:
And when the Lyon fawns upon the Lamb,
The Lamb will never cease to follow him.
Hark, hark, my Lord, what Shouts are these?
Seize on the shamefaced Henry, bear him hence,
And once again proclaim vs King of England.
You are the Foun???, that makes small Brookes to flow,
Now stops thy Spring, my Sea shall suck them dry,
And swell so much the higher, by their ebb.
Hence with him to the Tower, let him not speak.
And Lords, towards Coventry bend we our course,
Where peremptory Warwick now remains:
The Sun shines hot, and if we use delay,
Cold biting Winter mars our hop'd-for Hay.
Away betimes, before his forces join,
And take the great-growne Traitor unawares:
Brave Warriors, march amain towards Coventry.
Where is the Post that came from valiant Oxford?
How far hence is thy Lord, mine honest fellow?
By this at Dunsmore, marching hitherward.
How far off is our Brother Mountague?
Where is the Post that came from Mountague?
By this at Daintry, with a puissant troop.
Say Someruile, what says my loving Son?
And by thy guess, how nigh is Clarence now?
At Southam I did leave him with his forces,
And doe expect him here some two hours hence.
Then Clarence is at hand, I hear his Drum.
It is not his, my Lord, here Southam lies:
The Drum your Honour hears, marches from Warwick.
Who should that be? belike unlooked for friends.
They are at hand, and you shall quickly know.
Go, Trumpet, to the Walls, and sound a Parley.
See how the surly Warwick mans the Wall.
Oh vnbid spite, is sportful Edward come?
Where slept our Scouts, or how are they seduced,
That we could hear no news of his repair.
Now Warwick, wilt thou op the City Gates,
Speak gentle words, and humbly bend thy Knee,
Call Edward King, and at his hands beg Mercy,
And he shall pardon thee these Outrages?
Nay rather, wilt thou draw thy forces hence,
Confess who set thee up, and plucked thee down,
Call Warwick Patron, and be penitent,
And thou shalt still remain the Duke of York.
I thought at least he would have said the King,
Or did he make the Jest against his will?
Is not a Dukedom, Sir, a goodly gift?
I, by my faith, for a poor Earl to give,
Isle doe thee service for so good a gift.
It was I that gave the Kingdom to thy Bro???there.
Why then it is mine, if but by Warwickes gift.
Thou art no Atlas for so great a weight:
And Weakeling, Warwick takes his gift again,
And Henry is my King, Warwick his Subject.
But Warwickes King is Edwards Prisoner:
And gallant Warwick, doe but answer this,
What is the Body, when the Head is off?
Alas, that Warwick had no more fore-cast,
But whiles he thought to steal the single Ten,
The King was slyly fingered from the Deck:
You left poor Henry at the Bishops Palace,
And ten to one you'll meet him in the Tower.
It is even so, yet you are Warwick still.
Come Warwick,
Take the time, kneel down, kneel down:
Nay when? strike now, or else the Iron cools.
I had rather chop this Hand off at a blow,
And with the other, fling it at thy face,
Then bear so low a sail, to strike to thee.
Sail how thou can,
Have Wind and Tide thy friend,
This Hand, fast wound about thy coal-black hair,
Shall, whiles thy Head is warm, and new cut off,
Write in the dust this Sentence with thy blood,
Wind-changing Warwick now can change no more.
Oh cheerful Colours, see where Oxford comes.
Oxford, Oxford, for Lancaster.
The Gates are open, let vs enter too.
So other foes may set upon our backs.
Stand we in good array: for they no doubt
Will issue out again, and bid vs battle;
If not, the City being but of small defence,
We'll quickly rowze the Traitors in the same.
Oh welcome Oxford, for we want thy help.
Mountague, Mountague, for Lancaster.
Thou and thy Brother both shall buy this Treason
Even with the dearest blood your bodies bear.
The harder matched, the greater Victory,
My mind presages happy gain, and Conquest.
Somerset, Somerset, for Lancaster.
Two of thy Name, both Dukes of Somerset,
Have sold their Lives unto the House of York,
And thou shalt be the third, if this Sword hold.
And lo, where George of Clarence sweeps along,
Of force enough to bid his Brother Battle:
With whom, in upright zeal to right, prevails
More then the nature of a Brothers Love.
Come Clarence, come: thou wilt, if Warwick call.
Father of Warwick, know you what this means?
Look here, I throw my infamy at thee:
I will not ruinate my Fathers House,
Who gave his blood to lyme the stones together,
And set up Lancaster. Why, trow thou, Warwick,
That Clarence is so harsh, so blunt unnatural,
To bend the fatal Instruments of War
Against his Brother, and his lawful King.
Perhaps thou wilt object my holy Oath:
To keep that Oath, were more impiety,
Then Iephah, when he sacrificed his Daughter.
I am so sorry for my Trespass made,
That to deserve well at my Brothers hands,
I here proclaim my self thy mortal foe:
With resolution, wheresoever I meet thee,
(As I will meet thee, if thou stir abroad)
To plague thee, for thy foul misleading me.
And so, prowd-hearted Warwick, I defy thee,
And to my Brother turn my blushing Cheeks.
Pardon me Edward, I will make amends:
And Richard, doe not frown upon my faults,
For I will henceforth be no more inconstant.
Now welcome more, and ten times more beloved,
Then if thou never had deserved our hate.
Welcome good Clarence, this is Brother-like.
Oh passing Traitor, perjured and unjust.
What Warwick,
Wilt thou leave the Town, and fight?
Or shall we beat the Stones about thine Ears?
Alas, I am not cooped here for defence:
I will away towards Barnet presently,
And bid thee Battle, Edward, if thou dare.
Yes Warwick, Edward dares, and leads the way:
Lords to the field: Saint George, and Victory.
So, lye thou there: dye thou, and dye our fear,
For Warwick was a Bug that feared vs all.
Now Mountague sit fast, I seek for thee,
That Warwickes Bones may keep thine company.
Ah, who is nigh? come to me, friend, or foe,
And tell me who is Victor, York, or Warwick?
Why ask I that? my mangled body shows,
My blood, my want of strength, my sick heart shows,
That I must yield my body to the Earth,
And by my fall, the conquest to my foe.
Thus yields the Cedar to the Axes edge,
Whose Arms gave shelter to the Princely Eagle,
Under whose shade the romping Lyon slept,
Whose top-branch ouer-peer'd Ioues spreading Tree,
And kept low Shrubs from Winters powerful Wind.
These Eyes, that now are dim'd with Deaths black Veyle,
Have been as piercing as the Mid-day Sun,
To search the secret Treasons of the World:
The Wrinkles in my Brows, now filled with blood,
Were lik'ned oft to Kingly Sepulchers:
For who lived King, but I could dig his Grave?
And who durst smile, when Warwick bent his Brow?
Lo, now my Glory smeared in dust and blood.
My Parks, my Walks, my Manors that I had,
Even now forsake me; and of all my Lands,
Is nothing left me, but my bodies length.
Why, what is Pomp, Rule, Reign, but Earth and Dust?
And live we how we can, yet dye we must.
Ah Warwick, Warwick, were thou as we are,
We might recover all our Loss again:
The Queen from France hath brought a puissant power.
Even now we heard the news: ah, coldest thou fly.
Why then I would not fly. Ah Mountague,
If thou be there, sweet Brother, take my Hand,
And with thy Lips keep in my Soul a while.
Thou love me not: for, Brother, if thou did,
Thy tears would wash this cold congealed blood,
That glewes my Lips, and will not let me speak.
Come quickly Mountague, or I am dead.
Ah Warwick, Mountague hath breathed his last,
And to the latest gasp, cried out for Warwick:
And said, Commend me to my valiant Brother.
And more he would have said, and more he spoke,
Which sounded like a Cannon in a Vault,
That mought not be distinguished: but at last,
I well might hear, delivered with a groan,
Oh farewell Warwick.
Sweet rest his Soul:
Fly Lords, and save your selves,
For Warwick bids you all farewell, to meet in Heaven.
Away, away, to meet the Queens great power.
Thus far our fortune keeps an upward course,
And we are graced with wreaths of Victory:
But in the midst of this bright-shining Day,
I spy a black suspicious threatening Cloud,
That will encounter with our glorious Sun,
Ere he attain his easeful Western Bed:
I mean, my Lords, those powers that the Queen
Hath raised in Galley, have arrived our Coast,
And, as we hear, march on to fight with vs.
A little gale will soon disperse that Cloud,
And blow it to the Source from whence it came,
Thy very Beams will dry those Vapours up,
For every Cloud engenders not a Storm.
The Queen is valued thirty thousand strong,
And Somerset, with Oxford, fled to her:
If she have time to breathe, be well assured
Her faction will be full as strong as ours.
We are advertised by our loving friends,
That they doe hold their course toward Tewksbury.
We having now the best at Barnet field,
Will thither straight, for willingness rids way,
And as we march, our strength will be augmented:
In every County as we go along,
Strike up the Drum, cry courage, and away.
Great Lords, wise men ne'er sit and wail their loss,
But cheerly seek how to redress their harms.
What though the Mast be now blown overboard,
The Cable broke, the holding-Anchor lost,
And half our Sailors swallowed in the flood?
Yet lives our Pilot still. Is it meet, that hee
Should leave the Helm, and like a fearful Lad,
With tearefull Eyes add Water to the Sea,
And give more strength to that which hath too much,
Whiles in his moan, the Ship splits on the Rock,
Which Industry and Courage might have saved?
Ah what a shame, ah what a fault were this.
Say Warwick was our Anchor: what of that?
And Mountague our Top-Mast: what of him?
Our slaughtered friends, the Tackles: what of these?
Why is not Oxford here, another Anchor?
And Somerset, another goodly Mast?
The friends of France our Shrouds and Tacklings?
And though unskilful, why not Ned and I,
For once allowed the skilful Pilots Charge?
We will not from the Helm, to sit and weep,
But keep our Course (though the rough Wind say no)
From Shelves and Rocks, that threaten vs with Wrack.
As good to chide the Waives, as speak them fair.
And what is Edward, but a ruthless Sea?
What Clarence, but a Quick-sand of Deceit?
And Richard, but a raged fatal Rock?
All these, the Enemies to our poor Bark.
Say you can swim, alas it is but a while:
Tread on the Sand, why there you quickly sink,
Bestride the Rock, the Tide will wash you off,
Or else you famish, that's a three-fold Death.
This speak I (Lords) to let you understand,
If case some one of you would fly from vs,
That there's no hop'd-for Mercy with the Brothers,
More then with ruthless Waives, with Sands and Rocks.
Why courage then, what cannot be avoided,
It were childish weakness to lament, or fear.
Me thinks a Woman of this valiant Spirit,
Should, if a Coward heard her speak these words,
Infuse his Breast with Magnanimity,
And make him, naked, foil a man at Arms.
I speak not this, as doubting any here:
For did I but suspect a fearful man,
He should have leave to go away betimes,
Least in our need he might infect another,
And make him of like spirit to himself.
If any such be here, as God forbid,
Let him depart, before we need his help.
Women and Children of so high a courage,
And Warriors faint, why it were perpetual shame.
Oh brave young Prince: thy famous Grandfather
Doth live again in thee; long may thou live,
To bear his Image, and renew his Glories.
And he that will not fight for such a hope,
Go home to Bed, and like the Owl by day,
If he arise, be mocked and wondered at.
Thanks gentle Somerset, sweet Oxford thanks.
And take his thanks, that yet hath nothing else.
Prepare you Lords, for Edward is at hand,
Ready to fight: therefore be resolute.
I thought no less: it is his Policy,
To haste thus fast, to find vs unprovided.
But hoe's deceived, we are in readiness.
This cheers my heart, to see your forwardness.
Here pitch our Battle, hence we will not budge.
Brave followers, yonder stands the thorny Wood,
Which by the Heavens assistance, and your strength,
Must by the Roots be hew'ne up yet ere Night.
I need not add more fuel to your fire,
For well I wot, ye blaze, to burn them out:
Give signal to the fight, and to it Lords.
Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, what I should say,
My tears gainsay: for every word I speak,
Ye see I drink the water of my eye.
Therefore no more but this: Henry your Sovereign
Is Prisoner to the Foe, his State usurped,
His Realm a slaughter-house, his Subjects slain,
His Statutes cancelled, and his Treasure spent:
And yonder is the Wolf, that makes this spoil.
You fight in Justice: then in Gods Name, Lords,
Be valiant, and give signal to the fight.
Now here a period of tumultuous Broils.
Away with Oxford to Hames Castle straight:
For Somerset, off with his guilty Head.
Go bear them hence, I will not hear them speak.
For my part, Isle not trouble thee with words.
Nor I, but stoup with patience to my fortune.
So part we sadly in this troublous World,
To meet with Joy in sweet Jerusalem.
Is Proclamation made, That who finds Edward,
Shall have a high Reward, and he his Life?
It is, and lo where youthful Edward comes.
Bring forth the Gallant, let vs hear him speak.
What? can so young a Thorne begin to prick?
Edward, what satisfaction can thou make,
For bearing Arms, for stirring up my Subjects,
And all the trouble thou hast turned me to?
Speak like a Subject, proud ambitious York.
Suppose that I am now my Fathers Mouth,
Resign thy Chair, and where I stand, kneel thou,
Whilst I propose the selfsame words to thee,
Which (Traitor) thou would have me answer to.
Ah, that thy Father had been so resolved.
That you might still have worn the Petticoat,
And ne'er have stolen the Breech from Lancaster.
Let Aesop fable in a Winters Night,
His Currish Riddles sorts not with this place.
By Heaven, Brat, Isle plague ye for that word.
I, thou wast borne to be a plague to men.
For Gods sake, take away this Captive Scold.
Nay, take away this scolding Crooke-backe, rather.
Peace wilful Boy, or I will charm your tongue.
Vntutor'd Lad, thou art too malapert.
I know my duty, you are all undutiful:
Lascivious Edward, and thou perjured George,
And thou misshapen Dicke, I tell ye all,
I am your better, Traitors as ye are,
And thou usurp my Fathers right and mine.
Take that, the likeness of this Rayler here.
Sprawl thou? take that, to end thy agony.
And ther's for twitting me with perjury.
Oh, kill me too.
Marry, and shall.
Hold, Richard, hold, for we have done too much.
Why should she live, to fill the World with words.
What? doth she swoon? use means for her recovery.
Clarence excuse me to the King my Brother:
Isle hence to London on a serious matter,
Ere ye come there, be sure to hear some news.
What? what?
Tower, the Tower.
Oh Ned, sweet Ned, speak to thy Mother Boy.
Can thou not speak? O Traitors, Murderers!
They that stabbed Caesar, shed no blood at all:
Did not offend, nor were not worthy Blame,
If this foul deed were by, to equal it.
He was a Man; this (in respect) a Child,
And Men, ne'er spend their fury on a Child.
What's worse then Murderer, that I may name it?
No, no, my heart will burst, and if I speak,
And I will speak, that so my heart may burst.
Butchers and Villains, bloody Cannibals,
How sweet a Plant have you untimely cropped:
You have no children (Butchers) if you had,
The thought of them would have stirred up remorse,
But if you ever chance to have a Child,
Look in his youth to have him so cut off.
As deathsmen you have rid this sweet young Prince.
Away with her, go bear her hence perforce.
Nay, never bear me hence, dispatch me here:
Here sheath thy Sword, Isle pardon thee my death:
What? wilt thou not? Then Clarence do it thou.
By heaven, I will not do thee so much ease.
Good Clarence do: sweet Clarence do thou do it.
Did thou not hear me swear I would not do it?
I, but thou uses to forswear thy self.
It was Sin before, but now it is Charity.
What wilt you not? Where is that devils butcher Richard?
Hard fauor'd Richard? Richard, where art thou?
Thou art not here; Murder is thy Almes-deed:
Petitioners for Blood, thou ne'er put back.
Away I say, I charge ye bear her hence,
So come to you, and yours, as to this Prince.
Whore's Richard gone.
To London all in post, and as I guess,
To make a bloody Supper in the Tower.
He's sudden if a thing comes in his head.
Now march we hence, discharge the common sort
With Pay and Thanks, and let's away to London,
And see our gentle Queen how well she fares,
By this (I hope) she hath a Son for me.
Good day, my Lord, what at your Book so hard?
I my good Lord: my Lord I should say rather,
Tic sin to flatter, Good was little better:
Good Gloster, and good Devil, were alike,
And both preposterous: therefore, not Good Lord.
Sir, leave vs to our selves, we must confer.
So flies the wreaklesse shepherd from ye Wolf:
So first the harmless Sheep doth yield his Fleece,
And next his Throat, unto the Butchers Knife.
What Scene of death hath Rossius now to Act?
Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind,
The Thief doth fear each bush an Officer,
The Bird that hath bin limed in a bush,
With trembling wings misdoubts every bush;
And I the haplesse Male to one sweet Bird,
Have now the fatal Object in my eye,
Where my poor young was limed, was caught, and killed.
Why what a peevish Fool was that of Create,
That taught his Son the office of a Foul,
And yet for all his wings, the Fool was drowned.
I Dedaius, my poor Boy Icarus,
Thy Father Minos, that denied our course,
The Sun that seared the wings of my sweet Boy.
Thy Brother Edward, and thy Self, the Sea
Whose envious Gulf did swallow up his life:
Ah, kill me with thy Weapon, not with words,
My breast can better brooke thy Daggers point,
Then can my ears that Tragic History.
But wherefore dost thou come? Is it for my Life?
Think thou I am an Executioner?
A Persecutor I am sure thou art,
If murdering Innocents be Executing.
Why then thou art an Executioner.
Thy Son I killed for his presumption.
Had thou bin killed, when first you did presume,
Thou had not lived to kill a Son of mine:
And thus I prophecy, that many a thousand,
Which now mistrust no parcel of my fear,
And many an old mans sigh, and many a Widows,
And many an Orphans water-standing-eye,
Men for their Sons, Wives for their Husbands,
Orphans, for their Parents timeless death,
Shall rue the hour that ever thou was it borne.
The Owl shrieked at thy birth, an evil sign,
The Night-Crow cried, aboding luckless time,
Dogs howled, and hiddeous Tempest shook down Trees:
The Raven rooked her on the Chimneys top,
And chatt'ring Pies in dismal Discords sung:
Thy Mother felt more then a Mothers pain,
And yet brought forth less then a Mothers hope,
To wit, an indigested and deformed lump,
Not like the fruit of such a goodly Tree.
Teeth had thou in thy head, when thou was it borne,
To signify, thou came to bite the world:
And if the rest be true, which I have heard,
Thou came???
Isle hear no more:
Dye Prophet in thy speech,
For this (amongst the rest) was I ordained.
I, and for much more slaughter after this,
O God forgive my sins, and pardon thee.
What? will the aspiring blood of Lancaster
Sink in the ground? I thought it would have mounted.
See how my sword weeps for the poor Kings death.
O may such purple tears be always shed
From those that wish the downfall of our house.
If any spark of Life be yet remaining,
Down, down to hell, and say I sent thee thither.
I that have neither pity, love, nor fear,
Indeed it is true that Henrie told me of:
For I have often heard my Mother say,
I came into the world with my Legs forward.
Had I not reason (think ye) to make hast,
And seek their Ruin, that usurped our Right?
The Midwife wondered, and the Women cried
O Iesus bless vs, he is borne with teeth,
And so I was, which plainly signified,
That I should snarl, and bite, and play the dog:
Then since the Heavens have shaped my Body so,
Let Hell make crooked my Mind to answer it.
I have no Brother, I am like no Brother:
And this word [Loue] which Gray-beards call Divine,
Be resident in men like one another,
And not in me: I am my self alone.
Clarence beware, thou keept'st me from the Light,
But I will sort a pitchy day for thee:
For I will buzz abroad such Prophesies,
That Edward shall be fearful of his life,
And then to purge his fear, Isle be thy death.
King Henry, and the Prince his Son are gone,
Clarence thy turn is next, and then the rest,
Counting my self but bad, till I be best.
Isle throw thy body in another room,
And Triumph Henry, in thy day of Doom.
Once more we sit in Englands Royal Throne,
Re-purchac'd with the Blood of Enemies:
What valiant Foe-men, like to Autumns Corn,
Have we mow'd down in tops of all their pride?
Three Dukes of Somerset, threefold Renown,
For hardy and undoubted Champions:
Two Cliffords, as the Father and the Son,
And two Northumberlands: two braver men,
Ne'er spurred their Coursers at the Trumpets sound.
With them, the two brave Bears, Warwick &amp; Montague,
That in their Chains fettered the Kingly Lyon,
And made the Forest tremble when they roared.
Thus have we swept Suspicion from our Seat,
And made our Footstool of Security.
Come hither Bess, and let me kiss my Boy:
Young Ned, for thee, thine Uncles, and my self,
Have in our Armours watched the Winters night,
Went all afoot in Summers scalding heate,
That thou might repossess the Crown in peace,
And of our Labours thou shalt reap the gain.
Isle blast his Harvest, if your head were laid,
For yet I am not looked on in the world.
This shoulder was ordained so thick, to heave,
And heave it shall some weight, or break my back,
Work thou the way, and that shalt execute.
Clarence and Gloster, love my lovely Queen,
And kiss your Princely Nephew Brothers both.
The duty that I owe unto your Majesty,
I Seal upon the lips of this sweet Babe.
Thank Noble Clarence, worthy brother thanks.
And that I love the tree fro?? whence you sprang:
Witness the loving kiss I give the Fruit,
To say the truth, so Iudas kissed his master,
And cried all hail, when as he meant all harm.
Now am I seated as my soul delights,
Having my Countries peace, and Brothers loves.
What will your Grace have done with Margaret,
Reynard her Father, to the King of France
Hath pawned the Sicils and Jerusalem,
And hither have they sent it for her ransom.
Away with her, and waft her hence to France:
And now what rests, but that we spend the time
With stately Triumphs, mirthful Comic shows,
Such as befits the pleasure of the Court.
Sound Drums and Trumpets, farewell sour annoy,
For here I hope begins our lasting joy.

NOble Patricians, Patrons of my right,
Defend the justice of my Cause with Arms.
And Countrymen, my loving Followers,
Plead my Successive Title with your Swords.
I was the first-borne Son, that was the last
That wore the Imperial Diadem of Rome:
Then let my Fathers Honours live in me,
Nor wrong mine Age with this indignity.
Romaines, Friends, Followers,
Favourers of my Right:
If ever Bassianus, Caesars Son,
Were gracious in the eyes of Royal Rome,
Keep then this passage to the Capitol:
And suffer not Dishonour to approach
The Imperial Seat to Virtue: consecrate
To Justice, Continence, and Nobility:
But let Desert in pure Election shine;
And Romans, fight for Freedom in your Choice.
Princes, that strive by Factions, and by Friends,
Ambitiously for Rule and Empery:
Know, that the people of Rome for whom we stand
A special Party, have by Common voice
In Election for the Roman Empery,
Chosen Andronicus, Sur-named Pious,
For many good and great deserts to Rome.
A Nobler man, a braver Warrior,
Lives not this day within the City Walls.
He by the Senate is accited home
From weary Wars against the barbarous Gothes,
That with his Sons (a terror to our Foes)
Hath yoked a Nation strong, trained up in Arms.
Ten years are spent, since first he undertook
This Cause of Rome, and chastised with Arms
Our Enemies pride. Five times he hath returned
Bleeding to Rome, bearing his Valiant Sons
In Coffins from the Field.
And now at last, laden with Honours Spoils,
Returns the good Andronicus to Rome,
Renowned Titus, flourishing in Arms.
Let vs entreat, by Honour of his Name,
Whom (worthily) you would have now succeed,
And in the Capitol and Senates right,
Whom you pretend to Honour and Adore,
That you withdraw you, and abate your Strength,
Dismiss your Followers, and as Suitors should,
Plead your Deserts in Peace and Humbleness.
How fair the Tribune speaks,
To calm my thoughts.
Marcus Andronicus, so I do affy
In thy uprightness and Integrity:
And so I Love and Honour thee, and thine,
Thy Noble Brother Titus, and his Sons,
And Her (to whom my thoughts are humbled all)
Gracious Lauinia, Romes rich Ornament,
That I will here dismiss my loving Friends:
And to my Fortunes, and the Peoples Favour,
Commit my Cause in balance to be weighed.
Friends, that have been
Thus forward in my Right,
I thank you all, and here Dismiss you all,
And to the Love and Favour of my Country,
Commit my Self, my Person, and the Cause:
Rome, be as just and gracious unto me,
As I am confident and kind to thee.
Open the Gates, and let me in.
Tribunes, and me, a poor Competitor.
Romans make way: the good Andronicus,
Patron of Virtue, Romes best Champion,
Successful in the Battles that he fights,
With Honour and with Fortune is returned,
From whence he circumscribed with his Sword,
And brought to yoke the Enemies of Rome.
Hail Rome:
Victorious in thy Mourning Weeds:
Lo as the Bark that hath discharged his fraught,
Returns with precious lading to the Bay,
From whence at first she weg•h'd her Anchorage:
Comes Andronicus bound with Laurel bows,
To resolute his Country with his tears,
Tears of true joy for his return to Rome,
Thou great defender of this Capitol,
Stand gracious to the Rites that we intend.
Romaines, of five and twenty Valiant Sons,
Half of the number that King Priam had,
Behold the poor remains alive and dead!
These that Survive, let Rome reward with Love:
These that I bring unto their latest home,
With burial amongst their Ancestors.
Here Gothes have given me leave to sheath my Sword:
Titus unkind, and careless of thine own,
Why suffer thou thy Sons unburied yet,
To hover on the dreadful shore of Styx?
Make way to lay them by their Brethren.
There greet in silence as the dead are wont,
And sleep in peace, slain in your Countries wars:
O sacred receptacle of my joys,
Sweet Cell of virtue and Noblitie,
How many Sons of mine hast thou in store,
That thou wilt never render to me more?
Give vs the proudest prisoner of the Gothes,
That we may hew his limbs, and on a pile
Admanus fratrum, sacrifice his flesh:
Before this earthly prison of their bones,
That so the shadows be not vnappeas'd,
Nor we disturbed with prodigies on earth.
I give him you, the Noblest that Survives,
The eldest Son of this distressed Queen.
Stay Romaine Brethren, gracious Conqueror,
Victorious Titus, rue the tears I shed,
A Mothers tears in passion for her son:
And if thy Sons were ever dear to thee,
Oh think my sons to be as dear to me.
Suffices not, that we are brought to Rome
To beautify thy Triumphs, and return
Captive to thee, and to thy Romaine yoke,
But must my Sons be slaughtered in the streets,
For Valiant doings in their Countries cause?
O! If to fight for King and Commonwealth,
Were piety in thine, it is in these:
Andronicus, stain not thy Tomb with blood.
Wilt thou draw near the nature of the Gods?
Draw near them then in being merciful.
Sweet mercy is Nobilities true badge,
Thrice Noble Titus, spare my first borne son.
Patient your self Madam, and pardon me.
These are the Brethren, whom you Gothes beheld
Alive and dead, and for their Brethren slain,
Religiously they ask a sacrifice:
To this your son is marked, and die he must,
To appease their groaning shadows that are gone.
Away with him, and make a fire straight,
And with our Swords upon a pile of wood,
Let's hew his limbs till they be clean consumed.
O cruel irreligious piety.
Was ever Scythia half so barbarous?
Oppose me Scythia to ambitious Rome,
Alarbus goes to rest, and we survive,
To tremble under Titus threatening looks,
Then Madam stand resolved, but hope withal,
The self same Gods that armed the Queen of Troy
With opportunity of sharpe revenge
Upon the Thracian Tyrant in his Tent,
May favour Tomorrow the Queen of Gothes,
(When Gothes were Gothes, and Tomorrow was Queen)
To quit the bloody wrongs upon her foes.
See Lord and Father, how we have performed
Our Romaine rights, Alarbus limbs are lopped,
And entrails feed the sacrificing fire,
Whose smoke like in cense doth perfume the sky.
Remains nought but to inter our Brethren,
And with loud Larums welcome them to Rome.
Let it be so, and let Andronicus
Make this his latest farewell to their souls.
In peace and Honour rest you here my Sons,
Romes readiest Champions, repose you here in rest,
Secure from worldly chances and mishaps:
Here lurks no Treason, here no envy swells,
Here grow no damned grudges, here are no storms,
No noise, but silence and Eternal sleep,
In peace and Honour rest you here my Sons.
In peace and Honour, live Lord Titus long,
My Noble Lord and Father, live in Fame:
Lo at this Tomb my tributary tears,
I render for my Bretherens Obsequies:
And at thy feet I kneel, with tears of joy
Shed on the earth for thy return to Rome.
O bless me here with thy victorious hand,
Whose Fortune Romes best Citizens applau'd.
Kind Rome,
That hast thus lovingly reserved
The Cordial of mine age to glad my hart,
Lauinia live, out-liue thy Fathers days:
And Fems eternal date for virtues praise.
Long live Lord Titus, my beloved brother,
Gracious Triumpher in the eyes of Rome.
Thanks Gentle Tribune,
Noble brother Marcus.
And welcome▪ Nephews from successful wars,
You that survive and you that sleep in Fame:
Fair Lords your Fortunes are all alike in all,
That in your Countries service drew your Swords.
But safer Triumph is this Funeral Pomp,
That hath aspired to Solons Happiness,
And Triumphs over chance in honours bed.
Titus Andronicus▪ the people of Rome,
Whose friend in justice thou hast ever been,
Send thee by me their Tribune and their trust,
This Palliament of white and spotless Hue,
And name thee in Election for the Empire,
With these our late deceased Emperors Sons:
Be Candidatus then, and put it on,
And help to set a head on headless Rome.
A better head her Glorious body fits,
Then his that shakes for age and feebleness:
What should I d'on this Robe and trouble you,
Be chosen with proclamations to day,
To morrow yield up rule, resign my life,
And set abroad new business for you all▪
Rome I have been thy Soldier forty years,
And led my Countries strength successfully,
And buried one and twenty Valiant Sons,
Knighted in Field, slain manfully in Arms,
In right and Service of their Noble Country:
Give me a staff of Honour for mine age,
But not a Sceptre to control the world,
Upright he held it Lords, that held it last.
Titus, thou shalt obtain and ask the Empery.
Proud and ambitious Tribune can thou tell?
Patience Prince Saturninus.
Romaines do me right.
Patricians draw your Swords, and sheath them not
Till Saturninus be Romes Emperor:
Andronicus would thou were shipped to hell,
Rather then rob me of the peoples harts.
Proud Saturnine, interrupter of the good
That Noble minded Titus means to thee.
Content thee Prince, I will restore to thee
The peoples harts, and we are them from themselves.
Andronicus, I do not flatter thee
But Honour thee, and will doe till I die:
My Faction if thou strengthen with thy Friend?
I will most thankful be, and thanks to men
Of Noble minds, is Honourable Mead.
People of Rome, and Noble Tribunes here,
I ask your voices and your Suffrages,
Will you bestow them friendly on Andronicus?
To gratify the good Andronicus,
And Gratulate his safe return to Rome,
The people will accept whom he admits.
Tribunes I thank you, and this sure I make,
That you Create your Emperors eldest son,
Lord Saturnine, whose Virtues will I hope,
Reflect on Rome as Titans Rays on earth,
And ripen Justice in this Commonwealth:
Then if you will elect by my advise,
Crown him, and say: Long live our Emperor.
With Voices and applause of every sort,
Patricians and Plebeans we Create
Lord Saturninus Romes Great Emperor.
And say, Long live our Emperor Saturnine.
Titus Andronicus, for thy Favours done,
To vs in our Election this day,
I give thee thanks in part of thy Deserts,
And will with Deeds requite thy gentleness:
And for an Onset Titus to advance
Thy Name, and Honourable Family,
Lauinia will I make my Empress,
Romes Royal Mistress, Mistress of my hart
And in the Sacred Pardon her espouse:
Tell me Andronicus doth this motion please thee?
It doth my worthy Lord, and in this match,
I hold me Highly Honoured of your Grace,
And here in fight of Rome, to Saturnine,
King and Commander of our Commonwealth,
The Wide-worlds Emperor, do I Consecrate,
My Sword, my Chariot, and my Prisoners,
Presents well Worthy Romes Imperial Lord:
Receive them then, the Tribute that I owe,
Mine Honours Ensigns humbled at my feet.
Thanks Noble Titus, Father of my life,
How proud I am of thee, and of thy gifts
Rome shall record, and when I do forget
The least of these unspeakable Deserts,
Romans forget your Fealty to me.
Now Madam are your prisoner to an Emperor,
To him that for you Honour and your State,
Will use you Nobly and your followers.
A goodly Lady, trust me of the Hue
That I would choose, were I to choose a new:
Clear up Fair Queen that cloudy countenance,
Though chance of war
Hath wrought this change of cheer,
Thou come not to be made a scorn in Rome:
Princely shall be thy usage every way▪
Rest on my word, and let not discontent
Daunt all your hopes: Madam he comforts you,
Can make your Greater then the Queen of Gothes?
Lauinia you are not displeased with this?
Not I my Lord, sith true Nobili•e,
Warrants these words in Princely courtesy?
Thanks sweet Lauinia Romans let vs go.
Ransomless here we set our Prisoners free,
Proclaim our Honours Lords with Trump and Drum.
Lord Titus by your leave, this Maid is mine.
How sir? Are you in earnest then my Lord?
I Noble Titus, and resolved withal,
To doe my self this reason, and this right.
Suum cuiquam, is our Roman Justice,
This Prince in Justice ceases but his own.
And that he will and shall, if Lucius live.
Traitors avaunt, where is the Emperors Guard?
Treason my Lord, Lauinia is surprised.
Surprised, by whom?
By him that justly may
Bear his Betrothed, from all the world away.
Brothers help to convey her hence away,
And with my Sword Isle keep this door safe.
Follow my Lord▪ and Isle soon bring her back.
My Lord you pass not here.
What villain Boy, bar me my way in Rome?
Help Lucius help.
My Lord you are unjust, and more then so,
In wrongful quarrel, you have slain your son.
Nor thou, nor he are any sons of mine,
My sons would never so dishonour me.
Traitor restore Lauinia to the Emperor.
Dead if you will, but not to be his wife,
That is another lawful promised Love.
No Titus▪ no, the Emperor needs her not,
Nor her, nor thee, nor any of thy stock:
Isle trust by Leisure him that mocks me once.
Thee never: not thy Traitorous haughty sons,
Confederates all, thus to dishonour me.
Was none in Rome to make a stale
But Saturnine? Full well Andronicus
Agree these Deeds, with that proud brag of thine,
That said, I begged the Empire at thy hands.
O monstrous, what reproachful words are these?
But go thy ways, go give that changing piece,
To him that flourished for her with his Sword:
A Valiant son in-law thou shalt enjoy:
One, sit to bandy with thy lawless Sons,
To ruffle in the Common-wealth of Rome.
These words are Razors to my wounded hart.
And therefore lovely Tomorrow Queen of Gothes,
That like the stately Thebe mong'st her Nymphs
Dost ouer-shine the Gallant'st Dames of Rome,
If thou be pleased with this my sudden choice,
Behold I choose thee Tomorrow for my Bride,
And will Create thee Empress of Rome.
Speak Queen of Gods dost thou applau'd my choice?
And here I swear by all the Romaine Gods,
Sith Priest and Holy-water are so near,
And Tapers burn so bright, and every thing
In readiness for Hymeneus stand,
I will not res•lute the streets of Rome,
Or clime my Palace, till from forth this place,
I lead espoused my Bride along with me,
And here in sight of heaven to Rome I swear,
If Saturnine advance the Queen of Gothes,
She will a Hand-maid be to his desires,
A loving Nurse, a Mother to his youth.
Ascend Fair Queen,
Pantheon Lords, accompany
Your Noble Emperor and his lovely Bride,
Sent by the heavens for Prince Saturnine,
Whose wisdom hath her Fortune Conquered,
There shall we Consummate our Spousal rites.
I am not bid to waite upon this Bride:
Titus when were it thou wont to walk alone,
Dishonoured thus and Challenged of wrongs?
O Titus see! O see what thou hast done!
In a bad quarrel, slain a Virtuous son.
No foolish Tribune, no: No son of mine,
Nor thou, nor these Confederates in the deed,
That hath dishonoured all our Family,
Unworthy brother, and unworthy Sons.
But let vs give him burial as becomes:
Give Mutius burial with our Brethren.
Traitors away, he rest's not in this Tomb:
This Monument five hundredth years hath stood,
Which I have Sumptuously re-edified:
Here none but Soldiers, and Romes Servitors,
Repose in Fame: None basely slain in brawls,
Bury him where you can, he comes not here.
My Lord this is impiety in you,
My Nephew Mutius deeds do plead for him,
He must be buried with his brethren.
And shall, or him we will accompany.
And shall! What villain was it spake that word?
He that would vouched it in any place but here.
What would you bury him in my despite?
No Noble Titus, but entreat of thee,
To pardon Mutius, and to bury him.
Marcus, Even thou hast stroke upon my Crest,
And with these Boy• mine Honour thou hast wounded,
My foes I doe repute you every one.
So trouble me no more, but get you gone.
He is not himself, let vs withdraw.
Not I tell Mutius bones be buried.
Brother, for in that name doth nature played.
Father, and in that name doth nature speak.
Speak thou no more if all the rest will speed.
Renowned Titus more then half my soul.
Dear Father, soul and substance of vs all.
Suffer thy brother Marcus to inter
His Noble Nephew here in virtues nest,
That died in Honour and Lauinia's cause.
Thou art a Romaine, be not barbarous:
The Greeks upon advise did bury Aiax
That slew himself: And Laertes son,
Did graciously plead for his Funerals:
Let not young Mutius then that was thy joy,
Be bared his entrance here.
Rise Marcus, rise,
The dismallest day is this that ere I saw,
To be dishonoured by my Sons in Rome:
Well, bury him, and bury me the next.
There lie thy bones sweet Mutius with thy friends
Till we with Trophies do adorn thy Tomb.
No man shed tears for Noble Mutius,
He lives in Fame, that died in virtues cause.
My Lord to step out of these sudden dumps,
How comes it that the subtle Queen of Gothes,
Is of a sudden thus advanced in Rome?
I know not Marcus: but I know it is,
(Whether by devise or no) the heavens can tell,
Is she not then beholding to the man,
That brought her for this high good turn so far?
Yes, and will Nobly him remunerate.
So Bassianus, you have plaid your prize,
God give you joy sir of your Gallant Bride.
And you of yours my Lord: I say no more,
Nor wish no less, and so I take my leave.
Traitor, if Rome have law, or we have power,
Thou and thy Faction shall repent this Rape.
Rape call you it my Lord, to cease my own,
My true betrothed Love, and now my wife?
But let the laws of Rome determine all,
Mean while I am possessed of that is mine.
It is good sir: you are very short with vs,
But if we live, weal be as sharpe with you.
My Lord, what I have done as best I may,
Answer I must, and shall do with my life,
Only thus much I give your Grace to know,
By all the duties that I owe to Rome,
This Noble Gentleman Lord Titus here,
Is in opinion and in honour wronged,
That in the rescue of Lauinia,
With his own hand did slay his youngest Son,
In zeal to you, and highly moved to wrath.
To be controlled in that he frankly gave:
Receive him then to favour Saturnine,
That hath expre'st himself in all his deeds,
A Father and a friend to thee, and Rome.
Prince Bassianus leave to plead my Deeds,
It is thou, and those, that have dishonoured me,
Rome and the righteous heavens be my judge,
How I have loved and Honoured Saturnine.
My worthy Lord if ever Tomorrow,
Were gracious in those Princely eyes of thine,
Then hear me speak indifferently for all:
And at my suit (sweet) pardon what is past.
What Madam, be dishonoured openly,
And basely put it up without revenge?
Not so my Lord,
The Gods of Rome for-fend,
I should be Author to dishonour you.
But on mine honour dare, I undertake
For good Lord Titus innocence in all:
Whose fury not dissembled speaks his griefs:
Then at my suit look graciously on him,
Loose not so noble a friend on vain suppose,
Nor with sour looks afflict his gentle heart.
My Lord, be ruled by me, be won at last,
Dissemble all your griefs and discontents,
You are but newly planted in your Throne,
Least then the people, and Patricians too,
Upon a just survey take Titus part,
And so supplant vs for ingratitude,
Which Rome reputes to be a heinous sin.
Yield at entreats, and then let me alone:
Isle find a day to massacre them all,
And race their faction, and their family,
The cruel Father, and his trayt'rous sons,
To whom I sued for my dear sons life.
And make them know what it is to let a Queen.
Kneel in the streets, and beg for grace in vain.
Come, come, sweet Emperor, (come Andronicus)
Take up this good old man, and cheer the heart,
That dies in tempest of thy angry frown.
Rise Titus, rise,
My Empress hath prevailed.
I thank your Majesty,
And her my Lord.
These words, these looks,
Infuse new life in me.
Titus, I am incorporate in Rome,
A Roman now adopted happily.
And must advise the Emperor for his good,
This day all quarrels die Andronicus.
And let it be mine honour good my Lord,
That I have reconciled your friends and you.
For you Prince Bassianus, I have past
My word and promise to the Emperor,
That you will be more mild and tractable.
And fear not Lords:
And you Lauinia,
By my advise all humbled on your knees,
You shall ask pardon of his Majesty.
We doe,
And vow to heaven, and to his Highness,
That what we did, was mildly, as we might,
Tendering our sisters honour and our own.
That on mine honour here I do protest.
Away and talk not, trouble vs no more.
Nay, nay,
Sweet Emperor, we must all be friends,
The Tribune and his Nephews kneel for grace,
I will not be denied, sweet hart look back.
Marcus,
For thy sake and thy brothers here,
And at my lovely Tamora's entreats,
I doe remit these young men's heinous faults.
Stand up: Lauinia, though you left me like a churl,
I found a friend, and sure as death I swear,
I would not part a Bachelor from the Priest.
Come, if the Emperors Court can feast two Brides,
You are my guest Lauinia, and your friends:
This day shall be a Loue-day Tomorrow.
To morrow and it please your Majesty,
To hunt the Panther and the Hart with me,
With horn and Hound,
Weal give your Grace Bon jour.
Be it so Titus, and Gramercy to.
Now climb Tomorrow Olympus top,
Safe out of Fortunes shot, and sits aloft,
Secure of Thunders crack or lightning flash,
Advanced about pale envies threatening reach:
As when the golden Sun salutes the morn,
And having gilt the Ocean with his beams,
Gallops the Zodiac in his glistening Coach,
And ouer-lookes the highest peering hills:
So Tomorrow.
Upon her wit doth earthly honour waite,
And virtue stoops and trembles at her frown.
Then Aaron arm thy hart, and fit thy thoughts,
To mount aloft with thy Imperial Mistress,
And mount her pitch, whom thou in ttiumph long
Hast prisoner held, fettered in amorous chains,
And faster bound to Aarons charming eyes,
Then is Prometheus ti'de to Caucasus.
Away with slavish weeds, and idle thoughts,
I will be bright and shine in Pearl and Gold,
To waite upon this new made Empress.
To waite said I? To wanton with this Queen,
This Goddess, this Semorimis, this Queen,
This Siren, that will charm Romes Saturnine,
And see his shipwreck, and his Common weals.
Hello, what storm is this?
Chiron thy years wants wit, thy wit wants edge
And manners to intru'd where I am graced,
And may for ought thou know affected be.
Demetrius, thou dost overween in all,
And so in this, to bear me down with braves,
It is not the difference of a year or two
Makes me less gracious, or thee more fortunate:
I am as able, and as fit, as thou,
To serve, and to deserve my Mistress grace,
And that my sword upon thee shall approve,
And plead my passions for Lauinia's love.
Clubs, clubs, these lovers will not keep the peace.
Why Boy, although our mother (unadvised)
Gave you a dancing Rapier by your side,
Are you so desperate grown to threat your friends?
Go too: have your Lath glued within your sheath,
Till you know better how to handle it.
Mean while sir, with the little skill I have,
Full well shalt thou perceive how much I dare.
I Boy, grow ye so brave?
Why how now Lords?
So ne'er the Emperors Palace dare you draw,
And maintain such a quarrel openly?
Full well I wot, the ground of all this grudge.
I would not for a million of Gold,
The cause were known to them it most concerns.
Nor would your noble mother for much more
Be so dishonoured in the Court of Rome:
For shame put up.
Not I, till I have sheathed
My rapier in his bosom, and withal
Thrust these reproachful speeches down his throat,
That he hath breathed in my dishonour here.
For that I am prepared, and full resolved,
Foul spoken Coward,
That thundrest with thy tongue,
And with thy weapon nothing dare perform.
A way I say.
Now by the Gods that warlike Gothes adore,
This pretty brabble will undo vs all:
Why Lords, and think you not how dangerous
It is to set upon a Princes right?
What is Lauinia then become so loose,
Or Bassianus so degenerate,
That for her love such quarrels may be broached,
Without controlment, Justice, or revenge?
Young Lords beware, and should the Empress know,
This discord ground, the music would not please.
I care not I, knew she and all the world,
I love Lauinia more then all the world.
Youngling,
Learn thou to make some meaner choice,
Lauinia is thine elder brothers hope.
Why are ye mad? Or know ye not in Rome,
How furious and impatient they be,
And cannot brooke Competitors in love?
I tell you Lords, you doe but plot your deaths,
By this devise.
Aaron, a thousand deaths would I propose,
To achieve her whom I do love.
To achieve her, how?
Why, make thou it so strange?
She is a woman, therefore may be wooed,
She is a woman, therefore may be won,
She is Lauinia therefore must be loved.
What man, more water glides by the Mill
Then wots the Miller of, and easy it is
Of a cut loaf to steal a shive we know:
Though Bassianus be the Emperors brother,
Better then he have worn Vulcans badge.
I, and as good as Saturnius may.
Then why should he despair that knows to court it
With words, fair looks, and liberality:
What hast not thou full often struck a Doe,
And borne her cleanly by the Keepers nose?
Why then it seems some certain snatch or so
Would serve your turns.
I so the turn were served.
Aaron thou hast hit it.
Would you had hit it too,
Then should not we be tired with this ado:
Why hark ye, hark ye, and are you such fools,
To square for this? Would it offend you then?
Faith not me.
Not me, so I were one.
For shame be friends, &amp; join for that you jar:
It is policy, and stratagem must doe
That you affect, and so must you resolve,
That what you cannot as you would achieve,
You must perforce accomplish as you may:
Take this of me, Lucrece was not more chaste
Then this Lauinia, Bassianus love,
A speedier course this lingering languishment
Must we pursue, and I have found the path:
My Lords, a solemn hunting is in hand.
There will the lovely Roman Ladies troop:
The Forest walks are wide and spacious,
And many unfrequented plots there are,
Fitted by kind for rape and villain:
Single you thither then this dainty Doe,
And strike her home by force, if not by words:
This way or not at all, stand you in hope.
Come, come, our Empress with her sacred wit
To villainy and vengeance consecrate,
Will we acquaint with all that we intend,
And she shall file our engines with advise,
That will not suffer you to square your selves,
But to your wishes height advance you both.
The Emperors Court is like the house of Fame,
The palace full of tongues, of eyes, of ears:
The Woods are ruthless, dreadful, deaf, and dull:
There speak, and strike brave Boys, &amp; take your turns.
There serve your lusts, shadowed from heavens eye,
And revel in Lauinia's Treasury.
Thy counsel Lad smells of no cowardice.
Sij fas aut nefas, till I find the streams,
To cool this heat, a Charm to calm their fits,
Per Stigia per manes Vehor.
The hunt is up, the morn is bright and gray,
The fields are fragrant, and the Woods are greene,
Vncouple here, and let vs make a bay,
And wake the Emperor, and his lovely Bride,
And rouse the Prince, and ring a hunters peal,
That all the Court may echo with the noise.
Sons let it be your charge, as it is ours,
To attend the Emperors person carefully:
I have been troubled in my sleep this night,
But dawning day new comfort hath inspired.
Many good morrows to your Majesty,
Madam to you as many and as good.
I promised your Grace, a Hunters peal.
And you have rung it lustily my Lords,
Somewhat to early for new married Ladies.
Lauinia, how say you?
I say no:
I have been awake two hours and more.
Come on then, horse and Chariots let vs have,
And to our sport: Madam, now shall ye see,
Our Romaine hunting.
I have dogs my Lord,
Will rouse the proudest Panther in the Chase,
And clime the highest Pomontary top.
And I have horse will follow where the game
Makes way, and runs likes Swallows ore the plain
Chiron we hunt not we, with Horse nor Hound
But hope to pluck a dainty Doe to ground.
He that had wit, would think that I had none,
To bury so much Gold under a Tree,
And never after to inherit it.
Let him that thinks of me so abjectly,
Know that this Gold must coin a stratagem,
Which cunningly effected, will beget
A very excellent piece of villainy:
And so repose sweet Gold for their unrest,
That have their Alms out of the Empress Chest.
My lovely Aaron,
Wherefore look thou sad,
When every thing doth make a Gleeful boast?
The Birds chant melody on every bush,
The Snake lies rolled in the cheerful Sun,
The greene leaves quiver▪ with the cooling wind,
And make a cheker'd shadow on the ground:
Under their sweet shade, Aaron let vs sit,
And whilst the babbling Echo mock's the Hounds,
Replying shrilly to the well tun'd-Hornes,
As if a double hunt were heard at once,
Let vs sit down, and mark their yelping noise:
And after conflict, such as was supposed.
The wandering Prince and Dido once enjoyed,
When with a happy storm they were surprised,
And Curtained with a Counsaile-keeping Cave,
We may each wreathed in the others arms,
(Our pastimes done) possess a Golden slumber,
Whiles Hounds and Horns, and sweet Melodious Birds
Be unto vs, as is a Nurses Song
Of Lullaby, to bring her Babe asleep.
Madame,
Though Venus govern your desires,
Saturn is Dominator over mine:
What signifies my deadly standing eye,
My silence, and my Cloudy Melancholy,
My fleece of Woolly hair, that now vncurles,
Even as an Adder when she doth vnrowle
To do some fatal execution?
No Madam, these are no Venereal signs,
Vengeance is in my heart, death in my hand,
Blood, and revenge, are Hammering in my head.
Hark Tomorrow, the Empress of my Soul,
Which never hopes more heaven, then rests in thee,
This is the day of Doom for Bassianus;
His Philomel must loose her tongue to day,
Thy Sons make Pillage of her Chastity,
And wash their hands in Bassianus blood.
See thou this Letter, take it up I pray thee,
And give the King this fatal plotted Scroll,
Now question me no more, we are espied,
Here comes a parcel of our hopeful Booty,
Which dreads not yet their lives destruction.
Ah my sweet Moore:
Sweeter to me then life.
No more great Empress, Bassianus comes,
Be cross with him, and Isle go fetch thy Sons
To back thy quarrel what so ere they be.
Whom have we here?
Romes Royal Empress,
Vnfurnisht of our well beseeming troop?
Or is it Dian habitat like her,
Who hath abandoned her holy Groves,
To see the general Hunting in this Forest?
Saucy controller of our private steps:
Had I the power, that some say Dian had,
Thy Temples should be planted presently.
With Horns, as was Actions, and the Hounds
Should drive upon his new transformed limbs,
Unmannerly Intruder as thou art.
Under your patience gentle Empress,
It is thought you have a goodly gift in Horning,
And to be doubted, that your Moore and you
Are singled forth to try experiments:
Jove shield your husband from his Hounds to day,
It is pity they should take him for a Stag.
Believe me Queen, your swarth Cymerion,
Doth make your Honour of his bodies Hue,
Spotted, detested, and abominable.
Why are you sequestered from all your train?
Dismounted from your Snow-white goodly Steed,
And wandered hither to an obscure plot,
Accompanied with a barbarous Moore,
If foul desire had not conducted you?
And being intercepted in your sport,
Great reason that my Noble Lord, be rated
For Sauciness, I pray you let vs hence,
And let her joy her Raven coloured love,
This valley fits the purpose passing well.
The King my Brother shall have notice of this.
I, for these sli•s have made him noted long,
Good King, to be so mightily abused.
Why I have patience to endure all this?
How now dear Sovereign
And our gracious Mother,
Why doth your Highness look so pale and wan?
Have I not reason think you to look pale.
These two have tic'd me hither to this place,
A barren, detested vale you see it is.
The Trees though Summer, yet forlorn and lean,
Ore-come with Moss, and baleful Misselto.
Here never shines the Sun, here nothing breeds,
Unless the nightly Owl, or fatal Raven:
And when they showed me this abhorred pit,
They told me here at dead time of the night,
A thousand Fiends, a thousand hissing Snakes,
Ten thousand swelling Toads, as many Urchins,
Would make such fearful and confused cries,
As any mortal body hearing it,
Should strait fall mad, or else die suddenly.
No sooner had they told this hellish tale,
But strait they told me they would bind me here,
Unto the body of a dismal yew,
And leave me to this miserable death.
And then they called me foul Adulteress,
Lascivious Goth, and all the bitterest tea•n•es
That ever ear did hear to such effect.
And had you not by wondrous fortune come,
This vengeance on me had they executed:
Revenge it, as you love your Mothers life,
Or be ye not henceforth called my Children,
This is a witness that I am thy Son.
And this for me,
Struck home to show my strength.
I come Semeramis nay Barbarous Tomorrow.
For no name fits thy nature but thy own.
Give me thy poniard, you shall know my boys
Your Mothers hand shall right your Mothers wrong.
Stay Madam here is more belongs to her,
First thrash the Corn, then after burn the straw:
This Minion stood upon her chastity,
Upon her Nuptial vow, her loyalty.
And with that painted hope, braves your Mightiness,
And shall she carry this unto her grave?
And if she doe,
I would I were an Eunuch,
Drag hence her husband to some secret hole,
And make his dead Trunke-Pillow to our lust.
But when ye have the honey we desire,
Let not this Wasp out-liue vs both to sting.
I warrant you Madam we will make that sure:
Come Mistress, now perforce we will enjoy,
That nice-preserued honesty of yours.
Oh Tomorrow, thou bear a woman face.
I will not hear her speak, away with her.
Sweet Lords entreat her hear me but a word.
Listen fair Madam, let it be your glory
To see her tears but be your hart to them,
As unrelenting flint to drops of rain.
When did the Tigers young-ones teach the dam?
O doe not learn her wrath, she taught it thee,
The milk thou suck from her did turn to Marble,
Even at thy Teat thou had thy Tyranny,
Yet every Mother breeds not Sons alike,
Do thou entreat her show a woman pity.
What,
Would thou have me prove my self a bastard?
It is true,
The Raven doth not hatch a Lark,
Yet have I heard, Oh could I find it now,
The Lion moved with pity, did endure
To have his Princely paws par'd all away.
Some say, that Ravens foster forlorn children,
The whilst their own birds famish in their nests:
Oh be to me though thy hard hart say no,
Nothing so kind but something pitiful.
I know not what it means, away with her.
Oh let me teach thee for my Fathers sake,
That gave thee life when well he might have slain thee:
Be not obdurate, open thy deaf ears.
Had thou in person ne'er offended me.
Even for his sake am I pitiless:
Remember Boys I powered forth tears in vain,
To save your brother from the sacrifice,
But fierce Andronicus would not relent,
Therefore away with her, and use her as you will,
The worse to her, the better loved of me.
Oh Tomorrow,
Be called a gentle Queen,
And with thine own hands kill me in this place,
For it is not life that I have begged so long,
Poor I was slain, when Bassianus died.
What beg thou then? fond woman let me go?
It is present death I beg, and one thing more,
That womanhood denies my tongue to tell:
Oh keep me from their worse then killing lust,
And tumble me into some loathsome pit,
Where never mans eye may behold my body,
Doe this, and be a charitable murderer.
So should I rob my sweet Sons of their fee,
No let them satisfy their lust on thee.
Away,
For thou hast staid vs here too long.
No Garace,
No womanhood? Ah beastly creature,
The blot and enemy to our general name,
Confusion fall—
Nay then Isle stop your mouth
Bring thou her husband,
This is the Hole where Aaron bid vs hide him.
Farewell my Sons, see that you make her sure,
Ne'er let my heart know merry cheer indeed,
Till all the Andronici be made away:
Now will I hence to seek my lovely Moore,
And let my spleenful Sons this Trull deflower.
Come on my Lords, the better foot before,
Straight will I bring you to the loathsome pit,
Where I espied the Panther fast asleep.
My sight is very dull what ere it bodes.
And mine I promise you, were it not for shame,
Well could I leave our sport to sleep a while.
What art thou fallen?
What subtle Hole is this,
Whose mouth is covered with Rude growing Briers,
Upon whose leaves are drops of new-shed-blood,
As fresh as mornings dew distilled on flowers,
A very fatal place it seems to me:
Speak Brother hast thou hurt thee with the fall?
Oh Brother,
With the dismallest object
That ever eye with sight made heart lament.
Now will I fetch the King to find them here,
That he thereby may have a likely guess,
How these were they that made away his Brother.
Why dost not comfort me and help me out,
From this unhallowed and blood-stained Hole?
I am surprised with an uncouth fear,
A chilling sweat ore-runs my trembling joints,
My heart suspects more then mine eye can see.
To prove thou hast a true divining heart,
Aaron and thou look down into this den,
And see a fearful sight of blood and death.
Aaron is gone,
And my compassionate heart
Will not permit mine eyes once to behold
The thing whereat it trembles by surmise:
Oh tell me how it is, for ne'er till now
Was I a child, to fear I know not what.
Lord Bassianus lies embrewed here,
All on a heap like to the slaughtered Lamb,
In this detested, dark, blood-drinking pit.
If it be dark, how dost thou know it is he?
Upon his bloody finger he doth wear
A precious Ring, that lightens all the Hole:
Which like a Taper in some Monument,
Doth shine upon the dead mans earthly cheeks,
And shows the ragged entrails of the pit:
So pale did shine the Moon on Piramus,
When he by night lay bathed in Maiden blood:
O Brother help me with thy fainting hand.
If fear hath made thee faint, as me it hath,
Out of this fell devouring receptacle,
As hateful as Ocitus misty mouth.
Reach me thy hand, that I may help thee out,
Or wanting strength to doe thee so much good,
I may be plucked into the swallowing womb,
Of this deep pit, poor Bassianus grave:
I have no strength to pluck thee to the brink.
Nor I no strength to clime without thy help.
Thy hand once more, I will not loose again,
Till thou art here aloft, or I below,
Thou can not come to me, I come to thee.
Along with me, Isle see what hole is here,
And what he is that now is leapt into it.
Say, who art thou that lately did it descend,
Into this gaping hollow of the earth?
The unhappy son of old Andronicus,
Brought hither in a most unlucky hour,
To find thy brother Bassianus dead.
My brother dead? I know thou dost but jest,
He and his Lady both are at the Lodge,
Upon the North-side of this pleasant Chase,
It is not an hour since I left him there.
We know not where you left him all alive,
But out alas, here have we found him dead.
Where is my Lord the King?
Here Tomorrow, though grieved with killing grief.
Where is thy brother Bassianus?
Now to the bottom dost thou search my wound,
Poor Bassianus here lies murdered.
Then all too late I bring this fatal writ,
The complot of this timeless Tragedy,
And wonder greatly that mans face can fold,
In pleasing smiles such murderous Tyranny.
And if we miss to meet him handsomely,
Sweet huntsman, Bassianus it is we mean,
Doe thou so much as dig the grave for him,
Thou know our meaning, look for thy reward
Among the Nettles at the Elder tree:
Which ouer-shades the mouth of that same pit:
Where we decreed to bury Bassianuss
Doe this and purchase vs thy lasting friends.
Oh Tomorrow, was ever heard the like?
This is the pit, and this the Elder tree,
Look sirs, if you can find the huntsman out,
That should have murdered Bassianus here.
My gracious Lord here is the bag of Gold.
Two of thy whelps, fell Curs of bloody kind
Have here bereft my brother of his life:
Sirs drag them from the pit unto the prison,
There let them bide until we have deuis'd
Some never heard-of tortering pain for them.
What are they in this pit,
Oh wondrous thing!
How easily murder is discovered?
High Emperor, upon my feeble knee,
I beg this boon, with tears, not lightly shed,
That this fell fault of my accursed Sons,
Accursed, if the faults be proved in them.
If it be proved? you see it is apparent,
Who found this Letter, Tomorrow was it you?
Andronicus himself did take it up.
I did my Lord,
Yet let me be their bail,
For by my Fathers reverent Tomb I vow
They shall be ready at your Highness will,
To answer their suspicion with their lives.
Thou shalt not bail them, see thou follow me:
Some bring the murdered body, some the murderers,
Let them not speak a word, the guilt is plain,
For by my soul, were there worse end then death,
That end upon them should be executed.
Andronicus I will entreat the King,
Fear not thy Sons, they shall do well enough.
Come Lucius come,
Stay not to talk with them.
So now go tell and if thy tongue can speak,
Who to was that cut thy tongue and ravished thee.
Write down thy mind, bewray thy meaning so,
And if thy stumps will let thee play the Scribe.
See how with signs and tokens she can scowl.
Go home,
Call for sweet water, wash thy hands.
She hath no tongue to call, nor hands to wash.
And so let's leave her to her silent walks.
And to were my cause, I should go hang my self.
If thou had hands to help thee knit the cord.
Who is this, my Niece that flies away so fast?
Cousin a word, where is your husband?
If I do dream, would all my wealth would wake me;
If I doe wake, some Planet strike me down,
That I may slumber in eternal sleep.
Speak gentle Niece, what sterne ungentle hands
Hath lopped, and hewed, and made thy body bare
Of her two branches, those sweet Ornaments
Whose circling shadows, Kings have sought to sleep in
And might not gain so great a happiness
As half thy Love: Why dost not speak to me?
Alas, a Crimson river of warm blood,
Like to a bubbling fountain stirred with wind,
Doth rise and fall between thy Roseate lips,
Coming and going with thy honey breath.
But sure some Tereus hath deflowered thee,
And least thou should detect them, cut thy tongue.
Ah, now thou turn away thy face for shame:
And notwithstanding all this loss of blood,
As from a Conduit with their issuing Spouts,
Yet doe thy cheeks look red as Titans face,
Blushing to be encountered with a Cloud,
Shall I speak for thee? shall I say it is so?
Oh that I knew thy hart, and knew the beast
That I might rail at him to ease my mind.
Sorrow concealed, like an Oven stopped,
Doth burn the hart to Cinders where it is.
Fair Philomela she but lost her tongue,
And in a tedious Sampler sowed her mind.
But lovely Niece, that mean is cut from thee,
A craftier Tereus hast thou met withal,
And he hath cut those pretty fingers off,
That could have better sowed then Philomel.
Oh had the monster seen those Lily hands,
Tremble like Aspen leaves upon a Lute,
And make the silken strings delight to kiss them,
He would not then have touched them for his life.
Or had he heard the heavenly Harmony,
Which that sweet tongue hath made:
He would have dropped his knife and fell asleep,
As Cerberus at the Thracian Poets feet.
Come, let vs go, and make thy father blind,
For such a sight will blind a fathers eye.
One hours storm will drown the fragrant meads,
What, will whole months of tears thy Fathers eyes?
Doe not draw back, for we will morn with thee:
Oh could our mourning ease thy misery.
Hear me grave fathers, noble Tribunes stay,
For pity of mine age, whose youth was spent
In dangerous wars, whilst you securely slept:
For all my blood in Romes great quarrel shed,
For all the frosty nights that I have watched,
And for these bitter tears, which now you see,
Filling the aged wrinkles in my cheeks,
Be pitiful to my condemned Sons,
Whose souls is not corrupted as it is thought:
For two and twenty sons I never wept,
Because they died in honours lofty bed.
For these, Tribunes, in the dust I write
My harts deep languor, and my souls sad tears:
Let my tears stanch the earths dry appetite.
My sons sweet blood, will make it shame and blush:
O earth! I will be friend thee more with rain
That shall distill from these two ancient ruins,
Then youthful April shall with all his showers
In summers drought: Isle drop upon thee still,
In Winter with warm tears Isle melt the snow,
And keep erernall spring time on thy face,
So thou refuse to drink my dear sons blood.
Oh reverent Tribunes, oh gentle aged men,
Unbind my sons, reverse the doom of death,
And let me say (that never wept before)
My tears are now preualing Orators.
Oh noble father, you lament in vain,
The Tribunes hear not, no man is by,
And you recount your sorrows to a stone.
Ah Lucius for thy brothers let me plead,
Grave Tribunes, once more I entreat of you.
My gracious Lord, no Tribune hears you speak.
Why it is no matter man, if they did hear
They would not mark me: oh if they did hear
They would not pity me.
Therefore I tell my sorrows bootless to the stones.
Who though they cannot answer my distress,
Yet in some sort they are better then the Tribunes,
For that they will not intercept my tale;
When I doe weep, they humbly at my feet
Receive my tears, and seem to weep with me,
And were they but attired in grave weeds,
Rome could afford no Tribune like to these.
A stone is as soft wax,
Tribunes more hard then stones:
A stone is silent, and offends not,
And Tribunes with their tongues doom men to death.
But wherefore stand thou with thy weapon drawn?
To rescue my two brothers from their death,
For which attempt the Judges have pronounc'st
My everlasting doom of banishment.
O happy man, they have befriended thee:
Why foolish Lucius, dost thou not perceive
That Rome is but a wilderness of Tigers?
Tigers must pray, and Rome affords no prey
But me and and mine: how happy art thou then,
From these devourers to be banished?
But who comes with our brother Marcus here?
Titus, prepare thy noble eyes to weep,
Or if not so, thy noble heart to break:
I bring consuming sorrow to thine age.
Will it consume me? Let me see it then.
This was thy daughter.
Why Marcus so she is.
Aye me this object kills me.
Faint-harted boy, arise and look upon her,
Speak Lauinia, what accursed hand
Hath made thee handles in thy Fathers sight?
What fool hath added water to the Sea?
Or brought a faggot to bright burning Troy?
My grief was at the height before thou came,
And now like Nylus it disdains bounds:
Give me a sword, Isle chop off my hands too,
For they have fought for Rome, and all in vain:
And they have nur'st this woe,
In feeding life:
In bootless prayer have they been held up,
And they have served me to effectless use.
Now all the service I require of them,
Is that the one will help to cut the other:
It is well Lauinia, that thou hast no hands,
For hands to do Rome service, is but vain.
Speak gentle sister, who hath martyred thee?
O that delightful engine of her thoughts,
That blabbed them with such pleasing eloquence,
Is torn from forth that pretty hollow cage,
Where like a sweet mellodius bird it sung,
Sweet varied notes enchanting every ear.
Oh say thou for her,
Who hath done this deed?
Oh thus I found her straying in the Park,
Seeking to hide herself as doth the Dear
That hath received some vnrecuring wound.
It was my Dear,
And he that wounded her,
Hath hurt me more, then had he kilt me dead:
For now I stand as one upon a Rock,
Environed with a wilderness of Sea.
Who marks the waxing tide,
Grow wave by wave,
Expecting ever when some envious surge,
Will in his brinish bowels swallow him.
This way to death my wretched sons are gone:
Here stands my other son, a banished man,
And here my brother weeping at my woes.
But that which gives my soul the greatest spurn,
Is dear Lauinia, dearer then my soul.
Had I but seen thy picture in this plight,
It would have matted me. What shall I doe?
Now I behold thy lively body so?
Thou hast no hands to wipe away thy tears,
Nor tongue to tell me who hath martyred thee:
Thy husband he is dead, and for his death
Thy brothers are condemned, and dead by this.
Look Marcus, ah son Lucius look on her:
When I did name her brothers, then fresh tears
Stood on her cheeks, as doth the honey dew,
Upon a gathred Lilly almost withered.,
Perchance she weeps because they killed her husband,
Perchance because she knows him innocent.
If they did kill thy husband then be joyful,
Because the law hath tan revenge on them.
No, no, they would not doe so foul a deed,
Witness the sorrow that their sister makes.
Gentle Lauinia let me kiss thy lips,
Or make some signs how I may do thee ease:
Shall thy good Uncle, and thy brother Lucius,
And thou and I sit round about some Fountain,
Looking all downwards to behold our cheeks
How they are stained in meadows, yet not dry
With miery slime left on them by a flood:
And in the Fountain shall we gaze so long,
Till the fresh taste be taken from that clearness,
And made a brine pit with our bitter tears?
Or shall we cut away our hands like thine?
Or shall we bite our tongues, and in dumb shows
Pass the remainder of our hateful days?
What shall we doe? Let vs that have our tongues
Plot some devise of further miseries
To make vs wondered at in time to come.
Sweet Father cease your tears, for at your grief
See how my wretched sister sobs and weeps.
Patience dear Niece, good Titus dry thine eyes.
Ah Marcus, Marcus, Brother well I wot,
Thy napkin cannot drink a tear of mine,
For thou poor man hast drowned it with thine own.
Ah my Lauinia I will wipe thy cheeks.
Mark Marcus mark, I understand her signs,
Had she a tongue to speak, now would she say
That to her brother which I said to thee.
His Napkin with her true tears all be wet,
Can do no service on her sorrowful cheeks.
Oh what a sympathy of woe is this!
As far from help as Limbo is from bliss,
Titus Andronicus, my Lord the Emperor,
Sends thee this word, that if thou love thy sons,
Let Marcus, Lucius, or thy self old Titus,
Or any one of you, chop off your hand,
And send it to the King: he for the same,
Will send thee hither both thy sons alive,
And that shall be the ransom for their fault.
Oh gracious Emperor, oh gentle Aaron.
Did ever Raven sing so like a Lark,
That gives sweet tidings of the Suns uprise?
With all my heart, Isle send the Emperor my hand,
Good Iron wilt thou help to chop it off?
Stay Father, for that noble hand of thine,
That hath thrown down so many enemies,
Shall not be sent: my hand will serve the turn,
My youth can better spare my blood then you,
And therefore mine shall save my brothers lives.
Which of your hands hath not defended Rome,
And reared aloft the bloody Battleaxe.
Writing destruction on the enemies Castle?
Oh none of both but are of high desert:
My hand hath bin but idle, let it serve
To ransom my two nephews from their death,
Then have I kept it to a worthy end.
Nay come agree, whose hand shall go along
For fear they die before their pardon come.
My hand shall go.
By heaven it shall not go.
Sirs strive no more, such withered herbs as these
Are meet for plucking up, and therefore mine.
Sweet Father, if I shall be thought thy son,
Let me redeem my brothers both from death.
And for our fathers sake, and mothers care,
Now let me show a brothers love to thee.
Agree between you, I will spare my hand.
Then Isle go fetch an Axe.
But I will use the Axe.
Come hither Aaron, Isle deceive them both,
Lend me thy hand, and I will give thee mine,
If that be called deceit, I will be honest,
And never whilst I live deceive men so:
But Isle deceive you in another sort,
And that you'll say ere half an hour pass.
Now stay you strife, what shall be, is dispatcht:
Good Iron give his Majesty me hand,
Tell him, it was a hand that warded him
From thousand dangers: bid him bury it:
More hath it merited: That let it have.
As for for my sons, say I account of them,
As jewels purchased at an easy price,
And yet dear too, because I bought mine own.
I go Andronicus, and for thy hand,
Look by and by to have thy sons with thee:
Their heads I mean: Oh how this villainy
Doth fat me with the very thoughts of it.
Let fools doe good, and fair men call for grace,
Iron will have his soul black like his face.
O here I lift this one hand up to heaven,
And bow this feeble ruin to the earth,
If any power pities wretched tears,
To that I call: what wilt thou kneel with me?
Doe then dear heart, for heaven shall hear our prayers,
Or with our sighs weal breath the welkin dim,
And stain the Sun with fog as sometime clouds,
When they do hug him in their melting bosoms.
Oh brother speak with possibilities,
And do not break into these deep extremes.
Is not my sorrow deep, having no bottom?
Then be my passions bottomless with them.
But yet let reason govern thy lament.
If there were reason for these miseries,
Then into limits could I bind my woes:
When heaven doth weep, doth not the earth ore flow?
If the winds rage, doth not the Sea wax mad,
Threatening the welkin with his big-swolne face?
And wilt thou have a reason for this coil?
I am the Sea. Hark how her sighs doe flow:
She is the weeping welkin, I the earth:
Then must my Sea be moved with her sighs,
Then must my earth with her continual tears,
Become a deluge: overflowed and drowned:
For why, my bowels cannot hide her woes,
But like a drunkard must I vomit them:
Then give me leave, for losers will have leave,
To ease their stomachs with their bitter tongues,
Worthy Andronicus, ill art thou repaid,
For that good hand thou sentst the Emperor:
Here are the heads of thy two noble sons.
And hears thy hand in scorn to thee sent back:
Thy griefs, their sports: Thy resolution mocked,
That woe is me to think upon thy woes,
More then remembrance of my fathers death.
Now let hot Aetna cool in Cicilie,
And be my heart an euer-burning hell:
These miseries are more then may be borne.
To weep with them that weep, doth ease some deal,
But sorrow flouted at, is double death.
Ah that this sight should make so deep a wound,
And yet detested life not shrink thereat:
That ever death should let life bear his name,
Where life hath no more interest but to breath.
Alas poor hart that kiss is comfortless,
As frozen water to a starved snake.
When will this fearful slumber have an end?
Now farewell flattery, die Andronicus,
Thou dost not slumber, see thy two sons heads,
Thy warlike hands, thy mangled daughter here:
Thy other banished sons with this dear fight
Struck pale and bloodless, and thy brother I,
Even like a stony Image, cold and numme.
Ah now no more will I control my griefs,
Rent off thy silver hair, thy other hand
Gnawing with thy teeth, and be this dismal sight
The closing up of our most wretched eyes:
Now is a time to storm, why art thou still?
Ha, ha, ha,
Why dost thou laugh? it fits not with this hour.
Why I have not another tear to shed:
Besides, this sorrow is an enemy,
And would usurp upon my watery eyes,
And make them blind with tributary tears.
Then which way shall I find Revenges Cave?
For these two heads doe seem to speak to me,
And threat me, I shall never come to bliss,
Till all these mischiefs be returned again,
Even in their throats that have committed them.
Come let me see what task I have to doe,
You heavy people, circle me about,
That I may turn me to each one of you,
And swear unto my soul to right your wrongs.
The vow is made, come Brother take a head,
And in this hand the other will I bear.
And Lauinia thou shalt be employed in these things:
Bear thou my hand sweet wench between thy teeth:
As for thee boy, go get thee from my sight,
Thou art an Exile, and thou must not stay,
Hie to the Gothes, and raise an army there,
And if you love me, as I think you doe,
Let's kiss and part, for we have much to doe.
Farewell Andronicus my noble Father:
The woefullest man that ever lived in Rome:
Farewell proud Rome, till Lucius come again,
He loves his pledges dearer then his life:
Farewell Lauinia my noble sister,
O would thou were as thou to fore hast been,
But now, nor Lucius nor Lauinia lives
But in oblivion and hateful griefs:
If Lucius live, he will requite your wrongs,
And make proud Saturnine and his Empress
Beg at the gates likes Tarquin and his Queen.
Now will I to the Gothes and raise a power,
To be revenged on Rome and Saturnine.
So, so, now sit, and look you eat no more
Then will preserve just so much strength in vs
As will revenge these bitter woes of ours.
Marcus vnknit that sorrow-wreathen knot:
Thy Niece and I (poor Creatures) want our hands
And cannot passionate our tenfold grief,
With folded Arms. This poor right hand of mine,
Is left to tirranize upon my breast.
Who when my hart all mad with misery,
Beats in this hollow prison of my flesh,
Then thus I thumpe it down.
Thou Map of woe, that thus dost talk in signs,
When thy poor hart beats without ragious beating,
Thou can not strike it thus to make it still?
Wound it with sighing girl, kill it with groans:
Or get some little knife between thy teeth,
And just against thy hart make thou a hole,
That all the tears that thy poor eyes let fall
May run into that sink, and soaking in,
Drown the lamenting fool, in Sea salt tears.
Fie brother fie, teach her not thus to lay
Such violent hands upon her tender life.
How now! Has sorrow made thee dote already?
Why Marcus, no man should be mad but I:
What violent hands can she lay on her life:
Ah, wherefore dost thou urge the name of hands,
To bid Aeneas tell the tale twice ore
How Troy was burnt, and he made miserable?
O handle not the theme, to talk of hands,
Least we remember still that we have none,
Fie, fie how Frantiquely I square my talk
As if we should forget we had no hands:
If Marcus did not name the word of hands.
Come, lets fall too, and gentle girl eat this,
Here is no drink? Hark Marcus what she says,
I can interpret all her martyred signs,
She says, she drinks no other drink but tears
Braved with her sorrow: mesh'd upon her cheeks,
Speechless complaynet, I will learn thy thought:
In thy dumb action, will I be as perfect
As begging Hermits in their holy prayers.
Thou shalt not sigh nor hold thy stumps to heaven,
Nor wink, nor nod, nor kneel, nor make a sign,
But I (of these) will wrest an Alphabet,
And by still practice, learn to know thy meaning.
Good grandsire leave these bitter deep laments,
Make my Aunt merry, with some pleasing tale.
Alas, the tender boy in passion moved,
Doth weep to see his grandsires heaviness.
Peace tender Sapling, thou art made of tears,
And tears will quickly melt thy life away.
What doest thou strike at Marcus with knife.
At that that I have killed my Lord, a Flies
Out on the murderour: thou kil'st my hart,
Mine eyes cloi'd with view of Tirranie:
A deed of death done on the Innocent
Becomes not Titus broher: get thee gone,
I see thou art not for my company.
Alas (my Lord) I have but kilt a fly.
But? How: if that Fly had a father and mother?
How would he hang his slender gilded wings
And buzz lamenting doings in the air,
Poor harmless Fly,
That with his pretty buzzing melody,
Came here to make vs merry,
And thou hast killed him.
Pardon me sir,
It was a black ill-favoured Fly,
Like to the Empress Moore, therefore I kilt him.
O, o, o,
Then pardon me for reprehending thee,
For thou hast done a Charitable deed:
Give me thy knife, I will insult on him,
Flattering my selfes, as if it were the Moore,
Come hither purposely to poison me.
There's for thy self, and thats for Tamira: Ah sir,
Yet I think we are not brought so low,
But that between vs, we can kill a Fly,
That comes in likeness of a Cole-blacke Moore.
Alas poor man, grief he's so wrought on him,
He takes false shadows, for true substances.
Come, take away: Lauinia, go with me,
Isle to thy closet, and go read with thee
Sad stories, chanced in the times of old.
Come boy, and go with me, thy sight is young,
And thou shalt read, when mine begin to dazzle.
Help Grandsier help, my Aunt Lauinia,
Follows me every where I know not why.
Good Uncle Marcus see how swift she comes,
Alas sweet Aunt, I know not what you mean.
Stand by me Lucius, doe not fear thy Aunt.
She loves thee boy too well to doe thee harm
I when my father was in Rome she did.
What means my Niece Lauinia by these signs?
Fear not Lucius, somewhat doth she mean:
See Lucius see, how much she makes of thee:
Some whether would she have thee go with her.
Ah boy, Cornelia never with more care
Read to her sons, then she hath read to thee,
Sweet Poetry, and Tullies Orator:
Can thou not guess wherefore she plies thee thus?
My Lord I know not I, nor can I guess,
Unless some fit or frenzy do possess her:
For I have heard my Grandsier say full oft,
Extremity of griefs would make men mad.
And I have read that Hecubae of Troy,
Ran mad through sorrow, that made me to fear,
Although my Lord, I know my noble Aunt,
Loves me as dear as ere my mother did,
And would not but in fury fright my youth,
Which made me down to throw my books, and fly
Causeless perhaps, but pardon me sweet Aunt,
And Madam, if my Uncle Marcus go,
I will most willingly attend your Ladyship.
Lucius I will.
How now Lauinia, Marcus what means this?
Some book there is that she desires to see,
Which is it girl of these? Open them boy,
But thou art deeper read and better skilled,
Come and take choice of all my Library,
And so beguile thy sorrow, till the heavens
Reveal the damned contriver of this deed.
What book?
Why lifts she up her arms in sequence thus?
I think she means that there was more then one
Confederate in the fact, I more there was:
Or else to heaven she heaves them to revenge.
Lucius what book is that she tosses so?
Grandsier it is Ouids Metamorphosis,
My mother gave it me.
For love of her that's gone,
Perhahs she could it from among the rest.
Soft, so busily she turns the leaves,
Help her, what would she find? Lauinia shall I read?
This is the tragic tale of Philomel?
And treats of Tereus treason and his rape,
And rape I fear was root of thine annoy.
See brother see, note how she quotes the leaves
Lauinia, were thou thus surprised sweet girl,
Ravished and wronged as Philomela was?
Forced in the ruthless, vast, and gloomy woods?
See, see, I such a place there is where we did hunt,
(O had we never, never hunted there)
Patterned by that the Poet here describes,
By nature made for murders and for rapes.
O why should nature build so foul a den,
Unless the Gods delight in tragedies?
Give signs sweet girl, for here are none but friends
What Romaine Lord it was durst do the deed?
Or slunk not Saturnine, as Tarquin ersts,
That left the Camp to sin in Lucrece bed.
Sit down sweet Niece, brother sit down by me,
Apollo, Pallas, Jove, or Mercury,
Inspire me that I may this treason find.
My Lord look here, look here Lauinia.
This sandy plot is plain, guide if thou can
This after me, I have writ my name,
Without the help of any hand at all.
Cursed be that hart that force vs to that shift:
Write thou good Niece, and here display at last,
What God will have discovered for revenge,
Heaven guide thy pen to print thy sorrows plain,
That we may know the Traitors and the truth.
Oh doe ye read my Lord what she hath writs?
Stuprum, Chiron, Demetrius.
What, what, the lustful sons of Tomorrow,
Performers of this heinous bloody deed?
Magni Dominator poli,
Tam lentus audis scelera, tam lentus vides?
Oh calm thee gentle Lord: Although I know
There is enough written upon this earth,
To stir a mutiny in the mildest thoughts,
And arm the minds of infants to exclaims.
My Lord kneel down with me: Lauinia kneel,
And kneel sweet boy, the Romaine Hectors hope,
And swear with me, as with the woeful Fear
And father of that chaste dishonoured Dame,
Lord Iunius Brutus swear for Lucrece rape,
That we will prosecute (by good advise)
Mortal revenge upon these traitorous Gothes,
And see their blood, or die with this reproach.
Tic sure enough, and you knew how.
But if you hunt these Beare-whelpes, then beware
The Dam will wake, and if she wind you once,
Shoe's with the Lyon deeply still in league.
And Iulls him whilst she palyeth on her back,
And when he sleeps will she do what she list.
You are a young huntsman Marcus, let it alone:
And come, I will go get a leaf of brass,
And with a Gad of steel will write these words,
And lay it by: the angry Northern wind
Will blow these sands like Sibels leaves abroad,
And wheres your lesson then. Boy what say you?
I say my Lord, that if I were a man,
Their mothers bed-chamber should not be safe,
For these bad bond-men to the yoke of Rome.
I that's my boy, thy father hath full oft,
For his ungrateful country done the like.
And Uncle so will I, and if I live.
Come go with me into mine Armoury,
Lucius Isle fit thee, and withal, my boy
Shall carry from me to the Empress sons,
Presents that I intend to send them both,
Come, come, thou'st do thy message, wilt thou not?
I with my dagger in their bosoms Grandsire:
No boy not so, Isle teach thee another course,
Lauinia come, Marcus look to my house,
Lucius and Isle go brave it at the Court,
I marry will we sir, and weal be waited on.
O heavens! Can you hear a good man groan
And not relent, or not compassion him?
Marcus attend him in his ecstasy,
That hath more scars of sorrow in his heart,
Then foe-mens marks upon his battered shield,
But yet so just, that he will not revenge,
Revenge the heavens for old Andronicus.
Demetrius hears the son of Lucius,
He hath some message to deliver vs.
I some mad message from his mad Grandfather.
My Lords, with all the humbleness I may,
I greet your honours from Andronicus,
And pray the Roman Gods confound you both.
Gramercy lovely Lucius, what's the news?
For villanie's marked with rape. May it please you,
My Grandsire well advised hath sent by me,
The goodliest weapons of his Armoury,
To gratify your honourable youth,
The hope of Rome, for so he bad me say:
And so I do and with his gifts present
Your Lordships, when ever you have need,
You may be armed and appointed well,
And so I leave you both: like bloody villains.
What's here? a scroll, &amp; written round about?
Let's see.
Integer vitae scelerisque purus, non egit maury iaculis nec are∣cus.
O it is a verse in Horace, I know it well.
I read it in the Grammar long ago.
I just, a verse in Horace: right, you have it,
Now what a thing it is to be an Ass?
Heir's no sound jest, the old man hath found their guilt,
And sends the weapons wrapped about with lines,
That wound (beyond their feeling) to the quick:
But were our witty Empress well a foot,
She would applaud Andronicus conceit:
But let her rest, in her unrest a while.
And now young Lords, wa'st not a happy star
Led vs to Rome strangers, and more then so;
Captives, to be advanced to this height?
It did me good before the Palace gate,
To brave the Tribune in his brothers hearing.
But me more good, to see so great a Lord
Basely insinuate, and send vs gifts.
Had he not reason Lord Demetrius?
Did you not use his daughter very friendly?
I would we had a thousand Roman Dames
At such a bay, by turn to serve our lust.
A charitable wish, and full of love.
Here lack's but you mother for to say, Amen.
And that would she for twenty thousand more.
Come, let vs go, and pray to all the Gods
For our beloved mother in her pains.
Pray to the devils, the gods have given vs over.
Why do the Emperors trumpets flourish thus?
Belike for joy the Emperor hath a son.
Soft, who comes here?
Good morrow Lords:
O tell me, did you see Aaron the Moore?
Well, more or less, or ne'er a whit at all,
Here Aaron is, and what with Aaron now?
Oh gentle Aaron, we are all undone,
Now help, or woe betide thee evermore.
Why, what a caterwauling dost thou keep?
What dost thou wrap and fumble in thine arms?
O that which I would hide from heavens eye,
Our Empress shame, and stately Romes disgrace,
She is delivered Lords, she is delivered.
To whom?
I mean she is brought a bed?
Well God give her good rest.
What hath he sent her?
A devil.
Why then she is the Devils Dam: a joyful issue.
A ioylesse, dismal, black &amp;, sorrowful issue,
Here is the babe as loathsome as a toad,
Amongst the fairest breeders of our clime,
The Empress sends it thee, thy stamp, thy seal,
And bids thee christen it with thy daggers point.
Out you whore, is black so base a hue?
Sweet blowse, you are a beauteous blossom sure.
Villain what hast thou done?
That which thou can not undo.
Thou hast undone our mother.
And therein hellish dog, thou hast undone,
Woe to her chance, and damned her loathed choice,
Accurse the off-spring of so foul a fiend.
It shall not live.
It shall not die.
Aaron it must, the mother wills it so.
What, must it Nurse? Then let no man but I
Doe execution on my flesh and blood.
Isle broach the Tadpole on my Rapiers point:
Nurse give it me, my sword shall soon dispatch it.
Sooner this sword shall plough thy bowels up.
Stay murderous villains, will you kill your brother?
Now by the burning Tapers of the sky,
That sh'one so brightly when this Boy was got,
He dies upon my Semitars sharpe point,
That touches this my first borne son and heir.
I tell you young-lings, not Enceladus
With all his threatening band of Typhons brood,
Nor great Alcides, nor the God of war,
Shall cease this prey out of his fathers hands:
What, what, ye sanguine shallow hearted Boys,
Ye white-limb'd walls, ye Ale-house painted signs,
Cole-blacke is better then another hue,
In that it scorns to bear another hue:
For all the water in the Ocean,
Can never turn the Swans black legs to white,
Although she lave them hourly in the flood:
Tell the Empress from me, I am of age
To keep mine own, excuse it how she can.
Wilt thou betray thy noble mistress thus?
My mistress is my mistress: this my self,
The vigour, and the picture of my youth:
This, before all the world do I prefer,
This manger all the world will I keep safe,
Or some of you shall smoke for it in Rome.
By this our mother is for ever shamed.
Rome will despise her for this foul escape.
The Emperor in his rage will doom her death.
I blush to think upon this ignominy.
Why ther's the privilege your beauty bears:
Fie treacherous hue, that will betray with blushing
The close enacts and counsels of the hart:
Heir's a young Lad framed of another leer,
Look how the black slave smiles upon the father;
As who should say, old Lad I am thine own.
He is your brother Lords, sensibly fed
Of that self blood that first gave life to you,
And from that womb where you imprisoned were
He is enfranchised and come to light:
Nay he is your brother by the surer side,
Although my seal be stamped in his face.
Aaron what shall I say unto the Empress?
Advise thee Aaron, what is to be done,
And we will all subscribe to thy advise:
Save thou the child, so we may all be safe.
Then sit we down and let vs all consult.
My son and I will have the wind of you:
Keep there, now talk at pleasure of your safety.
How many women saw this child of his?
Why so brave Lords, when we join in league
I am a Lamb: but if you brave the Moore,
The chafed Bore, the mountain Lioness,
The Ocean swells not so at Aaron storms:
But say again, how many saw the child?
Cornelia, the midwife, and my self,
And none else but the delivered Empress.
The Empress, the Midwife, and your self,
Two may keep counsel, when the the third's away:
Go to the Empress, tell her this I said,
Week, week, so cries a Pig prepared to the spit.
What mean thou Aaron?
Wherefore did thou this?
O Lord sir, it is a deed of policy?
Shall she live to betray this guilt of or's:
A long tongued babbling Gossip? No Lords no:
And now be it known to you my full intent.
Not far, one Muliteus my Country-man
His wife but yesternight was brought to bed,
His child is like to her, fair as you are:
Go pack with him, and give the mother gold,
And tell them both the circumstance of all,
And how by this their Child shall be aduaunc'd,
And be received for the Emperors heir,
And substituted in the place of mine,
To calm this tempest whirling in the Court,
And let the Emperor dandle him for his own.
Hark ye Lords, ye see I have given her physic,
And you must needs bestow her funeral,
The fields are near, and you are gallant Grooms:
This done, see that you take no longer days
But send the Midwife presently to me.
The Midwife and the Nurse well made away,
Then let the Ladies tattle what they please.
Aaron I see thou wilt not ttust the ayre with se¦crets.
For this care of Tomorrow,
Her self, and hers are highly bound to thee.
Now to the Gothes, as swift as Swallow flies,
There to dispose this treasure in mine arms,
And secretly to greet the Empress friends:
Come on you thick-lipt-slaue, Isle bear you hence,
For it is you that puts vs to our shifts:
Isle make you feed on berries, and on roots,
And feed on curds and whey, and suck the Goat,
And cabin in a Cave, and bring you up
To be a warrior, and command a Camp.
Come Marcus, come, kinsmen this is the way.
Sir Boy let me see your Archery,
Look ye draw home enough, and it is there straight:
Terrace Astrea reliquit, be you remembered Marcus.
She's gone, she's fled, sirs take you to your tools,
You Cousins shall go sound the Ocean:
And cast your nets, happily you may find her in the Sea,
Yet ther's as little justice as at Land:
No Publius and Sempronius, you must doe it,
It is you must dig with Mattock, and with Spade,
And pierce the inmost Center of the earth:
Then when you come to Platoes Region,
I pray you deliver him this petition,
Tell him it is for justice, and for aide,
And that it comes from old Andronicus,
Shaken with sorrows in ungrateful Rome,
Ah Rome! Well, well, I made thee miserable,
What time I threw the peoples suffrages
On him that thus doth tyrannise ore me.
Go get you gone, and pray be careful all,
And leave you not a man of war unsearched,
This wicked Emperor may have shipped her hence,
And kinsmen then we may go pipe for justice.
O Publius is not this a heavy case
To see thy Noble Uncle thus distract?
Therefore my Lords it highly vs concerns,
By day and night to attend him carefully:
And feed his humour kindly as we may,
Till time beget some careful remedy.
Kinsmen, his sorrows are past remedy.
Join with the Gothes, and with revengeful war,
Take wreak on Rome for this ingratitude,
And vengeance on the Traitor Saturnine.
Publius how now? how now my Masters?
What have you met with her?
No my good Lord, but Pluto sends you word,
If you will have revenge from hell you shall,
Marry for justice she is so employed,
He thinks with Jove in heaven, or some where else:
So that perforce you must needs stay a time.
He doth me wrong to feed me with delays,
Isle dive into the burning Lake below,
And pull her out of Acaron by the heals.
Marcus we are but shrubs, no Cedars we,
No big-bon'd-men, framed of the Cyclops size,
But mettle Marcus, steel to the very back,
Yet wrung with wrongs more then our back can bear:
And sith there's no justice in earth nor hell,
We will solicit heaven, and move the Gods
To send down Justice for to wreak our wongs:
Come to this gear, you are a good Archer Marcus.
Ad Iouem, that's for you: here ad Appollonem,
Ad Martem, that's for my self,
Here Boy to Pallas, here to Mercury,
To Saturnine, to Caius, not to Saturnine,
You were as good to shoot against the wind.
Too it Boy, Marcus loose when I bid:
Of my word, I have written to effect,
Ther's not a God left vnsollicited.
Kinsmen, shoot all your shafts into the Court,
We will afflict the Emperor in his pride.
Now Masters draw, Oh well said Lucius:
Good Boy in Virgos lap, give it Pallas.
My Lord, I aim a Mile beyond the Moon,
Your letter is with Iupiter by this.
Ha, ha, Publius, Publius, what hast thou done?
See, see, thou hast, shot off one of Taurus horns.
This was the sport my Lord, when Publius shot,
The Bull being galled, gave Aries such a knock,
That down fell both the Rams horns in the Court,
And who should find them but the Empress villain:
She laughed, and told the Moore he should not choose
But give them to his Moister for a present.
Why there it goes, God give your Lordship joy.
News, news, from heaven,
Marcus the post is come.
Sirrah, what tidings? have you any letters?
Shall I have Justice, what says Iupiter?
Ho the Iibbetmaker, he says that he hath ta∣ken them down again, for the man must not be hanged till the next week.
But what says Iupiter I ask thee?
Alas sir I know not Iupiter:
I never drank with him in all my life.
Why villain art not thou the Carrier?
I of my Pigeons sir, nothing else.
Why, did thou not come from heaven?
From heaven? Alas sir, I never came there, God forbid I should be so bold, to press to heaven in my young days. Why I am going with my pigeons to the Tribunal Plebs, to take up a matter of brawl, betwixt my Uncle, and one of the Imperials men.
Why sir, that is as fit as can be to serve for your Oration, and let him deliver the Pigeons to the Emperor from you.
Tell me, can you deliver an Oration to the Em∣perour with a Grace?
Nay truly sir, I could never say grace in all my life.
Sirrah come hither, make no more ado,
But give your Pigeons to the Emperor,
By me thou shalt have Justice at his hands.
Hold, hold, mean while her's money for thy charges.
Give me pen and ink.
Sirrah, can you with a Grace deliver a Supplication?
I sir
Then here is a Supplication for you, and when you come to him, at the first approach you must kneel, then kiss his foot, then deliver up your Pigeons, and then look for your reward. Isle be at hand sir, see you do it bravely.
I warrant you sir, let me alone.
Sirrha hast thou a knife? Come let me see it.
Here Marcus, fold it in the Oration,
For thou hast made it like an humble Suppliant:
And when thou hast given it the Emperor,
Knock at my door, and tell me what he says.
God be with you sir, I will.
Come Marcus let vs go, Publius follow me.
Why Lords,
What wrongs are these? was ever seen
An Emperor in Rome thus overborne,
Troubled, Confronted thus, and for the extent
Of eg all justice, used in such contempt?
My Lords, you know the mightfull Gods,
(How ever these disturbers of our peace
Buzz in the peoples ears) there nought hath past,
But even with law against the wilful Sons
Of old Andronicus. And what and if
His sorrows have so overwhelmed his wits,
Shall we be thus afflicted in his wreakes,
His fits, his frenzy, and his bitterness?
And now he writes to heaven for his redress.
See, hears to Jove, and this to Mercury,
This to Apollo, this to the God of war:
Sweet scrolls to fly about the streets of Rome:
What's this but Libelling against the Senate,
And blazoning our Injustice every where?
A goodly humour, is it not my Lords?
As who would say, in Rome no Justice were.
But if I live, his fained ecstasies
Shall be no shelter to these outrages:
But he and his shall know, that Justice lives
In Saturninus health; whom if he sleep,
He will so awake, as he in fury shall
Cut off the proud'st Conspirator that lives.
My gracious Lord, my lovely Saturnine,
Lord of my life, Commander of my thoughts,
Calm thee, and bear the faults of Titus age,
The effects of sorrow for his valiant Sons,
Whose loss hath pier'st him deep, and scared his heart;
And rather comfort his distressed plight,
Then prosecute the meanest or the best
For these contempts. Why thus it shall become
High wetted Tomorrow to gloss with all:
But Titus, I have touched thee to the quick,
Thy life blood out: If Aaron now be wise,
Then is all safe, the Anchor's in the Port.
How now good fellow, would thou speak with vs?
Yea forsooth, and your Mistership be Imperial.
Empress I am, but yonder sits the Emperor.
It is he; God &amp; Saint Stephen give you good den;
I have brought you a Letter, &amp; a couple of Pigeons here.
Go take him away, and hang him presently.
How much money must I have?
Come sirrah you must be hanged.
Hanged? ber Lady, then I have brought up a neck to a fair end.
Despiteful and intolerable wrongs,
Shall I endure this monstrous villainy?
I know from whence this same devise proceeds:
May this be borne? As if his traytrous Sons,
That died by law for murder of our Brother,
Have by my means been butchered wrongfully?
Go drag the villain hither by the hair,
Nor Age, nor Honour, shall shape privilege:
For this proud mock, Isle be thy slaughter man:
Sly frantic wretch, that help to make me great,
In hope thy self should govern Rome and me.
What news with thee Emillius?
Arm my Lords, Rome never had more cause,
The Gothes have gathered head, and with a power
Of high resolved men, bent to the spoil
They hither march amain, under conduct
Of Lucius, Son to old Andronicus:
Who threats in course of this revenge to do
As much as ever Coriolanus did.
Is warlike Lucius General of the Gothes?
These tidings nip me, and I hang the head
As flowers with frost, or grass beat down with storms:
I, now begins our sorrows to approach,
It is he the common people love so much,
My self hath often heard them say,
(When I have walked like a private man)
That Lucius banishment was wrongfully,
And they have wished that Lucius were their Emperor.
Why should you fear? Is not our City strong?
I, but the Citizens favour Lucius,
And will revolt from me, to succour him.
King, be thy thoughts Imperious like thy name.
Is the Sun dim'd, that Gnats do fly in it?
The Eagle suffers little Birds to sing,
And is not careful what they mean thereby,
Knowing that with the shadow of his wings,
He can at pleasure stint their melody.
Even so may thou, the giddy men of Rome,
Then cheer thy spirit, for know thou Emperor,
I will enchant the old Andronicus,
With words more sweet, and yet more dangerous
Then baits to fish, or honey stalks to sheep,
When as the one is wounded with the bait,
The other rotted with delicious food.
But he will not entreat his Son for vs.
If Tomorrow entreat him, then he will,
For I can smooth and fill his aged ear,
With golden promises, that were his heart
Almost Impregnable, his old ears deaf,
Yet should both ear and heart obey my tongue.
Go thou before to our Ambassador,
Say, that the Emperor requests a parley
Of warlike Lucius, and appoint the meeting.
Emillius do this message Honourably,
And if he stand in Hostage for his safety,
Bid him demand what pledge will please him best.
Your bidding shall I do effectually.
Now will I to that old Andronicus,
And temper him with all the Art I have,
To pluck proud Lucius from the warlike Gothes.
And now sweet Emperor be blithe again,
And bury all thy fear in my devises.
Then go successantly and plead for him.
Approved warriors, and my faithful Friends,
I have received Letters from great Rome,
Which signifies what hate they bear their Emperor,
And how desirous of our sight they are.
Therefore great Lords, be as your Titles witness,
Imperious and impatient of your wrongs,
And wherein Rome hath done you any scathe,
Let him make treble satisfaction.
Brave slip, sprung from the Great Andronicus,
Whose name was once our terror, now our comfort,
Whose high exploits, and honourable Deeds,
Ungrateful Rome requites with foul contempt:
Behold in vs, weal follow where thou lead,
Like stinging Bees in hottest Summers day,
Led by their Moister to the flowered fields,
And be avenged on cursed Tomorrow:
And as he saith, so say we all with him.
I humbly thank him, and I thank you all.
But who comes here, led by a lusty Goth?
Renowned Lucius, from our troops I strayed,
To gaze upon a ruinous Monastery,
And as I earnestly did fix mine eye
Upon the wasted building, suddenly
I heard a child cry underneath a wall:
I made unto the noise, when soon I heard,
The crying babe controlled with this discourse:
Peace Tawny slave, half me, and half thy Dam,
Did not thy Hue bewray whose brat thou art?
Had nature lent thee, but thy Mothers look,
Villain thou might have been an Emperor.
But where the Bull and Cow are both milk-white,
They never do beget a cole-blacke-Calfe:
Peace, villain peace, even thus he rates the babe,
For I must bear thee to a trusty Goth,
Who when he knows thou art the Empress babe,
Will hold thee dearly for thy Mothers sake.
With this, my weapon drawn I rushed upon him,
Surprised him suddenly, and brought him hither
To use, as you think neeedefull of the man.
Oh worthy Goth, this is the incarnate devil,
That robed Andronicus of his good hand:
This is the Pearl that pleased your Empress eye,
And heere's the Base Fruit of his burning lust.
Say wall-ey'd slave, whether would thou convey
This growing Image of thy fiend-like face?
Why dost not speak? what deaf? Not a word?
A halter Soldiers, hang him on this Tree,
And by his side his Fruit of Bastardy.
Touch not the Boy, he is of Royal blood.
Too like the Sire for ever being good.
First hang the Child that he may see it sprall,
A sight to vex the Fathers soul withal.
Get me a Ladder Lucius, save the Child,
And bear it from me to the Empress:
If thou do this, Isle show thee wondrous things,
That highly may advantage thee to hear;
If thou wilt not, befall what may befall,
Isle speak no more: but vengeance rot you all.
Say on, and if it please me which thou speak,
Thy child shall live, and I will see it Nourished.
And if it please thee? why assure thee Lucius,
Twill vex thy soul to hear what I shall speak:
For I must talk of Murders, Rapes, and Massacres,
Acts of Blacke-night, abominable Deeds,
Complots of Mischief, Treason, Villainies
Ruthful to hear, yet piteously preform'd,
And this shall all be buried by my death,
Unless thou swear to me my Child shall live.
Tell on thy mind,
I say thy Child shall live.
Swear that he shall, and then I will begin.
Who should I swear by,
Thou believe no God,
That granted, how can thou believe an oath?
What if I do not, as indeed I do not,
Yet for I know thou art Religious,
And hast a thing within thee, called Conscience,
With twenty Popish tricks and Ceremonies,
Which I have seen thee careful to observe:
Therefore I urge thy oath, for that I know
An Idiot holds his Bauble for a God,
And keeps the oath which by that God he swears,
To that Isle urge him: therefore thou shalt vow
By that same God, what God so ere it be
That thou adore, and hast in reverence,
To save my Boy, to nourish and bring him up,
Ore else I will discover nought to thee.
Even by my God I swear to to thee I will.
First know thou,
I be got him on the Empress.
Oh most Insatiate luxurious woman!
Tut Lucius, this was but a deed of Charity,
To that which thou shalt hear of me anon,
It was her two Sons that murdered Bassianus,
They cut thy Sisters tongue, and ravished her,
And cut her hands off, and trimmed her as thou saw.
Oh detestable villain!
Call thou that Trimming?
Why she was washed, and cut, and trimmed,
And it was trim sport for them that had the doing of it.
Oh barbarous beastly villains like thy self!
Indeed, I was their Tutor to instruct them.
That Codding spirit had they from their Mother,
As sure a Card as ever won the Set:
That bloody mind I think they learned of me,
As true a Dog as ever fought at head.
Well, let my Deeds be witness of my worth:
I trained thy Brethren to that guileful Hole,
Where the dead Corps of Bassianus lay:
I wrote the Letter, that thy Father found,
And hid the Gold within the Letter mentioned.
Confederate with the Queen, and her two Sons,
And what not done, that thou hast cause to rue,
Wherein I had no stroke of Mischief in it.
I played the Cheater for thy Fathers hand,
And when I had it, drew my self apart,
And almost broke my heart with extreme laughter.
I pried me through the Crevice of a Wall,
When for his hand, he had his two Sons heads,
Beheld his tears, and laughed so heartily,
That both mine eyes were rainy like to his:
And when I told the Empress of this sport,
She sounded almost at my pleasing tale,
And for my tidings, gave me twenty kisses.
What can thou say all this, and never blush?
I, like a black Dog, as the saying is.
Art thou not sorry for these heinous deeds?
I, that I had not done a thousand more:
Even now I curse the day, and yet I think
Few come within few compass of my curse,
Wherein I did not some Notorious ill,
As kill a man, or else devise his death,
Ravish a Maid, or plot the way to do it,
Accuse some Innocent, and forswear my self,
Set deadly Enmity between two Friends,
Make poor men's Cattle break their necks,
Set fire on Barnes and Haystackes in the night,
And bid the Owners quench them with the tears:
Oft have I dug up dead men from their graves,
And set them upright at their dear Friends door,
Even when their sorrows almost was forgot,
And on their skins, as on the Bark of Trees,
Have with my knife carved in Romaine Letters,
Let not your sorrow die, though I am dead.
Tut, I have done a thousand dreadful things
As willingly, as one would kill a Fly,
And nothing grieves me heartily indeed,
But that I cannot doe ten thousand more.
Bring down the devil, for he must not die
So sweet a death as hanging presently.
If there be devils, would I were a devil,
To live and burn in everlasting fire,
So I might have your company in hell,
But to torment you with my bitter tongue.
Sirs stop his mouth, &amp; let him speak no more.
My Lord, there is a Messenger from Rome
Desires to be admitted to your presence.
Let him come near.
Welcome Emillius, what the news from Rome?
Lord Lucius, and you Princes of the Gothes,
The Romaine Emperor greetes you all by me,
And for he understands you are in Arms,
He craves a parley at your Fathers house
Willing you to demand your Hostages,
And they shall be immediately delivered.
What says our General?
Emillius, let the Emperor give his pledges
Unto my Father, and my Uncle Marcus,
And we will come I march away.
Thus in this strange and sad Habilliament,
I will encounter with Andronicus,
And say, I am Revenge sent from below,
To join with him and right his heinous wrongs:
Knock at his study where they say he keeps,
To ruminate strange plots of dire Revenge,
Tell him Revenge is come to join with him,
And work confusion on his Enemies.
Who doth molest my Contemplation?
Is it your trick to make me op the door,
That so my sad decrees may fly away,
And all my study be, to no effect?
You are deceived, for what I mean to do,
See here in bloody lines I have set down:
And what is written shall be executed.
Titus, I am come to talk with thee,
No not a word: how can I grace my talk,
Wanting a hand to give it action,
Thou hast the odds of me, therefore no more.
If thou did know me,
Thou would talk with me.
I am not mad, I know thee well enough,
Witness this wretched stump,
Witness these crimson lines,
Witness these Trenches made by grief and care,
Witness the trying day, and heavy night,
Witness all sorrow, that I know thee well
For our proud Empress, Mighty Tomorrow:
Is not thy coming for my other hand?
Know thou sad man, I am not Tomorrow,
She is thy Enemy, and I thy Friend,
I am Revenge sent from the infernal Kingdom,
To ease the gnawing Vulture of the mind,
By working wreakful vengeance on my Foes:
Come down and welcome me to this worlds light,
Confer with me of Murder and of Death,
Ther's not a hollow Cave or lurking place,
No Vast obscurity, or Misty vale,
Where bloody Murder or detested Rape,
Can couch for fear, but I will find them out,
And in their ears tell them my dreadful name,
Revenge, which makes the foul offenders quake.
Art thou Revenge? and art thou sent to me,
To be a torment to mine Enemies?
I am, therefore come down and welcome me.
Doe me some service ere I come to thee:
Lo by thy side where Rape and Murder stands,
Now give some surance that thou art Revenge,
Stab them, or tear them on thy Chariot wheels,
And then Isle come and be thy Waggoner,
And whirl along with thee about the Globes.
Provide thee two proper Palfries, as black as Jet,
To hale thy vengeful Waggon swift away,
And find out Murder in their guilty cares.
And when thy Car is laden with their heads,
I will dismount, and by the Waggon wheel,
Trot like a Servile footman all day long,
Even from Eptons rising in the East,
Until his very downfall in the Sea.
And day by day Isle do this heavy task,
So thou destroy Rapine and Murder there.
These are my Ministers, and come with me.
Are them thy Ministers, what are they called?
Rape and Murder, therefore called so,
Cause they take vengeance of such kind of men.
Good Lord how like the Empress Son? they are,
And you the Empress: But we worldly men,
Have miserable mad mistaking eyes:
Oh sweet Revenge, now do I come to thee,
And if one arms embrace will content thee,
I will embrace thee in it by and by.
This closing with him, fits his Lunacy,
What ere I forge to feed his brainsick fits,
Do you uphold, and maintain in your speeches,
For now he firmly takes me for Revenge,
And being Credulous in this mad thought,
Isle make him send for Lucius his Son,
And whilst I at a Banquet hold him sure,
Isle find some cunning practise out of hand
To scatter and disperse the giddle Gothes,
Or at the least make them his Enemies:
See here he comes, and I must play my theme.
Long have I been forlorn, and all for thee,
Welcome dread Fury to my woofull house,
Rapine and Murder, you are welcome too,
How like the Empress and her Sons you are.
Well are you fitted, had you but a Moore,
Could not all hell afford you such a devil?
For well I wot the Empress never wags;
But in her company there is a Moore.
And would you represent our Queen aright
It were convenient you had such a devil:
But welcome as you are, what shall we doe?
What would thou have vs doe Andronicus?
Show me a Murderer, Isle deal with him.
Show me a Villain that hath done a Rape,
And I am sent to be revenged on him.
Show me a thousand that have done thee wrong,
And Isle be revenged on them all.
Look round about the wicked streets of Rome,
And when thou find a man that's like thy self,
Good Murder stab him, hoe's a Murderer.
Go thou with him, and when it is thy hap
To find another that is like to thee,
Good Rapine stab him, he is a Ravisher.
Go thou with them, and in the Emperors Court,
There is a Queen attended by a Moore,
Well moist thou know her by thy own proportion,
For up and down she doth resemble thee.
I pray thee doe on them some violent death,
They have been violent to me and mine.
Well hast thou lesson'd vs, this shall we do.
But would it please thee good Andronicus,
To send for Lucius thy thrice Valiant Son,
Who leads towards Rome a Band of Warlike Gothes,
And bid him come and Banquet at thy house.
When he is here, even at thy Solemn Feast,
I will bring in the Empress and her Sons,
The Emperor himself, and all thy Foes,
And at thy mercy shall they stoop, and kneel,
And on them shalt thou ease, thy angry heart:
What says Andronicus to this devise?
Marcus my Brother, it is sad Titus calls,
Go gentle Marcus to thy Nephew Lucius,
Thou shalt enquire him out among the Gothes,
Bid him repair to me, and bring with him
Some of the chiefest Princes of the Gothes,
Bid him encamp his Soldiers where they are,
Tell him the Emperor, and the Empress too,
Feasts at my house, and he shall Feast with them,
This do thou for my love, and so let him,
As he regards his aged Fathers life.
This will I do, and soon return again.
Now will I hence about thy business,
And take my Ministers along with me.
Nay, nay, let Rape and Murder stay with me,
Or else Isle call my Brother back again,
And cleave to no revenge but Lucius.
What say you Boys, will you bide with him,
Whiles I go tell my Lord the Emperor,
How I have governed our determined jest?
Yield to his Humour, smooth and speak him fair,
And tarry with him till I turn again.
I know them all, though they suppose me mad,
And will ore-reach them in their own devises,
A pair of cursed hell-hounds and their Dam.
Madam depart at pleasure, leave vs here.
Farewell Andronicus, revenge now goes
To lay a complot to betray thy Foes.
I know thou dost, and sweet revenge farewell.
Tell vs old man, how shall we be employed?
Tut, I have work enough for you to doe,
Publius come hither, Caius, and Valentine.
What is your will?
Know you these two?
The Empress Sons
I take them, Chiron, Demetrius.
Fie Publius, fie, thou art too much deceived,
The one is Murder, Rape is the others name,
And therefore bind them gentle Publius,
Caius, and Valentine, lay hands on them,
Oft have you heard me wish for such an hour,
And now I find it, therefore bind them sure,
Villains forbear, we are the Empress Sons.
And therefore do we, what we are commanded.
Stop close their mouths, let them not speak a word,
Is he sure bound, look that you bind them fast.
Come, come Lauinia, look, thy Foes are bound,
Sirs stop their mouths, let them not speak to me,
But let them hear what fearful words I utter.
Oh Villains, Chiron, and Demetrius,
Here stands the spring whom you have stained with mud,
This goodly Summer with your Winter mixed,
You killed her husband, and for that vil'd fault,
Two of her Brothers were condemned to death,
My hand cut off, and made a merry jest,
Both her sweet Hands, her Tongue, and that more dear
Then Hands or tongue, her spotless Chastity,
Inhumaine Traitors, you constrained and for'st.
What would you say, if I should let you speak?
Villains for shame you could not beg for grace.
Hark Wretches, how I mean to martyr you,
This one Hand yet is left, to cut your throats,
Whilst that Lauinia tweene her stumps doth hold:
The Basin that receives your guilty blood.
You know your Mother means to feast with me,
And calls herself Revenge, and thinks me mad.
Hark Villains, I will grinned your bones to dust,
And with your blood and it, Isle make a Paste,
And of the Paste a Coffin I will rear,
And make two Pasties of your shameful Heads,
And bid that strumpet your unhallowed Dam,
Like to the earth swallow her increase.
This is the Feast, that I have bid her to,
And this the Banquet she shall surfeit on,
For worse then Philomel you used my Daughter,
And worse then Progne, I will be revenged,
And now prepare your throats: Lauinia come.
Receive the blood, and when that they are dead,
Let me go grinned their Bones to powder small,
And with this hateful Liquor temper it,
And in that Paste let their vil'd Heads be baked,
Come, come, be every one officious,
To make this Banquet, which I wish might prove,
More sterne and bloody then the Centaurs Feast.
So now bring them in, for Isle play the Cooke,
And see them ready, against their Mother comes.
Uncle Marcus, since it is my Fathers mind
That I repair to Rome, I am content.
And ours with thine befall, what Fortune will.
Good Uncle take you in this barbarous Moore,
This Ravenous Tiger, this accursed devil,
Let him receive no sustenance, fetter him,
Till he be brought unto the Emperous face,
For testimony of her foul proceedings.
And see the Ambush of our Friends be strong,
If ere the Emperor means no good to vs.
Some devil whisper curses in my ear,
And prompt me that my tongue may utter forth,
The Venomous Malice of my swelling heart.
Away Inhumaine Dog, Unhallowed Slave,
Sirs, help our Uncle, to convey him in,
The Trumpets show the Emperor is at hand.
What, hath the Firemament more Suns then one?
What boots it thee to call thy self a Sun?
Romes Emperor &amp; Nephew break the parley
These quarrels must be quietly debated,
The Feast is ready which the careful Titus,
Hath ordained to an Honourable end,
For Peace, for Love, for League, and good to Rome:
Please you therefore draw no and take your places.
Marcus we will.
Welcome my gracious Lord,
Welcome Dread Queen,
Welcome ye Warlike Gothes, welcome Luciu•,
And welcome all: although the cheer be poor,
Twill fill your stomachs, please you eat of it.
Why art thou thus attired Andronicus?
Because I would be sure to have all well,
To entertain your Highness, and your Empress.
We are beholding to you good Andronicus?
And if your Highness knew my heart, you were:
My Lord the Emperor resolve me this,
Was it well done of rash Virginius,
To slay his daughter with his own right hand,
Because she was enfor'st, stained, and deflowered?
It was Andronicus.
Your reason, Mighty Lord?
Because the Girl, should not suruine her shame,
And by her presence still renew his sorrows.
A reason mighty, strong, and effectual,
A pattern, president, and lively warrant,
For me (most wretched) to perform the like:
Die, die, Lauinia, and thy shame with thee,
And with thy shame, thy Fathers sorrow die.
What hast done, unnatural and unkind?
Killed her for whom my tears have made me blind.
I am as woeful as Virginius was,
And have a thousand times more cause then he.
What was she ravished? tell who did the deed,
Wilt please you eat,
Wilt please your Highness feed?
Why hast thou slain thine only Daughter?
Not I, it was Chiron and Demetrius,
They ravished her, and cut away her tongue,
And they, it was they, that did her all this wrong.
Go fetch them hither to vs presently.
Why there they are both, baked in that Pie,
Whereof their Mother dantily hath fed,
Eating the flesh that she herself hath bred.
It is true, it is true, witness my knives sharpe point.
Die frantic wretch, for this accursed deed.
Can the Sons eye, behold his Father bleed?
There's mead for mead, death for a deadly deed.
You sad faced men, people and Sons of Rome,
By vprores severed like a flight of Foul,
Scattred by winds and high tempestuous gusts:
Oh let me teach you how, to knit again
This scattred Corn, into one mutual sheaf,
These broken limbs again into one body.
Let Rome herself be bane unto herself,
And she whom mighty kingdoms curse too,
Like a forlorn and desperate castaway,
Doe shameful execution on her self.
But if my frosty signs and chaps of age,
Grave witnesses of true experience,
Cannot induce you to attend my words,
Speak Romes dear friend, as erst our Ancestor,
When with his solemn tongue he did discourse
To loue-sicke Didoes sad attending ear,
The story of that baleful burning night,
When subtle Greeks surprised King Priams Troy:
Tell vs what Sinon hath bewitched our ears,
Or who hath brought the fatal engine in,
That gives our Troy, our Rome the civil wound.
My heart is not compact of flint nor steel,
Nor can I utter all our bitter grief,
But floods of tears will drown my Oratory,
And break my very utterance, even in the time
When it should move you to attend me most,
Lending your kind hand Commiseration.
Here is a Captain, let him tell the tale,
Your hearts will throb and weep to hear him speak.
This Noble Auditory, be it known to you,
That cursed Chiron and Demetrius
Were they that murdered our Emperors Brother,
And they it were that ravished our Sister,
For their fell faults our Brothers were beheaded,
Our Fathers tears despised, and basely cozened,
Of that true hand that fought Romes quarrel out,
And sent her enemies unto the grave.
Lastly, my self unkindly banished,
The gates shut on me, and turned weeping out,
To beg relief among Romes Enemies,
Who drowned their enmity in my true tears,
And op'd their arms to embrace me as a Friend:
And I am turned forth, be it known to you,
That have preserved her welfare in my blood,
And from her bosom took the Enemies point,
Sheathing the steel in my adventurous body.
Alas you know, I am no Vaunter I,
My scars can witness, dumb although they are,
That my report is just and full of truth:
But soft, me thinks I do digress too much,
Cyting my worthless praise: Oh pardon me,
For when no Friends are by, men praise themselves,
Now is my turn to speak: Behold this Child,
Of this was Tomorrow delivered,
The issue of an Irreligious Moore,
Chief Architect and plotter of these woes,
The Villain is alive in Titus house,
And as he is, to witness this is true.
Now judge what course had Titus to revenge
These wrongs, unspeakable past patience,
Or more then any living man could bear.
Now you have heard the truth, what say you Romaines?
Have we done ought amiss? show vs wherein,
And from the place where you behold vs now,
The poor remainder of Andronici,
Will hand in hand all headlong cast vs down,
And on the ragged stones beat forth our brains,
And make a mutual closure of our house:
Speak Romaines speak, and if you say we shall,
Lo hand in hand, Lucius and I will fall.
Come come, thou reverent man of Rome,
And bring our Emperor gently in thy hand,
Lucius our Emperor: for well I know,
The common voice do cry it shall be so.
Lucius, all hail Romes Royal Emperor,
Go, go into old Titus sorrowful house,
And hither hale that misbelieving Moore,
To be adjudged some direful slaughtering death,
As punishment for his most wicked life.
Lucius all hail to Romes gracious Governor.
Thanks gentle Romans, may I govern so,
To heal Romes harms, and wipe away her woe.
But gentle people, give me aim awhile,
For Nature puts me to a heavy task:
Stand all aloof, but Uncle draw you near,
To shed obsequious tears upon this Trunk:
Oh take this warm kiss on thy pale cold lips,
These forrowfull drops upon thy bloud-slaine face,
The last true Duties of thy Noble Son.
Tear for tear, and loving kiss for kiss,
Thy Brother Marcus tenders on thy Lips:
O were the sum of these that I should pay
Countless, and infinite, yet would I pay them.
Come hither Boy, come, come, and learn of vs
To melt in showers: thy Grandsire loved thee well:
Many a time he danced thee on his knee:
Sung thee asleep, his Loving Breast, thy Pillow:
Many a matter hath he told to thee,
Meet, and agreeing with thine Infancy:
In that respect then, like a loving Child,
Shed yet some small drops from thy tender Spring,
Because kind Nature doth require it so:
Friends, should associate Friends, in Grief and Wo.
Bid him farewell, commit him to the Grave,
Do him that kindness, and take leave of him.
O Grandsire, Grandsire: even with all my heart
Would I were Dead, so you did Live again.
O Lord, I cannot speak to him for weeping,
My tears will choke me, if I op my mouth.
You sad Andronici, have done with woes,
Give sentence on this execrable Wretch,
That hath been breeder of these dire events.
Set him breast deep in earth, and famish him:
There let him stand, and rave, and cry for food:
If any one relieves, or pities him,
For the offence, he dyes. This is our doom:
Some stay, to see him fastened in the earth.
O why should wrath be mute, &amp; Fury dumb?
I am no Baby I, that with base Prayers
I should repent the Evils I have done.
Ten thousand worse, then ever yet I did,
Would I perform if I might have my will:
If one good Deed in all my life I did,
I do repent it from my very Soul.
Some loving Friends convey the Emp. hence,
And give him burial in his Fathers grave.
My Father, and Lauinia, shall forthwith
Be closed in our Households Monument:
As for that heinous Tiger Tomorrow,
No Funeral Rite, nor man in mournful Weeds:
No mournful Bell shall ring her Burial:
But throw her forth to Beasts and Birds of prey:
Her life was Beast-like, and devoid of pity,
And being so, shall have like want of pity.
See Justice done on Aaron that damned Moore,
From whom, our heavy hippos had their beginning:
Then afterwards, to Order well the State,
That like Events, may ne'er it Ruinate.

NOt out of Envy, for ther's no effect
Where there's no cause; nor out of Imitation
For we have evermore bin Imitated;
Nor out of our contention to doe better
Then that which is opposde to ours in Title,
For that was good; and better cannot be:
And for the Title if it seem affected
We might as well have called it, God you good Even:
Only that East-ward; west-wards still exceeds,
Honour the Suns fair rising, not his setting;
Nor is our Title utterly ensorste,
As by the points we touch at, you shall see;
Bear with our willing pains, if dull or witty,
We only dedicate it to the City.
AND whether with you now? what loose action are you bound for? come what com∣rades are you to meet withal? whirs the supper? whirs the supper? whirs the rendezvous?
Indeed, and in very good so∣ber truth, Sir.
Indeed, and in very good sober truth Sir? Behind my back thou wilt swear faster then a french foot boy, and talk more bawdily then a common mid∣wife, and now indeed and in very good sober truth Sir: but if a privy search should be made, with what furniture are you rigged now? Sirrah I tell thee, I am thy moister William Tutch∣stone Goldsmith: and thou my Prentice Francis Quick-siluer: and will see whether you are running. Work upon that now.
Why Sir I hope a man may use his recreation with his masters profit.
Prentices recreations are seldom with their masters profit. Work upon that now. You shall give up your cloak tho you be no Alderman. Heyday, Ruffians hall. Sword, pumps, heers a Racket indeed. 
Work upon that now.
Thou shameless Varlet dost thou jest at thy lawful moister contrary to thy Indentures?
Why zbloud sir, my mother's a Gentlewoman: and my father a Justice of Peace, and of Quorum, and tho I am a younger brother and a prentice yet I hope I am my fathers son: and by Gods lid, tic for your worship and for your commode∣tie that I keep company. I am entertained among gallants,
true: They call me cousin Frank, right; Ilend them mon∣niece, good; they spend it, well. But when they are spent, must not they strive to get more? must not their land fly? and to whom? shall not your worship ha, the refusal? well, I am a good member of the City if I were well concede∣red. How would Morchants thrive, if Gentlemen would not be unthrifts? How could Gentlemen be vnthrists if their humours were not fed? How should their humours be fed but by whit meat, and cunning secondings? well, the City might consider vs. I am going to an Ordinary now; the gal∣lants fall to play, I carry light gold with me: the gallants call cousin Frank some gold for silver, I change, gain by it, the gallants loose the gold; and then call cousin Frank lend me some silver. Why—
Why? I cannot tell, seuē score pound art thou out in the cash, but look to it, I will not be gallanted out of my monies. And as for my rising by other men's fall; God shield me. Did I gain my wealth by Ordinaries? no: by exchanging of gold? no: by keeping of gallants company? no. I hired me a little shop, fought low, took small gain, kept no debt book, garnished my shop for want of Plate, with good wholesome thrifty sentences; As, Touchstone, keep thy shop, and thy shop will keep thee. Light gains makes heavy purses. Tic good to be merry and wise: And when I was wived, having something to stick too, I had the horn of Suretiship ever before my eyes: You all know the devise of the Horn, where the young fellow slips in at the Butte end, and comes squesd out at the Buckall: and I grew up, and I praise providence, I bear my brows now as high as the best of my neighbours: but thou-well look to the accounts, your fathers bond lies for you: seven score pound is yet in the rear.
Why Slid sir, I have as good, as proper gallants words for it as any are in London, Gentlemen of good phrase, perfect language, passingly behau'd, Gallants that wear socks and clean linen, and call me kind cousin Frank, good cousin Frank, for they know my Father; and by god; lid shall not I trust hem? not trust?
What doe ye lack Sir? What first you'll buy Sir?
I marry Sir, there's a youth of another piece. There's thy fellowe-Prentise, as good a Gentleman borne as thou art: nay, and better meant. But dos he pump it, or Racket it? Well, if he thrive not, if he out-last not a hun∣dred such crackling Bauins as thou art, God and men neglect industry.
It is his Shop, and here my M. walks. 
With me Boy?
My Moister, Sir Petronel Flash, recommends his love to you, and will instantly visit you,
To make up the match with my eldest daughter, my wives Dilling, whom she longs to call Madam. He shall find me unwillingly ready Boy. 
Ther's another afliction too. As I have two Prentices: the one of a boundless prodigality, the other of a most hopeful In∣dustrie. So have I only two daughters: the eldest, of a proud ambition and nice wantonness: the other of a modest humility and comely soberness. The one must bee Ladyfied forsooth: and be attired just to the Court-cut, and long tail. So far is she ill naturde to the place and means of my pre∣ferment and fortune, that she throws all the contempt and despite, hatred it self can cast upon it. Well, a piece of Land she has, t'was her Grandmothers gift: let her, and her Sir Petronel, flash out that. But as for my substance, she that skornes me, as I am a Citizen and Trades-man, shall never pamper her pride with my industry: shall never use me as men doe Foxes; keep themselves warm in the skin, and throw the body that bare it to the dung-hill. I must go entertain this Sir Petronell. Goulding, My utmost care's for thee, and one∣lie trust in thee, look to the shop, as for you, Moister Quick-siluer, think of husks, for thy course is running directly to the prodigaills hogs trough. husks Sri. Works upon that now.
Mary sough goodman flat-cap: Sfoot tho I am a prentice I can give arms, and my father's a justice a peace by descent: and zbloud—
Fie how you swear.
Sfoot man I am a Gentleman, and may swear by my pedigree, Gods my life. Sirrah Goulding, weet be ruled by a fool? turn good fellow, turn swaggering gallant, and let the Welkin roar, and Erebus also: Look not Westward to the fall of Don Phoebus, but to the East; Eastward Hoe,
"Where radiant beams of lusty Sol appear,
"And bright Eous makes the welkin clear.
We are both Gentlemen, and therefore should be no cox∣combs: lets be no longer fools to this flat-cap Touchstone. Eastward Bully: this Satin belly, &amp; Canvas backed Touchstone; Slife man his father was a Malt-man, and his mother sold Ginger-bread in Christ-church.
What would ye ha me doe?
Why do nothing, be like a gentleman, be idle the curse of man is labour. Wipe thy bum with testones, &amp; make Ducks and Drakes with shillings: What Eastward hoe. Wilt thou cry, what first ye lack? stand with a bare pate, and a dropping nose, under a wooden pent-house, and a•t a gentle∣man? wilt thou bear Tankards, and moist bear Aims? be ruled, turn gallant, Eastward hoe, ta lyre, lyre, to., Who calls Ieronimo? speak here I am: gods so, how like a sheep thou look, a my conscience some cowheard begot thee, thou Goul∣ding of Goulding-hall, ha boy?
Go, ye are a prodigal coxcomb, I a cowheards son, because I turn not a drunkē whore-hunting rake-hell like thy self? 
Rakehell? rakehell?
Pish, in soft terms ye are a cowardly bragging boy. Isle ha you whipped.
Whipped, thats good in faith, untruss me?
No, thou wilt undo thy self. Alas I behold thee with pity, not with anger; thou common shot-clog, gull of all companies: me thinks I see thee already walking in Moore fields without a Cloak, with half a Hat, with∣out a band, a Doublet with three Buttons, without a girdle,
a hose with one point and no Garter, with a cudgel under thine arm borrowing and begging three pence.
Nay Slife, take this and take all: as I am a Gentle∣man borne, Isle be drunk, grow valiant, and beat thee. 
Go thou most madly vain, whom nothing can re∣cover but that which reclaims Atheists, and makes great persons sometimes religious: Calamity. As for my place and life thus I have read:
What ere some vainer youth may term disgrace,
The gain of honest pains is never base:
From trades from arts, from valour honour springs,
These three are founts of gentry, yea of Kings.
For the passion of patience, look if sir Petronell ap∣proach; that sweet, that fine, that delicate, that—for loves sake tell me if he come. O sister Mill, though my father be a low capt tradsman, yet I must be a Lady: and I praise God my mother must call me Medam, (does he come?) off with this gown for shames sakes, off with this gown: let not my Knight take me in the City cut in any hand: tear't, pox ont (does he come) tear't of. Thus whilst she sleeps I sorrow, for her sake, &amp;c.
Lord sister, with what an immodest impaciencie and disgraceful scorn, doe you put off your City tier: I am sor∣rye to think you imagine to right your self, in wronging that which hath made both you and vs.
I tell you I cannot endure it, I must be a Lady: do you wear your Quoiffe with a London licket; your Stammel petticoat with two guards, the Buffin gown with the Tuf∣taffitic cape, and the Velvet lace. I must be a Lady, and I will be a Lady. I like some humours of the City Dames well, to eat Cherries only at an Angel a pound, good; to dye rich Scarlet black, pretty: to line a Grogaram gown clean
thorough with velvet, tolerable; their pure linen, their smocks of 3. li. a smock are to be borne withal. But your mincing nice∣rios, taffeta pipkins, durance petticotes, &amp; silver bodkins:—Gods my life, as I shall be a Lady I cannot endure it. Is hee come yet? Lord what a long knight tic! And ever she cried shout home, and yet I knew one longer, and ever she cried shout home, fa, la, lie, re, lo, la.
Well Sister, those that scorn their nest, oft fly with a sick wing.
Boe-bell.
Where Titles presume to thrust before fit means to second them, Wealth and respect often grow sullen and will not follow. For sure in this, I would for your sake I spake not truth. Where ambition of place goes before fitness of birth, con∣tempt and disgrace follow. I heard a Scholar once say, that Ʋlis∣ses when he counterfeited himself mad, yoked cattes, and foxes, and dogs together to draw his plow, whilst he follow∣ed and sowed salt: But sure I judge them truly mad, that yoke citizens and courtiers, trades men and soldiers, a gold-smiths daughter and a knight: well sister, pray God my father sow not salt too.
Alas, poor Mil. when I am a Lady, Isle pray for thee yet I faith: Nay, and Isle vouchsafe to call thee sister Mil still, for though thou art not like to be a Lady as I am, yet sure thou art a creature of Gods making; and may peradventure to bee saved as soon as I, (dos he come?) And ever and anon she dou∣bled in her song.
Now (Ladies my comfort)
What a profane Ape's here!
Tailor, Poldavis, prithee fit it
fit it: is this a right Scot?
Does it clip close? and bear up round?
Fine and stiffly i faith, twill keep your thighs so cool and make your waste so small: here was a fault in your body, but I have supplied the desect, with the effect of my steel in∣strument
which, though it have but one eye, can see to rectify the imperfection of the proportion.
Most aedefying Tailor! I protest you Tailers are most sanctified members, and make many crooked thing go upright. How must I bear my hands? light? light?
O I, now you are in the Lady-fashion, you must doe all things light. Tread light, light. I and fall so: that's the court-Amble. 
Has the Court ne'er a trot?
No, but a false gallop, Lady.
And if she will not go to bed 
The knights come forsooth.
Is my knight come? O the Lord. my band? Sister doo my cheeks look well? give me a little box a the ear that I may see me to blush: now, now. So, there, there, there! here he is: O my dearest delight, Lord, Lord, and how doe my Knight?
Fie, with more modesty.
Modesty! why I am no citizen now, modesty? am I not to bee married? you're best to keep me modest now I am to be a Lady.
Boldness is good fashion and courtlike.
I, in a country Lady I hope it is: as I shall be. And how chance ye came no sooner knight?
Faith, I was so entertained in the Progress with one Count Epernoum a welch knight: wee had a match at Baloone too, with my Lord Whachum, for four crowns.
At Baboon? Iesu! you and I will play at Baboon in the country? Knight.
O sweet Lady: tic a strong play with the arm.
With arm, or leg, or any other member, if it bee a court-sport. And when shal's be married my Knight?
I come now to consummate it; and your father may call a poor Knight, Son in Law.
Sir, ye are come, what is not mine to keep, I must not be sorry to forgo: A 100. li. Land her Grandmother left her, tic yours, her self (as her mothers gift) is yours. But if
you expect ought from me, know, my hand and mine eyes open together; I doe not give blindly: Work upon that now.
Sir, you mistrust not my means? I am a Knight.
Sir, Sir; What I know not, you will give me leave to say, I am ignorant of.
Yes, that he is a Knight; I know where he had money to pay the Gentlemen Ushers, and Heralds their Fees. I, that he is a Knight: and so might you have been too, if you had been ought else then an Ass, as well as some of your neighbours. And I thought you would not ha been Knighted, (as I am an honest woman) I would ha dubbed you my self, I praise God I have wherewithal. But as for you daughter.—
I mother, I must bee a Lady to morrow: and by your leave mother (I speak it not without my duty, but only in the right of my husband) I must take place of you, Mother.
That you shall Lady-daughter, and have a Coach as well as I too.
Yes mother. But by your leave mother, (I speak it not without my duty but only in my husbands right) my Coach-horses must take the wall of your Coach-horses.
Come, come, the day grows low: tic sup∣per time; use my house the wedding solemnity is at my wives cost; thank me for nothing but my willing blessing: for (I cannot fine) my hopes are faint. And Sir, respect my daughter, she has refused for you wealthy and honest mat∣ches, known good men, well monied, better traded, best re∣putted.
Body a truth, Chittizens, Chittizens. Sweet Knight, as soon as ever wee are married, take me to to thy mercy out of this miserable Chittie, presently, carry me out of the sent of New-castle Coal, and the hearing of Boe-bell, I beseech thee down with me for God sake.
Well daughter, I have read, that old wit sings:
The greatest rivers flow from little springs.
Though thou art full, scorn not thy means at first,
He that's most drunk may soonest be a thirst.
Work upon that now.
No, no; yon'd stand my hopes.
Come hither daughter. And how approve you your sisters fashion? how doe you phantsie her cho ye? what dost thou think?
I hope as a sister, well.
Nay but, nay but how dost thou like her behaviour and humour? speak freely.
I am loath to speak ill: and yet I am sorry of this, I cannot speak well.
Well: very good, as I would wish: A modest an∣swear▪ Goulding, come hither: hither Golding. How dost thou like the Knight. Sir Flash? dos he not look big? how likst thou the Elephant? he says he has a castle in the Country.
Pray heaven, the Elephant carry not his Castle on his back.
Fore heaven, very well: But seriously, how dost re∣put him?
The best I can say of him is, I know him not.
Ha G ulding? I commend thee, I approve thee, and will make it appear my affection is strong to thee. My wise has her humour, and I will ha, mine. Dost thou see my daugh∣la here? she is not fair, well-fauoured or so, indifferent, which modest measure of beauty, shall not make it thy only work to watch her, nor sufficient mis•bounce, to suspect her. Thou art towardly, she is modest, thou art provident, she is careful. Shoe's now mine: give me thy hand, shoe's now thine▪ Work upon that now.
Sir, as your son, I honour you; and as your servant obey you.
Say thou so, come hither Mildred. Doe you see yon'd fellow? he is a Gentlemen (tho my Prentice) &amp; has some∣what to take too: a Youth of good hope; well friended, well par∣ted. Are you mine▪ You are his. Work (you) upon that now.
Sir, I am all yours: your body gave me life, your care and love happiness of life: let your veriue still direct it, for to your wisdom I wholly dispose my self.
Say thou so? be you two better acquainted. Lip her, Lip her knave. So shut up shop: in▪ We must make holiday.
This match shall on, for I intend to prove 
Which thrives the l•st, the mean or lofty love.
Whether fit Wedlock vowed twixt like and like.
Or prouder hopes, which daringly ore strike
Their place and means: tic honest Times expense.
When seeming lightness bears a morrallsence.
Work upon that now. 
Quickesiluer, moister Frances Quickesiluer, moister Quickesiluer? 
Here sir; 
So sir; nothing but flat Moister Quickesiluer (with∣out any familiar addition) will fetch you: will you truss my points sir?
I forsooth: 
How now sir? the druncken hyckop, so soon this morning?
Tic but the coldness of my stomach forsooth.
What? have you the cause natural for it? you're a very learned drunckerd: I believe I shall miss some of my silver spoons with your learning. The nuptial night will not moi∣sten your throat sufficiently, but the morning likewise must rain her dews into your gluttonous wesand.
An't please you sir, we did but drink  to the coming off, of the Knightly Bridegroom.
To the coming off an'him?
I forsooth: we drunk to his coming on  when we went to bed; and now we are up, we must drink to his coming off: for thats the chief honour of a Soldier sir, and therefore we must drink so much the more to it, forsooth. 
A very capital reason. So that you go to bed late, and rise early to commit drunkenness? you fulfil the Scrip∣ture very sufficient wickedly forsooth.
The Knights men forsooth be still a their knees at it,  &amp; because tic for your credit sir, I wold be loath to flinch.
I pray sir, even to 'hem again then; you're one of the separated crew, one of my wives faction, &amp; my young Ladies, with whō &amp; with their great match, I will have nothing to do.
So sir, now I will go keep my  credit with 'hem an't please you sir.
In any case Sir, lay one cup of Sack more alyour cold stomach, I beseech you.
Yes forsooth. 
This is for my credit Servants ever maintain drun∣kennesse in their masters house, for their masters credit; a good idle Seruing-mans reason: I thank Time, the night is past; I ne'er waked to such cost; I think we have stout more sorts of flesh in our bellies, then ever Noahs Arc received: and for Wine, why my house turns giddy with it, and more noise in it then at a Conduict; Aye me, even beasts condemn our gluttony. Well, it is our Cities fault, which because we commit seldom, we commit the more sinfully, wee lose no time in our sensuality, but we make amends for it; O that we would do so in virtue, and religious negligences; But see here are all the sober parcels my house can show, Isle cauesdrop, hear what thoughts they utter this morning.
But is it possible, that you seeing your sister preferred to the bed of a Knight, should contain your affections in the arms of a Prentice?
I had rather make up the garment of my affections in some of the same piece, then like a fool wear gowns of two colours, or mix Sackcloth with Satin.
And doe the costly garments; the title and fame of a Lady the fashion; observation, and reverence proper to such preferment, no more inflame you, then such convenience as my poor means and industry can offer to your virtues?
I have observed that the bridle given to those violent flatteries of fortune, is seldom recovered; they bear one headlong in desire from one novelty to another: and where those ranging appetites reign, there is ever more passion then reasons no staye, and so no happiness. These hasty advance∣mints are not natural; Nature hath given vs legs, to go to our objects; not wings to fly to them.
How dear an object you are to my desires I cannot express, whose fruition would my masters absolute consent and yours vouchsafe me, I should be absolutely happy. And though it were a grace so far beyond my merit, that I should blush with unworthiness to receive it, yet thus far both my love &amp; my means shall assure your requital; you shall want nothing fit for your birth and education; what increase of wealth and advancement the honest and orderly industry &amp; skill of our trade will afford in any, I doubt not will be as∣pirde by me; I will ever make your contenment the end of my endeavours; I will love you aboue all; and only your grief shall be my misery; and your delight, my felicity.
Work upon that now. By my hopes, he woes ho∣nestly and orderly; he shall be Anchor of my hopes. Look, see the ill yoked monster his fellow.
Eastward Hoe; Holla ye pampered lades of Asia.
Drunk now down right, a, my fidelity.
 pulldo, Pulldo; showse quoth the Caliver.
Fie fellow Quickesiluer, what a pickle are you in?
Pickle? pickle in thy throat; zounes pickell? wa ha ho, good morrow knight Petronell: morrow lady Goldsmith▪ come of, Knight, with a counterbuff, for the honour of knighthood.
Why how now sir? doe ye know where you are?
Where I am? why sbloud you loulthead where I am?
Go to, go to, for shame go to bed, and sleep out this immodesty: thou sham'st both my moister and his house.
Shame? what shame? I thought, thou would show thy bringing up: and thou were a Gentleman as I am, thou would think it no shame to be drunk. Lend me some mo∣ney, save my credit, I must dine with the Serving men and their wives; and their wives sirha.
E'ene who you will, Isle not lend thee three pence.
Sfoote lend me some money, hast thou not Hyren here?
Why how now sirha? what vein's this, ho?
Who cries on murder? lady was it you? how does our moister? pray thee cry Eastward ho?
Sirha, sirrha, you're past your hickvp now, I see you're drunk.
Tic for your credit moister.
And hear you keep a whore in town.
Tic for your credit Moister.
And what you are out in Cashe, I know.
So do I. my fathers a Gentleman, Work upon that now; Eastward hoe.
Sir, Eastward hoe, will make you go Westward ho; I will no longer dishonest my house, nor endanger my stock with your licence; There sir, there's your Indenture, all your apparel (that I must know) is on your back; and from this time my door is shut to you: from me be free; but for other freedom, and the moneys you have wasted; Eastward ho, shall not serve you.
Am I free a, my ferters? Rense; Fly with a Duck in thy mouth: and now I tell thee Touchstone—
Good sir.
When this eternal substance of my soul,
Well said, chandge your gould ends for your play ends.
Did live imprisoned in my wanton flesh.
What then sir?
I was a Courtier in the Spanish court, and Don Andrea was my name.
Good moister Don Andrea will you marche?
Sweet Touchstone, will you lend me two shillings?
Not a penny.
Not a penny? I have friends, &amp; I have acquaintance, I will peace at thy shop posts, and throw rotten Eggs at thy sign: Work upon that now. 
Now sirha, you? hear you? you shall serve me no more neither; not an hour longer.
What mean you sir?
I mean to give thee thy freedom; &amp; with thy free∣dome my daughter: &amp; with my daughter a fathers love. And with all these such a portion, as shall make Knight Petronell himself envy thee: you're both agreed? are ye not?
With all submission, both of thanks and duty.
Well then, the great power of heauē bless &amp; confirm you. And, Goulding, that my love to thee may not show less then my wives love to my eldest daughter; thy marriage feast shall equal the Knights and hers.
Let me beseech you, no Sir, the superfluity and cold meat left at their Nuptials, will with bounty furnish ours. The grossest prodigality is superfluous cost of the Belly: nor would I wish any invitement of States or friends, only your reverent presence and witness shall sufficiently grace and confirm vs.
Son to mine own bosom, take her and my blessing: The nice fondling, my Lady sir-reuerence, that I must not now presume to call daughter, is so ravished with desire to hansell her new Coche, and see her knights Eastward Castle, that the next morning will sweat with her busy setting forth, away will she and her mother, and while their proper∣ration is making, our selves with some two or three other friends will consummate the humble match, we have in Gods name concluded.
Tic to my wish; for I have often read,
Fit birth, fit age, keeps long a quiet bed.
Tic to my wish; For Tradesmen (well tic known)
Get with more ease, then Gentry keeps his own. 
My privy Guest, lusty Quickesiluer, has drunk too deep of the Bride-boule, but with a little sleep he is much re∣covered; And I think is making himself ready, to bee drunk in a gallanter likeness: My house is as it were the Cave, where the young Out-lawe hoards the stolen veils of his occupation; And here when he will revel it in his prodigal similitude, he retires to his Trunks, and (I may say softly) his Punks: he dares trust me with the keeping of both: for I am Security it self, my name is Security, the famous Usurer.
Come old Security, thou father of destruction: th'in∣dented Sheepeskinne is burned wherein I was wrapped, and I am now loose, to get more children of perdition into thy vsurous Bonds. Thou feed my Lechery, and I thy Covetousness: Thou art Pander to me for my wench, and I to thee for thy coosena∣ges: K. me, K. thee, runs through Court and Country.
Well said my subtle Quickesiluer, These K's op the
doors to all this worlds felicity: the dullest forehead sees it. Let not mast. Courtier think hee carries all the knavery on his shoulders: I have poor Hob in the country, that has worn hob-nayles on's shoes, have as much villainy in's head, as he that wears gold bottons in's cap.
Why man, tic the London high-way to thrist, if ver∣tu bee used; tic but as a scrap to the net of villainy. They that use it simply, thrive simply I warrant: Weight and fashion makes Goldsmiths Cockolds.
Here sir, put of the other half of your Prentiship.
Well said sweet Syn: bring forth my bravery.
Now let my Trunks shoot soorth their silks concealed,
I now am free; and now will justify
My Trunks and Punkes: Avaunt dull Flat-cap then,
Ʋia, the curtain that shadowed Borgia;
There lie thou husk of my envassail'd State.
I Simpson now, have burst the Philistins Bands,
And in thy lap my lovely Delight,
Isle lie and snore out my enfranchisde state.
When Simpson was a tall young man
His power and strength increased than,
He sold no more, nor cup, nor can,
But did them all despise.
Old Touchstone, now wright to thy friends,
For one to sell thy base gold ends
Quickesiluer, now no more attends
Thee Touchstone.
But Dad, hast thou seen my running Gelding dressed to day?
That I have Frank, the Ostler a'th Cock, dressed him for a Breakfast.
What did he eat him?
No, but he eat his breakfast for dressing him: and so dressed him for breakfast.
Quicksiluer. O witty Age, where age is young in wit,
And al youths words have gray beards full of it!
But ah-las Frank, how will all this bee maintained now?
Your place maintained it before.
Why and I maintained my place. Isle to the Court, another manner of place for maintenance I hope then the silly City. I heard my father say, I heard my mother sing a nolde Song and a true: Tou art a she fool, and know not what belongs to our male wisdom. I shall be a Merchant for-sooth: trust my estate in a wooden Trough as hee does? What are these Ships, but Tennis Balls for the winds to play withal? Tossed from one wave to another; Now un∣der-line; Now over the house; Sometimes Bricke-wal'd against a Rock, so that the guts fly out again: sometimes struck under the wide Hazard, and farewell Mast. Merchant.
Well Frank, well; the Seas you say are uncertain: But hee that sails in your Court Seas, shall find 'hem ten times fuller of hazard; wherein to see what is to bee seen, is torment more then a free Spirit can endure; But when you come to suffer, howe many Injuries swallow you? What care and devotion must you use, to humour an imperious Lord? proportion your looks to his looks? smiles to his smiles? fit your sails to the wind of his breath?
Tush hoe's no Iourney-man in his craft, that can not doe that.
But hoe's worse then a Prentice that does it, not only humouring the Lord, but every Trencher∣bearer, every Groom that by indulgence and intelligence crept into his favour, and by Pandatisme into his Chamber; He rules the roast: And when my honourable Lord says it shall bee thus, my worshipful Rascal (the Groom of his close stool) says it shall not bee thus, claps the door after him, and who dares enter? A Prentice, quoth you? tic but to learn to live, and does that disgrace a man? hee that rises hardly, stands firmly: but hee that rises with ease, Alas, falls as easily.
A pox on you, who taught you this more rallitie?
Tic long of this witty Age, Moister Fran∣cis. But indeed, Mistress Synnedefie, all Trades complain of inconvenience, and therefore tic best to have none. The Merchant hee complains, and says, Traffic is subject to much uncertainty and loss: let 'hem keep their goods on dry land with a vengeance, and not expose other men's substances to the mercy of the winds, under protection of a wooden wall (as Moister Francis says) and all for gre∣die desire, to enrich themselves with unconscionable gain, two for one, or so: where I, and such other honest men as live by lending money, are content with moderate pro∣fit; Thirty, or Forty i'th'hundred: so wee may have it with quietness, and out of peril of wind and weather, ra∣there then run those dangerous courses of trading, as they doe.
I Dad thou may well bee called Security, for thou take the safest course.
Faith the quieter, and the more contented; and, out of doubt, the more godly. For Merchants in their courses are never pleased, but ever ripening against Hey∣uen: One prays for a Westerly wind to carry his ship forth; another for an Easterly to bring his ship home; and at every shaking of a lease, hee falls into an agony, to think what danger his Ship is in on such a Coast, and so forth. The Farmer hee is ever at odds with the Weather, sometimes the clouds have been too barren; Sometimes the Heavens forget themselves, their Har∣uests answer not their hopes; Sometimes the Season falls out too fruitful, Corn will bear no price, and so forth. Th'Artificer, hoe's all for a stirring world, if his Trade bee too full and fall short of his expectation, then falls he out of joint. Where we that trade nothing but money, are free from all this, wee are pleased with all weathers: let it rain or hold up, bee calm or windy, let the season be whatso∣ever, let Trade go how it will, wee take all in good part;
even what please the heavens to send vs; so the Sun stand not still; and the Moon keep her usual returns; and make up days, months, and years.
And you have good security?
I mary Frank, that's the special point.
And yet forsooth wee must have Trades to live withal; For wee cannot stand without legs, nor fly with∣out wings; and a number of such scurvy phrases. No, I say still; hee that has wit, let him live by his wit: hee that has none, let him be a Trades-man.
Witty Moister Francis!
Tic pity any Trade should dull that quick brain of yours. Doe but bring Knight Petronell into my Parchment Toils once, and you shall never need to toil in any trade, a my credit! You know his wives Land?
Even to a foot Sir, I have been often there: a pretty fine Seat, good Land, all entire within it self.
Well wooded?
Two hundred pounds worth of wood ready to fell. And a fine sweet house that stands just in the midst an't, like a Prick in the midst of a Circle; would I were your Far∣mer, for a hundred pound a year.
Excellent M. Francis; how I do long to doe thee good: How I doe hunger, and thirst to have the honour to enrich thee? I, even to die, that thou might inherit my living: even hun∣ger and thirst, for a my Religion, M. Francis. And so tell Knight Petrouell I doe it to doe him a pleasure.
Marry Dad, his horses are now coming up, to bear down his Lady, wilt thou lend him thy stable to set 'hem in?
Faith M. Francis, I would be loathe to lend my Stable out of doors, in a greater matter I will pleasure him, but not in this.
A pox of your hunger and thirst. Well Dad, let him have money: All he could any way get, is bestowed on a Ship, now bound for Ʋirginia: the frame of which voyage is so close∣lie conveyed, that his new Lady nor any of her friends know it. Notwithstanding, as soon as his Ladies hand is gotten to the
sale of her inheritance, and you have furnished him with money, he will instantly hoist Sail, and away.
Now a Frank gale of wind go with him, Moister Frank, we have too few such knight adventurers: who would not sell away competent certainties, to purchase (with any danger) excellent uncertainties? your true knight venturer ever does it. Let his wife seal to day, he shall have his money to day.
To morrow she shall, Dad, before she goes into the coū∣try, to work her to which actio, with the more engines, I pur∣pose presently to prefer my sweet Sin here, to the place of her Gentlewoman; whom you (for the more credit) shall present as your friends daughter, a Gentlewoman of the coun∣try, new come up with a will for a while to learn fashions for-sooth, and be toward some Lady; and she shall buzz pretty devises into her Ladies ear; feeding her humours so service∣blie (as the manner of such as she is you know.)
True good Moister France.
That she shall keep her Port open to any thing she commends to her.
A'my religion, a most fashionable project; as good she spoil the Lady, as the Lady spoil her; for tic three to one of one side: sweet mistress Sin, how are you bound to moister Frances! I doe not doubt to see you shortly wed one of the head men of our city.
But sweet Frank, when shall my father Security present me?
With all festination; I have broken the Ice to it al∣ready; and will presently to the Knights house, whether, my good old Dad, let me pray thee with all formality to man her.
Command me Moister Frances; I doe hunger and thirst to doe thee service. Come sweet Mistress Sin, take leave of my Wynnifride, and we will instantly meet frank Moister Frances at your Ladies.
Where is my Cu there? Cu?
I Winnie.
Wilt thou come in, sweet Cu?
I Wynney, presently. 
I Wynney, quote he? thats all he can doe poor man; he may well cut off her name at Wynney. O tic an egregious Pander! what will not an vsurous knave be, so he may bee rich? O it is a notable lewes trump! I hope to live to see dogs meat made of the old Usurers flesh; Dice of his bones; and Indentures of his skin: and yet his skin is too thick to make Parchment, it would make good Boots for a Peeter man to catch Salmon in. Your only smooth skin to make fine Vellum is your Puritans skin; they be the smoothest and slickest knaves in a country.
Isle out of this wicked town as fast as my horse can trot: Here's now no good action for a man to spend his time in. Taverns grow dead; Ordinaries are blown up; Plays are at a stand; Houses of Hospitality at a fall; not a Feather waving, nor a Spur jingling any where: Isle away in∣stantlie.
Y'ad best take some crowns in your purse Knight, or else your Eastward Castle will smoke but miserably.
O Frank! my castle? Alas all the Castles I have, are built with ayre, thou know.
I know it Knight, and therefore wonder whether your Lady is going.
Faith to seek her Fortune I think. I said I had a castle and land Eastward, and Eastward she will without country∣diction; her coach, and the coach of the Sun must meet full butt: And the Sun being out shined with her Lady-ships glory, she fears hee goes Westward to hang him∣self.
And I fear, when her enchanted Castle becomes in∣uisible, her Ladyship will return and follow his example.
O that she would have the grace, for I shall never be able to pacific her, when she sees her self deceived so.
As easily as can be. Tell her she mistook your di∣reactions, and that shortly, your self will down with her to approve it; and then, cloth but her cropper in a new
Gown, and you may drive her any way you list: for these womē Sir, are like Essex Calves, you must wriggle 'hem on by the tail still, or they will never drive orderly.
But alas sweet Frank, thou know my hability will not furnish her blood with those costly humours.
Cast that cost on me Sir, I have spoken to my old Pander Security, for money or commodity; and commode∣tie (if you will) I know he will procure you.
Commodity! Alas what commodity?
Why Sir? what say you to Figs, and Raysons?
A plague of Figs and Raysons, and all such frail commodities, we shall make nothing of 'hem.
Why then Sir, what say you to Forty pound in to∣sted Beef?
Out upon it, I have less stomach to that, then to the Figs and Raysons: Isle out of Town, though I sojourn with a friend of mine, for staye here I must not; my creditors have laid to arrest me, and I have no friend under heaven but my Sword to bail me.
Gods me Knight, put 'hem in sufficient sureties, rather then let your Sword bail you; Let 'hem take their choice, either the Kings Bench, or the Fleet, or which of the two Counters they like best, for by the Lord I like none of 'hem.
Well Frank there is no jesting with my earnest no∣cessitie; thou know if I make not present money to further my voyage begun ell's lost, and all I have laid out about it.
Why then Sir in earnest, if you can get your wise La∣die to sether hand to the sale of her Inheritance, the blood hound Security will smell out ready money for you in∣stantly.
There spake an Angel. To bring her to which conformity, I must fine my self extremely amorous; and alleging urgent excuses for my stay, behind, part with her as passionately, as she would from her foisting hound.
You have the Sow by the right ear Sir: I warrant there was never Child longed more to ride a Cock horse, or wear his new coat, thē she longs to ride in hexr new Coach:
She would long for every thing when she was a maid; and now she will run mad for 'hem: I lay my life she will have every year four children; and what charge and change of humour you must endure while she is with child; and how she will tie you to your tackling till she be with child, a Dog would not endure: Nay, there is no Turne-spit Dog bound to his wheel more seruily, then you shall be to her wheel; For as that Dog can never climb the top of his wheel, but when the top comes under him: so shall you never clime the top of her contentment, but when she is under you.
Slight how thou terrify me?
Nay hark you sir; what Nurses, what Midwives, what Fools, what Physicians, what cunning women must be sought for (fearing sometimes she is bewitched, some times in a consumption) to tell her tales, to talk bawdy to her, to make her laugh, to give her glisters, to let her blood under the tongue, and betwixt the toes; how she will revile and kiss you; spit in your face, and lick it off again; how she will vaunt you are her Creature; she made you of nothing; how she could have had thousand mark jointures; she could have bin made a Lady by a Scotch Knight; &amp; never have married him: She could have had Poynados in her bed every morning; how she set you up, and how she will pull you down: you'll never be able to stand of your legs to endure it.
Out of my fortune, what a death is my life bound face to face too? The best is, a large Time-fitted conscience is bound to nothing: Marriage is but a form in the School of Policy, to which Scholars sit fastened only with painted chains, old Securities young wife is ne'er the further of with me.
Thereby lies a tale sir. The old usurer will be here instantly, with my Puncke Syndefie, whom you know your Lady has promised me to entertain for her Gentlewoman: and he (with a purpose to feed on you) invites you most so∣lemnly by me to supper.
It falls out excellently fitly: I see desire of gain makes Jealousy venturous: 
See Frank here comes my Lady; Lord how she views thee, she knows thee not I think in this bravery.
How now? who be you I pray?
One moister Frances Quickesiluer, an't please your La∣diship.
Gods my dignity! as I am a Lady, if he did not make me blush so that mine eyes stood awater, would I were vnma∣ried again: 
Whore's my woman I pray?
See Madam, she now comes to attend you.
God save my honourable Knight, and his worship∣full Lady.
You're very welcome! you must not put on your Hat yet.
No Madam; till I know your Ladyships further plea∣sure, I will not presume.
And is this a Gentleman's daughter new come out of the country?
She is Madam; &amp; one that her Father hath a special care to bestow in some honourable Ladies service, to put her out of her honest humours forsooth, for she had a great de∣sne to be a Nun, an't please you.
A Nun? what Nun? a Nun Substantive? or a Nun Adiectiue?
A Nun Substantive Madam I hope, if a Nun be a Noune. But I mean, Lady, a vowed maid of that order.
Isle teach her to be a maid of the order I warrant you: and can you doe any work belongs to a Ladies Chamber?
What I cannot doe, Madam, I would bee glad to learn.
Well said, hold up then; hold up your head I say, come hither a little.
I thank your Ladyship.
And hark you; Good man, you may put on your Hat now, I doe not look on you: I must have you of my faction now; not of my Knights, maid.
No forsooth Madam of yours.
And draw all my servants in my Bow, and keep my counsel, and tell me tales, and put me Riddles and read on a book sometimes when I am busy, and laugh at country Gentlewomen, and command any thing in the house for my retainers, and care not what you spend, for it is all mine; and in
any case, be still a Maid what soever you doe, or whatsoever any man can doe unto you.
I warrant your Ladyship for that.
Very well, you shall ride in my coach with me into the country to morrow morning; Come Knight, pray thee lets make a short supper, and to bed presently.
Nay good Madam, this night I have a short Supper at home, waits on his worships acceptance.
By my faith but he shall not go Sir; I shall swoon and he sup from me.
Pray thee forbear; shall he lose his provision?
I by Lady Sir, rather then I lose my longing; come in I say: as I am a Lady you shall not go.
I told him what a Bur he had gotten.
If you will not sup from your Knight Madam, let me entreat your Ladyship to sup at my house with him.
No by my faith Sir, then we cannot be a bed soon en∣ough, after supper.
What a Medcine is this? well Moister Security, you are new married as well as I; I hope you are bound as well: we must honour our young wives you know.
In policy Dad, till to morrow she has sealed.
I hope in the morning yet your Knight-hood will breake-fast with me.
As early as you will Sir.
Thank your good worship; I do hunger and thirst to do you good Sir.
Come sweet Knight come, I do hunger and thirst to be a bed with thee. 
Thanks for our feastlike Breakfast good Moister Se∣curitie, I am sorry, (by reason of my instant haste to so long a voyage as Ʋirginia,) I am without means, by any kind
amends to show how affectionately I take your kindness, and to confirm by some worthy ceremony a perpetual league of friendship betwixt vs.
Excellent Knight; let this be a token betwixt vs of inviolable friendship: I am new married to this fair Gen∣tlewoman you know; &amp; (by my hope to make her fruitful though I be something in years) I vow faithfully unto you, to make you Godfather (though in your absence) to the first child I am blessed withal; and henceforth call me Gossip I beseech you, if you please to accept it.
In the highest degree of gratitude, my most worcester∣thy Gossip; for confirmation of which friendly title, let me entreat my fair Gossip your Wife here, to accept this Diamond, and keep it as my gift to her first Child, wheresoever my Fortune in event of my Voyage shall be∣stowe me.
How now my coy wedlock! make you strange of so Noble a favour? take it I charge you, with all affection, and (by way of taking your leave) present boldly your lips to our honourable Gossip.
How venturous he is to him, and how jealous to others!
Long may this kind touch of our lips Print in our hearts al the forms of affection. And now my good Gos∣sip, if the writings be ready to which my wife should seal, let them be brought this morning, before she takes Coach into the country, and my kindness shall work her to dis∣patch it.
The writings are ready Sir. My learned counsel here, Moister Bramble, the Lawyer hath perusde them; and within this hour, I will bring the Scriuenour with them to your worshipful Lady.
Good Moister Bramble, I will here take my leave of you then; God send you fortunate Pleas sir, and contentious Clients.
And you foreright winds Sir, and a fortunate voyage. 
Sir Petronell, here are three or four Gentlemen desire to speak with you.
What are they?
They are your followers in this voyage Knight, Cap∣taine Seagull and his associates, I met them this morning, and told them you would be here.
Let them enter I pray you, I know they long to bee gone, for their stay is dangerous.
God save my honourable Colonel.
Welcome good Captain Seagull, and worthy Gentle∣men, if you will meet my friend Frank here, and me, at the blew Anchor Tavern by Billinsgate this Evening, we will there drink to our happy voyage, be merry, and take Boat to our Ship with all expedition.
Defer it no longer I beseech you Sir, but as your voyage is hitherto carried closely, and in another Knights name, so for your own safety and ours, let it be continued, our meeting and speedy purpose of departing known to as few as is possible, least your Ship and goods be attached.
Well advised Captain our Colonel shall have money this morning to dispatch all our departures, bring those Gentlemen at night to the place appointed, and with our skins full of vintage, weal take occasion by the vantage, and away.
We will not fail but be there sir.
Good morrow good Captain, and my worthy asso∣ciates. Health and all Sovereignty to my beautiful gossip, for you sir, we shall see you presently with the writings.
With writings and crowns to my honourable gossip: I do hunger and thirst to doe you good sir. 
Heir's a stir when Citizens ride out of Town in∣deed, as if all the house were a fire; Slight they will not give a man leave, to oat's breakfast before he rises.
What Coachman? my Ladies Coach for shame; her ladyships ready to come down;
Sfoote Hamlet; are you mad? whether run you now you should brush up my old Mistress?
What Potkinn? you must put off your Tankerd, and put on your blew cote and waite upon Mistress Toochstone into the country. 
I will forsooth presently. 
Come sweet Mistress Gazer, lets watch here, and see my Lady Flash take coach.
A my word heir's a most fine place to stand in, did you see the new Ship launched last day Mistress Fond.
O God, and we citizens should loose such a sight?
I warrant, here will be double as many people to see her take coach, as there were to see it take water.
O shoe's married to a most fine Castle in the country they say?
But there are no Giants in the Castle, are there?
O no, they say her Knight kild' hem all and therefore he was knighted.
Would to God her Ladyship would come away.
She comes, she comes, she comes.
Fond. Pray heaven bless your Ladyship.
Thank you good people; my coach for the love of Heaven, my coach? in good truth I shall swoon else.
Coach? coach my Ladies coach. 
As I am a Lady, I think I am with child already, I long for a coach so; may one be with child before they are married Mother?
I by 'rladie Madam, a little thing does that; I have seen a little prick no bigger then a pins head, swell big∣ger and bigger, till it has come to an Income; &amp; even so tic in these cases.
Your Coach is coming, Madam.
That's well said; Now heaven! me thinks, I am even up to the knees in preferment;
But a little higher, but a little higher, but a little higher,
There, there, there lies Cupids fire.
But must this young man, an't please you Ma∣dam, run by your coach all the way a foot?
I by my faith I warrant him, he gives no other milk, as I have an other servant does.
Alas! tic even pity me thinks; for Gods sake Madam buy him but a Hobby horse, let the poor youth have something betwixt his legs to ease 'hem; Alas! we must do as we would be done too;
Go too, hold your peace dame, you talk like an old fool I tell you.
Wilt thou be gone, sweet Honey suckle, before I can go with thee?
I pray thee sweet Knight let me; I do so long to dress up thy castle before thou come: But I marle how amy modest Sister occupies her self this morning, that she can not waite on me to my Coach, as well as her mother!
Mary Madam, shoe's married by this time to Prone∣tise Goulding; your Father, and some one more, stole to Church with 'hem, in all the haste, that the cold meat lest at your wed∣ding, might serve to furnish their Nuptial table.
There's no base fellow, my Father, now: but hoe's even fit to Father such a Daughter: he must call me daughter no more now; but Madam; and please you Madam: and please your worship Madam, indeed; out upon him, marry his daughter to a base Prentice?
What should one doe? is there no law for one that marries a women's daughter against her will? howe shall we punish him Madam.
As I am a Lady an't would snow, weed so pebble 'hem with snow balls as they come from Church; but sir, Frank Quicksiluer.
I Madam.
Dost remember since thou and I clapped what d'ye' clats in the Garrat?
I know not what you mean Madam.
His head as white as milk,
All flaxen was his hair:
But now he is dead,
And laid in his Bed,
And never will come again.
God be at your labour.
Was there ever such a Lady?
See Madam, the Bride and Bridegroom:
Gods my precious! God give you joy Mistress What lack you. Now out upon thee Baggage: my sister married in a Taffeta Hat? Mary hang you; Westward with a waniō te'yee, Nay I have done we ye Minion thēy faith, never look to have my countnance any more: nor any thing I can do for thee. Thou ride in my Coach? or come down to my Castle? fie upon thee: I charge thee in my Ladyships name, call me Sister no more.
An't please your worship, this is not your Sister: This is my daughter, and she call me Father, and so does not your Ladyship an't please your worship Madam.
No nor she must not call thee Father by Heral∣dry, because thou make thy Prentice thy Son as well as she; Ah thou misproude Prentice, dare thou presume to marry a Ladies Sister?
It pleased my Master forsooth to embolden me with his favour: And though I confess my self far unworthy so worthy a wife (being in part, her servant, as I am your Prone∣tise) yet (since I may say it without boasting) I am borne a Gentleman, and by the Trade I have learned of my Master (which I trust taints not my blood) able with mine own Industry and portion to maintain your daughter, my hope is, heaven will so blesle our humble beginning, that in the end I shall be no disgrace to the grace with which my Master hath bound me his double Prentice.
Master me nomore Son if thou think me worcester∣thy to be thy father.
Sun? Now good Lord how he shines and you mark him! hoe's a gentleman.
I indeed Madam, a Gentleman borne.
Never stand a'your Gentry M. Bridgegrome: if your legs be no better then your Arms, you'll be able to stand up∣on neither shortly.
An't please your good worship Sir, there are two sorts of Gentlemen.
What mean you Sir?
Bold to put off my hat to your worship.
Nay pray forbear Sir, and then forth with your two sorts of Gentlemen.
If your worship will have it so? I say there are two sorts of Gentlemen. There is a Gentleman Artificial, and a gentleman Natural; Now, though your worship be a Gentle∣man Natural: Work upon that now.
Well said old Touchstone, I am proud to hear thee enter a set speech in faith, forth I beseech thee.
Cry you mercy Sir, your worship's a Gentleman, I doe not know? if you bee one of my acquaintance you're very much disguised Sir.
Go too old Quipper: forth with thy speech I say.
What Sir, my speeches were ever in vain to your gracious worship: And therefore till I speak to you gallantry in deed, I will save my breath for my broth anon. Come my poor son and daughter; Let vs hide our selves in our poor humility and live safe: Ambition consumes it self, with the ve∣rye show. Work upon that now.
Let him go, let him go for Gods sake: let him make his Prentice, his son for Gods sake: give away his daughter for Gods sake: and when they come a begging to vs for Gods sake, let's laugh at their good husbandry for Gods sake. Fare-well sweet Knight, pray thee make haste after.
What shall I say? I would not have thee go,
Now, O now, I must depart;
Parting though it absence move,
This Ditty knight, doe I see in thy looks in Capital Letters.
What a grieftis to depart, and leave the slower that has my hart?
My sweet Lady, and alack for wee, why should we part so?
Tell truth Knight, and shame all dissembling Lovers; does not your pain lye on that side?
If it doe, can thou tell me how I may cure it?
Excellent easily; divide your self in two halfes, just by the girdlestead; send one half with your Lady, and keep the cother your self: or else doe as all true Lovers doe, part with your heart and leave your body behind: I have seen't done a hundred times: Tic as easy a matter for a Lover to part with∣out a heart from his sweet heart, and he ne'er the worse: as for a Mouse to get from a Trappe and leave her tail behind him. See here comes the Writings.
Good morrow to my worshipful Lady. I present your Ladyship with this writing; to which if you please to set your hand, with your Knights, a velvet Gown shall attend your journey a'my credit.
What Writing is it Knight?
The sale (sweet heart) of the poor Tenement I told thee off, only to make a little money to send thee down furniture for my Castle, to which my hand shall lead thee.
Very well: Now give me your Pen I pray.
It goes down without chewing y'faith.
Your worships deliver this as your deed?
Wee doe.
So now Knight farewell till I see thee.
All farewell to my sweet heart.
God-boye, son Knight.
Farewell my good Mother.
Farewell Frank, I would fine take thee down if I could.
I thank your good Ladyship; Farewell Mistrie Syndifie. 
O tedious Voyage, where of there is no end! What will they think of me?
Think what they list; They longed for a vagary in∣to the Country, and now they are fitted: So a woman marry to ride in a Coach, she cares not if she ride to her Ruin; Tic the great end of many of their marriages: This is not first time a
Lady has rid a false journey in her Coach I hope.
Nay, tic no Matter, I care little what they think; hee that ways men's thoughts, has his hands full of nothing: A man in the course of this world should bee like a Surgeons instrument, work in the wounds of others, and feel no∣thing himself. The sharper, and subtler, the better.
As it falls out now Knight, you shall not need to devise excuses, or endure her out cries, when she re∣turns; wee shall now bee gone before, where they can not reachevs.
Well my kind Compare, you have now Th'as∣surance we both can make you; let me now entreat you, the money wee agreed on may bee brought to the Blew An∣cor, ne'er to Billings-gate, by Six a Clock: where I and my chief friends, bound for this voyage, will with Feasts attend you.
The money my most honourable Compare, shall with∣out fail observe your appointed hour.
Thanks my dear Gossip. I must now impart
To your approved love, a loving secret:
As one on whom my life doth more rely
In friendly trust, then any man alive.
Nor shall you be the chosen Secretary
Of my affections, for affection only;
For I protest, (if God bless my return,)
To make you Partner, in my actions gain
As deeply, as if you had ventured with me
Half my expenses. Know then, honest Gossip,
I have enjoyed with such divine contentment,
A Gentle women's Bed, whom you well know,
That I shall ne'er enjoy this tedious Voyage,
Nor live the lest part of the time it asks,
Without her presence; So I thirst and hunger
To taste the dear feast of her company.
And if the hunger and the thirst you vow
(As my sworn Gossip) to my wished good
Be (as I know it is) vnfainde and firm,
Doe me an easy favour in your Power.
Bee sure brave Gossip, all that I can doe
To my best Nerve, is wholly at your service:
Who is the woman (first) that is your friend?
The woman is your learned Counsels wife,
The Lawyer Moister Bramble: whom would you,
Bring out this Even, in honest Neighbour-hood
To take his leave with you, of me your Gossip.
I, in the mean time, will send this my friend
Home to his house, to bring his wife disguised
Before his face, into our company:
For Love hath made her look for such a wile,
To free her from his tyrannous Jealousy.
And I would take this course before another:
In stealing her away to make vs sport,
And gull his circumspection the more grossly.
And I am sure that no man like your self,
Hath credit with him to entice his Jealousy,
To so long staye abroad, as may give time
To her enlardgment, in such safe disguise.
A pretty, pithy, and most pleasant project!
Who would not strain a point of Neighbourhood,
For such a point, de-vice? that as the ship
Of famous Draco, went about the world,
Will wind about the Lawyer, compassing,
The world him self, he hath it in his arms:
And that's enough, for him, without his wife.
A Lawyer is Ambitious, and his head,
Can not bee praised, nor raised too high,
With any Forcke, of highest knavery.
Isle go fetch her straight.
So, so, Now Frank go thou home to his house,
Stead of his Lawyers, and bring his wife hither:
Who just like to the Lawyers wife, is prisoned,
With his sterne vsurous Jealousy; which could never
Be over reacht-thus, but with ouer-reaching.
And M. Francis, watch you th'instant time
To Enter with his Exit: t'wilbe rare,
Two fine horned Beasts A Cammell and a Lawyer!
How the old villain joys in villainy?
And hark you Gossip, when you have her here,
Have your Boat ready, ship her to your Ship
With utmost haste, lest Moister Bramble stay you,
To o'er reach that head that outreacheth all heads?
Tic a trick Rampant; Tic a very Quiblyn;
I hope this harvest, to pitch cart with Lawyers;
Their heads will be so forked; This sly tooche
Will get Apes to invent a number such.
Was ever Rascal, honied so with poison?
He that delights in slavish Avarice.
Is apt to joy in every sort of vice.
Well, isle go fetch his wife, whilst he the Lawyers.
But stay Frank, lets think how we may disguise her upon this sudden.
Gods me there's the mischief; but hark you, here's an excellent device; fore God a Rare one: I will carry her a Sailors gown and cap and cover her; &amp; a players beard;
And what upon her head?
I tell you a Sailors Cap: slight God forgive me, what kind of sigentmemorie have you?
Nay then, what kind of figent wit hast thou?
A Sailors cap? how shall she put it off
When thou presentst her to our company?
Tush man, for that, make her a saucy sailor.
Tush tush tic no fit sauce for such sweet mutton; I know not what t'aduise.
Knight, knight a rare devise.
Sownes yet again.
What stratagem have you now?
The best that ever. You talked of disguising?
Emery Gossip thats our present care.
Cast care a way then, here's the best device
For plain Security (for I am no better)
I think that ever lived: here's my wives gown
Which you may put upon the Lawyers wife,
And which I brought you sir for two great reasons;
One is, that Moister Bramble may take hold
Of some suspicion that it is my wife,
And gird me so perhaps with his law wit,
The other (which is policy indeed)
Is, that my wife may now be tied at home,
Having no more but her old gown abroad,
And not show me a quirk, while I firk others.
Is not this rare?
The best that ever has.
Am I not borne to furnish Gentlemen?
O my dear Gossip!
Well hold Moister Francis, watch when the Lawyer's out, and put it in; and now—I will go fetch him. 
O my Dad! he goes as it were the Devil to fetch the Lawyer; and devil shall he be if horns will make him.
why how now Gossip, why stay you there musing?
A toy, a toy runs in my head in faith.
A pox of that head, is there more toys yet?
What is it pray thee Gossip?
Why Sir? what if you should slip away now with my wives best gown. I having no security for it?
For that I hope Dad you will take our words.
I by th'masse your word thats a proper staff
For wise Security to lean upon;
But tic no matter, once isle trust my Name,
On your cracked credits, let it take no shame,
Fetch the wench Frank.
Isle wait upon you sir.
And fetch you over, you were ne'er so fetched:
Go, to the Tavern Knight, your followers
Dare not be drunk I think, before their Captain.
Would I might lead them to no hotter seruise,
Till our Ʋirginian gould were in our purses
Come Drawer, pierce your neatest Hogsheads, &amp; lets have cheer, not fit for your Billingsgate Tavern; but for our Ʋirginian Colonel; he will be here instantly.
You shall have all things fit sir; please you have any more Wine.
More wine Slave? whether we drink it or no, spill it, and draw more.
Fill all the pots in your house with all sorts of liquor, and let 'hem waite on vs here like Soldiers in their Pewter, coats; And though we doe not employ them now, yet wee will maintain 'hem, till we doe.
Said like an honourable Captain; you shall have all you can command Sir. 
Come boys, Ʋirginia longs till we share the rest of her Maiden-head,
Why is she inhabited already with any English?
A whole Country of English is there man, bred of those that were left there in 79. They have married with the Indians, and make 'hem bring forth as beautiful faces as any we have in England: and therefore the Indians are so in love with 'hem, that all the treasure they have, they lay at their feet.
But is there such treasure there Captain, as I have heard?
I tell thee, Gold is more plentiful there then Cop∣per is with vs: and for as much red Copper as I can bring, Isle have thrice the weight in Gold. Why man all their drip∣ping Pans and their Chamber pots are pure Gold; and all the Chains, with which they chain up their streets, are massy Gold; all the Prisoners they take, are fetterd in Gold: and for Rubies and Diamonds, they go forth on holidays and gather 'hem by the Sea-shore, to hang on their childrens Coats, and stick in their Caps, as common∣lie as our children wear Saffron guilt Brooches, and groats with pools in 'hem.
And is it a pleasant Country withal?
As ever the Sun shined on: temperate and full of all sorts of excellent viands; wilde Boar is as common there, as our tamest Bacon is here: Venison, as Mutton. And then you shall live freely there, without Sergeants, or Courtiers, or Lawyers, or Intelligencers. Then for your means to advancement, there, it is simple, and not preposte∣rously
mixed: You may be an Alderman there, and never be Scauinger; you may be any other officer, and never be a Slave. You may come to preferment enough, and never be a
To Riches, and Forune enough and have never the more Villainy, nor the less wit. Besides, there, we shall have no more Law then Conscience, and not too much of either; serve God enough, eat and drink enough, and enough is as good as a Feast.
Gods me! and how far is it thither?
Some six weeks sail, no more, with any indifferent good wind: And If I get to any part of the coast of Offer∣ca, Isle sail thither with any wind. Or when I come to Cape Finister, ther's a foreright wind continual wastes vs till we come at Virginia. See, our Colonel's come.
Well met good Captain Seagull, and my Noble Gentlemen! Now the sweet hour of our freedom is at hand.
Come Drawer. Fill vs some carouses; and prepare vs for the mirth, that will be occasioned presently: Here will be a pretty wench Gentlemen, that will bear vs com∣pany all our voyage.
Whatsoever she be; here's to her health Noble Colo∣nil, both with Cap and Knee.
Thanks kind Captain Seagull. Shoe's one I love dearly; and must not bee known till we bee free from all that know vs: And so Gentlemen, heir's to her health.
Let it come worthy Colonel, Wee doe hunger and thirst for it,
Before heaven, you have hit the phrase of one that her presence will touch, from the foot to the forehead, if ye knew it.
Why then we will join his forehead, with her health, sir: and Captain Scapethrift, here's to 'hem both,
See, see, Moister Bramble; fore heaven their voyage cannot but prosper, they are o'their knees for success to it.
And they pray to God Bacchus.
God save my brave Colonel with all his tall Cap∣taines and Corporals; see sir, my worshipful learned Coun∣sail, M. Bramble, is come to take his leave of you.
Worshipful M. Bramble, how far doe you draw vs into the sweet brier of your kindness? come Captain Seagull, another health to this rare Bramble, that hath never a prick about him.
I pledge his most smooth disposition sir: come moister Security, bend your supporters, and pledge this notorious health here.
Bend you yours likewise, M. Bramble, for it is you shall pledge me.
Not so, M. Security, hee must not pledge his own health.
No Moister Captain? 
Why then here's one is fitly come to doe him that honour.
Here's the Gentlewoman your cousin sir, whom with much entreaty I have brought to take her leave of you in a Tavern; ashamed whereof, you must pardon her if she put not off her Mask.
Pardon me sweet Cousin, my kind desire to see you before I went, made me so importunate to entreat your pre∣sense here.
How now M. Frances? have you honoured this pre∣sense with a fair Gentlewoman?
Pray sir, take you no notice of her, for she will not be known to you.
But my learned Counsel, M. Bramble here, I hope may know her.
No more then you sir, at this time, his learning must pardon her.
Well, God pardon her for my part, and I doe Isle bee
sworn; and so Moister Francis, here's to all that are going Eastward to night, towards Cuckolds haven; and so to the health of Moister Bramble.
I pledge it Sir, hath it gone round, Captains?
It has sweet Frank, and the round closes with thee.
Well Sir, here's to al Eastward &amp; toward Cuckolds, &amp; so to famous Cuckolds haven so fatally remembered. Surgit.
Nay pray thee Cousin weep not; Gossip Security?
I my brave Gossip.
A word I beseech you Sir; our friend, Mistress Bram∣ble here, is so dissolved in tears, that she drowns the whole mirth of our meeting: sweet Gossip, take her aside and com∣fort her.
Pity of all true love, Mistress Bramble, what weep you to enjoy your love? whats the cause Lady? first because your husband is so near, and your heart earns, to have a little abused him? Alas, Alas, the offence is too common to be re∣spected; So great a grace, hath seldom chanced to so vnthank∣full a woman; to be rid of an old jealous Dotard; to enjoy the arms, of a loving young Knight; that when your prick-lesse Bramble is withered with grief of your loss, will make you floorish a fresh in the Bed of a Lady.
Sir Petronell, here's one of your water men come to tell you, it will be flood these three hours; and that t'will bee dangerous going against the Tide: for the sky is over cast, &amp; there was a Porcpisce, even now seen at Londō bridge, which is always the messenger of tempests, he says.
A Porcpisce? whats that to th'purpose? charge him if he love his life to attend vs: can we not reach Black wall (where my ship lies) against the tide, and in spite of Tempests? Cap∣taines and Gentlemen, we'll begin a new ceremony at the be∣ginning of our voyage, which I believe will be followed of all future adventurers.
Whats that good Colonel?
This, Captain Seaguli; we'll have our provided Supper brought a board Sir Francis Drakes Ship, that hath compassed the world: where with full Cupps, and Banquets we will doe sacri∣fice for a prosperous voyage. My mind gives me that some
good Spirits of the waters should haunt the desert ribs of her; and be auspicious to all that honour her memory, and will with like Orgies, enter their voyages.
Rarely conceited; one health more to this motion, &amp; aboard to perform it. He that will not this night be drunk, may he never be Sober. 
Sir Petronell and his honourable Captains in these young services, we old Servitors may bee spared: We only came to take our leaves, and with one health to you all, Isle be bold to do so. Here neighbour Security, to the health of Sir Petronell, and all his Captains.
You must bend then Moister Bramble; So, now I am for you: I have one corner of my brain, I hope, fit to bear one carouse more. Here Lady, to you that are encompassed there, &amp; are ashamed of our company. Ha, ha, ha, by my troth, (my learned counsel Moister Bramble) my mind runs so of Cuckolds haven to night, that my Head runs over with admiration.
But is not that your wife, Neighbour?
No by my troth Moister Bramble; ha, ha, ha, a Pox of all Cuckolds-hauens I say.
A'my faith, her garments are exceeding like your wives.
Cucullus non facet Monachum, my learned Counsel; all are not Cuckolds that seem so, nor all seem not that are so. Give me your hand, my learned Counsel, you and I will Supp some where else, then at Sir Frances Drakes Ship to night. Adieu my Noble Gossip.
Good Fortune brave Captains; fair skies God send ye.
Farewell my harts, farewell.
Gossip, laugh no more at Cuckolds-hauen Gossip.
I have done, I have done Sir, will you lead Moister Bramble? ha, ha, ha.
Captain Seagull, charge a boat.
A Boat, a boat, a boat. 
You're in a proper taking indeed to take a Boat, espe∣pecially at this time of night, and against Tide and Tempest; They say yet, drunken men never take harm; this night will
try the truth of that Proverb. 
What Winnie? Wife, I say? out of doors at this time▪ where should I seek the Gadfly? Billingsgate, Billingsgate,
Shoe's gone with the Knight, shoe's gone with the Knight; woe be to thee Billingsgate. A boat, a boat, a boat, a full hunderd Marks for a boat. 
All hail, fair Haven of married men only, for there are none but married men Cuckolds. For my part, I presume not to arrive here, but in my Masters behalf, (a poor But∣cher of East-cheape) who sends me to set up (in honour of Saint Luke) these necessary Ensigns of his homage: And up I got this morning, thus early, to get up to the top of this famous Tree, that is all fruit and no leaves, to ad∣uance this Crest of my Masters occupation. Up then, Heaven and Saint Luke bless me, that I be not blown into the Thames as I clime, with this furious Tempest; Slight, I think the Devil be abroad, in likeness of a storm, to rob me of my Horns: Hark how he roars. Lord! what a coil the Thames keeps! she bears some unjust burden I believe, that she kicks and curuets thus to cast it: Heaven bless all honest passengers, that are upon her back now, for the Bit is out of her mouth I see, and she will run away with 'hem. So, so, I think I have made it look the right way, it runs against London-Bridge (as it were) even full butt. And now, let me discover from this lofty prospect, what pranks the rude Thames plays in her desperate lunacy. O me, here's a Boat has been cast away hard by. Alas, alas, See one of her passengers, labouring for his life, to land at this Ha∣uen here; pray heaven he may recover it: His next land is euē just under me; hold out yet a little: whatsoever thou art, pray, and take a good heart to thee. Tic a man, take a mans heart to thee; yet a little further, get up a thy legs man: now, tic
snallowe enough. So, so, so! Alas, hoe's down again; hold thy wind Father: tic a man in a Night-cappe. So! now hoe's got up again: now hoe's past the worst: yet thanks be to heaven; he comes toward me pretty and strongly.
Heaven, I beseech thee, how have I offended thee! where am I cast a shore now, that I may go a righter way home by land? Let me see. O I am scarce able to look about me! where is there any Sea-marke that I am acquainted withal?
Look up Father, are you acquainted with this Mark?
What! landed at Cuckolds haven? Hell and damnation. I will run back and drown my self. 
Poor man how weak hee is! the weak water he's washed away his strength.
Landed at Cuckolds haven? if it had not bin to die twenty times a live, I should never have escaped death: I will never arise more: I will grovel here, and eat dirt till I be choak't: I will make the gentle earth doe that, which the cruel water he's denied me.
Alas good father, be not so desperate; Rise man: if you will, Isle come presently and lead you home.
Home? shall I make any know my Home, that has known me thus abroad? how Jove shall I crouch away, that no eye may see me? I will creep on the earth while I live, and never look heaven in the face more. 
What young Planet reigns now trow, that old men are so foolish? What desperate young Swaggerer would have bin a∣broad such a whether as this, upon the water? Ay me, see a another remnant of this unfortunate ship-wrack! or some other. A wo∣man! in faith, a woman, though it be almost at S. Kath'rins, I dis∣corn it to be a woman for al her body is aboue the water, &amp; her clothes swim about her most handsomely. O they bear her up most bravely! has not a woman reason to love the taking up of her clothes the better while she lives, for this? Alas, how busy the rude Thames is about her? A pox a'that wave. It will drown her, in faith, twill drown her. Cry God mercy, she has escaped it! I thank heaven she has escaped it. O, how she swims like a
Mermaid! some vigilant body look out, and save her. That's well said, just where the Priest fell in, there's one sets down a Ladder, and goes to take her up: Gods blessing a thy heart boy, now take her up in thy arms and to bed with her. Shoe's up, shoe's up! Shoe's a beautiful woman I warrant her, the Billows durst not devour her.
How fare you now Lady?
Much better, my good friend then I wish: as one desperate of her Fame, now my Life is preserved.
Comfort your self; That power that preserved you from death: can likewise defend you from infamy, howsoever you deserve it. Were not you one that took Boat, late this night, with a Knight, and other Gentlemen at Billings-gate?
Unhappy that I am, I was.
I am glad it was my good hap to come down thus far after you, to a house of my friends here in S. Kath'rines, since I am now happily made a mean to your rescue, from the ruthless tempest; which (when you took Boat) was so ex∣treame, and the Gentleman that brought you forth, so despe∣rate and vnsober, that I feared long ere this I should hear of your ship-wracke, and therefore (with little other reason) made thus far this way: And this I must tell you, since perhaps you may make use of it, there was left behind you at our Ta∣uerne, brought by a Porter (hired by the young Gentleman that brought you) a Gentle women's Gown, Hat, Stockings, and Shoes; which if they be yours, and you please to shift you, ta∣king a hard bed here, in this house of my friend, I will presently go fetch you.
Thanks my good friend, for your more then good news. The Gown with all things bound with it are mine; which if you please to fetch as you have promised, I will boldly receive the kind favour you have offered, till your re∣turn: entreating you, by all the good you have done in preser∣uing me hitherto, to let none take knowledge of what favour you doe me, or where such a one as I am bestowed, lest you in∣cur me much more damage in my fame, then you have done me pleasure in preserving my life.
Come in Lady, and shift your self; resolve, that no∣thing, but your own pleasure, shall bee used in your discovery.
Thank you good friend: the time may come, I shall requite you. 
See, see, see! I hold my life, there's some other a taking up at Wapping, now! Look, what a sort of people cluster about the Gallows there! in good troth it is so. O me! a fine young Gentleman! What? and taken up at the Gallows? Heaven grant he be not one day taken down there: A, my life it is ominous. Well, hee is delivered for the time, I see the people have all left him; yet will I keep my prospect a while, to see if any more have bin shipwrecked. 
Accurse, that ever I was saved, or borne.
How fatal is my sad arrival here?
As if the Stars, and Providence spake to me,
And said, the drift of all unlawful courses,
(What ever end they dare propose themselves,
In frame of their licentious policyes.)
In the firm order of just Destiny,
They are the ready high ways to our Ruins.
I know not what to doe, my wicked hopes
Are, with this Tempest, torn up by the roots.
O, which way shall I bend my desperate steppes,
In which unsufferable Shame and Misery
Will not attend them? I will walk this Bank,
And see if I can meet the other relics
Of our poor shipwrecked Crew, or hear of them.
The Knight (alas) was so far gone with wine,
And the other three, that I refuse de their Boat,
And took the haplesse Woman in another,
Who cannot but be sunk, what ever Fortune
Hath wrought upon the others desperate lives.
Zounds Captain, I tell thee, we are cast up of the Coast of France, Sfoote, I am not drunk still, (I hope?) Dost remember where we were last Night?
No by my troth Knight, not I. but me thinks wee have bin a horrible while upon the water, and in the water.
Aye me we are undone for ever: hast any money about thee?
Not a penny by heaven.
Not a penny betwixt vs, and cast a shore in France?
Faith I cannot tell that; my brains, nor mine eyes are not mine own, yet.
Sfoote wilt not believe me? I know it by th'eleuation of the Pole; and by the altitude and latitude of the Climate. See! hers comes a couple of French Gentlemen▪ I knew we were in France: dost thou think our Englishmen are so Frenchyfied, that a man knows not whether he be in France, or in England, whē he sees 'hem? What shall we doe? we must cene to 'hem, and in∣treat some relief of hem: Life is sweet, and we have no other means to relieve our lives now, but their Charities;
Pray you, do you beg on 'hem thē, you can speak French.
Monsieur, plaist il d'auoir pity de nostre grand infortunes? Ie∣suis un pour Chevalier D'Angloterre queen a souffris infortune de Naufrage.
Un pour Chevalier D'Angliterre?
Oui Monsieur, il est trop vraye; maize vousscaues bien nous so∣mes toutes subject a fortune.
A poor Knight of England? a poor Knight of Windsor, are you not? Why speak you this broken French, when you're a whole English man? on what coast are you, think you?
on the coast of France, sir.
On the cost of Dogs Sir: You're in the Isle a Dogs I tell you. I see you've been washed in the Thames here, &amp; I believe ye were drowned in a Tavern before, or else you would never have took boat in such a dawning as this was. Farewell, farewell, we will not know you for shaming of you. I ken the man weel, hoe's one of my thirty pound Knights.
No no, this is he that stole his knighthood of the grand day, for four pound giving to a Page, all the money in's purse I wot well. 
Death, Colonel, I knew you were over shot.
Sure I think now indeed, Captain Seagull, we were something overshot. 
What▪ my sweet Frank Quicksiluer! dost thou survive to re∣joyce me? But what▪ no body at thy heels, Frank? Ay me, what is become of poor Mistress Security.
Faith gone quite from her Name, as she is from her Fame I think; I left her to the mercy of the water.
Let her go, let her go: let vs go to our ship at Black∣wall and shift vs.
Nay by my troth, let our clothes rot upon vs. and let vs rot in them: twenty to one our Ship is attached by this time? if we set her not under Sail this last Tide, I never looked for any other. Woe, woe is me, what shall become of vs? the last money we could make, the greedy Thams has deuourde; and if our Ship be attach't, there is no hope can relieve vs.
Sfoote Knight, what an vn-knightly faintness tran∣sports thee? let our Ship sink, and all the world thats with∣out vs be taken from vs, I hope I have some tricks, in this brain of mine, shall not let vs perish.
Well said Frank faith. O my nimble-spirited Quick-siluer, Foregod, would thou had been our Colonel.
I like his spirit rarely, but I see no means he has to support that spirit.
Go to Knight, I have more means then thou art a∣ware off: I have not lived amongst Gould-smiths and Gould∣makers all this while, but I have learned something worthy of my time with 'hem. And, not to let thee stink where thou standst, Knight, Isle let thee know some of my skill presently.
Doe good Frank I beseech thee.
I will blanch Copper so cunningly, that it shall en∣dure all proofs, but the Test: it shall endure malleation, it shall▪ have the ponderositie of Luna, and the tenacity of Luna, by no means friable.
Slight, where learn'st thou these terms, trow?
Tush Knight, the terms of this Art, every ignorant Quack-saluer is perfect in: but Isle tell you how your self shall blanch Copper thus cunningly. Take Arsnicke, otherwise called Realga, (which indeed is plain Ratsbane) Sublime 'hem three or four times, then take the Sublimate of this Re∣alga, and put'hem into a Glass, into Chymia, &amp; let'hem have a convenient decoction Natural, four and twenty hours, &amp; he will become perfectly fixed: Then take this fixed powder, &amp; project him upon wel-purgd Copper, et habebis Magistriū.
Excellent Frank, let vs hug thee.
Nay this I will do besides; Isle take you off twelve pence from every Angel, with a kind of Aquafortis, and never deface any part of the Image.
But then it will want weight?
You shall restore that thus: Take your sal Achyme prepared, and your distild Urine; and let your Angels lie in it but four and twenty hours, and they shall have their perfect weight again: come on now I hope this is enough to put some spirit into the livers of you, Isle infuse more an other time. We have saluted the proud Ayre long enough with our bare skon∣ces, now will I have you to a wenches house of mine at Lone∣don, there make shift to shift vs, and after such fortunes as the stars shall assign vs.
Notable Frank! we will ever adore thee. 
Now sweet friend you have brought me ne'er e∣nough your Tavern, which I desired that I might with some colour be seen near, enquiring for my husband; who I must tel you stale thither last with my wet gown we have left at your friends: which, to continue your former honest kind∣nes, let me pray you to keep close from the knowledge of any; and so, with all vow of your requital, let me now entreat you to leave me to my women's wit, and fortune.
All shall be done you desire; and so, all the fortune you can wish for, attend you. 
I will once more to this unhappy Tavern before I shift one rag of me more, that I may there know what is left be∣hind, and what news of their passengers. I have bought me a Hat and band with the little money I had about me, and made the streets a little leave staring at my night-cap.
O my dear husband! where have you bin to night? al night abroad at Taverns? rob me of my garments? and fare as one run away from me? Alas! is this seemly for a man of your credit? of your age? and affection to your wife?
What should I say? how miraculously sorts this? was not I at home, and called thee last night?
Yes Sir, the harmless sleep you broke, and my an∣swer to you would have witnessed it, if you had had the patience
to have staid and answered me; but your so sudden retreat, made me imagine you were gone to Moister Brambles, and so rested patient, and hopeful of your coming again, till this your unbeleeued absence brought me abroad with no less then wonder, to seek you, where the false Knight had car∣ried you.
Villain, and Monster that I was, howe have I abused thee, I was suddenly gone indeed! for my sudden jealousy transferred me. I will say no more but this dear wife I suss∣pected thee.
Did you suspect me?
Talk not of it I beseech thee, I am ashamed to imagine it; I will home, I will home, and every morning on my knees ask thee heartily forgiveness. 
Now will I descend my honourable Prospect; the farthiest seeing Sea mark of the World: No marvel then if I could see two miles about me. I hope the red Tempests anger be now over blown, which sure I think Heaven sent as a pu∣nishment, for profaning holy Saint Lukes memory, with so ridiculous a custom. Thou dishonest Satire, farewell to honest married Men; Farewell, to all sorts, and degrees of thee. Fare∣well thou horn of hūger that call th'Inns a court to their Man∣ger; Farewell thou horn of aboundāce, that adornest the heads∣men of the Common-wealth; Farewell thou home of Dire∣ction, that is the City Lantern; Farewell thou Horn of Pleasure, the Ensign of the huntsman; Farewell thou Horn of Destiny, thensigne of the married man; Farewell thou Horn Tree that bear nothing but Stone fruit 
Ha Sirah! Thinks my Knight Aduenturer we can no point of our compass? Doe wee not know North-north-east? North-east and by East? East and by North! nor plain Eastward? Ha? have we never heard of Ʋirginia? nor the Ca∣uallaria? not the Colonoria? Can we discover no discoveries? well, mine errant Sir Flash, and my runagate Quicksiluer, you may drink drunk, crack cannes, hurl away a browne dozen of Monmouth Caps or so, in sea-ceremonie to your boon voy∣age but for reaching any Coast save the coast of Kent; or Essex, with this Tide, or with this fleet, Isle be your warrant for a Grauesend Tossed: There's that gone asore, will stay your Admiral
and Ʋice-admirall, and Rere-admirall, were they al (as they are) but one Pinnace, and under sail, as well as a Remora, doubt it not; and from this Sconce, without either powder or shot, work upon that now. Nay, and you'll show tricks, we'll vie with you, a little. My Daughter, his Lady, was sent Eastward, by land, to a Castle of his, in the ayre (in what region I know not) and (as I hear) was glad to take up her lodging in her Coach, she and her two waiting women, her maid, and her mother, like three Snails in a shall, and the Coachman a top on 'hem, I think. Since they have all found the way back again by weeping Cross. But isle not see them. And for two on 'hem, Madam, and her Malkm, they are like to bite o the bridle for William, as the poor horses have done al this while that hurried 'hem, or else go graze of the cō∣mon: So should my Dame Touchstone too, but she has been my Cross these thirty years, and isle now keep her, to fright away sprights; In faith. I wonder I hear no news of my son Goulding! He was sent for to the Guild-hall, this Morning betimes, and I marvel at the matter, if I had not laid up Comfort, &amp; hope in him, I should grow desperate of al. See, He is come I'my thought! How now Son? what news at the Court of Aldermen?
Troth Sir, an Accident somewhat strange, else it hath little in it worth the reporting.
What? It is not borrowing of money then?
No sir it hath pleased the worshipful Commoners of the city, to take me one i'their number at presentation of the in∣quest
Ha!
And the Alderman of the ward wherein Idwel, to ap∣point me his Deputy—
Howe!
In which place, I have had an oath ministered me, since I went.
Now my dear, &amp; happy Sonnellet we kiss thy new worship, &amp; a little boast mine own happiness in thee: What a for∣tune was it (or rather my judgment indeed) for me, first to see that in his disposition, which a whole City so conspires to second? Tan into the Liuory of his company, the first day of his freedōe? now (not a week married) chosen Commoner? and Aldermans Deputy in a day? note but the reward of a thrifty course. The wōder of his Time! Well, I will honour M. Alderman, for this act, (as becomes me) &amp; shall think the better of the cômon Councels wisdōe, &amp; worship, while I live, for thus meeting, or but cōming
after me in the opinion of his desert. Forward, my sufficient Son, and as this is the first, so esteem it the least step, to that high and prime honour that expects thee.
Sir, as I was not ambitious of this, so I covet no high∣er place; it hath dignity enough, if it will but save me from contempt: and I had rather my bearing, in this, or any other office, should add worth to it; then the Place give the least opinion to me.
Excellently spoken: This modest Answer of thine blushes, as if it said, I will wear Scarlet shortly. Worshipful Son! I cannot contain my self, I must tell thee, I hope to see thee one of the Monuments of our City, and reckoned a∣mong her worthies, to be remembered the same day with the Lady Ramsay, and grave Gresham: when the famous fable of Whittington, and his Pusse, shall be forgotten, and thou and thy Acts become the Posies for Hospitals, when thy name shall be written upon Conduits, and thy deeds plaid i'thy life time, by the best companies of Actors, and be called their Get-peny. This I divine. This I Prophecy.
Sir, engage not your expectation farther, then my abi∣lites will answer: I that know mine own strengths, fear 'hem; and there is so seldom a loss in promising the least, that commonly it brings with it a welcome deceit. I have other news for you Sir.
None more welcome, I am sure?
They have their degree of welcome, I dare affirm. The Colonel, and all his company, this morning putting forth drunk from Belinsgate, had like to have been cast away o'this side Greenwich: and (as I have intelligence, by a false Brother,) are come dropping to town, like so many Masterless men, i'their doublets and hose, without Hat, or Cloak, or any other—
A miracle! the Justice of Heaven! where are they? lets go presently and lay for 'hem.
I have done that already Sir, both by Constables, and other officers, who shall take 'hem at their old Anchor; and with less tumult, or suspicion, then if your self were seen in it: under colour of a great Press, that is now abroad, and they shall here be brought before me.
Prudent, &amp; politic son! Disgrace 'hem all that ever thou can; their Ship I have already arrested. How to my wish it falls out, that thou hast the place of a Justicer upon 'hem! I am partly glad of the injury done to me, that thou moist punish it. Be severe i'thy place, like a new officer of the first quarter, vnreflected: you hear how our Lady is come back with her train, from the invisible Castle?
No, where is she?
Within, but I have not seen her yet, not her mother; who now begins to wish her daughter vndub'd, they say, and that she had walked a foot-pase with her sister. Here they come, stand back.
God save your Ladyship; 'saue your good Ladyship: your Ladyship is welcome from your enchanted Castle; so are your beauteous Retinew. I hear your Knight errant is trauayld on strange adventures: Surely in my mind, your Ladyship hath fished fair, and caught a Frog, as the saying is.
Speak to your Father, Madam, &amp; kneel down.
Kneel? I hope I am not brought so low yet: though my Knight be run away, &amp; has sold my land, I am a Lady, still.
Your Ladyship says true, Madam, &amp; it is fitter, and a greater decorum, that I should curtsy to you that are a knights wife, and a Lady, then you be brought a'your knees to me, who am a poor Cullion, and your Father.
Law! my Father knows his duty.
O child!
And therefore I doe desire your Ladyship, my good Lady Flash in all humility, to depart my obscure Cottage, and return in quest of your bright, and most transparent Castle, how ever presently concealed to mortal eyes. And as for one poor woman of your train here, I will take that order, she shall no longer be a charge unto you, nor help to spend your Ladyship; she shall stay at home with me, and not go abroad, not put you to the pawning of an odd Coach-horse, or three wheels, but take part with the Touchstone: If we lack, we will not complain to your Ladyship. And so good Madam, with your Damsel here, please you to let vs see your straight
backs, in equipage; for truly, here is no roust for such Chickens as you are, or birds o'your feather, if it like your Ladyship.
Mary, fist o'your kindness. I thought as much. Come away Sin, we shall as soon get a fart from a dead man, as a farthing of curtsy here.
O, good Sister!
Sister, sir reverence? come away, I say, Hunger drops out at his nose.
O Madam, Fair words never hurt the tongue.
How say you by that? you come out with your gold ends now!
Stay Lady-daughter: good husband.
Wife, no man loves his fetters, be they made of gold: I list not have my head fastened under my child's girdle; as she has brewed, so let her drink, a Gods name: she went witless to wedding, now she may go wisely a begging. It's but hony-Moone yet with her Ladyship; she has Coach horses, Appa∣rell, Jewels yet left, she needs care for no friends, nor take knowledge of Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, or any body: When those are pawned, or spent, perhaps we shall return in∣to the list of her acquaintance.
I scorn it in faith. Come Sin. 
O Madam, why do you provoke your Father, thus?
Nay, nay, even let Pride go before, Shame will follow after, I warrant you. Come, why dost thou weep now? thou art not the first good Cow hast had an ill Calfe, I trust. What's the news, with that fellow? 
Sir, the Knight, and your man Quickesiluer are with∣out, will you ha 'hem brought in?
O by any means. And Son, here's a Chair; ap∣pear terrible unto 'hem, on the first enter view. Let them be∣hold the melancholy of a Magistrate, and taste the fury of a Citizen in office.
Why Sir, I can do nothing to 'hem, except you charge 'hem with somewhat.
I will charge 'hem, and recharge 'hem, rather then Authority should want foil to set it of.
No good Sir, I will not.
Son, it is your place; by any means.
Believe it, I will not Sir.
How Misfortune pursues vs still in our misery!
Would it had been my fortune, to have been trust up at Wapping, rather then ever have come here.
Or mine, to have famished in the Island.
Must Goulding sit upon vs?
You might carry an M. under your girdle to My∣ster Deputis worship.
What are those, moister Constable?
And't please your worship, a couple of Masterless men, I pressed for the Low-countries, Sir.
Why do you not cary 'hem to Bridewell, according to your order, they may be shipped away?
An't please your Worship, one of'hem says he is a Knight; and we thought good to show him to your worship, for our discharge.
Which is he?
This Sir.
And what's the other?
A Knights Fellow Sir, an't please you.
What? a Knight, and his Fellow thus accoutred? Where are their Hats and Feathers, their Rapiers, and their Cloaks?
O they mock vs.
Nay truly sir, they had cast both their Feathers, and Hats too, before wee see 'hem. Here's all their furniture, an't please you, that we found. They say, Knights are now to be known without Feathers, like Cockerels by their Spurs, Sir.
What are their names, say they?
Very well this. He should not take knowledge of 'hem in his place, indeed.
This is Sir Petronell Flash.
How!
And this Francis Quickesiluer.
Is it possible? I thought your Worship had been gone for Ʋirginia, Sir▪ You are welcome home sir. Your Worcester∣ship has made a quick return, it seems and no doubt a good voyage. Nay pray you be co••••… Sir. How did your Bisquet hold out Sir? Me thought, I had seen this Gentlemen before; good Moister Quickesiluer! How a degree to the Southward has changed you.
Doe you know 'hem Father? Forbear your offers a little, you shall be heard anon.
Yes, Moister Deputy: I had a small venture with them in the voyage, a Thing, called a Son in Law, or so. Officers, you may let 'hem stand alone, they will not run away, Isle give my word for them. A couple of very ho∣nest Gentlemen. One of 'hem was my Prentice, M. Quicksiluer, here, &amp; whē he had 2. year to serve, kept his whore, &amp; his hun∣ting Nag, would play his 100. pound at Gresco, or Primero, as fa∣miliarly (&amp; al a'my purse) as any bright peace of Crimson on 'hem all, had his changeable trunks of Apparel, standing at livery, with his Mare, his Chest of perfumd linen, and his Ba∣thing Tubbs, which whē I told him off, why he—he was a Gen∣tleman, and I a poor Cheapside Groom. The remedy was, we must part. Since when he hath had the gift of gathering up some small parcels of mine, to the value of 500. pound dispersed among my customers to furnish this his Virginian vēture; where∣in this knight was the chief, sir Flash: one that married a daugh∣la of mine, Ladefied her, turned two thousand pounds worth of good land of hers, into Cash, within the first week, bought her a new Gown, &amp; a Coach, sent her to seek her fortune by land, whilst himself prepared for his fortune by sea, took in fresh flesh at Baling sgate, for his own diet, to serve him the whole voyage, the wife of a certain usurer, called Security, who hath been the broker for 'hem in all this business: Please My∣ster Deputy, Work upon that now.
If my worshipful Father have ended.
I have, it shall please M. Deputy.
Well then, under correction.—
Now son, come over 'hem with some fine guird, as thus, Knight you shall be encountered, that is, had to the Counter; or Quicksiluer, I will put you in a crucible or so.
Sir Petronell Flash, I am sorry to see such flashes as these proceed from a Gentleman of your Quality, &amp; Rank; For mine own part, I could wish, I could say, I could not see thē: but such is the misery of Magistrates, and men in Place, that they must not wink at Offenders. Take him aside, I will hear you anon sir.
I like this well yet: there's some grace in the knight, left, He cries.
Francis Quick-siluer, would God thou had turned Quack-saluer, rather then run into these dissolute, &amp; lewd cour∣ses;
It is great pity, thou art a proper young man, of an honest and clean face, somewhat near a good one, (God hath done his part in thee) but, thou haste made too much, and been to proud of that face, with the rest of thy body; for maintenance of which in neat and garish attire, (only to be looked upon by some light houswifes) thou hast prodigally consumed much of thy Masters estate: and being by him gently admonished, at several times, hast returned thy self haughty, and rebellious, in thine answers, thundering out uncivil comparisons, requiting al his kindness with a course and harsh behaviour, never returning thanks for any one benefit, but receiving all, as if they had bin Debts to thee, &amp; no Courtesies. I must tel thee Francis, these are manifest signs of an ill nature; and God doth often punish such pride, and butrecuidance, with scorn and infamy, which is the worst of misfortune. My worshipful father, what do you please to charge them withal? from the press I will free 'hem Moister Constable.
Then isle leave your worship, Sir.
No, you may stay, there will be other matters against 'hem.
Sir I do charge this Gallant, Moister Quicksiluer, on suspicion of Felony; and the Knight as being accessory, in the receipt of my goods.
O God Sir!
Hold thy peace, impudēt varlot, hold thy peace. With what forehead or face, dost thou offer to chop Logic with me, having run such a race of Riot, as thou hast done? Do's not the sight of this worshipful mans fortune &amp; temper, confound thee, that was thy younger fellow in household, and now come to have the place of a Judge upon thee? Dost not observe this? Which of al thy Gallants, &amp; Gasters, thy Swearers &amp; thy Swaggerers, will come now to moan thy misfortune, or pity thy penury? They le look out at a window, as thou rid'st in triumph to Ti∣borne, and cry, yonder goes honest Frank, mad Quicksiluer; He was a free boon companion, when hee had money, says one; Hang him fool, says another, he could not keeepe it when he had it; A pox of the Culliō his Mr. (sais a third) he has brought him to this: when their Pox of pleasure, &amp; their piles of perditi∣on, would have been better bestowed upon thee, that hast ven∣tred for 'hem with the best, and by the clew of thy knavery,
brought thy self weeping, to the Cart of Calamity.
Worshipful Moister.
Offer not to speak, Crocodile, I will not hear a sound come from thee. Thou hast learnt to whine at the Play yonder. Moister Deputy, pray yon commit 'hem both to safe custody, till I be able farther to charge 'hem.
O me, what an unfortunate thing am I!
Will you not take security Sir.
Yes mary will I sir Flash, if I can find him, &amp; charge him as deep as the best on you. He has been the plotter of all this: he is your Inginer, I hear. Moister Deputy, you'll dis∣pose of these? In the mean time, Isle to my Lo. Mayor, &amp; get his warrant, to seize that Serpent Security into my hands, &amp; seal up both house, and goods, to the Kings use, or my satisfaction.
Officers take 'hem to the Counter.
O God.
Nay on, on: you see the issue of your Sloth. Of Sloth comes Pleasure, of Pleasure comes Riot, of Riot comes Whoring, of Whoring comes Spending, of Spending comes Want, of Want comes Theft, of Theft comes Hanging; and there is my Quickesiluer fixed. 
Ah Sin! hast thou ever read in the Chronicle of any Lady, and her waiting-woman, driven to that extremity, that we are, Sin?
Not I truly, Madam, and if I had, it were but cold comfort, should come out of books, now.
Why, good faith Sin, I could dine with a lamentable story, now. O hone, hone, o no nera, &amp;c. Can thou tell ne'er a one, Sin?
None, but mine own, Madam, which is lamentable enough; first to be stolen from my Friends, which were worcester∣shipfull, and of good account, by a Prentile, in the habit and disguise of a Gentleman, and here brought up to London, and promised marriage, and now likely to be forsaken (for he is in possibility to be hanged.)
Nay weep not good Sin. My Petronell, is in as good possibility as he. Thy miseries, are nothing to mine, Sin: I was more then promised marriage, Sin, I had it Sin: &amp; was
made a Lady; and by a Knight, Sin: which is now as good as no Knight, Sin: And I was borne in London, which is more then brought up, Sin: and already forsaken; which is past likelihood, Sin: and in stead of Land in the Country, all my Knights Living lies in the Counter, Syn. there's his Castle now?
Which hee cannot be forced out off, Madam.
Yes, if he would live hungry a week, or two. Hunger they say breaks stone walls. But he is even well enough served, Sin, that so soon as ever he had got my hand to the sale of my inheritance run away from me, and I had been his Punk, God bless vs. Would the Knight of the Sun, or Palmerin of England, have used their Ladies so, Syn? or sir Lancelot? or sir Tristram?
I doe not know, Madam.
Then thou know nothing, Syn. Thou art a Fool, Syn. The Knighthood now a days, are nothing like the Knighthood of old time. They rid a horseback Ours go afoot. They were attended by their Squires. Our by their Lackeys. They went buckled in their Armour, Ours muffled in their Cloaks. They tra∣uaild wildernesses; &amp; deserts, Ours dare scarce walk the streets. They were still pressed to engage their Honour, Ours still ready to pane their clothes. They would gallop on at sight of a Mōster, Ours run away at sight of a Sergeant. They would help poor Ladies, Ours make poor Ladies.
I Madam, they were Knights of the Round-Table at Win∣chester, that sought Aduētures, but these of the Square Table at Ordinaries, that sit at Hazard.
True Syn, let him vanish And tel me, what shall we pawn next
I mary, Madā, a timely consideration, for our Hostess (pro∣phone woman) has sworn by bread, &amp; salt, she will not trust vs another meal.
Let it stink in her hand thē: Isle not be beholding to her. Let me see, my Jewels begone, &amp; my Gowns, &amp; my red velvet Petticoat, that I was married in, &amp; my wedding silk stockings, &amp; al thy best apparel, poor Syn. Good faith, rather thē thou should∣dest pawn a rag more, Il'd lay my Ladyship in lavender, if I knew where.
Alas, Madam, your Ladyship?
I, why? you do not scorn my Ladyship, though it is in a Waistcoat? Gods my life, you are a Peat indeed! do I offer to mortgage my Ladyship, for you, and for your avail, and do you turn the Lip, and the Alas to my Ladyship?
No Madam, but I make question, who will lend any thing upon it?
Who? marry enough, I warrant you, if you'll seek 'hem out. I'm sure I remember the time, when I would have given a thousand pound, (if I had had it) to have bin a Lady; and I hope I was not bred and borne with that appetite alone: some other gentle-borne of the City, have the same longing I trust. And for my part, I would afford 'hem a peny'rth, my Ladyship is little the worse, for the wearing, and yet I would bate a good deal of the sum. I would lend it (let me see) for 40 li• in hand, Syn, that would apparel vs; and ten pound a year: that would keep me, and you, Syn, (with our needles) and wee should never need to be beholding to our sciruy Parents? Good Lord, that there are no Fairies now adays, Syn.
Why Madame?
To doe Miracles, and bring Ladies money. Sure, if we lay in a cleanly house, they would haunt it, Sin? Isle try. Isle sweep the Chamber soon at night, &amp; set a dish of water of the Hearth. A Fayrie may come, and bring a Pearl, or a Diamond Wee do not know Syn? Or, there may be a pot of Gold hid of the backside, if we had tools to dig for it? why may not wee two rise early in the morning (Syn) before any body is up, and find a Jewel, in the streets, worth a 100. li.? May not some great Court-Lady, as she comes from Revels at midnight, look out of her Coach, as it is running, and loose such a Jewel, and wee find it? Ha?
They are pretty waking dreams; these.
Or may not some old Usurer bee drunk ouer-night, with a Bag of money, and leave it behind him on a Stall? for God-sake, Syn, let's rise to morrow by break of day, and see. I protest law, If I had as much money as an Alderman, I would setter some on it, i'th'streetes for poor Ladies to find, when their Knights were laid up. And, now I remember my Song of the Golden shower, why may not I have such a fortune?
Isle sing it, and try what luck I shall have after it.
Fond Fables tell of old,
How love in Danes lap
Fell in a shower of Gold,
By which she caught a clap;
O, had it been my hap,
(How ere the blow doth threa∣ten)
So well I like the play,
That I could wish all day
And night to be so beaten.
O, heir's my Mother! good luck, I hope. Have you brought any money, Mother? Pray you Mother, your Blessing. Nay, sweet Mother, doe not weep.
God bless you; I would I were in my Grave.
Nay, dear Mother, can you steal no more money from my father? dry your eyes, &amp; comfort me. Alas, it is my Knights fault, and not mine, that I am in a Wast-coate, and attired thus simply.
Simply? Tic better then thou deserve. Never whimper for the matter. Thou should have looked, before thou had leaped. Thou were a fire to be a Lady, and now your Lady∣ship and you may both blow at the Cole, for ought I know. Self doe, self have. The hasty person never wants woe, they say.
Nay then Mother, you should ha loook'd to it; A body would think you were the older: I did but my kind, l. He was a Knight, and I was fit to be a Lady. Tic not lack of liking, but lack of living, that severs vs. And you talk like your self and a Cittiner in this, in faith. You show what Husband you come on I∣wis. You smell the Touch-stone. He that will doe more for his daughter, that he has married a sciruie Gold-end man, and his Prentice, then he will for his t'other Daughter, that has wedded a Knight, and his Customer. By this light, I think hee is not my legitimate Father.
O good Madam, doe not take up your mother so.
Nay, nay, let her cene alone. Let her Lady∣ship grieve me still, with her bitter taunts and terms. I have not dole enough to see her in this miserable case, l? without her Velvet gowns, without Ribbons, without Jewels, without French-wires, or Cheat bread, or Quails, or a little Dog, or a Genttleman Usher, or any thing indeed, that's fit for a Lady.—
Except her tongue.
And I not able to relieve her neither, being kept so short, by my husband. Well, God knows my heart. I did little think, that ever she should have had need of her si∣ster Golding.
Why Mother, I ha not yet. Alas, good Mother, bee not intoxicate for me, I am well enough. I would not change hus∣bands with my Sister, I. The leg of a Lark is better then the body of a Kite.
I know that. But—
What sweet Mother, What?
It's but ill food, when nothing's left but the Claw.
That's true Mother; Aye me.
Nay, sweet Lady-bird, sigh not. Child, Madame. Why doe you weep thus? Bee of good cheer. I shall die, if you cry, and mar your complexion, thus?
Alas Mother, what should I doe,
Go to thy Sister's Child, She'll be proud, thy Lady-ship will come under her roof. She'll win thy Father to release thy Knight, and redeem thy Gowns, and thy Coach, and thy Horses, and set thee up again.
But will she get him to set my Knight up, too?
That she will, or any thing else thou'it ask her.
I will begin to love her, if I thought she would doe this.
Try her good Chuck, I warrant thee.
Dost thou think she'll do it?
I Madame, and be glad you will receive it.
That's a good Maiden, she tells you true. Come, Isle take order for your debts i the Ale-house.
Go, Syn, and pray for thy Frank, as I will, for my Pet.
I will receive no Letters, M Woolf, you shall pardon me.
Good Father let me entreat you.
Son Goulding, I will not be tempted, I find mine own easy nature, and I know not what a well-pend subtle Letter may work upon it: There may be Tricks, Packing, doe you see? Return with your Packet, Sir.
Believe it Sir, you need fear no packing here. These are but Letters of Submission, all.
Sir, I doe look for no Submission. I will bear my self in this like Blind Justice, Work upon that now. When the Sessions come, they shall hear from me.
From whom come your Letters, M. Woolfe?
And't please you Sir. One from Sir Petronell. Ano∣there from Francis Quickesiluer. And a third, from old Security, who is almost mad in Prison. There are two, to your worcester∣ship:
One from M. Francis, Sir. Another from the Knight.
I doe wonder, M. Woolfe, why you should travail thus, in a business so contrary to kind, or the nature o'your Place! that you being the Keeper of a Prison, should labour the release of your Prisoners! Whereas me thinks, it were far more Natural, &amp; Kindly in you, to be ranging about for more, &amp; not let these scope you have already under the Tooth. But they say, you Wolves, when you have sucked the blood once, that they are dry, you have done.
Sir, your Worship may descant as you please o'my name, but I protest, I was never so mortified with any men's dis∣course, or behaviour in Prison; yet I have had of all sorts of men in the Kingdom, under my Keys, &amp; almost of all Religions in the land, as Papist, Protestant, Paritane, Brownest, Anabaptist, Mil∣lenary, Fam•lie o'Loue, Iewe, Turk, Infidel, Atheist, Good Fell∣low, &amp;c.
And which of all these (thinks M. Woolfe) was the best Religion?
Troth, M. Deputy, they that pay Fees best: we never examine their consciences farther.
I believe you M. Woolfe. Good faith, Sir, Here's a great deal of humility i'these Letters.
Humility, Sir? I, were your Worship an Eye∣witness of it, you would say so. The Knight will in the Knights-Ward, doe what wee can Sir, and Moister Quickesiluer, would be in the Hole, if we would let him. I never knew, or saw Prison∣ners more penitent, or more devout. They will sit you up all night singing of Psalms, and aedifying the whole Prison• only, Security sings a note to high, sometimes, because he lies in the Two-penny ward. far of, and can not take his tune. The Neighbours can not rest for him, but come every Morning to ask, what godly Prisoners we have.
Which on 'hem is it is so devout, the Knight, or the to'ther?
Both Sir. But the young Man especially! I never heard his like! He has cut his hair too▪ He is so well given, and has such good gifts! Hee can tell you, almost all the Stories of the Book of Martyrs, and speak you all the Sicke-mans Salve without Book.
I, if he had had grace, he was brought up where it grew, I wis. On Moister Wolf.
And he has converted one Fangs a Sergeant, a fellow could neither write, nor read, he was called the Bandog of the Counter: and he has brought him already to pare his nails, and say his prayers, and it is hoped, he will sell his place short∣lie, and become an Intelligencer.
No more, I am coming all ready. If I should give any farther ear, I were takē. Adieu good Moister Wolf. Son, I doe feel mine own weaknesses, do not importune me. Pity is a Rheum, that I am subject too, but I will resist it. Moister Wolf, Fish is cast away, that is cast in dry Pools: Tell Hippo∣crisie, it will not do, I have touched, and tried too often; I am yet proof, and I will remain so: when the Sessions come, they shall hear from me. In the mean time, to all suites, to all in∣treaties, to all letters, to all tricks, I will be deaf as an Adder, and blind as a Beetle, lay mine care to the ground, and lock mine eyes i'my hand, against all temptations. 
You see, moister Wolf, how inexorable he is. There is no hope to recover him Pray you commend me to my brother Knight, and to my fellow Francis, present 'hem with this small token of my love; tell 'hem, I wish I could do 'hem any worcester∣their office, but in this, it is desperate: yet I will not fail to try the uttermost of my power for 'hem. And sir, as far as I have any credit with you pray you let 'hem want nothing: though I am not ambitious, they should know so much.
Sir, both your actions, and words speak you to be a true Gentleman. They shall know only what is fit, and no more. 
Who would you speak with, Sir?
I would speak with one Security, that is prisoner here.
You'are welcome Sir. Stay there isle call him to you. Moister Security.
Who call's?
Here's a Gentleman would speak with you.
What is he? Is it one that grafts my forehead now I am in prison, and comes to see how the Horns shoot up, and prosper.
You must pardon him Sir: The old man is a little
crazed with his imprisonment.
What say you to me, Sir? Look you here. My learned Counsel, M. Bramble! Cry you mercy, Sir: when saw you my wife?
She is now at my house, Sir, and desired me that I would come to Visit you and inquire of you your Case, that we might work some means to get you forth.
My Case, M. Bramble, is stone walls, and iron grates; you see it, this is the weakest part on it. And, for getting me forth, no means but hang my self, and so to be carried forth, from which they have here bound me, in intolerable bands.
Why but what is it you are in for, Sir?
For my Sins, for my Sins Sir, whereof Marriage, is the greatest. O, had I never married, I had never known this Purgatory, to which Hell is a kind of cool Bathe in respect: My wives confederacy Sir, with old Touchstone, that she might keep her Jubilee, and the Feast of her New-Moone. Doe you understand me Sir? 
Good Sir, go in and talk with him. The Light dos him harm, and his example will bee hurtful to the weak Pri∣soneis. Fit, Father Security, that you'll bee still so profane, will nothing humble you? 
What's he?
O hee is a rare young man. Doe you not know him?
Not I. I never saw him. I can remember.
Why, it is he that was the gallant Prentice of London, M. Touchstones man.
Who Quickesiluer?
I, this is hee.
Is this hee? They say, he has been a Gallant indeed.
O, the royal est fellow, that ever was bred up in the City. He would play you his thousand pound, a night at Dice; keep Knights and Lords Company; go with them to bawdy houses; had his fix men in a Livery; kept a stable of Hunting horses; and his Wench in her velvet Gown, and her Cloth of silver. Here is one Knight with him here in Prison.
And how miserably he is changed!
O, that's voluntary in him; he gave away all his rich clothes, as soon as ever hee came in here, among the Prisoners: and will eat of the Basket, for humility.
Why will he doe so?
Alas hee has no hope of life. Hee mortifies himself. He dos but linger on, till the Sessions.
O, he has penned the best thing, that hee calls his Re∣pentance, or his Last Fare-well, that ever you heard: Hee is a pretty Poet, and for Prose—You would wonder how many Pri∣sonars he has helped out, with penning Petitions for 'hem, and not take a penny. Look, this is the Knight, in the rug Gown. Standby.
Sir, for Securities Case, I have told him; Say he should be condemned to be carted, or whipped, for a Bawd, or so, why Isle lay an Execution on him o'two hundred pound, let him acknow∣ledge a Judgment, he shall do it in half an hour, they shall not all fetch him out, without paying the Execution, o'my word.
But can we not be bay'ld M. Bramble?
Hardly, there are none of the Judges in Town, else you should remove your self (in spite of him) with a Habeas Corpus: But if you have a Friend to deliver your tale sensibly to some Justice of the Town, that hee may have feeling of it, (doe you see) you may be bayl'd. For as I understand the Case, tic only done, In Terrorem, and you shall have an Action of false Imprisonment against him, when you come out: and per∣haps a thousand pound Costs. 
How now, M, Woolfe? What news? what return?
Faith, bad all: yonder will bee no Letters received. He says the Sessions shall determine it. Only, M. Deputy Gol∣ding commends him to you, and with this token, wishes he could doe you other good.
I thank him. Good M. Bramble, trouble our quiet no more; doe not molest vs in Prison thus, with your winding devises: Pray you depart. For my pat, I co mm t my cause to him that can succour me, let God work his will. M. Woolfe, I pray you let this be distributed, among the Prisoners, and desire 'hem to pray for vs.
It shall bee done, M. Francis.
An excellent temper!
Now God send him good-lucke. 
But what said my Father in Law, M. Woolfe?
Here's one would speak with you, Sir.
Isle tell you anon Sir Petronell. who is it?
A Gentleman, Sir, that will not be seen. 
Where is he? M. Deputy! your worcester: is wel-come.—
Peace!
Away, Srah.
Good faith, M. Woolfe, the estate of these Gentlemen, for whom you were so late and willing a Suitor, doth much affect me: and because I am desirous to doe them some fair office, and find there is no means to make my Father relent, so likely, as to bring him to be a Spectator of their Miseries; I have ventured on a device, which is, to make make my self your Pri∣sooner: entreating, you will presently go report it to my Father, and (sayning, an Action, at suit of some third person) pray him by this Token, that he will presently, and with all secrecy, come hither for my Bail; which train, (if any) I know will bring him abroad; and then, having him here, I doubt not but we shall be all fortunate, in the Event.
Sir, I will put on my best speed, to effect it. Please you come in.
Yes; And let me rest concealed, I pray you.
See, here a Benefit, truly done; when it is done timely, freely, and to no Ambition. 
I will sail by you, and not hear you, like the wise Vlisses.
Dear Father.
Husband.
Father.
M. Touchstone.
away sirens, I will inmure my self, against your cries; and locke my self vpto our Lamentations.
Gentle Husband, hear me.
Father, It is I Father; my Lady Flash: my sister and I am Friends.
Good Father.
Be not hardened, good M. Touchstone.
I pray you, Sir, be merciful.
I am dease, I doe not hear you; I have stopped mine ears, with Shoemakers wax, and drunk Lethe, and Mantra∣gore to forget you: All you speak to me, I commit to the Ayre. 
How now, M. VVoolfe?
Whore's M. Touchstone? I must speak with him
presently: I have lost my breath for hast.
What's the matter Sir? pray all be well.
Moister Deputy Goulding is arrested upon an execu∣tion, and desires him presently to come to him, forthwith.
Aye me; doe you hear Father?
Tricks, tricks, confederacy, tricks, I have 'hem in my nose, I sent 'hem.
Who's that? moister Touchstone?
Why it is M. Wolf himself, husband.
Father.
I am dease still, I say: I will neither yield to the song of the Siren, nor the voice of the Hyena, the tears of the Croco∣dile, nor the howling of the Wolf: avoid my habitatio mōsters,
Why you are not mad Sir? I pray you look forth, and see the token I have brought you, Sir.
Ha! what token is it?
Do you know it Sir?
My son Gouldings ring! Are you in earnest My. Wolf?
I by my faith sir. He is in prison, and required me to use all speed, and secrecy to you.
My Cloak there (pray you be patient) I am plagued for my Austerity; my Cloak: at whose suite moister Wolf?
Isle tell you as we go sir. 
Why, but is his offence such as he cannot hope of life?
Troth it should seem so: and it is great pity; for he is exceeding penitent.
They say he is charged but on suspicion of Felony, yet.
I but his moister is a shrewd fellow, Heel prove great matter against him.
I'd as live as any thing, I could see his Farewell.
O tic rarely written: why Tobis may get him to sing it to you, hoe's not curious to any body.
O no. He would that all the world should take know∣ledge of his Repentance, and thinks he merits in it, the more shame he suffers.
Pray thee try, what thou can doe.
I warrant you, he will not deny it; if he be not hoarse with the often repeating of it. 
You never saw a more courteous creature, then he is; and the Knight too: the poorest Prisoner of the house may command 'hem. You shall hear a thing, admirably pend.
Is the Knight any, Scholar too?
No, but he will speak very well, and discourse admi∣rably of running Horses, and White-Friers, and against Bawds; and of Cocks; and talk as loud as a Hunter, but is none.
Please you stay here sir, isle cal his worship down to you.
See, he has brought him, and the Knight too. Salute him I pray, Sir, this Gentleman, upon our report, is very desirous to hear some piece of your Repentance. 
Sir, withal my heart, &amp; as I told M. Toby, I shall be glad to have any man a witness of it. And the more openly I prosesse it, I hope it will appear the hartier and the more vnsained.
Who is this? my man Francis? and my son in Law?
Sir, it is all the Testmonie I shall leave behind me to the World, and my Master, that I have so offended.
Good Sir
I writ it, whē my spirits were oppressed.
I, Isle be sworn for you Francis.
It is in imitation of Maningtons; he that was hanged at Cambridge, that cut of the Horses head at a blow.
So sir.
To the tune of I wail in woe, I plunge in pain.
An excellent Ditty it is, and worthy of a new tune.
In Cheapside famous for Gold &amp; Plate,
Quicksiluer I did dwell of late:
I had a Master good, and kind,
That would have wrought me to his mind.
He bad me still, Work upon that,
But alas I wrought I knew not what.
He was a Touchstone black, but true:
And told me still, what would ensue,
Yet, woe is me, I would not learn,
I saw, alas, but could not discern.
Excellent, excellent well.
O let him alone, Hee is taken already.
I cast my Coat, and Cap away,
I went in silkci, and saitens gay,
False Mettle of good manners, I
Did daily coined valavvsully.
I scorned my Master, being drunk.
I kept my Golding, and my Punk,
And with a knight, sir Flash, by name,
(Who now is sorry for the same)
I thank you Francis.
I thought by sea to run, But Thames, and Tempest did me stay.
This cannot be fained sure. Heaven pardon my seucri∣tie. The Ragged Colt, may prooke a good Horse.
How he listens! and is transported? He has forgot me.
Still Eastward hoe was all my word:
But Westward I had no regard.
Nor never thought, what would coin aster
As did alas his youngest Daughter,
At last the black Ox trod o'my foot,
And I saw then what longed vntoo't,
Now try I, Touchstone, touch me still,
And make me currant by thy skill.
And I will do it, Francis.
Stay him M. Deputy, now is the time, we shall loose the song else.
I protest it is the best that ever I heard.
How like you it Gentlemen?
O admirable, sir!
This Stanza now following, alludes to the story of Man∣nington from whence I took my project for my invention.
Pray you go on sir.
O Manington thy stories show,
Thou cutst a Horse-head off at a blow
But I confess, I have not the force
For to cut off the head of a horse,
Yet I desire this grace to vvinne,
That I may cut off the Horse-head of Sin.
And leave his body in the dust
Of sinneshigh way and bogs of Lust,
Whereby I may take Virtues purse,
And live with her for better, for vvorse.
Admirable sir, &amp; excellently conceited.
Alas sir.
Son Goulding &amp; M. Wolf, I thank you: the deceit is welcome, especially from thee whose charitable soul in this hath shown a high point of wisdom and honesty. Listen. I am raui∣shed with his Repentance, and could stand here a whole print∣ship to hear him,
Forth good sir.
This is the last, and the Farewell.
Farewell Cheapside, sarevvel sweet trade
Of Goldsmiths all, that never shall fade
Farewell dear fellow Prentices all
And be you vvarned by my sall:
Shun Usurers, Bawds, and dice, and drabs.
Avoid them as you would French scabs
Seek not to go beyond your Tether,
But cut your Thongs unto your Leather
So shall you thrive by little and little,
Scope Tiborne, Coūters, &amp; the Spittle
And scope them shalt thou my penitent, &amp; dear Fran∣ces.
Master!
Fatherl
I can no longer forbear to doe your humility right: Arise, and let me honour your Repentance, with the hearty and joyful embraces, of a Father, and Friends love. Quicksiluer, thou hast eat into my breast, Quicksiluer, with the drops of thy sor∣row, and kilt the desperate opinion I had of thy reclaim:
O sir, I am not worthy to see your worshipful face.
Forgive me Father.
Speak no more, all former passages, are forgotten, and here my word shall release you. Thank this worthy Brother &amp; kind friend, Francis.—M. Wolf. I am their Bail;
Moister Touchstone? Moister Touchstone?
Who's that?
Security, Sir.
Pray you Sir, if you'll be won with a Song, hear my lamentable tune, too:
O Moister Touchstone,
My heart is full of woe;
Alas, I am a Cuckold:
And, why should it be so?
Because I was a Ʋsurer,
And Bavvd, as all you know,
For which, again I tell you,
My heart is full of wot.
Bring him forth, Moister Wolf, and release his bands. This day shable sacred to Mercy, &amp; the mirth of this Encoun∣la, in the Counter.—See, we are encountered with more Suitors.
Save your Breath, save your Breath; All things have suss∣ded to your wishes: &amp; we are heartily satisfied in their events.
Ah Runaway, Runaway! have I caught you? And, how has my poor Knight done all this while?
Dear Lady-wife; forgive me.
As heartily, as I would be forgiven, Knight. Dear Father, give me your blessing, and forgive me too; I have been proud, and lascivious, Father; and a Fool, Father; and being raised to the state of a wanton coy thing, called a Lady, Father; have scorned you, Father; and my Sister; &amp; my Sisters Velvet Cap, too; and would make a mouth at the City, as I rid through it; and stop mine ears at Bow-bell: I have said your Beard was a Base one, Father; and that you looked like Twier∣pipe, the Taborer; and that my Mother was but my Midwife.
Now God forgi'you, Child Madame.
No more Repetitions. What is else wanting, to make our Harmony full?
Only this, sir. That my fellow Francis make amends to mistress Sindefie, with marriage.
With all my heart.
And Security give her a do were, which shall be all the

NOw will the two Suns of our Roman Heaven
(Pompey &amp; Caesar) in their Tropic burning,
Wit• their contention, all the clouds assemble
That th•eaten tempests to our peace &amp; Em∣per,
Which we shall shortly see pour down in blood,
Civil and natural, wilde and barbarous turning.
From whence presage you this?
From both their Armies,
Now gathered near our Italy, contending
To enter severally: Pompeys brought so near
By Romes consent; for fear of tyrannous Caesar,
Which Caesar fearing to be done in favour
Of Pompey, and his passage to the Empire;
Hath brought on his for interuention.
And such a flock of Puttocks follow Caesar,
For fall of his ill-disposed Purse
(That never yet spared Cross to Aquiline virtue)
As well may make all civil spirits suspicious.
Look how against great rains, a standing Poole
Of Paddockes, Toads, and water-Snakes put up
Their speckled throats aboue the venomous Lake,
Croaking and gasping for some fresh fallen drops
To quench their poisond thirst; being near to stifle
With clotterd purgings of their own foul bane;
So still, where Caesar goes, there thrust up head,
Impostors, Flatterers, Favourites, and Bawds,
Buffons, Intelligencers, select wits;
Close Murderers, Montibanckes, and decayed Thieves,
To gain their baneful lives reliefs from him.
From Britain, Belgia, France, and Germanie,
The scum of either Country, (chose by him,
To be his black Guard, and red Agents here)
Swarming about him.
A•d all these are said
To be suborned, in chief, against your self;
Since Caesar chiefly fears, that you will •it
This day his opposite; in the cause for which
Both you were sent for home; and he hath stolen
Access so soon here; Pompey: whole rest raised
To his encounter; and on both sides, Rome
In general vproa•e.
Which Sir, if you •awe,
And knew, how for the danger, all suspect
To this your worthiest friend (for that known freedom
His spirit will use this day, against both the Rivals,
His wife and family morn, no food, no comfort
Allowed them, for his danger) you would use
Your utmost pours to stay him from the Senate,
All this days Session.
Hoe's too wise, Statilius,
For all is nothing.
Nothing Sir? I •awe
Castor and Pollux Temple, thrust up full,
With all the damned crew you have lately named:
The market place and suburbs swarming with them:
And where the Senate si•, are Ruffians pointed
To keep from entering the degrees that go
Up to the Bench; all other but the Consuls,
Caesar and Pompey, and the Senators,
And all for no cause, but to keep out Cato,
With any violence, any villainy;
And is this nothing Sir? Is his One life,
On whom all good lives, and their goods depend,
In Romes whole Empire! All the In••ice there
That's free, and simple; all such virtues too,
And all such knowledge; Nothing, nothing, all▪
Away Statilius; how long shall thy love
Exceed thy knowledge of me, and the Gods?
Whose rights tho• wrongst for my right? have not I
Their powers to guard me, in a cause of theirs?
Their justice, and integrity included,
In what I stand for? he that fears the Gods,
For guard of any goodness; all things fears;
Earth, Seas, and Air; Heaven, darkness, broad day-light,
Rumour, and Silence, and his very shade:
And what an Aspen soul hath such a creature?
How dangerous to his soul i• such a fear?
In whose cold fits, is all heavens justice shaken
To his faint thoughts; and all the goodness there
Due to all good men, by the gods own vows,
Nay, by the firmness of their endless Being,
All which shall fail as soon as any one
Good to a good man in them: for his goodness
Proceeds from them, and is a beam of theirs.
O never more, Statilius, may this fear
Taint thy bold bosom, for thy self, or friend,
More then the gods are fearful to defend.
Come; let him go, Statilius; and your fright;
This man hath inward guard, past your young sight.
Welcome; come stand by me in what is fit
For our poor Cities safety; nor respect
Her proudest foes corruption, or our danger
Of what seen face soever.
I am yours.
But what alas, Sir, can the weakness doe
Against our whole State of vs only two?
You know our Statists spirits are so corrupt
And servile to the greatest; that what crosses
Them, or their own particular wealth, or honour;
They will not enterprise to save the Empire.
I know it; yet let vs doe like our selves.
Move you for entering only Pomp•is army;
Which if you gain for him; for me, all justice
Will join with my request of entering mine.
Tic like so, and I purpose to enforce it.
But might we not win Cato to our friendship
By honouring speeches, nor persuasive gifts?
Not possible.
Nor by enforciue usage?
Not all the violence that can be used,
Of power, or set authoitry can stir him,
Much less fair words win, or rewards corrupt him;
And therefore all means we must use to keep him
From off the Bench.
Give you the course for that,
And if he offer entry, I have fellows
Will serve your will on him, at my given signal.
He is the man that sits so close to Caesar,
And holds the law there, whispering; see the Cowherd
Hath guards of armed men got, against one naked.
Isle part their whispering virtue.
Hold, keep out.
What? honoured Cato? enter, choose thy place.
Come in;
—Away unworthy grooms.
No more.
What should one say to him?
He will be Stoical.
Where fit place is not given, it must be taken.
Doe, take it Cato; fear no greatest of them;
Thou seek the peoples good; and these their own.
Brave Cato! what a countenance he puts on?
Let's give his noble will, our utmost power.
Be bold in all thy will; for being just,
Thou moist defy the gods.
Said like a God.
We must endure these people.
Doe; begin.
Consuls, and reverend Fathers; And ye people,
Whose voices are the voices of the Gods;
I here have drawn a law, by good consent,
For entering into Italy, the army
Of Romes great Pompey: that his forces here,
As well as he, great Rome, may rest secure
From danger of the yet still smoking fire,
Of Catilinet abhorred conspiracy:
Of which the very chief are left alive,
Only chastisde, but with a gentle prison.
Put them to death then, and strike dead our fear,
That well you urge, by their unfit suruiuall.
Rather then keep it quick; and two lives give it,
By entertaining Pompeys army too.
That gives as great cause of our fear, as they.
For their conspiracy, only was to make
One Tyrant over all the State of Rome.
And Pompeys army, suffered to be entered,
Is, to make him, or give him means to be so.
It follows not.
In purpose; clearly Sir,
Which Isle illustrate, with a clear exa••ple.
If it be day, the Sunne's aboue the earth;
Which follows not (you'll answer) for it is day
When first the morning breaks; and yet is then
The body of the Sun beneath the earth;
But he is virtually aboue it too,
Because his beams are there; and who then knows not
His golden body will soon after mount.
So Pompeys army entered Italy,
Yet Pompey's not in Rome; but Pompey's beams
Who sees not there? and consequently, he
Is in all means enthroned in th'Emperie.
Examples prove not, we will have the army
Of Pompey entered.
We? which we intend you?
Have you already bought the peoples voices?
Or bear our Consuls or our Senate here
So small love to their Country; that their wills
Beyond their Countries right are so perverse,
To give a Tyrant here entire command?
Which I have proved as clear as day, they doe;
If either the Conspirators surviving
Be let to live; or Pompeys army entered;
Both which, beat one sole path; and threat one danger.
Consuls, and honoured Fathers; The sole entry
Of Pompeys army, Isle not yet examine:
But for the great Conspirators yet living,
(Which Cato will conclude as one self danger,
To our dear Country; and deter all therefore
That love their Country, from their lives defence
I see no reason why such danger hangs
On their saved lives; being still safe kept in prison;
And since close prison, to a Roman freedom,
Ten fold torments more, then directest death,
Who can be thought to love the less his Country,
That seeks to save their lives? And lest my self
(Thus speaking for them) be unjustly touched
With any less doubt of my Countries love,
Why (reverend Fathers) may it be esteemed
Self praise in me, to prove my self a chief
Both in my love of her; and in desert
Of her like love in me? For he that does
Most honour to his Mistress; well may boast
(Without least question) that he loves her most.
And though things long since done, were long since known,
And so may seem superfluous to repeat;
Yet being forgotten, as things never done,
Their repetition needful is, in justice,
To inflame the shame of that oblivion:
For hoping it will seem no less impair
To others acts, to truly tell mine own;
Put all together; I have past them all
That by their acts can boast themselves to be
Their Countries lovers: first in those wilde kingdoms
Subdued to Rome, by my vnwearied toils.
Which I dissauag'd and made nobly civil.
Next, in the multitude of those rude Realms
That so I fashiond; and to Romes young Empire
Of old have added: Then the battles numbered
This hand hath fought, and won for her, with all
Those infinites of dreadful enemies
(I slue in them: Twice fifteen hundred thousand
All able Soldiers) I have driven at once
Before my forces: and in sundry onsets,
A thousand thousand of them, put to sword:
Besides, I took in less then ten years time,
By strong assault, aboue eight hundred Cities,
Three hundred several Nations, in that space,
Subduing to my Country; all which service,
I trust, may interest me in her love,
Public, and general enough, to aquit me
Of any selfe-loue; past her common good:
For any motion of particular justice
(By which her general Empire is maintained)
That I can make for those accused prisoners,
Which is but by the way; that so the reason
Metellus makes for entering Pompeys army,
May not more weighty seem, then to agree
With those imprisoned nobles, vital safeties.
Which granted, or but yielded fit to be,
May well extenuate the necessity
Of entering Pompeys army.
All that need
I took away before; and reasons gave
For a necessity to keep it out
Whose entry (I think) he himself affects not.
Since I as well think he affects not th'Empire,
And both those thoughts hold; since he loves his Country,
In my great hopes of him too well to seek
His sole rule of her, when so many souls,
So hard a task approve it; nor my hopes
Of his sincere love to his Country, build
On sandier grounds then Caesars; since he can
As good Cards show for it as Caesar did,
And quit therein the close aspersion
Of his ambition, seeking to employ
His army in the breast of Italy.
Let me not thus (imperial Bench and Senate)
Feel myself beat about the ears, and tossed
With others breathes to any coast they please:
And not put some stay to my errors in them.
The gods can witness that not my ambition
Hath brought to question th'entry of my army;
And therefore not suspected the effect,
Of which that entry is supposed the cause:
Which is a will in me, to give my power
The rule of Romes sole Empire; that most strangely
Would put my will in others powers; and powers
(Vnforfeit by my fault) in others wills.
My selfe-loue, out of which all this must rise:
I will not wrong the known proofs of my love
To this my native Cities public good,
To quit, or think of; nor repeat those proofs
Confirmed in those three triumphs I have made;
For conquest of the whole inhabited world;
First Africa, Europe, and then Asia,
Which never Consul but my self could boast.
Nor can blind Fortune vaunt her partial hand,
In any part of all my services,
Though some have said, she was the page of Caesar,
Both sailing, marching, fighting, and preparing
His fights in very order of his battles:
The parts she plaid for him inuerting nature,
As giving calmness to th'enraged sea;
Imposing Summers weather on sterne winter;
Winging the slowest foot he did command,
And his most Cowherd making fierce of hand.
And all this ever when the force of man
Was quite exceeded in it all; and she
In th'instant adding her clear deity.
Yet, her for me, I both disclaim and scorn;
And where all fortune is renounc't, no reason
Will think one man transferd with affectation
Of all Pumice Empire; for he must have fortune
That goes beyond a man; and where so many
Their hand-fulls find with it; the one is mad
That undergoes it: and where that is cleared;
Th'imputed means to it, which is my •ute
For entry of mine army, I confute.
What rests then, this of all parts being disclaimd?
My part, Sir, rests, that let great Pompey bear
What spirit he lists; it is needful yet for Rome,
That this Law be established for his army.
Tic then a• needful to admit in mine;
Or else let both lay down our arms; for else
To take my charge off, and leave Pompey his;
You wrongfully accuse me to intend
A tyranny amongst ye; and shall give
Pompey full means to be himself a tyrant,
Can this be answered?
Is it then your wills
That Pompey shall cease arms?
What else?
No, no.
Shall Caesar cease his arms?
I, I.
For shame
Then yield to this clear equity, that both
May leave their arms.
We indifferent stand.
Read but this law, and you shall see a difference
Twixt equity and your indifference;
All men's objections answered; Read it Notary.
He shall not read it.
I will read it then.
Nor thou shalt read it, being a thing •o vain,
Pretending cause for Pompeys armies entry,
That only by thy Accomplices and thee;
Tic forged to set the Senate in an uproar▪
I have it Sir, in memory, and will speak it.
Thou shalt be dumb as soon.
Pull down this Cato,
Author of factions, and to prison with him.
Come down Sir.
Hence ye mercenary Ruffians.
What outrage show you? sheath your insolent swords,
Or be proclaimed your Countries foes and traitors.
How insolent a part was this in you,
To offer the imprisonment of Cato?
When there is right in him (were form so answered
With terms and place) to send vs both to prison?
If, of our own ambitions, we should offer
Th'entry of our armies; for who knows
That, of vs both, the best friend to his Country,
And freest from his own particular ends;
(Being in his power) would not assume the Empire,
And having it, could rule the State so well
As now it is gouer'nd, for the common good?
Accuse your self, Sir, (if your conscience urge it)
Or of ambition, or corruption,
Or insufficiency to rule the Empire,
And sound not me with your Lead.
Lead? tic Gold,
And spirit of Gold too; to the politic dross
With which false Caesar •ounds men; and for which
His praise and honour crowns them; who sounds not
The inmost sand of Caesar? for but sand
Is all the rope of your great parts affected.
You speak well, and are learned; and golden speech
Did Nature never give man; but to guild
A copper soul in him; and all that learning
That heartily is spent in painting speech,
Is merely painted, and no solid knowledge.
But you've another praise for temperance,
Which nought commends your free choice to be temperate.
For so you must be; at least in your meals,
Since you've a malady that ties you to it;
For fear of daily false in your aspirings.
And your disease the gods ne'er gave to man;
But such a one, as had a spirit too great
For all his bodies passages to serve it,
Which notes the excess of your ambition.
The malady chancing where the pores and passages
Through which the spirit of a man is borne,
So narrow are, and straight, that oftentimes
They intercept it quite, and choke it up.
And yet because the greatness of it notes
A heat mere fleshly, and of bloods rank fire,
Goats are of all beasts subiect'st to it most.
Your self might have it then, if those faults cause it;
But deals this man ingeniously, to tax
Men with a frailty that the gods inflict?
The gods inflict on men, diseases never,
Or other outward maims; but to decipher,
Correct, and order some rude vice within them:
And why decipher they it, but to make
Men note, and shun, and tax it to th'extreame?
Nor will I see my Countries hopes abused,
In any man commanding in her Empire;
If my more trial of him, makes me see more
Into his intricacies; and my freedom
Hath spirit to speak more, then observers servile.
Be free, Sir, of your insight and your speech;
And speak, and see more, then the world besides;
I must remember I have heard of one,
That same gave out, could see thorough Ok and stone:
And of another set in Sicily,
That could discern the Carthaginian Navy,
And number them distinctly, leaving harbour,
Though full a day and nights sail distant thence:
But these things (Reverend Fathers) I conceive,
Hardly appear to you worth grave belief:
And therefore since such strange things have been seen
In my so deep and foul detractions,
By only Lyncean Pompey; who was most
Loved and believed of Romes most famous whore,
Infamous Flora; by so fine a man
As Galba, or Sarmentus; any easter
Or flatterer may draw through a Ladies Ring;
By one that all his Soldiers call in scorn
Great Agamemnon, or the king of men;
I rest vnmou'd with him; and yield to you
To right my wrongs, or his abuse allow.
My Lords, ye make all Rome amazed to hear.
Away, Isle hear no more; I hear it thunder
My Lords; All you that love the good of Rome,
I charge ye, follow me; all such as stay,
Are friends to Caesar, and their Countries foes.
Th'euent will fall out contrary, my Lords.
Go, thou art a thief to Rome, discharge thine army,
Or be proclaimed, forthwith, her open foe.
Pompey, I charge thee, help thy injured Country
With what powers thou hast armed, and levy more.
War, war, O Caesar.
Peace, peace, worthy Pompey.
wars, wars, and presses, fly in fire about;
No more can I lurk in my lasy corners,
Nor shifting courses: and with honest means
To rack my miserable life out, more,
The rack is not so fearful; when dishonest
And villainous fashions fail me; can I hope
To live with virtuous? or to raise my fortunes
By creeping up in Soldierly degrees?
Since villainy varied thorough all his fingures,
Will put no better case on me then this;
Despair! come seas me: I had able means;
And spent all in the swinge of lewd affections;
Plunged in all riot, and the rage of blood;
In full assurance that being knave enough,
Barbarous enough, base, ignorant enough,
I needs must have enough, while this world lasted;
Yet, since I am a poor, and ragged knave,
My rags disgace my knavery so, that none
Will think I am knave; as if good clothes
Were knacks to know a knave; when all men know
He has no living? which knacks since my knavery
Can show no more; and only show is all
That this world cares for; Isle st•p out of all
The cares it is s•eept in.
Hold Rascal, hang thy self in these days?
The only time that ever was for a Rascal to live in?
How chance I cannot live then?
Either you are not rascal nor villain enough;
Or else thou dost not pretend honesty
And piety enough to disguise it.
That's certain, for every ass does that.
What art thou?
A villain worse then thou.
And dost breathe?
I speak thou heur'st, I move, my pulse beats
Fast as thine.
And wherefore liu'st thou?
The world's out of frame, a thousand Rulers
Wresting it this way, and that, with as many
Religions; when, as heavens upper Sphere is moved
Only by one; so should the Sphere of earth be, and
Isle have it so.
How can thou? what art thou?
My shape may tell thee.
No man?
Man? no, spawn of a clot, none of that •ursed
Crew, damned in the mass it self; plagued in his birth,
Confined to creep below, and wrestle with the Elements▪
Teach himself tortures; kill himself, hang himself;
No such gally slave, but at war with heaven;
Spurning the power of the gods, command the Elements▪
What moist thou be then?
An endless friend of thine; an immortal devil.
Heaven bless vs.
Nay then, forth, go, hang thy self, and thou talk
Of heaven once.
I have done; what devil art thou?
Read the old stoic Pherecides, that tells thee
Me truly, and says that I Ophioneu• (for so is
My name.)
Ophioneus? what's that?
Devilish Serpent, by interpretation; was general
Captain of that rebellious host of spirits that
Waged war with heaven▪
And so were hurled down to hell.
We were so; and yet have the rule of earth; and cares
Any man for the worst of hell then?
Why should he?
Well said; what's thy name now?
My name is Fronto.
Fronto? A good one; and has Fronto lived thus long
In Rome? lost his state at dice? murdered his
Brother for his means? spent all? run thorough worse
Offices since? been a Promoter▪ a Purvey or? a Pander?
A Summer? a Sergeant? an Intelligencer? and at last
Hang thy self?
How the devil knows he all this?
Why thou art a most greene Plouer in policy, I
Perceive; and moist drink Colts-foote, for all thy
Horseman beard: S'light, what need hast
Thou to hang thy self? as if there were a dearth
Of hangmen in the land? Thou liu'st in a good cheap
State▪ a man may be hanged here for a little, or
Nothing. What's the reason of thy desperation?
My idle dissolute life, is thrust out of all his corners
By this searching tumult now on foot in Rome.
—Caesar now and Pompey
Are both for battle: Pompey (in his fear
Of Caesars greater force) is sending hence
His wife and children, and he bent to fly.
See, all are on their wings; and all the City
In such an uproar, as if fire and sword
Were ransacking, and ruining their houses,
No idle person now can lurk near Rome,
All must to arms; or shake their heals beneath
Her martial halters; whose officious pride
Isle shun, and use mine own swinge: I be forced
To help my Country, when it forces me
To this past-helping pickle?
Go to, thou shalt serve me; choose thy profession;
And what cloth thou would wish to have thy Coat
Cut out on.
I can name none.
Shall I be thy learned Counsel?
None better.
Be an Archflamen then, to one of the Gods.
Archflamen? what's that?
A Priest.
A Priest? that ne'er was Clerk?
No Clerk? what then?
The greatest Clerks are not the wisest men.
Nor skils it for degrees in a knave, or a fools preferment,
Thou shalt rise by fortune: let desert rise leisurely
Enough, and by degrees; fortune prefers headlong,
And comes like riches to a man; huge riches being
Got with little pains; and little with huge pains. And
For discharge of the Priesthood, what thou want
In learning, thou shalt take out in goodfellowship:
Thou shalt equiuocate with the Sophister, prate with
The Lawyer, scrape with the Usurer, drink with the
Dutchman, swear with the French man, cheat
With the English man, brag with the Scot, and
Turn all this to Religion, Hoc est regnum
Deorum Gentibus.
All this I can doe to a hair.
Very good, wilt thou show thy self deeply learned too,
And to live licentiously here, care for nothing hereafter?
Not for hell?
For hell? soft Sir; hop'st thou to purchase hell
With only dicing or whoring away thy living?
Murdering thy brother, and so forth? No there
Remain works of a higher hand and deeper brain,
To obtain hell. Think thou earths great
Potentates have gotten their places there with
Any single act of murder, poisoning, adutery,
And the rest? No; tic a purchase for all manner
Of villainy; especially, that may be privileged
By Authority; coloured with holiness, and enjoyed
With pleasure.
O this were most honourable and admirable.
Why such an admirable honourable villainy shalt
Thou be.
Is it possible?
Make no doubt on it; Isle inspire thee.
Sacred and puissant.
Away; Companion and friend, give me thy
Hand; say, dost not love me? art not enamourd
Of my acquaintance?
Protest I am.
Well said, protest and tic enough. And know for
Infallible; I have promotion for thee; both here, and
Hereafter; which not one great one amongst
Millions shall ever aspire to. Alexander, nor great
Cirrus, retain those titles in hell, that they did
On earth:
No?
No: he that sold Seacoale here, shall be
A Baron there; he that was a cheating
Rogue here, shall be a Justice of peace there;
A knave here, a knight there. In the mean
Space, learn what it is to live; and thou shalt
Have Choppiness at commandment to any height
Of life thou can wish.
I fear my fall is too low.
Too low fool? hast thou not heard of Vulcans falling
Out of heaven? Light a thy legs, and no matter
Though thou halt'st with thy best friend ever after; tic
The more comely and fashionable. Better go lame
In the fashion with Pompey, then never so upright,
Quite out of the fashion with Cato.
Yet you cannot change the old fashion (they say)
And hide your cloven feet.
No? I can wear Roses that shall spread quite
Over them.
For love of the fashion doe then.
Go to; I will hereafter.
But for the Priesthood you offer me, I affect it not.
No? what say thou to a rich office then?
The only second means to raise a rascal
In the earth.
Go to; Isle help thee to the be•• ith earth then:
And that's in Sicilia; the very storehouse of the
Romans, where the Lord chief Censor there
Lies now a dying; whose soul I will have; and
Thou shalt have his office.
Excellent; was ever great office better supplied?
Now is the mighty Empress of the earth
(Great Rome) fast locked up in her fancied strength,
All broke in uproars; fearing the just gods
In plagues will drown her so abused blessings.
In which fear, all without her walls, fly in;
By both their earring Champions rushing out;
And those that were within, as fast fly forth;
The Consuls both are fled without one rite
Of sacrifice submitted to the gods,
As ever heretofore their custom was
When they began the bloody frights of war.
In which our two great Soldiers now encountering,
Since both left Rome, opposed in bitter skirmish,
Pompey (not willing yet to hazard battle,
By Cat•s counsel, urging good cause) fled:
Which firing Caesars spirit▪ he pursued
So home, and fiercely, that great Pompey skorning
The heart he took, by his advised flight,
Despised advice as much as his pursuit.
And as in Lybia, an aged Lion,
Urged from his peaceful covert, fear• the light
With his unready and diseased appearance,
Gives way to chase a while, and coldly hunts,
Till with the youthful hunters wanton heat,
He all his cool wrath frets into a flame:
And then his sides he swings with his Sterne,
To lash his strand up, let's down all his brows
About his burning eyes; erects his mane,
Breaks all hi• throat in thunders, and to wreak
His hunters insolence, his heart even barking;
He frees his fury, turns, and rushes back
With such a ghastly horror, that in heaps,
His proud foe• fly, and he that station keeps:
So Pompeys cool spirits, put to all their heat
By Caesars hard pursuit he turned fresh head,
And flew upon his foe with such a rapture
A• took up into furies, all friends fears;
Who fired with his first turning, all turned head,
And gave so fierce a charge, their followers fled,
Whose instant issue on their both sides, see,
And after set out such a tragedy,
As all the Princes of the earth may come
To take their patterns by the spirits of Rome.
Stay cowherd, fly ye Caesars fortunes?
Forbear foolish Crassinius, we contend in vain
To stay these vapours, and must raise our Camp.
How shall we rise (my Lord) but all in uproars,
•eing still pursued?
The pursuit stays, my Lord,
Pompey hath sounded a retreat, resigning
His time to you to use, in instant raising
Your ill-lodg'd army, pi•ching now where fortune
May good amends make for her fault to day.
It was not fortunes fault, 〈◊〉 mine Acilius,
To give my foe charge, being so near the •ea,
Where well I knew the eminence of his strength,
And should have driven th'encounter further off;
Bearing before me such a goodly Country,
So plentiful, and rich, in all things fit
To have supplied my armies want with victuals,
And th'able Cities too, to strengthen it,
Of Macedon and Thessaly, where now
I rather was besieged for want of food,
Then did assault with fighting force of arms.
See, Sir, here's one friend of your foes recovered.
Vibius? In happy hour.
For me unhappy.
What? brought against your will?
Else had not come.
Sir, hoe's your prisoner, but had made you his,
Had all the rest pursued the chase like him;
He drove on like a fury; past all friends,
But we that took him quick in his engagement.
O Vibius, you deserve to pay a ransom
Of infinite rate, for had your General joined
In your addression, or known how to conquer;
This day had proved him the supreme of Caesar.
Known how to conquer? His five hundred Conquests
Achieved ere this day, make that doubt unfit
For him that flies him; for, of issues doubtful
Who can at all times put on for the best?
If I were mad, must hee his army venture
In my engagement? Nor are Generals ever
Their powers disposers, by their proper Angels,
But trust against them, oftentimes, their Counsels,
Wherein, I doubt not, Caesars self hath erred
Sometimes, as well as Pompey.
Or done worse,
In disobeying my Counsel (Vibius)
Of which, this days abused light is witness;
By which I might have seen a course secure
Of this discomfiture.
Amends •its ever
Aboue repentance, what's done, wish not undone;
But that prepared patience that you know
Best fits a soldier charged with hardest fortunes;
Asks still your use, since powers still temperate kept
Op still the clearer eyes by one faults sight
To place the next act, in the surer right.
You prompt me nobly Sir, repairing in me
Mine own stays practice, out of whose repose
The strong convulsions of my spirits forced me
Thus far beyond my temper; but good Vibius,
Be ransomed with my love, and haste to Pompey,
Entreating him from me, that we may meet,
And for that reason which I know this day
(Was given by Cato, for his pursutes stay
Which was prevention of our Roman blood)
Propose my offer of our hearty peace.
That being reconciled, and mutual faith
Given on our either part, not three days light
May further show vs foes, but (both our armies
Dispersed in Garrisons) we may return
Within that time to Italy, such friends
As in our Countries love, contain our splines
Tic offered, Sir, above the rate of Caesar
In other men, but in what I approve
Beneath his merits: which I will not fail
To enforce at full to Pompey, nor forget
In any time the gratitude of my service.
Your love, Sir, and your friendship.
This prepares a good induction to the change of for∣tune,
In this days issue, if the pride it kindles
In Pompeys veins, makes him deny a peace
So gently offered: for her altered hand
Works never surer from her ill to good
On his side she hath hurt, and on the other
With other changes, then when means are used
To keep her constant, yet retire refused.
I try no such conclusion, but desire
Directly peace. In mean space Isle prepare
For other issue in my utmost means;
Whose hopes now resting at Brundusium,
In that part of my army, with Sabinus,
I wonder he so long delays to bring me,
And must in person haste him, if this Even
I hear not from him.
That (I hope) flies far
Your full intent, my Lord, since Pompeys navy,
You know, lies hovering all along those seas,
In too much danger, for what aid soever
You can procure to pass your person safe.
Which doubt may prove the cause that stays Sabinus▪
And, if with shipping fit to pass your army,
He yet strains time to venture, I presume
You will not pass your person with such Convoy
Of those poor vessels, as may serve you here.
How shall I help it? shall I suffer this
Torment of his delay? and rack suspicions
Worse then assured destructions through my thoughts.
Past doubt he will be here; I left all ordered,
And full agreement made with him to make
All utmost haste, no least let once suspected.
Suspected? what suspection should fear a friend
In such assured straights from his friends enlargement.
If it were his soldiers safeties he so tenders,
Were it not better they should sink by sea,
Then wrack their number, King and cause ashore?
Their stay is worth their ruin, should we live,
If they in fault were? if their leader! he
Sold dye the deaths of all; in mean space, I
That should not, bear all, fly the sight in shame,
Thou eye of nature, and abortive night
Fall dead amongst vs: with defects, defects
Must serve proportion; justice never can
Be else restored, nor right the wrongs of man▪
This charge of our fierce foe, the firiendly gods
Have in our stregthen'd spirits beaten back
With happy issue, and his forces lessened,
Of two and thirty Ensigns forced from him,
Two thousand soldiers slain.
O boast not that,
Their loss is yours, my Lord.
I boast it not,
But only name the number.
Which right well
You might have raised so high, that on their tops
Your Throne was offered, ever t'ouerlooke
Subverted Caesar, had you been so blessed
To give such honour to your Captains Counsels
As their alacrities did long to merit
With proofefull action.
O it was ill neglected.
It was deferred with reason, which not yet
Th'euent so clear is to confute.
If it were,
Our likeliest then was, not to hazard battle,
Th'aduenture being so casual; if compared
With our more certain means to his subversion?
For finding now our army amply stored
With all things fit to tarry surer time,
Reason thought better to extend to length
The war betwixt vs; that his little strength
May by degrees prove none; which urged now,
(Consisting of his best and ablest soldiers)
We should have found at one direct set battle
Of matchless valours; their defects of victual
Not tyring yet enough on their tough nerues,
Where, on the other part, to put them still
In motion, and remotion, here and there;
Enforcing them to fortifying still
Where ever they set down; to siege a wall,
Keep watch all night in armour: their most part
Can never bear it, by their years oppression;
Spent heretofore too much in those steel toils.
I so advised, and yet repent it not,
But much rejoice in so much saved blood
As had been poured out in the stroke of battle,
Whose fur• thus prevented, comprehends
Your Countries good, and Empires; in whose care▪
Let me beseech you that in all this war,
You sack no City, subject to our Rule,
Nor put to sword one Citizen of Rome;
But when the needful fury of the sword
Can make no fit distinction in maine battle,
That you will please still to prolong the stroke
Of absolute decision to these jars,
Considering you shall strike it with a man
Of much skill and experience, and one
That will his Conquest •ell at infinite rate,
If that must end your difference; but I doubt
There will come humble offer on his part,
Of honoured peace to you, for whose sweet name
So cried out to you in our late-met Senate,
Lost no fit offer of that wished treaty.
Take pity on your Countries blood as much
As possible may stand without the danger
Of hindering her justice on her foes,
Which all the gods to your full wish dispose.
Why will you leave vs? whither will you go
To keep your worthiest person in more safety
Then in my army, so devoted to you?
My person is the least, my Lord, I value;
I am commanded by our powerful Senate,
To view the Cities, and the kingdoms situate
About your either army, that which side
Soever conquer, no disordered •traglers
Puffed with the Conquest, or by need impaled,
May take their swinge more then the care of one
May curb and order in these neighbor confines
My chief pass yet resolves for Vtica.
Your pass (my truest friend, and worthy Father)
May all good powers make safe, and always answer
Your infinite merits, with their like protection.
In which, I make no doubt but we shall meet
With mutual greetings, or for absolute conquest
Or peace preventing that our bloody stroke,
Nor let our parting be dishonoured so,
As not to take into our noblest notice
Your self (most learned and admired Father)
Whose merits, if I live, shall lack no honour.
Porcius, Statilius, though your spirits with mine
Would highly chere me, yet ye shall bestow them
In much more worthy conduct, but love me,
And wish me conquest, for your Countries sake.
Our lives shall •eale our loves, Sir, with worst deaths
Adventured in your service.
You're my friends.
These friends thus gone, tic more then time we minded
Our lost friend Vibius.
You can want no friends,
See, our two Consuls, Sir, betwixt them bringing
The worthy Brutus.
We attend (my Lord)
With no mean friend, to spirit your next encounter,
Six thousand of our choice Patricia• youths
Brought in his conduct.
And though never yet
He hath saluted you with any word
Or look of slendrest love in his whole life,
Since that long time since, of his fathers death
By your hand authord; yet see, at your need
He comes to serve you freely for his Country.
His friendly presence, making up a third
With both your persons, I as gladly welcome,
As if Io•es triple flame had guilt this field,
And lightened on my right hand, from his shield.
I well assure my self, Sir, that no thought
In your ingenious construction, touches
At the aspersion that my tendered service
Proceeds ••om my despair of elsewhere safety▪
But that my Countries safety owning justly
My whole habilities of life and fortunes,
And you the ablest f•utor of her safety,
Her love, and (for your love of her) your own
Only makes sacred to your use my offering.
Far fly all other thought from my construction▪
And due acceptance of the liberal honour,
Your love hath done me, which the gods are witness,
I take as stirred up in you by their favours,
Nor less esteem it then an offering holy;
Since, as of all things, man is said the measure,
So your full merits measure forth a man.
See yet, my Lord, more friends.
Five Kings, your servants.
Conquest and all grace crown the gracious Pompey,
To serve whom in the sacred Roman safety,
My self, Iber•as King, present my forces.
And I that hold the tributary Throne
Of Grecian Thessaly, submit my homage,
To Rome, and Pompey.
So Cilicia too.
And so Epiru•.
Lastly I from Thrice
Present the duties of my power and service.
Your royal aides deserve of Rome and Pompey
Our utmost honour•. O may now our fortune
Not balance her broad breast twixt two light wings,
Nor on a slippery globe sustain her steps,
But as the Spartans say, the Paphian Queen
(The flood Eurota• passing) laid aside
Her Glass, her Ceston, and her amorous graces,
And in Lycurgus favour; armed her beauties
With Shield and •aueline, so may fortune now,
The flood of all our enemies forces passing
With her fair Ensigns, and arrived at ours,
Displume her shoulders, •ast off her winged shoes,
Her faithless, and still-rowling stone spurn from her,
And enter our powers as she may remain
Our firm assistant: that the general aids,
Favours, and honours you perform to Rome,
May make her build with you her endless home.
The gods vouchsafe it; and our causes right.
What sudden Shade is this? observe my Lords,
The night, me thinks, comes on before her hour.
Nor trust me if my thoughts conceive not so.
What thin clouds fly the winds, like swiftest shafts
Along aires middle region.
They presage
Unusual tempests.
And tic their repair,
That timeless darken thus the gloomy ayre.
Let's force no omen from it, but avoid
The vapors furies now by Jove• employed.
The wrathful tempest of the angry night,
Where hell flies muffled up in clouds of pitch,
Mingled with Sulphur, and those dreadful bolts,
The Cyclops Ram in Ioues Artillery,
Hath roused the furies, armed in all their horrors,
Up to the envious seas, in spite of Caesar.
O night, O jealous night, of all the noblest
Beauties, and glories, where the gods have stroke
Their four digestions, from thy ghastly Chaos,
Blush thus to drown them all in this hour signed
By the necessity of •ate for Caesar.
I that have ransacked all the world for worth,
To form in man the image of the gods,
Must like them have the power to check the worst
Of all things under their celestial Empire,
Stoop it, and burst it, or break• through it all,
With use and safety, till the Crown be set
On all my actions; that the hand of nature
In all her worst works aiming at an end,
May in a master-peece of hers be served
With tops, and state fit for his virtuous Crown:
Not lift arts thus far up in glorious frame,
To let them vanish thus in smoke and shame.
This river Anius (in whose mouth now lies
A Pinnace I would pass in, to fetch on
My armies dull rest from Brundu•ium)
That is at all times else exceeding calm,
(By reason of a purling wind that flies
Off from the shore each morning, driving up
The billows far to sea) in this night yet,
Bears such a terrible gale; put off from sea,
As beats the land wind back, and thrusts the flood
Up in such uproar, that no boat dare stir.
And on it is dispersed all Pompeys navy
To make my peril yet more envious.
Shall I yet shrink for all? were all, yet more?
There is a certain need that I must give
Way to my paste; none, known, that I must give.
What battle is there fought now in the ayre.
That threats the wrack of nature?
Master? come.
Shall we thrust through it all?
What lost man,
Art thou in hopes and fortunes, that dare make
So desperate a motion.
Launch man, and all thy fears freight disavow,
Thou carry Caesar and his fortunes now.
NOw to Pharsalia, where the smarting strokes
Of our resolved contention must resound,
(My Lords and friends of Rome) I give you all
Such welcome as the spirit of all my fortunes,
Conquests, and triumphs (now come for their cro•••)
Can crown your favours with, and serve the hopes
Of my dear Country, to her utmost wish;
I can but set up all my being to give
So good an end to my forerunning Acts;
The powers in me that formed them having lost
No least time since, in gathering skill to better;
But like so many Bees have brought me home,
The sweet of whatsoever flowers have grown
In all the me•des, and gardens of the world.
All which hath grown still, as the time increase
In which it was gathered, and with which it stemmed.
That what decay soever blood inferred,
Might with my minds store, be supplied, and cher'd,
All which, in one fire of this instant fight
Isle burn, and sacrifice to every cinder
In sacred offering to my Countries love,
And therefore what event soever sort,
As I no praise will look for, but the good
Freely bestow on all; (if good succeed)
So if adverse fate fall, I wish no blame,
But the isle befallen me, made my fortunes shame,
Not mine, nor my fault.
We too well love Pompey,
To doe him that injustice.
Who more thirsts
The Conquest, then resolves to bear the foil?
Said Brutus-like, give several witness all,
That you acquit me whatsoever fall.
Particular men particular fates must bear,
Who feels his own wounds less, to wound another?
Leave him the worst whose best is left undone,
He only conquers whose mind still is one.
Free minds, like dice, fall sqare, what ere the cast.
Who on him self sole stands, stands solely fast.
He's never down, whose mind fights still aloft.
Who cares for up or down, when ell's but thought.
To things events doth no mans power extend.
Since gods rule all, who any thing would mend.
Ye sweetly ease my charge, your selves vnburthening.
Returned not yet our trumpet, sent to know
Of Vibius certain state?
Not yet, my Lord.
Too long protract we all means to recover
His person quick or dead, for I still think
His loss served fate, before we blew retreat;
Though some affirm him seen, soon after fighting.
Not after, Sir, (I heard) but ere it ended.
He bore a great mind to extend our pursuit
Much further then it was; and served that day
(When you had, like the true head of a battle,
Led all the body in that glorious turn)
Upon a farre-off Squadron that stood fast
In conduct of the great Marc Anthony,
When all the rest were fled, so past a man
That in their tough receipt of him, I saw him
Thrice break thorough all with ease, and pass as fair
As he had all been fire, and they but ayre.
He stuck at last yet, in their midst, it seemed.
So have I seen a fire drake glide at midnight
Before a dying man to point his grave,
And in it stick and hide.
He comes yet safe.
O Vibius, welcome, what a prisoner?
With mighty Caesar, and so quickly ransomed?
I Sir, my ransom, needed little time,
Either to gain agreement for the value,
Or the disbursment, since in Caesars grace
We both concluded.
Was his grace so free.
For your respect, Sir▪
Nay, Sir, for his glory.
That the maine Conquest he so surely builds on,
(Which ever is forerun with petty fortunes)
Take not effect, by taking any friend
From all the most, my poor defence can make,
But must be complete, by his perfect own.
I know, Sir, you more nobly rate the freedom
He freely gave your friend; then to pervert it
So past his wi•dome: that knows much too well
Th'vncertaine state of Conquest; to raise frames
Of such presumption on her fickle wings,
And chiefly in a loss so late, and grievous.
Besides, your forces far exceeding his,
His whole powers being but two and twenty thousand:
And yours full four and forty thousand strong:
For all which yet, he stood as far from fear
In my enlargement, as the confident glory
You please to put on him; and had this end
In my so kind dismission, that as kindly
I might •olicite a sure peace betwixt you.
A peace? Is it possible?
Come, doe not show this wanton incredulity too much.
Believe me I was far from such a thought
In his high stomach: Cato prophesied then.
What think my Lords our Consuls, and friend Brutus?
An offer happy:
Were it plain and hearty.
I, there's the true inspection to his prospect.
This straight of his perhaps may need a slight
Of some hid stratagem, to bring him off.
Devices of a new fordge to entrap me?
I rest in Caesars shades? walk his strewn paths?
Sleep in his quiet waives? Isle sooner trust
Hibernian Bogs, and quicksands; and hell mo•th
Take for my sanctuary: in bad parts
That no extremes will better, natures finger
Hath marked him to me, to take heed of him.
What thinks my Brutus?
Tic your best and safest.
This offered peace of his is sure a snare
To make our war the bloodier, whose •it fear
Makes me I dare not now (in thoughts maturer
Then late inclined me) put in use the Counsel
Your noble father Cato(parting) gave me,
Whose much too tender shunning innocent blood,
This battle hazards now, that must cost more.
It doe•, and therefore now no more defer it.
Say all men so?
We doe.
I grieve ye doe,
Because I rather wish to err with Cat•
Then with the truth go of the world besides;
But since it shall abide this other stroke.
Ye gods that our great Roman Genius
Have made, not give vs one days conquest only.
Nor grow in conquests for some little time,
As did the Genius of the Macedons;
Nor be by land great only, like Laconians;
Nor yet by sea alone, as was the Athenians▪
Nor slowly stirred up, like the Persian Angel;
Nor rocked asleep soon, like the Ionian spirit.
But made our Roman Genius, fiery, watchful,
And even from Romes prime, joined his youth with hers,
Grow as she grew, and firm as earth abide,
By her increasing pomp, at sea, and shore,
In peace, in battle; against Greece as well
As our Barbarian foes; command yet further
Ye firm and just gods, our assistfull Angel
For Rome, and Pompey, who now fights for Rome;
That all these royal Laws, to vs, and justice
Of common safety, may the selfe-loue drown
Of tyrannous Caesar; and my care for all
Your Altars crowned with endless festival.
Say (sacred Southsayer) and inform the truth,
What liking hast thou of our sacrifice?
Imperial Caesar, at your sacred charge,
I drew a milk white Ox into the Temple,
And turning there his face into the east,
(Fearfully shaking at the shining light)
Down fell his horned forehead to his hoof,
When I began to greet him with the stroke,
That should prepare him for the holy rites,
With hideous roars he laid out such a throat
As made the secret lurkings of the god
To answer ecco-like, in threatening sounds:
I stroke again at him, and then he slept,
His life-blood boiling out at every wound
In streams as clear as any liquid Ruby,
And there began to alter my presage,
The other ill signs showing the other fortune,
Of your last skirmish, which far opposite now
Proves, ill beginnings good events foreshew.
For now the beast cut up, and laid on the isle•are,
His limbs were all licked up with instant flames,
Not like the Elemental fire that burns
In household uses, lamely struggling up,
This way and that way winding as it rises,
But (right and upright) reached his proper sphere
Where burns the fire eternal and sincere.
And what may that presage?
That even the spirit
Of heavens pure flame flew down and ravished up
Your offerings blaze in that religious instant,
Which shows th'alacritie and cheerful virtue
Of heavens free bounty, doing good in time,
And with what swiftness true devotions clime.
The gods be honoured.
O behold with wonder,
The sacred blaze is like a torch enlightened,
Directly burning just aboue your camp!
Miraculous.
Believe it, with all thanks:
The Roman Genius is altered now,
And arms for Caesar.
Soothsayer be for ever
Reverenced of Caesar. O Marc Anthony,
I thought to raise my camp, and all my tents,
Took down for sue•t remotion to Scotussa.
Shall now our purpose hold?
Against the gods?
They grace in th'instant, and in th'instant we
Must add our parts, and be in th'vse as free.
See Sir, the scouts return.
What news, my friends?
Arm, arm, my Lord, the voward of the foe
Is ranged already:
Answer them, and arm:
You cannot set your rest of battle up
In happier hour; for I this night beheld
A strange confusion in your enemies camp,
The soldiers taking arms in all dismay,
And hurling them again as fast to earth.
Every way routing; as th'alarme were then
Given to their army. A most causeless fear
Dispersed quite through them.
Then it was Jove himself
That with his secret finger stirred in them.
Other presages of success (my Lord)
Have strangely happened in th'adiacent City•,
To this your army: for in Tralleis,
Within a Temple, built to Victory,
There stands a statue of your form and name,
Near whose firm base, even from the marble pavement,
There sprang a Palm tree up, in this last night,
That seems to crown your statue with his boughs,
Spread in wrapped shadows round about your brows.
The sign, Crassinius, is most strange and graceful,
Nor could get issue, but by power divine;
Yet will not that, nor all abodes besides
(Of never such kind promise of success)
Perform it without tough acts of our own.
No care, no nerve the less to be employed;
No offering to the gods, no vows, no prayers:
Secure and idle spirits never thrive
When most the gods for their advancements strive.
And therefore tell me what abodes thou buildst on
In an spirit to act, inflamed in thee,
Or in our Soldiers seen resolved addresses?
Great and fiery virtue. And this day
Be sure (great Caesar) of effects as great
In absolute conquest; to which are prepared
Enforcements resolute, from this armed hand,
Which thou shalt praise me for alive or dead.
Alive (ye gods vouchsafe) and my true vows
For life in him (great heaven) for all my foes
(Being natural Romans) so far jointly hear
As may not hurt our Conquest; as with fear
Which thou already strangely hast diffusde
Through all their army; which extend to flight
Without one bloody stroke of force and fight.
Tic time, my Lord, you put in form your battle.
Since we must fight then, and no offered peace
Will take with Pompey: I rejoice to see
This long-time looked for, and most happy day,
In which we now shall fight, with men, not hunger,
With toils, not sweats of blood through years extended,
This one day se•uing to decide all jars
Twixt me and Pompey. Hang out of my tent
My Crimsine coat of arms, to give my soldiers
That euer-sure sign of resolu'd-for fight.
These hands shall give that sign to all their longings.
My Lord, my army, I think best to order
In three full Squadrons: of which let me pray
Your self would take on you the left wings charge;
My self will lead the right wing, and my place
Of fight elect in my tenth legion:
My battle by D•mitius Calvinus
Shall take direction.
Hark, your soldiers shout
For joy to see your bloody Cote of Arms
Assure their fight this morning.
A blessed Even
Bring on them worthy comforts. And ye gods
Perform your good presages in events
Of fit crown for our discipline, and deeds
Wrought up by conquest; that my use of it
May wipe the hateful and unworthy s•aine
Of Tyrant from my Temples▪ and exchange it
For fautor of my Country, ye have given
That title to those poor and fearful fowls
That every sound puts up, in frights and cries;
Even then, when all Romes powers were weak and heartless,
When traitorous fires, and fierce Barbarian swo•ds,
Ripens, and soule-expiring slaughters filled
Her houses, Temples, all her ayre, and earth▪
To me then (whom your bounties have informed
With such a spirit as despises fear;
Commands in either fortune, knows, and arms
Against the worst of fate; and therefore can
Dispose blessed means, encouraged to the best)
Much more vouchsafe that honour; chiefly now,
When Rome wants only this days conquest given me
To make her happy, to confirm the brightness
That yet she shines in over all the world;
In Empire, riches, strife of all the Arts,
In gifts of Cities, and of kingdoms sent her;
In Crowns laid at her feet, in every grace
That shores, and seas, floods, Islands, Continents,
Groves, fields, hills, mines, and metals can produce;
All which I (victor) will increase, I vow
By all my good, acknowledged given by you.
THe poison stooped in every vain of Empire,
In all the world, meet now in only me,
Thunder and lighten me to death; and make
My senses feed the flame, my soul the crack.
Was ever sovereign Captain of so many
Armies and Nations, so oppressed as I,
With one hosts headstrong outrage? urging fight,
Yet fly about my camp in panick terrors;
No reason under heaven suggesting cause.
And what is this but even the gods deterring
My judgment from enforcing fight this morn•?
The new-fled night made day with Meteors,
Fired over Caesars camp, and fallen in mine,
As pointing out the terrible event•
Yet in suspense; but where they threat their •all
Speak not these prodigies with fiery tongues,
And eloquence that should not move but ravish
All sound minds, from thus tempting the just gods,
And spitting out their fair premonishing flames
With brackish •heumes of ruderand brainsick number,
What's infinitely more, thus wild, thus mad
For one poor fortune of a beaten few;
To half so many staid, and dreadful soldiers?
Long trained▪ long foughten? able, nim•le, perfect
To turn and wind advantage every way?
Increase with little, and enforce with none?
Ma•e bold as Lyons, gaunt as famished wolves,
With still served slaughters, and continual toils.
You should no•, Sir, foe•sake your own wise Counsel,
Your own experien•'t discipline, own practise,
Own god inspired insight to all changes,
Of Protean fortune, and her ••ny, war,
For hosts, •nd hell• of such; What man will think
The best of them, not mad; to see them ra•ge
So up and down your camp, already suing
For offices fallen, by Caesars built on fall,
Before one stroke be struck? Domitius, Spender,
Your father Scipi• new preparing friends
For Caesars place of universal Bishop?
Are you the observed rule, and vouched example;
Who ever would commend Physicians,
That would not follow the diseased desires
Of their sick patients? yet incur your self
The faults that you so much abhor in others.
I cannot, Sir, abide men's open mouths,
Nor be ill spoken of; nor have my counsels
And circumspections; turned on me for fears,
With mocks and scandals that would make a man
Of lead, a lightning; in the desperat'st onset
That ever trampled under death, his life.
I bear the touch of fear for all their safeties,
Or for mine own? enlarge with twice as many
Selfe-liues, selfe-fortunes? they shall sink beneath
Their own credulities, before I cross them.
Come, haste, dispose our battle.
Good my Lord,
Against your Genius war not for the world.
By all worlds he that moves me next to bear
Their sco•s and imputations of my fear
For any cause, shall bear this sword to hell.
Away, to battle; good my Lord lead you
The whole six thousand of our young Patricians,
Placed in the left wing to environ Caesar.
My father Scipio shall lead the battle;
Domitius the left wing; I the right
Against Marc Anthony. Take now your fills
Ye beastly doters on your barbarous wills.
Fly, fly, the day was lost before was fought.
The Romans feared their shadows.
Were there ever
Such monstrous confidences, as last night
Their Cups and musique showed? Before the morning
Made such amazes ere one stroke was struck?
It made great Pompey mad, which who could mend?
The gods had hand in it.
It made the Consuls
Run on their swords to see it. The brave Patrician•
Fled with their spoiled faces, arrows sticking
As shot from heaven at them.
It was the charge
That Caesar gave against them.
Come, away,
Leave all, and wonder at this fatal day.
Pursue, pursue; the gods foreshew'd their powers,
Which we gave issue, and the day is ours.
Crassineus? O look up: he does, and shows
Death in his broken eyes; which Caesars hands
Shall doe the honour of eternal closure.
Too well thou keptst thy word, that thou this day
Would doe me service to our victory,
Which in thy life or death I should behold,
And praise thee for; I doe, and must admire
Thy matchless valour; ever ever rest
Thy manly lineaments, which in a tomb
Erected to thy noble name and virtues,
Isle curiosly preserve with balms, and spices,
In eminent place of these Pharsalian fields,
Inscribed with this true soul of funeral.
Crassineus fought for fame, and died for Rome,
Whose public weal springs from this private tomb.
Thus have the gods their justice, men their wills,
And I, by men's wills ruled; my self renouncing,
Am by my Angel and the gods abhorred;
Who drew me, like a vapour, up to heaven
To dash me like a tempest against the earth:
O the deserved terrors that attend
On humane confidence! had ever men
Such outrage of presumption to be victors
Before they armed? To send to Rome before
For houses near the market place, their tents
Strowd all with flowers, and nosegays; tables covered
With cups and banquets; baize and myrtle garlands,
As ready to doe sacrifice for conquest
Rather then arm them for fit fight to enfore it;
Which when I saw, I knew as well th'euent
As now I feel it, and because I raged
In that presage, my Geniu• showing me clearly
(As in a mirror) all this cursed issue;
And therefore urged all means to put it off
For this day, or from these fields to some other,
Or from this om•nous confidence, till I saw
Their spirits settled in some graver knowledge
Of what belonged to such a d•are decision;
They spotted me with fe•re, with love of glory,
To keep in my command so many Kings,
So great an army; all the hellish blastings
That could be breathed on me, to strike me blind
Of honour, spirit and soul: And should I then
Save them that would in spite of heaven be ruined?
And, in their safeties ruin me and mine
In everlasting rage of their detraction.
Your safety and own honour did deserve▪
Respect past all their values; O my Lord.
Would you?
Upbraid me not; go to, go on.
No; Isle not rub the wound. The misery is,
The gods for any error in a man
(Which they might rectify, and should; because
That man maintained the right) should suffer wrong
To be thus insolent, thus graced, thus ble•t?
O the strange carriage of their acts, by which
Men order theirs; and their devotions in them;
Much rather striving to entangle men
In pithless error, then with regular right
Confirm their reasons, and their pieties light.
For now Sir, whatsoever was foreshowne
By heaven, or prodigy; ten parts more for vs,
Forewarning vs, deterring vs, and all
Our blind and brainless frenzies, then for Caesar;
All yet will be ascribed to his regard
Given by the gods for his good parts, preferring
Their gloss (being starck impostures) to the justice,
Love, honour, piety, of our laws and Country.
Though I think these are arguments enough
For my acquittal, that for all these fought.
You're clear, my Lord.
Gods help me, as I am;
What ever my untouched command of millions
Through all my eight and fifty years, hath won,
This one day (in the worlds esteem) hath lost.
So vile is praise and dispraise by event.
For I am still my self in every worth
The world could grace me with, had this days Even
In one blaze joined, with all my other Conquests.
And shall my comforts in my well-known self
Fail me for their false fires, Demetrius?
O no, my Lord.
Take grief for them, as if
The rotten-hearted world could steep my soul
In filthy putrefaction of their own?
Since their applauses fail me? that are hisses
To every sound acceptance? I confess,
That till th'affaire was past, my passions flamed,
But now its helpless, and no cause in me,
Rest in these embers my vnmoued soul,
With any outward change▪ this distich minding;
No man should more allow his own loss, woes,
(Being past his fault) then any stranger does.
And for the worlds false loves, and airy honours,
What soul that ever loved them most in life,
(Once severed from this breathing sepulchre)
Again came and appeared in any kind
Their kind admirer still, or did the state
Of any best man here, associate?
And every true soul should be here so feuer'd
From love of such men, as here drown their souls
As all the world does? Cato sole accepted,
To whom Isle fly now, and my wife in way
(Poor Lady, and poor children, worse then fatherless)
Visit, and comfort. Come Demetrius,
We now must •ute our habits to our fortunes▪
And since these changes ever chance to greatest.
Nor desire to be
(Doe fortune, to exceed it, what she can)
A Pompey, or a Caesar, but a man.
O We have slain, not conquered, Roman blood
Peruerts th'euent, and desperate blood let out
With their own swords. Did ever men before
Envy their own lives, since another lived
Whom they would wilfully conceive their foe,
And forge a Tyrant merely in their fears
To justify their slaughters? Consuls? furies.
Be, Sir, their fault• their griefs! The greater number
Were only slaves, that left their bloods to ruth,
And altogether, but six thousand slain.
How ever many; gods and men can witness
Themselves enforced it, much against the most
I could enforce on Pompey for our peace.
Of all slain, yet, if Brutus only lived,
I should be comforted, for his life •au'd
Would weigh the whole six thousand that are lost.
But much I fear his death, because the battle
Full stricken now, he yet abides vnfound.
I saw him fighting near the battles end▪
But suddenly give off, as be•t to fly.
He comes here, see Sir.
I submit to Caesar
My life and fortunes.
A more welcome fortune
Is Brutus, then my conquest.
Sir, I fought
Against your conquest, and your self; and merit
(I must acknowledge) a much sterner welcome.
You fought with me, Sir, for I know your arms
Were taken for your Country, not for Pompey:
And for my Country I fought, nothing less
Then he, or both the mighty-stomak't Consuls;
Both whom (I hear) have slain themselves before
They would enjoy life in the good of Caesar.
But I am nothing worse, how ill foeuer
They, and the great authority of Rome
Would fine enforce me by their mere suspicions.
Loved they their Country better then her Brutus?
Or knew what fitted nobles, and a Roman
With freer souls then Brutus. Those that live
Shall see in Caesars justice, and what ever
Might make me worthy both their lives and loves,
That I have lost the one without my merit,
And they the other with no Roman spirit.
Are you impaired to live, and joy my love?
Only requite me, Brutus, love but Caesar,
And be in all the powers of Caesar, Caesar▪
In which free wish, I join your father Cato;
For whom Isle haste to Vtica, and pray
His love may strengthen my fuccesse to day.
To what use take you that (my Lord?)
Take you
No note that I take it, nor let any servant,
Besides your self, of all my fathers nearest,
Serve any mood he serves, with any knowledge
Of this or any other. Caesar comes
And gives his army wings to reach this town.
Not for the towns sake, but to save my father.
Whom justly he suspects to be resolved
Of any violence to his life, before
He will preserve it by a Tyrants favour.
For Pompey hath miscarried, and i• fled.
Be true to me, and to my fathers life;
And doe not tell him; nor his fury serve
With any other.
I will dye, my Lord,
Ere I observe it.
O my Lord and father.
What fears fly here on all sides? what wilde looks
Are squinted at me from men's mere suspicions
That I am wilde my self, and would enforce
What will be taken from me by the •yrant.
No: Would you only ask life, he would think
His own life given more strength in giving yours
I ask my life of him?
Ask what's his own?
Of him he scorns should have the least drop in it
At his disposure.
No, Statilius.
Men that have forfeit lives by breaking laws,
Or have ever been overcome, may beg their lives,
But I have ever been in every justice
Better then Caesar, and was never conquered,
Or made to fly for life, as Caesar was.
But have been victor ever, to my wish,
Against whomsoever ever hath opposde;
Where Caesar now is conquered in his Conquest,
In the ambition, he till now denied;
Taking upon him to give life, when death
Is tenfold due to his most tyrannous self.
No right, no power given him to raise an army,
Which in despite of Rome he leads about
Slaughtering her loyal subjects, like an outlaw,
Nor is he better. Tongue, show, falsehood are,
To bloodiest deaths his parts so much admired,
Vaineglory, villainy; and at best you can,
Fed with the parings of a worthy man.
My fame affirm my life received from him?
Isle rather make a beast my second father▪
The gods avert from every Roman mind
The name of slave to any Tyrants power.
Why was man ever just, but to be free,
Against all injustice? and to bear about him
As well all means to freedom every hour,
As every hour he should be armed for dea•h,
Which only is his freedom?
But Statilius
Death is not free for any mans election,
Till nature, or the law, impose it on him.
Must a man go to law then, when he may
Enjoy his own in peace? if I can use
Mine own my self, must I of force, reserve it
To serve a Tyrant with it? All just men
Not only may enlarge their lives, but must,
From all rule tyrannous, or live unjust.
By death must they enlarge their lives?
By death.
A man's not bound to that.
Isle prove he is.
Are not the lives of all men bound to justice?
They are.
And therefore not to serve injustice:
Justice it self ought ever to be free,
And therefore every just man being a part
Of that free justice, should be free as it.
Then wherefore is there law for death?
That all
That know not what law is, nor freely can
Perform the fitting justice of a man
In kingdoms common good, may been forced.
But is not every just man to him self
The perfect'st law▪
Suppose.
Then to himself
Is every just man• life subordinate.
Again, Sir; Is not our free soul infused
To every body in her absolute end
To rule that body? in which absolute rule
Is she not absolutely Empress of it?
And being Empress, may she not dispose
It, and the life in it, at her just pleasure?
Not to destroy it.
No; she not destroys it
When she disliues it; that their freedoms may
Go firm together, like their powers and organs,
Rather then let it live a rebel to her,
Profaning that divine conjunction
Twixt her and it; nay, a disiunction making
Betwixt them worse then death; in killing quick
That which in iust-death lives: being dead to her
If to her rule dead; and to her alive,
If dying in her just rule.
The body lives not
When death hath rest it.
Yet tic free, and kept
Fit for reiunction in mans second life;
Which dying rebel to the soul, is far
Unfit to join with her in perfect life.
It shall not join with her again.
It shall.
In reason shall it?
In apparent reason;
Which Isle prove clearly.
Hear, and judge it Sir.
As nature works in all things to an end,
So in th'appropriate honour of that end,
All things precedent have their natural frame;
And therefore is there a proportion
Betwixt the ends of those things and their primes:
For else there could not be in their creation,
Always, or for the most part, that firm form
In their still like existence; that we see
In each full creature. What proportion then
Hath an immortal with a mortal substance?
And therefore the mortality to which
A man is subject; rather is a sleep,
Then bestial death; since sleep and death are called
The twin• of nature. For if absolute death
And bestial seas the body of a man,
Then is there no proportion in his parts,
His soul being free from death, which otherwise
Retains divine proportion. For as sleep
No disproportion holds with humane souls,
But aptly quickens the proportion
Twixt them and bodies, making bodies fitter
To give up forms to souls, which is their end:
So death (twin-borne of sleep) resolving all
Mans bodies heavy parts; in lighter nature
Makes a reunion with the sprightly soul;
When in a second life their beings given,
Holds their proportion firm, in highest heaven.
Hold you our bodies shall revive, resuming
Our souls again to heaven?
Past doubt, though others
Think heaven a world too high for our low reaches.
Not knowing the sacred sense of him that sings,
Jove can let down a golden chain from heaven,
Which tied to earth, shall fetch up earth and seas;
And what's that golden chain, but our pure souls,
A golden beam of him, let down by him,
That governed with his grace, and drawn by him,
Can hoist this earthy body up to him,
The sea, and ayre, and all the elements
Comprest in it: not while tic thus concrete,
But fined by death, and then given heavenly heat.
Your happy exposition of that place
(Whose sacred depth I never heard so sounded)
Euicts glad grant from me you hold a truth.
Is it not a manly truth, and mere divine?
Tic a good cheerful doctrine for good men.
But (son and servants) this is only argued
To spend our dear time well, and no life urges
To any violence further then his owner
And graver men hold fit. Lets talk of Caesar,
He's the great subject of all talk, and he
Is hotly hasting on. Is supper ready?
It is, my Lord.
Why then let's in and •at;
Our cool submission will quench Caesars heat.
Submission? here's for him.
Statilus,
My reasons must not strengthen you in error,
Nor learned Athenodorus gentle yielding.
Talk with some other deep Philosophers,
Or some divine Priest of the knowing gods,
And hear their reasons▪ in mean time comes up.
SO may my comforts for this good news thrive
As I am thankful for them to the Gods.
Joys unexpected, and in desperate plight,
Are still most sweet, and prove from whence they come;
When earths still Moonelike confidence, in joy,
Is at her full. True joy descending far
From past her sphere, and from that highest heaven
That moves and is not moved: how far was I
From hope of these events, when fearful dreams
Of Harpies tearing out my heart? of armies
Terribly joining? Cities, kingdoms falling,
And all on me? proved sleep, not twin to death,
But to me, death it self? yet making then,
These letters, full of as much cheerful life,
I found closed in my hand. O gods how justly
Ye laugh at all things earthly? at all fears
That rise not from your judgements? at all joys,
Not drawn directly from your selves▪ and in ye,
Distrust in man is faith, trust in him ruin.
Why write great learned men? men merely rapt
With sacred rage, of confidence, belief?
Undaunted spirits? inexorable fate
And all fear treading on? tic all but ayre,
If any comfort be, tic in despair.
You learned Ladies may hold any thing.
Now madam is your walk from coach come near
The promontory, where you late commanded
A Sentinel should stand to see from thence
If either with a navy, brought by sea,
Or train by land; great Pompey comes to greet you
As in your letters, he near this time promised.
O may this Isle of Lesbos, compassed in
With the Aegae•• sea that doth divide
Europe from Asia. (The sweet literate world
From the Barbarian) from my barbarous dreams
Divide my dearest husband and his fortunes.
He's busied now with ordering offices.
By this time, madam, sits your honoured father
In Caesars chair of universal Bishop.
Domitius Aenobarbas, is made Consul,
Spynther his Consort; and Phaoniu•
Tribune, or Praetor.
These were only sought
Before the battle, not obtained; nor moving
My father but in shadows.
Why should men
Tempt fate with such firm confidence? seeking places
Before the power that should dispose could grant them?
For then the stroke of battle was not struck.
Nay, that was sure enough. Physicians know
When sick men's eyes are broken, they must dye.
Your letters telling you his victory
Lost in the skirmish, which I know hath broken
Both the eyes and heart of Caesar: for as men
Healthful through all their lives to grey•haired age,
When sickness takes them once, they seldom scope:
So Caesar victor in his general fights
Till this late skirmish, could no adverse blow
Sustain without his utter overthrow.
See, madam, now; your Sentinel: enquire.
See thou no fleet yet (Sentinel) nor train
That may be thought great Pompeys?
Not yet, madame.
See thou no travellers addressed this way?
In any number on this Lesbian shore?
I see some not worth note; a couple coming
This way, on foot, that are not now far hence.
Come they apace? like messengers with news?
No, nothing like (my Lord) nor are their habits
Of any such men's fashions; being long mantles,
And •able hewed; their heads all hid in hats
Of parching Thessaly, broad brimmed, high crowned.
These serve not our hopes.
Now I see a ship.
A kenning hence▪ that strikes into the haven.
One only ship?
One only, madam, yet.
That should not be my Lord.
Your Lord? no madam.
She now lets out armed men upon the land.
Armed men? with drum, and colours?
No, my Lord,
But bright in arms, yet bear half pikes, or bead hooks.
These can be no plumes in the train of Pompey.
Isle see him in his letter, once again.
Now, madam, come the two I saw on foot.
See your Princess, Sir, come thus far from the
City in her coach, to encounter your promised coming
About this time in your last letters.
The world is altered since Demetrius; (offer to go by▪
See, madam, two Thessalian Augurs it seem••
By their habits. Call, and enquire if either by their
Skils or travels, they know no news of your husband.
My friends? a word.
With vs, madam?
Yes. Are you of Thessaly?
I, madam, and all the world besides.
Your Country is great.
And our portions little.
Are you Augurs?
Augurs, madam? yes a kind of Augurs, alias
Wiz•rds, that go up and down the world, teaching
How to turn ill to good.
Can you doe that?
I, madam, you have no work for vs, have you?
No ill to turn good, I mean?
Yes; the absence of my husband.
What's she?
Pompey the great.
Wherein is he great?
In his command of the world.
Then he's great in others. Take him without his
Addition (great) what is he then?
Pompey.
Not your husband then?
Nothing the less for his greatness.
Not in his right; but in your comforts he is.
His right is my comfort.
What's his wrong?
My sorrow.
And that's ill.
Yes.
You're come to the use of our Profession, madam,
Would you have that ill turned good? that
Sorrow turned comfort?
Why is my Lord wronged?
We profess not that know•ledge, madam:
Suppose he were.
Not I.
You'll suppose him good.
He is so.
Then must you needs suppose him wronged; for
All goodness is wronged in this world.
What call you wrong?
Ill fortune, affliction.
Think you my Lord afflicted?
If I think him good (madam) I must. Unless he
Be worldly good; and then, either he is ill, or has ill:
Since, as no sugar is without poison: so is no worldly
Good without ill. Even naturally nourished in it, like a
Household thief, which is the worst of all thieves.
Then he is not worldly, but truly good.
He's too great to be truly good; for worldly greatness
Is the chief worldly goodness; and all worldly goodness
(I proved before) has ill in it: which true good has not.
I• he rule well with his greatness; wherein is he ill?
But great Rulers are like Carpenters, that wear their
Rules at their backs still: and therefore to make good your
True good in him, y'ad better suppose him little or mean,
For in the mean only is the true good.
But every great Lady must have her husband
Great still, or her love will be little.
I am none of those great Ladies.
She's a Philosophresse Augur, and can •urn
Ill to good as well as you.
I would then, not honour, but adore her: could you
Submit your self cheerfully to your hue•band,
Supposing him fallen?
I• he submit himself cheerfully to his fortune.
Tic the greatest greatness in the world you undertake.
I would be so great, if he were.
In supposition.
In fact.
Be no woman, but a Goddess then; &amp; make good thy greatness;
I am cheerfully fallen; be cheerful.
I am: and welcome, as the world were closed
In these embraces.
Is it possible?
A woman, losing greatness, still as good,
As at her greatest? O gods, was I ever
Great till this minute?
Pompey?
View me better▪
Conquered by Caesar?
Not I, but mine army.
No fault in me, in it: no conquest of me.
I tread this low earth as I trod on Caesar.
Must I not hold my self, though lose the world?
Nor lose I less; a world lost at one clap,
Tic more then •ove ever thundered with.
What glory is it to have my hand hurl
So vast a volley through the groaning ayre?
And is it not great, to turn griefs thus to joys,
That break the hearts of others?
O tic Jove like.
It is to imitate Jove, that from the wounds
Of softest clouds, beats up the terriblest sounds.
I now am good, for good men still have least,
That twixt themselves and God might rise their rest.
O Pompey, Pompey: never Great till now.
O my Cornelia: let vs still be good,
And we shall still be great: and greater far
In every solid grace, then when the tumor
And bile of rotten observation swelled vs.
Griefs for wants outward, are without our cure,
Greatness, not of it self, is never sure.
Before, we went upon heaven, rather treading
The virtues of it vnderfoot, in ma•ing
The vicious world our heaven; then walking there•
Even here, as knowing that our home; con•emning
All forged heavens here raised; setting hills on hills.
Vulcan from heaven •ell, yet on's feet 〈◊〉 light;
And stood no less a god then at his height;
At lowest, things lye fast: we now are like
The two Poles propping heaven, on which heaven moves;
And they are fixed, and quiet, being aboue
All motion far; we rest aboue the heavens.
O, I more joy, to embrace my Lord thus fixed,
Then he had brought me ten inconstant conquests.
Miraculous standing in a fall so great,
Would Caesar knew, Sir, how you conquered him
In your conviction.
Tic enough for me
That Pompey knows it. I will stand no more
On others legs: nor build one joy without me.
If ever I be worth a house again,
Isle build all inward: not a light shall op
The common outway: no expense, no art,
No ornament, no door will I use there,
But raise all plain, and rudely, like a rampire,
Against the false society of men
That still batters
All reason piecemeal. And for earthy greatness
All heavenly comforts rarefies to ayre,
Isle therefore live in dark, and all my light,
Like ancient Temples, let in at my top.
This were to turn ones back to all the world,
And only look at heaven. Empedocles
Recurred a mortal plague through all his Country,
With stopping up the yawning of a hill,
From whence the hollow and unwholesome South
Exhald his venomed vapor. And what else
Is any King, given over to his lusts,
But even the poisoned cleft of that cracked mountain,
That all his kingdom plagues with his example?
Which I have stopped now, and so cured my Country
Of such a sensual pestilence:
When therefore our diseased affections
Harmful to humane freedom; and stormelike
Inferring darkness to th'infected mind
Oppress our comforts: tic but letting in
The light of reason, and a purer spirit,
Take in another way; like rooms that fight
With windows against the wind, yet let in light.
My Lord, we served before, but now adore you.
My Lord, the armed men I discou'rd lately
Vnshipt, and landed; now are trooping near.
What armed men are they?
Some, my Lord, that lately
The Sentinel discovered, but not knew.
Now all the sea (my Lords) is hid with ships,
Another Promontory flanking this,
Some furlong hence, is climbed, and full of people,
That easily may see hither; it seems looking
What these so near intend: Take heed, they come.
Hail to Romes great Commander; to whom Egypt
(Not long since seated in his kingdom by thee,
And sent to by thee in thy passage by)
Sends vs with answer▪ which withdraw and hear▪
Isle kille my children first▪
Bless me, my Lord.
I will, and Cerise, my poor daughter too.
Even that high hand that hurled me down thus low,
Keep you from rising high: I hear: now tell me.
I think (my friend) you once served under me.
Nod only? not a word deign? what are these?
Cornelia? I am now not worth men's words.
Please you receive your aid, Sir?
I, I come.
Why draw they? See, my Lords; attend them ushers.
O they have slain great Pompey.
O my husband.
Mother, take comfort.
O my Lord and father.
See heavens your sufferings, is my Countries love
The justice of an Empire; piety;
Worth this end in their leader: last yet life,
And bring the gods off fairer: after this
Who will adore, or serve the deities?
Help hale him off: and take his head for Caesar.
Mother? O save vs; Pompey? O my father.
Yet false not heaven? Madam, O make good
Your late great spirits; all the world will say,
You know not how to bear adverse events,
If now you languish.
Take her to her coach.
O Beastly apprehenders of things manly,
And merely heavenly: they with all the reasons
I used for just men's liberties, to bear
Their lives and deaths up in their own free hands;
Fear still my resolution though I seem.
To give it off like them: and now am won
To think my life in laws rule, not mine own,
When once it comes to death; as if the law
Made for a sort of outlaws, must bound me
In their subjection; as if I could
Be racked out of my veins, to live in others;
As so I must, if others rule my life;
And public power keep all the right of death,
As if men needs must serve the place of justice;
The form, and idol, and renounce it self?
Our selves, and all our rights in God and goodness?
Our whole contents and freedoms to dispose,
All in the joys and ways of arrant rogues?
No stay but their wilde errors, to sustain vs?
No forges but their throats to vent our breaths?
To form our lives in, and repose our deaths?
See, they have got my sword. Who's there?
My Lord:
Who took my sword hence? Dumb? I doe not ask
For any use or care of it: but hope
I may be answered. Go Sir, let me have it.
Po•re slaves, how terrible this death is to them?
If men would sleep, they would be wroth with all
That interrupt them: Physic take to take
The golden rest it brings: both pay and pray
For good, and soundest naps: all friends consenting
In those kind invocations; praying all
Good rest, the gods vouchsafe you; but when death
(Sleeps natural brother) comes; (that's nothing worse,
But better; being more rich; and keeps the store;
Sleep ever •ickle, way ward still, and poor)
O how men grudge, and shake, and fear, and fly
His sterne approaches? all their comforts taken
In faith, and knowledge of the bliss and beauties.
That watch their wakings in an endless life:
Dround in the pains and horrors of their sense
Sustained but for an hour; be all the earth
Rapt with this error, Isle pursue my reason,
And hold that as my light and fiery pillar,
Th'eternall law of heaven and earth no firmer.
But while I seek to conquer conquering Caesar,
My soft-splen'd servants overrule and curb me.
Whore's he I sent to fetch and place my sword
Where late I left it? Dumb to? Come another!
Whore's my sword hung here?
My Lord, I know not,
The rest, come in there. Whore's the sword I charged you
To give his place again? Isle break your lips op,
Spite of my freedom; all my servants, friends;
My son and all, will needs betray me naked
To the armed malice of a foe so fierce
And Bear-like, mankind of the blood of virtue.
O gods, who ever saw me thus contemned?
Go call my son in; tell him, that the less
He shows himself my son, the less Isle care
To live his father.
I beseech you, Sir,
Rest patient of my duty, and my love;
Your other children think on, our poor mother,
Your family, your Country.
If the gods
Give over i'll, Isle fly the world with them.
Eden•dorus, I admire the changes,
I note in heavenly providence. When Pompey
Did all things out of course, past right, past reason,
He stood invincible against the world:
Yet, now his cares grew pious, and his powers
Set all up for his Country, he is conquered.
The gods wills secret are, nor must we measure
Their chast-reserued deeps by our dry shallows.
Suffices vs, we are entirely such
As twixt them and our consciences we know
Their graces, in our virtues, shall present
Unspotted with the earth; to'th high throne
That overlooks vs: for this giant world
Let's not contend with it, when heaven it self
Fails to reform it: why should we affect
The least hand over it, in that ambition?
A heap tic of digested villainy;
Virtue in labour with eternal Chaos
Pressed to a living death, and racked beneath it▪
Her throws unpitied; every worthy man
Limb by limb sawne out of her virgin womb,
To live here piecemeal tortured, fly life then;
Your life and death made presidents for men.
Ye hear (my masters) what a life this is,
And use much reason to respect it so.
But mine shall serve ye. Yet restore my sword,
Lest too much ye presume, and I conceive
Ye front me like my fortunes. Whore's Statilius?
I think Sir, gone with the three hundred Romans
In Lucius Caesars charge, to serve the victor.
And would not take his leave of his poor friend?
Then the Philosophers have stooped his spirit.
Which I admire, in one so free, and knowing,
And such a fiery hater of base life,
Besides, being such a vowed and noted foe
To our great Conqueror. But I advised him
To spare his youth, and live.
My brother Brutus
Is gone to Caesar.
Brutus? Of mine honour
(Although he be my son in law) I must say
There went as worthy, and as learned a President
As lives in Romes whole rule, for all lifes actions;
And yet your sister Portion (his wife)
Would scarce have done this. But (for you my son)
However Caesar deals with me; be counsailde
By your experienc't father, not to touch
At any action of the public weal,
Nor any rule bear near her politic sterne:
For, to be vbright, and sincere therein
Like Catos son, the times corruption
Will never bear it: and, to sooth the time,
You shall doe basely, and unworthy your life;
Which, to the gods I wish, may outweigh mine
In every virtue; howsoever ill
You thrive in honour.
I, my Lord, shall gladly
Obey that counsel.
And what needed you
Urge my kind care of any charge that nature
Imposes on me? have I ever shown
Loves least defect to you? or any dues
The most iddulgent father (being discreet)
Could doe his dearest blood? doe you me right
In judgment, and in honour; and dispense
With passionate nature: go, neglect me not,
But send my sword in. Go, tic I that charge you.
O my Lord, and father, come, advise me.
What have I now to think on in this world?
No one thought of the world, I go each minute
Discharged of all cares that may fit my freedom.
The next world, and my soul, then let me serve
With her last utterance, that my body may
With sweetness of the passage drown the sour
That death will mix with it: the Consuls souls
That slew themselves so nobly, scorning life
Led under Tyrants Scepters, mine would see.
For we shall know each other; and past death
Retain those forms of knowledge le•rn'd in life;
Since, if what here we learn, we t•ere shall lose,
Our immortality were not life, but time.
And that our souls in reason are immortal,
Their natural and proper objects prove;
Which immortality and knowledge are.
For to that object ever is referred
The nature of the soul, in which the acts
Of her high faculties are still employed.
And that true object must her powers obtain
To which they are in natures aim directed.
Since it were absurd to have her set an object
Which possibly she never can aspire.
Your sword, my Lord.
O is it found? lay down
Upon the bed (my boy)  Poor men; a boy
Must be presenter; manhood at no hand
Must serve so foul a fact; for so are called
(In common mouths) men's fairest acts of all.
Unsheathe; is it sharpe? tic sweet. Now I am safe,
Come Caesar, quickly now, or lose your vassal.
Now wing thee, dear soul, and receive her heaven.
The earth, the ayre, and seas I know, and all
The joys, and horrors of their peace and wars,
And now will see the gods state, and the stars.
Cate? my Lord?
I swear (Statilius)
He's forth, and gone to seek you, charging me
To seek elsewhere, lest you had slain your self;
And by his love entreated you would live.
I swear by all the gods, Isle run his fortunes.
You may, you may; but shun the victor now,
Who near is, and will make vs all his slaves.
He shall himself be mine first, and my slaves.
Look, look in to my father, O (I fear)
He is no sight for me to bear and live.
O ruthful spectacle▪
He hath ripped his entrails.
Search, search; they may be •and.
They may, and are.
Give leave, my Lord, that I may few them up
Being yet vnperisht.
Stand off; now they are not.
Have he my curse that my lifes least part saves.
•used men are only free, the rest are slaves.
Mirror of men.
The gods envied his goodness.
Too late, too late; with all our haste. O cato,
All my late Conquest, and my lifes whole acts,
Most crowned, most beautified, are basted all
With thy grave lifes expiring in their scorn.
Thy life was rule to all lives; and thy death
(Thus forcibly despising life) the quench
Of all lives glories.
Vnreclaimed man?
How censure• Brutus his sterne fathers fact?
It was not well done.
O censure not his acts;
Who knew as well what fitted man, as all men.
Your enemies head great Caesar.
Cursed monsters,
Wound not mine eyes with it, nor in my camp
Let any da•e to view it; far as nobles
The den of barbarism flies, and bliss
The bitterest curse of vexed and tyrannisde nature,
Transfer it from me. Borne the plagues of virtue
How durst ye poison thus my thoughts? to torture
Them with instant rapture.
Sacred Caesar.
Away with them; I vow by all my comforts,
Who slack seems, or not fiery in my charge,
Shall suffer with them.
Out base murderers;
Tortures, tortures for them:
Cruel Caesar.
Too mild with any torture.
Let me crave
The •as of my hate on their one cursed life.
Good Brutus take it; O you cool the poison
These villains flaming pou'rd upon my spleen
To suffer with my loadings. If the blood
Of every common Roman touched so near;
Shall I confirm the fees brand of my tyranny
With being found a fautor of his murder
Whom my dear Country chusde to ••light for her?
Your patience Sir, their tortures well will quit you.
Let my slaves use, Sir, be your president.
It shall, I swear: you doe me infinite honour.
O Cato, I envy thy death, since thou
Enuiedst my glory to preserve thy life.
Why fled his son and friend Statilius?
So far I fly their hurt, that all my good
Shall fly to their desires. And (for himself)
My Lords and Citizens of Vtica,
His much renown of you, quit with your most.
And by the sea, upon some eminent rock,
Erect his sumptuous tomb; on which advance
With all fit state his statue; whose right hand
Let hold his sword, where, may to all times rest
His bones as honoured as his soul is blessed.

NOw will the two Suns of our Roman Heaven
(Pompey &amp; Caesar) in their Tropic burning,
With their contention, all the clouds assemble
That threaten tempests to our peace &amp; Em∣per,
Which we shall shortly see pour down in blood,
Civil and natural, wilde and barbarous turning.
From whence presage you this?
From both their Armies,
Now gathered near our Italy, contending
To enter severally: Pompeys brought so near
By Romes consent; for fear of tyrannous Caesar,
Which Caesar fearing to be done in favour
Of Pompey, and his passage to the Empire,
Hath brought on his for interuention.
And such a flock of Puttocks follow Caesar,
For fall of his ill-disposed Purse
(That never yet spared Cross to Aquiline virtue)
As well may make all civil spirits suspicious.
Look how against great rains, a standing Poole
Of Paddockes, Toads, and water-Snakes put up
Their speckled throats aboue the venomous Lake,
Croaking and gasping for some fresh fallen drops
To quench their poisond thirst; being near to stifle
With clotterd purgings of their own foul bane;
So still, where Caesar goes, there thrust up head,
Impostors, Flatterers, Favourites, and Bawds,
Buffons, Intelligencers, select wits;
Close Murderers, Montibanckes, and decayed Thieves,
To gain their baneful lives reliefs from him.
From Britain, Belgia, France, and Germanie,
The scum of either Country, (chose by him,
To be his black Guard, and red Agents here)
Swarming about him.
And all these are said
To be suborned, in chief, against your self;
Since Caesar chiefly fears, that you will sit
This day his opposite; in the cause for which
Both you were sent for home; and he hath stolen
Access so soon here; Pompey• whole rest raised
To his encounter; and on both sides, Rome
In general uproar.
Which Sir, if you saw,
And knew, how for the danger, all suspect
To this your worthiest friend (for that known freedom
His spirit will use this day, against both the Rivals,
His wife and family morn, no food, no comfort
Allowed them, for his danger) you would use
Your utmost pours to stay him from the Senate,
All this days Session.
Hoe's too wise, Statilius,
For all is nothing.
Nothing Sir? I saw
Castor and Pollux Temple, thrust up full,
With all the damned crew you have lately named▪
The market place and suburbs swarming with them:
And where the Senate sit, are Ruffians pointed
To keep from entering the degrees that go
Up to the Bench; all other but the Consuls,
Caesar and Pompey, and the Senators,
And all for no cause, but to keep out Cato,
With any violence, any villainy;
And is this nothing Sir? Is his One life,
On whom all good lives, and their goods depend,
In Romes whole Empire! All the Justice there
That's free, and simple; all such virtues too,
And all such knowledge; Nothing, nothing, all?
Away Statilius; how long shall thy love
Exceed thy knowledge of me, and the Gods?
Whose rights thou wrongst for my right? have not?
Their powers to guard me, in a cause of theirs?
Their justice, and integrity included,
In what I stand for? he that fears the Gods,
For guard of any goodness; all things fears;
Earth, Seas, and Air; Heaven, darkness, broad day-light,
Rumour, and Silence, and his very shade:
And what an Aspen soul hath such a creature?
How dangerous to his soul is such a fear?
In whose cold fits, is all heavens justice shaken
To his faint thoughts; and all the goodness there
Due to all good men, by the gods own vows,
Nay, by the firmness of their endless Being,
All which shall fail as soon as any one
Good to a good man in them: for his goodness
Proceeds from them, and is a beam of theirs.
O never more, Statilius, may this fear
Taint thy bold bosom, for thy self, or friend.
More then the gods are fearful to defend.
Come; let him go, Statilius; and your fright;
This man hath inward guard, past your young sight.
Welcome; come stand by me in what is fit
For our poor Cities safety; nor respect
Her proudest foes corruption, or our danger
Of what seen face soever.
I am yours.
But what alas, Sir, can the weakness doe
Against our whole State of vs only two?
You know our Statists spirits are so corrupt
And servile to the greatest; that what crosses
Them, or their own particular wealth, or honour,
They will not enterprise to save the Empire.
I know it; yet let vs doe like our selves.
Move you for entering only Pompeys army;
Which if you gain for him; for me, all justice
Will join with my request of entering mine.
Tic like so, and I purpose to enforce it.
But might we not win Cato to our friendship
By honouring speeches, nor persuasive gifts?
Not possible.
Nor by enforciue usage?
Not all the violence that can be used,
Of power, or set authoitry can stir him,
Much less fair words win, or rewards corrupt him;
And therefore all means we must use to keep him
From off the Bench.
Give you the course for that,
And if he offer entry, I have fellows
Will serve your will on him, at my given signal.
He is the man that sits so close to Caesar,
And holds the law there, whispering; see the Cowherd
Hath guards of armed men got, against one naked.
Isle part their whispering virtue.
Hold, keep out.
What? honoured Cato? enter, choose thy place.
Come in;
—Away unworthy grooms.
No more.
What should one say to him?
He will be Stoical.
Where fit place is not given, it must be taken.
Doe, take it Cato; fear no greatest of them;
Thou seek the peoples good; and these their own.
Brave Cato! what a countenance he puts on?
Let's give his noble will, our utmost power.
Be bold in all thy will; for being just,
Thou moist defy the gods.
Said like a God.
We must endure these people.
Doe; begin.
Consuls, and reverend Fathers; And ye people,
Whose voices are the voices of the Gods;
I here have drawn a law, by good consent,
For entering into Italy, the army
Of Romes great Pompey: that his forces here,
As well as he, great Rome, may rest secure
From danger or the yet still smoking fire,
Of Catiline• abhorred conspiracy:
Of which the very chief are left alive,
Only chastisde, but with a gentle prison.
Put them to death then, and strike dead our fear,
That well you urge, by their unfit suruiuall.
Rather then keep it quick; and two lives give it,
By entertaining Pompeys army too.
That gives as great cause of our fear, as they.
For their conspiracy, only was to make
One Tyrant over all the State of Rome.
And Pompeys army, suffered to be entered,
Is, to make him, or give him means to be so.
It follows not.
In purpose; clearly Sir,
Which Isle illustrate, with a clear example.
If it be day, the Sunne's aboue the earth;
Which follows not (you'll answer) for it is day
When first the morning breaks; and yet is then
The body of the Sun beneath the earth;
But he is virtually aboue it too,
Because his beams are there, and who then knows not
His golden body will soon after mount.
So Pompeys army entered Italy,
Yet Pompey's not in Rome; but Pompey's beams
Who sees not there? and consequently, he
Is in all means enthroned in th'Emperie.
Examples prove not, we will have the army
Of Pompey entered.
We? which we intend you?
Have you already bought the peoples voices?
Or bear our Consul or our Senate here
So small love to their Courtry; that their wills
Beyond their Countries right are so perverse,
To give a Tyrant here entire command?
Which I have proved as clear as day, they doe,
If either the Conspirators surviving
Be let to live; or Pompeys army entered;
Both which, beat one sole path; and threat one danger.
Consuls, and honoured Fathers; The sole entry
Of Pompeys army, Isle not yet examine:
But for the great Conspirators yet living,
(Which Cato will conclude as one self danger,
To our dear Country; and deter all therefore
That love their Country, from their lives defence
I see no reason why such danger hangs
On their saved lives; being still safe kept in prison;
And since close prison, to a Roman freedom,
Ten fold torments more, then directest death,
Who can be thought to love the less his Country,
That seeks to save their lives? And lest my self
(Thus speaking for them) be unjustly touched
With any less doubt of my Countries love.
Why (reverend Fathers) may it be esteemed
Self praise in me, to prove my self a chief
Both in my love of her; and in desert
Of her like love in me? For he that does
Most honour to his Mistress; well may boast
(Without least question) that he loves her most.
And though things long since done, were long since known,
And so may seem superfluous to repeat;
Yet being forgotten, as things never done,
Their repetition needful is, in justice,
T'enflame the shame of that oblivion:
For hoping it will seem no less impair
To others acts, to truly tell mine own;
Put all together; I have past them all
That by their acts can boast themselves to be
Their Countries lovers: first in those wilde kingdoms
Subdued to Rome, by my vnwearied toils.
Which I dissauag'd and made nobly civil.
Next, in the multitude of those rude Realms
That so I fashiond; and to Romes young Empire
Of old have added: Then the battles numbered
This hand hath fought, and won for her, with all
Those infinites of dreadful enemies
(I slue in them: Twice fifteen hundred thousand
All able Soldiers) I have driven at once
Before my forces: and in sundry onsets,
A thousand thousand of them, put to sword:
Besides, I took in less then ten years time,
By strong assault, aboue eight hundred Cities,
Three hundred several Nations, in that space,
Subduing to my Country; all which service,
I trust, may interest me in her love,
Public, and general enough, to aquit me
Of any selfe-loue; past her common good:
For any motion of particular justice
(By which her general Empire is maintained)
That I can make for those accused prisoners,
Which is but by the way; that so the reason
Metellus makes for entering Pompeys army,
May not more weighty seem, then to agree
With those imprisoned nobles, vital safeties.
Which granted, or but yielded fit to be,
May well extenuate the necessity
Of entering Pompeys army.
All that need
I took away before; and reasons gave
For a necessity to keep it out
Whose entry (I think) he himself affects not.
Since I as well think he affects not th'Empire,
And both those thoughts hold; since he loves his Country,
In my great hopes of him too well to seek
His sole rule of her, when so many souls,
So hard a task approve it; nor my hopes
Of his sincere love to his Country, build
On sandier grounds then Caesars; since he can
As good Cards show for it as Caesar did,
And quit therein the close aspersion
Of his ambition, seeking to employ
His army in the breast of Italy.
Let me not thus (imperial Bench and Senate)
Feel myself beat about the ears, and tossed
With others breathes to any coast they please:
And not put some stay to my errors in them.
The gods can witness that not my ambition
Hath brought to question th'entry of my army;
And therefore not suspected the effect,
Of which that entry is supposed the cause:
Which is a will in me, to give my power
The rule of Romes sole Empire; that most strangely
Would put my will in others powers; and powers
(Vnforfeit by my fault) in others wills.
My selfe-l•ue, out of which all this must rise:
I will not wrong the known proofs of my love
To this my native Cities public good,
To quit, or think of; nor repeat those proofs
Confirmed in those three triumphs I have made;
For conquest of the whole inhabited world;
First Africa, Europe, and then Asia,
Which never Consul but my self could boast.
Nor can blind Fortune vaunt her partial hand,
In any part of all my services,
Though some have said, she was the page of Caesar,
Both sailing, marching, fighting, and preparing
His fights in very order of his battles:
The parts she plaid for him inuerting nature,
As giving calmness to th'enraged sea;
Imposing Summers weather on sterne winter;
Winging the slowest foot he did command,
And his most Cowherd making fierce of hand.
And all this ever when the force of man
Was quite exceeded in it all; and she
In th'instant adding her clear deity.
Yet, her for me, I both disclaim and scorn;
And where all fortune is renounc't, no reason
Will think one man transferd with affectation
Of all Pumice Empire; for he must have fortune
That goes beyond a man; and where so many
Their hand-fulls find with it; the one is m•d
That undergoes it: and where that is cleared;
Th'imputed means to it, which is my suit
For entry of mine army, I confute.
What rests then, this of all parts being disclaimd?
My part, Sir, rests, that let great Pompey bear
What spirit he lists; it is needful yet for Rome,
That this Law be established for his army.
Tic then as needful to admit in mine;
Or else let both lay down our arms; for else
To take my charge off, and leave Pompey his;
You wrongfully accuse me to intend
A tyranny amongst ye; and shall give
Pompey full means to be himself a tyrant.
Can this be answered?
Is it then your wills
That Pompey shall cease arms?
What else?
No, no.
Shall Caesar cease his arms?
I, I.
For shame
Then yield to this clear equity, that both
May leave their arms.
We indifferent stand.
Read but this law, and you shall see a difference
Twixt equity and your indifference;
All men's objections answered; Read it Notary.
He shall not read it.
I will read it then.
Nor thou shalt read it, being a thing so vain,
Pretending cause for Pompeys armies entry.
That only by thy Accomplices and thee;
Tic forged to set the Senate in an uproar
I have it Sir, in memory, and will speak it.
Thou shalt be dumb as soon.
Pull down this Cato,
Author of factions, and to prison with him.
Come down Sir.
Hence ye mercenary Ruffians.
What outrage show you? sheath your insolent swords,
Or be proclaimed your Countries foes and traitors.
How insolent a part was this in you,
To offer the imprisonment of Cato?
When there is right in him (were form so answered
With terms and place) to send vs both to prison?
If, of our own ambitions, we should offer
Th'entry of our armies; for who knows
That, of vs both, the best friend to his Country,
And freest from his own particular ends;
(Being in his power) would not assume the Empire,
And having it, could rule the State so well
As now it is gouer'nd, for the common good?
Accuse your self, Sir, (if your conscience urge it)
Or of ambition, or corruption,
Or insufficiency to rule the Empire,
And sound not me with your Lead.
Lead? tic Gold,
And spirit of Gold too; to the politic dross
With which false Caesar sounds men; and for which
His praise and honour crowns them; who sounds not
The inmost sand of Caesar? for but sand
Is all the rope of your great parts affected.
You speak well, and are learned; and golden speech
Did Nature never give man; but to guild
A copper soul in him; and all that learning
That heartily is spent in painting speech,
Is merely painted, and no solid knowledge.
But you've another praise for temperance,
Which nought commends your free choice to be temperate·
For so you must be; at least in your meals,
Since you've a malady that ties you to it;
For fear of daily false in your aspirings.
And your disease the gods ne'er gave to man;
But such a one, as had a spirit too great
For all his bodies passages to serve it,
Which notes th'excesse of your ambition.
The malady chancing where the pores and passages
Through which the spirit of a man is borne,
So narrow are, and straight, that oftentimes
They intercept it quite, and choke it up.
And yet because the greatness of it notes
A heat mere fleshly, and of bloods rank fire,
Goats are of all beasts subiect'st to it most.
Your self might have it then, if those faults cause it;
But deals this man ingeniously, to tax
Men with a frailty that the gods inflict?
The gods inflict on men, diseases never,
Or other outward maims; but to decipher,
Correct, and order some rude vice within them:
And why decipher they it, but to make
Men note, and shun, and tax it to th'extreame?
Nor will I see my Countries hopes abused,
In any man commanding in her Empire;
If my more trial of him, makes me see more
Into his intricacies; and my freedom
Hath spirit to speak more, then observers servile.
Be free, Sir, of your insight and your speech;
And speak, and see more, then the world besides;
I must remember I have heard of one,
That fame gave out, could see thorough Ok and stone:
And of another set in Sicily,
That could discern the Carthaginian Navy,
And number them distinctly, leaving harbour,
Though full a day and nights fail distant thence:
But these things (Reverend Fathers) I conceive,
Hardly appear to you worth grave belief:
And therefore since such strange things have been seen
In my so deep and foul detractions,
By only Lyncean Pompey; who was most
Loved and believed of Romes most famous whore,
Infamous Flora; by so fine a man
As Galba, or Sarmentus; any easter
Or flatterer may draw through a Ladies Ring;
By one that all his Soldiers call in scorn
Great Agamemnon, or the king of men;
I rest vnmou'd with him; and yield to you
To right my wrongs, or his abuse allow.
My Lords, ye make all Rome amazed to hear.
Away, Isle hear no more; I hear it thunder
My Lords; All you that love the good of Rome,
I charge ye, follow me; all such as slay,
Are friends to Caesar, and their Countries foes.
Th'euent will fall out contrary, my Lords.
Go, thou art a thief to Rome, discharge thine army,
Or be proclaimed, forthwith, her open foe.
Pompey, I charge thee, help thy injured Country
With what powers thou hast armed, and levy more.
War, war, O Caesar.
Peace, peace, worthy Pompey.
Wars, wars, and presses, fly in fire about;
No more can I lurk in my lasy corners,
Nor shifting courses: and with honest means
To rack my miserable life out, more,
The rack is not so fearful; when dishonest
And villainous fashions fail me; can I hope
To live with virtuous? or to raise my fortunes
By creeping up in Soldierly degrees?
Since villainy varied thorough all his figures,
Will put no better case on me then this;
Despair! come seas me: I had able means;
And spent all in the swinge of lewd affections;
Plunged in all riot, and the rage of blood;
In full assurance that being knave enough,
Barbarous enough, base, ignorant enough,
I needs must have enough, while this world lasted;
Yet, since I am a poor, and ragged knave,
My rags disgace my knavery so, that none
Will think I am knave; as if good clothes
Were knacks to know a knave; when all men know
He has no living? which knacks since my knavery
Can show no more; and only show is all
That this world cares for; Isle stop out of all
The cares it is steeped in.
Hold Rascal, hang thy self in these days?
The only time that ever was for a Rascal to live in?
How chance I cannot live then?
Either you are not rascal nor villain enough;
Or else thou dost not pretend honesty
And piety enough to disguise it.
That's certain, for every ass does that.
What art thou?
A villain worse then thou.
And dost breathe?
I speak thou hear, I move, my pulse beats
Fast as thine.
And wherefore liu'st thou?
The world's out of frame, a thousand Rulers
Wresting it this way, and that, with as many
Religions; when, as heavens upper Sphere is moved
Only by one; so should the Sphere of earth be, and
Isle have it so.
How can thou? what art thou?
My shape may tell thee.
No man?
Man? no, spawn of a clot, none of that cursed
Crew, damned in the mass it self; plagued in his birth,
Confined to creep below, and wrestle with the Elements;
Teach himself tortures; kill himself, hang himself;
No such gally slave, but at war with heaven;
Spurning the power of the gods, command the Elements.
What moist thou be then?
An endless friend of thine; an immortal devil.
Heaven bless vs.
Nay then, forth, go, hang thy self, and thou talk
Of heaven once.
I have done; what devil art thou?
Read the old stoic Pherecides, that tells thee
Me truly, and says that I Ophioneus (for so is
My name.)
Ophioneus? what's that?
Devilish Serpent, by interpretation; was general
Captain of that rebellious host of spirits that
Waged war with heaven.
And so were hurled down to hell.
We were so; and yet have the rule of earth; and cares
Any man for the worst of hell then?
Why should he?
Well said; what's thy name now?
My name is Fronto.
Fronto? A good one; and has Fronto lived thus long
In Rome? lost his state at dice? murdered his
Brother for his means? spent all? run thorough worse
Offices since? been a Promoter? a Purveyor? a Pander?
A Sumner? a Sergeant? an Intelligencer? and at last
Hang thy self?
How the devil knows he all this?
Why thou art a most greene Plouer in policy, I
Perceive; and moist drink Golte-foote, for all thy
Horseman beard: S'light, what need hast
Thou to hang thy self? as if there were a dearth
Of hangmen in the land? Thou liu'st in a good cheap
State, a man may be hanged here for a little, or
Nothing. What's the reason of thy desperation?
My idle dislolute life, is thrust out of all his corners
By this searching tumult now on foot in Rome.
—Caesar now and Pompey
Are both for battle: Pompey (in his fear
Of Caesars greater force) is sending hence
His wife and children, and he bent to fly.
See, all are on their wings; and all the City
In such an uproar, as if fire and sword
Were ransacking, and ruining their houses,
No idle person now can lurk near Rome,
All must to arms; or shake their heals beneath
Her martial halters; whose officious pride
Isle shun, and use mine own swinge: I be forced
To help my Country, when it forces me
To this past-helping pickle?
Go to, thou shalt serve me, choose thy profession;
And what cloth thou would wish to have thy Coat
Cut out on.
I can name none.
Shall I be thy learned Counsel?
None better.
Be an Archflamen then, to one of the Gods.
Archflamen? what's that?
A Priest.
A Priest? that ne'er was Clerk?
No Clerk? what then?
The greatest Clerks are not the wisest men.
Nor skils it for degrees in a knave, or a fools preferment,
Thou shalt rise by fortune: let desert rise leisurely
Enough, and by degrees; fortune prefers headlong,
And comes like riches to a man; huge riches being
Got with little pains; and little with huge pains. And
For discharge of the Priesthood, what thou want
In learning, thou shalt take out in goodfellowship:
Thou shalt equiuocate with the Sophister, prate with
The Lawyer, scrape with the Usurer, drink with the
Dutchman, swear with the French man, cheat
With the English man, brag with the Scot, and
Turn all this to Religion, Hoc est regnum
Deorum Gentibus.
All this I can doe to a hair.
Very good, wilt thou show thy self deeply learned too,
And to live licentiously here, care for nothing hereafter?
Not for hell?
For hell? soft Sir; hop'st thou to purchase hell
With only dicing or whoring away thy living?
Murdering thy brother, and so forth? No there
Remain works of a higher hand and deeper brain,
To obtain hell. Think thou earths great
Potentates have gotten their places there with
Any single act of murder, poisoning, adutery,
And the rest? No; tic a purchase for all manner
Of villainy; especially, that may be privileged
By Authority; coloured with holiness, and enjoyed
With pleasure.
O this were most honourable and admirable.
Why such an admirable honourable villainy shalt
Thou be.
Is it possible?
Make no doubt on it; Isle inspire thee.
Sacred and puissant.
Away; Companion and friend, give me thy
Hand; say, dost not love me? art not enamourd
Of my acquaintance?
Protest I am.
Well said, protest and tic enough. And know for
Infallible; I have promotion for thee; both here, and
Hereafter; which not one great one amongst
Millions shall ever aspire to. Alexander, nor great
Cirrus, retain those titles in hell, that they did
On earth:
No?
No: he that sold Seacoale here, shall be
A Baron there; he that was a cheating
Rogue here, shall be a Justice of peace there;
A knave here, a knight there. In the mean
Space, learn what it is to live; and thou shalt
Have Choppiness at commandment to any height
Of life thou can wish.
I fear my fall is too low.
Too low fool? hast thou not heard of Vulcans falling
Out of heaven? Light a thy legs, and no matter
Though thou halt'st with thy best friend ever after; tic
The more comely and fashionable. Better go lame
In the fashion with Pompey, then never so upright,
Quite out of the fashion with Cato.
Yet you cannot change the old fashion (they say)
And hide your cloven feet.
No? I can wear Roses that shall spread quite
Over them.
For love of the fashion doe then.
Go to; I will hereafter.
But for the Priesthood you offer me, I affect it not.
No? what say thou to a rich office then?
The only second means to raise a rascal
In the earth.
Go to; Isle help thee to the bested earth then:
And that's in Sicilia; the very storehouse of the
Romans, where the Lord chief Censor there
Lies now a dying; whose soul I will have; and
Thou shalt have his office.
Excellent; was ever great office better supplied?
Now is the mighty Empress of the earth
(Great Rome) fast locked up in her fancied strength,
All broke in uproars; fearing the just gods
In plagues will drown her so abused blessings.
In which fear, all without her walls, fly in;
By both their earring Champions rushing out;
And those that were within, as fast fly forth;
The Consuls both are fled without one rite
Of sacrifice submitted to the gods,
As ever heretofore their custom was
When they began the bloody frights of war.
In which our two great Soldiers now encountering,
Since both left Rome, opposed in bitter skirmish,
Pompey (not willing yet to hazard battle,
By Catos counsel, urging good cause) fled:
Which firing Caesars spirit; he pursued
So home, and fiercely, that great Pompey skorning
The heart he took, by his advised flight,
Despised advice as much as his pursuit.
And as in Lybia, an aged Lion,
Urged from his peaceful covert, fears the light
With his unready and diseased appearance,
Gives way to chase a while, and coldly hunts▪
Till with the youthful hunters wanton heat,
He all his cool wrath frets into a flame:
And then his sides he swings with his Sterne,
To lash his strand up, let's down all his brows
About his burning eyes; erects his mane,
Breaks all his throat in thunders, and to wreak
His hunters insolence, his heart even barking;
He frees his fury, turns, and rushes back
With such a ghastly horror, that in heaps,
His proud foes fly, and he that station keeps:
So Pompey• cool spirits, put to all their heat
By Caesars hard pursuit he turned fresh head,
And flew upon his foe with such a rapture
As took up into furies, all friends fears;
Who fired with his first turning, all turned head,
And gave so fierce a charge, their followers fled,
Whose instant issue on their both sides, see,
And after set out such a tragedy,
As all the Princes of the earth may come
To take their patterns by the spirits of Rome.
Stay cowherd, fly ye Caesars fortunes?
Forbear foolish Crassinius, we contend in vain
To stay these vapours, and must raise our Camp.
How shall we rise (my Lord) but all in uproars,
Being still pursued?
The pursuit stays, my Lord,
Pompey hath sounded a retreat, resigning
His time to you to use, in instant raising
Your ill-lodg'd army, pitching now where fortune
May good amends make for her fault to day.
It was not fortunes fault, but mine Acilius,
To give my foe charge, being so near the sea,
Where well I knew the eminence of his strength,
And should have driven th'encounter further off;
Bearing before me such a goodly Country,
So plentiful, and rich, in all things fit
To have supplied my armies want with victuals,
And th'able Cities too, to strengthen it,
Of Macedon and Thessaly▪ where now
I rather was besieged for want of food,
Then did assault with fighting force of arms.
See, Sir, here's one friend of your foes recovered.
Vibius? In happy hour.
For me vphappy.
What? brought against your will?
Else had not come.
Sir, hoe's your prisoner, but had made you his,
Had all the rest pursued the chase like him;
He drove on like a fury; past all friends,
But we that took him quick in his engagement.
O Vibius, you deserve to pay a ransom
Of infinite rate, for had your General joined
In your addression, or known how to conquer;
This day had proved him the supreme of Caesar.
Known how to conquer? His five hundred Conquests
Achieved ere this day, make that doubt unfit
For him that flies him; for, of issues doubtful
Who can at all times put on for the best?
If I were mad, must hee his army venture
In my engagement? Nor are Generals ever
Their powers disposers, by their proper Angels,
But trust against them, oftentimes, their Counsels,
Wherein, I doubt not, Caesars self hath erred
Sometimes, as well as Pompey.
Or done worse,
In disobeying my Counsel (Vibius)
Of which, this days abused light is witness;
By which I might have seen a course secure
Of this discomfiture.
Amends sits ever
Aboue repentance, what's done, wish not undone;
But that prepared patience that you know
Best fits a soldier charged with hardest fortunes;
Asks still your use, since powers still temperate kept
Op still the clearer eyes by one faults sight
To place the next act, in the surer right.
You prompt me nobly Sir, repairing in me
Mine own stays practice, out of whose repose
The strong convulsions of my spirits forced me
Thus far beyond my temper; but good Vibius,
Be ransomed with my love, and haste to Pompey,
Entreating him from me, that we may meet,
And for that reason which I know this day
(Was given by Cato, for his pursutes stay
Which was prevention of our Roman blood)
Propose my offer of our hearty peace.
That being reconciled, and mutual faith
Given on our either part, not three days light
May further show vs foes, but (both our armies
Dispersed in Garrisons) we may return
Within that time to Italy, such friends
As in our Countries love, contain our splines
Tic offered, Sir, above the rate of Caesar
In other men, but in what I approve
Beneath his merits: which I will not fail
T'enforce at full to Pompey, nor forget
In any time the gratitude of my service.
Your love, Sir, and your friendship.
This prepares a good induction to the change of for∣tune,
In this days issue, if the pride it kindles
In Pompeys veins, makes him deny a peace
So gently offered: for her altered hand
Works never surer from her ill to good
On his side she hath hurt, and on the other
With other changes, then when means are used
To keep her constant, yet retire refused.
I try no such conclusion, but desire
Directly peace. In mean space Isle prepare
For other issue in my utmost means;
Whose hopes now resting at Brundusium,
In that part of my army, with Sabinus,
I wonder he so long delays to bring me,
And must in person haste him, if this Even
I hear not from him.
That (I hope) flies far
Your full intent, my Lord, since Pompeys navy,
You know, lies hovering all along those seas,
In too much danger, for what aid soever
You can procure to pass your person safe.
Which doubt may prove the cause that stays Sabinus;
And, if with shipping fit to pass your army,
He yet strains time to venture, I presume
You will not pass your person with such Convoy
Of those poor vessels, as may serve you here.
How shall I help it? shall I suffer this
Torment of his delay? and rack suspicions
Worse then assured destructions through my thoughts.
Past doubt he will be here; I left all ordered,
And full agreement made with him to make
All utmost haste, no least let once suspected.
Suspected? what suspection should fear a friend
In such assured straights from his friends enlargement.
If it were his soldiers safeties he so tenders,
Were it not better they should sink by sea,
Then wrack their number, King and cause ashore?
Their stay is worth their ruin, should we live,
If they in fault were? if their leader! he
Sold dye the deaths of all; in mean space, I
That should not, bear all, fly the sight in shame,
Thou •ye of nature, and abortive night
Fall dead amongst vs: with defects, defects
Must serve proportion; justice never can
Be else restored, nor right the wrongs of man.
This charge of our fierce foe, the firiendly gods
Have in our stregthen'd spirits beaten back
With happy issue, and his forces lessened,
Of two and thirty Ensigns forced from him,
Two thousand soldiers slain.
O boast not that,
Their loss is yours, my Lord.
I boast it not,
But only name the number.
Which right well
You might have raised so high, that on their tops
Your Throne was offered, ever t'ouerlooke
Subverted Caesar, had you been so blessed
To give such honour to your Captains Counsels
As their alacrities did long to merit
With proofefull action.
O it was ill neglected.
It was deferred with reason, which not yet
Th'euent so clear is to confute.
If it were,
Our likeliest then was, not to hazard battle,
Th'aduenture being so casual; if compared
With our more certain means to his subversion?
For finding now our army amply stored
With all things fit to tarry surer time,
Reason thought better to extend to length
The war betwixt vs; that his little strength
May by degrees prove none; which urged now,
(Consisting of his best and ablest soldiers)
We should have found at one direct set battle
Of matchless valours; their defects of victual
Not tyring yet enough on their tough nerues,
Where, on the other part, to put them still
In motion, and remotion, here and there;
Enforcing them to fortifying still
Where ever they set down; to siege a wall,
Keep watch all night in armour: their most part
Can never bear it, by their years oppression;
Spent heretofore too much in those steel toils.
I so advised, and yet repent it not,
But much rejoice in so much saved blood
As had been poured out in the stroke of battle,
Whose fury thus prevented, comprehends
Your Countries good, and Empires▪ in whose care
Let me beseech you that in all this war,
You sack no City, subject to our Rule,
Nor put to sword one Citizen of Rome;
But when the needful fury of the sword
Can make no fit distinction in maine battle,
That you will please still to prolong the stroke
Of absolute decision to these jars,
Considering you shall strike it with a man
Of much skill and experience, and one
That will his Conquest sell at infinite rate,
If that must end your difference; but I doubt
There will come humble offer on his part,
Of honoured peace to you, for whose sweet name
So cried out to you in our late-met Senate,
Lost no fit offer of that wished treaty.
Take pity on your Countries blood as much
As possible may stand without the danger
Of hindering her justice on her foes,
Which all the gods to your full wish dispose.
Why will you leave vs? whither will you go
To keep your worthiest person in more safety
Then in my army, so devoted to you?
My person is the least, my Lord, I value;
I am commanded by our powerful Senate,
To view the Cities, and the kingdoms situate
About your either army, that which side
Soever conquer, no disordered stragglers
Puffed with the Conquest, or by need impaled,
May take their swinge more then the care of one
May curb and order in these neighbor confines
My chief pass yet resolves for Vtica.
Your pass (my truest friend, and worthy Father)
May all good powers make sa•e, and always answer
Your infinite merits, with their like protection.
In which, I make no doubt but we shall meet
With mutual greetings, or for absolute conquest
Or peace preventing that our bloody stroke,
Nor let our parting be dishonoured so,
As not to take into our noblest notice
Your self (most learned and admired Father)
Whose merits, if I live, shall lack no honour.
Porcius, Statilius, though your spirits with mine
Would highly chere me, yet ye shall bestow them
In much more worthy conduct; but love me,
And wish me conquest, for your Countries sake.
Our lives shall seal our loves, Sir, with worst death▪
Adventured in your service.
You're my friends.
These friends thus gone, tic more then time we minded
Our lost friend Vibius.
You can want no friends,
See, our two Consuls, Sir, betwixt them bringing
The worthy Brutus.
We attend (my Lord)
With no mean friend, to spirit your next encounter,
Six thousand of our choice Patrician youths
Brought in his conduct.
And though never yet▪
He hath saluted you with any word
Or look of slendrest love in his whole life,
Since that long time since, of his fathers death
By your hand authord; yet see, at your need
He comes to serve you freely for his Country.
His friendly presence, making up a third
With both your persons, I as gladly welcome,
As if Iones triple flame had guilt this field,
And lightened on my right hand, from his shield.
I well assure my self, Sir, that no thought
In y•ur ingenious construction, touches
At the aspersion that my tendered service
Proceeds from my despair of elsewhere safety
But that my Countries safety owning justly
My whole liabilities of life and fortunes,
And you the ablest fautor of her safety,
Her love, and (for your love of her) your own
Only makes sacred to your use my offering.
Far fly all other thought from my construction,
And due acceptance of the liberal honour,
Your love hath done me, which the gods are witness,
I take as stirred up in you by their favours,
Nor less esteem it then an offering holy;
Since, as of all things, man is said the measure,
So your full merits measure forth a man.
See yet, my Lord, more friends.
Five Kings, your servants.
Conquest and all grace crown the gracious Pompey,
To serve whom in the sacred Roman safety,
My self, Iberias King, present my forces.
And I that hold the tributary Throne
Of Grecian Thessaly, submit my homage,
To Rome, and Pompey.
So Cilicia too.
And so Epirus.
Lastly I from Thrice
Present the duties of my power and service.
Your royal aides deserve of Rome and Pompey
Our utmost honours. O may now our fortune
Not balance her broad breast twixt two light wings,
Nor on a slippery globe sustain her steps,
But as the Spartans say, the Paphian Queen
(The flood Eur•tas passing) laid a side
Her Glass, her Ceston, and her amorous graces,
And in Lycurgus favour; armed her beauties
With Shield and Javelin, so may fortune now,
The flood of all our enemies forces passing
With her fair Ensigns, and arrived a• ours,
Displume her shoulders, cast off her winged shoes,
Her faithless, and still-rowling stone spurn from her,
And enter our powers as she may remain
Our firm assistant▪ that the general aids,
Favours, and honours you perform to Rome,
May make her build with you her endless home.
The gods vouchsafe it; and our causes right
What sudden Shade is this? observe my Lords,
The night, me thinks, comes on before her hour.
Nor trust me if my thoughts conceive not so.
What thin clouds fly the winds, like swiftest shafts
Along aires middle region.
They presage
Unusual tempests.
And tic their repair,
That timeless darken thus the gloomy ayre.
Let's force no omen from it, but avoid
The vapors furies now by Jove employed.
The wrathful tempest of the angry night,
Where hell flies muffled up in clouds of pitch,
Mingled with Sulphur, and those dreadful bolts,
The Cyclops Ram in Ioues Artillery,
Hath roused the furies, armed in all their horrors,
Up to the envious seas, in spite of Caesar.
O night, O jealous night, of all the noblest
Beauties, and glories, where the gods have stroke
Their four digestions, from thy ghastly Chaos,
Blush thus to drown them all in this hour signed
By the necessity of sate for Caesar.
I that have ransacked all the world for worth,
To form in man the image of the gods,
Must like them have the power to check the worst
Of all things under their celestial Empire,
Stoop it, and burst it, or break through it all,
With use and safety, till the Crown be set
On all my actions; that the hand of nature
In all her worst works aiming at an end,
May in a master-peece of hers be served
With tops, and state fit for his virtuous Crown:
Not lift arts thus far up in glorious frame,
To let them vanish thus in smoke and shame.
This river Anius (in whose mouth now lies
A Pinnace I would pass in, to fetch on
My armies dull rest from Brundusium)
That is at all times else exceeding calm,
(By reason of a purling wind that flies
Off from the shore each morning, driving up
The billows far to sea) in this night yet,
Bears such a terrible gale; put off from sea,
As beats the land wind back, and thrusts the flood
Up in such uproar, that no boat dare stir
And on it is dispersed all Pompeys navy
To make my peril yet more envious.
Shall I yet shrink for all? were all, yet more?
There is a certain need that I must give
Way to my pass; none, known, that I must live.
What battle is there sought now in the ayre.
That threats the wrack of nature?
Master? come.
Shall we thrust through it all?
What lost man,
Art thou in hopes and fortunes, that dare make
So desperate a motion.
Launch man, and all thy fears freight disavow,
Thou carry Caesar and his fortunes now.
NOw to Pharsalia, where the smarting strokes
Of our resolved contention must resound,
(My Lords and friends of Rome) I give you all
Such welcome as the spirit of all my fortunes,
Conquests, and triumphs (now come for their crown)
Can crown your favours with, and serve the hopes
Of my dear Country, to her utmost wish;
I can but set up all my being to give
So good an end to my forerunning Acts;
The powers in me that formed them having lost
No least time since, in gathering skill to better;
But like so many Bees have brought me home,
The sweet of whatsoever flowers have grown
In all the meads, and gardens of the world.
All which hath grown still, as the time increase
In which it was gathered, and with which it stemmed.
That what decay soever blood inferred,
Might with my minds store, be supplied, and cher'd,
All which, in one fire of this instant 〈◊〉
Isle burn, and sacrifice to every cinder
In sacred offering to my Countries love,
And therefore what event soever sort,
As I no praise will look for, but the good
Freely bestow on all; (if good succeed)
So if adverse fate fall, I wish no blame,
But the isle befallen me, made my fortunes shame,
Not mine, nor my fault.
We too well love Pompey,
To doe him that injustice.
Who more thirsts
The Conquest, then resolves to bear the foil?
Said Brutus-like, give several witness all,
That you acquit me whatsoever fall.
Particular men particular fates must bear,
Who feels his own wounds less, to wound another?
Leave him the worst whose best is left undone,
He only conquers whose mind still is one.
Free minds, like dice, fallsqare, what ere the cast.
Who on him self sole stands, stands solely fast.
He's never down, whose mind fights still aloft.
Who cares for up or down, when ell's but thought.
To things events doth no mans power extend.
Since gods rule all, who any thing would mend.
Ye sweetly ease my charge, your selves vnburthening.
Returned not yet our trumpet, sent to know
Of Vibius certain state?
Not yet, my Lord.
Too long protract we all means to recover
His person quick or dead, for I still think
His loss served fate, before we blew retreat;
Though some affirm him seen, soon after fighting.
Not after, Sir, (I heard) but ere it ended.
H• bore a great mind to extend our pursuit
Much further then it was; and served that day
(When you had, like the true head of a battle,
Led all the body in that glorious turn)
Upon a fa•re-off Squadron that stood fast
In conduct of the great Marc Anthony,
When all the rest were fled, so past a man
That in their tough receipt of him, I saw him
Thrice break thorough all with ease, and pass as fair
As he had all been fire, and they but ayre.
He stuck at last yet, in their midst, it seemed.
So have I seen a fire drake glide at midnight
Before a dying man to point his grave,
And in it stick and hide.
He comes yet safe.
O Vibius, welcome, what a prisoner?
With mighty Caesar, and so quickly ransomed?
I Sir, my ransom, needed little time,
Either to gain agreement for the value,
Or the disbursment, since in Caesars grace
We both concluded.
Was his grace so free·
For your respect, Sir.
Nay, Sir, for his glory.
That the maine Conquest he so surely builds on,
(Which ever is forerun with petty fortunes)
Take not effect, by taking any friend
From all the most, my poor defence can make,
But must be complete, by his perfect own.
I know, Sir, you more nobly rate the freedom
He freely gave your friend; then to pervert it
So past his wisdom: that knows much too well
Th'vncertaine state of Conquest; to raise frames
Of such presumption on her fickle wings,
And chiefly in a loss so late, and grievous▪
Besides, your forces far exceeding his,
His whole powers being but two and twenty thousand:
And yours full four and forty thousand strong:
For all which yet, he stood as far from fear
In my enlargement, as the confident glory
You please to put on him; and had this end
In my so kind dismission, that as kindly
I might solicit a sure peace betwixt you.
A peace? Is it possible?
Come, doe not show this wanton incredulity too much.
Believe me I was far from such a thought
In his high stomach: Cato prophesied then.
What think my Lords our Consuls, and friend Brutus?
An off• happy.
Were it plain and hearty.
I, there's the true inspecton to his prospect.
This straight of his perhaps may need a slight
O some hid stratagem, to bring him off.
Devices of a new fordge to entrap me?
I rest in Caesars shades? walk his strewn paths?
Sleep in his quiet waives? Isle sooner trust
Hibernian Bogs, and quicksands; and hell mouth
Take for my sanctuary: in bad parts
That no extremes will better, natures finger
Hath marked him to me, to take heed of him.
What thinks my Brutus?
Tic your best and safest.
This offered peace of his is sure a snare
To make our war the bloodier, whose fit fear
Makes me I dare not now (in thoughts maturer
Then late inclined me) put in use the Counsel
Your noble father Cato (parting) gave me,
Whose much too tender shunning innocent blood,
This battle hazards now, that must cost more.
It does, and therefore now no more defer it.
Say all men so?
We doe.
I grieve ye doe,
Because I rather wish to err with Cato
Then with the truth go of the world besides;
But since it shall abide this other stroke.
Ye gods that our great Roman Genius
Have made, not give vs one days conquest only,
Nor grow in conquests for some little time,
As did the Genius of the Macedons;
Nor be by land great only, like Laconians;
Nor yet by sea alone, as was th'Athenians;
Nor slowly sty•red up, like the Persian Angel;
Nor rocked asleep soon, like the Ionian spirit.
But made our Roman Genius, fiery, watchful,
And even from Romes prime, joined his youth with hers,
Grow as she grew, and firm as earth abide,
By her increasing pomp, at sea, and shore,
In peace, in battle; against Greece as well
As our Barbarian foes; command yet further
Ye firm and just gods, our assistfull Angel
For Rome, and Pompey, who now fights for Rome;
That all these royal Laws, to vs, and justice
Of common safety, may the selfe-loue drown
Of tyrannous Caesar; and my care for all
Your Altars crowned with endless festival.
Say (sacred Southsayer) and inform the truth,
What liking hast thou of our sacrifice?
Imperial Caesar, at your sacred charge,
I drew a milk white Ox into the Temple,
And turning there his face into the east,
(Fearfully shaking at the shining light)
Down fell his horned forehead to his hoof,
When I began to greet him with the stroke,
That should prepare him for the holy rites,
With hideous roars he laid out such a throat
As made the secret lurkings of the god
To answer ecco-like, in threatening sounds:
I stroke again at him, and then he slept,
His life-blood boiling out at every wound
In streams as clear as any liquid Ruby,
And there began to alter my presage,
The other ill signs showing the other fortune,
Of your last skirmish, which far opposite now
Proves, ill beginnings good events foreshew.
For now the beast cut up, and laid on th'Altar,
His limbs were all licked up with instant flames,
Not like the Elemental fire that burns
In household uses, lamely struggling up,
This way and that way winding as it rises,
But (right and upright) reached his proper sphere
Where burns the fire eternal and sincere.
And what may that presage?
That even the spirit
Of heavens pure flame flew down and ravished up
Your offerings blaze in that religious instant,
Which shows th'alacritie and cheerful virtue
Of heavens free bounty, doing good in time,
And with what swiftness true devotions clime.
The gods be honoured.
O behold with wonder,
The sacred blaze is like a torch enlightened,
Directly burning just aboue your camp!
Miraculous.
Believe it, with all thanks:
The Roman Genius is altered now,
And arms for Caesar.
Soothsayer be for ever
Reverenced of Caesar. O Marc Anthony,
I thought to raise my camp, and all my tents,
Took down for swift remotion to Scotussa.
Shall now our purpose hold▪
Against the gods?
They grace in th'instant, and in th'instant we
Must add our parts, and be in th'vse as free.
See Sir, the scouts return.
What news, my friends?
Arm, arm, my Lord; the ••ward of the foe
Is ranged already:
Answer them, and arm:
You cannot set your rest of battle up
In happier hour; for I this night beheld
A strange confusion in your enemies camp,
The soldiers taking arms in all dismay,
And hurling them again as fast to earth.
Every way routing; as th'alarme were then
Given to their army. A most causeless fear
Dispersed quite through them.
Then it was Jove himself
That with his secret finger stirred in them.
Other presages of success (my Lord)
Have strangely happened in th'adiacent Cities,
To this your army: for in Tralleis,
Within a Temple, built to Victory,
There stands a statue of your form and name,
Near whose firm base, even from the marble pavement,
There sprang a Palm tree up, in this last night,
That seems to crown your statue with his boughs,
Spread in wrapped shadows round about your brows.
The sign, Crassinius, is most strange and graceful,
Nor could get issue, but by power divine;
Yet will not that, nor all abodes besides
(Of never such kind promise of success)
Perform it without tough acts of our own.
No care, no nerve the less to be employed;
No offering to the gods, no vows, no prayers:
Secure and idle spirits never thrive
When most the gods for their advancements strive.
And therefore tell me what abodes thou buildst on
In an spirit to act, inflamed in thee,
Or in our Soldiers seen resolved addresses?
Great and fiery virtue. And this day
Be sure (great Caesar) of effects as great
In absolute conquest; to which are prepared
Enforcements resolute, from this armed hand,
Which thou shalt praise me for alive or dead.
Alive (ye gods vouchsafe) and my true vows
For life in him (great heaven) for all my foes
(Being natural Romans) so far jointly hear
As may not hurt our Conquest; as with fear
Which thou already strangely hast diffusde
Through all their army; which extend to flight
Without one bloody stroke of force and fight.
Tic time, my Lord, you put in form your battle.
Since we must fight then, and no offered peace
Will take with Pompey: I rejoice to see
This long-time looked for, and most happy day,
In which we now shall fight, with men, not hunger,
With toils, not sweats of blood through years extended,
This one day serving to decide all jars
Twixt me and Pompey. Hang out of my tent
My Crimsine coat of arms, to give my soldiers
That euer-sure sign of resolu'd-for fight.
These hands shall give that sign to all their longings.
My Lord, my army, I think best to order
In three full Squadrons: of which let me pray
Your self would take on you the left wings charge;
My self will lead the right wing, and my place
Of fight elect in my tenth legion▪
My battle by Domitius Calvinus
Shall take direction.
Hark, your soldiers shout
For joy to see your bloody Cote of Arms
Assure their fight this morning.
A blessed Even
Bring on them worthy comforts. And ye gods
Perform your good presages in events
Of fit crown for our discipline, and deeds
Wrought up by conquest; that my use of it
May wipe the hateful and unworthy slain
Of Tyrant from my Temples, and exchange it
For fautor of my Country, ye have given
That title to those poor and fearful sowles
That every sound puts up, in frights and cries;
Even then, when all Romes powers were weak and heartless,
When traitorous fires, and fierce Barbarian swords,
Ripens, and soule-expiring slaughters filled
Her houses, Temples, all her ayre, and earth.
To me then (whom your bounties have informed
With such a spirit as despises fear;
Commands in either fortune, knows, and arms
Against the worst of fate; and therefore can
Dispose blessed means, encouraged to the best)
Much more vouchsafe that honour; chiefly now,
When Rome wants only this days conquest given me
To make her happy, to confirm the brightness
That yet she shines in over all the world;
In Empire, riches, strife of all the Arts,
In gifts of Cities, and of kingdoms sent her;
In Crowns laid at her feet, in every grace
That shores, and seas, floods, Islands, Continents,
Groves, fields, hills, mines, and metals can produce;
All which I (victor) will increase, I vow
By all my good, acknowledged given by you.
THe poison stooped in every vain of Empire,
In all the world, meet now in only me,
Thunder and lighten me to death; and make
My senses feed the flame, my soul the crack.
Was ever sovereign Captain of so many
Armies and Nations, so oppressed as I,
With one hosts headstrong outrage? urging fight,
Yet fly about my camp in panick terrors;
No reason under heaven suggesting cause.
And what is this but even the gods deterring▪
My judgment from enforcing fight this morn?
The new-fled night made day with Meteors,
Fired over Caesars camp, and fallen in mine,
As pointing out the terrible events
Yet in suspense; but where they threat their fall
Speak not these prodigies with fiery tongues,
And eloquence that should not move but r•uish
All sound minds, from thus tempting the just gods,
And spitting out their fair premonishing flames
With brackish rheumes of ruderand brainsick number,
What's infinitely more, thus wild, thus mad
For one poor fortune of a beaten few;
To half so many staid, and dreadful soldiers?
Long trained, long foughten? able, nimble, perfect
To turn and wind advantage every way?
Increase with little, and enforce with none?
Made bold as Lyons, gaunt as famished wolves,
With still-seru'd slaughters, and continual toils.
You should not, Sir, forsake your own wise Counsel,
Your own experienc't discipline, own practise,
Own god inspired insight to all changes,
Of Protean fortune, and her z•ny, war,
For hosts, and hells of such; What man will think
The best of them, not mad; to see them range
So up and down your camp, already suing
For offices fallen, by Caesars built on fall,
Before one stroke be struck? Domitius, Spender,
Your father Scipio new preparing friends
For Caesars place of universal Bishop?
Are you the observed rule, and vouched example;
Who ever would commend Physicians,
That would not follow the diseased desires
Of their sick patients? yet incur your self
The faults that you so much abhor in others.
I cannot, Sir, abide men's open mouths,
Nor be ill spoken of; nor have my counsels
And circumspections, turned on me for fears,
With mocks and scandals that would make a man
Of lead, a lightning; in the desperat'st onset
That ever trampled under death, his life.
I bear the touch of fear for all their safeties.
Or for mine own? enlarge with twice as many
Selfe-liues, selfe-fortunes? they shall sink beneath
Their own cred•lites, before I cross them.
Come, haste, dispose our battle.
Good my Lord,
Against your Genius war not for the world.
By all worlds he that moves me next to bear
Their scofs and imputations of my fear
For any cause, shall bear this sword to hell.
Away, to battle; good my Lord lead you
The whole six thousand of our young Patricians,
Placed in the left wing to environ Caesar.
My father Scipio shall lead the battle;
Domitius the left wing; I the right
Against Marc Anthony. Take now your fills
Ye beastly doters on your barbarous wills.
Fly, fly, the day was lost before it was fought.
The Romans feared their shadows.
Were there ever
Such monstrous confidences, as last night
Their Cups and musique showed? Before the morning
Made such amazes ere one stroke was struck?
It made great Pompey mad, which who could mend?
The gods had hand in it.
It made the Consuls
Run on their swords to see it. The brave Patricians
Fled with their spoiled faces, arrows sticking
As shot from heaven at them.
It was the charge
That Caesar gave against them.
Come, away,
Leave all, and wonder at this fatal day.
Pursue, pursue; the gods foreshew'd their powers,
Which we gave issue, and the day is ours.
Crassineus? O look up: he does, and shows
Death in his broken eyes; which Caesars hands
Shall doe the honour of eternal closure.
Too well thou keptst thy word, that thou this day
Would doe me service to our victory.
Which in thy life or death I should behold,
And praise thee for; I doe, and must admire
Thy matchless valour; ever ever rest
Thy manly lineaments, which in a tomb
Erected to thy noble name and virtues,
Isle curiosly preserve with balms, and spices,
In eminent place of these Pharsalian fields,
Inscribed with this true soul of funeral,
Crassineus fought for fame, and died for Rome,
Whose public weal springs from this private tomb.
Thus have the gods their justice, men their wills,
And I, by men's wills ruled; my self renouncing,
Am by my Angel and the gods abhorred;
Who drew me, like a vapour, up to heaven
To dash me like a tempest against the earth:
O the deserved terrors that attend
On humane confidence! had ever men
Such outrage of presumption to be victors
Before they armed? To send to Rome before
For houses near the market place, their tents
Strowd all with flowers, and nosegays; tables covered
With cups and banquets; baize and myrtle garlands,
As ready to doe sacrifice for conquest
Rather then arm them for fit fight t'enfore it;
Which when I saw, I knew as well th'euent
As now I feel it, and because I raged
In that presage, my Genius showing me clearly
(As in a mirror) all this cursed issue;
And therefore urged all means to put it off
For this day, or from these fields to some other,
Or from this om•nous confidence, till I saw
Their spirits settled in some graver knowledge
Of what belonged to such a dear decision;
They spotted me with fear, with love of glory,
To keep in my command so many Kings,
So great an army; all the hellish blastings
That could be breathed on me, to strike me blind
Of honour, spirit and soul: And should I then
Save them that would in spite of heaven be ruined?
And, in their safeties ruin me and mine
In everlasting rage of their detraction.
Your safety and own honour did deserve
Respect past all their values; O my Lord
Would you?
Upbraid me not; go to, go on.
No; Isle not rub the wound. The misery is,
The gods for any error in a man
(Which they might rectify, and should; because
That man maintained the right) should suffer wrong
To be thus insolent, thus graced, thus blessed?
O the strange carriage of their acts, by which
Men order theirs; and their devotions in them;
Much rather striving to entangle men
In pithless error, then with regular right
Confirm their reasons, and their pieties light.
For now Sir, whatsoever was foreshowne
By heaven, or prodigy; ten parts more for vs,
Forewarning vs, deterring vs, and all
Our blind and brainless frenzies, then for Caesar;
All yet will be ascribed to his regard
Given by the gods for his good parts, preferring
Their gloss (being starck impostures) to the justice,
Love, honour, piety, of our laws and Country.
Though I think these are arguments enough
For my acquittal, that for all these fought.
You're clear, my Lord.
Gods help me, as I am;
What ever my untouched command of millions
Through all my eight and fifty years, hath won,
This one day (in the worlds esteem) hath lost.
So vile is praise and dispraise by event.
For I am still my self in every worth
The world could grace me with, had this days Even
In one blaze joined, with all my other Conquests.
And shall my comforts in my well-known self
Fail me for their false fires, Demetrius?
O no, my Lord.
Take grief for them, as if
The rotten-hearted world could steep my soul
In filthy putrefaction of their own?
Since their applauses fail me? that are hisses
To every sound acceptance? I confess,
That till th'affaire was past, my passions flamed,
But now tic helpless, and no cause in me,
Rest in these embers my vnmoued soul,
With any outward change, this distich minding;
No man should more allow his own loss, woes,
(Being past his fault) then any stranger does.
And for the worlds false loves, and airy honours,
What soul that ever loved them most in life,
(Once severed from this breathing sepulchre)
Again came and appeared in any kind
Their kind admirer still, or did the state
Of any best man here, associate?
And every true soul should be here so severed
From love of such men, as here drown their souls
As all the world does? Cato sole accepted,
To whom Isle fly now, and my wife in way
(Poor Lady, and poor children, worse then fatherless)
Visit, and comfort. Come Demetrius▪
We now must suit our habits to our fortunes
And since these changes ever chance to greatest.
Nor desire to be
(Doe fortune, to exceed it, what she can)
A Pompey, or a Caesar, but a man.
O We have slain, not conquered, Roman blood
Peruerts th'euent, and desperate blood let out
With their own swords. Did ever men before
Envy their own lives, since another lived
Whom they would wilfully conceive their foe,
And forge a Tyrant merely in their fears
To justify their slaughters? Consuls? furies.
Be, Sir, their faults their griefs! The greater number
Were only slaves, that left their bloods to ruth,
And altogether, but six thousand slain.
How ever many; gods and men can witness
Themselves enforced it, much against the most
I could enforce on Pompey for our peace.
Of all slain, yet, if Brutus only lived,
I should be comforted, for his life saved
Would weigh the whole six thousand that are lost.
But much I fear his death, because the battle
Full stricken now, he yet abides vnfound.
I saw him fighting near the battles end,
But suddenly give off, as bent to fly.
He comes here, see Sir.
I submit to Caesar
My life and fortunes.
A more welcome fortune
Is Brutus, then my conquest.
Sir, I fought
Against your conquest, and your self; and merit
(I must acknowledge) a much sterner welcome.
You fought with me, Sir, for I know your arms
Were taken for your Country, not for Pompey:
And for my Country I fought, nothing less
Then he, or both the mighty-stomak•t Consuls;
Both whom (I hear) have slain themselves before
They would enjoy life in the good of Caesar.
But I am nothing worse, how ill soever
They, and the great authority of Rome
Would fine enforce me by their mere suspicions.
Loved they their Country better then her Brutus?
Or knew what fitted nobles, and a Roman
With freer souls then Brutus. Those that live
Shall see in Caesars justice. and what ever
Might make me worthy both their lives and loves,
That I have lost the one without my merit,
And they the other with no Roman spirit.
Are you impaired to live, and joy my love?
Only requite me, Brutus, love but Caesar,
And be in all the powers of Caesar, Caesar.
In which free wish, I join your father Cato;
For whom Isle haste to Vtica, and pray
His love may strengthen my success to day.
To what use take you that (my Lord?)
Take you
No note that I take it, nor let any servant,
Besides your self, of all my fathers nearest,
Serve any mood he serves, with any knowledge
Of this or any other, Caesar comes
And gives his army wings to reach this town.
Not for the towns sake, but to save my father.
Whom justly he suspects to be resolved
Of any violence to his life, before
He will preserve it by a Tyrants favour.
For Pompey hath miscarried, and is fled.
Be true to me, and to my fathers life;
And doe not tell him; nor his fury serve
With any other.
I will dye, my Lord,
Ere I observe it.
O my Lord and father.
What fears fly here on all sides? what wilde looks
Are squinted at me from men's mere suspicions
That I am wilde my self, and would enforce
What will be taken from me by the Tyrant.
No: Would you only ask life, he would think
His own life given more strength in giving yours
I ask my life of him?
Ask what's his own?
Of him he scorns should have the least drop in it
At his disposure.
No, Statilius.
Men that have forfeit lives by breaking laws,
Or have been overcome, may beg their lives,
But I have ever been in every justice
Better then Caesar, and was never conquered,
Or made to fly for life, as Caesar was.
But have been victor ever, to my wish,
Against whomsoever ever hath opposde;
Where Caesar now is conquered in his Conquest,
In the ambition, he till now denied;
Taking upon him to give life, when death
Is tenfold due to his most tyrannous self.
No right, no power given him to raise an army,
Which in despite of Rome he leads about
Slaughtering her loyal subjects, like an outlaw,
Nor is he better. Tongue, show, falsehood are,
To bloodiest deaths his parts so much admired,
Vaineglory, villainy; and at best you can,
Fed with the parings of a worthy man.
My fame affirm my life received from him?
Isle rather make a beast my second father.
The gods avert from every Roman mind
The name of slave to any Tyrants power.
Why was man ever just, but to be free,
Against all injustice? and to bear about him
As well all means to freedom every hour,
As every hour he should be armed for death,
Which only is his freedom?
But Statilius
Death is not free for any mans election,
Till nature, or the law, impose it on him.
Must a man go to law then, when he may
Enjoy his own in peace? If I can use
Mine own my self, must I of force, reserve it
To serve a Tyrant with it? All just men
Not only may enlarge their lives, but must,
From all rule tyrannous, or live unjust.
By death must they enlarge their lives?
By death.
A man's not bound to that.
Isle prove he is.
Are not the lives of all men bound to justice?
They are.
And therefore not to serve injustice:
Justice it self ought ever to be free,
And therefore every just man being a part
Of that free justice, should be free as it.
Then wherefore is there law for death?
That all
That know not what law is, nor freely can
Perform the fitting justice of a man
In kingdoms common good, may been forced.
But is not every just man to him self
The perfect'st law▪
Suppose.
Then to himself
Is every just mans life subordinate.
Again, Sir; Is not our free soul infused
To every body in her absolute end
To rule that body? in which absolute rule
Is she not absolutely Empress of it?
And being Empress, may she not dispose
It, and the life in it, at her just pleasure?
Not to destroy it.
No; she not destroys it
When she disliues it; that their freedoms may
Go firm together, like their powers and organs,
Rather then let it live a rebel to her,
Profaning that divine conjunction
Twixt her and it; nay, a disiunction making
Betwixt them worse then death; in killing quick
That which in just death lives: being dead to her
If to her rule dead; and to her alive,
If dying in her just rule.
The body lives not
When death hath rest it.
Yet tic free, and kept
Fit for reiunction in mans second life;
Which dying rebel to the soul, is far
Unfit to join with her in perfect life.
It shall not join with her again.
It shall.
In reason shall it?
In apparent reason;
Which Isle prove clearly.
Hear, and judge it Sir.
As nature works in all things to an end,
So in th'appropriate honour of that end,
All things precedent have their natural frame;
And therefore is there a proportion
Betwixt the ends of those things and their primes:
For else there could not be in their creation,
Always, or for the most part, that firm form
In their still like existence; that we see
In each full creature. What proportion then
Hath an immortal with a mortal substance?
And therefore the mortality to which
A man is subject; rather is a sleep,
Then bestial death; since sleep and death are called
The twins of nature. For if absolute death
And bestial seas the body of a man,
Then is there no proportion in his parts,
His soul being free from death, which otherwise
Retains divine proportion For as sleep
No disproportion holds with humane souls,
But aptly quickens the proportion
Twixt them and bodies, making bodies fitter▪
To give up forms to souls, which is their end:
So death (twin-borne of sleep) resolving all
Mans bodies heavy parts; in lighter nature
Makes a reunion with the sprightly soul;
When in a second life their beings given,
Holds their proportion firm, in highest heaven.
Hold you our bodies shall revive, resuming
Our souls again to heaven?
Past doubt, though others
Think heaven a world too high for our low reaches.
Not knowing the sacred sense of him that sings,
Jove can let down a golden chain from heaven,
Which tied to earth, shall fetch up earth and seas;
And what's that golden chain, but our pure souls,
A golden beam of him, let down by him,
That governed with his grace, and drawn by him,
Can hoist this earthy body up to him,
The sea, and ayre, and all the elements
Comprest in it: not while tic thus concrete,
But fined by death, and then given heavenly heat.
Your happy exposition of that place
(Whose sacred depth I never heard so sounded)
E••cts glad grant from m• you hold a truth.
Is it not a manly truth, and mere divine?
Tic a good cheerful doctrine for good men.
But (son and servants) this is only argued
To spend our dear time well, and no life urges
To any violence further then his owner
And graver men hold fit. Lets talk of Caesar,
He's the great subject of all talk, and he
Is hotly hasting on. Is supper ready?
It is, my Lord.
Why then let's in and eat;
Our cool submission will quench Caesars heat.
Submission? here's for him.
Statilus▪
My reasons must not strengthen you in error,
Nor learned Athenodorus gentle yielding.
Talk with some other deep Philosophers.
Or some divine Priest of the knowing gods,
And hear their reasons; in mean time come sup.
SO may my comforts for this good news thrive
As I am thankful for them to the Gods.
Joys unexpected, and in desperate plight,
Are still most sweet, and prove from whence they come;
When earths still Moonelike confidence, in joy,
Is at her full. True joy descending far
From past her sphere, and from that highest heaven
That moves and is not moved: how far was I
From hope of these events, when fearful dreams
Of Harpies tearing out my heart? of armies
Terribly joining? Cities, kingdoms falling,
And all on me? proved sleep, not twin to death,
But to me, death it self? yet making then,
These letters; full of as much cheerful life,
I found closed in my hand. O gods how justly
Ye laugh at all things earthly? at all fears
That rise not from your judgements? at all joys,
Not drawn directly from your selves, and in ye,
Distrust in man is faith, trust in him ruin.
Why write great learned men? men merely rapt
With sacred rage, of confidence, belief?
Undaunted spirits? inexorable fate
And all fear treading on? tic all but ayre,
If any comfort be, tic in despair.
You learned Ladies may hold any thing.
Now madam is your walk from coach come near
The promontory, where you late commanded
A Sentinel should stand to see from thence
If either with a navy, brought by sea,
Or train by land; great Pompey comes to greet you
As in your letters, he near this time promised.
O may this Isle of Lesbos, compassed in
With the Aegaean sea, that doth divide
Europe from Asia. (The sweet literate world
From the Barbarian) from my barbarous dreams
Divide my dearest husband and his fortunes.
He's busied now with ordering offices.
By this time, madam, sits your honoured father 
In Caesars chair of universal Bishop.
Domitius Aenobarbas, is made Consul,
Spynther his Consort; and Phaonius
Tribune, or Praetor.
These were only sought
Before the battle, not obtained; nor moving
My father but in shadows.
Why should men
Tempt fate with such firm confidence? seeking places
Before the power that should dispose could grant them?
For then the stroke of battle was not struck.
Nay, that was sure enough. Physicians know
When sick men's eyes are broken, they must dye.
Your letters telling you his victory
Lost in the skirmish, which I know hath broken
Both the eyes and heart of Caesar: for as men
Healthful through all their lives to grey-hayr'd age,
When sickness takes them once, they seldom scope:
So Caesar victor in his general fights
Till this late skirmish, could no adverse blow
Sustain without his utter overthrow.
See, madam, now; your Sentinel: enquire.
See thou no fleet yet (Sentinel) nor train
That may be thought great Pompeys?
Not yet, madame.
See thou no travellers addressed this way?
In any number on this Lesbian shore?
I see some not worth note; a couple coming
This way, on foot, that are not now far hence.
Come they apace? like messengers with news?
No, nothing like (my Lord) nor are their habits
Of any such men's fashions; being long mantles,
And sable hewed; their heads all hid in hats
Of parching Thessaly, broad brimmed, high crowned.
These serve not our hopes.
Now I see a ship,
A kenning hence; that strikes into the haven.
One only ship?
One only, madam, yet.
That should not be my Lord.
Your Lord? no madam.
She now lets out armed men upon the land.
Armed men? with drum and colours?
No, my Lord,
But bright in arms, yet bear half pikes, or beadhookes.
These can be no plumes in the train of Pompey.
Isle see him in his letter, once again.
Now, madam, come the two I saw on foot.
See your Princess, Sir, come thus far from the
City in her coach, to encounter your promised coming
About this time in your last letters.
The world is altered since Demetrius;
See, madam, two Thessalian Augurs it seems
By their habits. Call, and enquire if either by their
Skils or travels, they know no news of your husband.
My friends? a word.
With vs, madam?
Yes. Are you of Thessaly?
I, madam, and all the world besides.
Your Country is great.
And our portions little.
Are you Augurs?
Augurs, madam? yes a kind of Augurs, alias
Wizards, that go up and down the world, teaching
How to turn ill to good.
Can you doe that?
I, madam, you have no work for vs, have you?
No ill to turn good, I mean?
Yes; the absence of my husband.
What's he?
Pompey the great.
Wherein is he great?
In his command of the world.
Then he's great in others. Take him without his
Addition (great) what is he then?
Pompey.
Not your husband then?
Nothing the less for his greatness.
Not in his right; but in your comforts he is.
His right is my comfort.
What's his wrong?
My sorrow.
And that's ill.
Yes.
You're come to the use of our Profession, madam,
Would you have that ill turned good? that
Sorrow turned comfort?
Why is my Lord wronged.
We profess not that knowledge, madam:
Suppose he were.
Not I.
You'll suppose him good.
He is so.
Then must you needs suppose him wronged; for
All goodness is wronged in this world.
What call you wrong?
Ill fortune, affliction.
Think you my Lord afflicted?
If I think him good (madam) I must. Unless he
Be worldly good, and then, either he is ill, or has ill:
Since, as no sugar is without poison: so is no worldly
Good without ill. Even naturally nourished in it, like a
Household thief, which is the worst of all thieves.
Then he is not worldly, but truly good.
He's too great to be truly good; for worldly greatness
Is the chief worldly goodness; and all worldly goodness
(I proved before) has ill in it: which true good has not.
If he rule well with his greatness, wherein is he ill?
But great Rulers are like Carpenters that wear their
Rules at their backs still: and therefore to make good your
True good in him, y'ad better suppose him little, or mean.
For in the mean only is the true good.
But every great Lady must have her husband
Great still, or her love will be little.
I am none of those great Ladies.
She's a Philosophresse Augur, and can turn
Ill to good as well as you.
I would then, not honour, but adore her: could you
Submit your self cheerfully to your husband,
Supposing him fallen?
I• he submit himself cheerfully to his fortune▪
Tic the greatest greatness in the world you undertake.
I would be so great, if he were.
In supposition.
In fact.
Be no woman, but a Goddess then; &amp; make good thy greatness;
I am cheerfully fallen; be cheerful.
I am: and welcome, as the world were closed
In these embraces.
Is it possible?
A woman, losing greatness, still as good,
As at her greatest? O gods, was I ever
Great till this minute?
Len. Pompey?
View me better.
Len. Conquered by Caesar?
Not I, but mine army.
No fault in me, in it: no conquest of me:
I tread this low earth as I trod on Caesar.
Must I not hold my self, though lose the world?
Nor lose I less; a world lost at one clap,
Tic more then Jove ever thundered with.
What glory i• it to have my hand hurl
So vast a volley through the groaning ayre?
And is it not great, to turn griefs thus to joys,
That break the hearts of others?
Len. O tic Ioue-like.
It is to imitate Jove, that from the wounds
Of softest clouds, beats up the terriblest sounds.
I now am good, for good men still have least,
That twixt themselves and God might rise their rest.
O Pompey, Pompey: never Great till now.
O my Cornelia: let vs still be good,
And we shall still be great: and greater far
In every solid grace, then when the tumor
And bile of rotten observation swelled vs.
Griefs for wants outward, are without our cure,
Greatness, not of it self, is never sure.
Before, we went upon heaven, rather treading
The virtues of it under•oot, in making
The vicious world our heaven; then walking there
Even here, as knowing that our home; con•emning
All forged •evens here raised; setting hills on hills.
Vulcan from heaven fell, yet on's feet did light,
And stood no less a god then at his height;
At lowest things lye fast▪ we now are like
The two Poles propping heaven, on which heaven moves;
And they are fixed, and quiet, being aboue
All motion far; we rest aboue the heavens.
O, I more joy, to embrace my Lord thus fixed,
Then he had brought me ten inconstant conquests.
Miraculous standing in a fall so great,
Would Caesar knew, Sir, how you conquered him
In your conviction.
Tic enough for me
That Pompey knows it. I will stand no more
On others legs: nor build one joy without me.
If ever I be worth a house again,
Isle build all inward: not a light shall op
The common outway: no expense, no art,
No ornament, no door will I use there,
But raise all plain, and rudely, like a rampire,
Against the false society of men
That still batters
All reason piecemeal. And for earthy greatness
All heavenly comforts ratifies to ayre,
Isle therefore live in dark, and all my light,
Like ancient Temples, let in at my top.
This were to turn ones back to all the world,
And only look at heaven. Empedocles
Recurred a mortal plague through all his Country,
With stopping up the yawning of a hill,
From whence the hollow and unwholesome South
Exhald his venomed vapor. And what else
Is any King, given over to his lusts,
But even the poisoned cleft of that cracked mountain,
That all his kingdom plagues with his example?
Which I have stopped now, and so cured my Country
Of such a sensual pestilence:
When therefore our diseased affections
Harmful to humane freedom; and stormelike
Inferring darkness to th'infected mind
Oppress our comforts: tic but letting in
The light of reason, and a purer spirit,
Take in another way; like rooms that fight
With window against the wind, yet let in sight.
My Lord, we served before, but now adore you.
My Lord, the armed men I discou'rd lately
Vnshipt, and landed; now are trooping near.
What armed men are they?
Some, my Lord, that lately
The Sentinel discovered, but not knew▪
Now all the sea (my Lords) is hid with ships,
Another Promontory flanking this,
Some furlong hence, is climbed, and full of people,
That easily may see hither; it seems looking
What these so near intend: Take heed, they come.
Hail to Romes great Commander; to whom Egypt
(Not long since seated in his kingdom by thee,
And sent to by thee in thy passage by)
Sends vs with answer: which withdraw and hear.
Isle kiss my children first.
Bless me, my Lord.
I will, and Cerise, my poor daughter too.
Even that high hand that hurled me down thus low,
Keep you from rising high: I hear: now tell me.
I think (my friend) you once served under me:
Nod only? not a word deign? what are these?
Cornelia? I am now not worth men's words.
Please you receive your aid, Sir?
I, I come.
Why draw they? See, my Lords; attend them ushers.
O they have slain great Pompey.
O my husband.
Mother, take comfort.
O my Lord and father.
See heavens your sufferings, is my Countries love,
The justice of an Empire; piety;
Worth this end in their leader: last yet life,
And bring the gods off fairer: after this
Who will adore, or serve the deities?
Help hale him off: and take his head for Caesar.
Mother? O save vs; Pompey? O my father.
Yet false not heaven? Madam, O make good
Your late great spirits; all the world will say,
You know not how to bear adverse events,
If now you languish.
Take her to her coach.
O Beastly apprehenders of things manly,
And merely heavenly: they with all the reasons
I used for just men's liberties, to bear
Their lives and deaths up in their own free hands;
Fear still my resolution though I seem
To give it off like them: and now am won
To think my life in laws rule▪ not mine own,
When once it comes to death; as if the law
Made for a sort of outlaws, must bound me
In their subjection; as if I could
Be racked out of my veins, to live in others;
As so I must, if others rule my life;
And public power keep all the right of death,
As if men needs must serve the place of justice;
The form, and idol, and renounce it self?
Our selves, and all our rights in God and goodness?
Our whole contents and freedoms to dispose,
All in the joys and ways of arrant rogues?
No stay but their wilde errors, to sustain vs?
No forges but their throats to vent our breaths?
To form our lives in, and repose our deaths?
See, they have got my sword. Who's there?
My Lord.
Who took my sword hence? Dumb? I doe not ask
For any use or care of it: but hope
I may be answered. Go Sir, let me have it.
Poor slaves, how terrible this death is to them?
If men would sl•epe, they would be wroth with all
That interrupt them Physic •ache to take
The golden rest it brings: both pay and pray
For good, and soundest naps all friends consenting
In those kind invocations; praying all
Good rest, the gods vouchsafe you; put when death
(Sleeps natural brother) comes; (that's nothing worse,
But better; being more rich; and keeps the store;
Sleep ever fickle, wayward still, and poor)
O how men grudge, and shake, and •ear, and fly
His sterne approaches? all their comforts taken
In •aith, and knowledge of the bliss and beauties
That watch their wakings in an endless life:
Dround in the pains and horrors of their sense
Sustained but for an hour; be all the earth
Rapt with this error, lie pursue my reason,
And hold that as my light and fiery pillar,
Th'eternall law of heaven and earth no firmer.
But while I seek to conquer conquering Caesar,
My soft-splen'd servants overrule and curb me.
Whore's he I sent to fetch and place my sword
Where late I left it? Dumb to? Come another!
Whore's my sword hung here?
My Lord, I know not,
The rest come in there. Whore's the sword I charged you
To give his place again? Isle break your lips op,
Spite of my freedom; all my servants, friends;
My son and all, will needs betray me naked
To the armed malice of a foe so fierce
And Bear-like, mankind of the blood of virtue.
O gods, who ever saw me thus contemned?
Go call my son in; tell him, that the less
He shows himself my son, the less Isle care
To live his father.
I beseech you, Sir,
Rest patient of my duty, and my love;
Your other children think on, our poor mother,
Your family, your Country.
If the gods
Give over all, Isle fly the world with them.
Athenodorus, I admire the changes.
I note in heavenly providence. When Pompey
Did all things out of course, past right, past reason,
He stood invincible against the world:
Yet, now his cares grew pious, and his powers
Set all up for his Country, he is conquered.
The gods wills secret are, nor must we measure
Their chast-reserued deeps by our dry shallows.
Suffices vs, we are entirely such
As twixt them and our consciences we know
Their graces, in our virtues, shall present
Unspotted with the earth; to'th high throne
That overlooks vs: for this giant world
Let's not contend with it, when heaven it self
Fails to reform it: why should we affect
The least hand over it, in that ambition?
A heap tic of digested villainy;
Virtue in labour with eternal Chaos
Pressed to a living death, and racked beneath it.
Her throws unpitied; every worthy man
Limb by limb sawne out of her virgin womb,
To live here piecemeal tortured, fly life then;
Your life and death made presidents for men.
Ye hear (my masters) what a life this is,
And use much reason to respect it so.
But mine shall serve ye. Yet restore my sword,
Lest too much ye presume, and I conceive
Ye front me like my fortunes. Whore's Statilius?
I think Sir, gone with the three hundred Romans
In Lucius Caesars charge, to serve the victor.
And would not take his leave of his poor friend?
Then the Philosophers have stooped his spirit,
Which I admire, in one so free, and knowing,
And such a fiery hater of base life,
Besides, being such a vowed and noted foe
To our great Conqueror. But I advised him
To spare his youth, and live.
My brother Brutus
Is gone to Caesar.
Brutus? Of mine honour
(Although he be my son in law) I must say
There went as worthy, and as learned a President
As lives in Romes whole rule, for all lifes actions;
And yet your sister Portion (his wife)
Would scarce have done this. But (for you my son)
However Caesar deals with me; be counsailde
By your experienc't father, not to touch
At any action of the public weal,
Nor any rule bear near her politic sterne:
For, to be upright, and sincere therein
Like Catos son, the times corruption
Will never bear it: and, to sooth the time,
You shall doe basely, and unworthy your life;
Which, to the gods I wish, may outweigh mine
In every virtue; howsoever ill
You thrive in honour.
I, my Lord, shall gladly
Obey that counsel.
And what needed you
Urge my kind care of any charge that nature
Imposes on me? have I ever shown
Loves least defect to you? or any dues
The most indulgent father (being discreet)
Could doe his dearest blood? doe you me right
In judgment, and in honour; and dispense
With passionate nature: go, neglect me not,
But send my sword in. Go, tic I that charge you.
O my Lord, and father, come, advise me.
What have I now to think on in this world?
No one thought of the world, I go each minute
Discharged of all cares that may fit my freedom.
The next world, and my soul, then let me serve
With her last utterance, that my body may
With sweetness of the passage drown the sour
That death will mix with it: the Consuls souls
That slew themselves so nobly, scorning life
Led under Tyrants Scepters, mine would see.
For we shall know each other; and past death
Retain those forms of knowledge learned in life;
Since, if what here we learn, we there shall lose,
O• immortality were not life, but time.
And that our souls in reason are immortal,
Then natural and proper objects prove;
Which immortality and knowledge are.
For to th•t object ever is referred
The nature of the soul, in which the acts
Of her high faculties are still employed.
And that true object must her powers obtain
To which they are in nature•s aim directed.
Since it were absurd to have her s•t an object
Which possibly she never can aspire.
Your sword, my Lord.
O is it found? lay down
Upon the bed (my boy)
Poor men; a boy
Must be presenter; manhood at no hand
Must serve so foul a fact; for so are called
(In common mouths) men's fairest acts of all.
Unsheathe; is it sharpe? tic sweet. Now I am safe,
Come Caesar, quickly now, or lose your vassal.
Now wing thee, dear soul, and receive her heaven.
The earth, the ayre, and seas I know, and all
The joys, and horrors of their peace and wars,
And now will see the gods state, and the stars.
Cato? my Lord?
I swear (Statilius)
He's sorth, and gone to seek you, charging me
To seek elsewhere, lest you had slain your self;
And by his love entreated you would live.
I swear by all the gods, Isle run his fortunes.
You may, you may; but shun the victor now,
Who near is, and will make vs all his slaves.
He shall himself be mine first, and my slaves.
Look, look in to my father, O (I fear)
He is no sight for me to bear and live.
O ruthful spectacle▪
He hath ripped his entrails.
Search, search; they may be sound.
They may, and are.
Give leave, my Lord, that I may sew them up
Being yet vnperisht.
Stand off; now they are not.
Have he my curse that my lifes least part saves.
Just men are only free, the rest are slaves.
Mirror of men.
The gods envied his goodness.
Too late, too late; with all our haste. O Cato,
All my late Conquest, and my lifes whole acts,
Most crowned, most beautified, are basted all
With thy grave lifes expiring in their scorn.
Thy life was rule to all lives, and thy death
(Thus forcibly despising life) the quench
Of all lives glories.
Vnreclaimed man?
How censures Brutus his sterne fathers fact?
It was not well done.
O censure not his acts;
Who knew as well what fitted man, as all men.
Your enemies head great Caesar.
Cursed monsters,
Wound not mine eyes with it, nor in my camp
Let any dare to view it; far as nobles
The den of barbarism flies, and bliss
The bitterest curse of vexed and tyrannisde nature,
Transfer it from me. Borne the plagues of virtue
How durst ye poison thus my thoughts? to torture
Them with instant rapture.
Sacred Caesar.
Away with them; I vow by all my comforts,
Who slack seems, or not fiery in my charge,
Shall suffer with them.
Out base murderers;
Tortures, tortures for them:
Cruel Caesar.
Too mild with any torture.
Let me crave
The ease of my hate on their one cursed life.
Good Brutus take it; O you cool the poison
These villains flaming pou'rd upon my spleen
To suffer with my loadings. If the blood
Of every common Roman touched so near;
Shall I confirm the false brand of my tyranny
With being found a fautor of his murder
Whom my dear Country chusde to fight for her?
Your patience Sir, their tortures well will quit you▪
Let my slaves use, Sir, be your president.
It shall, I swear: you doe me infinite honour.
O Cato, I envy thy death, since thou
Enuiedst my glory to preserve thy life.
Why fled his son and friend Statilius?
So far I fly their hurt, that all my good
Shall fly to their desires. And (for himself)
My Lords and Citizens of Vtica,
His much renown of you, quit with your most.
And by the sea, upon some eminent rock,
Erect his sumptuous tomb; on which advance
With all fit state his statue; whose right hand
Let hold his sword, where, may to all times rest
His bones as honoured as his soul is blessed.

MAke thy self less Philotas then thou art?
What means my father thus to write to me?
Less then I am: in what? how can that bee?
Must I be then set underneath my hart?
Shall I let go the hold I have of grace
Gained with so hard adventures of my blood,
And suffer others mount into my place,
And from below, look up to where I stood?
Shall I degrade th'opinion of my worth?
By putting off employment; as undone
In spirit or grace: whilst other men set forth
To get that start of action I have won?
As if such men as I, had any place,
To stay betwixt their ruin, and their grace.
Can any go beyond me, but they will
Go over me, and trample on my state,
And make their fortune good upon my ill,
Whilst fear hath power to wound me worse thē hate?
Philotas, you deceive your self in this,
Your father means not you should yield in place,
But in your popular dependences:
Your entertainments, guifes, and public grace,
That doth in jealous Kings, distaste the Peers,
And makes you not the greater but in fears.
Alas what popular dependences
Do I retain? can I shake off the zeal
Of such as do out of their kindnesses
Follow my fortunes in the commonwealth.
Indeed Philotas therein you say true:
They follow do, your fortunes, and not you.
Yea but I find their love to me sincere.
Even such as to the Wolf the Fox doth bea•e,
That visits him but to partake his pray,
And seeing his hopes deceived turns to betray.
I know they would if I in danger stood,
Run unto me, with hazard of their blood.
Yea like as men to burning houses run,
Not to lend aid, but to be lookers on.
But I with bounty, and with gifts have tide
Their harts so sure, I know, they will not slide.
Bounty &amp; gifts loose more then they do find,
Where many look for good, few have their mind:
Each thinks he merits more then than he hath,
And so gifts laid for love do catch men wrath.
But many merely out of love attend.
Yea, those that love and have no other end:
Think you that men can love you when they know,
You have them not for friendship, but for shoe•••.
And as you are engaged in your affairs,
And have your ends, think, likewise they have theirs.
But I do truly from my hart affect
Virtue and worth, where I do find it set:
Besides my foes do force me in effect,
To make my party of opinion gre•,
And I must arm me thus against their scorns,
Men must be shodd, that go among the thorns.
Ah good Philotas you your self be guile,
Tic not the way to quench the fire with oil.
The meek and humble Lamb with small ado,
Sucks his own dam, we see, and others too.
In Courts men longest live and keep their ranks,
By taking injuries, and giving thanks.
And is it so? then never are these hairs,
Like to attain that sober hew of gray,
I cannot plaster and disguise m'affaires,
In other colours then my hart doth lay.
Nor can I patiently endure this fond
And strange proceeding of authority,
That hath engrossed up all into their hand,
By idoliuing feeble majesty.
And impiously do labour all they can,
To make the King forget he is a man.
Whilst they divide the spoils, and pray of power,
And none at all respect the public good.
Those hands that guard and get vs what is our,
The Solderie, engaged to vent their blood,
In worse •as seem then Pallas old-growne Moil,
The Athenians fostered at their public cost;
For these poor souls consumed with tedious toil
Remain neglected, having done their most.
And nothing shall bring home of all these wars
But empty age and bodies chardgd with skarres.
Philotas, all this public care I fear
Is but some private touch of your dislike.
Who seeing your own designs not stand to square
With your desires, no others courses like.
The grief you take things are not ordered well,
Is that you feel your self I fear not well.
But when your fortunes shall stand parabel
With those you envy now: all will be well.
For you great men, I see are never more
Your ends attained the same you were before.
You with a finger can point out the stains
Of others errors now, and now condemn
The train of state, whilst your desire remains
without. But once got in you jump with them,
And interleague ye with iniquity,
And with a like neglect do temporise
And only serve your own commodity:
Your fortune then views things with other eyes.
For either greatness doth transform the hart.
Int'other shapes of thoughts or certainly
This vulgar honesty doth dwell apart
From power, and is some private quality,
Or rather those fair parts which we esteem
In such as you, are not the same they seem,
You double with your selves or else with vs.
And therefore now Philotas even as good.
Timbrace the times, as swell, and do no good.
Alas Chalisthenes you have not laid
True level to my nature, but are wide
From what I am within; all you have said
Shall never make me of another side
Then that I am, and I do scorn to climb
By shaking hands with this unworthy time.
The time, Philotas then will break thy neck.
They dare nor, friend, my faith will keep my neck,
My service to the state hath causioned
So surely for mine honour, as it shall
Make good the place my deeds have purchased
With danger, in the love, and harts of all,
Those services, will serve as weights to charge
And presle you unto death, if your foot fail
never so little underneath your charge
And will be dee•'d, donne, for your own avail.
And who have spirits to do the greatest good,
May do most hurt if they remain not good.
Tush. They cannot want my service in the state.
These times want not men to supply the state.
I fear not whilst Parmenios forces stand.
Water far off q•inches not fire near hand.
You may be fair dispatcht, e•e he can hear
Or if he heard, before he could be here.
And therefore do not build upon such sand
It will deceive your hopes, when all is done
For though you were the minion of the land
If you break out, be sure you are undone.
When running with the current of the state,
Were you the weakest man of men alive
And in conuentions, and in counsel sate
And did but sleep or nod, yet should you thrive
These mo•iue spirits are never fit to rise,
And tic a danger to be held so wise.
What call you running with the slate; shall I
Combine with those that do abuse the slate?
Whose want of judgment, wit and honesty,
I am ashamed to see, and seeing hate.
Tush, tush, my Lord think not of what were fit,
The world is governed more by form, then wit.
He that will •ret at Lords, and at the r•in,
Is but a fool, and grieves himself in vain.
Cannot you great men suffer others to
Have part in rule, but must have all to doo.
Now good my Lord con•orme you to the rest,
Let not your wings be greater then your nest.
solves. See how these vain discoursiue Bookmen talk,
Out of those shadows of their aerie powers,
And do not see how much they must defalke
Of their accounts, to make them gre with ours.
They little know to what necessities,
Our courses stand allied, or how we are,
Engaged in reputation other-wise
To be our selves in our particular.
They think we can command our harts to lye,
Out of their place: and still they preach to vs.
Pack-bearing Patience that base property,
And silly g•i•• of th'all enduring Ass.
But let them talk their fill, it is but wind,
I must sail by the compass of my mind,
My Lord, the King calls for you come my Lord away,
Well then I know there's some new stratage•
In hand, to be consulted on to day.
That I am sent for with such speed, to him,
Whose youth and fortune cannot brooke delay.
But here's a Suitor stands t'impeech my hast,
I would I had gone up the priule way:
Whereby we escape th'attending multitude,
Though I confess, that in humanity
Tic better to deny, then to delude.
My Lord Philotas I am come with news,
Of great importance that concerns vs all,
And well hath my good fortune met with you:
Who best can hear, and best discharge my care.
Say what it is and pray-thee friend be brief.
The case requires your patience good my lord,
And therefore I must crave your ear a while,
I cannot now be long from Alexander.
Nor Alexander will be long with vs,
Unless you hear, and therefore know, the news
I bring, concerns his life; and this it is,
There is one Dymnus here within the camp:
Whose low estate, and high affections
Seem to have thrust him int'outragious ways.
This man affecting one Nichomacus
A youth, my brother, whom one day h'allures
Int'a temple where being both alone,
He breaks out in this sort: Nichomacus
Sweet lovely youth, ah should I not impart
To thee the deepest secrets of my hart,
My hart that hath no lock shut against thee,
Would let it out some-times unawares of me.
But as it issues from my faithful love,
So close it up in thine, and keep it fast:
Swear to be secret dear Nichomacus.
Swear by the sacred God-head of this place
To keep my council, and I will reveal
A matter of the greatest consequence
That ever man imparted to his friend.
Youth and desire drawn with a love to know,
Swore to be secret, and to keep it close
When Dymnus tells him, that within three days
There should b'effected a conspiracy
On Alexanders person, by his means
And divers more of the Nobility.
To free their labours and redeem them home,
Which when Nichomacus my brother heard:
Is this your tale saith he? O God forbid
Mine oath should tie my tongue to keep in this.
This ugly sin of treason, which to tell
Mine oath compels me, faith against my faith
Must not be kept. My falsehood here is truth
And I must tell• friend or friend not, Il• tell.
Dymnus amazed hearing beyond conceit
The self-willd youth vow to reveal their plot:
Stands staring on him, drawing back his breath,
Or else his breath confounded with his thoughts
Bufied with death and horror, could not work,
Not having leisure now, to think what was
But what would be, his fears were run before,
And at misfortune ere she came to him.
At length yet, when his reason had reduced
His flying thoughts back to some certain stand,
Perceiving yet some distance was betwixt
Death and his fears which gave him time to work,
With his returning spirits he drew his sword,
Puts it t'his own then to my brothers throat,
Then lays it down, thē wrings his hands, thē kneels.
Then steadfast looks, then takes him in his arms,
Weeps on his neck, no word, but O wilt thou?
Wilt thou, be the destruction of vs all?
And finding no relenting in the youth.
His milerie grew furiou• and again
He takes his sword, and swears to sacrifice
To silence and their cause, his dearest blood.
The boy amazed, seeing no other way,
Was fine to vow, and promise secrecy;
And as if won t'allow and take that part,
Prays him to tell, who were his accomplices.
Which, though perplexed with grief for what was done,
Yet thinking now t'haue gained him to his side,
Dymnus replies: no worcester•e then Loceus,
Demetrius of the privy Chamber, and
Nicanor, Amyntas, and Archelopis,
Drocenus, Aphebetus, Leuculaus,
Shall be th'associats of Nichomacus.
This when my brother once had understood,
And after much a do had got away
He comes and •else me all the whole discourse:
Which here I have related unto you,
And here will I attend t'auouch the same,
Or bring my brother to confirm as much.
Whom now I least behind, least the conspirators
Seeing him here vnusing to this place,
Suspecting •'b'appeachd, might shifts away.
Well fellow, I have heard thy strange report,
And will find time t'acquaint the king therewith,
WHat can a free estate afford me more
Then my incaptiu'd fortune doth allow?
Was I beloud, enriched, and graced before?
Am I not loved, enriched, and graced now?
Yea, but before thou were a kings delight.
I might be his although he was not mine.
His greatness made thee greater in men's sight.
More great perhaps without, but not within:
My love was then aboue me, I am now
Aboue my love. Darius then had thousands more
Philotas hath but me as I do know.
Nor none else will he have, and so he swore.
Nay then you may believe him, if he swore.
Alas poor soul, she never came to know
Her liberty, nor lovers perjuries.
Stand I not better with a meaner love,
That is alone to me, then with these powers,
Who out of all proportion must b'aboue
And have vs theirs, but they will not be ours.
And Thais although thou be a Grecian,
And I a Persian, do not envy me.
That I embrace the only gallant man
Persia, or Greece or all the world can see.
Thou, who art entertained and graced by all
The flower of honour else, do not despise.
That unto me poor captive should befall
So great a grace in such a worthies eyes.
I envy not thy love,
But thinks thee blessed t'inioy him in that sort.
But tell me truly did thou ever prove
Whether he loved in earnest or in sport
let m'a little glory in my grace,
Out of the passion of the joy I feel
And tell the'a secret, but in any case,
As you're a woman do not it reueile.
One day as I was fitting all alone,
In comes Philotas from a victory
All blood and dust, yet jolly having when
The glory of the day most gallantly.
And warmed with honour of his good Success.
Relates to me the dangers he was in:
Whereat I wondering, blamed his forwardness.
Faith wench, says he, thus must we fight, toil, win.
To make that young man proud, thus is he borne:
Upon the wings of our deserts, our blood
Sets him aboue himself and makes him scorn,
His own, his country, and the Authors of his good.
My father was the first that out from Greece
Showed him the way of Asia, set him on
And by his project raised the greatest piece
Of this proud work which now he treads upon.
Parmenio without Alexander much hath wrought,
Without Parmenio, Alexander hath done nought.
But let him use his fortune whilst he may,
Times have their change, we must not still be lead.
And sweet Antigona thou may one day
Yet, bless the hour t'haue known Philotas bed.
Wherewith he sweetly kissed me, and now deem,
If that so great, so wise, so rare a man,
Would if he held me not in dear esteem
Have uttered this t'a captive Persian.
But Thais I may no longer stay, for fear
My lord return, and find me not within,
Whose eyes yet never saw me any where
But in his chamber where I should have been.
And therefore Thais farewell.
Fare well Antigona.
Now have I that which I desired long
Laid in my lap by this fond woman here,
And means t'auenge me of a secret wrong
That doth concern my reputation ne'er.
This gallant man, whom this fool in this wise
Vaunts to be hers, I must confess t'haue loved
And used all th'ingins of these conquering eyes
Affections in his hy-built hart t'haue moved
Yet never could: for what my labour seeks
I see is lost upon vain ignorance.
Whilst he that is the glory of the Greeks
Virtues upholder, honours countenance,
Out of this garnish of his worthy parts
Is fallen upon this foolish Persian,
To whom his secretes gravely he imparts,
Which she as wisely keep and govern can:
Tic strange to see the humour of these men,
These great aspiring spirits that should be wise
We women shall know all; for now and then
Out of the humour of their jollities
The smoke of their ambition must have vent,
And out it comes what rackes should not reuaile,
For this her humour hath so much of wind,
That it will burst it self if too close pent,
And none more fit then vs their wisdoms find,
Who will for love or want of wit conceal.
For being the nature of great spirits, to love
To be, where they may be most eminent,
And rating of themselves so far aboue
Vs in conceit with whom they do frequent,
Imagine how we wonder and esteem
AIl that they doo or say, which makes them strive
To make our admiration more extreme:
Which they suppose they cannot, less they give
Notice of their extreme and highest thoughts.
And then th'opinion that we love them too,
Begers a confidence of secrecy,
Whereby what ever they intend to doo,
We shall be sure to know it presently.
But faith, I scorn that such a one as she,
A silly wetted wench, should have this grace
To be preferred and honoured before me,
Having but only beauty, and a face.
I that was ever courted by the Great
And gallanist Peers and Princes of the East,
Whom Alexander in the greatest state
The earth did ever see him, made his guest.
There where this tongue obtained for her merit
Eternity of fame: there where these hands
Did write in fire the glory of my spirit,
And set a trophy that for ever stands.
Thaeïs Action with the Grecian acts shall be
Inregistred alike. Thaeis she that fired
The stareliest Palace th'earth did ever see,
Darius house that to the clouds aspired,
She is put back behind Antigona,
But soon Philotas shall his error see,
Who thinks that beauty best, men's passions fi•s,
For that they use our bodies, not our wits:
And unto Craterus will I presently,
And him acquaint with all this whose discourse,
Who I am sure will take it well of vs,
For these great minions, who with envious eye
Look on each others greatness, will be glad,
In such a case of this importance,
To have th'aduantage that may here be had.
WE as the Chorus of the vulgar• stand
Spectators here, to see these great men play
Their parts both of obedience and command,
And censure all they doo, and all they say.
For though we be esteemed but ignorant,
Yet are we capable of truth, and know
Where they do well, and where their actions want
The grace that makes them prove the best in show.
And though we know not, what they do within,
Where they attire, their mysteries of state:
Yet know we by th'euents, what plots have been,
And how they all without do personate.
We see who well a meaner part became,
Fail in a greater and disgrace the same.
We see some worthy of advancement deemed,
Save when they have it: some again have got
Good reputation, and been well esteemed
In place of greatness, which before were not.
We see affliction act a better scene,
Then prosperous fortune which hath mar•d it clean.
We see that all which we have praisd in some,
Have only been their fortune, not desert:
Some war have graced, whom peace doth ill become:
And lustful ease hath blemished all their part.
Wee see Philotas acts his goodness ill,
And makes his passions to report of him
Worse then he is: and we doo fear he will
Bring his free nature to b'intrapt by them.
For sure there is some engine closely laid
Against his grace and greatness with the King:
And that unless his humours prove more staide,
We soon shall see his utter ruining.
And his affliction, our compassion draws,
Which still looks on men's fortunes, not the cause,
EPhestion, thou dost Alexander love,
Craterus thou the King: yet both you meet
In one self point of loyalty and love,
And both I find like careful, like discreet.
Therefore my faithfuls• Councellors to you
I must a weighty accident impart,
Which lies so heavy, as I tell you true
I find the burden much t'oppresse my hart.
Ingratitude and stubborn carriage,
In one of whom my love deserved respect,
Is that which moves my passion into rage,
And is a thing, I ought not to neglect.
You see how I Philotas raised have
Aboue his rank, his Peers, beyond his term:
You see the place, the offices I gave,
As th'earnest of my love to bind his firm.
But all, he deeming rather his deserts,
Then the effects of my grace any way,
Begins to play most peremptory parts,
As fitter to control then to obey.
And I have been informed, he fosters too,
The faction of that home-bent cowardice,
That would run back from glory, and undo
All the whole wonder of our enterprise,
And one day to our self presumes to write,
(Seeming ourstile and title to obrayd,
Which th'oracles themselves held requisite
And which not I, but men on me have laid)
And said he pitied those who under him should live.
Who held himself the son of Iupiter.
Alas good man, as though what breath could give,
Could make mine own thoughts other then they are.
I that am Arbiter betwixt my hart,
And their opinion, know how it stands within,
And find that my infirmities take part,
Of that same frailty, other men live in.
And yet what if I were disposed to wink,
At th'intertaind opinion spread so far.
And rather was content the world should think.
Vs other then we are, then what we are.
In doing which, I know I am not gone
Beyond example, seeing that Majesty
Needs all the propps of admiration
That may be got to bear it up on hye.
And much more mine, which but even now begun
By miracles of fortune, and our worth,
Needs all the complements to rest upon:
That reverence and opinion can bring forth,
Which this wise man conceives not, and yet takes:
Upon him to instruct vs what to do.
But these are but the florishes he makes,
Of greater malice he is bent unto:
For sure me thinks I view within his face,
The map of change and inncuacion:
I see his pride contented with no place,
Unless it be the throne I sit upon.
Had I not heard this from your sacred tongue,
Dear sovereign, I would never have believed
Philotas folly would have done that wrong
T'his own worth, and th'honors he received,
And yet me thought of late his carriage.
In such exceeding pomp and galiantry,
And such a world of followers; did presage
That he affected popularity.
Especially since for his service done.
He was adiudgd to have the second place
In honour with Antigonus, which won,
To some th'opinion to be high in grace.
Then this last action leading the right wing,
And th'ouerthrow he gave, might hap enlarge
Th'opinion of himself considering,
Th'especiall grace and honour of his charge.
Whereby perhaps in rating his own worth,
His pride might vnder-ualew that great grace:
From whence it grew, and that which put him forth.
And made his fortune suiting to the place.
But yet I think he is not so unwise,
Although his fortune, youth and jollity.
Makes him thus mad, as he will enterprise
Ought against course, his faith, and loyalty.
And therefore if your grace did but withdraw,
Those beams of favour which doo daze his w••ts:
He would be soon reduced t'his rank of awe.
And know himself, and bear bim as befits.
With-draw our grace, and how can that be donne.
Without some sulliuation to ensue.
Can he be safe brought in being so sar gone,
I hold it not. Say Craterus what think you.
Sovereign. I know the man, I find his spirit,
And malice shall not make me I protest.
Speak other then I know his pride doth merit,
And what I speak is for your interest.
Which long ere this I would have uttered,
But that I feared your majesty would take,
That from some private g•edge it rather bred,
Then out of care for your dea•e sisters sake.
Or rather that I sought to cross your grace,
Or to confine your favour within bounds,
And finding him to hold so high a place:
In that divine conceit which ours confounds,
I thought the safest way to let it rest,
In hope that time some passage open would:
To let in those clear looks into that breast
That doth but malice and confusion hold.
And now I see you have discerned the man,
Whom I protest I hold most dangerous.
And that you ought with all the speed you can
Work to repress a spirit so mutinou•:
For even already he is swollen so high,
That his affections ouer-flowe the brim
Of his own powers, not able to deny
Passage unto the thoughts that govern him.
For but even now I heard a strange report
Of speeches he should use t'his Courtesan:
Vaunting what he had done, and in what sort,
He labourd to advance that proud young man.
(So terming of your sacred majesty)
With other such extravagant discourse:
Whereof we shall attain more certainty,
I doubt not shortly and descry his course,
Mean while about your person I advise,
Your grace should• all • more sufficient guard:
And on his actions set such wary eyes,
As may thereof take special good regard.
And note what p•rson• chiefly he frequents:
And who to him have the most free access,
How he bestows his time, where he presents,
The large revenue of his bounteousnesse.
And for his wench that lies betwixt his arms.
And knows his hare I will about with her,
She shall be wrought t'apply her usual charms:
And I will make her my discoverer.
Alex. This counsel Craterus we do well allow,
And give thee many thanks for thy great care.
But yet we must bear fair, lest he should know,
That we suspect what his affections are,
For that you see he holds a side of power:
which might perhaps call up some mutiny.
His father old Parmenio at this hour,
Rules Medea with no lesser powers then I.
Himself you see gallantly followed:
Holds next to vs a special government:
Canus that with his Sister married,
Hath under him again commandment:
Amintas and Symanus his dear friends
With both their honourable offices.
And then the private train that on them tends,
With all particular dependences.
Are motives to advice vs how to deal.
Crat. Your grace says true, but yet these clouds of smoke
Vanish before the sun of that respect
Whereon men's long-inurd affections look
With such a native zeal, and so affect:
As that the vain and shallow practises,
Of no such giddy traitor (if the thing,
Be took in time with due aduisednesse:
Shall the least show of any fealing bring.
Alex, Well then to thee dear Craterus I refer,
Th'especiall care of this great business.
MY Lord. I here have long attendance made
Expecting to be called t'auouch my news•
In troth my friend I have not found the king•
At any leisure yet to hear the same.
No not at leisure to prevent his death?
And is the matter of no more import?
Isle try another. Yet me thinks such men,
As are the eyes and ears of princes, should,
Not weigh so light such an intelligence
My lord the sum you willed me to give,
The captain that did visit you to day:
To tell you plain your cosfers yield it not,
How, if they yield it not, have I not then,
Apparel, plate jewels; why sell them:
And go your way dispatch and give it him.
Me thinks I find the king much changed of late,
And unto me his graces not so great.
Although they seem in show all of one rate,
Yet by the touch I find them counterfe•••
For when I speak, although I have his ear
Yet do I see his mind is other where.
And when he speaks to me I see he strives,
To give a coulor unto what is not,
For he must think that we whose states, whose lives.
Depend up•n his grace l•earn not by rote,
T'obserue his actions, and to know his trym,
And though indeed princes be manifold,
Yet have they still such eyes to waite on them.
As are to piercing that they can behold.
And penetrate the inwards of the hart,
That no device can set so close a door,
Betwixt their shows and thoughts, but that their art:
Of shadowing it, makes it appear the more.
But many malicing my state of grace,
I know doo work, with all the powers they have
Upon that easy nature, to displace
My fortunes, and my actions to deprave:
And though I know they seek t'inclose him in,
And fine would lock him up and chamber him:
Yet will I never stoop and seek to win
My way by them, that came not in by them.
And scorn to stand on any other feet
Then these of mine own worth; and what my plain
And open actions cannot fairly get
Baseness and soothing them shall never gain.
And yet, I know my presence and access,
Clears all these mists which they have raised before:
Though with my back straight turns that happiness.
And they again blow up as much or more;
Thus do we role the stone of our own toil,
And men suppose our hell, a heaven the while.
ANtigona, there is no remedy,
You needs must justify the speech you held,
With Thais, who will your conf'rence verify,
And therefore now it cannot be concealed.
O my good Lord I pray you urge me not,
Thais only of a cunning envious w•,
Scorning a stranger should have such alott,
Hath out of her invention forged it.
Why then shall rackes and tortures force thee show,
Both this and other matters which we know.
Think therefore if it were not a wiser part,
T'accept of rest, rewards, pre•erment, grace,
And being perhaps so beauteous as thou art,
Of fair election for a nearer place,
To tell the truth, then to be obstinate,
And fall with the misfortune of a man•
Who in his dangerous and concusled state,
No good to thee but ruin render can•
Resolve thee of this choice, and let me know
Thy mind at full, at my returning back.
What shall I doo, shall I betray my love,
Or die disgraced? what do I make a doubt
Betray my love? O heavenly powers aboue
Forbid that such a thought should issue out
Of this confused breast: nay rather first
Let tortures, death, and horror do their worst.
But out alas this inconsidrate tongue,
Without my hart• consent and privity,
Hath done already this unwilling wrong,
And now it is no wisdom to deny.
No wisdom to deny? yes, yes, that tongue
That thus hath been the •avtor to my hart,
Shall either powrefully redeem that wrong,
Or never more shall words of breath impart,
Yet what can my den•all profit him,
Whom they perhaps whether I tell or not,
Are purposed upon matters known to them,
To •uinate on some discovered plot.
Let them do what they will. Let not thy hart
Seem to be accessory in a thought,
To give the least advantage of thy part,
To have a part of shame in what is wrought.
O this were well, if that my dangers could
Redeem his peril, and his grace restore,
For which, I vow, my life I render would,
If this poor life could satisfy therefore.
But tic not for thy honour to forsake
Thy love for death, that loved thee in this sort,
Alas what notice will the world take
Of such respects in women of my sort.
This act may yet put on so fey•e a cote
Upon my foul profession, as it may
Not blush t'appeare with those of cleanest note,
And have as hye a place with fame as they.
What do I talk of fame? do I not see
This faction of my flesh, my fears, my youth
Already entered and have bent at me,
The joys of life to batter down my truth.
O my subdued thought• what have you done.
To let in fear and falsehood, to my hart,
Whom though they have surprised they have not won,
For still my love shall hold the dearest part.
Antigona what are you yet resolved.
Resolved my Lord t'indure all misery.
And so be sure you shall if that b'your choice.
What will you have me doo my Lord, I am
Content to say what you will have me say.
Then come go with me to Alexander.
HOw dost thou wear, and weary out thy days,
Restless ambition never at an end:
Whose travails no her culean pillor stays•
But still beyond thy rest thy labours tend.
Aboue good fortune, thou thy hopes dost raise.
Still climbing and yet never can ascend:
For when thou hast attained unto the top,
Of thy desires thou hast not yet got up.
That heigh of fortune either is controlled.
By some more powerful overlooking eye:
(That doth the fullness of thy grace withhold)
Or counter-checkt with some concurrencie:
That it doth cost far more ado to hold,
The higth attained, then was to get so hie.
Where stand thou can not, but with careful toil,
Nor loose thy hold with out thy utter spoil.
There dost thou struggle with thine own distrust,
And others iealosies, their conterplot:
Against some vnderworking pride that must,
Supplanted be, or else thou stand not:
There wrong is paid with wrong, and he that thrust:
Down others, comes himself to have that lot.
The same concussion doth afflict his breast.
That others shook, oppression is oppressed
That either happiness dwells not so hie,
Or else aboue. whereto pride cannot rise:
And that the hy'st of mans felicity,
But in the region of affliction lies:
And that we clime but up to misery,
High fortunes are but high calamities,
It is not in that Sphere, where peace doth move,
Rest dwells below it, happiness aboue.
For in this hight of fortune are imbred,
Those thundering fragors that affright the earth.
From thence have all distempratures their head:
That brings forth desolation, famine, d•arth,
There certain order is disordered:
And there it is confusion hath her birth.
It is that high of fortune doth undo,
Both her own quietness and others too.
COme, Metron say of whom hast thou received,
Th'intelligence of this conspiracy:
Contriud against our person, as thou say,
By Dymnus and some other of the Camp,
Is it not some vain report borne without cause,
That envy or imagination draws
From private ends to breed a public fear.
T'amuze the world with things that never were,
Here may it please your highness is the man,
One Ceballinus that brought me the news.
O Alexander I have saved thy life.
I am the man that hath reueild their plot.
And how came thou to be informd thereof,
By mine own brother, one Nichomacus,
Whom Dymnus chief of the conspirators,
Acquainted with the whole of their intents,
How long since is it, this was told to thee?
About some three days, my Sovereign Lord.
What three days since? and hast thou so long kept
The thing cōceald from vs being of that weight.
Guard, take and lay him presently in hold:
O may it please your grace I did not keep,
The thing concealed one hour, but presently,
Ran to acquaint Philotas therewithal,
Supposing him a man so ne'er in place,
Would best repect a case that touched so near•
And on him have I waited these two days.
Expecting t'haue been brought unto your Grace,
And seeing him weigh it light, pretending that
Your graces leisure served not fit to hear.
I, to the moister of your armoury,
Addressed my self forthwith, to Metron here,
Who without making any more delay,
Pressed in unto your grace being in your bath,
Locking me up the while in th'armorie,
And all what I could show revealed hath.
If this be so then, fellow I confess,
Thy loyal care of vs was more then theirs,
Who had more reason theirs should have bin more,
Cause Dymnus to be presently brought forth,
And call Philotas straight, who now I see
Hath not deceived me, in deceiving me,
Who would have thought one whom I held so ne'er.
Would from my safety have been so far off,
When most it should and ought import his care,
And wherein his allegiance might make proof
Of those effects my favours had deserved,
And ought t'haue claimed more duly at his hands
Then any of the rest. But thus w'are served.
When private grace out of proportion stands
And that we call up men from of below:
From th'Element of baser property,
And set them where they may behold and know
The way of might and work of majesty.
Where se'ing those rays, which being sent far off,
Reflect a heat of wonder and respect,
To fail ne'er hand and not to show that proof,
(The object only working that effect,)
Think seeing themselves (though by our favour) set.
Within the self same orb of rule with vs,
Their light would shine alone if ours were set,
And so presume t'obscure or shadow vs.
But he shall know although his nearness hath,
Not felt our heat that we can burn him too.
And grace that shines can kindle unto wrath:
And Alexander and the king are two.
But here they bring vs Dymnus in whose face,
I see is gilt, despair, horror and death.
Yea death indeed, for ere he could b'attachd.
He stabbed himself so deadly to the hart,
As tic impossible that he should live.
Say Dymnus what have I deserved of thee:
That thou should think worthier to be thy king,
Philotas then our self. Hold hold he sinks:
Guard keep him up get him to answer vs.
H'hath spoke his last h'will never answer more•
Sorry I am for that, for now hath death,
Shut vs clean out from knowing him within:
And locked up in his breast all th'others harts,
But yet this deed argues the truth in grosle,
Though we be bared it in particular.
Philotas? are you come look here this man,
This Ceballinus should have suffered death:
Could it but have ben proved he had concealed,
Th'intended treason from vs these two days,
Wherewith he says he straight acquainted thee:
Think the more ne'er thou are•e about our self,
The greater is the shame of thine offence.
And which had been less foul in him then thee.
Renowned prince, for that my hart is clear,
Amazement cannot overcast my face,
And I must boldly with th'as•ured cheer,
Of my unguilty conscience tel your grace:
That this offence (thus happening) was not made,
By any the least thought of ill in me:
And that the keeping of it vnbewraid,
was that I held the iumor vain to be.
Considring some who were accused were known,
Your ancient and most loyal servitors:
And such as rather would let out their own:
Hart blood I know then once endanger yours,
And for me then upon no certain note,
But on the brable, of two wanton youths,
T'haue told an idle tale, that would have wrought,
In your distrust, and wrong to other• truths,
And to no end but only to have made,
My self a scorn and odious unto all.
(For which I rather took the bait was laid:
Then else for any treachery at all.)
I must confess I thought the safest way,
To smoother it a while, to the end I might:
If such a thing could be, some proufes bewray,
That might yield probability of right.
Protesting that mine own unspotted thought.
A like belief of others truth did breed,
Judging no impious wretch could have been wrought
T'imagin such a detestable deed.
And therefore O dread Sovereign do not way
Philotas faith by this his ouer-fight.
But by his actions past, and only lay
Error t'his chardge, not malice not despite.
Well, lo thou hast a favourable judge,
Whē though thou hast not power to clear thy blame,
Yet hath he power to pardon thee the same,
Which take not as thy right but as his grace,
Since here the person alters not the case.
And here Philotas, I forgive th'offence,
And to confirm the same, lo here's my hand.
O sacred hand the witness of my life,
By thee I hold my safety •s secure,
As is my conscience free from treachery.
Well got'your charge, &amp; look to our affairs,
For we to morrow purpose to remove.
In troth I know not what to judge herein,
Me thinks the man seems surely clear in this,
How ever otherwise his hopes have been,
Transported by his vnaduisednesse:
It cannot be, a guilty conscience should
Put on so sure a brow, or else by art
His looks stand new•rall, seeming not to hold
Respondencie of interest with his hart.
Sure for my part, he hath dissolved the knot
Of my suspicion, with so clear a hand,
As that I think in this (what ever plot
Of mischief it may be) he hath no hand
My Lord, the greater confidence he shows,
Who is suspected should be feared the more:
For danger from weak natures never grows,
Who must disturb the world are built therefore.
He more is to be feared that nothing fears,
And malice most effects, that least appears.
Presumption of men's powers as well may breed,
Assuredness, as innocence may:
And mischief seldom but by trust doth speed,
Who kings betray, first their belief betray.
I would your grace had first conferrd with us
Since you would needs such clemency have shown.
That we might yet but have advised you thus,
That he his danger never might have known.
In faults wherein an after shame will live.
Tic better to conceal then to forgive.
For who are brought unto the block of death,
Think rather on the peril they have past:
Then on that grace which hath preserved their breath,
And more their sufferings then their mercy taste,
He now to plot your danger still may live.
But you his guilt not always to forgive.
Know that a man so swollen with discontent,
No grace can cure nor pardon can restore:
He knows how those who once have mercy spent,
Can never hope to have it any more.
But say that through remorse he calmer prove,
Will great Parmenio so attended on,
With that brave Army fostered in his love:
Be thankful for this grace you do his son•
Some benefits are odious, so is this:
Where men are still ashamed to confess,
To have so done as to deserve to die:
And ever do desire that men should guess,
They rather had received an injury,
Then life, since life they know in such a case,
May be restored to all but not to grace.
And for my part my liege I hold this mind
That sure he would not have so much suppressed,
The notice of a treason in that kind,
Unless he were a party with the rest:
Can it be thought that great Parmenios son,
The general commander of the horse:
The minion of the camp the only one,
Of secret counsel, and of free recourse
should not in three days space have found the king,
At leisure t'heare three words of that import:
Whilst he himself in idle lavishing,
Did thousands spend t'adua•ce his own report?
And if he gave no credit to the youth,
Why did he two days space delay him then?
As if he had belieu'd it for a truth,
To hinder his address to other men:
If he had held it but a vain conceit,
I pray why had he not dismissed him straight?
Men in their private dangers may be stout:
But in th'occasions and the fears of kings,
We ought not to be credulous, but doubt,
The intimation of the vainest things.
Well howsoever, we will yet this night,
Disport and banquet in unusual wise.
That it may seem we weigh this practise light,
How ever heavy, here within it lies.
Kings may not know distrust, and though they fear,
They must not take acquaintance of their fear.
OY'are a secret councell-keeper Thais,
In troth I little thought you such a one:
And why Antigona what have I done.
You know fulwell your conscience you bewrays,
Alas good soul would you have me conceal:
That which your self could not but needs reueile?
Think you another can be more to you,
In what concerns them not, then you can be,
Whom it imports? Will others hold them true:
When you prove false to your own secrecy?
But yet this is no wonder for we see,
Wiser then we do lay their heads to gage:
For riotous expenses of their tongues
Although it be a property belongs,
Especially to vs and every age,
Can show strange presidents what we have ben,
In cases of the greatest plots of men.
And tic the Scene on this worlds stage we play,
Whose revolution, we with men conuer•,
And are to act our pa•te as well as they:
Though commonly the weakest, yet apart.
For this great motion of a state we see,
Doth turn on many wheels• and some though small
Do yet the greater move, who in degree.
Stir those who likewise turn the greatest of all.
For though we are not wise, we see the wise
By vs are made or make vs pa••ies still,
In actions of the greatest qualities
That they can manage, be they good or ill.
I cannot tell; but you have made me doo,
That which must ever more aflict my hart,
And if this be my woeful part t'vndo,
my dearest love, would I had had no part.
How have I sealy woman sifted been
Examined, tried, flattred, la•ifide,
By Craterus the cunningest of men,
That never least me till I had discride
What ever of Philotas I had known.
What is that all? perhaps I have thereby
Done thee more good then thou can apprehend.
Such good I rather you should get then I.
If that can be a good t'accuse my friend.
Alas thy accusation did but quote
The margin of some text of greater note.
But that is more then thou or I can tell.
Yes yes Antigona I know it well.
For be thou sure that always those who seek
T'attack the Lyon, so provide that still,
Their toils be such as that he shall not skip.
To turn his rage on those that wrought his ill.
Philotas neither was so strong nor high
But malice overlooked him, and discride,
Where he lay weak, where was his vanity,
And built her contermonts upon that side,
In such sort as they would be sure to raze
His fortunes with the engines of disgrace.
And now moist thou perhaps come great hereby,
And gracious with his greatest enemy.
For such men think they have no full success:
unless they likewise gain the mistresses,
Of those they moister, and succeed the place,
And fortunes of their loves with equal grace
Loves out alas, love such a one as hee,
That seeks t'vndoo my love• and in him me.
Tush love his fortunes, love his state, his place,
What ever greatness doth it must have grace.
I weigh not greatness I must please mine eye.
The eye nothing fairer sees then dignity.
But what is dignity without our love?
If we have that we cannot want our love,
Why that gives but the outside of delight:
The day-time joy, what comfort hath the night?
If power procure not that, what can it doo?
I know not how that can b'attaind unto.
Nor will I teach thee if thou know it not.
Tic vain I see to lea•no an Asian wit.
If this be that great wit that learned skill,
You Greeks profess let me be foolish still,
So I be faithful. And now being here alone,
Let me record the heavy notes of moan.
MY Lords, you see the flexible conceit,
Of our endangered sovereign, and you know:
How much his peril, and Philotas pride,
Imports the state and vs, and therefore now,
We either must oppose against deceit:
Or be undone. For now hath time discride,
An open passage to his farthest ends,
From whence if negligence now put vs back,
Return we never can wi•hout our wrack.
And good my Lords since you conceive as much,
And that we stand alike, make not me prosecute
The cause alone as if it did but touch
Only my self, and that I did both breed,
And urge these doubts out of a private grief.
Indeed I know I might with much more ease,
Sit still like others, and if dangers come:
Might think to shift for one as well as they,
But yet the saith the duty and respect:
We owe both to our sovereign and the state,
My Lords, I hold, requires another care,
My Lord, assure you we will take a time
To urge a stricter count of Dymnus death.
My Lords I say unless this be the time,
You will apply your physic after death.
You see the king invited hath this night
Philotas with the rest, and entertains
Him with as kind an usage to our sight,
As ever, and you see the cunning strains
Of sweet insinuation that are used
Tallure the ear of grace with false reports,
So that all this will come to be excusd;
With one remove, one action quite transports
The kings affections over to his hopes,
And sets him so beyond the due regard
Of his own safety, as one enterprise,
May serve their turn, and may vs all surprise.
But now since things thus of them selue break out
We have advantage to prevent the worst,
And every day will yield vs more no doubt,
For they are saved that thus are warned first.
So my Lord Clitus are they likewise warned.
T'accelarate their plot, being thus bewraide.
But that they cannot now it is too late
For treason taken ere the birth, doth come
Abortive, and her womb, is made her tomb
You do not know how far it hath put forth
The force of malice, nor how far is spread
Already the contagion of this ill.
Why then there may some one be tortured
Of those whom Ceballinus bath reueald
Whereby the rest may be discovered.
That one must be Philotas from whose head
All this corruption flows, take him, take all.
Philotas is not named, and therefore may
Perhaps not be acquainted with this plot.
That his concealing of the plot betrays,
And if we do not cast to find him first.
His wit be sure bath laid so good a ground,
As he will be the last that will be found.
But if he be not found: then in this case,
We doo him more by iniuring his grace.
If that he be not found t'haue dealt in this,
Yet this will force out some such thoughts of his,
As will undo him, for you seldom see,
Such men araignd that ever quited be:
Well my Lord Craterus we will move his grace
(Though it be late) before he take his rest,
That some course may be taken in this case,
And God ordain it may be for the best.
SEE how these greatmen cloth their private hate,
In those fair colours of the public good:
And to effect their ends pretend the state,
As if the state by their affections stood.
And arm• with power and princes iealosies,
Will put the least conceit of discontent:
Into the greatest rank of treacheries:
That no one action shell seem innocent.
Yea, valour, honour bounty shall be made,
As accessories unto ends unjust:
And even the service of the state must lade,
The needfull'st undertakings with distrust.
So that base vileness idle luxury,
Seem safer far, then to do worthily.
Suspicion full of eyes, and full of ears,
Doth thorough the tincture of her own conceit,
See all things in the colours of her fears:
And truth it self must look• like to deceit,
That what ways' ever the suspected take,
Still, envy will most cunningly forelay
The ambush of their ruin, or will make
Their humours of themselves to take that way.
But this is still the fate of those that are,
By nature or their fortunes eminent.
Who either carried in conceit too far,
Do work their own or others discontent:
Or else are deemed sit to be suppressed.
Not for they are, but that they may be ill,
Since states have ever had far more unrest,
By spirits of worth, then men of meaner skill:
And find that those do always better prove,
Wh'are equal to employment not aboue.
For self opinion would be seen more wise
Then present counsels, customs, orders laws,
And to the end to have them otherwise,
The common wealth into combustion draws.
As if ordained t'imbroyle the world with wit,
As well as grosenesse to dishonour it.
CAn there be such a sudden change in Court
As you report? is it to be belieud
That great Philotas whom we all beheld
In grace last night should be arraignd to day.
It can be: and it is as I report
For states of grace are no sure holds in courts.
But yet tic strange they should be overthrown
Before their certain forseitures were known.
Tush it was breeding long though suddenly
This thunder-crack comes but to break out now.
The time I waited and I waited long
Until Philotas with some other Lords
Depart the presence, and as I conceived,
I never saw the king in better mood,
Nor yet Philotas ever in more grace
Can such storms grow and yet no clouds appear?
Yea court storms grow when skies there seem most clear
It was about the deepest of the night
The blackest hour of darkness and of sleep
When with some other lords comes Craterus
Falls down before the King, entreats, implores,
Conjures his grace as ever he would look
To save his person and the state from spoil,
Now to prevent Philotas practises.
Whom they had plainly found to be the man
Had plotted the destruction of them all.
The king would fine have put them off to time
And farther day, till better proofs were known
Which they perceiving pressed him still the more
And reinforced his dangers and their own.
And never least him till they had obtained
Commission t'apprehend Philotas straight.
Now to make fear look with more hideous face•,
Or else but to beget it out of form,
And careful preparations of distrust:
About the palace men in armour watch
In armour men about the king attend,
All passages and issue were forelaid
With horse, t'interrupt what ever news
Should hence break out into Parmenios camp.
I with three hundred men in armour charged
Had warrant to attach and to committ
The person of Philotas presently:
And coming to his lodging where he lay,
Found him imburied in the soundest sleep
That ever man could bee. where neither noise
Of clattring weapons, or our rushing in
With rude and trampling rumour, could dissolve
The heavy humour of that drowsy brow
Which held perhaps his senses now more fast
As loath to leave because it was the last.
Attarras, what can treason sleep so sound?
Will that loud hand of Horror that still beats,
Upon the guilty conscience of distrust:
Permit it •'haue so resolute a rest?
I cannot tell but thus we found him there,
Nor could wee I assure you waken him:
Till thrice I called him by his name, and thrice
Had shook him hard, and then at length he wakes,
And looking on me with a settled cheer,
Dear friend Attarras, what's the news said hee?
What up so soon to hasten the remove,
Or raised by some al'arme or some distrust?
I told him that the king had some distrust.
Why what will Nabarzanes play saith he
The villain with the king; as he hath done
Already with his miserable Lord?
I seeing he would, or did not understand
His own distressed: told him the charge I had:
Wherewith he rose, and rising used these words:
O Alexander now I see my foes,
Have got aboue thy goodness, and prevailed:
Against my innocence and thy word.
And as we then enchained and fettered him,
Looking on that base furniture of shame,
Poor body, said he, hath so many alarm:
Raised thee to blood and danger from thy rest,
T'inuest thee with this armour now at last,
Is this the service I am called to now?
But we that were not to attend his plaints,
Covering his head with a disgraceful weed:
Took and conveyed him suddenly to ward,
From whence he shall be instantly brought forth,
Here to b'arraignd before the king, who sits,
(According to the Macedonian use)
In cases capital, himself, as Judge.
Well then I see who are so high aboue,
Are ne'er to lightning that are ne'er to Jove.
THe heinous treason of some few had like,
T'haue •ent me from you worthy soldiers,
But by the mercy of th'immortall Gods
I live, and joy your sight, your reverend sight,
Which makes me more t'abhore those parricides,
Not for mine own respect, but for the wrong,
You had received, if their design had stood.
Since I desire but life to do you good.
But how will you be moved when you shall know,
Who were the men that did attempt this shame:
When I shall show that which I grieve to show:
And name such as would God I could not name,
But that the foulness of their practise now:
Blots out all memory of what they were
And though I would suppress them, yet I know,
This shame of theirs will never but appear.
Parmenio is the man, a man you see
Bound by so many merits both to me
And to my father, our ancienst friend
A man of years, experience gravity,
Whose wicked minister Philotas is
Who here Dimetrius Luculaus, and
This Dymnus whose dead body here you see
With others hath subornd to slaughter me.
And, here comes Motron with Nichomacus
To whom this murdered wretch at first reueald
The project of this whole conspiracy
T'auere as much as was disclosed to him.
Nichomacus look here advise thee well,
What dost thou know this man that here lies dead?
My sovereign Lord: I know him very well,
It is one Dymnus who did three days since
Bewray to me a treason practised
By him and others to have slain your grace.
Where or by whom, or when did he report
This wicked act should be accomplished?
He said within three days your majesty
Should be within your chamber murdered
By special men of the nobility
Of whom he many named, and they were these:
Loceus, Dimetrius, and Archelopis
Nicanor and Amyntas, Luculous
Droceus with Aphebaetus and himself.
Thus much his brother Ceballinus did
Reveal to me from out this youths report.
And so much with the circumstance of all
Did I unto Philotas intimate.
Then what hath been his mind, who did sup∣press
The information of so foul a train
Your selves my worthy Soludiers well may guess,
Which Dymnus death declares not to be vain.
Poor Ceballinus not a moment stays,
To redischarge himself of such a weight,
Philotas careless, fearless, nothing weighs
Nor ought reveals. His silence shows deceit,
And tells he was content it should be done
Which though he were no party makes him one.
For he that knew upon what power he stood
And saw his fathers greatness, and his own
Saw nothing in the way which now withstood
His vast• desires, but only this my crown.
Which in respect that I am issulesse
He thinks the rather easy to b'attaind
But yet Philotas is deceiud in this
I have who shall inhe•it all I gained.
In you I have both children, kindred friends
You are the heirs of all my purchases,
And whilst you live I am not issuleste.
And that these are not shadows of my fears,
(For I fear nought but want of enemies,)
See what this intercepted letter bears,
And how Parmenio doth his sons advise:
This shows their ends, hold read it Craterus.
My sons, First ha•e a special care unto your selves
Then unto those which do depend on you.
So Shall you do what you intend to doo.
See but how close he writes, that if these lines
Should come unto his sons, as they are sent,
They might encourage them in their designs,
If enterprised, might mock the ignorant
But now you see what was the thing was meant,
You see the fathers care the sons intent.
And what if he as a conspirator,
Was not by Dymnus named among the rest:
That shows not his innocence but his power,
Whom they account too great to be suppressed:
And rather will accuse themselves then him,
For that whilst he shall live, there's hope for them.
And how h'hath borne himself in private sort.
I will not stand to urge, it's too well known,
Nor what hath been his arrogant report:
T'imbase my actions, and to brag his own.
Nor how he mocked my letter which I wrote•:
To show him of the stile bestowed on me,
By th'Oracle of Jove. these things I thought
But weaknesses, and words of vanity,
(Yet words that read the ulcers of his hart)
Which I suppressed, and never ceased to yield
The chief rewards of worth and still compart,
the best degrees and honours of the field.
In hope to win his love, yet now at length,
There have I danger where I looked for strength:
I would to God my blood had rather been
Poured out, the offering of an enemy;
Then practiced to be shed by one of mine,
That one of mine should have this in•amy.
Have I been so reserved from fears to fall
There where I ought not to have feared at all•
Have you so oft advised me to regard
The safety, which you saw me running from,
When with some hot pursuit I pressed hard
My foes abroad; to perish thus at home?
But now that safety only rests in you
Which you so oft have wished me look unto.
And now unto your bosoms must I fly
Without whose will I will not wish to live:
And with your wills I cannot; less I give
Due punishment unto this treachery.
Attarras, bring the hateful prisoner forth
This traitor which hath sought t'vndoo vs all,
To give vs up to slaughter, and to make
Our blood a scorn, here in a barbarous land.
That none of vs should have returned back,
Unto our native country, to our wives
Our aged parents, kindred, and our friends.
To make the body of this glorious host
A most deformed trunk without a head,
Without the life or soul to guide the same
O thou base traitor impious parricide,
Who make me loath the blood that matched with thine
And if I might but have my will. I vow
Thou should not die by other hand then mine.
Fie Caenus what a barbarous course is this
He first must to his accusation plead.
And have his trial, formal to our laws
And let him make the best of his bad cause
Philotas here the Macedonians are
To judge your fact, what language wilt thou use?
The Persian language if it please your grace,
For there beside the Macedonians, here
Are many that will better understand,
If I shall use the speech your grace hath used,
Which was I hold unto no other end,
But that the most men here might understand.
See how his native language he disdains,
But let him speak at large as he desires,
So long as you remember he doth hate
Besides the speech our glory and the state.
Black are the colours laid upon the crime,
Wherewith my faith stands charged my worthy lord••
That as behind in fortune so in time,
I come too late to clear the same with words.
My condemnation is gone out before
My innocence, and my just defence:
And takes up all your harts, and leaves no door
For mine excuse to have an entrance.
That destitute of all compassion, now,
Betwixt an up•ight conscience of desert,
And an unjust disgrace, I know not how
To satisfy the time, and mine own hart.
Authority looks with so sterne an eye
Upon this woeful Bar, and must have still
Such an advantage over misery
As that it will make• good, all that it will.
He who should only judge my cause, is gone,
And why he would not stay, I do not see,
Since when my cause were heard his power alone,
As well might then condemn as set me free:
Nor can I by his absence now be cleared
Whose presence hath condemned me thus unheard.
And though the grievance of a prisoners tongue,
May both superfluous and disgraceful seem,
Which doth not sue, but shows the judge his wrong:
Yet pardon me, I must not disesteme
My rightful cause for being despised, nor must
Forsake my self, though I am least of all,
Fear cannot make my innocence unjust
Unto it self, to give my truth the fall.
And I had rather, seeing how my fortune draws,
My words should be deformed then my cause.
I know that nothing is more delicate
Then is the sense and feeling of a state:
The clap, the bruit, the fear but of a hurt
In kings behalfes, thrusts with that violence
The subjects will to prosecute report,
As they condemn, ere they discern th'offence.
Philotas you deceive your self in this
That think to win compassion, and belief
B'impugning justice and to make men guess
We doo you wrong out of our heat of grief,
Or that our place or passions did lay more
On your misfortunes, then your own deseart
Or have not well discerned your fact before,
Or would without, due proofs your state subvert,
These are the usual theames of traitors tongues
Who practise mischiefs, and complain of wrongs
Your treasons are too manifestly known
To mask in other livery then their own.
Think not, that we are set to charge you here
With bare suspicions but with open fact,
And with a treason that appears as clear
As is the sun, and known to be your act.
What is this treason? who accuses me?
The process of the whole conspiracy.
But wher's the man that names me to be one?
Here this dead traitor shows you to be one.
How can he dead, accuse me of the same
Whom living he nor did, nor yet could name.
But we can other testimony show
From those who were your chiefest accomplices.
I am not to b'adiudgd in law you know
By testimony, but by witnesses.
Let them be here produced unto my face
That can avouch m'a party in this case.
My Lords and fellow soldiers if of those
Whom Dymnus nominated, any one
Out of his tortures will a word disclose
To show I was a party: I have done.
Think not so great a number ever will
Endure their torments and themselves accuse
And leave me out. Since men in such case, still
Will rather slander others then excuse.
Calamity malignant is, and he
That suffers justly for his guiltiness
Eases his own affliction, but to see
Others tormented in the same distress,
And yet I fear not whatsoever they
By rackes and tortures can be forest to say.
Had I been one would Dymnus have concealed,
My name being held to be the principal?
would he not for his glory have reueald
The best to him to whom he must tell all?
Nay if he falsely then had named me one?
To grace himself, must I of force be one.
Alas, if Ceb•llinus had not come to me
And given me note of this conspiracy
I had not stood here now but bin as free
From question as I am from treachery.
That is the only cloud that thundered
On my disgrace. Which had I deemed true
Or could but have deuind of Dymnus death
Philotas, had, my Lords, sat therewith you.
My fault was to have been too credulous
Wherein I showed my weakness I confess.
Philotas what a monarch and confess
Your imperfections and your weakness?
O Craterus, do not insult upon calamity,
It is a barbarous grossness to lay on
The weight of skome where heavy misery
To much already ways men's fortunes down
For if the cause be ill I undergo,
The law and not reproach must make it so.
Ther's no reproach can ever be too much
To lay on traitors, whose desearts are such.
Men use the most reproaches where they fear
The cause will better prove then their desire.
But sir, a traitors •ause that is so clear.
As this of yours will never need that fear.
I am no traitor but suspected one,
For not believing a conspiracy.
And mere suspect by law condemns none,
They are approved facts for which men die.
The law in treasons doth the will correct.
With like seuerenes as it doth th'effect.
Th'affection is the essence of th'offence,
The execution only but th'accidence,
To have but willed it, is t'haue done the same.
I did not err in will, but in belief,
And if that be a traitor, then am I the chief.
Yea but your will made your belief consent
To hide th'practise till th'accomplishment.
Belief turns not by motions of our will,
And it was but the event that made that ill.
Some facts men may excuse, though not defend,
Where will &amp; fortune have a divers end.
Th'example of my father made me fear,
To be too forward to relate things heard.
Who writing to the king, wished him forbear,
The potion his physician had prepared.
For that he heard Darius tempted had,
His faith, with many talents, to b'vntrue.
And yet his druggs in th'end not proving bad,
Did make my fathers care seem more then due.
For oft by an untimely diligence,
A busy faith may give a prince offence.
So that, what shall wee doo? if wee reveal,
Wee are despised, suspected if conceal.
And as for this where ever now thou bee
O Alexander thou hast pardoned me.
Thou hast already given me thy hand,
The earnest of thy reconciled hart.
And therefore now ô let thy goodness stand,
Unto thy word, and be thou as thou were.
If thou beleuidst me then, I am absolute,
If pardoned me, these fetters are dissolved.
What have I else deserved since yester night,
When at thy table I such grace did find,
What heinous crime hath since been brought to light•
To wrong my faith, and to divert thy mind?
That from a restful quiet most profound,
Sleeping in my misfortunes, made secure
Both by thy hand, and by a conscience sound,
I must be waked for Gyves, for robes impure,
For all disgrace that on me wrath could lay,
And see the worst of shame, ere I saw day.
When I least thought that others cruelty,
Should have wrought more thē thine own clemency.
Philotas whatsoever gloss you lay,
Upon your rotten cause, it is in vain,
Your pride, your carriage, ever did bewray.
Your discontent, your malice, and disdain.
You cannot palliate mischief but it will,
Th'row all the fairest coverings of deceit
Be always seen; we know those streams of ill,
Flowed from that head that feed them with conceit.
You foster malcontents, you entertain
All humours, you all factions must embrace.
You vaunt your own exploits, and you disdain
The kings proceedings, and his stile disgrace.
You promise mountains, and you draw men on,
With hopes of greater good then hath been seen.
You braggd of late that something would be donne
Whereby your Concubine should be a Queen.
And now we see the thing that should be donne.
But God be praisd we see you first undone.
Ah do not make my nature, if it had,
So pliable a sterne of disposition,
To turn to every kindness, to be bad,
For doing good to men of all condition.
Make not you charity t'inter prete all
Is donne for favour to be donne for show,
And that we in our bounties prodigal.
Upon our ends not on men's needs bestow.
Let not my one days error make you tell,
That all my life-time I did never well.
And that because this falls out to be ill,
That what I did, did tend unto this ill.
It is unjust to join t'a present fact
More of time past then it hath ever had
Before to doo with-all, as if it lacked
Sufficient matterels to make it bad.
• d•o confess indeed I wrote something.
Against this title of the son of Jove,
And that not of the king but to the king,
I •really used these words out of my love,
And thereby hath that dangerous liberty
Of speaking truth, with trust on former grace
Betrayed my meaning unto enmity
And drawn an argument of my disgrace.
So that I see though I spake what I ought,
It was not in that manner as I ought.
And God forbid that ever soldiers words
Should be made liable unto misdeeds,
When fainting in their march, tired in the fight,
Sick in their tent, stopping their wounds that bleeds,
Or haut and jolly after conquest got
They shall out of their heate use words unkind,
Their deeds deserve to have them rather thought
The passion of the season, then their mind.
For soldiers joy, or wrath is measureless•
Rapt with an instant motion, and we blame,
We hate, we praise, we pity in excess
According as our present passions flame.
Sometimes to pass the Ocean we would fine
Sometimes to other worlds, and sometimes slack
And idle, with our conquests, entertain
A sullen humour of returning back.
All which conceits one trumpets sound doth end,
And each man running to his ranks doth lose
What in our tents dislike• vs, and we spend
All that conceived wrath upon our foes.
And words, if they proceed of levity
Are to be skornd, of madness pitied
If out of malice or of injury
To be remiss'd or vnacknowledged:
For of themselves they vanish by disdain,
But if pursued they will be thought not vain.
But words according to the person way,
If his designs are heinous so are they,
They are the tinder of sedition, still,
Wherewith you kindle fierce inflame men's will.
Craterus you have th'aduantage of the day,
The law is yours to say what you will say.
And yet doth all your Gloss but bear the sense,
Only of my misfortune not offence.
Had I pretended mischief to the king,
Could not I have effected it without
Dimnus? did not my free access bring
Continual means t'haue brought the same about?
Was not I since I heard the thing discride,
Alone, and armed in private with his grace,
What hindered me that then I had not tried
T'haue done that mischief, having time and place?
Philotas even the providence aboue.
Protectress of the sacred state of kings,
That never suffers treachery to have
Good council, never in this case but brings
Confusion to the actors, did undo
Your harts, in what you went about to do.
But yet despair we see doth thrust men on
Se'ing no way else t'vndoo er be undone.
That same despair doth likewise let men fall
In that amaze they can do nought at all.
Well, well, my Lords my service hath made known•
The faith I owe my Sovereign and the state
Philotas forwardness hath ever shown
Unto all nations at how high a rate
I prized my king, and at how low my blood,
To do him honour and my country good.
We blame not what you've been, but what you are:
We accuse not here your valour, but your fact,
Not to have been a leader in the war,
But an ill subject, in a wicked act.
Although we know thrust rather with the love
Of your own glory, then with duty lead
You have done much, yet all your courses prove
You tide still your a•chieuements to the head
Of your own honour, when it had bin meet,
You had them laid, down at your sovereigns feet.
God gives to kings the honour to command,
To subjects all their glory to obey:
Who ought in time of war as rampires stand,
In peace as th'ornaments of state array.
The king hath recompensd your services
With better love then you show thankfulness.
By grace, he made you greater then you were
By nature: you received that which he was not tide
To give to you: his gift was far more dear
Then all you did, in making you employed.
But say your service hath deserved at all,
This one offence hath made it odious all.
And therefore here in vain, you use that mean
To plead for life, which you have concealed clean.
My lord you far mistake me if you dee•e
I plead for life, that poor weak blast of breath,
From which so oft I ran with light esteem
And so well have acquainted me with death,
No no, my Lords, it is not that I fear
It is mine honour that I seek to clear.
And which if my disgraced cause would let
The language of my hart be understood,
Is all which I have ever sought to get
And which (o leave me now) and take my blood.
Let not your envy go beyond the bound
Of what you seek: my life stands in your way
That is your aim, take it and do not wound
My reputation with that wrong I pray.
If I must needs be made the sacrifice
Of envy, and that no oblation will
The wrath, of Kings but only blood suff•ze,
Yet let me, have something left that is not ill.
Is there no way to get unto our lives
But first to have our honour overthrown?
Alas though grace of Kings all greatness gives
It cannot give vs virtue, that's our own
Though all be theirs our harts and hands can do
Yet that by which we doo is only ours:
The trophies that our blood erects unto
Their memory to glorify their powers
Let them enjoy: yet only to have done
Worthy of grace let not that be undone.
Let that high swelling river of their fame
Leave humble streams that feed them yet their name
O my dear father did thou bring that spirit
Those hands of valour that so much have done.
In this great work of Asia, this to merit
By doing worthily to be undone?
And hast thou made this purchase of thy sword
To get so great an Empire for thy Lord
And so disgraced a grave for thee and thine,
T'extinguish by thy service all thy line?
One of thy sons by being to valorous
But five days since, yet ô well, lost his breath
Thy dear Nicanor th'halfe arch of thy house,
And here now the other at the barr of death
Stands ouerchardgd with wrath in far worse case
And is to be confounded with disgrace.
Thy self must give th'acquitance of thy blood
For others debts to whom thou hast done good.
Which if they would a little time afford
Death would have taken it without a sword.
Such the rewards of great employments are
Hate kills in peace, whom fortune spares in war.
And this is that high grace of Kings we seek,
Whose favour, and whose wrath consumes a like.
Lo here the misery of kings, whose cause
How ever just it be, how ever strong,
Yet in respect they may, their greatness draws
The world to think they ever do the wrong.
But this foul fact of yours you stand upon
Philotas shall beside th'apparancy
Which all the world sees plain, ere we have done
By your own mouth be made to satisfy.
The most stiff par•lalist that will not see.
My mouth will never prove so false I trust
Unto my hart, to show it self unjust:
And what I here do speak I know my lords
I speak with mine own mouth, but other where
What may be said I say, may be the words
Not of my breath, but fame that oft doth err,
Let th'oracle of Ammon be inquir•d
About this fact, who if it shall be true
Will never suffer those who have conspired
Against Ioues son t'escape without their due;
But will reveal the truth, or if this shall
Not seem convenient: why then lay on all
The tortures that may force a tongue to tell,
The secret'st thought that could imagine ill.
What need we sēd to know more then we know
That were to give you time t'acquaint your friends
With your estate, till some combustion grow
Within the camp to hasten on your ends:
And that the gold and all the treasury
Committed to your fathers custody
In Media, now might arm his desperate troupes
To come upon vs and to cut our throats.
What shall we ask of Jove that which he hath
Reueald already? but let's send to give
Thanks that by him, the king hath skipped the wrath
Of thee disloyal traitor and doth live.
Lets tear the wretch in pieces, let vs rend
With our own hands, the traitrous para•id.
Peace •alone, silence loving soldiers.
You see my lords out of your judgments grau•
That all excuses sickly colours have,
And he that hath thus false and faithless ben•
Must find out other gods and other men
Whom to forswear, and whom he may desolve,
No words of his can make vs more believe
His impudence, and therefore seeing tic late,
We till the morning, do dismiss the court.
WEll then I see there is small difference
Betwixt your state and ours, you civil Greek•
You great contrivers of free gouerments.
Whose skill the world from out all countries seeks.
Those whom you call your kings are but the same
As are our sovereign tyrants of the East,
I see they only differ but in name,
Th'effects they show agree, or near at least.
Your great men here as our great Satrapaes
I see laid prostrate are with basest shame,
Upon the least suspect, or jealousies
Your King, •conceive or others en••yes frame,
Only herein they differ, that your Prince
Proceeds by form of law t'effect his end;
Our Persian Monarch makes his frown convince
The strongest truth: his sword the process ends
With present death, and makes no more ado,
He never stands to give a gloss unto
His violence, to make it to appear
In other hew, then that it ought to bear•
Wherein plain dealing best his course commends
For more h'offends who by the law offends
What need hath Alexander so to strive
By all these shows of fornie to find this man
Guilty of treason, when he doth contrive
To have him so adiudgd, do what he can.
He must not be acquit, though he be clear
Th'offendor not th'offence is punished here.
And what avails the fore-condemnd to speak
How ever strong his cause, his state is weak.
Ah, but it satisfies the world, and wee
Think that well don, which done by law wesee.
And yet your law serves but your private ends
And to the compass of your power extends.
But is it for the ••iesty of Kings
To sit in judgments thus themselves with you?
To do men justice is the thing that brings
The greatest majesty on earth to Kings.
That by their subalternate ministers
May be performed as well, and with more grate
For to command it to be don infers
More glory then to doo. It doth imbase
Th'opinion of a power t'inuulgar so
That sacred presence, which should never go
Never bes•en, but even as Gods below
Like to our Persian Kings in glorious show.
And who as stars affixed to their Sphere
May not descend to be from what they are.
Where kings are so like gods, there subjects are not men,
Your king begins this course, &amp; what will you be thē?
Indeed since prosperous fortune gave the rain
To head-strong power and lust, I must confess
We Gracious have lost deeply by our gain,
And this our greatness makes vs much the l•ss•
For by th'accession of these mighty states
Which Alexander wondrously hath got
He hath forgot himself, and vs, and rates
His state aboue mankind, and ours at noughs.
This hath thy pompeô feeble Asia wrought,
Thy base adorings hathtransformd the King
Into that shape of pride, as he is brought
Out of his wits, out of acknowledging
From whence the glory of his greatness springes,
And that it was our swords that wrought these things.
How well were we within the narrow bounds
Of our sufficient yielding Macedon,
Before our kings inlardgd then with our wounds
And made these sales of ambition.
Before they came to give the regal law
To those free states which kept their crowns in awe.
They by these large dominions are made more
But we become far weaker then before.
What get we now by winning but wide minds
And weary bodies with th'expence of blood?
What should ill doo, since happy fortune finds
But misery, and is not good, though good?
Action begets still action, and retains
Our hopes beyond our wishes, drawing on
Aneuer ending circle of our pains
That makes vs not have donne, when we have done.
What can give bounds to Alexanders ends
Who counts the world but small, that calls him great:
And his desires beyond his pray distends
Like beasts that murder more then they can eat?
When shall we look his travails will be donne,
That tends beyond the Ocean and the Sun?
What discontentments will there still arise
In such a Camp of kings, to inter-shock
Each others greatness, and what mutinies,
Will put him from his comforts, and will mock
His hopes, and never suffer him to have
That which he hath of all which fortune gave?
And from Philotas blood (ô worthy man)
Whose body now rent on the torture lies
Will slow that vain of fresh conspiracies,
As ouer-flow him will, do what he can.
For cruelty doth not embitter men
But them more wary makes, then they have ben.
Are not your great-men free from tortures then
Must they be likewise racked, as other men?
Treason affords a privilege to none
Who like offends, hath punishment all one.
Friend Sostratus, come have you euet known
Such a distracted face of court as now,
Such a distrustful eye, as men are grown
To fear themselves and all: and do not know.
Where is the side that shakes not, who looks best
In this foul day, th'oppressor or th'opprest.
What posting, what dispatches, what advice,
What search, what running, what discoveries?
What rumours, what suggestions, what device
To clear the king, please people, hold the wise,
Retain the •ude, crush the suspected sort
At unawares, ere they discern they are hurt.
So much the fall of such a weighty peer
Doth shake the state, and with him tumble down,
All whom his beam of favour did vpbeare,
All who to rest upon his base were known.
And none that did but touch upon his love
Are free from fear to perish with his love.
My self whom all the world have known to embrace
Parmenio in th'intirenes of my hart,
And ever in all battles, every chase
Of danger, fought still next him on that part:
Was seazd on this last night, late in my bed,
And brought unto the presence of the king.
To pay I thought the tribute of my head,
But ô it was for a more abhorred thing:
I must redeem my danger with the blood
Of this dear friend, this dear Parmenios blood.
His life must pay for mine, these hands must gore,
That worthy hart, for whom they fought before.
What hath the king commanded such a deed,
To make the harts of all his subjects bleed?
Must that old worthy man Parmenio die?
O Sostratus he hath his doom to die,
And we must yield unto necessity.
For coming to the king, and there received
With unexpected grace, he thus began:
Polidamas we both have ben deceiud
In holding friendship with that faithless man
Parmenio, who for all his glossing mine
Thou see hath sought to cut my throat and thine,
And thou must work revenge for thee and me:
And therefore haste to Media speedily,
Take these two letters here, the one from me
Unto my sure and trusty seiuants there,
The other signed with Philotas seal,
As if the same t'his father written were:
Carry them both, effect what I have said,
The one will give th'accesse, the other aid,
I took the letters, vowed t'effect the same.
And here I go the instrument of shame.
But will you charge your honour with this shame?
I must or be undone with all my name.
For I have left all th'adamantiue ties
Of blood and natūre, that can hold a hart
Chaind to the world• my br̄ethren and allies
The Ostages to caution for my part.
And for their lives must I dishonour mine.
Else should the king rather have turned this sword
Upon my hart, then forced it impiously,
(Having done all fair service to his Lord
Now to b'imployd in this foul villainy.)
Thus must we do who are inthrald to kings,
whether they will just or unlawful things.
But now Parmenio, ô me think I see
Thee walking in th'artificiall Grove
Of pleasant Susis, when I come to thee,
And thou rememb•ing all our ancient love
Hastes to embrace me. Saying ô my friend,
My dear Polidamas, welcome my friend,
Well art thou come that we may sit and chate
Of all the old adventures we have run.
Tic long Polidamas since we two met,
How doth my sovereign Lord, how doth my son?
When I vile wretch, whilst m'answere he attends
With this hand give the letter, this hand ends
His speaking joy, and stabs him to the hart.
And thus Parmenio thou rewarded art
For all thy service, thou that did agree
For Alexander to kill Attalus
For Alexander I must now kill thee.
Such are the judgments of the heavenly pours,
We others ruins work, and others ours.
Why this is right now Alexander takes
The course of power, this is a Persian trick,
This is our way, here public trial makes
No doubtful noise, but buries clamour quick.
Indeed now Persia hath no cause to few,
For you have vs undone, who undid you.
THis work is donne, the sad Catastrophe
Of this great act of blood is finished now.
Philotas ended hath the tragedy.
Now good my friend I pray thee tell vs how.
As willing to relato as you to hear
A full-chargd hart is glad to find an ear.
The Council being dimissd from hence, and gone,
Still Craterus plies the King, still in his ear,
Still whispering to him privately alone,
Urging it seemed a quick dispatch of fear:
For they who speako but privately to Kings,
Do seldom speak the best and fittest things.
Some would have had him forthwith stoned to death.
According to the Macedonian course:
But yet that would not satisfy the breath
Of busy rumour; but would argue force,
There must be some confessions made within,
That must abroad more satisfaction minne.
Craterus with Caenus and Ephestion,
Do mainly urge to have him tortured,
Whereto the king consents, and there upon
They three are sent to see it accomplished.
Racks, Irons, Fires, the grizzly torturers
Stand hidcously prepared before his face.
Philotas all vnmou'd, vnchaungd appears,
As if• he would, deaths ougliest brow out-face,
And skornd the worst of force, and asked them why
They staid to torture the kings enemy.
That part was acted well, God grant we hear
No worse a Scene then this, and all goes clear.
So should worth act, and they who dare to fight
Against corrupted times should dye upright:
Such harts kings may dissolve but not defeat,
Agreat man where he falls he should lye great
Whose ruin (like the sacred carkeses
Of skattred temples which still reverent leo,
And the religious honour them no less
Then if they stood in all their gallantry.
But on with thy report.
Straight were hote-yrons applied to sere his flesh,
Then wresting racks, his comely body strain:
Then iron whips and then the rack afresh,
Then fire again, and then the whips again:
Which he endures with so resolved a look
As if his mind were of another side
Then of his body, and his sense for sooke
The part of nature, to be wholly tide
To honour, that he would not once consent
So much as with a sight' his punishment.
Yet doth he like himself yet all is well.
This Argument no tyrant can refill,
This plea of resolution wins his cause
More right then all, more admiration draws,
For we love nothing more then to renown
Men stoutly miserable, highly down.
But now.
We f•are that but. O if he ought descend
Leave here, and let the Tragedy here end,
Let not the least act now of his at last,
Mar all his act of life and glories past.
I must tell all, and therefore give no leave,
Swollen with raw tumors, vlcered with the jerk•s
Of Iron whips, that slesh from been had raz•d,
And no part free from wounds; it erkes
His soul to see the house so foul defast,
Wherein his life had dwelt so long time clean,
And therefore craves he, they would now dismiss
His grievous tortures, and he would begin
To open all wherein h'had donne amiss.
Straight were his tortures ceased, and after they
Had let him to recover sense he said,
Now Craterus say, what you will have me say?
Wherewith as if deluded, or delayed,
Cratetus in wrath calls presently again,
To have the tortures to be reapplied.
When what soever secret of his hart
Which had been fore-conceiued but in athought
What friend soever had but took his part
In common love h'accus'd; and so forgot
Himself that now he was more forward to
Confess, then they to urge him thereunto,
Whether affliction had his spirits undone,
Or seeing to hide or utter was all one;
Both ways lay death, and therefore he would vie
Now to be sure to say enough to die.
•nd then began his fortunes to deplore
Humbly besought them, whom he skornd before,
That Alexander where he stood behind
A Travers, out of sight, was heard to speak:
I never thought a man that had a mind
T'attempt so much, had had a heart so weak.
There he confessed that one Hegelochus,
When first the King proclaimed himself Ioues son:
Incene'd his fathers heart against him thus,
By telling him that now we were undone,
If we endured, that he which did disdain
To have been Philips son, should live and reign.
He that aboue the state of man will strain
His stile, and will not be that which we are,
Not only vs contemns, but doth disdain
The gods themselves, with whom he would compare,
We have lost Alexander, lost (said he)
The King; and falue on pride and vanity:
And we have made a God of our own blood,
That glorisies himself, neglects our good.
Intolerable is this impious deed,
To Gods, whom he would match, to men he would exceed.
Thus having over-night Hegelochus
Discoursed: my father sends next day
For me to hear the same: and there to vs
All he had said to him made him re-say.
Supposing out of wine the night before
He might but idles rave. When he again
Far more enraged; in heat and passion more
Urged vs to clear the state of such a stain.
Coniurd vs to redeem the commonwealth
And doo like men, or else as men conceal.
Parmenio thought whilst yet Darius st•od
This course was out of season; and thereby
Th'extinguishing of Alexanders blood
Would now not profit vs, but th'enemy.
But he once dead; we seazing th'others powers
Might make all the orient, and all Asia ours,
That course we liked, to that our council stands,
There-to we tide our oaths, and gave our hands.
And as for this, he said, for Dymnus plot,
Though he were clear yet now it cleared him not.
And yet the force of racks at last could do
So much with him, as he confessed that too.
And said that fearing Bactra would detain
The king too long, he hastened on his ends,
Least that his father, Lord of such a train
And such a wealth, an whom the whole depends,
Should being aged, by his death prevent
These his designs, and frustrate his intent.
O would we had not heard this latter jar,
This all his former strains of worth doth mar:
Before this last his foes his spirit commends,
But now he is unpitied of his friends.
Then was Demetrius likewise brought in place,
And put to torture, who denies the deed,
Philotas he auerres it to his face.
Demetrius still denies: then he espied
A youth one Calm that was standing by;
Calin said he, how long wilt thou abide,
Demetrius vainly to avouch a lie.
The youth, that never had ben named before
In all his tortures, gave them cause to guess
Philotas cared not now to utter more
Then had been privy to his practises.
And seeing they had as much as they desired,
They with Demetrius stoned him unto death,
And all whom Dymnus named to have conspired,
With grievous tortures now must loose their breath:
And all that were allied which could not fly,
Are in the hands of Justice now to dye.
What must the punishment arrive beyond
The offence, not with th'offender make an end?
They all must dye who may be feared in time
To be the heirs unto their kindreds crime,
All other punishments end with our breath,
But treason is pursued beyond our death,
The wrath of Kings doth seldom measure keep,
Seeking to cure bad parts they lance too deep:
When punishment like lightning should appear
To few men's hurt, but unto all men's fear.
Great Elephants, and Lyons murder least,
The ignoble beast is the most cruel beast,
But all is well if by the mighty fall
Of this great man, the King be safely freed:
But if this Hydra of ambition shall
Have other heads, to spring up in his ste•d
Then hath he made but way for them to rise,
Who will assault him with fresh treacheries.
The which may teach vs to observe this strain,
T'admire high hills, but live within the plain•

HOw is it Melibaeus that we find
Our Country, fair, Arcadia, so much changed
From what it was, that was thou know of late,
The gentle region of plain honesty,
The modest seat, of undisguised truth,
Inhabited with simple innocence:
And now, I know not how, as if it were,
Unhallowed, and divested of that grace,
Hath put off that fair nature which it had,
And grows like •udder countries, or more bad.
Indeed Ergastus I have never known,
So universal a distemperature,
In all parts of the body of our state,
As now there is; nor ever have we heard
So much complaining of disloyalty,
Amongst our younger Nymphs, nor ever found
Our heardsmen so deluded in their loves,
As if there were no faith on either side.
We never had in any age before
So many spotless Nymphs, so much distained
With black report, and wrongful infamy,
That few escape the tongue of malice free.
And me thinks too, our very ayre is changed,
Our wholesome climate grown more maladiue,
The fogs, and the Siren offends vs more
(Or we made think so) then they did before,
The winds of Autumn, now are said to bring
More noysomnesse, then those do of the Spring:
And all of vs feel new in •••mities,
New Fevers, new Catarres, oppress our powers,
The milk wherewith we cured all maladies,
Hath either lost the nature, or we ours.
And we that never were accustomed
To quarrel for our bounds, how do we see
Montanus and Acrysius inter-striue
How far their several Sheep-walkes should extend,
And cannot be agreed do what we can:
As if some vnderworking hand struck fire,
To th'apt inkindling tinder of debate,
And fostered their contention and their hate.
And me thinks too, the beauty of our Nymphs
Is not the same, as it was wont to be.
That Rosie hew, the glory of the Cheek,
Is either stolen, or else they have forgot,
To blush with shame, or to be pale with fear:
Or else their shame doth make them always blush•
For always doth their beauties bear one hew,
And either Nature's false, or that untrue.
Besides their various habits grow so strange,
As that although their faces certain are,
Their bodies are uncertain every day,
And always differing from themselves so far,
As if they scorned to be the same they are.
And all of vs are so transformed, that we
Discern not an Arcadian by th•attire,
Our ancient Pastoral habits are despised,
And all is strange, hearts, clothes, and all disguised.
Indeed unto our grief we may perceive,
The whole complexion of Arcadia changed,
Yet cannot find th'occasion of this change:
But let vs with more wary eye observe
Whence the contagion of these customs rise,
That have infected thus our honest plains,
With cunning discord, idle vanity,
Deceitful wrong, and causeless infamy.
That by the assistance of our graver Swains,
We now at first, may labour to prevent
The further course of mischiefs, and restore
Our late clean woods, to what they were before.
Content Ergastus, and even here will be
A place convenient for so fit a work:
For here our Nymphs, and heardsmen on this Greene,
Do usually resort, and in this Grove
We may observe them best, and be unseen.
Come my dear Techne, thou and I must plot
More cunning proiects yet, more strange designs
Amongst these simple gross Arcadians here,
That know no other world, but their own plains,
Nor yet can apprehend the subtle trains
We lay, to mock their rural ignorance.
But see, here comes two of their amorous Swains
In hot contention, let vs close convey
Our selves, here underneath this coverture,
And ouer-heare their passionate discourse.
Colax, this place well such a purpose fits,
Let vs sit close, and faith, it shall go hard,
Unless we make some profit by their wits.
Now fond Amyntas, how came thou possessed
With such a vain presumption, as thou art,
To think that Cloris should affect thee best,
When all Arcadia knows I have her heart?
And how Carinus can thou be so mad,
T'imagine Cloris, can, or doth love thee,
When by so many signs, as I have had,
I find her whole affection bent to me?
What are those signs by which you come to cast,
And calculate the fortune of your hopes?
More certain signs, then thou can ever show.
But they are more then signs, that I can show.
Why let each then produce the best he can,
To prove which may be thought the likeliest man.
Content Amintas, and do thou begin.
And I am well contented to begin.
First if by chance, whilst she at Barely-breake
With other Nymphs, do but perceive me come,
Straight looks her cheek with such a Rosie red,
As gives the setting Sun unto the West
When morrow t•mpests are prefigured.
Even so that hew prognosticates her wrath,
Which brings to thee, the stormy winds of sighs.
And if I find her, with her fellow Nymphs
Gathering of flowers by some sweet Rivers side,
At my approach she straight way stands •pright,
Forgets her work, and down lets slide her lap,
And out fall all her flowers, upon the ground.
So doth the silly sheep forge•t to feed,
When it perceives the greedy Wolf at hand.
And if she meet but with my d•g, she takes
And strokes him on the head plays with his ears,
Spits in his mouth, and claps him on the back,
And says, come, come Melampus go with me.
She may love what is thine, but yet hate thee.
Whilst at a Crystal spring the other day,
She washed her lovely face, and seeing me come,
She takes up water with her dainty hand,
And with a down cast look besprinckles me.
That shows that she would gladly quench in thee
The fire of love, or else like love doth bear,
As did the Delian Goddess, when she cast
Disdainful water on Actaeons face.
As Siluia, one day, sate with her alone,
Binding of certain choice selected herbs
To her least arm, against bewitching spells;
(And I at th'instant coming) she perceived
Her pulse with far more violence to beat
(As she after told me) then it did before.
The like is felt when natures enemy,
The hateful fever, doth surprise our powers.
And even but yester night, she going before
With other maids, and seeing me following her,
Lets fall this dainty Nosegay, having fi•st
Bestowed a kiss thereon, to the end I might
Receive it so, and with it do the like.
Poor withered favours, they might teach thee know,
That she esteems thee, and thy love as light
As those dead flowers, she wore but for a show,
The day before, and cast a way at night.
Now friend Carinus, thou that mutterest so
At these plain speaking figures of her love,
Tell by what signs thou doest her favours prove?
Now silly man, doest thou imagine me
So fond to blab the favours of my love?
Was it not a pact agreed twixt thee and me?
A pact to make thee tell thy secrecy.
And hast thou then betrayed my easy trust,
And dallied with my open simpleness?
And fitly art thou served, that so wilt vaunt
The imagined favours, of a gentle Nymph;
And this is that which makes vs feel that dearth
Of grace, t'haue kindness at so hie a rate.
This makes them wary how they do bestow
The least regard of common curtsy,
When such as you poo•e, oredulous, devout,
And humble souls, make all things miracles
Your faith conceives, and vainly do convert
All shadows to the figure of your hopes.
Carinus now thou doest me double wrong,
First to deride my easy confidence,
And then t'obrayd my trust, as if my tongue
Had here profaned fair Cloris excellence,
In telling of her mercies, or had sinned
In uttering the honour of a modest grace
Bestowing comfort, in so just a case.
Why man, thou hast no way deserved her love.
Desert I cannot urge, but faith I can,
If that may have reward, then happy man.
But you know how I saved her from the hands
Of that rude Satire, who had else undone
Her honour utterly; and therefore ought
My love of due reign Sovereign in her thought.
But how that free and vnsubdued heart,
Infranchisd by the Charter of her eyes,
Will bear the imposition of a due
I do not see, since love knew never Lord
That could command the region of our will.
And therefore urge thy due, I for my part,
Must plead compassion, and a faithful heart.
Plead thou thy faith, whilst I will get thy love,
For you kind souls do seldom graceful prove.
The more unkind they, who should better way
Our honest vows, and love, for love repay,
But oft they bear the penance of their will,
And for the wrong they do, they speed as ill.
Alas poor fools, how hotly they contend
Who shall possess a prey that's yet vngot.
But Techne, I must by thy help forestall
The mart of both their hopes, and whilst they shall
Pursue the Air, I must surprise their gain.
And fitly now, thou moist occasion take
By these advantages discovered here,
T'impresse in Cloris tender heart that touch
Of deep dislike of both their vanteries,
As may convert her wholly unto me.
Why will you then Dorindas love forsake,
For whom you trauayld so, and made me take
Such labour to entice her to your love?
Tush Techne we desire not what we have,
But what we would, our longings never stay
With our attainings, but they go beyond.
And why? Dorinda is as fair as she.
That I confess, but yet that pays not me,
For Cloris is another and tic that,
And only that, which Techne I desire.
Some thing there is peculiar, and alone
To every beauty that doth give an edge
To our desires, and more we still conceive
In that we have not, then in that we have.
And I have heard, abroad where best experience,
And wit is learned, that all the fairest choice
Of women in the world, serve but to make
One perfect beauty, whereof each brings part.
One hath a pleasing smile, and nothing else:
Another but some silly Mole to grace
The area of a disproportioned face;
Another pleases not but when she speaks,
And some in silence only graceful are:
Some till they laugh, we see, seem to be fair,
Some have their bodies good, their gestures ill,
Some please in Motion, some in sitting still,
Some are thought lovely, that have nothing fair,
Some again fair that nothing lovely are.
So that we see how beauty doth consist
Of divers pieces, and yet all attract
And therefore unto al my love aspires,
As beauty varies, so doth my desires.
Ah but yet Colax doe not so much wrong
Unto a Nymph, now when thou hast subdued
And won her heart, &amp; know she holds thee dear.
Tush wrong is as men think it, and I see
It keeps the world the best in exercise
That else would languish, and have nought to do.
Discord in parts, makes harmon' in the whole:
And some must laugh, whilst othersome condole.
And so it be not of the side we are,
Let others bear it, what need we to care.
And now Dorinda something hath to doe,
Now she may sit, and think, and vex, and plot,
For ease, and joying of her full delight
Would but have dulld her spirits and mart her quite.
Alas yet I must pity her poor soul
In this distress, I being one my self
Of that frail corporation, and do know
That she will take it very grievously.
And yet in troth sh'is served but well enough,
That would neglect Mirtillus honest love,
And trust strange protestations, and new oaths,
Be won with guarded words, and gaudy chothes.
Well, well, Dorinda shall not wail alone,
She shall have others to consort her moan:
For since my late return from Telos Court
I hauemade twenty of their coyest Nymphs
Turn lovers, with a few protesting words
And some choice complemental perjuries;
I made Palaemon, to suspect the faith
Of his chaste Siluia, and chaste Siluia his,
In hope thereby to work her love to me.
I wrought coy Daphne to infringe her vow
Made to Menalcas, and I told her how
Those fetters which so heavily were laid
Upon our free affections, only were
But customary bands, not natural.
And I think Techne thou hast done thy part,
Here, in this gentle region of kind hearts,
Since thou came hither, for I see thou thriu'st.
In deed whilst I in Corinth did remain,
I hardly could procure the means to live,
There were so many of my trade, that sold
Complexions, dressings, tiffanies and tyres,
Divisors of new fashions and strange wiers
Bedbrokers, night worms, and Compositors
That though I knew these arts as well as they
yet being so many we could get small pay.
Here, who but Techne now is all in all?
Techne is sent for, Techne only shows
New strange devises to the choicest Nymphs:
And I think Techne teaches them those tricks.
As they will not forget again in haste.
I have so opened their unapt conceits
Unto that understanding of themselves,
As they will show in time they were well taught,
If they observe my rules, and hide a fault.
Ah well done Techne. Thus must thou and I
Trade for our profit with their ignorance,
And take our time, and they must have their chance.
But pray thee Techne, do not thou forget
To lay a train for Cloris. So adieu.
Colax I will not, and the rather too,
For that I bear a little leaning love
To Sweet Amintas, for me thinks he seems
The loveliest Shepherd all Arcadia yields
And I would gladly intercept his love,
So this is well. Here's one discovery made;
Here are the heads of that distemperature,
Frō whence these strange deban'shmēts of our nymphs
And vile deluding of our Shepheadrs Springs:
Here is a monster, that hath made his •ustes
As wide as is his will, and least his will
Without all bounds, and cares not whom he wrongs,
So that he may his own desires fulfil,
And being all foul himself, would make all ill.
This is that Colax that from foreign lands,
Hath brought home that infection which undoes
His country goodness, and impoysons all.
His being abroad would mar vs quite, at home.
Tic strange to see, that by his going out,
He hath out-gone that native honesty,
Which here the breeding of his country gave.
For here I do remember him a child,
The son of Nicoginus of the Hill,
A man though low in fortune, yet in mind
High set, a man still practising
T'aduance his forward son beyond the train
Of our, Arcadian breed, and still me thought
I saw a disposition in the youth,
Bent to a self conceited surlinesse,
With an insinuating impudence.
A man the fitter made for Courts abroad,
Where I would God he had remained still,
With those loose-liuing wanton Sybarites,
Where luxury, hath made her outmost proof.
From whence Fear he comes, and hither brings
Their shames, to brand vs with the like reproach.
And for this other viper, which you saw,
I do remember how she came of late
For succour to these parts, and sought to teach
Our younger maids to dress, and try out Flax,
And use the Distaff, and to make a hem,
And such like skill, being skill enough for them,
But since I see she hath presumed to deal
In points of other science, different far
From that plain Art of honest housewifery,
And as it seems hath often made repair
Unto the neighbour Cities round about,
From whom she hath these strange disguises go•
T'abuse our Nymphs, and as it seems desires,
To suit their minds, as light as their attires,
But we shall soon prevent this growing plague,
Of pride, and folly, now that she descry
The true symptom of this malady,
And by this overture thus made, we trust
We shortly shall discover all the rest.
O Cloris, here have thou and I full oft
Sate and been merry, in this shady Grove.
Here have we sung full many a Rundelay,
Told Riddles, and made Nosegays, laughed at love,
And others passions, whilst my self was free,
From that Intolerable misery,
Whereto affection now inuassells me.
Now Cloris I shall never more take joy
To see, or to be seen, with mortal eye,
Now sorrow must be all my company.
Why Siluia, whence, should all this grief arise?
I am undone Cloris, let that suffice.
Tell me, sweet Siluia, how comes that to pass?
O Cloris if thou be, as once, I was
Free, from that miserable plague of love,
Keep thee so still, let my affliction warn
Thy youth, that never man have power, to move
Thy heart to liking, for believe me this,
They are the most unfaithful impious race
Of creatures on the earth; never believe
Their protestations, nor their vows, nor tears,
All is deceit, none means the thing he swears.
Trust a mans faith? nay rather will I go
And give my self a prey to Savage beasts,
For all they seek, and all they labour for,
Is but t'vndoe vs, and when that is done,
They go and triumph on the spoil the'haue won.
Trust men, or take compassion when they grieve,
O Cloris tic to cherish and relieve
The frozen Snake, which with our heat once warmd,
Will sting vs to the heart in recompense,
And ô no marvel tho the Satire shunt,
To live with man, when he perceived he could,
With one and the same breath blow heat and cold.
Who would have ever thought Palaemons oaths
Would have proved false? who would have judged the face
That promised so much faith, and honesty,
Had been the visor but of treachery?
Is it possible Palemon should b'vntrue?
It is possible, Palaemon is untrue.
If it be so, dear Siluia, I think then
That thou say truth, there is no trust in men,
For I protest I never saw a face
That promised better of a heart then his,
And if he fail, whose faith then consta•t is?
O Cloris if thou did but know how long,
And with what earnest suite, he sought my love,
What vows he used, what oaths, what tears among•
What shows he made, his constancy to prove,
You would admire: and then again to see
How I although I loved him with my heart
Stood out, and would by no means urged be,
To show the least affection of my part.
For I had heard that, which (ô now too well)
I find, that men were cunning, and would not
Regard the thing that easily was got.
Siluia, indeed and I have heard so too.
And therefore I would try him, and not seem
His vows, nor protestations to esteem,
At length one day, here in this selfsame place,
(Which I shall ever, and good cause I have
To think on whilst I live) walking with me,
After he had urged me most earnestly:
O Siluia, said he, since nor other, nor vow,
Nor tears, nor prayers, have the power to move,
Nor all that I can doe, can make thee know
How true a heart, I offer to thy love;
I must try some way else to show the same,
And make thy vndiscerning wilful youth
Know, though too late, (perhaps unto thy shame)
Thy wayward error, and my constant truth:
When thou moist sigh, and say in grief of mind,
Palaemon loved, and Siluia was unkind.
With that wringing my hand, he turns away,
And though his tears would hardly let him look,
Yet such a look, did through his tears make way,
As showed how sad a farewell there he took.
And up towards yonder craggy Rock he goes,
His arms incross'd, his head down on one side,
With such a mournful pace, as showed his woes
Weighed heavier then his passions could abide:
Fine would I have resold him back, but shame,
And modesty could not bring forth his name:
And fine would I have followed, yet me thought
It did not fit the honour of a maid
To follow one, yet still I sent from me,
T'attend his going, fear, and a careful eye.
At length when he was gotten to the top,
I might perceive how with unfolded arms,
And looks bent up to heaven, he stands, and turns
His woeful face unto the other side,
Whereas that hideous fearful downfall is:
And seemed as if he would have thrown him off:
And as I thought, was now upon the point:
When my affrighted powers could hold no more,
But pity breaking all those bands of shame,
That held me back; I shrikd, and ran, God knows,
With all the speed my feeble feet could make,
And clammering up at length (with much ado)
Breathless I got, and took him by the hand,
And glad I had his hand, and was not come
Too late to have it, and I pulled him back:
But could not speak one word, no more did he,
Sense seemed to fail in him, and breath in me.
And on before I went, and lead him on,
And down conducted him into this plain.
And yonder lo, under that fatal tree,
Look Cloris there, even in that very place,
We sate vs down, my arm about his neck,
Which Jove thou know held never man before:
There only did my tears confer with his,
Words we had none, it was enough to think,
For passion was too busy now within,
And had no time to come abroad in speech.
And though I would have spoken, yet me thought
I should not, but my silence told him this,
That told too much, that all I was was his.
Well Siluia, I have heard so sad a tale,
As that I grieve to be a woman borne,
And that by nature we must be exposd
Unto the mercy of inconstant men.
But what said then Palaemon in the end?
Oh what he said, and what deep vows he made,
When joy and grief, had let his senses loose.
Witness ô gentle tree under whose shade,
We sate the while; witness if ever maid
Had more assurances by oaths of man.
And well may you bear witness of this deed,
For in a thousand of your barks he hath
Incaru'd my name, and vnderwrote his vows,
Which will remain so long as you bear bows.
But, Cloris, learn this lesson now of me;
Take head of pity, pity was the cause
Of my confusion, pity hâth undone
Thousands of gentle natures, in our sex,
For pity is sworn servant unto love,
And this be sure, where ever it begin
To make the way, it lets your moister in.
But what assurance have you of his fraud:
It may be you suspect him without cause?
Ah Cloris, Cloris, would I had no cause,
He who beheld him wrong me in these woods,
And heard him courting Nice, and protest
As deep to her, as he had done to me,
Told me of all his wicked t•eachery.
Pray who was that? tell me good Siluia, tell.
Why it was Colax, one I know full well
would not report untruths to gain the world,
A man of virtue, and of worthy parts,
He told me all and more then I will show,
I would I knew not half of that I know
Ah had he none but Nice that base trull,
The scorn and jest of all Arcadia now
To serve his lusts, and falsify his vow?
Ah had it yet been any else, the touch
Of my disgrace, had never bin so much
But to be least for such a one as she,
The stale of all, what will folk think of me?
Cloris in troth, it makes me so much loath
My self, loath these woods, and even hate the day,
As I must hide my griefs out of the way
I will be gone, Cloris, I leave thee here,
I cannot stay, and prithee, Cloris, yet
Pity thy poor companion Siluias care,
And let her fortune make thee to beware.
Siluia adieu, the Gods relieve thy woes,
Since men thus fail, and love no pity shows,
Love? nay, I'm taught for loving whilst I live,
Siluia, thy council hath locked up my heart
So fast from love, as let them sigh, and grieve,
And pine, and wail who will, I for my part
Will pity none of all this race of men.
I see what shows so ever they pretend,
Their love is never deadly, none of these
That languish thus, have did of this disease
That ever I could hear, I see all do
Recover soon, that happen thereinto.
And if they did not, there were no great hurt,
They may endure, they are of stronger powers,
Better their hearts should ache, then they break ours.
Well had I not been thus forewarnd to day,
Out of all question, I had shortly fall•e,
Into the melting humour of compassion too;
That tender pity that betrays vs thus.
For something I began to feel, me thought,
To move within me, when as I beheld
Amyntas walk so sadly, and so pale,
And ever where I went, still in my way,
His looks bent all to me, his care of me,
Which well I saw, but would not seem to see.
But now he hath his arrent, let him go,
Pity shall never cure that heart of his
T'vndoo mine own, the grief is best where tic.
What Cloris al alone, now fie for shame,
How ill doth this become so fair a face,
And that fresh youth to be with out your love?
Love Techne? I have here as many loves
As I intende to have, whilst I have breath.
Nay that you have not, never halt with me,
For I know two at least possessors be
Of your kind favours, as themselves doe boste.
Boste of my favours, no man rightly can.
And otherwise, let them say what they can.
No Cloris did not you the other night
A gallant nosegay to Amintas give?
I never gave him nosegay in my life.
Then trust me Cloris he doth wrong you much:
For he produced it there in open sight,
And vaunted to Carinus, that you first,
Did kiss the same, then gave it unto him:
And told too, how far gone you were in love,
What passion you would use, when he was by,
How you would jest with him, and wantonly
Cast water in his face; cal his dog yours,
And show him your affections by your eye.
And then Carinus on the other side
He vaunts, that since he had redeemed you
Out of the satyrs hands, he could command
Your love and all, that you were only his.
This and much more, I heard them I protest
Give out of you, how truly you know best.
Techne, their idle talk, shall not vex me,
I know the ground I stand on, and how free
My heart, and I enjoy our liberty,
And it Amyntas, hath interpreted
My look, according to his own conceit,
He hath m•stooke the text, and he shall find
Great difference, twixt his comment, and my mind
And for his Nosegay it shall make me take
More care hereafter how I scatter flowers:
Let him preserve it well, and let him make
Much of his gains, he gets no more of ours.
But thus had I been served, had I reueald
The least regard of common curtsy
To such as these: but I doe thank the Gods
I have reserved me, from that vanity:
For ever I suspected this to be
The vain of men, and this now settles me.
And for Carinus, let him vaunt what good
He did for me, he can but have again
My hearty thanks, the payment for his pain,
And that he shall• and ought in woman-hood.
And as for love, let him go look on her
That sits, and grieves, and languishes for him,
Poor Amarillis, who affects him dear,
And sought his love with many an woeful tear.
And well deserves a better man then be,
Though he be rich Lupinus son, and stands
Much on his wealth, and his ability,
She'is witty, fair and full of modesty.
And were she of my mind, she rather would
Pull out her eyes, then that she would be seen,
To offer up so dear a sacrifice
To his wilde youth, that scorns her in that wise.
Cloris in troth, I like thy judgment well,
In not affecting of those home-bred Swains,
That know not how to manage true delight,
Can neither hide their love, nor show it right.
Who would be troubled with gross ignorance,
That understands not truly how to love?
No Cloris, if thou did but know, how well
Thou art esteemed, of one that knows indeed
How to observe thy worth, and his own ways,
How to give true delight, how to proceed
With secrecy, and wit, in all aslayes,
Perhaps you might think one day of the man.
What is this creature then you praise a man?
A man? yes Cloris, what should he be else?
Nought else, it is enough he be a man.
Yea and so rare a man as ever yet
Arcadia bred, that may be proud she bred
A person of so admirable parts,
A man that knows the world, hath seen abroad,
Brings those perfections that do truly move,
A gallant spirit, an understanding love.
O if you did but know how sweet it were,
To come unto the bed of worthiness,
Of knowledge, of conceit, where strange delights
With strange discourses still shall entertain
Your pleased thoughts, with fresh variety,
Ah you would loath to have your youth confined,
For ever more, between th'vnskilfull arms
Of one of these rude vnconceiuing Swains,
Who would but seem a trunk without a mind;
As one that never saw but these poor plains,
Knows but to keep his sheep, and set his fold.
Pipe on an Oaten Reed, some Rundelayes,
And dance a Morris on the holidays.
And so should you be always sweetly sped
With ignorance, and two fools in a bed.
But with this other gallant spirit you should
Be sure to overpass that tediousness,
And that society which cloys this life,
With such a variable cheerfulness,
As you will bless the time t'haue been his wife.
What hath this man you thus commend fa name?
A name? why yes, no man but hath a name.
His name is Colax, and is one I swear
Doth honour even the ground whereon you tread,
And oft, and many many times, God knows,
Hath he with tender passion, talked of you:
And said; Well, there is one within these woods
(Meaning by you) that yet of all the Nymphs
Mine eyes have ever seen upon the earth,
In all perfections doth exceed them all.
For all the beauties in that glorious Court
Of Telos, where I lived, nor all the Stars
Of Greece beside, could sparkle in my heart,
The fire of any heat but only she.
Then would he stay, and sigh; and then again
Ah what great pity such a creature should
Be tide unto a clog of ignorance,
Whose body doth deserve to be embraced,
By the most mighty Monarch upon earth.
Ah that she knew her worth, and how unfit
That private woods should hide, that face, that wit.
Thus hath he often said, and this I say,
Observe him when you will, you shall not see
From his hye forehead, to his slender foot,
A man in all parts, better made then he.
Techne, me thinks, the praises that you give
Shows your own love, and if he be that man
You say, it were good you kept him for your self.
I must not love impossibilities,
Cloris, he were a most fit man for you.
For me? alas Techne you move too late.
Why have you past your promise t'any yet?
Yes sure, my promise is already past.
And if it be, I trust you are so wise
T'vnpasse the same again for your own good.
No that I may not when it is once past.
No Cloris, I presume that wit of yours.
That is so piersiue, can conceive how that
Our promise must not prejudice our good:
And that it is no reason that the tongue,
Tie the whole body to eternal wrong.
The tongue is but the Agent of the heart.
And only as commissioner allowed
By reason, and the will, for the whole state,
Which warrants all it shall negotiate.
But prithee tell me to what rustic Swain
You passed your word to cast away your self?
No I have past my word to save my self
From the deceitful, impious perjuries
Of treacherous men, and vowed unto my heart,
Until I see more faith then yet I see,
None of them all shall triumph over me.
Nay then, and be no otherwise tic well,
We shall have other time to talk of this.
But Cloris I have fitted you in faith,
I have here brought, the most conceited tyre,
The rarest dressing ever Nymph put on.
Worth ten of that you wear, that now me thinks
Doth not become you, and besides tic s•ale.
Stale why? I have not worn it scarce a month.
A month? why you must change thē twice a day.
Hold hither Cloris, this was not well laid,
Here is a fault, you have not mixed it well
To make it take, or else it is your haste
To come abroad so soon into the Ayre.
But I must teach you to amend these faults,
And ere I shall have done with you, I think,
I shall make some of these enamoured youths
To hang themselves, or else run mad for love.
But go let's try this dressing I have brought.
Mirtillus did Dorinda ever vow,
Or make thee any promise to be thine?
Palaemon no, she never made me vow,
But I did ever hope she would be mine.
For that I had delivered up my youth,
My heart, my all, a tribute to her eyes,
And had secured her of my constant truth,
Under so many faithful specialties,
As that although she did not grant again,
With any show the acquittance of my love
Yet did she ever feeme to entertain
My affections, and my services t'approoue.
Till now of late I know not by what mean,
(Ill fare that mean) she grew to that despite,
As she not only clouds her favours clean,
But also scorned to have me in her •gsight.
That now I am not for her love thus, moved
But only that she will not be beloved.
I• this be all th'occasion of thy grief,
Mirtillus, thou art then in better case
Then I supposed, and therefore cheer thy heart,
And good cause too, being in the state thou art.
For if thou did but hear the history
Of my distress, and whatpart I have shared
Of sad affliction, thou wilt then soon see
There is no misery unless compared.
For all Arcadia, all these hills, and plains,
These holts and woods and every Crystal spring.
Can testify my tears, and tell my flames,
And with how clean a heart, how clear a faith
Palaemon loved Siluia, and how long.
And when consumed with grief, and dri'd with care.
Even at the point to sacrifice my life
Unto her cruelty, then lo she yields,
And was content for ever to be mine:
And gave m'assurance underneath her hand,
Signed with a faithful vow, as I conceived,
And witnessed with many a lovely kiss,
That I thought sure I had attaine'd my bliss.
And yet (aye me) I got not what I got,
Siluia I have, and yet I have her not.
How may that be, Palaemon pray thee tell?
O know Mirtillus that I rather could
Run to some hollow cave, and burst and die
In darkness, and in horror, then unfold
Her shameful stain, and mine own infamy.
But yet it will abroad, her impudence
will be the trumpet of her own disgrace,
And fill the wide, and open mouth of fame
So full, as all the world shall know the same.
Why what is Siluia false, or is she gone?
Siluia is false and I am quite undone.
Ah out alas who ever would have thought,
That modest look, so innocent a face,
So chaste a blush, that shamefaced countenance,
Could ever have told how to wantonness?
Ah what shall we poor lovers hope for now
Who must to win, consume, and having won
With hard and much ado, must be undone?
Ah but Mirtillus if thou did know who
Is now the man, her choice hath lighted on,
How would thou wonder? for that passes all,
That I abhor to tell: yet tell I shall;
For all that would will shortly know it too well:
It is base Thyrsis that wild hare-braine youth
Whom every milkmaid in Arcadia skornes:
Thyrsis is now the man with whom she walks
Alone, in thickets, and in groves remote.
Thyrsis is all in all, and none but he,
With him she dally, under every tree.
Trust women? ah Mirtillus, rather trust
The Summer winds, th'Oceans constancy,
For all their substance is but le•itie:
Light are their waving veils, light their attires,
Light are their heads, and lighter their desires:
Let them lay on what coverture they will
Upon themselves, of modesty and shame,
They cannot hide the woman with the same.
Trust women? ah Mirtillus rather trust
The false devouring Crocodiles of Nile,
For all they work is but deceit and guile:
What have they but is faind? their hair is faind,
Their beauty feigned, their stature feigned, then pace,
Their gesture, motion, and their grace is feigned•
And if that all be feigned without, what then
Shall we suppose can be sincere within?
For if they do but weep, or sing, or smile,
Smiles, tears, and tunes, are engines to beguile.
And all they are, and all they have of grace,
Consists but in the out-side of a face.
O love and beauty, how are you ordained
Like unto fire, whose flames far of delight,
But if you be embraced consume vs quite?
Why cannot we make at a lower rate
A purchase of you, but that we must give
The treasure of our hearts, and yet not have
What we have bought so dearly for all that?
O Siluia if thou needs would have been gone,
Thou should have taken all away of thee;
And nothing least to have remained with me.
Thou should have carried hence the portraiture
Which thou hast left behind within my heart,
Set in the table-frame of memory,
That puts me still in mind of what thou were,
Whilst thou were honest, and thy thoughts were pure,
So that I might not thus in every place,
Where I shall set my careful foot, confer
With it of thee, and evermore be told,
That here sate Siluia underneath this tree,
And here she walked, and len't upon mine arm,
There gathred flowers, and brought them unto me.
Here by the murmour of this rustling spring,
She sweetly lay, and in my bosom slept:
Here first she showed me comforts when I pin'de:
As if in every place her foot had s•ept,
It had least Siluia in a print behind.
But yet, ô these were Siluias images,
Then whilst her heart held fair, and she was chaste,
Now is her face all sullied with her fact,
And why are not those former prints defaced?
Why should she hold, still in the form she was,
Being now deformed, and not the same she was?
O that I could Mirtillus lock her out
Of my remembrance, that I might no more
Have Siluia here, when she will not be here.
But good Palaemon, tell what proofs hast thou
Of her disloyalty, that makes thee show
These heavy passions, and to grieve so much?
Mirtillus, proofs, that are alas too plain;
For Colax one thou know can well observe
And judge of love, a man both staid, and wise,
A gentle herdsman, out of love, and care
He had of me, came and reported all:
And how he saw them divers times alone,
Embracing each the other in the woods,
Besides she hath of late with sullaine looks,
That showed disliking, shunt my company,
Kept her aloof, and now I think to day,
Is gone to hide her quite our of the way.
But Siluia though thou goo and hide thy face,
Thou can not •id thy shame, and thy disgrace,
No secret thicket, grove, nor yet close grotto,
Can cover shame, and that immodest blot.
Ah did thou lend thy hand in kind remorse,
To save me from one death, to give m'a worse?
Had it not ye• been better I had dyed,
By thy unspotted honest cruelty,
Then now by thy disgraced infamy?
That so I might have carried to my grave,
The image of chaste Siluia in my heart,
And not have had these notions, to engrave
A stained Siluia there, as now thou art?
Ah yes, it had been better far, I prove,
T'haue perished for thy love, then with thy love.
Ah good Palaemon cease these sad complaints,
And moderate thy passions, thou shalt see
She may return, and these reports be found
But idle fictions, on uncertain ground.
Mirtillus I perceive my tedious tale,
Begins to be distasteful to thine ear,
And therefore will I to some desert vale,
To some close Grove to wail, where none shall hear
But beasts, and trees, whose sense I shall not tyre,
With length of moan, for length is my desire.
And therefore, gentle Shepherd, now adieu,
And trust not women, for they are untrue.
Adieu Palaemon, and thy sad distress,
Shall make me way Dorindas loss the less:
For if I should be hers, and she prove so,
Better to be mine own, and let her go.
Now Melibaeus; who would have supposed,
That had not seen these impious passage•,
That ever monstrous wretch could have exposd,
Two honest hearts to these extremities,
T'attaine his wicked ends? by having wrought
First in, unto their easy confidence
Away, by an opinion to be thought,
Honest, discreet, of great experience.
Whereby we see open-fac•t villainy
Without a mask, no mischief could have done,
It was the coverture of honesty,
That laid the snare, whereby they were undone.
And that's the engine that confounds vs all,
That makes the breach whereby the world is saclet,
And made a prey to cunning, when we fall
Into the hands of wise dishonesty:
When as our weak credulity is racked
By that opinion of sufficiency,
To all the inconveniences that guile,
And impious craft can practise to beguile.
And note but how these cankers always seize
The choicest fruits with their infections,
How they are still ordained to disease,
The natures of the best complexions.
Tic true. And what an instrument hath he there got,
To be the Agent of his villainy?
How truly she negotiats, and doth plot,
To undermine frail imbecility.
How strong, these spirits, combine them in a knot,
To circum•ent plain open honesty?
And what a creature there is to converse
With feeble maids, whose weakness soon is led
With toys, and new disguises, to reverse
The cour•e wherein by custom they were bred?
And then what fitness too, her trade affords,
To traffic with the secrets of their heart,
And che•p•n their affections with fair words.
Which women straight to women will impart?
And then to see how soon example will
Disperse it self, being met with our desire:
How soon, it will •nkindle others ill,
Like Naptha, that takes fire by sight of fire?
So that unless we run with all the speed
We can, to quench this new arising flame.
Of vanity, and lust, it will proceed
T'vndoe vs, ere we shall perceive the same:
How far already is the mischief run,
Before we scarce perceived it was begun?
What my friend Lincus? now in troth well met.
Well met good Alcon, this falls happily,
That we two thus encounter all alone,
Who had not any conference scarce this month.
In troth I longed to hear how you proceed,
In your new practise, here among, these swains,
For you and I must grace each others Art;
Though you knew me, when I in Pa•ras dwelt,
And waited on a poor Physicians man,
And I knew you a Pronotories boy,
That wrote Indentu•es at the Town house door.
Yet are you here, now a great man of law,
And I a grave Physician •ull of skill,
And here we two are held the only men.
But how thrive you in your new practise now?
Alcon in troth not any thing to speak,
For these poor people of Arcadia here,
Are so contented each man with his own,
As they desire no more, nor will be drawn,
To any contestation, nor indeed
Is there yet any frame composed, whereby
Contention may proceed in practicke form?
For If they had this form once to contend,
Then would they brawl and wrangle without end.
For then might they be taught, and •cancelled how
To litigate perpetually you know;
And so might I be sure to doo some good:
But having here no matter where upon
To furnish real actions, as else where,
No tenures, but a cons•umarie hold
Of what they have from their progenitors
Common, with out indiuiduitie;
No purchasings, no contracts, no comerse,
No politi•que commands, no services,
No general Assemblies but to feast
And to delight themselves with fresh pastimes;
How can I hope that ever I shall thrive?
First possible that a society
Can with so little noise, and sweat subsist?
It seems it may, before men have transformed
Their state of nature in so many shapes
Of their own managements, and are cast out
Into confusion by their knowledges.
And either I must pack me hence, or el•
Must labour wholly to dissolve the frame,
And composition, of their strange b•ult state.
Which now I seek to doe, by drawing them
To appr'hend of these proprieties
Of mine and thine and teach them to in croch
And get them states apart, &amp; private shares.
And this I have already set a work
If it will take, for I have met with two
The aptest spirits the country yields, I know,
Mon•anus, and Acrisius, who are both
Old, and both choleric•e, and bothperuerse,
And both inchnable to A•arice
And if there quarrel hold, as tic begun
I do not doubt, but all the rest will on.
And if the worst should fall, if I could gain
The reputation but to arbitrate,
And sway their strifes, I would get well by that.
Tic marvel, that there long and easy peace
That fosters plenty, and gives nought to doe,
Should not with them beget contention too,
As well as other where we see it doth.
This peace of theirs, is not like others peace
Where craft lays trapps t'inrich it self with wiles,
And men make prey of men, and rise by spoils.
This rather seems a quiet then a peace.
For this poor corner of Arcadia here,
This little angle of the world you see,
Which hath shut out of door, all th'earth beside
And are barred up with mountains, and with rocks;
Hath had no intertrading with thereste
Of men, nor yet will have• but here alone,
Quite out of fortunes way, and underneath
Ambition, or desire, that ways them not
They live as if still in the golden age,
When as the world was in his pupillage.
But for mine own part, Alcon I protest
I envy them that they thus make themselves,
An everlasting holiday of rest,
Whilst others work, and I doe think it fit
Being in the world, they should be of the world,
And If that other states should doe this too
As God forbid, what should we Lawyers doe?
But I hope shortly yet, we shall have here
As many of vs as are other where:
And we shall sweat, and chafe, and tal•e as loud,
Brawl our selves hoarse, as well as they shall doe
At Patras, Sparta, Corinth or at Thebe•,
And be as arrogant and even as proud
And then twill be a world, and not before.
But how dost thou with thy profession frame?
No man can wish a better place then this
To practise in my art, for here they will
Be sick for company, they are so kind.
I have now twenty patients at this time,
That know not what they ail, no more doe I,
And they have physic all accordingly.
First Phillis got running at Barly-breake
A little cold, which I with certain druggs
I ministered, was thought to remedy,
Doris saw that, how Phillis physic wrought
(For Phillis had told her, she never took
So delicate a thing in all her life
That more revived her heart, and cleared her blood,)
Doris would needs be sick too, and take some.
Melina seeing that, she would the like,
And so she had the very same receipt,
For to say tree•th I have no more but that,
And one poor pill I use for great• cures.
But this is only sweet and delicate,
Fit for young women, and is like th'hearb Iohn,
Doth neither good nor hurt, but that's all one,
For if they but conceive it doth, it doth,
And it is that Physicians hold the chief
In all their cures, conceit, and strong belief:
Besides I am a stranger come from far
Which doth add much unto opinion too.
For who now but the Arabian or the Iewe
In foreign lands, are held the only men,
Although their knowledge be no more then mine.
It is true friend Alcon, he that hath once got
Th'Elixir of opinion hath got all,
And h'is th'man that turns his brass to gold.
Then can I talk of Gallon, Aucrois,
Hippocrates, Rasis, and Auicen
And books I never read, and use strange speech
Of Symptoms, Crisis, and the Critique days,
Of Trochiscs, Opiats, Apophilegmatismes,
Eclegmats, Embrochs, Lixiues, Cataplasmes,
With all the hideous terms, Art can devise,
T'amuse weak, and admiring ignorance
And that is right• my trick, I overwhelm
My practise too, with darkness, and strange words,
With Paragraphs, Condictions, Codicil•,
Acceptilations, Actions rescissorie,
Noxall, and Hypothecall, and involve
Domestic matter in a foreign phrase.
Then am I as abstruse and mystical
In Character, and giving my receipt
Observing still th'odd number in my pills,
And certain hours to gather and compound
My simples, and make all t'attend the Moon.
Then do I show what rare ingredients
I use for some great cures, when need requires,
The liver of a Wolf, the Lions gall,
The least side of a Mole, the Foxes heart,
The right foot of a Tortuse, Dragons blood,
And such strange savage stuff, as even the names
Are physic of them selves, to move a man.
And all the drugs I use, must come from far,
Beyond the Ocean, and the Sun at least,
Or else it hath no virtue Physical,
These home-bred simples do no good at all.
No, no, it must be foreign stuff, God wot,
Or something else, that is not to be got.
But now in faith I have found out a trick,
That will perpetually so feed their rheumes,
And entertain their idle weaknesses,
As nothing in the world could do the like,
For lately being at Corinth, it was my chance
T'incounter with a Sea-man, new arrived
Of Alexandria, who from India came,
And brought a certain herb wrapped up in rolls,
From th'l s•and of Nicosia, where it grows:
Infused I think in some pestiferous juice,
(Produced in that contagious burning clime,
Contrary to our nature, and our spirits)
Or else slept in the fuming sap, it self
Doth yield, t'inforce th'infecting power thereof,
And this in powder made, and fired, he sucks
Out of a little hollow instrument
Of calcinated clay, the smoke thereof:
Which either he conuayes out of his nose,
Or down into his stomach with a whiff.
And this he said a wondrous virtue had,
To pu•ge the head, and cure the great Cata••e,
And to dry up all other meaner rheumes,
Which when I saw, I straight way thought how well
This new fantastical devise would please
The foolish people here grown humeto•s.
And up I took all this commodity,
And here have taught them how to use the same.
And it is easy to bring in the use
Of any thing, though never so absurd,
When nations are prepared to all abuse,
And th'humour of corruption once is stirred.
Tic true, and now to see with what a strange
And gluttenous desire, th'exhaust the same
How infinite, and how in•atiably,
They doe devour th'intoxicating fume,
You would admire, as if their spirits thereby
Were taken, and enchanted, or transformed,
By some infused philter in the drug.
For whereas heretofore they wonted were
At all they• meetings, and their •eastiualls,
To pass the time in •ealing witty tales,
In questions, riddles, and in purposes,
Now do they nothing else, but sit and suck,
And spit and sla•er, all the time they sit.
That I go by, and laugh unto my self,
And think that this will one day make some work
For me or others, but I fear it will
B'another age will find the hurt of this.
But sure the time's to come, when they look back
On this, will wonder with themselves to think
That men of sense could ever be so mad,
To suck so gross a vapour, that consumes
Their spirits, spends nature, dries up memory,
Corrupts the blood, and in a vanity.
But Alcon peace, here comes a patien•, peace.
Lintus there doth indeed, therefore away.
Leave me alone, for I must now resume
My surly, grave, and Doctoral aspect.
This wench I know, tic Duphne who hath wronged
Her love Menalcas, and plaid fast and loose
With Colax, who reueald the whole to me.
Good Doctor Alcon, I am come to crave
Your counsel, to advise me for my health,
For I suppose, in •roth, I am not well,
Me thinks I should be sick, yet cannot tell:
Some thing there is amiss that troubles me,
For which I would take Physic willingly.
Welcome, fair nymph, come let me try your pulse.
I cannot blame you, •hold your self not well.
Some thing amiss quoth you, here's all amiss,
Th'whole Fabric of your self distempred is,
The Systole, and Dyastole of your pulse,
Do show your passions most hystoricall,
It seems you have not very careful been,
T'obserue the prophilactick regiment
Of your own body, so that we must now
Descend unto the Theraphentica•l;
That so we may prevent the syndrome
Of Symptoms, and may afterwards apply
Some analepticall Elexipharmacum,
That may be proper for your malady:
It seems fai•e Nymph you dream much in the night.
Doctor, I do indeed.
I know you doe,
You're troubled much with thought.
I am indeed.
I know you are.
You have great heaviness about your heart.
Now truly so I have.
I know you have.
You wake oft in the night.
In troth I do.
All this I know you doe.
And this unless by physic you prevent,
Think whereto it may bring you in the end.
And therefore you must first euacua•e
All those Colaxicall hot humour which
Disturb your heart, and then refrigerate
Your blood by some Menalchian Cordials,
Which you must take, and you shall straight find ease,
And in the morning I will visit you.
I pray Sir, let me take of that you gave,
To Phillis the other day, for that she said,
Did comfort wondrously, and cheer her heart.
Fair Nymph, you must, if you will use my art,
Let me alone, to give what I think good,
I knew what fitted Phillis malady,
And so, I think, I know what will serve you.
O what a wondrous skilful man is this?
Why he knows all? O God, who ever thought
Any man living, could have told so right
A women's grief in all points as he hath?
Why this is strange that by thy very pulse,
He should know all I aisle, as well as I.
Beside I fear he sees too m•ch in me,
More then I would that any man should see.
Me thought (although I could not well conceive
His words, he spake so learned and so strange)
He said I had misr•lt my body much,
As if he meant that in some wanton sort,
I had abused my body with some man.
O how should he know that what is my pulse
Become th'intelligencer of my shame?
Or are my looks the index of my heart?
Sure so he said, and me thought too, he named
Menalcas, or else some thing very like,
And likewise named that cunning treacherous wretch
That hath undone me, Colax, that vile devil,
Who is indeed the cause of all my grief,
For which I now seek physic, but ô what
Can physic doe, to cure that hideous wound
My lusts have given my Conscience? which I see
Is that which only is deseas'd with in
And not my body now, that's it doth so
Disquiet all the lodging of my spirits,
As keeps me waking, that is, it presents,
Those ugly forms of terror that affright
My broken sleeps, that lays upon my heart
This heavy load that weighs it down with grief;
And no disease beside, for which there is
No cure I see at all, nor no redress.
Did thou allege vile man to my weak youth,
How that those vows I made unto my love
Were bands of custom, and could not lay on
Those manacles on nature, which should keep
Her freedom prisoner by our dome of breath?
Oimpious wretch now nature gives the lie
To thy foul heart, and tells my grieved soul,
I have done wrong, to falsify that vow
I first to my dear love Menalcas made.
And says th'assurance and the faith is given
By band on earth, the same is sealed in heaven.
And therefore how Menalcas can these eyes
That now abhor to look upon my self,
Dare ever view that wronged face of thine,
Who hast relied on this false heart of mine?
First possible sweet Techne, what you say,
That Cloris is so witty, and so coy?
It is as I tell you, Colax, sh is as coy
And hath as shrewd a spirit, as quick conceit
As ever wench I brok'd in all my life.
Then there's some glory in attaining her;
Here now I shall be sure t'haue something yet
Besides dull beauti• I shall lie with wit.
For these fair creat•res, have such feeble spirits,
And are so languisli•ng, as gives no edge
To appetite, and lo••, but stuffs delight.
Well if yo 〈◊〉 her, then you shall be sure
To have your 〈◊〉 and yet perhaps that store,
You find in her, may check your longing more
Then all their wants whom you have tried before.
How? if I get her? what do you suppose,
I shall not get her, that were very strange.
Yes sir, she may be got, but yet I know
Sh'will put you to the trial of your wit.
Let me alone, could I find season fit
To talk with her in private, she were mine.
That season may you now have very well.
For Colax, 〈◊〉 hath 〈◊〉 faith fully
This evening late 〈◊〉 me at the cave
Of Erycina underneath the hill,
Where I must fit her with a new attire.
Where with she is far in love, and the other day
Thinking to try it at her fathers house,
(Whether I went with 〈◊〉 to deal for 〈◊〉
The old Acre 〈◊〉 was himself at home,
Which did in force vs to defer our work
Until this evening, that we might alone
There out of sight, more closely do the same:
Where while she stays (for I will make her stay
For me a while) you at your pleasure may
Have th'opportunitie which you desire,
O Techne thou hast blessed me, if I now
On this advantage conquer not her mind,
Let me be loathed, of all womankind.
And presently will I go suit my self
As bravely as I can, go set my looks
Arm my discourse, frame speeches passionate
And action both, fit for so great a work.
Techne a thousand thanks and so adieu.
Well Colax, she may yet deceive thy hopes,
And I persuade my self she is as like,
As any subtle wench was ever borne,
To give as wise a man as you the scorn:
But see where one whose faith hath better right
Unto her love then you, comes here forlorn
Like fortunes out-cast, full of heaviness.
Ah poor Amintas, would thou knew how much
Thou art esteemed, although not where thou would,
Yet where thou should have love in that degree,
As never living man had like to thee.
Ah see how I, who sets for others love,
Am took my self, and intricated here
With one, that hath his heart another where?
But I will labour to divert the stream
Of his affections, and to turn his thoughts
From that coy• Cloris, to the liberty
Of his own heart, with hope to make him mine.
Now fie Amyntas, why should you thus grieve
For a most foolish way ward girl, that scorns
Your honest love, and laughs at all you doe;
For shame Amyntas let her go as 〈◊〉
You see her vain, and how peruersly set,
It is fond so follow what we cannot get.
O Techne, Techne, though I never get,
Yet will I ever follow whilst I breath,
And if I perish by the way, yet shall
My death be pleasing that for her I die.
And one day she may hap to come that way,
(And be it, ô her way) where I shall lye,
And with her proud disdainful foo•e she may
Tread on my tomb, and say, lo where he lies,
The triumph, and the conquest of mine eyes.
And though I loose my self, and looso my tears,
It shall be glory yet that I was hers.
What have I done of late, should make her thus
My presence with that strange disdain to fly,
As if she did abhor my company?
Cloris God knows, thou hast no cause therefore,
Unless it be for loving more, and more.
Why thou we•t wont to lend me yet an ear,
And though thou would not help, yet would thou hear.
Perhaps she thinks thy heat will be allayed,
The fire being gone, and therefore doth she well
Not to be seen there where she will not aide.
Alas she knows no hand but hers can que•ch
That heat in me, and therefore doth she wrong
To fire my heart, and then to run away.
And if she would not aid, yet might she ease
My careful soul, if she would but stand by
And only look upon me while I die.
Well well Amintas, little dost thou know
With whom that cunning wanton sorts her self,
Whilst thus thou mourn, and with what secret wiles
She works, to meet her lover in the wo•des,
With whom in groves, and caves she •allying sitts,
And mocks thy passions, and thy doleful fits.
No Techne, no, I know that cannot be,
And therefore doe not wrong her modesty,
For Cloris loves no man, and that's some case
Unto my grief, and gives a hope that ye•
If ever soft affection touch her heart,
She will look back, and think on my desert.
If that be all, that hope is at an end,
For if thou wilt this evening but attend
And walk down under Ericinas grove,
And place thy self in some close secret bush,
Right opposite unto the hollow cave
That looks into the vallye, thou shalt see
That honesty, and that great modesty.
If I see Cloris there, I know I shall,
See nothing else with her, but modesty.
Yes something else will grieve your heart to see•
But you must be content, and think your self
Are not the first, that thus have benedeceiud,
With fair appearing out-sides, and mis•ooke
A wanton heart by a chaste steaming look.
But I con•ur you by the love you bear
Unto those eyes, which make you (as you are
Th'example of compassion to the world)
Sit close and be not seen in any case.
Well Techne, if I shall see Cloris there
It is enough, then thither will I go,
Who will go any where to look on her.
And Cloris know, I do not go to see,
Any thing else of thee, but only thee.
Well go and think yet of her honest care,
Who gives thee note of such a shameful dead,
And judge Amyntas when thou shalt be free,
Who more deserves thy love, or I or she.
Now what infernal proiects are here laid,
T'afflict an honest heart, t'expose a maid,
Unto the danger of alone aslault,
To make her to offend without her fault.
And see what other new appearing spirits
Would raise the tempests of disturbances,
Upon our rest, and labour to bring in
All the whole Ocean of unquietness,
To overwhelm the poor peace we live in?
How one would fine instruct, and teach vs how
To cut our throats with form, and to contend
With artificial knowledge, to undo
Each other, and to brabble without end.
As if that nature had not took more care
For vs, then we for our own selves can take,
And makes vs better laws then those we make.
And as if all that science ought could give
Unto our bliss, but only shows vs how
The better to contend, but not to live.
And evermore we see, how vice doth grow
With knowledge, and brings sorth a more increase,
When skilful men begin, how good men •ease.
And therefore how much better doe we live,
With quiet ignorance then we should doe
With turbulent and euer-working skill,
Which makes vs not to live but labour still.
And see that other vain fantastic spirit,
Who would corrupt out bodies too likewise,
As this our minds, and make our health to be
As trouolesome as sickness, to devise,
That no part of vs ever should be free;
Both foraging on our credulity,
Take still th'aduantage of our weaknesses;
Both cloth their frivolous uncertainties
In strange attires, to make it seen the less.
Amyntas must come back I know this way,
And here it will be best for me to stay,
And here, indeed he comes, poor man I site
All quite dismayed and now isle work on him.
Come, who tells troth Amynta, who deceives
Your expectation now, Cloris, or I?
Peace Techne peace, and doe not interrupt
The grief that hath no leisure to attend
Ought but itself, and hath shut up with it
All other sense in private close within,
From doing any thing, but only think.
Think? whereon should you think? you've thought ynow
And too too much, on such a one as she.
Whom now you see you've tried her honesty:
And let her go proud girl accordingly,
There's none of these young wanton things that know
How t'vse a man, or how to make their choice.
Or answer men's affections as they ought,
And if y' will think, think she is not worth a thought.
Good Techne, leave me for thy speech and sight
Bear both that disproportion to my grief,
As that they trouble, trouble and confound
Confusion in my sorrows, which doth loath
That sound of words, that answers not the tone
Of my despairs in accents of like moan,
And now hath sorrow no worse plague I see,
Then free and vnpartaking company.
Who are not in the fashion of our woes,
And whose affection do not look likewise
Of that complexion as our miseries?
And therefore pray thee leave me or else leave
To speak, or if thou speak let it not be
To me, or else let me, not answer thee.
Well I say nothing you know what you've seen.
Tic true I doe confess that I have seen
The worst the world can show me, and the worst
That can be ever seen with mortal eye.
I have beheld the whole, of all where in
My heart had any interest in this life;
To be disrent and torn from of my hopes,
That nothing now is least, why I should live:
That ostage I had given the world, which was
The hope of her that held me to hold truce
With it, and with this life is gone, and now
Well may I break with them, and break I will
And rend that pact of nature, and dissolve
That league of blood that ties me to my self.
For Cloris now hath thy immodesty
Infranchizd me, and made me free to die:
Which otherwise I could not least it might
Have been (some stain and some disgrace to thee.
Ah was it not ynow for this poor heart
T'indure the burden of her proud disdain?
That weighed it to the earth but that it must
Be crushed thus with th'oppression of her stain?
The first wound yet though it were huge and wide,
Yet was it cleanly made, it festered not,
But this now given, comes by a poysned shot,
Against all laws of honours that are pure,
And rankles deadly is without all cure.
Ah how she blushed when as she islued forth
With her enamoured ma•e out of the cave?
And well then might she blush at such a deed,
And with how wild a look she casts about
Her fearful eyes? as if her loathsome sin
Now coming thus into the open sight,
With terror did her guiltiness a•lright;
And up she treads the hill with such a pace,
As if she gladly would have out gone shame,
Which yet for all her hasting after came.
And at their coming forth, me thought I heard
The villain use my name, and she return
The same again in very earnest sort,
Which could be for no good I know to me,
But only that perhaps it pleased her then
To cast me up by this way of her mouth
From of her heart, least it might stuff the same.
But Cloris know thou shalt not need to fear,
I never more shall interrupt thy joys
With my complaints, nor more observe thy ways;
And ô I would thy heart could be as free
From sin and shame, as thou shalt be from me.
I could (and I have reason so to do)
Revenge my wrong upon that wicked wretch,
Who hath surprised my love, and robbed thy shame,
And make his blood th'oblation of my wrath
Even at thy feet, that thou might see th•a n•
To expiate, for this injustice donne,
But that the fact examined would display
Thy infamy abroad unto the world,
Which I had rather die then once bewray.
And Techne pray-thee, tell her thus from me,
But yet, ah tell it softly in her ear,
And be thou sure no living creature hear,
That her immodesty hath lost this day,
Two the most honest guardians of her good
She had in life, her honour, and my blo•d.
Now I may speak I trust you speak to me.
No not yet Techne, pray-thee stay a while,
And tell her too, though she spares not her shame,
My death shall show, that I respect her fame.
Then now I may.
O Techne no not yet.
And bid her not forget Amyntas faith,
Though she despised him, and one day yet
She may betoucht with grief, and that ere long,
To think on her dishonour, and his wrong.
Now Techne I have done, and so farewell.
But stay Amyntas, now must I begin.
I cannot stay Techne, let go your hold,
It is in vain I say, I must be gone.
Now dear Amyntas, hear me but one word.
Ah he is gone, and in that fury gone,
As sure he will in this extremity
Of his despair, do violence to himself:
And therefore now what help shall I devise
To stay his ruin? sure there is no means
But to call Cloris, and persuade with her
To follow him, and to prevent his death;
For though this practise was for mine own good,
Yet my deceipts use not to stretch to blood.
But now I know not where I should find out
That cruellmaide, but I must cast about.
Dorinda, you are yet in happy case,
You are beloved, you need not to complain;
It is I have reason only to bewail
My fortunes, who am cast upon disdain,
And on his rocky heart that wrackes my youth
With storms of sorrows, and contemns my truth;
It is I that am shut out from all delight
This world can yield a maid, that am removed
From th'onely joy on earth, to be beloved:
Cruel Carinus scorns this faith of mine,
And lets poor Amarillis grieve and pine.
•' is true indeed you say, I am beloved,
Sweet Amarillis, and perhaps much more
Then I would be: plenty doth make me poor.
For now my heart, as if divided stands
Betwixt two passions love, and pity both,
That draw it either way with that maine force,
As that I know not which to yield unto:
And then fear in the midst, holds m in suspense,
Least I loath both by mine improvidence.
How may that be Dorinda? you know this,
You can enjoy but one, and one there is
Ought to possess your heart, and love alone,
Who hunts two Hares at one time, catches none.
I must tell you dear friend the whole discourse
From whom I cannot any thing conceal,
Arcadia knows, and every Shepherd knows
How much Mirtillus hath deserved of me,
And how long time his woeful suit hath lain,
Depending on the mercy of mine eyes,
For whom I doe confess, pity hath been
The A•turn evermore that stands and pleads
Before my heart, the justice of his cause,
And says he ought have love, by loves own laws.
But now the moister sovereign Lord of hearts.
That great commander, and that tyrant love,
Who must have all according to his will,
Whom pity only Ushers goes before,
As lightning doth the thunder, he says no,
And will that Colax only have my heart,
That gallant herdsman full of skill and art:
And all experience of loves my steries:
To whom I must confess me to have given
The earnest of my love; but since that time
I never saw the man, which makes me much
To wonder that his dealings should be such:
For either love, hath in respect that I
Despised have the true and honest faith,
Of one that loved me with sincerity,
Made me the spoil of falsehood and contempt,
Or else perhaps the same is done to try,
My resolution, and my constancy?
But yet I fear the worst, and fear I may,
Least he now having got the victory,
Cares for no more; and seeing he knows my love
Turns towards him, he turns his back to me,
So that I know not what were best resolve,
Either to stand unto the doubtful faith
Of one that bath so dangerously begun,
Or else return• accept Mirtillus love,
Who will perhaps when mine begins have done
So that inwrapt in this distracted toil
I vex, and know not what to doe the while•
And therefore Amarillis I think sure,
(Se'ing now how others love in me hath proved)
You are most happy not to be beloved.
Now here between you two, kind loving souls,
I know there can be no talk but of love,
Love must be all the scope of your discourse,
Alas poor hearts, I wonder how you can
In this deceitful world think of a man.
For they doe nothing but make fools of you,
And laugh when they have done, and prove untrue.
Well Cloris well, reioye• that you are free,
You may be touched one day as well as we.
Indeed and I had like so this last night,
Had I not looked with such an angry eye,
And frowned so sour that I made love afraid,
There was a fellow needs forsooth, would have
My heart from me whether I would or not,
And had as great advantage one could have,
I tell you that he had me in a Cave.
What in a Cave? Cloris, how came you there?
Truly Dorinda I will tell you how.
By no art magique, but a plain devise
Of Techne, who would try her wit on me,
For she had promised me, to meet me there
At such an hour, and thither bring with her
A new strange dressing she had made for me,
Which there close out of sight, I should try on:
Thither went I poor fool, at th'houre decreed,
And there expecting Technes company,
In rushes steering Colax after me.
Whom sure she sent of purpose to the place,
And there with his affected apish grace
And strained speech, offering to seize on me,
Out rushed I from him, as indeed, amazed
At his so sudden and unexpected sight.
And after follows hee, vows, swears, protests
By all the gods, he never loved before
Any one living in the world but me,
And for me only, would he spend his life.
Alas and what am I forgotten then?
Why these were even the words he spake to me.
And then inueighes against Amintas love,
Vents his own parts, and his great knowledges,
And all so idle, as, in troth me thought
I never heard a man more vainly talk,
For so much as I heard, for up the hill
I went with such a pace and never staide
To give regard to any thing he said:
As at the last I scarce had least him breath
Sufficient to forswear himself with all.
Ah what hath then my silly ignorance done
To be deceiud, and mocked by such a one?
And when I had recovered up the hill,
I fairly ran away and least my man
In midst of his conjuring perjuries;
All empty to return with mighty loss
Of breath and labour, having cast away
Much foolish pains in tricking up him self
For this exploit, and goes without his game,
Which he in hope deuourd before he came.
And I too, mist my dressing by this means.
But I admire how any Woman can?
Be so unwise to like of such a man,
For I protest I see nought else but froth,
And shallow impudence, affected grace,
And some few idle practiced complement:
And all the thing he is, he is with out,
For affection strives but to appear,
And never is of substance, nor Sincere.
And yet this dare of falsehood hath beguiled
Athousand foolish wenches in his days.
The more wretch he, &amp; more hard hap was theirs.
Why doe you sigh Dorinda are you touched
With any of these passages of mine?
No truly not of yours, but I have cause
In my particular that makes me sigh.
Well well come on to put vs from this talk,
Let vs devise some sport to pass the time.
Faith I have no great list to any sport.
Nor I in troth it is farthest from my mind.
Then let vs tell old tales, repeat our dreams,
Or any thing rather then think of love.
And now you speak of dreams, in •roth last night
I was much troubled with a fearful dream.
And truly Amarillis so was I.
And now I doe remember too, I, had
A foolish idle dream, and this it was:
Me thought the fairest of Montanus lambs,
And one he loved the best of all his flock,
Was singled out, and chased b'a cruel cur,
And in his hot pursuit makes towards me,
(Me thought) for succour, and about me ran,
As if it begged my aid to save his life,
Which I long time deferrd, and still looked on,
And would not res•ue it, until at length
I saw it even quite wourtied out of breath,
And panting at my feet and could no more:
And then me thought, I took it up from death,
And cherished it with me, and brought it back.
Home to Montanus, who was glad to see
The poor recovered creature thus restored;
And I my self was greatly pleas•d, me thought,
That by my hand so good a deed Was wrought,
And Amarillis now tell vs your dream?
Me thought as I in Eremanthus walked
A fearful woolfe rushed forth from out a brake,
And towards me makes with open hideous 〈◊〉
From whom I ran with all the speed I could,
T'escape my danger, and t'ouertake
One whom I saw before, that might lend aid
To me distressed, but he, me thought did run
As fast from me, as I did from the beast.
I cried to him, (but all in vain) to stay;
The more I cried, the more he ran away;
And after I, and after me the Wolf,
So long, as I began to faint in mind,
Seeing my despair before, my death behind:
Yet ran I still, and lo, me thought, at length
A little he began to s•ack his pace,
Which I perceiving, put to all my strength
And ran, as if desire had winged my heals,
And in the end me thought recou'red him.
But never woman felt more joy it seemed
To overtake a man, then I did him,
By whom I escaped the danger I was in,
That when I waked, as presently I waked,
Touched with that sudden joy, which my poor heart
God knows, had not been used unto of late:
I found my self all in a moist faint sweat,
Which that affrighting horror did beget,
And though I were delivered of my fear,
And felt this joy, yet did the trembling last
Upon my heart, when now the fear was past.
This Amarillis may your good portend,
That yet you may have comfort in the end.
God grant I may, it is the thing I want.
And now Dorinda tell vs what you dreamt.
I dreamt, that having gone to gather flowers,
And weary of my work, reposing me
Upon a bank near to a Rivers side,
A subtle Serpent lurking in the grass.
Came secretly, and seizd on my left breast,
Which though I saw, I had no power to stir,
But lay me still, till he had eat a way
Into my bosom, whence he took my heart,
And in his mouth carrying the same away,
Returns, me thought again from whence he came,
Which I perceiving presently arose,
And after it most woefully I went,
To see if I could find my heart again,
And up and down, I sought but all in vain.
In troth it is no good luck to dream of Snakes,
One shall be sure t'heare anger after it.
And so it may be I have done to day.
Indeed and I have heard it never fails.
Come you are talking here in jollity,
Whilst I have sought you Cloris all about:
Come, come, good Cloris quickly come away.
What is the news? what have we now to doo,
Have you another Cave to send me too?
Ah talk no more of that but come away,
As ever you will save the woeful life
Of a distressed man that dyes for you.
Why what doth Colax whom you sent to me
Into the Cave, faint now with his repulse?
I sent him not, you would so wisely go,
In open sight, as men might see you go,
And trace you thither all the way you went.
But come, ah it is not he, it is the man
You ought to save; Amyntas is the man
Your cruelty, and rigour hath undone:
O quickly come, or it will be too late;
For it was his chance, and most unluckily,
To see both you and Colax, as you came
Out of the Cave, and he thinks verily
You are possessed by him; which so confounds
His spirits, and sinckes his heart, that sure h'is run
T'vndoe himself, and ô I fear it is done.
If it be done, my help will come too late,
And I may stay, and save that labour here.
Ah Cloris haste away, if this be so,
And doe not, if thou hast a heart of flesh,
And of a woman, stay and trifle time,
Go run, and save thine own, for if he die,
It is thine that dyes, his blood is shed for thee,
And what a horror this will ever be
Hereafter to thy guilty conscience, when
Years shall have taught thee wit, and thou shalt find
This deed instampt in bloody Characters,
Within the black records of thine own thoughts,
Which never will be razed whilst thou hast breath,
Nor yet will be forgotten by thy death.
Besides wide Fame, will Trumpet forth thy wrong,
And thou shalt be with all posterity,
Amongst the examples held of cruelty,
And have this savage deed of thine be made
A sullein subject for a Tragedy,
Entitled Cloris, that thereby thy name
May serve to be an everlasting shame;
And therefore go prevent so foul a stain.
Ah go, go Cloris, haste away with speed.
Why whether should I go? I know not where
To find him now, and if he doe this deed,
It is his error, and no fault of mine.
Yet pray thee Techne, which way went the man?
Come Cloris, I will show which way he went,
In most strange fury, and most desperate speed,
Still crying, Cloris, hast thou done this deed?
Why had not you staid? and persuaded him?
I could not stay him by no means I used.
Though all the means I could devise I used.
Well I will go, poor man, to seek him out,
Though I can do him else, no other good.
I know indeed he hath deserved my love,
And if I would like any, should be him,
So that I thought he would be true to me.
But thus my dream may now chance come to pass,
And I may happen to bring home indeed
Montanus son, Amyntas that dear Lamb
He loves so well, and by my gracious deed,
He may escape the danger he was in.
Which if I doe, and thereby doe enthral
My self, to free another misery,
Then will I sit and sigh, and talk of love
As well as you, and have your company.
For something I doe feel begin to move,
And yet I hope it is nothing else but fear;
Yet what know I? that fear may hap be love.
Well Techne come, I would not have him yet
To perish, poor Amyntas in this fit.
Well Cloris yet he may, for ought I see
Before you come, unless you make more haste.
Ah cruel maid, she little knows the grief
Of such a heart that's desperate of relief,
Nor understands she her own happiness,
To have so true a lover as he is.
And yet I see sh'is touched, if not too late,
For I perceived her colour come and go,
And though in pride she would have hid her woe,
Yet I saw sorrow look out at her eyes.
And poor Amyntas if thou now be gone,
Thou hast (like to the Bee that stinging dyes,
And in another wound least his own life)
Transpierced by thy death, that marble heart,
Which living thou, could touch by no desert.
And if thou shalt escape, thou hast survived
Her cruelty, which now repents her wrong,
And thou shalt by her favours be revived,
After the affliction thou hast suffered long.
Which makes me think, that time, and patience may
Intenerat at length the hardest heart,
And that I may yet after all my woe,
Live t'ouertake Carinus mercy too.
And here this sad distress of such a true,
And constant lover, overcome with grief,
Presents unto my guilty memory
The wrongs, Mirtillus hath endured of me.
And ô I would I knew now how he doth,
I fear he is not well, I saw him not
Scarce these three days, I marvel where he is,
And yet what need I marvel, who have thus
Chased him from me with frowns, and usage vile,
And fondly least the substance of his faith,
To catch the shadow of deceit and guile?
Was Colax he I thought the only man,
And is he now proved to be such a one?
O that I ever lent an easy ear,
Unto so false a wretches flatteries,
Whose very name I now abhor to hear,
And loath my self, for being so vnwife.
What shall I doe sweet Amarillis now,
Which way shall I betake me to recover
The loss of shame, and loss of such a lover?
Indeed Dorinda you have done him wrong,
But your repentance, and compassion now
May make amends, and you must learn to do
As I long time have done, endure and hope,
And on that turn of Fortunes Scene depend,
When all extremities must mend, or end.
Well, come Ergastus, we have seen ynow,
And it is more then time, that we prepare
Against this Hydra of confusion now,
Which still presents new hideous heads of fear:
And every hour we see begets new broils,
And intricates our youth in desperate toils.
And therefore let th'aduantage of this day,
Which is the great, and general hunting day
In Eremanthus, serve for this good deed•
And when we meet (as all of vs shall meet
Here in this place anon, as is decreed)
We will advise our Shepherds to intermit
That work, and fall to this imports vs more,
To chase out these wild mischiefs that doe lurk,
And worse infest, then the Eremanthian Boar,
O••ll Beasts else, which only spoil our fields,
Whilst these which are of more prodigious kinds,
Bend all their forces to destroy our minds.
And this occasion will be very fit
Now to be took, for one day lost may lose
More by example, then we shall reget
In thousands, for when men shall once disclose
The way of ill that lay unknown before,
Scarce all our pains will ever stop it more.
Man is a creature of a wilful head,
And hardly'is driven, but easily is lead.
Ah gentle Lelaps, pretty loving dog,
Where hast thou least thy moister, where is hee,
That great commander over thee and me?
Thou were not wont be far off from his feet,
And ô no more would I, were he so pleased;
But would as well as thou go follow him,
Through brakes, and thickers, over cliffs and rocks
So long as I had life to follow him,
Would he but look upon me with that eye
Of favour, as h'is used to look on thee.
Thou can be clapped, and strookt with that fair hand
That thrusts away my heart, and beats it back
From following him, which yet it ever will
And though he fly me I must after still.
But here he comes, me thought he was not far.
What mean you Amarillis in this sort
By taking up my dog to mar my sport?
My dear Carinus thou dost much mistake
I doe not mar thy sport, tic thou marrstmine,
And killst my joys with that hard heart of thine.
Thy dooge perhaps by some instinct doth know
How 〈◊〉 I am his masters creature too,
And kindly comes himself, and fawns on me
To show what you in nature ought to doe?
Fie Amarillis, you that know my mind
Should not me thinks this ever trouble me.
What is it troublesome to be beloved?
How is it then Carinus to be loathed?
If I had donne like Cloris, skornd your suit,
And spourn'd your passions, in disdainful sort,
I had been wooed, and sought, and highly prized,
But having n'other art to win thy love,
Save by discovering mine, I am despised.
As if you would not have the thing you sought,
Unless you knew, it were not to be got.
And now because I lie here at thy feet,
The humble booty of thy conquering eyes,
And lay my heart all open in thy sight,
And tell thee I am thine, and tell thee right.
And doe not sure my looks, nor cloth my words
In other colours, then my thoughts do wear,
But doe thee right in all, thou scorn me
As if thou did not love sincerity
Never did Crystal more apparently
Present the colour it contained with in
Then have these eyes, these tears, this tongue of mine,
Betrayed my heart, and told how much I'am thine.
Tic true I know you have too much betrayed
And more then fits the honour of a maid.
O if that nature hath not armed my breast
With that strong temper of resisting proof,
But that by treason of my weak complexion, I
Am made thus easy to the violent shot
Of passion, and th'affection I should not.
Me thinks yet you out of your strength and power,
Should not disdain that weakness, but should think
It rather is your virtue, as indeed
It is, that makes me thus against my kind,
T'vnlock my thoughs, and to let out my mind,
When I should rather die and burst with love
Then once to let my tongue to say, I love.
And if your worthy parts be of that power
To vanquish nature, and I must be won
Do not disdain the work when you have don,
For in contemmig me you do despise
That power of yours which makes me to be thus.
Now what ado is here with idle talk?
And to no purpose, for you know I have
Ingagd long since my heart, my love and all
To Cloris, who must have the same and shall.
Why there is no such odds twixt her and me,
I am a Nymph, tic known as well as she.
There is no other difference betwixt vs twain
But that I love, and she doth thee disdain.
No other reason can induce thy mind,
But only that which should divert thy mind.
I will attend thy flocks better then she,
And dress thy Bower more sweet, more daintily,
And cheerish thee with Salets, and with Fruits,
And all fresh dainties as the season suits;
I have more skill in heat bes, then she, by far,
I know which nourish, which restoring are:
And I will find Dictamnus for thy Goats,
And seek out Clauer for thy little Lambs,
And Tetrifoll to cheerish up their Dams.
And this I know, I have a better voice
Then she, though she perhaps may have more art,
But which is best; I have the faithfulst heart.
Besides Amyntas hath her love, I know,
And she begins to manifest it now.
Amyntas have her love? that were most strange•
When he hath gotten that, you shall have mine.
O dear Carinus, let me rest upon
That blessed word of thine, and I have done.
Well met Carinus, I can tell you news,
Your rival, poor Amyntas, hath undone
And spoiled himself, and lies in that weak case,
As we think never more to see his face.
Mirtillus, I am sorry t'heare so much:
Although Amyntas be competitor
In th'Empire of her heart, wherein my life
Hath chiefest claim, I doe not wish his death:
But by what chance, Mirtillus pray thee tell?
I will Carinus, though I grieve to tell.
As Titcrus, M•nalcas, and my self
Were placing of our toils (against anon
That we shall hunt) below within the straight,
Twixt Er•manthus, and Lycaeus mount,
We might perceive under a ragged cliff,
In that most uncouth desert, all alone,
Distressed Amyntas lying on the ground,
With his sad face, turned close unto the rock,
As if he loathd to see more of the world,
Then that poor space, which was twixt him and it:
His right hand stretched, along upon his side,
His least, he makes the pillor to support
His careful head, his Pipe he had hung up
Upon a Beach tree by, where he likewise
Had placed his Sheephooke, and his Knife, wherewith
He had incaru'd an woeful Elegy,
To show th'occasion of his misery.
His dog Molampus sitting by his side,
As if he were partaker of his woe:
By which we knew it was he, and to him went,
And after we had called, and shook him up,
And found him not to answer, nor to stir
And yet his eyes abroad, his body warm;
We took him up, and held him from the ground,
But could not make him stand by any means;
And sinking down again, we searched to see
If he had any wound, or blow, or wrench,
But none could find: at last by chance we spied
A little horn which he had slung aside,
Whereby we gest he had some poison took.
And thereupon we sent out presently
To fetch Vrania, whose great skill in herbs
Is such, as if there any means will be,
As I fear none will be, her only art
Must serve to bring him to himself again•
Indeed Vrania hath been known • have done
Most desperate cures, and peradventure may
Restore him yet, &amp; I doe wish she may.
But having there used all the help we could,
And all in vain, and standing by with grief,
(As we might well, to see so sad a sight)
(And such an worthy Shepherd in that plight)
We might perceive come running down the hill,
Cloris, and Techne, with what speed they could,
But Cloris had got ground, and was before,
And made more haste, as it concerned her more.
And nearer as she came, she faster went,
As if she did desire to have been there
Before her feet, too flow for her swift fear.
And coming to the place, she suddenly
Stopped, starts, and shrunk, and having made such haste
T'haue something done, now could she nothing doe.
Perhaps our presence might perplex her too,
As being ashamed that any eye should see
The new appearing of her naked heart,
That never yet before was seen till now.
And it is ill hap for me it was seen now.
For we perceived how Love and Modesty
With several Ensigns, strove within her cheeks
Which should be Lord that day, and charged hard
Upon each other, with their fresh supplies
Of different colours, that still came, and went,
And much disturbed her but at length dissolved
Into affection, down she casts her self
Upon his senseless body, where she saw
The mercy she had brought was come too late:
And to him calls; ô dear Amyntas speak,
Look on me, sweet Amyntas, it is I
That calls thee, sit is, that holds thee here,
Within those arms thou haste esteemed so dear.
And though that love were yet so young in her
As that it knew not how to speak, or what,
And that she never had that passion proved,
Being first a lover ere she knew she loved,
Yet what she could not utter, she supplied,
With her poor busy hands that rubbed his face,
Chafd his pale temples, wrung his fingers ends,
Held up his head, and pulled him by the hands,
And never least her work, nor ever ceased.
Alas the least of this regard before,
Might have help all, then when it was in her power,
T'haue saved his heart, and to revive his mind,
Now for all this, her mercy is unkind;
The good that's out of season, is not good.
There is no difference now twixt cruelty,
And the compassion thats not understood.
But yet at length, as if those dainty hands,
Had had a power to have awakened death,
We might perceive him move his heavy eyes,
Which had stood fixed all the whole time before,
And fastens them directly upon her.
Which when she saw, it struck her with that force,
As that it pierced through all the spirits she had,
Made all the powers and parts of her shrink up,
With that conuulsion of remorse and grief,
As out she shrunk, ô dear, ô my dear heart,
Then shrinks again, and then again cries out.
For now that look of his did shake her more,
Then death or any thing had done before,
That look did read t'her new conceiving heart,
All the whole tragic Lecture of his love,
All his sad sufferings, all his griefs, and fear,
And now in th'end what he had done for her.
And with that powerful force of moving too,
As all a world of words could never doe.
Ah what a silly messenger is Speech,
To be employed in that great Embassy
Of our affections, in respect of the eye?
Ah it is the silent rhetoric of a look,
That worker the league betwixt the states of hearts,
Not words I see, nor knowledge of the book,
Nor incantations made by hidden arts,
For now this look so melts her into tears,
As that she powered them down like thunder drops,
Or else did Nature taking pity now
Of her distress, employ them in that store,
To serve as veils, and to be interposde
Betwixt her grief and her, t'impeach her sight,
From that full view of sorrow thus disclosed.
And now with this came in Vrania there,
With other women, to employ their best
To save his life, if b'any means they can.
And so we came our way, being sent for now
About some conference for our hunting sports,
And with vs Techne comes, who is supposed,
T'haue been a special cause of much of this.
Alas this sad report doth grieve me much,
And I did never think, that Cloris had
So dearly loved him as I find she doth,
For by this act of hers I plainly see,
There will be never any hope for me.
There may for me, if now Carinus thou
Wilt stand but to thy word, as thou hast said.
Ah would to God Dorinda had been there,
T'haue seen but Cloris act this woeful part;
It may be, it might have deterred her heart
From cruelty, so long as she had lived.
And I am glad Carinus hath but heard
So much this day, for he may hap thereby
To have some feeling of my misery,
But for Dorinda never doubt at all,
She is more yours Mirtillus then you think.
Ah Amarillis. • I would that were true.
But lo where come our chiefest heardsmen now,
Of all Arcadia, we shall know more news.
You gentle Shepherds and inhabitors
Of these remote, and solitary parts
Of Montaynous Arcadiae, shut up here
Within these Rocks, those unfrequented Clefts,
The walls and Bulwarks of our liberty,
From out the noise of tumult, and the throng
Of sweating toil, rattling concurrencie,
And have continued still the same and one
In all successions from antiquity,
Whilst all the states on earth besides have made
A thousand revolutions, and have rolled
From change to change, and never yet found rest,
Nor ever bettered their estates by change.
You, I invoke this day in general,
To doe a work that now concerns vs all:
Least that we leave not to posterity,
The Arcadia that we found continued thus
By our forefathers care who least it vs.
For none of you I know, whose iudgment's grave
Can ought discern, but sees how much we are
Transformed of late, and changed from what we were;
And what distempers daily doe arise
Amongst our people, never felt before,
At which I know you marvel, as indeed
You well may marvel, whence they should proceed:
And so did good Ergastus here, and I,
Until we set our selves more warily
To search it out, which by good hap we have,
And found the Authors of this wickedness.
Which Devils attired here in the shape of men,
We have produced before you, to the end
You may take speedy order to suppress
Our growing follies, and their impiousnesse.
Indeed these odious wretches which you see,
Are they who have brought in upon our rest,
These new and unknown mischiefs of debate,
Of wanton pride, of scandalous reports,
Of vile deluding chaste and honest loves,
Of undeserved suspicious desperate griefs,
And all the sadness we have seen of late.
And first this man, this Lincus here you see,
Montanus you, and you Acrysius know,
With what deceit, and with what cunning art,
He entertained your strifes, abused you both,
By first persuading you that you had right
In your demands, and then the right was yours,
And would have made as many rights, as men
Had m••nes, or power, or will to purchase them;
Could he have once attained to his desires.
We doe confess our error, that we were
Too easily persuaded by his craft,
To wrangle for imagined titles, which
We here renounce, and quit for evermore,
And we desire the memory thereof
May dye with vs, that it be never known
Our feeble age hath such example shown.
And now this other strange impostor here,
This Alcon, who like Lincus hath put on,
The habit too of empty gravity,
To catch opinion, and conceit withal,
Comes here to set vs all at variance too,
With nature, as this other with our selves,
And would confound her, working with his art,
And labours how to make our minds first sick,
Before our bodies, and persuade our health
It is not well, that he may have thereby
Both it and sickness ever under cure.
And foreign druggs brings to distemper's here
And make vs like the wanton world abroad.
But there are two the most pernicious spirit;
The world I think did ever yet produce.
Colax and Techne, two such instruments
Of Wantonness, of Lust and treachery,
As are of power to entice and to debauch
The universal state of honesty.
But Techne who is that stands their by you,
What is your company increased of late?
Truly it is a very honest man
A friend of mine that comes to see me here.
He cannot then but be an honest man,
If he be one of your acquintance sure.
This man I found with them now since you went
Maintaining hot dispute with Titerus
About the rites, and mysteries of Pan.
H'is like to be of their associates then.
Techne, what is this secret friend of yours?
For-sooth he is a very holy man.
A very holy man? what is his name?
Truly his name Sir is Pistophoenax.
What is he maskt, or is that face his own?
He is not maskt, tic his complexion sure.
Techne we cannot credit thy report.
Let one try whether it be so or not,
O see a most deformed ugly face,
Wherewith if openly he should appear,
He would deter all men from coming ne'er.
And therefore hath that cunning wretch put on
This pleasing visor of apparencie,
T'intice and to delude the world withal;
So that you see with what strange engineers,
The project of our ruin is forecast.
How they implanted have their battery here,
Against all the maine pillors of our state,
Our Rites; our Customs, Nature, Honesty.
T'mbroyle, and to confound vs utterly,
Reckoning vs barbarous, but if thus their skill
Doth ciuilize let vs be barbarous still.
But now to show the horrible effects
Of Colax, and of Technes practises,
(Besides this last exploit they wrought upon,
Amyntas (who, poor youth, lies, now full weak:
Under Vranias cure, whose skill we hear
Hath yet recalled him to himself again)
We have sent out abroad into the woods,
For Siluia and Palamon two chaste souls
Whom they have tortured so with jealousy,
Of each the other, as they made them rue•
A part, to languish severally alone;
And we have sent for divers others too,
Whose hearts have felt what impious craft can do.
And here they come, and now you shall know all.
Come good Palaemon, and good Siluia come,
You have endured too much, and too too long.
Ah why Ergastus doo you set our names
So ne'er together, when our hearts so far,
Are distant from each other as they are?
Indeed whilst we were one as once we were,
And as we ought to be, were faith observed,
Palaemon should not have been named without:
A Siluia, nor yet Siluia without him.
But now we may Ergastus, we are two.
Siluia, there in the greater wrong you doe.
Palaemon, nay the greater wrong you doe.
Alas we know well where the wrong doth lie.
I know you doe, and all the world may know.
Siluia, you see your fault cannot be hid.
It is no fault of mine Palaemon, that
Your shame doth come to be revealed here;
I never told it you your self have not
Concealed your work so closely as you should.
But there stands one can tel what you have been.
Nay there he stands can tel what you have been.
And sure is now in public here produced
To testify your shame, but not set on
But me I doe protest, who rather would
Have did alone in secret with my grief
Then had your infamy discovered here.
wherein my shame, must have so great a share.
I have not sought to manifest your shame
Which Siluia, rather then have done I would
Have been content t'indure the worst of deaths,
I having such an interest in the same.
No Siluia, no Palaemon, I stand here
Not to accuse you but t'accuse my self
Of wrong, you both God knows are clear
I have abused your apt credulity,
With false reports of things that never were
And therefore here crave pardon for the same.
why Colax, did not Siluia entertain
The love of Thyrsis then as you told me?
Palaemon no, she never entertained
His love, nor wronged you as I ever knew.
But Colax you saw how Palaemon did
With Nice falsify his vow to me.
Siluia, by heaven and earth I swear not I,
But only faind it out of subtlety;
For some ungodly ends I had decreed.
O let not this be made some cunning bait
To take my griefs with false belief, for I
Had rather live with sorrow then deceit,
And still b'vndone, then to have such relief.
Ah let not this devise be wrought to guild
My bitterness, to make me swallow' it now,
That I might be another time beguiled
With confidence, and not trust what I know.
Ah Siluia now, how were I cleared of grief,
Had I the power to vnbeleeue belief.
But ah my heart hath dwelt so long in house
With that first tale, at this which is come new,
Cannot be put in trust with my desire
So soon, besides it is too good to be true.
Could I Palaemon but vnthinke the thought
Of the isle first heard, and that it were not so,
How blessed were I? but lo I see how doubt
Comes in far easier then it can g•t out.
And in these miseries of jealousy,
Our ear hath greater credit then our eye.
Stand not confused dear lovers any more,
For this is now the certain truth you hear,
And this vile wretch hath done you both this wrong.
First possible, and is this true you say,
And doe I live, and doe I see the day?
Ah then come Siluia, for I find this wound
That pierced into the center of my heart,
Hath let in love far deeper then it was.
If this be so, why then Palaemon know,
I likewise feel the love that was before
Most in my heart, is now become far more:
And now ô pardon me you worthy race
Of men, it I in passion uttered ought
In prejudice of your most noble sex;
And think it was m'agrieued error spake
It knew not what, transported so, not I:
And pardon me you glorious company
You stars of women, if 〈◊〉 raged 〈◊〉
Have ought profaned your reverent dignity,
And thou bright Pulls sovereign of at Nymph•,
The royal Mistress of our Pastoral Muse
And thou Diana honour of the wood•s
To whom I vow my songs, and vow my self,
Forgive me mine offence and be you pleased
T'accept of my repentance now therefore,
And grace me still, and I desire no more.
And now I would that Cloris knew this much
That so she might be vndeceiued too,
Whom I have made believe so ill of men.
But lo see where she comes, and as it seems
Brings her belief already in her hand
Prevents my act, and is confirmed before.
Look Cloris look, my fears have idle been,
Palaemon Loves me there is trust in men.
And Siluia I must now believe so too
Or else god help I know not what to doe.
Look here Mirtillus look what I told you
Is now proved false, and women they are •rue,
So I perceive Palaemon, and it seems
But vain conceit that other wise esteems.
Alas here comes my dear restored son
My lovely child Amyntas here is come.
And here is Cloris my dear daughter come
And looks as if she were affrighted still,
Poor soul, with fear, and with her sudden grief.
Lo here Montanus I have brought you home
Although with much ado, your son again
And sorry am with all my heart that I,
Have been the cause he hath endured so much.
And I restore him back again to you
Dear Cloris and doe wish you to forget
Your sorrows past, and pray the Gods you may
From henceforth lead your life with happy joy.
Do Cloris take him, and I wish as much.
Well then to make our joyful festivals
The more complete, Dorinda, we entreat
You also to accept Mirtillus love,
Who we are sure hath well deserved yours.
Although this be upon short warning, yet
For that I have been summoned before
By mine own heart, and his deserts to me
To yield to such a motion, I am now
Content t'accept his love, and will be his,
Dorinda then I likewise have my bliss
And reckon all the sufferings I have past
Worthy of thee to have this joy at last.
And you Carinus look on that good Nymph
Whose eye is still on you, as if she thought
Her sufferings too, deserved some time of joy
And now expects her turn, hath brought her lap
For comfort too whilst fortune deals good hap.
And therefore let her have it now poor soul
For she is worthy to possess your love.
I know she is, and she shall have my love,
Though Colax had persuaded me before
Never t'accept or to believe the love
Of any Nymph, and oft to me hath sworn
How he had tried them all, and that none were
As men, beguiled by shows, supposed they were:
But now I doe perceive his treachery,
And that they have both love and constancy.
O dear Carinus blessed be this good hour,
That I have lived to overtake at last
That heart of thine which fled from me so fast.
And Daphne, too me thinks your heavy looks
Show how that something is amiss with you.
Nothing amiss with me, but that of late
I took a fall, which some what grieves me yet.
That must advise you Daphne from henceforth
To look more war•lie unto your feet,
Which if you doe, no doubt but all will be well,
Then thus we see the sadness of this day
Is ended with the evening of our joy:
And now you impious spirits, who thus have raised
The hideous tempests of these miseries,
And thus abused our simple innocence,
We charge you all here presently t'auoyd,
From out our confines, under pain to be
Cast down, and dashed in pieces from these rocks,
And t'haue your odious carcasses deu••red
By beasts, being worse your selves then beasts to •
Well then come Techne, for I see we two
Must even be forced to make a marriage too.
And go to Corinth, or some City near,
And by our practise get our living there.
Which both together joined, perhaps we may:
And this is now the worst of miseries
Could come unto me, and yet worthily,
For having thus abused so many Nymphs,
And wronged the honour most irreverently
Of women, in that sort as I have done,
That now I'am forced to undergo therefore,
The worst of Plagues: To marry with a W.
But Lincus, let not this discourage vs,
That this poor people jealous of their rest,
Exile vs thus, for we no doubt shall find
Nations enough, that will most ready be
To entertain our skill, and cherish vs.
And worthier people too, of subtler spirits,
Then these unfashioned, and vncomb'd rude swain.
Yea and those Nations are far sooner drawn
T'all frivolous distractions then are these.
For oft we see, the gross doe manage things,
Far better then the subtle, cunning brings
Confusion sooner then doth ignorance.
Yea and I doubt not whilst there shall be found
Fantastic puling wenches in the world,
But I shall flourish, and live iollily,
For such as I by women must begin
To gain a name, and reputation win.
Which when we have attained to, you know then
How easily the women draw on men.
Nor do I doubt but I shall likewise live;
And thrive, where ever I shall plant my self;
For I have all those helps my skill requires,
A wrangling nature, a contesting grace,
A Clamorous voice, and an audacious face.
And I can cite the law t'oppugne the law,
And make the gloss to overthrow the text
I can allege, and vouch authority,
T'imbroyle the intent, and sense of equity:
Besides by having been a Notary,
And used to frame litigious instruments
And leave advantages for subtlety,
And strife to work on, I can so devise
That there shall be no writing made so sure
But it shall yield occasion to contest
At any time when men shall think it best,
Nor be thou checked with this Pistophoenax,
That at thy first appearing thou art thus
Discou'red here, thou shall along with vs,
And take thy fortune too, as well as we.
Tush Limus this can not discourage me,
For we that traffic with credulity,
And with opinion, still shall cherished bee.
But here your error was to enter first
And be before me, for you should have let
Me made the way, that I might have dislinkt
That chain of Zeal that holds in amity,
And called up doubt in their established rites,
Which would have made you such an easy way,
As that you might have brought in what you would,
Upon their shaken and discattered minds,
For our profession any thing refutes,
And ell's unsettled whereas faith disputes.
Now what a muttring keep you there, away
Be gone I say, and best too, whilst you may.
And since we have redeemed our selves so well
Out of the hands of mischief, let vs all
Exile with them their ill example too,
Which never more remains, as it begun,
But is a wicked sire t'a far worse son,
And stays not till it makes vs slaves unto
(That universal Tyrant of the earth
Custom) who takes from vs our privilege
To be our selves, reads that great charter too
Of nature, and would likewise cancel man:
And so inchaynes our judgments, and discourse
Unto the present vsances; that we
Must all our senses there unto refer,
Be as we find our selves, not as we are,
As if we had no other touch of truth
And reason then the nations of the times
And place wherein we live, and being our selves
Corrupted, and abastardized thus
Think all looks ill, that doth not look like vs.
And therefore let vs recollect our selves
Dispersed into these strange confused ill,
And be again Arcadians as we were
In manners and in habit as we were.
And so solemnize this our happy day,
Of restoration, with other feasts of joy.

GOod day, Gallants.
Good morrow, sweet Lodouico.
How doest thou Carolo.
Faith, as Physicians doe in a Plague, see the World sick, and am well my self.
Here's a sweet morning, Gentlemen.
Oh, a morning to tempt Jove frō his Ningle Ganimed, which is but to give Dary Wenches greene gowns as they are going a milking; what, is thy Lord stirring yet?
Yes, he will not be horsed this hour, sure.
My Lady swears he shall, for she longs to bee at Court.
Oh, wee shall ride switch and spur, would we were there once.
How now, is thy Lord ready?
No so crees sa me, my Lady will have some little Tyng in her polly first.
Oh, then they'll to breakfast.
Footman, does my Lord ride y'th Coach with my Lady, or on horseback?
No foot la, my Lady will have me Lord sheet wid her, my Lord will sheet in de one side, and my Lady sheet in de toder side.
My Lady sheet in de toder side: did you ever here a Rascal talk so like a Pagan? Is it not strange that a fellow of his star, should bee seen here so long in Italy, yet speak so from a Christian?
An Irishman in Italy! that so strange! why, the na∣tion have running heads.
Nay Carolo, this is more strange, I ha bin in France, theres few of them: Mary, England they count a warm chimney corner, and there they swarm like Crickets to the crevice of a Brew-house; but Sir, in England I have noted one thing.
What's that, what's that of England?
Mary this Sir, what's he yonder?
A poor fellow would speak with my Lord.
In England, Sir, troth I ever laugh when I think on it: to see a whole Nation should be marked in the forehead, as a man may say, with one Iron: why Sir, there all Costar∣mongers are Irishmen.
Oh, that's to show their Antiquity, as coming from Eve, who was an Apple-wife, and they take after the Mother.
Good, good, ha, ha.
Why then, should all your Chimny-sweepers like∣wise be Irishmen? answer that now, come, your wit.
Faith, that's soon answered, for S. Patrick you know keeps Purgatory, hee makes the fire, and his Country-men could doe nothing, if they cannot sweep the Chimneys.
Good again.
Then, Sir, have you many of them (like this fellow) (especially those of his hair) Footmen to Noblemen and o∣theirs, and the Knaves are very faithful where they love, by my faith very proper men many of them, and as active as the clouds, whirre, ho.
Are they so?
And stout! exceeding stout; Why, I warrant, this precious wild Villain, if hee were put to it, would fight more desperately then sixteen Dunkerkes.
The women they say are very fair.
No, no, our Country Bone Robes▪ oh! are the su∣grest delicious Rogues.
Oh, look, he has a feeling of them.
Not I, I protest, there's a saying when they com∣mend Nations: It goes, the Irishman for his hand, Welsh∣man for a leg, the Englishman for a face, the Dutchman for beard.
I faith, they may make swabbers of them.
The Spaniard, let me see, for a little foot (I take it) the
Frenchman, what a pox hath he? and so of the rest.
Are they at breakfast yet? come walk.
This Lodouico, is a notable tounged fellow.
Discourses well.
And a very honest Gentleman.
Oh! hoe's well valued by my Lord.
How now, how now, what's she?
Let's make towards her.
Will it be long, sir, ere my Lord come forth?
Would you speak with my Lord?
How now, what's this, a Nurses Bill? hath any here
got thee with child, and now will not keep it?
No sir, my business is unto my Lord.
Hoe's about his own wife now, he will hardly dis∣patch two causes in a morning.
No matter what he says, fair Lady, hoe's a Knight, there's no hold to be taken at his words.
My Lord will pass this way presently.
A pretty plump Rogue.
A good lusty bouncing baggage.
Doe you know her?
A pox on her, I was sure her name was in my Table∣book once, I know not of what cut her dye is now, but she has been more common then Tobacco: this is she that had the name of the Honest Whore.
Is this she?
This is the Blackamoor that by washing was turned white: this is the Birding Piece new scoured: this is she that (if any of her religion can be saved) was saved by my Lord Hipolito.
She has been a goodly creature.
She has bin! that's the Epitaph of all Whores, I'm well acquainted with the poor Gentleman her Husband, Lord! what fortunes that man has overreached? She knows not me, yet I have been in her company, I scarce know her, for the beauty of her cheek hath (like the Moon) suffered strange Eclipses since I beheld it: but women are like Med∣lars (no sooner ripe but rotten.)
A woman last was made, but is spent first,
Yet man is oft proved, in performance worst.
My Lord is come.
We ha wasted half this morning: morrow Lodouico.
Morrow Madam.
Let's away to Horse.
I, I to Horse, to Horse.
I doe beseech your Lordship, let your eye read ever this wretched Paper.
I'm in hast, pray the good womā take some apter time.
Good Woman doe.
Oh las! it does concern a poor mans life.
Life! sweet heart? Seat your self, Il'e but read this and come.
What stockings have you put on this morning, Ma∣dam? if they be not yellow, change them; that paper is a Letter from some Wench to your Husband.
Oh sir, that cannot make me jealous.
Your business, sir, to me?
Yes my good Lord.
Presently sir; are you Mathaeos wife.
That most unfortunate woman.
I'm sorry these storms are fallē on him, I love Mathaeo.
And any good shall doe him, hee and I.
Have sealed two bonds of friendship, which are strong
In me, how ever Fortune does him wrong;
He speaks here hoe's condemned. Is it so?
Too true.
What was he whom he killed? Oh, his name's here; old lacomo, son to the Florentine lacomo, a dog, that to meet profit, would to the very eyelids wade in blood of his own children. Tell Mathaeo, the Duke my father hardly shall deny his signed pardon, it was fair fight, yes if rumours tongue go true, so writes he here.
To morrow morning I return from Court;
Pray be you here then. Isle have done sir straight:
But in troth say, are you Mathaeos wife?
You have forgot me.
No, my Lord.
Your Turner,
That made you smooth to run an even bias,
You know I loved you when your very soul
Was full of discord: art not a good wench still?
Vmph, whē I had lost my way to heaven, you shewedit:
I was new borne that day.
S'foot, my Lord, your Lady asks if you have not left
your Wench yet? When you get in once, you never have done: come, come, come, pay your old score, and send her packing, come.
Ride softly on before, Isle oretake you.
Your Lady swears she'll have no riding on before, without ye.
Prithee good Lodonico.
My Lord pray hasten.
I come: to morrow let me see you, fare you well: commend me to Mathaeo: pray one word more: Does not your father live about the Court?
I think he does, but such rude spots of shame
Stick on my cheek, that he scarce knows my name.
Orlando Friscabaldo, Is it not?
Yes my Lord.
What does he for you?
All he should: when Children
From duty start, Parents from love may swerve.
He nothing does: for nothing I deserve.
Shall I join him unto you, and restore you to wonted grace?
It is impossible.
It shall be put to trial: fare you well:
The face I would not look on I sure then it was rare,
When in despite of grief, it is still thus fair.
Now, sir, your business with me.
I am bold to express my love and duty to your Lordship in these few leaves.
A Book!
Yes my good Lord.
Are you a Scholar?
Yes, my Lord, a poor one.
Sir, you honour me.
Kings may be Scholars Patrons, but faith tell me,
To how many hands besides hath this bird flown,
How many partners share with me?
Not one in troth, not one: your name I held more dear,
I'm not (my Lord) of that low Character.
Your name I pray?
Antonio Georgio.
Of Millan?
Yes my Lord.
Isle borrow leave
To read you o'er, and then we'll talk: till then
Drink up this gold, good wits should love good wine,
This of your loves, the earnest that of mine.
How now, sir, whore's your Lady, not gone yet?
I fart di Lady is run away from dee, a mighty deal of ground, she sent me back for dine own sweet face, I pray dee come my Lord away, wut tow go now?
Is the Coach gone?
Saddle my Horse the sorrel.
A pox a de Horses nose, he is a lousy rascally fellow, when I came to gird his belly, his scurvy guts rum∣bled, di Horse farted in my face, and dow know, an Irish∣man cannot abide a fart, but I have saddled de Hobby-horse, di fine Hobby is ready, I pray dee my good sweet Lord, wit tow go now, and I will-runne to de Devil before dee?
Well, sir, I pray lets see you Master Scholar.
Come I pray dee, wut come sweet face? Go.
Gods so, Gentlemen, what doe we forget?
What?
Are not we all enjoined as this day, Thursday is it not? I as that day to be at the Linnen-drapers house at din∣ner?
Signior Candido, the patient man.
Before Jove, true, upon this day hoe's married.
I wonder, that being so stung with a Wasp be∣fore, he dares venture again to come about the eaues a∣amongst Bees.
Oh it is rare sucking a sweet Hony-combe; pray Heaven his old wife be buried deep enough, that she rise
not up to call for her dance, the poor Fiddlers Instruments would crack for it, she would tickle them: at any hand lets try what mettle is in his new Bride, if there be none, we'll put in some; troth it's a very noble Citizen, I pity he should marry again, Isle walk along, for it is a good old fellow.
I warrant, the Wives of Millan would give any fellow twenty thousand Ducats, that could but have the face to beg of the Duke, that all the Citizens in Millan might be bound to the peace of patience, as the Linnen-draper is.
Oh fie upon it, it would undo all vs that are Court∣ers, we should have no who with the wenches then.
My Lord's come.
How now, what news?
None.
Your Lady is with the Duke her Father.
And we'll to them both presently, whoe's that?
Signior Friscabaldo.
Friscabaldo, oh! pray call him, and leave me, wee two have business.
Ho Signior! Signior Friscabaldo.
The Lord Hipollito.
My Noble Lord: my Lord Hipollito! the Dukes Son! his brave Daughters brave Husband! how does your honoured Lordship! does your Nobility remember so poor a Gentleman as Signior Orlando Friscabaldo! old mad Orlando!
Oh sir, our friēds! they ought to be unto vs as our Jew∣else, as dearly valued, being locked up, &amp; unseen, as when we wear them in our hands. I see, Friscabaldo, age hath not command of your blood, for all Times sickle has gone over you, you are Orlando still.
Why my Lord, are not the fields mowen and cut
down, and stripped bare, and yet wear they not pied coats again? tho my head be like a Leek, white: may not my heart be like the blade, greene?
Scarce can I read the Stories on your brow,
Which age hath writ there, you look youthful still.
I eat Snakes, my Lord, I eat Snakes.
My heart shall never have a wrinkle in it, so long as I can cry
Hem with a clear voice.
You are the happier man, sir.
Happy man! Isle give you (my Lord) the true picture of a happy man; I was turning leaves over this morning, and found it, an excellent Italian Painter drew it, If I have it in the right colours, Isle bestow it on your Lordship.
I stay for it.
He that makes gold his wife, but not his whore,
He that at noone-day walks by a prison door,
He that 'ith Sun is neither beam nor moat,
He that's not mad after a Petticoat,
He for whom poor men's curses dig no grave,
He that is neither Lords nor Lawyers slave,
He that makes This his Sea, and That his Shore,
He that in's Coffin is richer then before,
He that counts Youth his Sword, and Age his Staff,
He whose right hand carves his own Epitaph,
He that upon his death-bead is a Swan,
And Dead, no Crow, he is a happy man.
It's very well, I thank you for this Picture.
After this Picture (my Lord) doe I strive to have my face drawn:
For I am not covetous,
Am not in debt,
Sit neither at the Dukes side,
Nor lie at his feet.
Winching and I have done, no man I wrong,
No man I fear, no man I fee;
I take heed how far I walk, because I know yonders my home.
I would not die like a rich man, to carry nothing away save a winding sheet:
But like a good man, to leave Orlando behind me.
I sowed leaves in my Youth, and I reap now Books in my Age.
I fill this hand, and empty this, and when the bell shall toll for me, if I prove a Swan &amp; go singing to my nest, why so?
If a Crow! throw me out for carrion, &amp; pick out mine eyes,
May not old Friscabaldo (my Lord) be merry now! ha?
You may, would I were partner in your mirth.
I have a little,
Have all things;
I have nothing; I have no wife, I have no child, have no chick, and why should not I be in my Iocundare?
Is your wife then departed?
She's an old dweller in those high Countries,
Yet not from me,
Here, she's here: but before me, when a Knave and a Queen are married, they commonly walk like Sergeants together: but a good couple are seldom parted.
You had a Daughter too sir, had you not?
Oh my Lord! this old Tree had one Branch, (and but one Branch growing out of it) It was young, it was fair, it was straight; I prumde it daily, dressed it carefully, kept it from the wind, helped it to the Sun, yet for all my skill in planting, it grew crooked, it bore Crabs; I hewed it down,
What's become of it, I neither know, nor care.
Then can I tell you whats become of it;
That Branch is witherd.
So it was long ago.
Her name I think was Bellafront, she's dead.
Ha? dead?
Yes, what of her was left, not worth the keeping,
Even in my sight was thrown into a Grave.
Dead! my last and best peace go with her, I see deaths a good trencherman, he can eat course homely meat,
as well as the daintiest.
Why, Friscabaldo, was she homely?
O my Lord! a Strumpet is one of the Devils Vines; all the sins like so many Poles are stuck upright out of hell, to be her props, that she may spread upon them. And when she's ripe, every Slave has a pull at her, then must she be pressed. The young beautiful Grape sets the teeth of Lust on edge, yet to taste that lickrish Wine, is to drink a mans own damnation. Is she dead?
Shoe's turned to earth.
Wot she were turned to heaven; Vmh, is she dead! I am glad the world has lost one of his Idols; no Whore∣monger will at midnight beat at the doors; In her grave sleep all my shame, and her own; and all my sorrows, and all her sins.
I'm glad you are wax, not marble; you are made
Of mans best temper, there are now good hopes
That all these heaps of
Ice about your heart,
By which a fathers love was frozen up,
Are thawed in these sweet showers fetched from your eyes,
We are ne'er like Angels till our passion dyes,
She is not dead, but lives under worse fate,
I think she's poor, and more to clip her wings,
Her Husband at this hour lies in the Jail,
For killing of a man, to save his blood,
Join all your force with mine: mine shall be shown,
The getting of his life preserves your own.
In my daughter you will say! does she live then?
I am sorry I wasted tears upon a Harlot, but the best is I have a handkercher to drink them up, soap can wash them all out again.
Is she poor?
Trust me, I think she is.
Then she's a right Strumper; I ne'er knew any of their trade rich two years together; Siues can hold no
water, nor Harlots hoard up money; they have many vents, too many sluices to let it out; Taverns, Taylors, Bawds, Panders, Fiddlers, Swaggerers, Fools and Knaves, doe all waite upon a common Harlots trencher: she is the Gally∣pot to which these Drones fly: not for love to the pot, but for the sweet sucket within it, her money, her money.
I almost dare pawn my word, her bosom gives warmth to no such Snakes; when did you see her?
Not seventeen Summers.
Is your hate so old?
Older; it has a white head, and shall never dye till she be buried,
Her wrongs shall be my bedfellow.
Work yet his life, since in it lives her fame.
No, let him hang, and half her infamy departs out of the world: I hate him for her; he taught her first to taste poison; I hate her for her self, because she refused my Physic.
Nay but Friscabaldo.
I detest her, I defy both, she's not mine, she's.
Hear her but speak.
I love no Marcmaides, Isle not be caught with a quail pipe.
You're now beyond all reason.
I am then a Beast. Sir, I had rather be a beast, and not dishonour my creation, then be a doting father, &amp; like Time, be the destruction of mine own brood.
Is it dotage to relieve your child being poor?
Is it fit for an old man to keep a whore?
It is charity too.
It is foolery; relieve her!
Were her cold limbs stretched out upon a Beer,
I would not sell this dirt under my nails
To buy her an hours breath, nor give this hair,
Unless it were to choke her.
Fare you well, for Isle trouble you no more.
And fare you well sir, go thy ways, we have few
Lords of thy making, that love wenches for their honesty; Las my Girl! art thou poor? poverty dwells next door to despair, there's but a wall between them; despair is one of hells Catch-poles; and lest that Devil arrest her, Isle to her, yet she shall not know me; she shall drink of my wealth, as beggars doe of running water, freely, yet never know from what Fountains head it flows. Shall a silly bird pick her own breast to nourish her young ones, and can a father see his child starve? That were hard; The Peli∣can does it, and shall not I. Yes, I will victual the Camp for her, but it shall be by some stratagem; that knave there her husband will be hanged I fear, Isle keep his neck out of the noose if I can, he shall not know how.
How now knaves, whither wander you?
To seek your Worship.
Stay, which of you has my purse, what money have you about you?
Some fifteen or sixteen pounds, sir.
Give it me, I think I have some gold about me; yes, it's well; leave my Lodging at Court, and get you home. Come sir, tho I never turned any man out of doors, yet Isle be so bold as to pull your Coat over your ears.
What doe you mean to doe sir?
Hold thy tongue knave, take thou my Cloak, I hope I play not the paltry Merchant in this bartring; bid the Steward of my house, sleep with open eyes in my absence, and to look to all things, whatsoever I command by Letters to be done by you, see it done. So, does it sit well?
As if it were made for your Worship.
You proud Varlets, you need not bee ashamed to wear blue, when your Master is one of your fellows; away, doe not see me.
This is excellent.
I should put on a worse suite too; perhaps I will.
My Vizard is on, now to this mask. Say I should shave off this Honour of an old man, or tie it up shorter; Well, I will spoil a good face for once. My beard being off, how should I look? even like
A Winter Cuckoo, or vnfeatherd Owl;
Yet better lose this hair, then lose her soul.
O Gentlemen, so late, you're very welcome, pray sit down.
Carolo, did ere see such a nest of Caps?
Me thinks
It's a most civil and most comely sight.
What does he 'ith middle look like?
Troth like a spire steeple in a Country Village overpeering so many thatched houses.
It's rather a long pike staff against so many buck∣lers without pikes; they sit for all the world like a pair of Organs, and hoe's the tall great roaring pipe'ith midst.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
What's that you laugh at, Signiors?
Troth shall I tell you, and aloud Isle tell it,
We laugh to see (yet laugh we not in scorn)
Amongst so many Caps that long Hat worn.
Mine is as tall a felt as any is this day in Millan, and therefore I love it, for the block was cleft out for my head, and fits me to a hair.
Indeed you are good observers, it shows strange.
But Gentlemen, I pray neither contemn,
Nor yet deride a civil ornament;
I could build so much in the round Caps praise,
That love this hye roof, I this flat would raise.
Prithee sweet Bridegroom do it.
So all these guests will pardon me, Isle do it.
With all our hearts.
Thus then in the Caps honour,
To every Sex and state, both Nature, Time,
The Countries laws, yea and the very Clime
Doe allot distinct habits, the spruce Courtier
Jets up and down in silk: the Warrior
Marches in buff, the Clown plods on in gray:
But for these upper garments thus I say,
The Sea-man has his Cap, par'd without brim,
The Gallants head is featherd, that fits him;
The Soldier has his Murren, women ha Tires;
Beasts have their head-peeces, and men ha theirs.
Proceed.
Each degree has his fashion, it's fit then,
One should be laid by for the Citizen,
And that's the Cap which you see swells not hye,
For Caps are Emblems of humility;
It is a Citizens badge, and first was worn
By the Romans; for when any Bondmans turn
Came to be made a Freeman: thus it was said,
He to the Cap was called; that is, was made
Of Rome a Freeman, but was first close shorn,
And so a Citizens hair is still short worn.
That close shaving made Barbers a Company,
And now every Citizen uses it.
Of Geometricke figures the most rare,
And perfect'st are the Circle and the square,
The City and the School much build upon
These figures, for both love proportion.
The City Cap is round, the Scholars square.
To show that Government and learning are
The perfect'st limbs in the body of a State:
For without them, ell's disproportionate.
If the Cap had no honour, this might rear it,
The Reverend Fathers of the Law doe wear it.
It's light for Summer, and in cold it sits
Close to the scull, a warm house for the wits;
It shows the whole face boldly, it is not made
As if a man to look on it were afraid,
Nor like a Drapers shop with broad dark shed,
For hoe's no Citizen that hides his head.
Flat Caps as proper are to City Gowns,
As to Armours Helmets, or to Kings their Crowns.
Let then the City Cap by none be scorned,
Since with it Princes heads have been adorned.
If more the round Caps honour you would know,
How would this long Gown with this steeple show?
Ha, ha, ha: most vile, most ugly.
Pray Signior pardon me, it was done in jest.
A cup of claret wine there.
Wine: yes forsooth, wine for the Bride.
You ha well set out the Cap, sir.
Nay, that's flat.
A heaith.
Since his Cap's round, that
Shall go round. Be bare,
For in the Caps praise all of you have share.
The Bride's at cuffs.
Oh, peace I pray thee, thus far off I stand, I spied the error of my servants, she called for Claret, and you filled out Sack; that cup give me, it is for an old mans back, and not for hers. Indeed it was but mistaken, ask all these else.
No faith, it was but mistaken.
Nay, she took it right enough.
Good Luke reach her that glass of Claret.
Here, Mistress Bride, pledge me there.
Now Isle none.
How now?
Look what your Mistress ails.
Nothing, sir, but about filling a wrong glass, a scurvy trick.
I pray you hold your tongue, my servant there tells me she is not well.
Step to her, step to her.
A word with you: doe ye hear? This wench (your new wife) will take you down in your wedding shoes, unless you hang her up in her wedding garters.
How, hang her in her garters?
Will you be a rame Pigeon still? shall your back be like a Tortoise shell, to let Carts go over it, yet not to break? This Shee-cat will have more lives then your last Pusse had, and will scratch worse, and mouse you worse: look toot.
What would you have me doe, sir?
What would I have you doe? Swear, swagger, brawl, fling; for fighting it's no matter, we ha had knocking Pusses enough already; you know, that a woman was made of the rib of a man, and that rib was crooked. The Moral of which is, that a man must from his beginning be crooked to his wife; be you like an Orāge to her, let her cut you never so fair, be you sour as vinegar; will you be ruled by me?
In any thing that's civil, honest, and just.
Have you ever a Prentices suite will fit me?
I have the very same which my self wore.
Isle send my man for it within this half hour, and within this two hours Isle be your Prentice: the Hen shall not ouercrow the Cock, Isle sharpen your spurs.
It will be but some jest, sir.
Only a jest: farewell, come Carolo:
We'll take our leaves, Sir, too.
Pray conceit not ill of my wives sudden rising. This young Knight, Sir Lodouico, is deep seen in Physic, and he tells me, the disease called the Mother, hangs on my wife, it is a vehement heaving and beating of the Stomach, and that swelling did with the pain thereof cramp up her arm, that hit his lips, and brake the glass: no harm, it was no harm.
No, Signior, none at all.
The straightest arrow may fly wide by chance.
But come, we'll close this brawl up in some dance.
Oh my sweet Husband, were thou in thy grave, and art alive again? O welcome, welcome.
Doest know me? my cloak prithee lay it up. Yes faith, my winding sheet was taken out of Lavender, to be stuck with Rosemary, I lacked but the knot here, or here; yet if I had had it, I should ha made a wry mou•h at the world like a Playse: but sweetest villain, I am here now, and I will talk with thee soon.
And glad am I you are here.
Did these heals caper in shackles? A my little plump rogue, Isle bear up for all this, and fly hye. Catzo Catzo.
Matheo?
What say, what say? Oh brave fresh ayre, a pox on these Grates and jingling of Keys, and rattling of Iron, Isle bear up, Isle fly hye wench, hang Toss.
Matheo, prithee make thy prison thy glass,
And in it view the wrinkles, and the scars,
By which thou were disfigured, viewing them, mend them.
Isle go visit all the mad rogues now, and the good roaring boys.
Thou doest not hear me?
Yes faith doe I.
Thou hast been in the hands of misery, and tan strong Physic, prithee now be sound.
Yes. S'foot, I wonder how the inside of a Tavern looks now. Oh when shall I bizle, bizle?
Nay see, you are thirsty still for poison, come, I will not have thee swagger.
Honest Apes face.
It is that sharpened an axe to cut thy throat.
Good Love, I would not have thee sell thy substance
And time (worth all) in those damned shops of Hell;
Those Dicing houses, that stand never well,
But when they stand most ill, that foure-squared sin
Has almost lodged vs in the beggars Inn.
Besides (to speak which even my soul does grieve)
A sort of Ravens have hung upon thy sleeve,
And fed upon thee: good Mat. (if you please) so base as
Scorn to spread wing amongst these;
By them thy fame is speckled, yet it shows
Clear amongst them; so Crows are fair with Crows.
Custom in sin, gives sin a lovely dye.
Blackness in Mores is no deformity.
Bellafront, Bellafront, I protest to thee, I swear, as I hope my soul, I will turn over a new leaf, the prison I confess has bit me, the best man that sails in such a Ship, may be lousy.
One knocks at door.
Isle be the Porter: they shall see, a Jail cannot hold a brave spirit, Isle fly hye.
How wilde is his behaviour! oh, I fear
He's spoiled by prison, he's half damned comes there,
But I must sit all storms: when a full sail his
Fortunes spread, he loved me: being now poor,
Isle beg for him, and no wife can doe more.
Come in pray, would you speak with me, sir?
Is your name Signior Matheo?
My name is Signior Matheo.
Is this Gentlewoman your wife, sir?
This Gentlewoman is my wife, sir.
The Destinies spin a strong and even thread of both your loves: the Mothers own face, I ha not forgot that, I'm an old man, sir, &amp; am troubled with awhoreson salt rhew me, that I cannot hold my water. Gentlewoman, the last man I served was your Father.
My Father? any tongue that sounds his name,
Speaks Music to me: welcome good old man.
How does my father? lives he? has he health?
How does my father? I so much doe shame him,
So much doe wound him, that I scarce dare name him.
I can speak no more.
How now old Lad, what doest cry?
The rheum still, sir, nothing else; I should be well second, for mine eyes lye in brine: look you, sir, I have a suite to you.
What is it my little white pate?
Troth, sir, I have a mind to serve your Worship.
To serve me? Troth, my friend, my fortunes are, as a man may say—
Nay look you, sir, I know when all sins are old in vs, and go upon Crutches, that Covetousness does but then lie in her Cradle; It is not so with me. Lechery loves to dwell in the fairest lodging, and Covetousness in the oldest buildings, that are ready to fall: but my white head, sir, is no Inn for such a gossip. If a Serving-man at my years be not stored with biscuit enough, that has sailed about the world to serve him the voyage out of his life, and to bring him East-home; Ill pity but all his days should be fasting days: I care not so much for wages, for I have scraped a handful of gold together; I have a little money, sir, which I would put into your Worships hands, not so much to make it more.
No, no, you say well, thou say well; but I must tell you: How much is the money, say thou?
About twenty pound, Sir.
Twenty pound? Let me see: that shall bring thee in, after ten per centum, per annum.
No, no, no, sir, no; I cannot abide to have money in∣gender: fie upon this silver Lechery, fie; if I may have meat to my mouth, and rags to my back, and a flock-bed to snort upon, when I die, the longer liver take all.
A good old Boy, in faith, if thou serve me, thou shalt eat as I eat, drink as I drink, lye as I lye, and ride as I ride.
That's if you have money to hire horses.
What doest thou think on it? This good old
Lad here shall ser•e me.
Alas, Matheo, wilt thou load a back
That is already broke?
Peace, pox on you, peace, there's a trick in it, I fly hye, it shall be so, Front. as I tell you: give me thy hand, thou shalt serve me in faith: welcome: as for your money—
Nay, look you sir, I have it here.
Pesh, keep it thy self, man, and then you are sure it is safe.
Safe! and it were ten thousand Ducats, your Worship should be my cash-keeper; I have heard what your Worcester∣ship is, an excellent dunghill Cock, to scatter all abroad: but Isle venture twenty pounds on's head.
And did thou serve my Worshipful Father-in-law, Signior Orlando Friscabaldo, that mad man once?
I served him so long, till he turned me out of doors.
It's a notable Chuff, I ha not seen him many a day.
No matter and you ne'er see him: it's an arrant Gran∣die, a Churl, and as damned a cut-throat.
Thou villain, curb thy tongue, thou art a Iudas,
To sell thy Masters name to slander thus.
Away Ass, he speaks but truth, thy father is a—
Gentleman.
And an old knave, there's more deceit in him then in sixteen Poticaries: it's a Devil, thou moist beg, starve, hang, damn; does he send thee so much as a cheese?
Or so much as a Gammon of Bacon,
He will give it his Dogs first.
A Jail, a Jail.
A Jew, a Jew, sir.
A Dog.
An English Mastiff, sir.
Pox rot out his old stinking garbage.
Art not ashamed to strike an absent man thus?
Art not ashamed to let this wild Dog bark,
And bite my Father thus? Isle not endure it;
Out of my doors, base slave.
Your doors! a vengeance? I shall live to cut that old rogues throat, for all you take his part thus.
He shall live to see thee hanged first.
Gods so my Lord, your Lordship is most welcome, I'm proud of this, my Lord.
Was bold to see you.
Is that your wife?
Yes sir.
Isle borrow her lip.
With all my heart, my Lord.
Who's this, I pray sir?
My Lord Hipollito: what's thy name?
Pacheco.
Pacheco, fine name; Thou see, Pacheco, I keep company with no Scondrels, nor base fellows.
Came not my Footman to you?
Yes my Lord.
I sent by him a Diamond and a Letter,
Did you receive them?
Yes my Lord, I did.
Read you the letter?
O'er and o'er it is read.
And faith your answer?
Now the time's not fit,
You see, my Husbands here.
Isle now then leave you,
And choose mine hour; but ere I part away,
Hark, you remember I must have no nay.
Matheo, I will leave you.
A glass of wine.
Not now, Isle visit you at other times.
You're come off well then?
Excellent well, I thank your Lordship: I owe you my life, my Lord; and will pay my best blood in any service of yours.
Isle take no such dear payment, hark you Matheo, I know, the prison is a gulf, if money run low with you, my purse is yours: call for it.
Faith my Lord, I thank my stars, they send me down some; I cannot sink, so long as these bladders hold.
I will not see your fortunes ebb, pray try.
To starve in full barnes were fond modesty.
Open the door, sir.
Drink this, and anon I pray thee give thy Mistress this.
O Noble Spirit, if no worse guests here dwell,
My blue coat sits on my old shoulders well.
The only royal fellow, he's bounteous as the Indies,
what's that he said to thee, Bellafront?
Nothing.
I prithee good Girl?
Why I tell you nothing.
Nothing? it's well: tricks, that I must be behol∣den to a scald hot-liuerd gotish Gallant, to stand with my cap in my hand, and veil bonnet, when I ha spread as lofty sails as himself, wud I had been hanged. Nothing▪ Pa∣checo, brush my cloak.
Where is it, sir?
Come, we'll fly hye.
Nothing? there is a whore still in thine eye.
My twenty pounds flies high, O wretched woman,
This varlot's able to make Lucrece common.
How now Mistress? has my Master dyed you into this sad colour?
Fellow, be gone I pray thee; if thy tongue itch after talk so much, seek out thy Master, you are a fit instrument for him.
Zownes, I hope he will not play upon me?
Play on thee? no, you two will fly together,
Because you are roving arrows of one feather.
Would thou would leave my house, thou ne'er shalt
Please, me weave thy nets ne'er so hye,
Thou shalt be but a spider in mine eye.
You are rank with poison, poison tempered well,
Is food for health; but thy black tongue doth swell
With venom, to hurt him that gave thee bread,
To wrong men absent, is to spurn the dead.
And so did thou thy Master, and my Father.
You have small reason to take his part; for I have heard him say five hundred times, you were as arrant a whore as ever stiffened tiffany neckcloths in water-starch upon a Saturday 'ith afternoon.
Let him say worse, when for the earths offence
Hot vengeance through the marble clouds is driven,
Is it fit earth shoot again those darts at heaven?
And so if your Father call you whore, you'll not call him old knave: Friscabaldo, she carries thy mind up and down; she's thine own flesh, blood, and bone; troth Mi∣stress, to tell you true, the fireworks that ran from me upon lines against my good old Master, your father, were but to try how my young Master, your Husband loved such squibs: but it's well known, I love your father as my self; Isle ride for him at mid-night, run for you by Owle-light; Isle dye for him, drudge for you; Isle fly low, and Isle fly hye (as my Master says) to doe you good, if you'll forgive me.
I am not made of marble: I forgive thee.
Nay, if you were made of marble, a good Stone∣cutter might cut you: I hope the twenty pound I delivered to my Master, is in a sure hand.
In a sure hand I warrant thee for spending.
I see my young Master is a madcap, and a bonus socius, I love him well, Mistress: yet as well as I love him, Isle not play the knave with you; look you, I could cheat you of this purse full of money; but I am an old Lad, and I scorn to cunny-catch: yet I ha been Dog at a Cony in my time.
A purse, where had it?
The Gentleman that went away, whispered in mine care, and charged me to give it you.
The Lord Hipollito?
Yes, if he be a Lord, he gave it me.
It is all gold.
It is like so: it may be, he thinks you want money, and therefore bestows his alms bravely, like a Lord.
He thinks a silver net can catch the poor,
Here's bait to choke a Nun, and turn her whore.
Wilt thou be honest to me?
As your nails to your fingers, which I think no∣for deceived you.
Thou to this Lord shalt go, commend me to him,
And tell him this, the Town has held out long,
Because (within) it was rather true, then strong.
To sell it now were base; Say it is no hold
Built of weak stuff, to be blown up with gold.
He shall believe thee by this token, or this; if not, by this.
Is this all?
This is all.
Mine own Girl still.
A Star may shoot, not fall.
A Star? nay, thou art more then the moon, for thou hast neither changing quarters, nor a man standing in thy circle with a bush of thorns. Is it possible the Lord Hipollito, whose face is as civil as the outside of a Dedicato∣rye Book, should be a Muttonmunger? A poor man has but one Ewe, and this Grandy Sheepe-biter leaves whole Flocks of fat Weathers (whom he may knock down) to devour this. Isle trust neither Lord nor Butcher with quick flesh for this trick; the Cuckoo I see now sings all the year, though every man cannot hear him, but Isle spoil his notes; can neither Loue-letters, nor the Devils common Pick-lockes (Gold) nor Precious Stones make my Girl draw up her Percullis: hold out still, wench.
All are not Bawds (I see now) that keep doors,
Nor all good wenches that are marked for Whores.
Come, come, come, what doe ye lack, sir? what
doe ye lack, sir? what is it ye lack, sir? is not my Worship well suited? did you ever see a Gentleman better disguised?
Never, believe me, Signior.
Yes: but when he has bin drunk, there be Print∣ces would make mad Gallants, for they would spend all, and drink, and whore, and so forth; and I see we Gallants could make mad Prentices. How does thy wife like me? Nay, I must not be so saucy, then I spoil all: pray you how does my Mistress like me?
Well: for she takes you for a very simple fellow.
And they that are taken for such, are commonly the arrantest knaves: but to our Comedy, come.
I shall not act it, chide you say, and fret,
And grow impatient: I shall never do it.
S'blood, cannot you doe as all the world does? counterfeit.
Were I a Painter, that should live by drawing no∣thing but Pictures of an angry man, I should not earn my colours; I cannot do it.
Remember you're a Linen Draper, and that if you give your wife a yard, she'll take an ell: give her not there∣fore a quarter of your yard, not a nail.
Say I should turn to Ice, and nip her love now it is but in the blood.
Well, say she's nipped.
It will so ouerchange her heart with grief,
That like a Cannon, when her sighs go off,
She in her duty either will recoil,
Or break in pieces and so dye: her death,
By my unkindness might be counted murder.
Dye? never, never; I doe not bid you beat her, nor give her black eyes, nor pinch her sides: but cross her humours. Are not Bakers arms the skales of Justice? yet is not their bread light? and may not you I pray bridle her with a sharpe bit, yet ride her gently?
Well, I will try your pills, doe you your faithful service, and bee ready still at a pinch to help me in this
part, or else I shall be out clean.
Come, come, Isle prompt you.
Isle call her forth now, shall I?
Doe, doe, bravely.
Luke, I pray bid your Mistress to come hither.
Luke, I pray bid your Mistress to come hither.
Sir, bid my wife come to me: why, when?
Presently, sir, she comes.
La you, there's the echo, she comes.
What is your pleasure with me?
Mary wife,
I have intent, and (you see) this stripling here,
He bears good will and liking to my trade,
And means to deal in Linen.
Yes indeed, sir, I would deal in Linen, if my Mi∣stress like me so well as I like her?
I hope to find him honest, pray good wife look that his bed and chamber be made ready.
You're best to let him hire me for his maid? I look to his bed? look too't your self.
Even so
I swear to you a great oath.
Swear, cry Zounds.
I will not, go to wife, I will not,
That your great oath?
Swallow these gudgeons.
Well said.
Then fast, then you may choose.
You know at Table
What tricks you played, swaggerd, broke glasses! Fie,
Fie, fie, fie: and now before my Prentice here
You make an ass of me; thou, (what shall I call thee?)
Even what you will.
Call her arrant whore.
Oh fie, by no means, then she'll call me Cuckold, sirrah, go look to'th shop: how does this show?
Excellent well, Isle go look to the shop, sir. Fine
Cambrics, Lawns, what doe you lack.
A cursed Cowes milk I ha drunk once before,
And it was so rank in taste, Isle drink no more.
Wife, Isle tame you.
You may, sir, if you can,
But at a wrestling I have seen a fellow
Limbed like an Ox, thrown by a little man.
And so you'll throw me. Reach me (Knaves) a yard.
A Yard for my Master.
My Master is grown valiant.
Isle teach you fencing tricks.
Rare, rare; a prize.
What will you doe, sir?
Mary, my good Prentice, nothing but breathe my wife.
Breathe me with your yard?
No, he'll but measure you out, forsooth.
Since you'll needs fence, handle your weapon well,
For if you take a yard, Isle take an ell.
Reach me an ell.
An ell for my Mistress.
Keep the laws of the Noble Science, sir, &amp; measure weapons with her; your yard is a plain Heathenish weapon; it is too short, she may give you a handful, &amp; yet you'll not reach her.
Yet I ha the longer arm, come fall too't roundly,
And spare not me (wife) for Isle lay it on soundly.
If o'er husbands their wives will needs be Masters,
We men will have a law to win't at wasters
It is for the breeches, is it not?
For the breeches.
Husband I am for you, Isle not strike in jest.
Nor I.
But will you sign to one request?
What's that?
Let me give the first blow.
The first blow, wife, shall I? Prompt?
Let her ha'te.
If she strike hard, in to her, and break her pate.
A bargain. Strike.
Then guard you from this blow,
For I play all at legs, but it is thus low.
Behold, I am such a cunning Fencer grown,
I keep my ground, yet down I will be thrown
With the least blow you give me, I disdain
The wife that is her husbands Sovereign.
She that upon your pillow first did rest,
They say, the breeches wore, which I detest.
The tax which she imposed upon you, I abate you,
If me you make your Master, I shall hate you.
The world shall judge who offers fairest play;
You win the breeches, but I win the day.
Thou winced the day indeed, give me thy hand,
Isle challenge thee no more: my patient breast
Plaid thus the Rebel, only for a jest:
Here's the rank rider that breaks Colts, it is he
Can tame the mad folks, and cursed wives.
Who, your man?
My man? my Master, tho his head be bare,
But he's so courteous, he'll put off his hair.
Nay, if your service be so hot, a man cannot keep his hair on, Isle serve you no longer.
Is this your Schoolmaster?
Yes faith, wench, I taught him to take thee down: I hope thou can take him down without teaching; you ha got the conquest, and you both are friends.
Bear witness else.
My Prentiship then ends.
For the good service you to me have done,
I give you all your years.
I thank you Master.
Isle kiss my Mistress now, that she may say,
My man was bound, and free all in one day.
From whom says thou?
From a poor Gentlewoman, Madam, whom I serve.
And whats your business?
This, Madam: my poor Mistress has a waste piece of ground, which is her own by inheritance, and left to her by her mother; There's a Lord now that goes about, not to take it clean from her, but to enclose it to himself, and to join it to a piece of his Lordships.
What would she have me doe in this?
No more, Madam, but what one woman should doe for another in such a case. My Honourable Lord, your Husband would doe any thing in her behalf, but she had rather put her self into your hands, because you (a woman) may doe more with the Duke your Father.
Where lies this Land?
Within a stones cast of this place; my Mistress, I think, would be content to let him enjoy it after her decease, if that would serve his turn, so my Master would yield too: but she cannot abide to hear that the Lord should meddle with it in her life time.
Is she then married? why stirs not her Husband in it?
Her Husband stirs in it under hand: but because the other is a great rich man, my Master is loath to be seen in it too much.
Let her in writing draw the cause at large:
And I will move the Duke.
It is set down, Madam, here in black and white already: work it so, Madam, that she may keep her own without disturbance, grievance, molestation, or meddling of any other; and she bestows this purse of gold on your La∣dyship.
Old man, Isle plead for her, but take no fees:
Give Lawyers them, I swim not in that flood,
Isle touch no gold, till I have done her good.
I would all Proctors Clerks were of your mind, I should law more amongst them then I doe then; here, Ma∣dam, is the survey, not only of the Manor it self, but of
the Grange house, with every Meadow pasture, Plough-land, Cony-borough, Fish-pond, hedge, ditch, and bush that stands in it.
My Husbands name, and hand and seal at arms to a Loue-letter? Where had thou this writing?
From the foresaid party, Madam, that would keep the foresaid Land out of the foresaid Lords fingers.
My Lord turned Ranger now?
You're a good Huntress, Lady, you ha found your Game already; your Lord would fine be a Ranger, but my Mistress requests you to let him run a course in your own Park, if you'll not do it for love, then do it for money; she has no white money, but there's gold, or else she prays you to ring him by this token, and so you shall be sure his nose will not be rooting other men's pastures.
This very purse was woven with mine own hands,
This Diamond on that very night, when he
Entire my Virgin girdle, gave I him:
And must a common Harlot share in mine?
O•d man, to quit thy pains, take thou the gold.
Not I, Madam, old Serving-men want no money.
Cupped himself was sure his Secretary,
These ••nes are even the Arrows Love let flies,
The very Ink dropped out of Uenus eyes.
I doe not think, Madam, but hee fetched off some Poet or other for those lines, for they are parlous Hawks to fly at wenches.
Here's honied poison, to me he ne'er thus writ,
But Lust can set a double edge on wit.
Nay, that's true, Madam, a wench will whet any thing, if it be not too dull.
Oaths, promises, preferments, Jewels, gold,
What snares should break, if all these cannot hold?
What creature is thy Mistress?
One of those creatures that are contrary to man; a woman.
What manner of woman?
A little tiny woman, lower then your Ladyship by head and shoulders, but as mad a wench as ever unlaced a petticoat: these things should I indeed have delivered to my Lord your Husband.
They are delivered better: Why should she send back these things?
Ware, ware, there's knavery.
Strumpets like cheating gamesters will not win
At first: these are but baits to draw him in.
How might I learn his hunting hours?
The Irish Footman can tell you all his hunting hours, the Park he hunts in, the Doe he would strike, that Irish Shackatory beats the bush for him, and knows all; he brought that Letter, and that Ring; he is the Carrier.
Know thou what other gifts have past between them?
Little S. Patrick knows all.
Him Ise examine presently.
Not whilst I am here, sweet Madam.
Be gon then, &amp; what lies in me command.
Come hither sir, how much cost those Satins, and cloth of Silver, which my husband sent by you to a low Gentlewoman yonder?
Faat Satins? faat Siluers, faat low Gentlefolkes? dow prate dow know not what, yfaat la.
She there, to whom you carried letters.
By dis hand and bod dow say true, if I did so, oh how? I know not a letter a de Book yfaat la.
Did your Lord never send you with a Ring, sir, set with a Diamond?
Never, sa crees sa me, never; he may run at a tow∣sand rings yfaat, and I never hold his stirrup, till he leap in∣to de saddle. By S. Patrick, Madam, I never touch my Lords Diamond, nor ever had to doe, yfaat la, with any of his pre∣cious stones.
Are you so close, you Bawd, you pondering slave?
How now? why Infaelice? what's your quarrel?
Out of my sight, base varlet, get thee gone.
Away you rogue.
Slawne loot, fare de well, fare de well. Ah marragh frofat boddah breen.
What, grown a fighter? prithee what's the matter?
If you'll needs know, it was about the clock: how works the day, my Lord, (pray) by your watch?
Lest you cuff me, Isle tell you presently: I am near two.
How, two? I am scarce at one.
One of vs then goes false.
Then sure it is you,
Mine goes by heavens Dial, (the Sun) and it goes true.
I think (indeed) mine runs somewhat too fast.
Set it to mine (at one) then.
One? it is past:
It is past one by the Sun.
Faith then belike,
Neither your clock nor mine does truly strike,
And since it is uncertain which goes true,
Better be false at one, then false at two.
You're very pleasant, Madam.
Yet not merry.
Why Infaelice, what should make you sad?
Nothing my Lord, but my false watch, pray tell me,
You see, my clock, or yours is out of frame,
Must we upon the Workman lay the blame,
Or on your selves that keep them?
Faith on both.
He may by knavery spoil them, we by sloth,
But why talk you all riddle thus? I read
Strange Comments in those margins of your looks:
Your cheeks of late are (like bad printed Books)
So dimly charactred, I scarce can spell,
One line of love in them. Sure ell's not well.
All is not well indeed, my dearest Lord,
Locke up thy gates of hearing, that no sound
Of what I speak ma• enter.
What means this?
Or if my own tongue must my self betray,
Count it a dream, or turn thine eyes away,
And think me not thy wife.
Why doe you kneel?
Earth is sins cushion: when the sick soul feels her self growing poor, then she turns beggar, cries and kneels for help; Hipollito (for husband I dare not call thee) I have slolne that Jewel of my chaste honour (which was only thine) and given it to a slave.
Ho?
On thy pillow adultery &amp; lust have sl•pt, thy Groom
Hath climbed the unlawful tree, and plucked the sweets,
A villain hath usurped a husbands sheets.
S'death, who, (a Cuckold) who?
This Irish Footman.
Worse then damnation, a wild Kern, a Frog, a Dog: whom Isle scarce spurn. Longed you for Shamocke? were it my fathers father (heart) Isle kill him, although I take him on his death-bed gasping twixt heaven and hell; a shag-haired Cur? Bold Strumpet, why hangest thou on me? think Isle be a Bawd to a Whore, because she's Noble?
I beg but this,
Set not my shame out to the worlds broad eye,
Yet let thy vengeance (like my fault) soar hye,
So it be in darkened clouds.
Darkened! my horns
Cannot be darkened, nor shall my revenge.
A Harlot to my slave? the act is base,
Common, but foul, so shall thy disgrace:
Could not I feed your appetite? oh women
You were created Angels, pure and fair;
But since the first fell, tempting Devils you are,
You should be men's bliss, but you prove their rods.
Were there no women, men might live like gods:
You ha been too much down already, rise,
Get from my sight, and henceforth shun my bed,
Isle with no Strumpets breath be poisoned.
As for your Irish Lubrican, that spirit
Whom by prepostrous charms thy lust hath raised
In a wrong Circle, him Isle damn more black
Then any Tyrants soul.
Hipollito?
Tell me, did thou bait Hawks to draw him to thee, or did he bewitch thee?
The slave did woo me.
Two woos in that Skreech-owles language? Oh who would trust your corcke-heeld sex? I think to sate your lust, you would love a Horse, a Bear, a croaking Toad, so your hot itching veins might have their bound, then the wild Irish Dart was thrown. Come, how? the manner of this fight.
It was thus, he gave me this battery first. Oh I
Mistake, believe me, all this in beaten gold:
Yet I held out, but at length this was charmed.
What? change your Diamond wench, the act is base,
Common, but foul, so shall not your disgrace:
Could not I feed your appetite? Oh Men,
You were created Augels, pure and fair,
But since the first fell, worse then Devils you are.
You should our shields be, but you prove our rods.
Were there no Men, Women might live like gods.
Guilty my Lord?
Yes, guilty my good Lady.
Nay, you may laugh, but henceforth shun my bed,
With no whores leavings Isle be poisoned.
O're-reach'd so finely? It is the very Diamond
And Letter which I sent: this villainy
Some Spider closely weaues, whose poisoned bulk
I must let forth. Who's there without?
My Lord calls.
Send me the Footman.
Call the Footman to my Lord.
It can be no man else, that Irish Iudas,
Bred in a Country where no venom prospers,
But in the Nations blood hath thus betrayed me.
Slave, get you from your service.
Faat meanest thou by this now?
Question me not, nor tempt my fury, villain,
Could thou turn all the Mountains in the land,
To hills of gold, and to give me; here thou stayest not.
I faat, I care not.
Prate not, but get thee gone, I shall send else.
I, doe pretty, I had rather have thee make a scabbard of my guts, and let out all de Irish puddings in my poor belly, den to be a false knave to de I faat, I will never see dine own sweet face more. A mawhid deer a gre, fare de well, fare de well, I will go steal Cowes again in Ireland.
He's damned that raised this whirlwind, which hath blown
Into her eyes this jealousy: yet Isle on,
Isle on, stood armed Devils staring in my face,
To be pursued in flight, quickens the race,
Shall my blood streams by a wives lust be bard?
Fond woman, no: Iron grows by strokes more hard,
Lawless desires are seas scorning all bounds,
Or sulphur which being ram'd up, more confounds,
Struggling with mad men, madness nothing tames,
Winds wrestling with great fires, incense the flames.
How now, what ails your Master?
Has taken a younger brothers purge, forsooth, and that works with him.
Where is his Cloak and Rapier?
He has given up his Cloak, and his Rapier is bound to the Peace: If you look a little higher, you may see that another hath entered into hatband for him too. Six and four have put him into this sweat.
Whore's all his money?
It is put over by exchange: his doublet was going to be translated, but for me: if any man would ha lent but half a ducats on his beard, the hair of it had stuffed a pair of breeches by this time; I had but one poor penny, and that I was glad to niggle out, and buy a holly-wand to grace him thorough the street. As hap was, his boots were on, and then I dustied, to make people think he had been riding, and I had run by him.
Oh me, how does my sweet Matheo?
Oh Rogue, of what devilish stuff are these Dice made off? of the parings of the Devils corns of his toes, that they run thus damnably.
I prithee vex not.
If any handy-crafts man was ever suffered to keep shop in hell, it will be a Dice-maker; he's able to undo more souls then the Devil; I plaid with mine own Dice, yet lost. Ha you any money?
Las I ha none.
Must have money, must have some, must have a Cloak, and Rapier, and things: will you go set your lime∣twigs, and get me some birds, some money?
What limetwigs should I set?
You will not then? Must have cash and pictures: doe ye hear, (frailty) shall I walk in a Plimouth Cloak, (that's to say) like a rogue, in my hose and doublet, and a crabtree cudgel in my hand, and you swim in your Sat∣tins? must have money, come.
Is it bed-time, Master, that you undo my Mistress?
Undo me? Yes, yes, at these riflings
I have been too often.
Help to flea, Pacheco.
Fleeing call you it?
Isle pawn you by the Lord, to your very eye-browes.
With all my heart, since heaven will have me poor,
As good he drowned at sea, as drowned at shore.
Why hear you, sir? in faith doe not make away her Gown.
Oh it's Summer, it's Summer; your only fashion for a woman now, is to be light, to be light.
Why, pray sir, employ some of that money you have of mine.
Thine? Isle starve first, Isle beg first; when I touch a penny of that, let these fingers ends rot.
So they may, for that's past touching. I saw my twenty pounds fly hie.
Know thou never a damned Broker about the City?
Damned Broker? yes, five hundred.
The Gown stood me in aboue twenty Ducats, borrow ten of it, cannot live without silver.
Isle make what I can of it, sir, Isle be your Broker,
But not your dimbed broker: Oh thou scurvy knave,
What makes a wife turn whore, but such a slave?
How now little chic, what ails, weeping
For a handful of Taylors shreds? pox on them, are there not silks enough at Mercers?
I care not for gay feathers, I.
What doest care for then? why doest grieve?
Why doe I grieve? A thousand sorrows strike
At one poor heart, and yet it lives. Matheo,
Thou art a Gamester, prithee throw at all,
Set all upon one cast, we kneel and pray,
And struggle for life, yet must be cast away.
Meet misery quickly then, split all, sell all,
And when thou hast sold all, spend it, but I beseech thee
Build not thy mind on me to coin thee more,
To get it would thou have me play the whore?
It was your profession before I married you.
Vmh? it was indeed: if all men should be branded
For sins long since laid up, who could be saved?
The Quarter day's at hand, how will you doe
To pay the Rent, Matheo?
Why? doe as all of our occupation doe against Quarter days; break up house, remove, shift your lodge∣ings, pox a your Quarters.
Whore's this Gallant?
Signior Lodouico? how does my little Mirror of Knight-hood? this is kindly done in faith: welcome by my troth.
And how doest, frolic? Save you fair Lady. Thou look smug and bravely, Noble Mat.
Drink and feed, laugh and lie warm.
Is this thy wife?
A poor Gentlewoman, sir, whom I make use of a nights.
Pay custom to your lips, sweet Lady.
Borrow some shells of him, some wine, sweet heart.
Isle send for it then in faith.
You send for it? Some wine I prithee.
I ha no money.
S'blood, nor I: What wine love you, Signior?
Here, or Isle not stay, I protest; trouble the Gentle∣woman too much?
And what news flies abroad, Matheo?
Troth, none. Oh Signior, we ha been merry in our days.
And no doubt shall again.
The Divine powers never shoot Darts at men
Mortal, to kill them.
You say true.
Why should we grieve at want?
Say the world made thee her Minion, that
Thy head lay in her lap, and that she danced thee
On her wanton knee, she could but give thee a whole
World: that's all, and that ell's nothing; the worlds
Greatest part cannot fill up one corner of thy heart.
Say, the three corners were all filled, alas!
Of what art thou possessed, a thin blown glass:
Such as by Boys is puffed into the air.
Were twenty Kingdoms thine, you would live in care:
Thou coldest not sleep the better, nor live longer,
Nor merrier be, nor healthfuller, nor stronger.
If then thou want, thus make that want thy pleasure,
No man wants all things, nor has all in measure.
I am the most wretched fellow: sure some left∣handed Priest christened me, I am so unlucky: I am never out of one puddle or another, still falling.
Fill out wine to my little finger.
With my heart in faith.
Thanks, good Matheo.
To your own sweet self.
All the Brokers hearts, sir, are made of flint, I can with all my knocking, strike but six sparks of fire out of them, here's six ducats, if you'll take them.
Give me them: an evil conscience gnaw them all, moths and plagues hang upon their lousy wardrobs.
Is this your man, Matheo? An old Serving-man.
You may give me t'other half too, sir:
That's the Beggar.
What hast there, gold?
A sort of Rascals are in my debt, (God knows what) and they feed me with bits, with crumbs, a pox choke them.
A word, Matheo: be not angry with me,
Believe it that I know the touch of time,
And can part copper (tho it be gilded o'er)
From the true gold: the sails which thou doest spread,
Would show well, if they were not borrowed.
The sound of thy low fortunes drew me hither,
I give my self unto thee, prithee use me,
I will bestow on you a suite of Satin,
And all things else to fit a Gentleman,
Because I love you.
Thanks, good Noble Knight.
Call on me when you please,
Till then farewell.
Hast angled? hast cut up this fresh Salmon?
Wudst have me be so base?
It's base to steal, it's base to be a whore:
Thou't be more base, Isle make thee keep a door.
I hope he will not sneak away with all the money, will he?
Thou see he does.
Nay then it's well. I set my brains upon an upright Last; tho my wits be old, yet they are like a witherd pip∣pin, wholesome. Look you, Mistress, I told him I had but six ducats of the (Knave) Broker, but I had eight, and kept these two for you.
Thou should have given him all.
What, to fly hie?
Like waives, my misery drives on misery.
Sell his wives clothes from her back? does any Poulterers wife pull chickens alive? He Riots all abroad, wants all at home; he Dices, whores, swaggers, swears, cheats, borrows, pawns: Isle give him hook and line, a little more for all this.
Yet sure in the end he'll delude all my hopes,
And show me a French trick danced on the ropes.
Hist, hist, Lieutenant Bots, how dost, man?
Whither are you ambling, Madam Horsleach?
About worldly profit, sir: how doe your Worships?
We want tools, Gentlemen, to furnish the trade: they wear out day and night, they wear out till no mettle bee left in their back; wee hear of two or three new Wenches are come up with a Carrier, and your old Goshawk here is flying at them.
And faith, what flesh have you at home?
Ordinary Dishes, by my troth, sweet men, there's few good in the City; I am as well furnished as any, and tho I say it, as well customed.
We have meates of all sorts of dressing; we have stewed meat for your Frenchmen, pretty light picking meat for your Italian, and that which is rotten roasted, for Don Spaniardo.
A pox on it.
We have Poulterers ware for your sweet bloods, as Dove, Chicken, Duck, Teale, Woodcock, and so forth: and Butchers meat for the Citizen: yet Muttons fall very bad this year.
Stay, is not that my patient Linen Draper yonder, and my fine young smug Mistress, his wife?
Sir Grannam, Isle give thee for thy fee twenty crowns, if thou can but procure me the wearing of yon velvet cap.
You'd wear another thing besides the cap. You're a Wag.
Twenty crowns? we will share, and Isle be your pulley to draw her on.
Do it presently; we'll ha some sport.
Wheel you about, sweet men: doe you see, Isle chea∣pen wares of the man, whilst Bots is doing with his wife.
Too't: if we come into the shop to doe you grace, we'll call you Madam.
Pox a your old face, give it the badge of all scurvy faces, a Masque.
What is it you lack, Gentlewoman? Cambric or Lawns, or fine Hollands? Pray draw near, I can sell you a penny-worth.
Some Cambric for my old Lady.
Cambric? you shall, the purest thread in Millan.
Save you, Signior Candido.
How does my Noble Master? how my fair Mistress?
My Worshipful good Servant, view it well, for it is both fine and even.
Cry you mercy, Madam, tho masked, I thought it should be you by your man. Pray Signior, show her the best, for she commonly deals for good ware.
Then this shall fit her, this is for your Ladyship.
A word, I pray, there is a waiting Gentlewomon of my Ladies: her name is Ruin, says she's your Kinswoman, and that you should be one of her Aunts.
One of her Aunts? troth sir, I know her not.
If it please you to bestow the poor labour of your legs at any time, I will be your convoy thither?
I am a Snail, sir, seldom leave my house, if it please her to visit me, she shall be welcome.
Doe you hear? the naked troth is: my Lady hath a young Knight, her son, who loves you, you're made, if you lay hold vpont: this Jewel he sends you.
Sir, I return his love and Jewel with scorn; let go my hand, or I shall call my husband. You are an arrant Knave.
What, will she doe?
Doe? they shall all doe if Bots sets upon them once, she was as if she had professed the trade, squeamish at first, at last I showed her this Jewel, said, a Kuight sent it her.
Is it gold, and right stones?
Copper, Copper, I go a fishing with these baits.
She nibbled, but wud not swallow the hook, because the Cunger-head her husband was by: but she bids the Gentleman name any afternoon, and she'll meet him at her Garden house, which I know.
Is this no lie now?
Dam me if—
Oh prithee stay there.
The twenty crowns, sir.
Before he has his work done? but on my Knightly word, he shall pay't thee.
I thought thou had been gone into thine own Country.
No faat la, I cannot go dis four or tree days.
Look thee, yonders the shop, and that's the man himself.
Thou shalt but cheapen, and doe as we told thee, to put a jest upon him, to abuse his patience.
I faat, I doubt my pate shall be knocked: but sa crees sa me, for your shakes, I will run to any Linen Draper in hell, come pretty.
Save you Gallants.
Oh, well met!
You'll give no more you say? I cannot take it.
Truly Isle give no more.
It must not fetch it. What wud you have, sweet Gentlemen?
Nay, here's the Customer.
The Garden-house you say? we'll bolt out your roguery.
I will but lay these parcels by—My men are all at Custom-house vnloding Wares, if Cambric you wud deal in, there's the best, all Millan cannot sample it.
Doe you hear? 1. 2. 3. S'foot, there came in 4. Gallants, sure your wife is slipped up, and the 4th. man I hold my life, is grafting your Warden tree.
Ha, ha, ha: you Gentlemen are full of Jest.
If she be up, she's gone some wares to show,
I have aboue as good wares as below.
Have you so? nay then—
Now Gentlemen, is it Cambrics?
I predee now let me have de best wares.
What's that he says, pray 'Gentlemen?
Mary he says we are like to have the best wares.
The best wares? all are bad, yet wares doe good, And like to Surgeons, let sick Kingdoms blood.
Faat a Devil prate tow so, a pox on dee, I pretty let me see some Hollen, to make Linen shirts, for fear my body be lousy.
Indeed I understand no word he speaks.
Mary, he says, that at the siege in Holland there was much bawdry used among the Soldiers, tho they were lousy.
It may be so, that's likely, true indeed,
In every garden, sir, does grow that weed.
Pox on de gardens, and de weeds, and de fools cap dere, and de clouts; hear? doest make a Hobby-horse of me.
Oh fie, he has torn de Cambric.
It is no matter.
It frets me to the soul.
So doest not me.
My Customers doe oft for remnants call,
These are two remnants now, no loss at all.
But let me tell you, were my Servants here,
It would ha cost more.—Thank you Gentlemen,
I use you well, pray know my shop again.
Ha, ha, ha; come, come, let's go, let's go.
How am I suited, Front? am I not gallant, ha?
Yes, sir, you are suited well.
Exceeding passing well, and to the time.
The Taylor has plaid his part with you.
And I have plaid a Gentleman's part with my Tay∣lore, for I owe him for the making of it.
And why did you so, sir?
To keep the fashion; It's your only fashion now of your best rank of Gallants, to make their Taylors waite
for their money, neither were it wisdom indeed to pay them upon the first edition of a new suite: for commonly the suite is owing for, when the linings are worn out, and there's no reason then, that the Taylor should be paid be∣fore the Mercer.
Is this the suite the Knight bestowed upon you?
This is the suite, and I need not shame to wear it, for better men then I would be glad to have suites bestow∣ed on them. It's a generous fellow,—but—pox on him—we whose Pericranions are the very Limbecks and Stillitories of good wit, and fly hie, must drive liquor out of stale ga∣ping Oysters. Shallow Knight, poor Squire Tinacheo: Isle make a wild Cataine of forty such: hang him, he's an Ass, he's always sober.
This is your fault to wound your friends still.
No faith, Front, Lodouico is a noble Slauonian: it's more rare to see him in a women's company, then for a Spa∣niard to go into England, and to challenge the English Fen∣cers there.—One knocks,—See—La, fa, sol, la, fa, la, rustle in Silks and Satins: there's musique in this, and a Taffeta Petticoat, it make both fly hie,—Catzo.
Matheo? it is my Father.
Ha, Father? It's no matter, hee finds no tattered Prodigals here.
Is not the door good enough to hold your blue Coats? away, Knaves. Wear not your clothes thred-bare at knees for me; beg Heavens blessing, (not mine.) Oh cry your Worship mercy, sir, was somewhat bold to talk to this Gentlewoman, your wife here.
A poor Gentlewoman, sir.
Stand not, sir, bare to me; I ha read oft
That Serpents who creep low, belch ranker poison
That winged Dragons doe, that fly aloft.
If it offend you, sir? it is for my pleasure.
Your pleasure be it, sir; vmh, is this your Palace?
Yes, and our Kingdom, for it is our content.
It's a very poor Kingdom then; what, are all your Subjects gone a Sheepe-shearing? not a Maid? not a Man? not so much as a Cat? you keep a good house belike, just like one of your profession, every room with bare walls, and a halfe-headed bed to vault upon (as all your bawdy∣houses are.) Pray who are your Vpholsters? Oh, the Spider. I see, they bestow hangings upon you.
Bawdy-house? Zounds sir—
Oh sweet Matheo, peace. Upon my knees
I doe beseech you, sir, not to arraign me
For sins, which heaven, I hope, long since hath pardoned.
Those flames (like lightning flashes) are so spent,
The heate no more remains, then where ships went,
Or where birds cut the air, the print remains.
Pox on him, kneel to a Dog?
She that's a Whore,
Lives gallant, fares well, is not (like me) poor,
I ha now as small acquaintance with that sin,
As if I had never known it; that, never bin.
No acquaintance with it? what maintains thee then? how doest live then? has thy husband any Lands? any Rents coming in, any Stock going, any Ploughs jogging, any Ships sailing? hast thou any Wares to turn, so much as to get a single penny by? yes, thou hast Ware to sell, Knaves are thy Chapman, and thy Shop is Hell.
Doe you hear, sir?
So sir, I do hear, sir, more of you then you dream I do.
You fly a little too hie, sir.
Why, sir, too hie?
I ha suffered your tongue, like a bard Cater tra, to run all this while, and ha not stopped it.
Well, sir, you talk like a Gamester.
If you come to bark at her, because shoe's a poor rogue; look you, here's a fine path, sir, and there, there the door.
Matheo?
Your blue Coats stay for you, sir.
I love a good honest roaring Boy, and so—
That's the Devil.
Sir, sir, Isle ha no Ioues in my house to thunder A∣uaunt: she shall live and be maintained, when you, like a keg of musty Sturgeon, shall stink. Where? in your Coffin. How? be a musty fellow, and lousy.
I know she shall be maintained, but how? she like a Queen, thou like a Knave; she like a Whore, thou like a Thief.
Theife? Zounds Thief?
Good dearest Mat.—Father.
Pox on you both, Isle not be braved: New Satin scorns to be put down with bare bawdy Velvet. Thief?
I Thief, you are a Murderer, a Cheater, a Whore-monger, a Pot-hunter, a Borrower, a Beggar—
Dear Father.
An old Ass, a Dog, a Churl, a Chuff, an Usurer, a Villain, a Moth, a mangy Mule, with an old velvet foot-cloth on his back, sir.
Oh me!
Varlet, for this Isle hang thee.
Ha, ha, alas.
Thou keep a man of mine here, under my nose.
Under thy beard.
As arrant a smell-smocke, for an old Mutton-munger, as thy self.
No, as your self.
As arrant a purse-take. as ever cried, Stand, yet a good fellow, I confess, and valiant, but he'll bring thee to'th Gallows; you both have robbed of late two poor Country Peddlers.
How's this? how's this? doest thou fly hie? rob Peddlers? bear witness Front, rob Peddlers? my man and I a Thief?
Oh, sir, no more.
I Knave, two Peddlers, hue and cry is up, Warrants are out, and I shall see thee climb a Ladder.
And come down again as well as a Bricklayer, or a Tyler. How the vengeance knows he this? If I be han∣general, Isle tell the people I married old Friscabaldoes Daughter, Isle fresco you, and your old carcass.
Tell what thou can; if I stay here longer, I shall bee hanged too, for being in thy company; therefore, as I found you, I leave you.
Kneel, and get money of him.
A Knave and a Queen, a Thief and a Strumpet, a couple of Beggars, a brace of Baggages.
Hang upon him. I, I, sir, fare you well; we are so: follow close—we are Beggars—in Satin—to him.
Is this your comfort, when so many years
You ha left me frozen to death?
Freeze still, starve still.
Yes, so I shall: I must: I must and will.
If as you say I'm poor, relieve me then,
Let me not sell my body to base men.
You call me Strumpet, Heaven knows I am none:
Your cruelty may drive me to be one:
Let not that sin be yours, let not the shame
Of common Whore live longer then my name.
That cunning Bawd (Necessity) night and day
Plots to undo me; drive that Hag away,
Lest being at lowest ebb, as now I am,
I sink for ever.
Lowest ebb, what ebb?
So poor, that (tho to tell it be my shame)
I am not worth a dish to hold my meat;
I am yet poorer, I want bread to eat.
It's not seen by your cheeks.
I think she has read an Homely to tickle to the old rogue.
Want bread? there's Satin: bake that.
S'blood, make Pasties of my clothes?
A fair new Cloak, stew that; an excellent gilt Ra∣pier.
Will you eat that, sir?
I could feast ten good fellows with those Hangers.
The pox you shall.
I shall not (till thou biggest,) think thou art poor;
And when thou biggest, Isle feed thee at my door,
As I feed Dogs, (with bones) till then beg,
Borrow, pawn, steal, and hang, turn Bawd.
When you are no Whore, my heart-strings sure
Would crack, were they strained more.
This is your Father, your damned—confusion light upon all the generation of you; he can come bragging hither with four white Herrings (it's tail) in blue Coats without roes in their bellies, but I may starve ere he give me so much as a cob.
What tell you me of this? alas.
Go trot after your Dad, doe you capitulate, Isle pawn not for you, Isle not steal to be hanged for such an hypocritical close common Harlot: away, you Dog—Brave in faith! Vds foot, Give me some meat.
Yes, Sir.
Goodman slave, my man too, is galloped to the De∣will athe t'other side: Pacheco, Isle checo you. Is this your Dads day? England (they say) is the only hell for Horses, and only Paradise for Women: pray get you to that Paradise, because you're called an Honest Whore; there they live none but honest whores with a pox: Mary here in our City, all our sex are but foot-cloth Nags: the Master no sooner lights, but the man leaps into the saddle.
Will you sit down I pray, sir?
I could tear (by the Lord) his flesh, and eat his midriff in salt, as I eat this:—must I choke—my Father Friscabaldo, I shall make a pitiful Hog-louse of you Orlando, if you fall once into my fingers—Here's the sauo∣rest
meat: I ha got a stomach with chasing. What Rogue should tell him of those two Peddlers? A plague choke him, and gnaw him to the bare bones: come fill.
Thou sweetest with very anger, good sweet, vex not, alas, it is no fault of mine.
Where did buy this Mutton? I never felt better ribs.
A neighbour sent it me.
Ho, neighbour? foh, my mouth stinks, you whore, doe you beg victuals for me? Is this Satin doublet to bee bombasted with broken meat?
What will you doe, sir?
Beat out the brains of a beggarly—
Beat out an Asses head of your own; away, Mistress. Zownds, doe but touch one hair of her, and Isle so quilt your cap with old Iron, that your coxcomb shall ache the worse these seven years for it: Does she look like a roasted Rabbit, that you must have the head for the brains?
Ha, ha: Go out of my doors, you Rogue, away, four marks trudge.
Four marks? no, sir, my twenty pound that you ha made fly hie, and I am gone.
Must I be fed with chippings? you're best get a clap∣dish, and say you're Proctor to some Spittle-house. Where hast thou been, Pacheco? come hither my little Turkey∣cock.
I cannot abide, sir, to see a woman wronged, not I.
Sir, here was my Father-in-law to day.
Pish, then you're full of Crowns.
Hang him, he would ha thrust crowns upon me, to have fallen in again, but I scorn cast-cloathes, or any mans gold.
But mine: how did he brooke that (sir?)
Oh: swore like a dozen of drunken Tinkers; at last growing foul in words, he and four of his men drew up∣on me, sir.
In your house? wud I had bin by.
I made no more ado, but fell to my old locke, and so thrashed my blue Coats, and old crabtree-face my fa∣ther-in-law, and then walked like a Lion in my grate.
Oh Noble Master!
Sir, he could tell me of the robbing the two Peddlers, and that warrants are out for vs both.
Good, sir, I like not those crackers.
Crack halter, wut set thy foot to mine?
How, sir? at drinking.
We'll pull that old Crow my Father: rob thy Ma∣ster. I know the house, thou the servants: the purchase is rich, the plot to get it easy, the Dog will not part from a bone.
Pluck't out of his throat then: Isle snarl for one, if this can bite.
Say no more, say no more, old cole, meet me anon at the sign of the Shipwreck.
Yes, sir.
And dost hear, man?—the Shipwreck.
You are at the Shipwreck now, and like a swimmer
Bold (but unexpert) with those waives doest play,
Whose dalliance (whorelike) is to cast thee away.
And here's another Vessel, (better fraught,
But as ill manned) her sinking will be wrought,
If rescue come not: like a Man of war
Isle therefore bravely out: somewhat Isle doe,
And either save them both, or perish too.
It is my fate to be bewitched by those eyes.
Fate? your folly.
Why should my face thus mad you? alas, those colours
Are wound up long ago, which beauty spread,
The flowers that once grew here, are withered.
You turned my black soul white, made it look new,
And should I sin, it ne'er should be with you.
Your hand, Isle offer you fair play: When first
We met in the Lists together, you remember
You were a common Rebel; with one parley
I won you to come in.
You did.
Isle try
If now I can beat down this Chastity
With the same Ordnance; will you yield this Fort,
If with the power of Argument now (as then)
I get of you the conquest: as before
I turned you honest, now to turn you whore,
By force of strong persuasion?
If you can,
I yield.
The allarm's struck up: I'm your man.
A woman gives defiance.
Sit.
Begin:
It is a brave battle to encounter sin.
You men that are to fight in the same war,
To which I'm pressed, and plead at the same bar,
To win a woman, if you wud have me speed,
Send all your wishes.
No doubt you're heard, proceed.
To be a Harlot, that you stand upon,
The very name's a charm to make you one.
Harlot was a Dame of so divine
And ravishing touch, that she was Concubine
To an English King: her sweet bewitching eye
Did the Kings heart-strings in such loue-knots tie,
That even the coyest was proud when she could hear
Men say, Behold; another Harlot there;
And after her all women that were fair
Were Harlots called, as to this day some are:
Besides her dalliance, she so well does mix,
That she's in Latin called the Meretrix.
Thus for the name; for the profession, this,
Who lives in bondage, lives laced, the chief bliss
This world below can yield, is liberty:
And who (than whores) with looser wings dare fly?
As Iunoes proud bird spreads the fairest tail,
So does a Strumpet hoist the loftiest sail.
She's no mans slave; (men are her slaves) her eye
Moves not on wheels screwed up with Jealousy.
She (Horsed, or Coached) does merry journeys make,
Free as the Sun in his gilt Zodiake:
As bravely does she shine, as fast she's driven,
But stays not long in any house of Heaven:
But shifts from Sign, to Sign, her amorous prizes
More rich being when she's down, then when she rises.
In brief, Gentlemen haunt them, Soldiers fight for them,
Few men but know them, few or none abhor them:
Thus (for sport sake) speak I, as to a woman,
Whom (as the worst ground) I would turn to common:
But you I would enclose for mine own bed.
So should a husband be dishonoured.
Dishonoured? not a whit: to fall to one
(Besides your husband) is to fall to none,
For one no number is.
Faith, should you take
One in your bed, would you that reckoning make?
It is time you sound retreat.
Say, have I won,
Is the day ours?
The battaile's but half done,
None but your self have yet sounded alarms,
Let vs strike too, else you dishonour arms.
If you can win the day,
The glorie's yours.
To prove a woman should not be a whore,
When she was made, she had one man, and no more,
Yet she was tied to laws then, for (oven than)
It is said, she was not made for men, but man.
Anon, t'increase earths brood, the law was varied,
Men should take many wives: and tho they married
According to that Act, yet it is not known,
But that those wives were only tied to one.
New Parliaments were since: for now one woman
Is shared between three hundred, nay she's common;
Common? as spotted Leopards, whom for sport
Men hunt, to get the flesh, but care not for it.
So spread they Nets of gold, and tune their Calls,
To enchant silly women to take falls:
Swearing they are Angels, (which that they may win)
They'll hire the Devil to come with false Dice in.
Oh Sirens subtle tunes! your selves you flatter,
And our weak sex betray, so men love water;
It serves to wash their hands, but (being once foul)
The water down is powered, cast out of doors,
And even of such base use doe men make whores.
A Harlot (like a Hen) more sweetness reapes,
To pick men one by one up, then in heaps:
Yet all feeds but confounding. Say you should taste me,
I serve but for the time, and when the day
Of war is done, am cashiered out of pay:
If like lame Soldiers I could beg, that's all,
And there's lusts Rendezvous, an Hospital.
Who then would be a mans slave, a mans woman?
She's half starn'd the first day that feeds in Common.
You should not feed so, but with me alone.
If I drink poison by stealth, is it not all one?
Is it not rank poison still? with you alone!
Nay say you spied a Courtesan, whose soft side
To touch, you'd sell your birth-right for one kiss,
Be racked, she's won, you're sated: what follows this?
Oh, then you curse that Bawd that toald you in,
(The Night) you curse your lust, you loath the sin,
You loath her very sight, and ere the day
Arise, you rise glad when you're stolen away.
Even then when you are drunk with all her sweets,
There's no true pleasure in a Strumpets sheets.
Women, whom Lust so prostitutes to sale,
Like Dancers upon ropes; once seen, are stale.
If all the threads of Harlots lives are span,
So coorse as you would make them, tell me why
You so long loved the trade?
If all the threads
Of Harlots lives be fine as you would make them,
Why doe not you persuade your wife turn whore,
And all Dames else to fall before that sin?
Like an ill husband (•ho I knew the same,
To be my undoing) followed I that game.
Oh when the work of Lust had earned my bread,
To taste it, how I trembled, lest each bit,
Ere it went down, should choke me (chewing it?)
My bed seemed like a Cabin hung in Hell,
The Bawd Hells Porter, and the lickorish wine
The Pander fetched, was like an easy Fine,
For which, me thought I leas'd away my soul,
And oftentimes (even in my quaffing bowl)
Thus said I to my self, I am a whore,
And have drunk down thus much confusion more.
It is a common rule, and it is most true,
Two of one trade never love; no more doe you.
Why are you sharpe against that you once professed?
Why dote you on that, which you did once detest?
I cannot (seeing she's woven of such bad stuff)
Set colours on a Harlot base enough.
Nothing did make me, when I loved them best,
To loath them more then this: when in the street
A fair young modest Damsel I did meet,
She seemed to all a Dove (when I passed by)
And I (to all) a Raven: every eye
That followed her, wont with a bash full glance
At me, each bold and jeering countenance
Darted forth scorn: to her (as if she had bin
Some Tower unvanquished) would they veil,
Against me swollen Rumour hoisted every sail.
She (crowned with reverend praises) passed by them,
I (tho with face maskt) could not scope the hem,
For (as if Heaven had set strange marks on Whores,
Because they should be pointing stocks to man)
Dressed up in ciuilest shape a Courtesan.
Let her walk Saint-like, notelesse, and unknown,
Yet she's betrayed by some trick of her own.
Were Harlots therefore wise, they'd be sold dear:
For men account them good but for one year:
And then like Almanacs (whose dates are gone)
They are thrown by, and no more looked upon.
Who'le therefore backward fall, who will launch forth
In Seas so foul, for ventures no more worth?
Lusts voyage hath (if not this course) this cross,
Buy ne'er so cheap, your Ware comes home with loss.
What, shall I sound retreat? the battaile's done:
Let the world judge which of vs two have won.
I!
You? nay then as cowards doe in fight,
What by blows cannot, shall be saved by flight.
Fly to earths fixed Center: to the Caves
Of everlasting horror, Isle pursue thee,
(Tho laden with sins) even to Hells brazen doors.
Thus wisest men turn fools, doting on whores.
I beseech your Grace (tho your eye be so piercing) as under a poor blue Coat, to cull out an honest Father from an old Serving-man: yet good my Lord discover not the plot to any, but only this Gentleman that is now to be an Actor in our ensuing Comedy.
Thou hast thy wish, Orlando, pass unknown,
Sforsa shall only go along with thee,
To see that Warrant served upon thy Son.
To attach him upon felony, for 2. Peddlers: is it not so?
Right, my Noble Knight: those Peddlers were two Knaves of mine; he fleeced the men before, and now he pur∣poses to flea the Master. He will rob me, his teeth water to be nibbling at my gold, but this shall hang him by the gills, till I pull him on shore.
Away: ply you the business.
Thanks to your Grace: but my good Lord, for my Daughter.
You know what I have said.
And remember what I have sworn: She's more ho∣nest, on my soul, then one of the Turks Wenches, watched by a hundred Eunuchs.
So she had need, for the Turks make them whores.
He's a Turk that makes any woman a Whore, hoe's no true Christian I'm sure. I commit your Grace.
Infaelice.
Here, sir.
Signior Friscabaldo.
Frisking again, Pacheco?
Vds so, Pacheco? we'll have some sport with this Warrant: it is to apprehend all suspected persons in the house: Besides, there's one Bots a Pander, and one Madam Horsleach a Bawd, that have abused my friend, those two Coneyes will we ferret into the pursenet.
Let me alone for dabbing them of the neck: come, come.
Doe ye hear, Gallants? meet me anon at Matheos.
Enough.
The old Fellow sings that note thou did before,
Only his tunes are, that she is no Whore,
But that she sent his Letters and his gifts,
Out of a Noble Triumph o'er his Lust,
To show she trampled his Assaults in dust.
It is a good honest servant, that old man.
I doubt no less.
And it may be my husband,
Because when once this woman was unmasked,
He leveled all her thoughts, and made them fit:
Now he'd mar all again, to try his wit.
It may be so too, for to turn a Harlot
Honest, it must be by strong Antidots,
It is rare, as to see Panthers change their spots.
And when she's once a Star (fixed) and shines bright,
Tho it were impiety then to dim her light,
Because we see such Tapers seldom burn.
Yet it is the pride and glory of some men,
To change her to a blazing Star again,
And it may be, Hipollito does no more.
It cannot be, but you're acquainted all
With that same madness of our Son-in-law,
That dotes so on a Courtesan.
Yes, my Lord.
All the City thinks he's a Whoremonger.
Yet I warrant, he'll swear, no man marks him.
It is like so, for when a man goes a winching, is as if he had a strong stinking breath, every one smells him out, yet he feels it not, tho it be rancker then the sweat of six∣teene Bearewarders.
I doubt then you have all those stinking breaths,
You might be all smelt out.
Troth my Lord, I think we are all as you ha bin in your youth when you went a Maying, we all love to hear the Cuckoo sing upon other men's Trees.
It's well yet you confess: but Girl, thy bed
Shall not be parted with a Courtesan—it is strange,
No frown of mine, no frown of the poor Lady,
(My abused child, his wife) no care of fame,
Of Honour, Heaven or Hell, no not that name
Of Common Strumpet, can affright, or woo
Him to abandon her; the Harlot does undo him,
She has bewitched him, robbed him of his shape,
Turned him into a beast, his reason's lost,
You see he looks wild, does he not?
I ha noted new Moons
In's face, my Lord, all full of change.
He's no more life unto Hipollito,
Then dead men are to living—never sleeps,
Or if he doe, it's dreams; and in those dreams
His arms work,—and then cries—Sweet—what's her
Name, what's the drabs name?
In troth, my Lord, I know not,
I know no drabs, not I.
Oh, Bellafront!
And catching her fast, cries, My Bellafront.
A drench that's able to kill a Horse, cannot kill this disease of Smock-smelling, my Lord, if it have once eaten deep.
Isle try all Physic, and this Med'cine first:
I have directed Warrants strong and peremptory
(To purge our City Millan, and to cure the outward
Parts, the Suburbs) for the attaching
Of all those women, who (like gold) want weight,
Cities (like Ships) should have no idle freight.
No, my Lord, and light wenches are no idle freight,
But what's your Graces reach in this?
This (Carolo.) If she whom my Son dotes on,
Be in that Master-booke enroled, he'll shame
Ever to approach one of such noted name.
But say she be not?
Yet on Harlots heads
New Laws shall fall so heavy, and such blows shall
Give to those that haunt them, that Hipollito
(If not for fear of Law) for love to her,
If he love truly, shall her bed forbear.
Attach all the light heals in the City, and clap em up? why, my Lord? you dive into a Well unsearchable: all the Whores within the walls, &amp; without the walls? I would not be he should meddle with them for ten such Dukedoms; the Army that you speak on, is able to fill all the prisons within this City, and to leave not a drinking room in any Tavern besides.
Those only shall be caught that are of note,
Harlots in each street flow:
The fish being thus in the net, our self will sit,
And with eye most severe dispose of it.—come, Girl.
Arraign the poor Whore.
Isle not miss that Sessions.
Nor I.
Nor I,
Tho I hold up my hand there my self.
Let who will come (my Noble Shauileir) I can but play the kind Host, and bid um welcome.
We'll trouble your house (Matheo) but as Dutchman doe in Taverns (drink, be merry, and be gone.)
Indeed if you be right Dutchman, if you fall to drink∣ing, you must be gone.
The worst is, my wife is not at home; but we'll fly hie (my generous Knight) for all that: there's no Music when a woman is in the consort.
No, for she's like a pair of Virginals,
Always with Jacks at her tail.
See, the Couy is sprung.
Save you Gallants.
Happily encountered, sweet bloods.
Gentlemen, you all know Signior Candido, the Linen Draper, he that's more patient then a browne Baker, upon the day when he heats his Oven, and has forty Scolds a∣bout him.
Yes, we know him all, what of him?
Wud it not be a good fit of mirth, to make a piece of English cloth of him, and to stretch him on the Tainters, till the threads of his own natural humour crack, by ma∣king him drink healths, Tobacco, dance, sing bawdy songs, or to run any bias according as we think good to cast him?
It were a Morris dance worth the seeing.
But the old Fox is so crafty, we shall hardly hunt out of his den.
To that train I ha given fire already; and the hook to draw him hither, is to see certain pieces of Lawn, which I told him I have to sell, and indeed have such: fetch them down, Pacheco.
Yes, sir, I'm your Water-spanniell, and will fetch any thing: but Isle fetch one dish of meat anon, shall turn your stomach, and that's a Constable.
How now? how now?
What Gally-foist is this?
Peace, two dishes of stewed prunes, a Bawd and a Pander. My worthy Lieutenant Bots; why, now I see you are amen of thy word, welcome; welcome Mistress Horsleach: Pray Gentlemen, salute this reverend Matron.
Thanks to all your Worships.
I-bade a Drawer send in wine too: did none come along with thee (Grannam) but the Lieutenant?
None came along with me but Bots, if it like your Worship.
Who the pox should come along with you but Bots?
Oh brave! march fair.
Are you come? that's well.
Here's Ordnance able to sack a City.
Come, repeat, read this Inuentory.
Imprimis, a pottle of Greek wine, a pottle of Peter sa men, a pottle of Charnico, and a pottle of Zi∣attica.
You're paid?
Yes Sir.
So shall some of vs be anon, I fear.
Here's a hot day towards: but zounds, this is the
life out of which a Soldier sucks sweetness, when this Are∣tillery goes off roundly, some must drop to the ground: Can∣non, Demy-cannon, Saker, and Basalisk.
Give fire, Lieutenant.
So, so: Must I venture first upon the breach? to you all, Gallants: Bots sets upon you all.
Its hard (Bots) if we pepper not you, as well as you pepper vs.
My noble Linen Draper! Some wine: Welcome old Lad.
You're welcome, Signior.
These Lawns, sir?
Presently, my man is gone for them: we ha rigged a Fleet, you see here, to sail about the world.
A dangerous Voyage, sailing in such Ships.
There's no casting over board yet.
Because you are an old Lady, I will have you be ac∣quainted with this grave Citizen, pray bestow your lips upon him, and bid him welcome.
Any Citizen shall be most welcome to me:—I have used to buy ware at your shop.
It may be so, good Madam.
Your Prentices know my dealings well; I trust your good wife be in good case: if it please you, bear her a token from my lips, by word of mouth.
I pray no more forsooth, it is very well, indeed I love no sweet meats:—Sh'as a breath stinks worse then fifty Polecats. Sir, a word, is she a Lady?
A woman of a good house, and an ancient, shoe's a Bawd.
A Bawd? Sir, Isle steal hence, and see your Lawns some other time.
Steal out of such company? Pacheco? my man is but gone for em: Lieutenant Bots, drink to this worthy old fellow, and teach him to fly hie.
Swagger: and make him do it on his knees.
How, Bots? now bless me, what doe I with Bots? no wine in sooth, no wine, good Master Bots.
Gray-beard, Goats pizzle: it is a health, have this in your guts, or this, there: I will sing a bawdy song, sir, be∣cause your verges face is melancholy, to make liquor go down glib: will you fall on your maribones, and pledge this health, it is to my Mistress, a whore?
Here's Ratsbane upon Ratsbane: Master Bots, I pray, sir, pardon me: you are a Soldier, press me not to this service, I am old, and shoot not in such pot-gunnes.
Cap, Isle teach you.
To drink healths, is to drink sickness: Gentle∣men, pray rescue me.
Zounds, who dare?
We shall ha stabbing then?
I ha reckonings to cast up, good Master Bots.
This will make you cast em up better.
Why does your hand shake so?
The palsy, Signiors, dances in my blood.
Pipe with a pox, sir, then, or Isle make your blood dance—
Hold, hold, good Master Bots, I drink.
To whom?
To the old Countess there.
To me, old Boy? this is he that never drunk wine: once again too't.
With much ado the poison is got down,
Tho I can scarce get up; never before
Drank I a whores health, nor will never more.
Hast bin at Gallows?
Yes, sir, for I make account to suffer to day.
Look, Signior: here's the Commodity.
Your price?
Thus.
No: too dear: thus.
No: O fie, you must sly higher: yet take em home, trifles shall not make vs quarrel, we'll agree, you shall have them, and a pennyworth, Isle fetch money at your shop.
Be it so, good Signior, send me going.
Going? a deep bowl of wine for Signior Candido.
He wud be going.
Isle rather stay, then go so: stop your Bowl.
How now?
Is it Shroue-tuesday, that these Ghosts walk.
What's your business, Sir?
From the Duke: you are the man wee look for, Signior, I have Warrant here from the Duke, to apprehend you upon felony for robbing two Peddlers: I charge you in the Dukes name go quickly.
Is the wind turned? well: this is that old Wolf, my Father-in-law: seek out your Mistress, Sir.
Yes, Sir: as shafts by piecing are made strong,
So shall thy life be straightened by this wrong.
In troth we are sorry.
Brave men must bee crossed, pish, it's but Fortunes Dice roving against me: Come, sir, pray use me like a Gen∣tleman, let me not be carried through the streets like a Pa∣geant.
If these Gentlemen please, you shall go along with them.
Be it so: come.
What are you, sir?
I, sir? sometimes a figure, sometimes a cipher, as the State has occasion to cast up her accounts: I'm a Soldier.
Your name is Bots, is it not?
Bots is my name, Bots is known to this Company.
I know you are, Sir: what's she?
A Gentlewoman, my Mother.
Take em both along.
Me? Sir.
And Sir.
If he swagger, raise the street.
Gentlemen, Gentlemen, whither will you drag vs?
To the Garden house. Bots, are we even with you?
To Bridewell with em.
You will answer this.
Better then a challenge, I have warrant for my work, sir.
We'll go before.
Pray doe.
Who, Signior Candido? a Citizen of your degree consorted thus, and revelling in such a house?
Why, sir? what house I pray?
Lewd, and defamed.
Is it so? thanks, sir: I'm gone.
What have you there?
Lawns which I bought, sir, of the Gentleman that keeps the house.
And I have warrant here, to search for such stolen Ware: these Lawns are stolen.
Indeed!
So he's the Thief, you the Receiver: I'm sorry for this chance, I must commit you.
Me, sir, for what?
These Goods are found upon you, and you must answer't.
Must I so?
Most certain.
Isle send for Bail.
I dare not: yet because you are a Citizen of worth, you shall not be made a pointing stock, but without Guard pass only with my self.
To Bridewell too?
No remedy.
Yes, patience: being not mad, they had me once to Bedlam,
Now I'm drawn to Bridewell, loving no Whores.
You will buy Lawn?—
Yonder's the Lord Hipollito, by any means leave him and me together: Now will I turn him to a Madman.
Save you, my Lord.
I ha strange news to tell you.
What are they?
Your Mare's in the pound.
How's this?
Your Nightingale is in a Limebush.
Ha?
Your Puritanical Honest Whore sits in a blue gown.
Blue Gown!
She'll chalk out your way to her now: she beats chalk.
Where, who dares?
Doe you know the Bricke-house of Castigation, by the River side that runs by Millan: the School where they pronounce no letter well but O?
I know it not.
Any man that has borne Office of Constable, or any woman that has fallen from a Horse-load to a Cart-load, or like an old Hen that has had none but rotten eggs in her nest, can direct you to her: there you shall see your Puncke amongst her back-friends, there you may have her at your will, for there she beats Chalk, or grinds in the Mill, with a whip doodle, doodle, doodle, doodle; ah little monkey.
What Rogue durst serve that Warrant, knowing I loved her?
Some Worshipful Rascal, I lay my life.
Isle beat the Lodgings down about their ears
That are her Keepers.
So you may bring an old house over her head.
Isle to her—
Isle to her, stood armed Fiends to guard the doors.
Oh me! what Monsters are men made by whores?
If this false fire doe Kindle him, there's one Faggot
More to the bonfire, now to my Bridewell Birds,
What Song will they sing?
Your Bridewell? that the name? for beauty, strength,
Capacity and form of ancient building,
(Besides the Rivers neighbourhood) few houses
Wherein we keep our Court can better it.
Hither from foreign Courts have Princes come,
And with our Duke did Acts of State Commence,
Here that great Cardinal had first audience,
(The grave Campaign,) that Duke dead, his Son
(That famous Prince) gave free possession
Of this his Palace, to the Citizens,
To be the poor mans ware-house: and endowed it
With Lands to'th value of seven hundred mark,
With all the bedding and the furniture, once proper
(As the Lands then were) to an Hospital
Belonging to a Duke of Sauoy. Thus
Fortune can toss the World, a Princes Court
Is thus a prison now.
It is Fortunes sport:
These changes common are: the Wheel of Fate
Turns Kingdoms up, till they fall desolate.
But how are these seven hundred Marks by the year
Employed in this your Worke-house?
War and Peace
Feed both upon those Lands: when the Iron doors
Of wars burst open, from this House are sent
Men furnished in all Martial Complement.
The Moon hath thorough her Bow scarce drawn to'th head,
(Like to twelve silver Arrows) all the Months,
Since 1600. Soldiers went aboard:
Here Providence and Charity play such parts,
The House is like a very School of Arts,
For when our Soldiers (like Ships driven from Sea,
With ribs all broken, and with tattered sides,)
Cast anchor here again, their ragged backs
How often doe we cover? that (like men)
They may be sent to their own Homes again.
All here are but one swarm of Bees, and strive
To bring with wearied thighs honey to the Hive.
The sturdy Beggar, and the lazy Lowne,
Gets here hard hands, or laced Correction.
The Vagabond grows stayed, and learns to 'bey,
The Drone is beaten well, and sent away
As other prisons are, (some for the Thief,
Some, by which undone Credit gets relief
From bridled Debtors; others for the poor)
So this is for the Bawd, the Rogue, and Whore.
An excellent Teem of Horse.
Nor is it seen,
That the whip draws blood here, to cool the Spleen
Of any rugged Bencher: nor does offence
Feel smart, or spiteful, or rash evidence:
But pregnant testimony forth must stand,
Ere Justice leave them in the Beadles hand,
As Iron, on the Anvil are they laid,
Not to take blows alone, but to be made
And fashioned to some Charitable use.
Thus wholsom'st Laws spring from the worst abuse.
Let mercy touch your heart-strings (gracious Lord)
That it may sound like music in the ear
Of a man desperate, (being in the hands of Law.)
His name?
Matheo.
For a robbery? where is she?
In this House.
Fetch you him hither—
Is this the Party?
This is the Hen, my Lord, that the Cock (with the Lordly comb) your Son-in-law would crow over, and tread.
Are your two Servants ready?
My two Peddlers are packed together, my good Lord.
It is well: this day in Judgment shall be spent,
Vice (like a wound launc'd) mends by punishment.
Let me be gone, my Lord, or stand unseen;
It is rare when a Judge strikes, and that none dye,
And it is unfit then, women should be by.
We'll place you, Lady, in some private room.
Pray doe so.
Thus nice Dames swear, it is unfit their eyes
Sold view men carved up for Anatomies,
Yet they'll see all, so they may stand unseen,
Many women sure will sin behind a Screen.
Your Son (the Lord Hipollito) is entered.
Tell him we wish his presence. A word Storsa:
On what wings flew he hither?
These, I told him—his Lark whom he loved, was a Bridewell Bird, he's mad that this Cage should hold her, and is come to let her out.
It is excellent: away, go call him hither.
You are to vs a stranger (worthy Lord)
It is strange to see you here.
It is most fit,
That where the Sun goes, Attomyes follow it.
Attomyes neither shape, nor honour bear:
Be you yourself, a Sunne-beame to shine clear.
Is this the Gentleman? Stand forth &amp; hear your accusation.
Isle hear none: I fly hie in that: rather then Kites shall seize upon me, and pick out mine eyes to my face, Isle strike my talons thorough mine own heart first, and spit my blood in theirs: I am here for shriving those two fools of their sinful pack: when those Iack-dawes have cawde o∣for me, then must I cry guilty, or not guilty; the Law has work enough already, and therefore Isle put no work of mine into his hands, the Hangman shall have it first, I did pluck those Ganders, did rob them.
It is well done to confess.
Confess and be hanged, and then I fly hie, is it not so? that for that a gallows is the worst rub that a good Bowler can meet with: I stumbled against such a post, else this night I had plaid the part of a true Son in these days, undone my Father-in-law, with him wud I ha run at leap∣frog, and come over his gold, tho I had broke his neck for it: but the poor Salmon Trout is now in the Net.
And now the Law must teach you to fly hie.
Right, my Lord, and then may you fly low; no more words, a Mouse, Mum, you are stopped.
Be good to my poor husband, dear my Lords.
Ass, why should thou pray them to be good to me, when no man here is good to one another?
Did any hand work in this theft but yours?
O, yes, my Lord, yes:—the Hangman has never one Son at a birth, his Children always come by couples: Tho I cannot give the old dog, my Father, a bone to gnaw, the Daughter shall bee sure of a Choke-peare.—Yes, my Lord, there was one more that fiddled my fine Peddlers, and that was my wife.
Alas, I?
O everlasting, supernatural superlative Villain!
Your wife, Matheo?
Sure it cannot be.
Oh, Sir, you love no quarters of Mutton that hang up, you love none but whole Mutton; she set the robbery, I performed it; she spurred me on, I galloped away.
My Lords.
My Lords, (fellow give me speech) if my poor life
may ransom thine, I yield it to the Law,
Thou hurt'st thy soul (yet wipest off no offence)
By casting blots upon my Innocence:
Let not these spare me, but tell truth: no, see
Who slips his neck out of the misery,
Tho not out of the mischief: let thy Servant
That shared in this base Act, accuse me here,
Why should my Husband perish, he go clear?
A god Child, hang thine own Father.
Old fellow, was thy hand in too?
My hand was in the Pie, my Lord, I confess it: my Mistress I see, will bring me to the Gallows, and so leave me; but Isle not leave her so: I had rather hang in a women's com∣pany, then in a mans; because if weshould go to hell together, I should scarce be latin in, for all the Devils are afraid to have any women come amongst them, as I am true Thief, she neither consented to this felony, nor knew of it.
What fury prompts thee on to kill thy wife?
It's my humour, Sir, it is a foolish Bag-pipe that I make my self merry with: why should I eat hempe-seed at the Hangmans thirteene-pence halfe-penny Ordinary, and have this whore laugh at me as I swing, as I totter?
Is she a Whore?
A sixe-penny Mutton Pasty, for any to cut up.
Ah, Toad, Toad, Toad.
A Barbers Citterne for every Serving-man to play upon, that Lord, your Son, knows it.
I, sir, am I her Bawd then?
No, sir, but she's your Whore then,
Yea Spider, doest catch at great Flies?
My Whore?
I cannot talk, sir, and tell of your Reins, and your fees, and your whirligigs, and devices: but, my Lord, I found em like Sparrows in one nest, billing together, and bulling of me, I took em in bed, was ready to kill him was up to stab her—
Close thy rank Jaws: pardon me, I am vexed,
Thou art a Villain, a malicious Devil,
Deep as the place where thou art lost, thou lie,
Since I am thus far got into this storm,
Isle thorough, and thou shalt see Isle thorough untouched.
When thou shalt perish in it.
It is my cue
To enter now: room, let my Prize be plaid,
I ha lurked in Clouds, yet heard what all have said,
What Jury more can prove, she has wronged my bed,
Then her own husband, she must be punished;
I challenge Law, my Lord, Letters, and Gold, and Jewels
From my Lord that woman took.
Against that blacke-mouthed Devil, against Letters, and Gold,
And against a jealous Wife I doe uphold,
Thus far her reputation, I could sooner
Shake the Appenine, and crumble Rocks to dust,
Then (tho Ioues shower rayned down) tempt her to lust.
What shall I say?
Say thou art not a Whore, and that's more then fifteen women (amongst five hundred) dare swear with∣out lying: this shalt thou say, no let me say it for thee; thy Husband's a Knave, this Lord's an honest Man; thou art no Puncke, this Lady's a right Lady. Pacheco is a Thief as his Master is, but old Orlando is as true a man as thy Father is: I ha seen you fly hie, sir, &amp; I ha seen you fly low, sir, and to keep you from the Gallows, sir, a blue Coat have I worn, and a Thief did I turn, mine own men are the Peddlers, my
twenty pound did fly hie, sir, your wives Gown did fly low, sir: whither fly you now, sir? you ha escaped the Gal∣lowes, to the Devil you fly next, sir. Am I right, my Liege?
Your Father has the true Phisicion plaid.
And I am now his Patient.
And be so still, it is a good sign when our cheeks blush at ill.
The Linen Draper (Signior Candido)
He whom the City terms the Patient man,
Is likewise here for buying of those Lawns
The Peddlers lost.
Alas good Candido.
Fetch him: and when these payments up are cast,
Weigh out your light Gold, but let's have them last.
In Bridewell, Candido?
Yes, my good Lord.
What make you here?
My Lord, what make you here?
I'm here to save right, and to drive wrong hence.
And I to bear wrong here with patience.
You ha bought stolen Goods.
So they doe say, my Lord,
Yet bought I them upon a Gentleman's word,
And I magine now, as I thought then,
That there be Thieves, but no Thieves Gentlemen.
Your Credit's cracked being here.
No more then Gold
Being cracked which does his estimation hold.
I was in Bedlam once, but was I mad?
They made me pledge Whores healths, but am I bad,
Because I'm with bad people?
Well, stand by,
If you take wrong, we'll cure the injury.
Stay, stay, what's he? a prisoner?
Yes, my Lord.
He seems a Soldier?
I am what I seem, Sir, one of Fortunes Bastards, a Soldier, and a Gentleman, and am brought in here with Master Constables band of Bilmen, because they face me down that I live (like those that keep Bowling-alleyes) by the sins of the people, in being a Squire of the body.
Oh, an Apple-squire.
Yes, sir, that degree of scurvy Squires, and that I am maintained by the best part that is commonly in a woman, by the worst players of those parts, but I am known to all this company.
My Lord, it is true, we all know him, it is Lieutenant Bots.
Bots, and where ha you served, Bots?
In most of your hottest Services in the Low-coun∣tries: at the Groin I was wounded in this thigh, and halted upon it, but it is now sound. In Cleueland I mist but little, having the bridge of my nose broken down with two great stones, as I was scaling a Fort: I ha been tried, Sir, too, in Gelderland, and escaped hardly there from being blown up at a Breach: I was fired, and lay in the Surgeons hands for it, till the fall of the leaf following.
All this may be, and yet you no Soldier.
No Soldier, sir? I hope these are Services that your proudest Commanders doe venture upon, and never come off sometimes.
Well, sir, because you say you are a Soldier,
Isle use you like a Gentleman: make room there,
Plant him amongst you, we shall have anon
Strange Hawks fly here before vs: if none light on you,
You shall with freedom take your flight:
But if you prove a Bird of baser wing,
We'll use you like such Birds, here you shall sing.
I wish to be tried at no other weapon.
Why, is he furnished with those in p•yments?
The Pander is more dangerous to a State,
Then is the common Thief, and tho our laws
Lie heavier on the Thief, yet that the Pander
May know the Hangmans ruff should fit him too,
Therefore he's set to beat Hemp.
This does savour
Of Justice, basest Slaves to basest labour.
Now pray, set open Hell, and let vs see
The Shee-Deuils that are here.
Me thinks this place
Should make even Lais honest.
Some it turns good,
But (as some men whose hands are once in blood,
Doe in a pride spill more) so, some going hence,
Are (by being here) lost in more impudence:
Let it not to them (when they come) appear,
That any one does as their Judge sit here:
But that as Gentlemen you come to see,
And then perhaps their tongues will walk more free.
Let them be marshalled in: be covered all,
Fellows, now to make the Scene more Comical.
Will not you be smelt out, Bots.
No, your bravest whores have the worst noses.
Are not you a Bride, forsooth?
Say ye?
He wud know if these be not your Bridemen.
Vuh, yes, sir: and look ye, doe you see the Bride-laces that I give at my wedding, will serve to tie Rosemary
to both your Coffins when you come from hanging-Scab▪
Fie, Puncke, fie, fie, fie.
Out you stale stinking head of Garlic, foh, at my heals.
My head's cloven.
O, let the Gentlewoman alone, she's going to shrift.
Nay to doe penance.
I, I, go Puncke, go to the Cross and be whipped.
Mary mew, mary muff, mary hang you goodman Dog: whipped? doe ye take me for a base Spittle whore? in troth Gentlemen, you wear the clothes of Gentlemen, but you carry not the minds of Gentlemen, to abuse a Gentle∣woman of my fashion.
Fashion? pox a your fashions, art not a whore?
Goodman Slave.
O fie, abuse her not, let vs two talk,
What mought I call your name, pray?
I'm not ashamed of my name, Sir, my name is Mistress Doll Target, a Western Gentlewoman.
Her Target against any Pike in Millan.
Why is this wheel borne after her?
She must spin.
A coorse thread it shall be, as all threads are.
If you spin, then you'll earn money here too?
I had rather get half a Crown abroad, then ten Crowns here.
Abroad? I think so.
Doest thou not weep now thou art here?
Say ye? weep? yes forsooth, as you did when you lost your Maidenhead: doe you not hear how I weep?
Farewell Doll.
Farewell Dog.
Past shame: past penitence, why is that blue Gown?
Being stripped out of her wanton loose attire,
That Garment she puts on, base to the eye,
Only to cloth her in humility.
Are all the rest like this?
No, my good Lord.
You see, this Drab swells with a wanton reyne,
The next that enters has a different strain.
Variety is good, let's see the rest.
Your Grace sees I'm sound yet, &amp; no Bullets hit me.
Come off so, and it is well.
Here's the second Mess.
I'ha worn many a costly Gown, but I was never thus guarded with blue Coats, and Beadles, and Constables, and—
Alas fair Mistress, spoil not thus your eyes.
Oh sweet sir, I fear the spoiling of other places a∣bout me that are dearer then my eyes; if you be Gentlemen, if you be men, or ever came of a woman, pity my case, stand to me, stick to me, good sir, you are an old man.
Hang not on me, I prithee, old Trees bear no such fruit.
Will you bail me, Gentlemen?
Bail thee, art in for debt?
No—is my Judge, sir, I am in for no debts, I paid my Taylor for this Gown, the last five shillings a week that was behind, yesterday.
What is your name, I pray?
Penelope Whore-hound, I come of the Whore-hounds. How does Lieutenant Bots.
A ha Bots.
A very honest woman, as I'm a Soldier, a pox Bots ye.
I was never in this pickle before, and yet if I go a∣amongst Citizens wives, they ieere at me: if I go among the Loose-bodied Gowns, they cry a pox on me, because I go civilly attired, and swear their trade was a good
trade, till such as I am took it out of their hands: good Lieutenant Bots, speak to these Captains to bail me.
Begging for bail still? you are a trim gossip, go give her the blue Gown, set her to her chare, work Hus∣wife, for your bread, away.
Out you Dog, a pox on you all, women are borne to curse thee, but I shall live to see twenty such flat-caps sha∣king Dice for a penny-worth of Pippins: out, you blue-eyed Rogue.
Ha, ha, ha.
Even now she wept, and pried, now does she curse?
Seeing me: if still she had staid, this had been worse.
Was she ever here before?
Five times at least,
And thus if men come to her, have her eyes wrung, and
wept out her bail.
Bots, you know her?
Is there any Gentleman here, that knows not a
Whore, and is he a hair the worse for that?
Is she a Citty-dame, she's so attired?
No, my good Lord, that's only but the veil
To her loose body, I have seen her here
In gayer Masking Suits, as several Sauces
Give one Dish several Tastes, so change of Habits
In Whores is a bewitching Art: to day she's all in
Colours to besot Gallants, then in modest black,
To catch the Citizen, and this from their Examinations
Drawn, now shall you see a Monster both in shape
And nature quite from these, that sheds no tear,
Nor yet is nice, it is a plain romping Bear,
Many such Whales are cast upon this Shore.
Let's see her.
Then behold a swaggering Whore.
Keep your ground, Bots.
I doe but traverse to spy advantage how to arm my self.
Sir, when I cry hold your hands, hold, you Rogue-Catcher, hold: Bawd, are the French Chilblains in your heals, that you can come no faster? are not you (Bawd) a Whores Ancient, and must not I follow my Colours?
O Mistress Katherine, you doe me wrong to accuse me here as you doe, before the right Worshipful: I am known for a motherly honest woman, and no Bawd.
Mary foh, honest? burnt at fourteen, seven times whipped, six times carted, nine times ducked, searched by some hundred and fifty Constables, and yet you are honest? Honest Mistress Horsleach, is this World, a World to keep Bawds and Whores honest? How many times hast thou given Gentlemen a quart of wine in a gallon pot? how ma∣ny twelue-penny Fees, nay two shillings Fees, nay, when any Ambassadors ha been here, how many half crown Fees hast thou taken? how many Carriers hast thou bribed for Country Wenches? how often have I rinsed your lungs in Aquauitae, and yet you are honest?
And what were you the whilst?
Mary hang you, Master Slave, who made you an examiner?
Well said, belike this Devil spares no man.
What art thou prithee?
Nay what art thou prithee?
A Whore, art thou a Thief?
A Thief, no, I defy the calling, I am a Soldier, have borne Arms in the Field, been in many a hot Skier∣mesh, yet come off sound.
Sound with a pox to ye, ye abominable Rogue! you a Soldier? you in Skirmishes? where? amongst pottle pots in a Bawdy-house? Look, look here, you Madam
Wormeaten, doe not you know him?
Lieutenant Bots, where have ye been this many a day?
Old Bawd, doe not discredit me, seem not to know me.
Not to know ye, Master Bots? as long as I have breath, I cannot forget thy sweet face.
Why, doe you know him? he says he is a Sol∣dier.
He a Soldier? a Pander, a Dog that will like up six pence: doe ye hear, you Master Swines snout, how long is it since you held the door for me, and cried too't again, no body comes, ye Rogue you?
Ha, ha, ha, you're smelt out again, Bots.
Pox ruin her nose for it, and I be not revenged for this—um ye Bitch.
Dee ye hear ye Madam? why does your Ladyship swagger thus? you're very brave, me thinks.
Not at your cost, Master Cods-head,
Is any man here bleare-eyed to see me brave?
Yes, I am,
Because good Clothes upon a Whores back
Is like fair painting upon a rotten wall.
Mary muff Master Whoremaster, you come upon me with sentences.
By this light has small sense for it.
O fie, fie, doe not vex her.
And yet me thinks a creature of more scurvy conditions
Should not know what a good Petticoat were.
Mary come out,
You're so busy about my Petticoat, you'll creep up to my placket, and ye cood but attain the honour, but and the outsides offend your Rogueships, look of the lining, it is Silk.
Is it Silk it is lined with then?
Silk? I Silk, Master Slave, you wud bee glad to wipe your nose with the skirt on it: this it is to come a∣mong
a company of Cods-heads that know not how to use a Gentlewoman.
Tell her the Duke is here.
Be modest, Kata, the Duke is here.
If the Devil were here, I care not: set forward, ye Rogues, and give attendance according to your places, let Bawds and Whores be sad, for Isle sing and the Devil were a dying.
Why before her does the Basin ring?
It is an emblem of their revelling,
The whips we use lets forth their wanton blood,
Making them calm, and more to calm their pride,
In stead of Coaches they in Carts doe ride.
Will your Grace see more of this bad Ware?
No, shut up shop, we'll now break up the fair,
Yet ere we part—you, sir, that take upon ye
The name of Soldier, that true name of worth,
Which, action not vain boasting best sets forth,
To let you know how far a Soldiers name
Stands from your title, and to let you see,
Soldiers must not be wronged where Princes be:
This bee your sentence.
Defend your self, Bots.
First, all the private sufferance that the house
Inflicts upon Offenders, you (as the basest)
Shall undergo it double, after which
You shall bee whipped, sir, round about the City,
Then banished from the Land.
Beseech your Grace.
Away with him, see it done, Panders and Whores
Are Citty-plagues, which being kept alive,
Nothing that looks like goodness ere can thrive.
Now good Orlando, what say you to your bad Son-in-law▪
Mary this, my Lord, he is my Son-in-law, and in law will I be his Father: for if law can pepper him, he shall be so parboild, that he shall stink no more in the nose of the Common-wealth.
Be yet more kind and merciful, good Father.
Doest thou beg for him, thou precious mans meat, thou? has he not beaten thee, kicked thee, trod on thee, and doest thou fawn on him like his Spaniel? has hee not pound thee to thy Petticoat, sold thee to thy smock, made ye leap at a crust, yet woodst have me save him?
Oh yes, good sir, women shall learn of me,
To love their husbands in greatest misery,
Then show him pity, or you wrack my self.
Have ye eaten Pigeons that you're so kinde-hearted to your Mate? Nay, you're a couple of wilde Bears, Isle have ye both baited at one stake: but as for this Knave, the Gallows is thy due, and the Gallows thou shalt have, Isle have justice of the Duke, the Law shall have thy life, what, doest thou hold him? let go his hand: if thou doest not for∣sake him, a Fathers everlasting blessing fall upon both your heads: away, go, kiss out of my sight, play thou the Whore no more, nor thou the Thief again, my house shall be thine, my meat shall be thine, and so shall my wine, but my money shall bee mine, and yet when I die, (so thou doest not fly hie) take all, yet good Matheo, mend.
Thus for joy weeps Orlando, and doth end.
Then hear, Matheo: all your woes are stayed
By your good Father-in-law: all your Ills
Are clear purged from you by his working pills.
Come Signior Candido, these greene young wits
(We see by Circumstance) this plot hath laid,
Still to provoke thy patience, which they find
A wall of Brass, no Armour's like the mind;
Thou hast taught the City patience, now our Court
Shall be thy Sphere, where from thy good report,
Rumours this truth unto the world shall sing,
A Patient man's a Pattern for a King.

ARt sure old Maybery Innes here to night,
Tic certain the honest knave Chamberlain that hath bin my Informer, my baud, ever since I knew Ware assures me of it, and more being a Londoner though altogether unacquainted, I have requested his company at supper.
Excellent occasion: how wee shall carry our selves in this business is only to be thought upon.
Be that my undertaking: if I do not take a full revenge of his wives puritanical •oynesse.
Suppose it she should be chaste,
O hang her: this art of seeming honest makes many of our young sons and heirs in the City, look so like our prentices,—Chamberlain.
Hear Sir.
This honest knave is called Innocence, first not a good name for a Chamberlain? he dwe't at Dunstable not long since, and hath brought me and the two Butchers Daughters there to interview twenty times &amp; not so little I protest: how chance you left dunstable Sir?
Faith Sir the town droopt ever since the peace in Ire∣land, your captains were wont to take their leaves of their Lone∣don Polecats, (their wenches I mean Sir) at Dunstable: the next morning when they had broke their fast together the wenches brought them to •••ckly 'ith hole, &amp; so the one for London the other for Westchester, your only rode now Sir is York York• Sir.
True, but yet it comes scant of the Prophesy; Lincoln was, London is, and York shall-be.
Yes Sir, tic fullfild, York shall be, that is, it shall be York still, surely it was the meaning of the prophet: will you have some Crayfish, and a Spitchcocke.
And a fat Trout.
You shall Sir; the Londoners you wot of:
Most kindly welcome—I beseech you hold our bold∣ness excused Sir.
Sir it is the health of Travellers, to enjoy good company: will you wa•ke.
Whether Travail you I beseech you.
To London Sir we came from Sturbridge.
I •el you Gentlemen I have observed very much with be∣ing at sturbridge; it hath afforded me mirth beyond the length of five latin Comedies; here should you meet a Nor-folk yeo∣man ful-but; with his head able to ouer-turne you; and his pret∣tie wife that followed him, ready to excuse the ignorant hard∣ness of her husbands forehead, in the goose marked number of freshmen; stuck here and there, with a graduate: like cloves with great heads in a gammon of bacon: here two gentlemen ma∣king a marriage between their heirs over a wool-pack; there a Ministers wife that could speak false latin very lispingly; here two in one corner of a shop: Londoners selling their wares, &amp; other Gentlemen courting their wives; where they take up petticoats you should find scholars &amp; towns-mens wives crou∣ding together while their husbands wear in another market busy amongst the Oxen; it was like a camp for in other Coūtries so many Punks do not follow an army. I could make an excellent description of it in a Comedy: but whether are you travailing Gentlemen?
Faith Sir we purposed a dangerous voyage, but vpō better consideration we altered our course.
May we without offence partake the ground of it.
Tic altogether trivial in-sooth: but to pass away the time till supper, Isle deliver it to you, with protestation before hand, I seek not to publish every gētle-womans dishonour, only by the passage of my discourse to have you censure the state of our quarrel.
Forth Sir.
Frequenting the company of many merchants wives in the City, my heart by chance leapt into mine eye to affect the fairest but with al the falsest creature that ever affectiō stooped to.
Of what rank was she I beseech you.
Upon your promise of secrecy.
You shall close it up like treasure of your own, and your self shall keep the key of it,
She was and by report still is wife to a most grave and well reputed Citizen.
And entertained your love.
As Meadows do April: the violence as it seemed of her affection—but alas it proved her dissembling, would at my coming and departing be-dew her eyes with love drops; O she could the art of woman most feelingly.
Most feelingly.
I should not have liked that feelingly had she been my wife, give vs some sack hear and in faith— we are all friends; &amp; in private— what was her husbands name▪— Isle give you a carouse by and by.
O you shall pardon me his name, it seems you are a Citizen, it would bee discourse enough for you upon the ex∣change this fort-night should I tell his name.
Your modesty in this wives commendation; on sir.
In the passage of our loves, (amongst other favours of greater value) she bestowed upon me this •inge which she pro∣tested was her husbands gift.
The poesy, the poesy—O my heart, that ring good infaith:
Not many nights coming to her and being familiar with her.
Kissing and so forth.
I Sir.
And talking to her feelingly.
Pox on it, I lay with her.
Good infaith you are of a good complexion.
Lying with her as I say: and rising some-what early frō her in the morning, I lost this ring in her bed.
In my wives bed.
How do you Sir.
Nothing: lets have a fire chamberlain; I think my boots have taken water I have such a shuddering: in the bed you say;
Right Sir, in Mistress Maiberies sheets.
Was her name Maybery.
Beshrew my tongue for blabbing, I presume upon your secrecy.
O God Sir, but where did you find your loosing;
Where I found her falsnesse: with this Gentleman; who by his own confession partaking the like enjoyment; found this ring the same morning on her pillow, and shamed not in my sight to wear it.
What did she talk feelingly to him too; I war∣••ned her husband was forth a Town all this while,
and he poor man trauaild with hard Eggs in's pocket, to save the charge of a bait, whilst she was at home with her Plouers, Turkey, Chickens; do you know that Maibery.
No more then by name.
Hoe's a wondrous honest man; lets be merry; will not your mistress?-gentlemen, you are tenants in common I take it.
Yes.
Will not your Mistress make much of her husband when he comes home• as if no such legerdemain had bin acted.
Yes she hath reason for it, for in some countries, where men and women have good travailing stomachs, they begin with porridge; then they fall to Capon or so-forth: but if Ca∣pone come short of filling their bellies, to their porridge again, tic their only course, so for our women in England.
This wit taking of long journeys: kindred that comes in ore the hatch, and sailing to Westminster makes a number of Cuckolds.
Fie what an idle quarrel is this, was this her ring?
Her ring Sir.
A pretty idle toy, would you would take money for it,
Money sir.
The more I look on it, the more I like it.
Troth it is of no great value, and considering the loss, and finding of this ring made breach into your friendship, Gen∣tlemen, with this trifle purchase his love, I can tell you he keeps a good Table.
What my Mistress gift?
Faith you are a merry old Gentleman; Isle give you my part in it.
Troth and mine, with your promise to conceal it from her husband.
Doth he know of it yet?
No Sir.
He shall never then I protest • look you this ring doth fit me passing well.
I am glad we have fitted you.
This walking is wholesome, I was a cold even now, now I sweat for it.
Shalls walk into the Garden Luke. Gentlemen weal down and hasten supper.
Look you, we must be better acquainted that's all.
Most willingly; Excellent, hoe's heat to the proof, lets with-draw, and give him leave to rave a little.
Chamberlain, give vs a clean Towel.
How now man?
I am foolish old Maybery, and yet I can be wise May∣bery too; Isle to London presently, begone Sir.
How, how?
Nay, nay, Gods precious you doe mistake me Moister Bellamont; I am not distempered, for to know a mans wife is a whore, is to be resolved of it, and to be resolved of it, is to make no question of it, and when a case is out of question; what was I saying?
Why look you, what a distraction are you fallen into?
If a man be divorced, doe you see, divorced form Iuris, whether may he have an action or no, against those that make horns at him?
O madness! that the frailty of a woman should make a wise man thus idle! yet I protest to my understanding, this re¦port seems as far from truth, as you from patience.
Then am I a fool, yet I can bee wise and I list too: what says my wedding ring?
Indeed that breeds some suspicion: for the rest most gross and open, for two men, both to love your wife, both to in∣joy her bed, and to meet you as if by miracle, and not know∣ing you, upon no occasion in the world, to thrust upon you a discourse of a quarrel, with circumstance so dishonest, that not any Gentleman but of the country blushing, would have pub∣lisht. I and to name you: doe you know them?
Faith now I remember, I have seen them walk muf∣••ed by my shop.
Like enough; pray God they doe not borrow money of •• twixt Ware and London: come strive to blow over these •louts.
Not a cloud, you shall have clean Moone-shine, they have good smooth looks the fellows.
As Jet, they will take up I warrant you, where they may bee trusted; will you be merry?
Wondrous merry; lets have some Sack to drown this Cuckold, down with him: wondrous merry: one word &amp; no more; I am but a foolish tradesman, and yet Isle be a wise tradesman.
Arrest me? at whose suit? Tom Chartley, Dick Leuer-poole, stay, Ime arrested.
Arrested?
Gentlemen break not the head of the peace; its to no purpose, for hoe's in the laws clutches, you see hoe's fangd.
Vds life, doe you stand with your naked weapons in your hand, and doe nothing with em? put one of em into my fingers, Isle tickle the pimple-nosed varlets.
Hold Doll, thrust not a weapon upon a mad woman, Officers step back into the Tavern, you might ha tan me ith street, and not in the Tavern entry, you Cannibals.
Wee did it for your credit Sir.
How much is the debt? Drawer, some wine.
Four score pound: can you send for Bail Sir? or what will you doe? wee cannot stay.
You cannot, you pasty-footed Rascals, you will stay one day in hell.
Four score pounds draws deep; farewell Doll, come Sergeants, Isle step to mine Uncle not far off, here-by in Put∣ding lane, and he shall bail me: if not, Chartly you shall find me playing at Span-counter, and so farewell. Send me some Tobacco.
Have an eye to his hands.
Have an eye to his legs.
Ime as melancholy now?
Villainous spiteful luck, Isle hold my life some of these saucy Drawers betrayed him.
Wee sir! no by Gad Sir, wee scorn to have a Iudas in our company.
No, no, hee was dogd in, this is the end of all dyeing.
This is the end of all whores, to fall into the hands of knaves. Drawer, tie my shoe pry thee: the new knot as thou see this: Philip is a good honest Gentleman, I love him be∣cause heel spend, but when I saw him on his Fathers Hobby, and a brace of Punkes following him in a coach, I told him hee would run out, hast done boy?
Yes forsooth: by my troth you have a dainty leg.
How now good-man rogue.
Nay sweet Mistress Doll.
Doll! you reprobate! out you Bawd for seven years by the custom of the City.
Good Mistress Dorothy; the pox take me, if I touched your leg but to a good intent.
Prate you: the rotten toothed rascal, will for six pence fetch any whore to his masters customers: and is every one that swims in a Taffeta gown Lettis for your lips? vds life, this is rare, that Gentlewomen and Drawers, must suck at one Spigot: Doe you laugh you unseasonable puck-fist? doe you grin?
Away Drawer: hold pry thee good rogue, hold my sweet Doll, a pox a this swaggering.
Pox a your guts, your kidneys; mew: hang ye, rooke: I'm as melancholy now as Fleet-streete in a long vacation.
Melancholy? come weal ha some muld Sack.
When begins the te•me?
Why? hast any suites to be tried at Westminster?
My Suits you base ruffian have been tried at West∣minster already: so soon as ever the term begins, Isle change my lodging, it stands out a the way; Isle lye about Charing∣cross, for if there be any stirrings, there we shall have 'em: or if some Dutch-man would come from the States! oh! these Flemmings pay soundly for what they take.
If thou't have a lodging West-ward Doll, Isle fit thee.
At Tyburne will you not? a lodging of your prove∣ding? to bee cal•d a Lieutenants, or a Captains wench! oh! I scorn to bee one of your Low-country commodities, I; is this body made to bee maintained with Provant and dead
pay? no: the Mercer must bee paid, and Satin gown• 〈…〉 bee tan up.
And gallon pots must be tumbled down.
Stay: I have had a plot a breeding in my brains— Are all the Q•est-houses broken up?
Yes, long since: what then?
What then? mary then is the wind come about, and for those poor wenches that before Christmas fled West-ward with bag and baggage, come now sailing along the lee shore with a No•therly wind▪ and we that had warrants to lie with∣out the liberties, come now dropping into the freedom by Owle-light sneakingly.
B•t Doll, whats the plot thou spakst off?
Mary this: Gentlemen, and Tobacco-stinckers, and such like are still buzzing where sweet meates are (like Flies) but they make any flesh stink that they blow upon: I will leave those fellows therefore in the hands of their Laundresses: Sell∣for is the Kings stamp, man Gods stamp, and a woman is mans stamp, wee are not cu•rant till wee pass from one man to an∣other.
Very good.
I will therefore take a fair house in the City: no mat∣la tho it be a Tavern that has blown up his Moister: it shall be in trade s•ill, for I know diverse Taverns ith Town, that have but a Wall between them and a hotte-house. It shall then bee given out, that I'm a Gentlewoman of such a birth, such a wealth, have had such a breeding, and so forth, and of such a carriage, and such qualities, and so forth: to set it off the better, old Jack Hornet shall take upon him to bee my Father.
Excellent, with a chain about his neck and so forth.
For that, Saint Martins and wee will talk: I know we shall have Gudgions bite presently: if they doe boys, you shall live like Knights fe•lowes; as occasion serves, you shall vveare liveries and wait, but when Gulls are my winde-falls, you shall be Gentlemen, and keep them company: seek out Jack Hornet incontinently.
Wee will; come Charily, vveele play our parts I warrant.
Doe so:—
The world's a stage, from which strange shapes we borrow:
To day we are honest, and rank knaves to morrow.
Where is your Mistress, villain? when went she abroad?
Abroad Sir, why as soon as she was up Sir.
Up Sir, down Sir, so sir: Moister Bellamont, I will tell you a strange secret in Nature, this boy is my wives bawd.
O fie sir, fie, the boy he doe's not look like a Bawd, he has no double chin.
No sir, nor my breath does not stink, I smell not of Garlic or Aqua-vitae: I use not to bee drunk with Sack and Sugar: I swear not God dam me, if I know where the party is, when it is a lye and I doe know: I was never Carted (but in har∣uest) never whipped but at School: never had the Grincoms: never sold one Maiden-head ten several times, f••st to an Eng∣lishman, then to a Welshman, then to a Dutchman, then to a pose∣k•e Frenchman, I hope Sir I am no Bawd then.
Thou art a Baboune, and holdst me with tricks, whilst my Wife grafts grafts, away, trudge, run▪ search her out by land, and by water.
Well Sir, the land Isle ferret, and after that Isle search her by water, for it may be shees gone to Brainford.
Inquire at one of mine Aunts.
One of your Aunts are you mad?
Yea, as many of the twelve companies are, troubled, troubled.
Isle chide you: go too, Isle chide you soundly.
Oh moister Bellamont!
Oh Moister Maybery! before your Servant to dance a Lancashire Horne-pipe: it shows worse to me, then dancing does to a deaf man that sees not the fiddles: Sfoot you talk like a Player.
If a Player talk like a mad-man, or a fool, or an Ass, and knows not what hee talks, then Ime one: you are a Poet Moister Bellamont, I will bestow a piece of Plate upon you to bring my wife upon the Stage, wud not her humour please Gentlemen.
I think it would: yours wud make Gentlemen as fat as fools: I wud give two pieces of Plate, to have you stand by me, when I were to write a jealous mans part: Jealous men are either knaves or Coxcombs, bee you neither: you wear yale∣low hose without cause.
With-out cause, when my Mare bears double: with∣out cause?
And without wit.
When two Virginal Jacks skip up, as the key of my instrument goes down!
They are two wicked elders.
When my wives ring does smoke for it.
Your wives ring may deceive you.
O Ma•ster Bellamont! had it not been my wife had made me a Cuckold, it should never have grieved me.
You wrong her upon my soul.
No, she wrongs me upon her body.
Now blew-bottle? what fl•tter you for Sea-pye?
Not to catch fish Sir, my young Moister, your son my∣ster Philip is taken prisoner.
By the Dunkirks.
Worse: by Catch-polls: hoe's encountered.
Shall I never see that prodigal come home.
Yes Sir, if you'll fetch him out, you may kill a Calfe for him.
For how much lies he?
The debt is four score pound, marry he charged me to tell you it was four •core and ten, so that he lies only for the odd ten pound.
His child's part shall now be paid, this money shall be his last, &amp; this vexation the last of mine: if you had such a son my∣ster Maiberie.
To such a wife, it were an excellent couple.
Release him, and release me of much sorrow, I will buy a Son no more: go redeem him.
Here's the party Sir.
Hence, and lock fast the doors, now is my prize.
If she beat you not at your own weapon, wud her Buckler were cleft in two pieces.
I will not have you handle her too roughly.
No, I will like a Justice of peace, grow to the point: are not you a whore: never start: thou art a Cloth-worker, and hast •urnd me.
How Sir, into what Sir, have I turned you?
Into a Civil Suite: into a sober beast: a Land-rat, a Cuckold: thou art a common bedfellow, art not? art not?
Sir this Language, to me is strange, I understand it not.
O! you study the french now.
Good Sir, lend me patience.
I made a felled of that herb: doest see these flesh-hookes, I could tear out those false eyes, those Cats eyes, that can see in the night: punk I could.
Hear her answer for her self.
Good Moister Bellomont,
Let him not do me violence: dear Sir,
Should any but your self shoot out these names,
I would put off all female modesty,
To be revenged on him.
Know thou this ring? there has bin old running at the ring since I went.
Yes Sir, this ring is mine, he was a villain,
That stole it from my hand: he was a villain:
That put it into yours.
They were no villains,
When they stood stoutly for me: took your part:
And stead of colours fought under my sheets.
I know not what you mean.
They lay with the: I mean plain dealing.
With me! if ever I had thought unclean,
In detestation of your nuptial pillow:
Let Sulphur drop from Heaven, and nail my body
Dead to this earth: that slave, that damned fury
(Whose whips are in your tongue to torture me)
Casting an eye unlawful on my cheek,
Haunted your threshold daily, and threw forth
All tempting baits which lust and credulous youth,
Apply to our frail sex: but those being weak
The second siege he laid was in sweet words.
And then the breach was made.
Nay, nay, hear all.
At last he takes me sitting at your door,
Seizes my palm, and by the charm of oaths
(Back to restore it straight) he won my hand,
To crown his finger with that hoop of gold.
I did demand it, but he mad with rage
And with desires unbridled, fled and vowed,
That ring should me undo: and now belike
His spells have wrought on you. But I beseech you,
To dare him to my face, and in mean time
Deny me bedroom▪ drive me from your board,
Disgrace me in the habit of your slave,
Lodge me in some discomfortable vault
Where neither Sun nor Moon may touch my sight,
Till of this slander I my soul acquit.
Guiltless upon my soul.
Troth so •think I.
I now draw in your bow, as I before
Supposed they drew in mine: my stream of jealousy,
Abc back again, and I that like a horse
Ran b••nd-fold in a Mill (all in one circle)
Yet thought I had go• fore-right, now spy my error:
Villains you have abused me, and I vow
Sharp vengeance on your heads: drive in your tears
I take your word ya're honest, which good men,
Very good men will scarce do to their wives.
I will bring home these serpents and allow them,
The heate of mine own bosom: wife I charge you
Set out your hauiours towards them in such colours,
As if you had bin their whore, Isle have it so,
Isle candy o'er my words, and sleek my brow,
Entreat 'em that they would not point at me,
Nor mock my horns, with this Arm Isle embrace 'em
And with this—go too.
Oh we shall have murder—you kill my heart.
No: I will shed no blood,
But I will be revenged, they that do wrong
Teach others way to right: Isle fetch my blow
Fair and a far off and as Feneers use
Tho at the foot I strike, the head Isle bruise.
Isle join with you: lets walk: oh! here is my Son.
Welcome a shore Sir: from whence come you pray.
From the house of prayer and fasting—the Counter.
Art not, thou ashamed to bee seen come out of a pri∣son.
No Gods my Judge, but I was ashamed to go into prison.
I am told sir, that you spend your credit and your coin upon a light woman.
I ha seen light gold sir, pass away amongst Mer∣cers.
And that you have laid thirty or forty pounds upon her back in taffeta gowns, and silk petticoats.
None but Taylors will say so, I ne'er laid any thing upon her back: I confess I took up a petticoat and a raised fore-part for her, but who has to do with that?
Mary that has every body Moister Philip.
Leave her company, or leave me, for shoe's a woman of an ill name.
Her name is Dorothy sir, I hope thats no il name.
What is she? what wilt thou do with her?
Sbloud sir what does he with her?
Doest mean to marry her? of what birth is she? what are her comings in, what does she live upon?
Rents sir, Rents, she lives upon her Rents, and I can have her.
You can.
Nay father, if destiny dog me I must have her: you have often told me the nine Muses are all women, and you deal with them, may not I the better bee allowed one than you so many? look you Sir, the Northern man loves white-meates, the Southery man Salads, the Essex man a Calfe, the Kentishman a Wag-taile, the Lancashire man an Egg-pie, the Welshman Leekes and Cheese, and your Londoners raw Mutton, so Father god-boy, I was borne in London.
Stay, look you Sir, as hee that lives upon Sal∣lades without Mutton, feeds like an Ox, (for hee eats
grass you know) yet rises as hungry as an Ass, and as hee that makes a dinner of leekes will have lean cheeks, so, thou foolish Londoner, if nothing but raw mutton can diet thee, look to live like a fool and a slave, and to die like a beggar and a knave, come Moister Maiberie, farewell boy.
Farewell father Snot — Sir if I have her, Isle spend more in mustard &amp; vinegar in a year, then both you in beef.
More saucy knave thou.
AM I like a fiddlers base viol (new set up,) in a good case boys? first neat, is it terse! am I handsome? ha▪
Admirable, excellent.
An under sheriff cannot cover a knave more cunningly.
Sfoot if he should come before a Church-warden, he wud make him peu-fellow with a Lords steward at least.
If I had but a staff in my hand, fools wud think I were one of Simon and Iudes gentlemen ushers, and that my ap∣apparel were hired: they say three Taylors go to the making up of a man, but Ime sure I had four Taylors and a half went to the making of me thus: this Suite tho it ha bin canuast well, yet tic no law-suite, for it was dispatcht sooner than a posit on a wed∣ding night.
Why I tel thee Jack Hornet, if the Devil and all the Bro∣cares in long lane had rifled their wardrobe, they wud ha been damned before they had fitted thee thus.
Punk, I shall bee a simple father for you: how does my chain show now I walk.
If thou were hung in chains, thou could not show better.
But how fit our blew-coates on our backs.
As they do upon banckrout retainers backs at Saint Georges feast in London: but at VVestminster, It makes 'em scorn the badge of their occupation: there the bragging velure-cani∣and hobbi-horses, prance up and down as if some a the Ti•ters had ridden 'em.
Nay Sfoot, if they be banckrouts, tic like some have ridden
'em: and there-vpon the Citizens Proverb rises, when hee says; he trusts to a broken staff.
Hornet, now you play my Father, take heed you be not out of your part, and shame your adopted Daughter.
I will look gravely Doll, (doe you see boys) like the fore-man of a Jury: and speak wisely like a Latin School∣moister, and be surly and dogged, and proud like the Keeper of a prison.
You must lie horribly, when you talk of your lands.
No shop-keeper shall out lye me, nay, no Fencer: when I hem boys, you shall duck: when I cough and spit gob∣bets Doll.
The pox shall be in your lungs Hornet.
No Doll, these with their high shoes shall tread me out.
All the lessons that I ha pricked out for 'em, is when the Wether-cock of my body turns towards them, to stand bare.
And not to be saucy as Serving-men are.
Come, come, we are no such creatures as you take vs for.
If we •aue but good draughts in my peeter-boate, fresh Salmon you sweet villains shall be no meat with vs.
S•oot nothing moos my choler, but that my chain is Copper: but tic no matter, better men than old Jack Hornet have rode up Holburne, with as bad a thing about their necks as this: your •ight which•ler indeed hangs himself in Saint Martins, and not in Cheapside.
Peace, some-body rings: run both, whilst he has the the rope in's hand if it b• a prize, hale him, if a man a war, blow him up, or hang him out at the maine yards end.
But what ghost, (hold up my fine Girl) what ghosts haunts thy house?
Oh! why diverse: I have a Clothiers Factor or two; a Grocer that would fine Pepper me, a Welsh Gaptaine that lays hard siege, a Dutch Marchāt, that would spend al that he's able to make in the low countries, but to take measu•e of my Holland sheets when I lye in 'em: I hear trampling: it is my Flemish Hoy.
Dar is for you, and for you: even, twea, dry, veer, and
viue skilling, drinks Skellum vysie fréese: nempt, dats v drink gilt.
Till our crowns crack again Moister Hans van Belch.
How first met you, how first bro? ur•lick?
Ec var well God dank you: Nay Ime an apt school∣ler and can take.
Datt is good, dott is good: Ec can néet stay long: for Ec h•ben skip come now upon de vater: O mine schoo∣men vro, wee sall dance lanteera, tear, and sing Ec brincks to you min here, van: —wat man is dat vro.
Nay pray sir on.
Wat honds foot is dat Dorothy.
Tic my father.
Gotts Sacrament! your vader! why seyghen you niet so to me! mine heart tic mine all great desire, to call you mine vader ta for Ec love dis schonen vro your dochterkin.
Sir you are welcome in the way of honesty.
Ec bedanck you: Ec hob so ghe founden vader.
Whats your name I pray.
Mun nom bin Hans van Belch.
Hans Van Belch!
You, you, tic so, tic so, de drunken man is alteet re∣menber me.
Doe you play the merchant, son Belch.
You vader: Ec hob de skip swim now upon de vater if you endouty, go up in de little Skip dat go so, and bée pulled up to Wapping, Ec sal bear you on my back, and hang you about min neck into min great Skip.
He Says Doll, he would have thee to Wapping and hang thee.
No Father I understand him, but moister Hans, I would not be seen hanging about any mans neck, to be counted his Jewel, for any gold.
Is your father living Moister Hans.
You, you, min vader hob schonen husen in Aus∣burgh great mine hear is mine voters brother, mine vader hob land, and bin full of see, dat is beasts, cattle
He's lousy be-like.
Min vader bin be grotest fooker in all Ausbrough.
The greatest what?
Fooker he says.
Out upon him.
Yaw yaw, fooker is en great min here hes en el∣aldermen vane City, gots sacrament, wat is de clock? Ec met stay.
Call his watch before you, if you can.
Her's a pretty thing: do these wheels spin up the hours! what's a clock.
Acht: yaw tic acht.
We can hear neither clock, nor Jack going, wee dwell in such a place that I fear I shall never find the way to Church, because the bells hang so far; Such a watch as this, would make me go down with the Lamb, and be up with the Lark.
Seghen you so, dor it to.
O fie: I doe but jest, for in truth I could never abide a watch.
Gotts sacrament, Ec niet hob it any more.
An other peal! good father launch out this hollander.
Come Moister Belch, I will bring you to the water-side, perhaps to Wapping, and there isle leave you.
Ec bedanck you vader.
They say Whores and bawds go by clocks, but what a Manasses is this to buy twelve hours so dearly, and then bee begged out of'em so easily? heel be out at heals shortly sure for he's out about the clocks already: O foolish young man how doest thou spend thy time?
Your grocer.
Nay Sfoot, then isle change my tune: I may cause such leaden-heeld rascals; out of my sight: a knife, a knife I say: O Moister Allom, if you love a woman, draw out your knife and undo me, undo me.
Sweet mistress Dorothy, what should you do with a knife, it• ill meddling with edge tools, what's the matter Masters! knife God bless vs.
Sfoot what tricks at noddy are these.
Oh I shall burst, if I cut not my lace: I'm so vexed! my father hoe's rid to Court: one was about a matter of a 1000. pound weight; and one of his men like a rogue as he is is rid another way for rents, I looked to have had him up yesterday, and up to day, and yet hee shows not his head; s••e he's run away, or r•bt &amp; run thorough; and here was a scrivener but even now, to put my father in mind of a bond, that will be forfit this night if the money be not paid Maize•er Allom. Such cross fortune!
How much is the bond?
O rare little villain.
My father could take up, upon the bareness of his word five hundred pound: and five toe.
What is the debt?
But hee scorns to bee—and I scorn to bee—
Pree thee sweet Mistress Dorothy vex not, how much is it?
Alas Moister Allom, tic but poor fifty pound.
If that bee all, you shall upon your word take up so much with me: another time isle •un as far in your books.
Sir, I know not how to repay this kindness: but when my father —
Tush, tush, tic not worth the talking: Just 50 pound? when is it to be paid.
Between one and two.
That's wee three.
Let one of your men go along, and Isle send your fifty pound!
You so bind me sir, —go sir: Moister Allom, I ha some qu•nces brought from our house ith Country to preserve, when shall we have any good Sugar come over? the wars in Barberry make S•ger at such an excessive rate; you pay sweetly now I warrant, sir do you not.
You shall have a whole che•t of Sugar if you please.
Nay by my faith four or five loves will be enough, and Isle pay you at my fi•st child Moister Allom.
Content in faith, your man shall bring all under one, isle borrow a kiss of you at parting.
You shall sir, I borrow more of you.
Save you Captain.
Welcome good captain Iynkins.
What is hee a Barber Surgeon, that dressed your lips so.
A Barber • hoe's may Taylor; I bid him measure how hie, hee would make the standing collar of my new Taffeta Gown before, and hee as Tailors will be saucy and lickerish, laid me ore the lips.
Vds blood isle lay him cross upon his coxcomb next day.
You know tic not for a Gentlewoman to stand with a knave, for a small matter, and so I wud not strive with him, one∣lie to be rid of him.
If I take Moister prick-louse romping so hie again, by this Iron (which is none a gods Angel) isle make him know how to kiss your blind cheeks sooner: mistress Dorothy Whore∣net, I wud not have you bee a hornet, to like at Cowsherds, but to s••ng such sh•eds of rascality: will you sing a Tailor shall have me my joy?
Captain, isle bee lead by you in any thing! a Taylor! foh.
Of what stature or sis have you a stomach to have your husband now?
Of the meanest stature Captain, not a s•ze longer than your se•fe, nor shorter.
By god, tic well said: all your best Captain in the Low-cou•tree•es are as taller as I: but why of my pitch Mistress Dol?
Because your smallest Arrows fly farthest; ah you little hard-fauord villain, but sweet villain, I love thee bee∣cause thou't draw a my side, hang the rogue that will not fight for a woman.
Vds blould, and hang him for vrse than a rogue tha• will slash and cut for an omen, if she be a whore.
Pree the good Captain Iynki•s, teach me to speak some welch, me thinks a Welchmans tongue is the neatest tongue! —
As any tongue in the vrld, unless Cramacrees, that's vrse.
How do you say, I love you with all my heart.
Mi cara whee, en halon.
Mi cara whee, en hel-hound.
Hell▪ hound, o mondu, my cara whee, en halon.
O, my cara whee en halon.
Oh! and you went to writing school twenty score year in Wales, by Sesu, you cannot have better utterance, for welch.
Come tit me, come tat me, come throw a kiss at me, how is that?
By gad I kanow not, what your tit mees and tat mees are, but me uatha — Sbloud I know what kisses be, as well as I know a Welch hook, if you will go down with Shrop-sheere cariers▪ you shall have Welch enough in your polios forty weeks.
Say Captain that I should follow your colours into your Country how should I fare there?
Fare? by Sesu, O there is the most abominable seer! and wider silver pots to drink in, and softer peds to lie upon &amp; do our necessary pusines, and fairer houses and parks, &amp; holes for Cones, and more money, besides tosted Sees and butter∣milk in Northwales diggon: besides, harps, &amp; Welch Freeze, and Goats, and Cow-heeles, and Metheglin, oh, it may be set in the Kernicles, will you ma•ch thither?
Not with your Shrop-sheire cariers, Captain.
Will you go with Captain Ienkin and see his Cousin Maddoc upon Ienkin there, and isle run hedlongs by and by, &amp; batter away money for a new Coach to iolt you in.
Bestow your Coach upon me, &amp; two young white Mares, and you shall see how Isle ride.
Will you? by all the leekes that are worn on Saint Da∣uies day I will buy not only a Coach, with four wheels, but also a white Mare and a stone horse too, because they shall traw you, very lustily, as if the devil were in their arses.
How now, more Tailors —
How sir; Taylors.
O good Captain, tic my Cousin.
Is he, I will Cousin you then sir too, one day.
I hope sir then to Cousin you too.
By gad I hobe so, fare-well Sidanien.
Her's both money, and sugar.
O sweet villain, set it up.
Sfoot, what tame suaggerer was this I met Doll.
A Captain, a Captain: but hast escaped the Dunkerks ho∣nest Philip? Philip ryalls are not more welcome: did thy father pay the shoe•?
He paid that shot, and then shot pistolets into my pose∣kits: hark wench: chinck chink, makes the punk wanton and the Baud to wink.
O rare music.
Heavenly consort, better than old Moons.
But why? why Dol, go these two like Beadells in blew? ha?
Theres a moral in that: flea off your skins, you precious Cannibals: O that the welch Captain were here a∣gain, and a drum with him, I could march now, ran, tan, tan, ta∣ra, ran, tan, tan, sir Philip has thy father any plate in's house.
Enough to set up a Gold-smithes shop.
Can not borrow some of it? wee shall have guests to morrow or next day and I wud serve the hungry rag-a-muffins in plate, tho it were none of mine own.
I shall hardly borrow it of him but I could get one of mine Aunts, to beat the bush for me, and she might get the bird.
Why pree the, let me bee one of thine Aunts, and doe it for me then. As Ime virtuous and a Gentlewoman isle restore.
Say no more tic don.
What manner of man is thy father? Sfoot id fine see the witty Monkey because thou say he's a Poet: isle tell thee, what isle do: Leuer-poole or Chartly, shall like my Gentleman vs∣her go to him, and say such a Lady sends for him, about a son∣net or an epitaph for her child that died at nurse, or for some device about a mask or so; if he comes you shall stand in a cor∣ner, and see in what State isle bear my self: he does not know me, nor my lodging.
No, no.
First a match Sirs? shalls be merry with him and his muse.
Agreed, any scaffold to execute knavery upon.
Isle send then my vant-currer presently: in the mean time, marche after the Captain, scoundrels, come hold me up:
Look how Sabrina sunk in the river Seuerne,
So will we four be drunk in the ship-wrack Tavern.
Come Wife, our two gallants will be here presently: I have promised them the best of entertainment, with protestati∣on never to reveal to thee their slander: I will have thee bear thy self, as if thou made a feast upon Simon and Iudes day, to country Gentlewomen, that came to see the Pageant, bid them extremely welcome, though thou wish their throats cut; it is in fashion.
O God I shall never endure them.
Endure them, you are a fool: make it your case, as it may be many women's of the Freedom; that you had a friend in private, whom your husband should lay to his bosom: and he in requital should lay his wife to his bosom: what treads of the toe, salutations by winckes, discourse by bitings of the lip, amorous glances, sweet stolen kisses when your husbands backs turn•d, would pass between them, bear your self to Greeneshield as if you did love h•m for affecting you so entirely, not taking any notice of his journey: theile put more tricks up∣on you: you told me Greeneshield means to bring his Sister to your house, to have her board here.
Right, shoe's some cracked demy-culuerin, that hath mis∣carried in service: no matter though it be some charge to me for a time I care not.
Lord was there ever such a husband?
Why, would thou have me suffer their tongues to run at large, in Ordinaries and Cock-pits; though the Knaves doe lye, I tell you Moister Bellamont, lies that come from sterne looks, and Satin out-sides, and guilt Rapiers also, will be put up and go for currant.
Right sir, it is a small spark, gives fire to a beautiful wo∣mans discredit.
I will therefore use them like informing kna•es in this kind, make up their mouths with •iluer, and after bee re•eng'd upon them: I was in doubt I should have grown fat of late: &amp; it were no• for law suites: and fear of our wives, we rich men
should grow out of all compass: they come, my worthy friends welcome: look my wives colour rises already.
You have not made her acquainted with the discovery.
O by no means: ye see Gentlemen the affection of an old man; I would fine make all whole again. Wife give entertainment to our new acquaintance, your lips wife, any wo∣mā may lend her lips without her husbands privity tic alowable.
You are very welcome; I think it be near dinner time Gentlemen: Isle will the maid to cover, and return presently.
Gods precious why doth she leave them?
O I know her stomach: she is but retired into another chamber, to ease her heart with crying a little: it hath ever bin her humour▪ she hath done it 5. or 6. times in a day, when Court∣ers have been hear, if any thing hath bin out of order, and yet every return laughed and bin as merry: &amp; how is it Gentlemen, you are well acquainted with this room, are you not?
I had a delicate banquet once on that table.
In good time: but you are better acquainted with my bed chamber.
Were the cloth of gold Cushins set forth at your en∣tertainement?
Yes Sir.
And the cloth of T•ssew Valance▪
They are very rich ones.
God refuse me, they are lying Rascols, I have no such furniture.
I protest it was the strangest, and yet with-all the hap∣piest fortune that wee should meet you two at Ware, that ever redeemed such desolate actions: I would not wrong you again for a million of Londons.
No, do you want any money? or if you be in debt, I am a hundredth pound in the Subsidy, command me.
Alas good Gentleman; did you ever read of the like patience in any of your ancient Romans?
You see what a sweet face in a Velvet cap can do, your cit∣tizēs wives are like Partridges, the hens are better thē the cocks.
I believe it in troth, Sir you did observe how the Gen∣tlewoman could not contain her self, when she saw vs enter.
Right.
For thus much I must speak in allowance of her mode∣•tie, when I had her most private she would blush extremely.
I, I warrant you, and ask you if you would have such a great sin lie upon your conscience, as to lie with another mans wife.
In truth she would.
And tell you there were maids enough in london, if a man were so viciously given, whose Portions would help them to hue•sbands though gentlemen gave the first onset.
You are a merry old gentleman infaith Sir: much like to this was her language.
And yet clipe you with as voluntary a bosom; as if she had fallen in love with you at some Innes a court revels; and envy•ed you by letter to her lodging.
Your knowledge Sir, is perfect without any information.
Isle go see what my wife is doing gentlemen, when my wife enters show her this ring; and twill quit all suspicion.
Dost hear Luke Greeshield will thy wife by here presētly.
I left my boy to weight upon her, by this light, I think God provides; for if this citizen had not out of his overplus of kindness proffered her, her diet and lodging under the name of my sister, I could not have told what shift to have made; for the greatest part of my money is revolted; weal make more use of him, the whoresō rich Innkeeper of Doncaster her father showed himself a rank ostler: to send her up at this time a year; and and by the carrier to, it was but a jade trike of him.
But have you instructed her to call you brother.
Yes and shele do it, I left her at Bosoms Inn, sheele be here, presently.
Moister Greenesheild your sister is come; my wife is enter∣taining her, by the mass I have bin upon her lips already, Lady you are welcome, look you moister Greeneshield, because your sister is newly come out of the fresh air, and that to be pent up in a narrow lodging here in the city may offend her health she shall lodge at a garden house of mine in Morefeilds where if it please you and my worthy friend hear to bear her company your several lodgings and Joint commons (to the poor ability of a citizen) shall be provided.
O God Sir.
Nay no complement your loves command it: shalls to dinner Gentlemen, come moister Bellamont Isle be the Gentle∣man usher to this fair Lady.
Here is your ring Mistress; a thousand times, —and
would have willingly lost my best of maintenance that I might have found you hair so tractable.
Sir I am still my self, I know not by what means you have grown vpō my husbād, he is much deceived in you I take it: will you go in to dinner—O God that I might have my will of him &amp; it were not for my husbād id scratch out his eyes presētly.
Welcome to Londō bonny mistress Kate, thy husband little dreams of the familiarity that hath past between thee &amp; I Kate.
No matter if hee did: he ran away from me like a base slave as he was, out of Yorkshire, and pretended he would go the Island voyage, since I near heard of him till within this fort∣night: can the world condemn me for entertaining a friend, that am used so like an Infidel?
I think not, but if your husbād knew of this he'd be divorced.
Hee were an ass then, no wisemen should deal by their wives as the sale of ordinance passes in Englād, if it break the first discharge the workman is at the loss of it, if the second the Merchant, &amp; the workman jointly, if the third the Merchant, so in our case, if a woman prove false the first year, turn her upon her fathers n•ck, if the second, turn her home to her father but allow her a portion, but if she hold pure mettaile two year &amp; fly to several pieces, in the third, repair the ruins of her hone∣sty at your charges, for the best piece of ordinance, may bee cracked in the casting, and for women to have cracks and slaves, alas they are borne to them, now I have held out four year, doth my husband do any things about Londō doth he swagger?
O as tame as a fray in Fleet estreete, when their are no∣body to part them.
I ever thought so, we have notable valiant fellows about Doncaster, theile give the lie and the stab both in an instant.
You like such kind of man-hood best Kate.
Yes in truth for I think any woman that loves her friēd, had rather have him stand by it then lie by it, but I pray thee tel me, why must I be quarterd at this Citizens garden house, say you.
The disco•se of that will set thy blood on fire to be reuēgd on thy husbands forehead piece.
Will you go in to dinner sir?
Will you lead the way forsooth?
No sweet forsooth weal follow you.
O Moister Bellamont: as ever you took pity upon the simpli∣city of a poor abused gentlewoman: will you tell me one thing.
Any thing sweet Mistress Mayberrie.
I but will you doe it faithfully?
As I respect your acquaintance I shall doe it.
Tell me then I beseech you, doe not you think this minx is some noughty pack whom my husband hath fallen in love with, and means to keep under my nose at his garden house.
No upon my life is she not,
O I cannot believe it, I know by her eyes she is not honest, why should my husband proffer them such kindness? that have abused him and me; so intolerable: and will not luffer me to speak; theres the hellont not suffer me to speak.
Fie fie, he doth that like a usurer, that will vfe a man with all kindness, that he may be careless of paying his money, upon his day, and after-wards take the extremity of the forfa∣ture; your jealousy is Idle: say this were true, it lies in the by∣some of a sweet wife to draw her husband from any loose imperfection, from winching, from Jealousy, from couituousnes from crabbednes, which is the old mans common disease, by her politic yielding.
She may doe it from crabednes, for example I have known as tough blades as any are in England broke upon a featherbed,—come to diner,
Isle be ruled by you Sir, for you are very like mine uncle.
Suspicion works more mischief grows more strong, To sever ch•st beds then apparent wrongs.
Come my little Punk with thy two Compositors to this unlawful painting house, thy ponders a my old poe•icall dad will be here presently, •ache up thy State in this chair, and bear thy self as if thou were talking to thy apothecary after the receipt of a purgation: look scurvily upon him: sometimes be merry and stand upon thy pantoffles like a new elected scauinger.
And by and by melancholic like a Tilter that hath broke his staves foul before his Mistress.
Right, for hee takes thee to bee a woman of a great count: hark upon my life hoe's come.
See who knocks: thou shalt see me make a fool of a Poet, that hath made five hundred fools.
Please your new Lady-ship hoe's come.
Is hee? I should for the more state let him walk some two hours in an utter room: if I did owe him money, it were not much out of fashion; but come enter him: Stay, when we are in private conference send in my Tailor.
Look you my Laddie's a sleep, •heel wake presently.
I come not to teach a Starling sir, God-boy-you.
Nay, in truth Sir, if my Lady should but dream you had been hear.
Who's that keeps such a prating?
It is I Madam.
Isle have you preferred to be a Crier: you have an exlent throat for it: pox a the Poet is he not come yet?
Hoe's here Madam.
Cry you mercy: I ha cursed my Monkey for shrewd turns a hundred times, and yet I love it never the worse I protest.
Tic not in fashion dear Lady to call the breaking out of a Gentlewoman's lips, scabs, but the heate of the Liver.
So sir: if you have a sweet breath, and doe not smell of sweaty linen, you may draw nearer, nearer.
I am no friend to Garlic Madam.
You write the sweeter verse a great deal sir, I hau• heard much good of your wit moister Poet: you do many de∣uises for Citizens wives: I care not greatly because I have a City Laundress already, if I get a City Poet too: I have such a devise for you, and this it is.
O welcome Tailor: do but waite till I dispatch my Tailor, and Isle discover my device to you.
Isle take my leave of your Ladyship.
No: I pray thee stay: I must have you sweat for my device Moister Poet.
He sweats already believe it.
A cup of wine there: what fashion will make a woman have the best body Taylor.
A short dutch wast with a round cathern-wheele far∣dingale: a close sleeve wi•h a cartoose colour and a pickadell.
And what meat will make a woman have a fine wit Moister Poet.
Foul madam is the most light, delicate, &amp; witty feeding.
Foul say thou: I know them that feed of it every meal, and yet are as arrant fools as any are in a kingdom of my c•edit: hast thou don Taylor? now to discover my device sir: Isle drink to you sir.
Gods precious, wee ne'er thought of her device before, pray god it be any thing tolerable.
Isle have you make 12. poesies for a dozen of cheese tren∣chers.
O horrible!
In welch madam?
Why in welch sir.
Because you will have them serve•d in with your cheese Lady.
I will bestow them indeed upon a welch Captain: one that loves cheese better than venson, for if you should but get 3. or 4. Cheshire cheeses and set them a running down Hie∣gate-hill, he would make more hast after thē than after the best kennel of hounds in England; what think you of my device?
Fore-god a very strange device and a cunning one.
Now he begins to eye the goblet.
You should be a kin to the Bellamonts, you give the same Arms madam.
Faith I paid sweetly for the cup, as it may be you and some other Gentleman have don for their Arms.
Ha, the same weight: the same fashion: I had three nest of them given me, by a Nobleman at the christing of my son Philip.
Your son is come to full age sir: and hath tan posse∣ssion of the gift of his God-father.
Ha, thou wilt not kill me.
No sir, isle kill no Poet least his ghost write satires a∣against me.
Whats she? a good common welthes woman, she was borne.
For her Country, and has borne her Country.
Heart of virtue? what make I here?
This was the party you rail•d on: I keep no worse cō∣pany than your self father, you were wont to say venery is like usury that it may be allowed tho it be not lawful.
Wherefore come I hither.
To make a device for cheese-trenchers.
Isle tell you why I sent for you, for nothing but to show you that your gravity may bee drawn in: white hairs may fall into the company of drabs as well as red beards into the soci∣ety of knaves: would not this woman deceive a whole camp ith Low-countries, and make one Commander believe she on∣lie kept her cabin for him, and yet quarter twenty more in it.
Pree the Poet what doest thou think of me.
I think thou art a most admirable, brave, beautiful Whore.
Nay sir, I was told you would rail: but what doe you think of my device sir, nay: but you are not to depart yet My∣ster Poet: wut sup with me? Isle cashier all my young barnicles, &amp; weal talk over a peace of mutton and a partridge, wisely.
Sup with thee that art a common vndertaker? thou that doest promise nothing but watchet eyes, bombast calves and false peryvvigs.
Pree the comb thy beard with a comb of black lead, it may be I shall affect thee.
O thy unlucky star! I must take my leave of your worcester∣ship I cannot fit your device at this instant: I must desire to borrovv a nest of goblets of you: O villainy! I wud some honest Butcher would beg all the queens and knaves ith City and cary them into some other Country they'd sell better than Beefs and Calves: what a virtuous City would this bee then! mary I think there would bee a few people left int, vds foot, gulled with Cheese-trenchers and yoked in entertainment with a Taylor? good, good.
How doest Doll?
Scurvy, very scurvy.
Where shalls sup wench?
Isle sup in my bed: get you home to your
odging and come whē I send for you, ô filthy rogue that I am.
How! how, mistress Dorothy?
Saint Antonies fire light in your Spanish slops: vds life, ille make you know a difference, between my mirth and mel∣ancholy, you panderly rogue.
We observe your Ladyship.
The puncks in her humour—pox.
Isle humour you and you pox me: vds life have I lien with a Spaniard of late, that I have learnt to mingle such water with my Malago, Other's some scurvy thing or other breeding; how many several loves of Players of Vaulters, of Lieutenants have I entertained besides a runner a the ropes, and now to let blood when the sign is at the heart? should I send him a letter with some Jewel in it, he would requite it as lawyers do, that re-returne a wood-cock pie to their clients, when they send them a Basin and a Eu•e, I will instantly go and make my self drunk, till I have lost my memory, live a scoffing Poet?
Now Squire•l wilt thou make vs acquainted with the jest thou promised to tell vs of?
I will discover it, not as a Darby-shere women disco∣uers her great teeth, in laughter: but softly as a gentlemā courts a wench behind an Arras: and this it is, young Greenesheild thy Moister with Greenesheilds sister lie in my masters garden-house here in More-fields.
Right, what of this?
Mary sir if the Gentlewoman be not his wife, he com∣mitts incest, for Ime sure he lies with her every night.
All this I know, but to the rest.
I will tell thee, the most politic trick of a woman, that ere made a mans face look witherd and pale like the tree in Cuckolds Haven in a great snow: and this it is, my mistress makes her husband believe that she walks in her sleep a nights, and to confirm this belief in him, sundry times she hath risen out of her bed, unlocked all the doors, gon frō Cham∣ber to Chamber, opend her chests, toused among her linen, &amp; when he hath waked &amp; mist her, coming to question why she conjured thus at midnight, he hath found her fast a sleep, mary it was Cats sleep, for you shall hear what prey she watched for.
Good; forth.
I ouer-heard her last night talking with thy Moister, and she promised him that as soon as her husband was a sleep, she would walk according to her custom, and come to his Chamber, mar•y she wou•d do it so pu•••annically, so secretly I mean that no body should hear of it.
〈◊〉 possible?
Take but that corner and stand close, and thine eyes shall w•t• esse it.
O •ntollerable wit, what hold can any man take of a women's honesty.
Hold? no more hold then of a Bull noynted with Soap, and baited with a sn•a•e of •idle•s i• Staffordshire: stand close I hear her coming.
W•at a filt•y knave was the shoo-maker, that made my slippers, what a cre•king they keep: O Lord, if there be any power that can make a w•mans husband sleep s•undly at a pinch, as I have often 〈◊〉 in foolish Poetry that the•e is, now, now, and it be thy will, let him dream some fine d••am or o∣there, that hoe's made a Knight, or a Noble-man, or some-what whilst I go and take b•t two kisses, but two kisses from sweet Fetherstone.
Sfoot hee may well d•eame hes made a Knight: for Isle be hanged i• she do •ot d•b him.
Was there ever any walking spirit, like to my wife? what reason s•old there bee in nature for this▪ I will question some ••••tion: not hear neither: vdslife, I would laugh if she were in Moister Fetherstones Chamber, she would fright him, My••er Fetherstone, Moister Fetherstone.
Ha, how now who calls?
Did you leave your door open last night?
I know not, I ••ink my boy did.
Gods light shoe's there then, will you know the jest, my wife hath her old tricks, Isle hold my life, my wife's in your chamber, rise out of your bed, and see and you can feel her.
He will feel her • warrant you?
Have you her sir?
•ot yet sir, shees here sir.
So I said even now to my self before God la: take her up in your arms, and bring her hither softly, for fear of waking
her: I never knew the like of this before God la, alas poor Kate, look before God; shees a sleep with her eyes open: prit∣tie little rogue, Isle wake her, and make her ashamed of it.
O you'll make her sicker then.
I warrant you; would all women thought no more hurt then thou dost, now sweet villain, Kate, Kate.
I longed for the merry thought of a pheasant.
She talks in her sleep.
And the foule-gutted Tripe-wife had got it, &amp; eat half of it: and my colour went and came, and my stomach wambled: till I was ready to sound, but a Mid-wife perceived it, and marked which way my eyes went; and helped me to it, but Lord how I picked it, it was the sweetest meat me thought.
O politic Mistress.
Why Kate, Kate?
Ha, ha, ha, I beshrew your hart, Lord where am I?
I pray thee be not frighted.
O I am sick, I am sick, I am sick, O how my flesh trembles: oh some of the Angelica water, I shall have the Mother presently.
Hold down her stomach good moister Fetherstone, while I fetch some.
Well dissembled Kate.
Pish, I am like some of your Ladies that can be sick when they have no stomach to lie with their husbands.
What mischievous fortune is this: weel have a journey to Ware Kate, to redeem this misfortune.
Well, Cheaters do not win all ways: that woman that will entertain a friend, must as well provide a Closet or Back-doore for him, as a Featherbed.
Be my troth I pity thy husb•nd.
Pity him, no man dares call him Cuckold; for he wears Satin: pity him, he that will pull down a mans sign, and set up horns, there's law for him.
Be sick again, your husband comes.
I have the worst luck; I think I get more bumps and shrewd turns in the dark, how do's she moister Fetherstone.
Very ill sir; shees troubled with the mother extremely, I held down her belly even now, and I might feel it rise▪
O lay me in my bed, I beseech you.
I will find a remedy for this walking, if all the Doctors in town can sell it; a thousand pound to a penny she spoil not her face, or break her neck, or catch a cold that she may ne'er claw off again, how dost wench?
A little recovered; alas I have so troubled that Gentlemā.
None in the world Kate, may I do you any farther service.
And I were where I would be in your bed: pray pardon me, wast you Moister Fetherstone, hem, I should be well then.
Mark how she wrings him by the fingers.
Good night, pray you give the Gentleman thanks for patience.
Good night Sir.
You have a shrewd blow, you were best have it searched.
A scratch, a scratch.
Let me see what excuse should I frame, to get this wench forth a town with me: Isle persuade her husband to take Phi∣sick, and presently have a letter framed, from his father in law, to be delivered that morning for his wife, to come and receive some small parcel of money in Enfield chase, at a Keepers that is her Uncle, then sir he not being in case to travel, will entreat me to accompany his wife, weal lye at Ware all night, and the next morning to London, Isle go strike a Tinder, and frame a Letter presently.
And Isle take the pains to discover all this to my my∣ster old Maybery, there hath gone a report a good while, my Moister hath used them kindly, because they have been over familiar with his wife, but I see which way Fetherstone looks. sfoote ther's near a Gentleman of them all shall gull a Citizen, &amp; think to go scot-free: though your commons shrink for this be but secret, and my Moister shall entertain thee, make thee in∣steed of handling false Dice, finger nothing but gold and silver wag, an old Serving-man turns to a young beggar, whereas a young Prentice may turn to an old Alderman, wilt be secret?
O God sir, as secret as rushes in an old Ladies Cham∣ber.
Sir, Isle speak with none.
Not a plaier:
No tho a Sharer ball,
Isle speak with none although it be the mouth
Of the big company, Isle speak with none,—away.
Why should not I bee an excellent sty•esman? I can in the wry∣ting of a tragedy, make Caesar speak be•la than ever his am∣bition could: when I write of Pompey I have Pomp•ies soul within me, and when I pe•sona•e a worthy Poet, I a• then truly my self, a poo•e vnpreferd scholar.
Here's a •waggering fellow sir, that speaks not like a man of gods making, swears he must speak with you and will speak with you.
Not of gods making what is he? a Cuckold?
He's a Gentle•man sir, by his clothes.
Enter him and his clothes: cl•the• sometimes are bet∣la Gentlemen than their Masters.
is this he? Seek you me sir.
I seek sir, (god plesse you) for a Sentillman, that talks besides to himself when he's alone, as if hee were in Bed-lam, and he's a Poet.
So sir it may bee you seek me, for Ime sometimes out a my wits.
You are a Poet sir, are you.
Ime haunted with a Fury Sir.
Pray Moister Poet shute off this little pot-gun, and I will conjure your Few•y: tic well lay you sir, my desires are to have some amiable and amorous sonnet or madrigal composed by your Fury, see you.
Are you a lover sir of the nine Muses.
Ow, by gad out a cry.
You're then a scholar sir.
I ha picked up my cromes in Sesus college in Oxford one day a gad w•isle ag•e▪
You're welcome you're very welcome, Isle borrow your Judgment look you sir, Ime writing a Tragedy, the Tragedy of young Astianax.
S•••nix Tragedy is he living can you tell? was not Sty∣anax a M•n-mouth man?
O no sir, you mistake, he was a Trojan great Hectors Son.
Hector was grannam to Cadwallader, when she was great with child, god vdge me, there was one young Styanan of Mon-mouth sheire was a madder greek as any is in al Englād.
This was not he assure ye: look you sir, I will have this Tragedy presented in the French Court, by French Gallants.
By god your Frenchmen will doe a Tragedy interlude, poggy well.
It shall be sir at the marriages of the Duke of Orleans, and Chatilion the admiral of France, the stage.
Vds blood, does Orleans marry with the Admiral of France now.
O sir no, they are two several marriages. As I was say∣ing the stage hung all with black velvet, and while tic acted, my self will stád behind the Duke of Biron, or some other chief mi∣neon or so, — who shall, I they shall take some occasion about the music of the fourth Act, to step to the French King, and say, Sire, voile, il et votre treshumble servitor, le plu sage, è divine• espirit, monsi•ur Bellamont, all in French thus pointing at me, or you is the learned old English Gentleman Moister Bellamont a very worthy man, to bee one of your privy Chamber, or Poet Laureate.
But are you sure Duke Pepper-noone will give you such good vrdes, behind your back to your face.
Oh I, I, I man, he's the only courtier that I know there: but what do you think that I may come to by this.
God vdge me, all France may hap die in your debt for this.
I am now writing the description of his death.
Did he die in his ped▪
You shall hear: suspicion is the Minion of g•eat hearts, no: I will not begin there: Imagine a great man were •o be ex∣ecuted about the 7. hour in a gloomy morning.
As it might bee Simpson or so, or great Golias that was kilt by my Countryman.
Right sir, thus I express it in young Astianax.
Now the wilde people greedy of their griefs,
Longing to see, that which their thoughts abhord,
Prevented day, and rod on their own roofs.
Could the little horse that ambled on the top of Paules• cary all the people; else how could they ride on the roofs!
O sir, tic a figure in Poetry, mark how tic followed,
Rod on their own roofs,
Making all Neighboring houses tilde with men; tilde with men •first not good.
By Sesu, and it were tilde all with naked Imen it were better.
You shall hear no more; pick your ears, they are foul sir, what are you sir pray?
A Captain sir, and a follower of god Mars.
Mars, Bachus, and I love Apollo! a Captain! then I par∣don your sir, and Captain what wud you press me for?
For a witty ditty, to a Sentill-oman, that I am fallen in with all, over head and ears in affections, and natural desires.
An Acrostic were good upon her name me thinks.
Cross sticks: I wud not be too cross Moister Poet; yet if it bee best to bring her name in question, her name is mistress Dorothy Hornet.
The very consumption that wastes my Son, and the Aim that hung lately upon me: doe you love this Mistress Dorothy?
Love her! there is no Captains wife in England, can have more love put upon her, and yet Ime sure Captains wives, have their polios full of good men's loves.
And does she love you? has there past any great matter be∣tweene you?
As great a matter, as a whole coach, and a horse and his wife are gon too and fro between vs.
Is she? in faith Captain, bee valiant and tell truth, is she honest?
Honest? god vdge me, shoe's as honest, as a Punk, that cannot abide fornication, and lechery.
Look you Captain, Isle show you why I ask, I hope you think my winching days are past, yet Sir, here's a letter that her father, brought me from her and enforced me to take this very day.
Tic for some love—song to send to me, I hold my life.
This falls out pat, my man tells me, the party is at my door, shall she come in Captain?
O I, I, put her in, put her in I pray now.
The letter says here, that she's exceeding sick, and in∣treats me to visit her: Captain, lie you in ambush behind the hangings, and perhaps you shall hear the piece of a Comme∣die: she comes, she comes, make your self away.
Does the Poet play Torkin and cast my Lucraesies water too in hugger muggers? if he do, Styanax Tragedy was never so horrible bloudy-minded, as his Commedy shall be, — Tawsons Captain Ienkins.
Now Moister Poet, I sent for you.
And I came once at your Ladyships call.
My Ladyship and your Lordship lie both in one man∣ner; you have conjured up a sweet spirit in me have you not Rimer?
Why M•dea! what spirit! wud I were a young man for thy sake.
So wud I, for then thou could doe me no hurt; now thou doest.
If I were a yonker, it would be no Imodesty in me to bee seen in thy company; but to have snow in the lap of June; vile! vile: yet come; garlic has a white head, and a greene stalk, then why should not▪ I? lets bee merry: what says the devil to al the world, for Ime sure thou art carnally possessed with him.
Thou hast a filthy foot, a very filthy cariers foot.
A filthy shoe, but a fine foot, I stand not upon my foot I.
What stands he upon then? with a pox god bless vs?
A leg and a Calfe! I have had better of a butcher forty times for carrying a body! not worth begging by a Bar∣ber-surgeon.
Very good, you draw me and quarter me, fates keep me from hanging.
And which most turns up a women's stomach, thou art an old hoary man: thou hast gon over the bridge of many years, and now art ready to drop into a grave: what doe I see then
in that withered face of thine?
Wrinkles: gravity.
Wretchedness: grief: old fellow thou hast be witch me; I can neither eat for thee, nor sleep for thee, nor lie quietly in my bed for thee.
Vd• blood! I did never see a white flea before I will clinge you?
I was borne sure in the dog days •me so vnluky; I, in whom neither a flaxen hair, yellow beard, French doublet, nor Spanish hose, youth nor personage, rich •ace nor money cold ever breed a true love to any, ever to any man, am now besot∣ted, dote, am mad, for the carcass of a man, and as if I were a baud, no ring pleases me but a deaths head.
Sesu, are I men so arsy varsy.
Mad for me? why if the worm of lust were wrigling within me as it does in others, dost think Id crawl upon thee; wud I low after thee, that art a common calfe-bearer.
I confess it.
Doe you, are you a town cow and confess you bear calves.
I confess, I have bin an Inn for any guest.
A pogs a your stable-roome; is your Inn a bawdy house now?
I confess (for I ha bin taught to hide nothing from my Suergeon and thou art he) I confess that old stinking Surgeon like thy self) whom I call father, that Hornet never sweat for me, Ime none of his making.
You lie he makes you a punk Hornet minor.
Hes but a cheater, and I the false die hee plays with∣all, I power all my poison out before thee, because hereafter I will be clean: shun me not, loath me not, mock me not, plagues confound thee, I hate thee to the pit of hell, yet if thou goosed thither, isle follow thee, run, aid doe what thou can, isle run and ride over the world after thee.
Cockatrice: you mistress Salamanders that fear no bur∣ning, let my mare and my mares horse, and my coach come run∣ning home again and run to an hospital, and your Surgeons, and to knaves and panders and to the tiuell and his tame to.
Fiend art thou raised to torment me.
She loves you Captain honestly.
Isle have any man, omen or cilde by his ears, that says a common drab can love a Sentillman honestly, I will sell my Coach for a cart to have you to puncks hall, Pridewell, I sarge you in Apollos name, whom you belong to, see her forth-com∣ming, till I come and tiggle her, by and by, Sbloud I was never Couzend with a more rascal piece of mutton, since I came out a the Lawer Countries.
My doors are open for thee, be gon: woman!
This goats—peezle of thine —
Away: I love no such implements in my house.
Doest not? am I but an implement? by all the maiden∣heads that are lost in London in a year (&amp; thats a great oath) for this trick, other manner of women than my self shall come to this house only to laugh at thee; and if thou would labour thy heart out, thou shalt not do withal.
Is this my Poetical fury? how now sir!
Moister Maybery and his wife sir ith next room.
What are they doing sir?
Nothing sir, that I see, but only wud speak with you.
Enter 'em: this house will be to hot for me, if this wench cast me into these sweates, I must shift my self, for pure noses∣city, haunted with sprites in my old days!
A Commedy, a Canterbury tale smells not half so sweet as the Commedy I have for thee old Poet: thou shalt write upon it Poet.
Nay I will write upon it left bee a Commedie, for I have been at a most villainous female Tragedy: come, the plot, the plot.
Let your man give you the boots presently, the plot lies in Ware my white Poet: Wife thou and I this night, will have mad sport in Ware, mark me well Wife, in Ware.
At your pleasure sir.
Nay it shall be at your pleasure Wife: look you sir, look you: Fetherstones boy (like an honest crack-halter) laid o∣pen all to one of my prentices, (for boys you know like women love to be doing.)
Very good: to the plot.
Fetherstone like a crafty mutton-monger, persuades Greenshield to be run through the body.
Strange! through the body?
I man, to take physic▪ he does so, hoe's put to his pur∣gation; then sir what does me Fetherstone, but counterfeits a let∣la from an Innkeeper of Doncaster, to fetch Greenshield (who is needy you know) to a keepers lodge in Enfeild-chace▪ a certain Uncle, where Greenshield should receive money due to him in behalf of his wife.
His wife! is Greensheild married? I have heard him swear he was a bachelor.
So have I a hundred times.
The knave has more wives than the Turk, he has a wife almost in every shire in England, this parcel Gentlewoman is that Inkeepers Daughter of Doncaster.
Hath she the entertainment of her fore-fathers? will she keep all comers company?
She help's to pass away stale Capons, sower wine, and musty provender: but to the purpose, this train was laid by the baggage her self and Fetherstone, who it seems makes her hus∣band a unicorn: and to give fire to•t, Greensheild like an Arrant withal entreats his friend, to ride before his wife, and •etch the money, because taking bitter pills, he should prove but a loose fellow if he went, and so durst not go.
And so the poor Stag is to bee hunted in Enfeild•chase
No sir, Moister poet there you miss the plot. Fetherstone and my Lady Greensheild are rid to batter away their light com∣modities in Ware, Enfeild-chace is to cold for 'em.
In Ware!
In dur•• Ware: I forget my self wise, on with your rye∣ding suite and cry North-ward hoe, as the boy at Powles says, let my Prentice get up before thee, and m•n t•ee to Ware, lodge in the ••no I told thee, spur cut and away.
Well sir.
Stay, stay, whats the bottom of this riddle? why send you her away?
For a thing my little hoary Poet: look thee, I smelt out my noble stincker Greensheild in his Chamber, and as tho
my heart strings had bin cracked, I wept, and sighed, &amp; thumpd, and thumpd, and raved and randed, and raild, and told him how my wife was now grown as common as baibery, and that she had heard her Taylor to ride with her to Ware, to meet a Gentleman of the Court.
Good; and how took he this drench down.
Like Eggs and Muscadine, at a gulp: hee cries out pre∣sently, did not I tell you old man, that shed win my game when she came to bearing? hee rails upon her, wills me to take her in the Act; to put her to her white sheet, to bee divorced, and for all his guts are not fully scored by his Apothecary, hoe's pulling on his boots, &amp; will ride along with vs; lets muster as many as wee can.
It will be excellent spo•t, to see him and his own wife meet in Ware, wilt not? I, I, weal have a whole Regiment of horse with vs.
I stand upon thorns, tel I shake him bith whore•es: come, boots boy, we must gallop all the way, for the Sin you know is done with turning up the white of an eye, will you join your forces.
Like a Hollander against a Dunk•rke.
March then, this curse is on all lechers thrown,
They give horns and at last, horns are their own.
Set the best of your little diminutive legs before, and ride post I pray.
Is it possible that mistress D•ll should bee so bad?
Possible! S•old tic more easy for an omen to be nought, than for a soldier to beg, and thats horrible easy, you know.
I but to connicatch vs all so grossly.
Your Norfolk tumblers are but zanies to connicatch∣ing punckes.
She gelded my purse of fifty pounds in ready money.
I will geld all the horses in five hundred Sheires, but I will ride over her, and her cheaters, and her Hornets; She made a stark Ass of my Coach-horse, and there is a putter-box, whom she spread thick upon her white bread, and eat him up, I think she has sent the poor fellow to Gel∣derland, but I will marse privily in and out, and pack
again upon all the low countries in Christendom, as Holland and Zealand and Netherland, and Cleueland too, and I will be drunk and cast with moister Hans van Belch, but I will smell him out.
Doe so and weal draw all our arrows of revenge up to the head but weal hit her for her villainy.
I will traw as petter, and as vrse weapons as arrewes up to the head, lug you, it shall be warrants to give her the whip doodle.
But now she knows shees discovered, sheele take her bells and fly out of our reach.
Fl with her pells! ownds I know a parish that sal tag down all the pells and sell em to Captain Ienkens, to do him good▪ and if pelle will fly, weal fly too, unless, the pell-ropes hang vs: will you amble up and down to moister Justice by my side, to have this rascal Hornet in corum, and so, to make her hold her whoars peace.
Isle amble or trot with you Captain: you told me, she threatened her champions should cut for her, if so, wee may have the peace of her.
O mon du! u dguin! follow your leader, Ienken shall cut, and Slice, as worse as they: come I scorn to have any peace of her, or of any onam, but open wars.
What? will these young Gentlemen to help vs to catch this fresh Salmon, ha! Phillip! are they thy friends.
Yes Sir▪
We are beholding to you Gentlemen that you'll fill our consort I ho seen your faces me thinks before; and I cannot inform my self where.
May be so Sir.
Shalls to horse, hears a tickler: heigh: to horse.
Come Suits and Spurs! lets mount our Cheualls: merry quoth a.
Gentlemen shall I shoot a fools bolt out among you all, because weal be sure to be merry.
What first?
For mirth on the high way, will make vs rid ground fa∣ster then if thieves were at our tails, what say ye to this, lets all practise jests one against another, and hee that has the best jest thrown upon him, and is most gald, between our riding forth and coming in, shall bear the charge of the whole journey.
Content in faith.
Wee shall fit one a you with a Cox-combe at Ware I believe.
Peace.
First a bargen.
And hands clapped upon it.
Stay, yonders the Dolphin without Bishops-gate, where our horses are at rack and manger, and wee are going past it: come cross over: and what place is this?
Bedlam first not?
Where the mad-men are, I never was amongst them, as you love me Gentlemen, lets see what Greeks are within.
Wee shall stay too long.
Not a whit, Ware will stay for our coming I warrant you: come a spurt and away, lets bee mad once in our days: this is the door.
Save you sir, may we see some a your mad-folkes, doe you keep em?
Yes.
Pray bestow your name sir upon vs.
My name is Full-moone.
You well deserve this office good moister Full-moone: and what mad-caps have you in your house,
Diverse.
Gods so, see, see, whats hee walks yonder, is he mad.
Thats a Musician, yes hoe's besides himself.
A Musician, how fell he mad for Gods sake?
For love of an Italian Dwarf.
Has he been in Italy then?
Yes and speaks they say all manner of languages.
Gods so, look, look, whats she.
The dancing Bear: a p•itty well-fauourd little woman.
They say, but I know not, that she was a Bawd, and was frighted out of her wits by fire,
May we talk with 'em moister Ful-moone
Yes and you will; I must look about for I have unruly tenants.
What have you in this paper honest friend?
Is this he has al manner of languages, yet speaks none
How doe you Sir Andrew, will you send for some •qua∣uite for me, I have had no drink never since the last great rain that fell.
No thats a lye.
Nay by gad, then you lie, for all you're Sir Andrew, I was a dapper •ogue in Portugal voyage, not an inch broad at the heel, and yet thus high, I scorned I can tell you to be drunk with rain water then Sir, In those golden and silver days: I had sweet bitts then Sir Andrew: how doe you good brother Timothy?
You have bin in much trouble since that voyage.
Never in bride-wel I protest, as Ime a virgin: for I could never abide that bride-wel I protest, I was once sick, and I took my water in a basket, and carried it to a doctors.
In a basket.
Yes Sir: you arrant fool there was a urinal in it.
I cry you mercy.
The Doctor told me I was with child, how many Lords Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, and others promised me to be god-fathers to that child: it was not Gods will: the prentices made a riot upon my glass-windows the Shroue-tuesday foal∣lowing and I miscarried.
O doe not weep.
I ha cause to weep: I trust Gintlewomen their diet sometimes a fortnight: lend Gentlemen holland shirts, and they sweat 'em out at tennis: and no restitution, and no restitution▪ but Isle take a new order, I will have but six stewed prunes in a dish and some of mother Walls cakes: for my best customers are taylors.
Taylors! ha ha.
I Taylors: give me your London Prentice; your coun∣try Gentlemen are grown too politic.
But what say you to such young Gentlemen as these are.
•oh, they as soon as they come to their lands get up to London, and like squibs that run upon lines, they keep
a Spitting of fire, and cracking till they ha spent all, and when my squib is out, what says his punk, foh, he stinks.
Me thought this other night, I saw a pretty sight,
Which pleased me much.
A comely country maid, not squeamish nor afraid,
To let Gentlemen touch.
I sold her maiden-head once, and I sold her maiden-head twice,
And I sold it last to an Alderman of York.
And then I had sold it thrice.
You sing sc•ruily.
mary muff, sing thou better, for Isle go sleep my old sleeps.
What are you a doing my friend.
Pricking, pricking.
What doe you mean by pricking?
A Gentleman like quality.
This fellow is some what prouder, and sul••ner then the other.
Oh; so be most of your musicians.
Are my teeth rotten?
No Sir.
Then I am no Comfit-maker, nor Vintner, I doe not get wenches in my drink: are you a musician?
Yes.
weal be sworn brothers then, look you sweet rogue.
Gods so, now I think upon it, a Jest is crept into my head, steal away, if you love me.
Was ever any merchants band set better I set it: walk Ime a cold, this white satin is to thin unless it be cut, for then the Sun enters: can you speak Italian too, Sape•e Italiano.
Un poco.
Sblood if it be in you, Isle po•ke it out if you; un poco, come March lie hear with me but till the fall of the lease, and if you have but poco Italiano in you, Isle fill you full of more poco March.
Come on.
Good Moister Mayberie, Philip, if you be kind Gentle∣men uphold the jest: your whole voyage is paid for.
Follow it then.
The old Gentleman say you, why he talked even now as∣well in his wits as I do my self, and looked as wisely.
No matter how he talks, but his Pericranion's perished.
Where is he pray?
Mary with the Musician, and is madder by this time
Hoe's an excellent Musician himself, you must note that.
And having met one fit for his one tooth: you see hee skips from vs.
The troth is moister Full-m•one, divers trains have bin laid to bring him hither, without gaping of people, and never any took effect till now.
How fell he mad?
For a woman, look you sir: here's a crown to pro∣uide his supper: hoe's a Gentleman of a very good house, you shall bee paid well if you convert him; to morrow morning, bedding, and a gown shall be sent in, and wood and coal.
Nay sir, he must ha no fire.
No, why look what straw you buy for him, shall re∣turn you a whole harvest.
Let his straw be fresh and sweet we beseech you sir?
Get a couple of your sturdiest fellows, and bind him I pray, whilst wee slip out of his sight.
Isle hamper him, I warrant Gentlemen.
Excellent.
But how will my noble Poet take it at my hands, to betray him thus.
Foh, tic but a jest, he comes.
Perdonate mi, si Io dimando del vostro nome: oh, whether •hrunke you: I have had such a mad dialogue here.
Wee ha bin with the other mad folks.
And what says he and his prick-song?
Wee were up to the ears in Italian in faith.
In Italian; O good moister Bellamont lets hear him.
How now, Stead what do you mean? are you mad?
Away sir, bind him, hold fast: you want a wench sir, doe you?
What wench? will you take mine arms from me, being no Heralds? let go you Dogs.
Bind him, be quiet: come, come, dogs, fie, &amp; a gentleman.
Moister Maibery, Philip, moister Maibery, vds foot.
Isle bring you a wench, are you mad for a wench.
I hold my life my comrads have put this fools cap upon thy head: to gull me: I smell it now: why doe you hear Full-moone, let me loose; for Ime not mad; Ime not mad by Iesu:
Ask the Gentlemen that.
Bith Lord I'm as well in my wits, as any man in the house, &amp; this is a trick put upon thee by these gallants in pure knavery.
Isle try that, answer me to this question: loose his arms a little, look you sir, three Geese nine pence; every Goose three pence, whats that a Goose, roundly, roundly one with another.
Sfoot do you bring your Geese for me to cut up.
Hold, hold, bind him moister Full-moone.
Bind him you, hee has paid me all, Isle have none of his bonds not I, unless I could recover them better.
Have I given it you moister Poet, did the Lime-bush take.
It was his warrant sent thee to Bedlam, old Jack Bellamōt, and moister Full-ith'moone, our warrant discharges him; Poet, weal all ride upon thee to Ware, &amp; back again I fear to thy cost.
If you doe, I must bear you, thank you Moister Green∣shield, I will not dye in your debt: farewell you mad rascals, to horse come, it is well done; it was well done, you may laugh, you shall laugh Gentlemen: if the gudgeon had been swallow∣ed by one of you it had bin vile, but by Gad it is nothing, for your best Poets indeed are mad for the most part: farewell good-man Full-moone.
Pray Gentlemen if you come by call in.
Yes, yes, when they are mad, horse your selves now if you be men.
Hee gallop must that after women rides,
Get our wives out of Town, they take long strides.
But why have you brought vs to the wrong Inn? and withal possessed Greenshield that my wife is not in town: when my project was, that I would have brought him up into the
chamber, where young Fetherstone and his wife lay: and so all his Artillery should have recoild into his own bosom.
O it will fall out far better, you shall see my revenge will have a more neat and unexpected conveyance: he hath bin all up and down the town, to enquire for a Londoners wife, none such is to be found: for I have mewed your wife up already. mary he he•es of a Yorkshire Gentlewoman at next Inn, and thats all the commodity Ware affords at this instant: now sir, he very politically imagines, that your wife is •ode to Puckridge, five mile further, for saith he in such a town where Hosts will be fa∣miliar, and Tipsters saucy, &amp; Chamberlains worse then thieves intelligencers, theile never put foot out of Stirrup: either at Pus∣ridge or Wades-mill (saith he) you shall find them: &amp; because our horses are weary, hoe's gone to take up Post horse: my counsel is only this, when he comes in, •aine your self very melancho∣lie, swear you will ride no far••er, and this is your part of the Comedy: the sequeil of the jest shall come like money bore∣rowed of a Courtier, and paid within the day, a thing strange &amp; unexpected.
Enough, Iha't,
He comes.
Come gallants, the post horse are ready, tic but a quarter of an hours riding, weal •er•it them and ••ke them in-faith.
Are they grown politic? when do you see honesty covet corners, or a gentlemā thats no thie•e lie in the Inn of a carrier.
Nothing hath undone my wife, but too much riding.
She was a pri•tie piec• of a Poet indeed, &amp; in her discourse would as many of your Gold-smit•s wives doe, d•awe her ••mily from precious stones, so wittily, as redder then your Ruby, har∣der then your Diamond, and so from stone to stone, in l•sse time then a man can draw on a straight boot, as if she had been an excellent Lapidary.
Come will you to horse sir?
No let her go to the devil and she will, Isle not stir a foot further.
Gods precious first come to this: persuade him as you are a Gentleman, there will be ballads made of him, &amp; the bur∣then thereof will be, if you had rode out 5. mile forward, he had found the fatal house of Braineford North-ward, O hone, hone, hone ononero.
You are merry sir.
Like your Citizen, I never think of my debts, when I am a horseback.
Vou imagine you are riding from your creditors.
Good infaith: will you to horse?
Isle ride no further.
Thē isle discharge the post-maister: was it not a pretty wit of mine moister Poet to have had him rod into Puckridge, with a horn before him, ha wast not?
Good sooth excellent: I was dull in apprehending it: but come since we must stay: wele be merry, chamberlain call in the music, bid the Tipsters &amp; maids come up and dance, what weel make a night of it, hark you masters, I have an exellent jest to make old Maibery merry, Sfoote weal have him merry.
Lets make him drunk then, a simple catching wit I.
Go thy ways, I know a Nobleman would take such a de∣light in thee.
Why so he would in his fool.
Before God but hee would make a difference, hee would keep you in Satin, but as I was a saying weel have him merry: his wife is gon to Puckridge, tic a wench makes him melācholy, tic a wench must make him merry: we must help him to a wench. when your citizen comes into his Inn, wet &amp; cold, dropping, e••her the hostess or one of her maids, warmes his bed, pulls on his night-cap, cuts his corns puts out the candle, bids him cōmand ought, if he want ought: and so after moister cittiner sleeps as quietly, as if he lay in his own low-country of Holland, his own linen I mean sir, we must have a wench for him.
But wher's this wench to be found, here are al the move∣able peticotes of the house.
At the next Inn there lodged to night—
Gods precious a Yorkshire Gentlewoman; I have it, Isle angle for her presently, weal have him merry.
Procure some Chamberlain to Pander for you.
No Isle be Pander my self, because weal be mērry.
Will you, will you?
But how? be a Pander as I am a gentlemā? that were whore∣rible, Isle thrust my self into the out-side of a Falconer in town here: &amp; now I think on it there are a company of coūtry players, that are come to town here, shall furnish me with hair and beard: if I do not bring her, —will be wondrous merry.
About it look you sir, though she bear her far aloof, and her body out of distance, so her mind be cōming it is no matter.
Get old Maibery merry: tha• any man should take to heart thus the down fall of a woman, I think when he comes home poor snail, heel not dare to peep forth of doors least his horns usher him.
Go thy ways, there be more in England wear large ears and horns, then Stags and Asses: excellent hee rides post with a halter about his neck.
How now wilt take?
Beyond expectation: I have persuaded him the only way to make you merry, is to help you to a wench, and the fool is gone to pander his own wife hither.
Why heel know her?
She hath been maskt ever since she came into the Inn, for fear of discovery.
Then sheele know him.
For that his own unfortunate wit helped my lasy inuen∣tion, for he hath disguised himself like a Fawkner, in Town hear, hoping in that procuring shape, to doe more good upon her, then in the out-side of a Gentleman.
Young Fetherstone will know him?
Hoe's gone into the town, and will not return this half hour.
Excellent if she would come.
Nay upon my life sheele come: when she enters remem∣ber some of your young blood, talk as some of your gallant commoners will, Dice and drink: freely: do not call for Sack, least it betray the coldness of your man-hood, but fetch a ca∣per now &amp; then, to make the gold chink in your pockets: I so.
Ha old Poet, lets once stand to it for the credit of Milk∣street. Is my wife acquainted with this.
She's perfect, &amp; will come out vpō her qu, I warrant you.
Good wenches infaith: fills some more Sack hear.
Gods precious, do not call for Sack by any means.
Why then give vs a whole Lordship for life in Rhenish, with the reversion in Sugar,
Excellent.
It were not amiss if we were dancing.
Out upon it, I shall never do it.
Out of mine nostrils tipster, thou smell•t like Guild-hall •wo days after Simon and I•de, of drink most horribly, off with
thy mask sweet sinner of the North: these masks are foils to good faces, and to bad ones they are like new satin out-sides to lousy linings.
O by no means sir, your Merchant will not open a whole piece to his best costomer, hee that buys a woman, must take her as she fales: Isle unmask my hand hears the sample.
Go to then, old Poet I have tan her up already as a pinnace bound for the straights, she knows her burden yonder.
Lady you are welcome: you is the old Gentleman and observe him, he's not one of your fat City chuffs: whose great belly argues that the felicity of his life consists in capon, sack, and sincere honesty, but a lean spare bountiful gallant one that hath an old wife, and a young performance: whose reward is not the rate of a Captain newly come out of the Low-coūt•ies: or a Yorkeshiere Atturny in good contentious practice, some angel, no the proportion of your wealthy Citizen to his wench, is, her Chamber, her diet, her physic, her apparel, her painting, her monkey, her pander, her every thing. You'll say your young Gentleman, is your only service that lies before you like a Calves head, with his brains some half yard from him, but I assure you, they must not only have variety of foolery; but also of wenches: whereas your conscionable gray-beard of Farring∣ton within, will keep himself, to the ruins of one cast weigh∣ting-woman an age: &amp; perhaps, when he's past all other good works, to wipe out false weights, and twenty ith hundred, marry her—
O well bold Tom ( ) we have presedents, for it▪
But I have a husband sir.
You have, if the knave thy husband bee rich, make him poor, that he may borrow money of this Merchant, and be laid up in the Counter, or Ludgate, so it shall bee conscience in you old Gentleman, when he hath seized all thy goods, to take the horn and maintain thee.
O well bold Tom ( ) wee have presedents for it.
Well if you be not a Nobleman, you are some great vali∣ant Gentleman, by your bearth: and the fashion of your beard: and do but thus to make the Citizen merry, because you owe him some money.
O you are a wag.
You are very welcome.
He is tan, excellent, excellent, ther's one will make him merry: is it any imputation to help ones friend to a wench?
No more then at my Lords entreaty, to help my Lady to a pretty weighting woman: if he had given you a gelding, or the reversion of some Monopoly, or a new suit of Satin to have done this, happily your Satin would have smelt of the Pander: but what's done freely, comes like a present to an old Lady, without any reward, and what is done without any reward, comes like wounds to a Soldier, very honourably not-with∣standing.
This is my breeding Gentlewoman: and whether tra∣uaile you?
To London sir, as the old tale goes, to seek my fortune.
Shall I be your fortune Lady?
O pardon me sir, Isle have some young landed heir to be my Forrune, for they favour she fools more then Citizens.
Are you married?
Yes, but my husband is in garrison in the Low-countries, is his Colonels bawd, and his Captains Easter: he sent me word over, that he will thrive: for though is apparel lie ith Lumbard, he keeps his conscience in the Mu•ter-booke.
Hee may do his country good service Lady.
I as many of your Captains do, that fight as the Geese saved the Capitol, only with prattling: well, well, if I were in some Nobleman's hands now, may be he would not take a thou∣sand pounds for me.
No.
No sir: and yet may be at years end, would give me a brace of hundredth pounds to marry me to his Bailey, or the So∣licitor of his Law suits: whose this I beseech you?
I pray you forsooth be patient.
Passion of my heart, Mistress Maybery.
Now will she put some notable trick, upon her Cock∣oldly husband.
Why how now Wife, what means this? ha?
Well, I am very well: ô my unfortunate parents, would you had buried me quick, when you linked me to this misery.
O wife be patient, I have more cause to rail wife.
You have, prove it, prove it: wheres the Court∣er, you should have tan in my bosom: Isle spit my gall in's face, that can tax me of any dishonour: have I lost the pleasure of mine eyes, the sweets of my youth, the wishes of my blood: and the portion of my friends, to be thus dishonord, to be reputed wild in London, whilst my husband prepares common diseases for me at Ware, O god O god.
Prettily well dissembled.
As I am true hostess you are to blame sir, what are you masters: Isle know what you are before you depart masters, dost thou leave thy Chamber in an honest Inn, to come and inuea∣glee my costomers, and you had sent for me up, and kissed me and used me like an hostess▪ twold never have gre•ued me, but to do it to a stranger.
Isle leave you sir.
Stay, why how now sweet gentlewoman, cannot I come forth to breath my self, but I must bee haunted, rail upon old Bellamont, that he may discover them, you remember Fetherstone Greensheild.
I remember them, I, they are two as coging, disho∣norable damned forsworn beggarly gentlemē, as are in al Lone∣don, and ther's a reverent old gentleman to, your pander in my conscience.
Lady, I will not as the old gods were wont, swear by the infernal •tix: but by all the mingled wine in the seller be∣neath, and the smoke of Tobacco that hath fumed over the ves∣sails, I did not procure your husband this banqueting dish of suckket look you behold the parenthesis.
Nay Isle see your face too.
My dear unkind husband; I protest to thee I have played this knavish part only to be witty.
That I might bee presently turned into a ma•la more sodllid then horn, into Marble
Your husband gentlewoman: why hee never was a soldier
I but a Lady got him pricked for a Captain, I warrant you, he will answer to the name of Captain, though hee bee none: like a Lady there will not think scorn to answer to the name of her firs• husband; though he wear a Sope-boyler.
Hang of thou devil, away.
No, no, you fled me tother day,
When I was with child you ran away,
But since I have caught you now.
A pox of your wit and your singing.
Nay look you sir, she must sing because weal be merry, what though you rod not five mile forward, you have foūd that fatal house at Brainford Northward, O hone ho no na no to.
God refuse me Gentlemen, you may laugh and bee merry: but I am a Cockold and I think you knew of it, who lay ith segges with you to night wild-ducke.
No body with me, as I shall be saved: but Moister Feather∣stone, came to meet me as far as Roistone.
Fetherstone.
See the hawk that first stooped, my pheasant is kilt by the Spaniel that first sprang all of our side wife.
It was a pretty wit of you sir, to have had him rod into Puckeridge with a horn before him; ha: wast not;
Good.
Or where a Citizen keeps his house, you know tic not as a Gentleman keeps his Chamher for debt, but as you said even now very wisely, least his horns should usher him.
Very good Fetherstone he comes.
Luke Greeneshield Moister Maybery, old Poet: Mole and Kate, most happily encountered, vdslife how came you heather, by my life the man looks pale.
You are a villain, and Isle maked good upon you, I am no serving-man, to feed upon your reversion.
Go to the ordinary then.
This is his ordinary sit &amp; in this she is like a London or∣denariate: her best getting comes by the box.
You are a damned villain.
O by no means.
No, vdslife, Isle go instantly take a purse, be apprehen∣ded and hanged for it, better then be a Cockold.
Best first make your confession sir.
Tic this thou hast not used me like a Gentleman.
A Gentleman: thou a gentleman: thou art a Taylor.
Ware peaching.
No sir if you will confess ought, tell how thou hast
wronged that virtuous Gentlewoman: how thou laiest at her two year together to make her dishonest: how thou would send me thither with letters, how duly thou woudst watch the citizens wives vacation, which is twice a day; namely the exchainge time, twelve at noon and six at night, and where she refused thy importunity, and vowed to tell her husband: thou would fall down upon thy knees, and entreat her for the love of Heaven, if not to ease thy violent affection, at least to conceal it, to which her pity and simple virtue consented, how thou took her wedding ring from her, Met these two Gentlemen at Ware: fained a quarrel, and the rest is apparent, this only remains what wrong the poor Gentlewoman hath since received by our intolerable lye; I am most heartily sorry for, and to thy bosom will maintain all I have said to bee honest.
Victory wise thou art quit by proclamation.
Sir you are an honest man, I have known an arrant thief for peaching made an officer, give me your hand Sir.
O ffilthy abominable husband did you all this?
Certainly he is no Captain he blushes.
Speak Sir did you ever know me answer your wishes.
You are honest, very virtuously honest.
I will then no longer be a loose woman, I have at my husbands pleasure tan upon me this habit of jealousy: Ime sorry for you, virtue glories not in the spoil but in the victory.
How say you by that goody Sentence, look you sir; you gal∣lāts visit cittizēs houses, as the Spaniard first sailed to the Indies, you pretēd bying of wares or selling of lāds: but the end proves tic nothing but for discovery &amp; cōquest of their wives for better maintenance why look you, was he a ware of those broken pa∣tience when you met him at Ware, &amp; possessed him of the downfall of his wife: you are a Cockcold you have pāderd your own wife to this gentleman better men have don it, honest Tom ( ), wee have presidents for it, hie you to London: what is more Catholic ith City then for husbands daily for to forgive, the nightly sins of their bedfellows: if you like not that course but to intend to be rid of her: rifle her at a Tavern, where you may swallow
down some fifty wisacres sons and heirs to old tenements, and common gardens: like so many raw yeolkes with Muska∣dine to bed-ward.
O filthy knave, dost compare a woman of my cariadge to a horse.
And no disparagment; for a woman to have a high for∣head: a quick ear, a full eye, a wide nostril, a sleek skin, a straight back, a round hip, and so forth is most comely.
But is a great belly comely in a horse sir.
No Lady.
And what think you of it in a woman I pray you.
Certainly, I am put down at my own weapon; I there∣fore recant the riflying? no there is a new trade come up for cast Gentlewomen, of peeriwip making: let your wife set up ith Strand, and yet I doubt, whither she may or no, for they say, the womē have got it to be a corporatiō; if you can you may make good use of it, for you shall have as good a coming in by hair (tho it be but a falling commodity) &amp; by other foolish tyring, as any between Saint Clements and Charing.
Now you have run your self out of breath, here me: I protest the gentlewoman is honest, and since I have wronged her reputation in meeting her thus privately, Isle maintain her: wilt thou hang at my purse Kate, like a pair of barberry but∣tons, to open when tic full, and close when tic empty?
Isle be divorced by this Christian element, and because thou think thou art a Cockold, least I should make thee an in∣fidell, in causing thee to believe an vntrueth, Isle make thee a Cockold.
Excellent wench.
Come, lets go sweet: the Nag I ride upon bears dou∣ble, weal to London.
Do not bite your thumbs sir.
Bite his thumb!
Isle make him do a thing worse than this,
Come love me where as I lay.
What Kate!
He shall father a child is none of his,
O the clean contrary way.
O lusty Rate.
Me thought he said, even now you were a Taylor.
You shall hear more of that hereafter, Isle make Ware and him stink ere he goes, if I bee a Taylor, the rogues naked weapon shall not fright me, Isle beat him and my wife both out ath Town with a Taylors yard.
O Valiant sir Tree•stram; room there.
News father, most strange news out of the Low-coun∣tries, your good Lady and Mistress that set you to work upon a dozen of cheese-trenchers is new lighted at the next Inn, and the old venerable Gentleman's father with her.
Let the gate• of our Inn be locked up, closer than a No∣ble-mans gates at dinner time.
Why sir, why?
If she enter here, the house will be infected: the plague is not half so dangerous, as a Shee-hornet: Philip this is your shuffling a the cards, to turn up her for the boat∣tom card at Ware.
No as Ime virtuous sir, ask the two Gentlemen.
No in troth sir; she told vs, that inquiring at London for you or your son, your man chalked out her way to Ware.
I wud Ware might choke 'em both, Moister Maybery, my horse and I will take our leaves of you? Isle to Bedlam again rather than stay her.
Shall a woman make thee fly thy country? stay, stand to her tho she were greater than Pope Join, what are thy brains conjuring for, my poetical bay-leafe-eater?
For a sprite a the buttry, that shall make vs all drink with mirth if I can raise it: stay, the chicken is not fully hatched, hit I beseech thee: So; come! will you be secret Gentlemen and assisting.
With browne bills if you think good.
What will you say, if by some trick we put this little Whore∣net into Fetherstones bosom, and marry 'em together.
Fuh, tic impossible.
Most possible, Isle to my trencher-woman, let me alone for dealing with her: Fetherstone Gentlemen shall be your patient.
How! how?
Thus: I will close with this country Peddler mistress Doro∣thy (that travels up and down to exchange Pins for Cunny-skins) very lovingly, she shall eat of nothing but sweet-meates in my company (good words) whose taste when she likes, as I know she will, then will I play upon her with this Artillery, that a very proper man, and a great heir (naming Fetherstone) spied her from a window, when she lighted at her Inn, is ex∣treamly fallen in love with her, vows to make her his wife, if it stand to her good liking, even in Ware; but being (as most of your young Gentlemen are) some-what bashful, and ashamed to venture upon a woman.
City and suburbs can justify it: so sir.
Hee sends me (being an old friend) to undermine for him: Isle so whet the wenches stomach, and make her so hungry, that she shall have an appetite to him, fear it not; Greenesheild shall have a hand in it too, and to bee revenged of his partner, will I know strike with any weapon.
But is Fetherstone of any means? else you undo him and her.
Hee has land between Foolham and London, he would have made it over to me: to your charge Poet, give you the as∣salt upon her, and send but Fetherstone to me, Isle hang him by the gills.
Hes not yet horsed sure, Phillip, go thy ways, give fire to him, and send him hither with a powder presently.
Hes blown up already.
Gentlemen you'll stick to the devise, &amp; look to your plot?
Most Poetically: away to your quarter.
I marche, I will cast my rider gallants: I hope you see who shall pay for our voyage.
That must hee that comes here: Moister Fetherstone, O Moister Fetherstone, you may now make your fortunes weigh ten stone of Feathers more then ever they did: leap but into the Saddle now, that stands empty for you, you are made for ever.
An Ass Isle be sworn.
How for Gods sake? how?
I would you had, what I could wish you, I love you, and
because you shall be sure to know where my love dwells, look you sir, it hangs out at this sign: you shall pray for Ware, when Ware is dead and rotten: look you sir, there is as pretty a little Pinnas, struck sail hereby, and come in lately; shoe's my kinse-woman, my fathers youngest Sister, a ward, her portion three thousand; her hopes if her Grannam dye without issue, better.
Very good sir.
Her Guardian goes about to marry her to a Stone-cut∣la, and rather than sheele be subject to such a fellow, sheele dye a martyr, will you have all out? shoe's run away, is here at an Inn in the town, what parts so ever you have plaid with me, I see good parts in you, and if you now will catch times hair that's put into your hand, you shall clap her up presently.
Is she young? and a pretty wench?
Few Citizens wives are like her.
Young, why I warrant sixteen hath scarce gone over her.
Sfoot, where is she? if I like her personage, as well as I like that which you say belongs to her personage, Isle stand thrumming of Caps no longer, but board your Pynnis whilst it is hot.
Away then with these Gentlemen with a French gal∣lop, and to her: Phillip here shall run for a Priest, and dispatch you.
Will you gallants go along: wee may be married in a Chamber for fear of hew and cry after her, and some of the company shall keep the door.
Assure your soul she will be followed: away therefore. Hes in the Curtian gulf, and swallowed horse and man: hee will have some body keep the door for him, sheele look to that: I am younger then I was two nights ago, for this physic.— how now?
God plesse you; is there not an arrant scurvy trab in your company, that is a Sentill-woman borne sir, and can tawg Weleh, and Dutch and any tongue in your head?
How so? Drabs in my company: doe I look like a Drab-driuer?
The Trab will drive you (if she put you before her) in∣to a pench hole.
Is not a Gentleman here one Moister Bellamont sir of your company.
Yes, yes, come you from London, heel be here presently.
Will he? tawsone, this omen, hunts at his tail like your little Goats in Wales follow their mother, wee have warrants here from moister Sustice of this shire, to show no pity nor mer∣cie to her, her name is Doll.
Why sir, what has she committed? I think such a cry∣ture is in the town.
What has she committed: ownds she has committed more th•n man-slaughters, for she has committed her self God plesse vs to everlasting prison: lug you sir, she is a punk, she shifts her lovers (as Captains and Welsh Gentlemen and such) as she does her Trenchers when she has well fed upon it, and that there is left nothing but pa•e bones, she calls for a clean one, and scrapes away the first.
Gods so Moister Fetherstone, what will you do? here's three come from London, to fetch away the Gentlewoman with a warrant.
All the warrants in Europe shall not fetch her now, she's mine sure enough: what have you to say to her? shoe's my wife.
Ow! Sbloud doe you come so far to fish and catch Frogs? your wife is a Tilt-boate, any man or omen may go in her for money; shoe's a Cunny-catcher: where is my move∣ab'e goods called a Coach▪ and my two wild peasts, pogs on you wud they had trawne you to the gallows.
I must borrow fifty pound of you Mistress Bride.
Yaw vro, and you make me de gheck, de great fool, you hob mine gilt to: war is it?
Out you base scums, come you to disgrace me in my wedding shoes?
Is this your three thousand pound ward, ye told me sir she was your Kinswoman.
Right, one of mine Aunts.
Who pays for the Northern voyage now lads?
Why do you not ride before my Wife to London now? the Woodcocks ith• Sprindge.
O forgive me dear husband! I will never love a man that is worse than hanged, as he is.
Now a man may have a course in your Park?
Hee may sir.
Never I protest, I will bee as true to thee, as Ware and Wades-mill are one to another.
Well, it's but my fate: Gentlemen, this is my opinion, it's better to shoot in a Bow that has been shot in before, and will never start, than to draw a fair new one, that for every Are∣row will bee warping: Come wench wee are joined, and all the Dogs in France shall not part vs: I have some lands, those Isle turn into money, to pay you, and you, and any: Isle pay all that I can for thee, for Ime sure thou hast paid me.
God give you joy.
Come lets be merry, lye you with your own Wife, to be sure she shall not walk in her sleep: a noise of Musicians Chamberlain.
This night lets banquet freely: come, weal dare,
Our wives to combat in the great bed in Ware▪

Convey your carriage to my brother in Laws,
Th'Earle of Saint Anne, to whom and to my Sister,
Commend my humble service, tell them both
Of my arrival, and intent t'attend them:
When in my way, I have performed fit duties,
To Count Vaumont, and his most honoured Countess.
We will Sir, this way, follow honest Sailors.
Our first observance, after any absence
Must be presented ever to our Mistress:
As at our parting she should still be last,
Hinc Amor vt circulus, from hence tic said
That love is like a circle, being th'efficient
And end of all our actions; which excited
By no worse abject then my matchless mistress
Were worthy to employ vs to that likeness;
And be the only Ring our powers should beat,
Noble she is by birth, made good by virtue,
Exceeding fair, and her behaviour to it,
Is like a singular Musician
To a sweet Instrument, or else as doctrine
Is to the soul, that puts it into Act,
And prints it full of admirable forms
Without which it were an empty, idle flame
Her eminent judgment to dispose these parts,
Sits on her brow and holds a silver Sceptre,
with which she keeps time to the several musiques,
Placed in the sacred consort of her beauties:
Loves complete armoury is manadgd in her.
To stir affection, and the discipline
To check and to affright it from attempting
Any attained might disproportion her
Or make her graces less then circular;
Yet her even carriage, is as far from coyness
As from Immodesty, in play, in dancing
In suffering court-ship: in requiting kindness.
In use of places, hours, and companies
Free as the Sun, and nothing more corrupted,
As circumspect as Cynthia, in her vows,
And constant as the Center to observe them,
Ruthful, and bounteous never fierce nor dull,
In all her courses ever at the full
These three years, I have trauaild, and so long
Have been in travail with her dearest sight,
Which now shall beautify the enamoured light.
This is her house, what? the gates shut and clear
Of all attendants? Why, the house was wont
To hold the usual concourse of a Court,
And see, me thinks through the encourtaind windows
(In this high time of day) I see light Tapers,
This is exceeding strange. Behold the Farle
Walking in as strange sort before the door,
Isle know this wonder sure: My honoured Lord?
Keep of Sir and beware whom you embrace,
Why flies your Lordship back?
You should be sure
To know a man your friend ere you embraced him.
I hope my knowledge cannot be more sure
Then of your Lordships friendship.
No mans knowledge,
Can make him sure of any thing without him
Or not within his power to keep, or order.
I comprehend not this; and wonder much
To see my most loved Lord so much estranged.
The truth is, I have done your known deserts
More wrong, then with your right should let you greet me
And in your absence, which makes worse the wrong,
And in your honour, which still makes it worse.
If this be all my Lord, the discontent
You seem to entertain, is merely causeless:
Your free confession, and the manner of it,
Doth liberally excuse what wrong soever,
Your mis-conceit could make you lay on me,
And therefore, good my Lord discover it,
That we may take the spleen, and corsey from it.
Then hear a strange report and reason, why
I did you this repented injury.
You know my wife is by the rights of courtship,
Your chosen Mistress, and she not disposed
(As other Ladies are) to entertain
Peculiar terms, with common acts of kindness:
But (knowing in her, more then women's judgment,
That she should nothing wrong her husbands right,
To use a friend only for virtue, chosen
With all the right; of friendship) took such care
After the solemn parting to your travail,
And spake of you with such exceeding passion,
That I grew jealous, and with rage excepted
Against her kindness, utterly forgetting
I should have weighed so rare a women's words,
As duties of a free and friendly justice:
Not as the head-strong and incontinent vapors
Of other Ladies bloods, inflamed with lust,
Wherein I injured both your innocencies,
Which I approve, not out of flexible dotage,
By any cunning flatteries of my wife,
But in impartial equity, made apparent
Both by mine own well-waid comparison
Of all her other manifest perfections,
With this one only doubtful levity,
And likewise by her violent apprehension
Of her deep wrong and yours, for she hath vowed,
Never to let the common Pandresse light,
(Or any doom as vulgar) censure her
In any action she leaves subject to them,
Never to fit the day with her attire,
Nor grace it with her presence; Nourish in it,
(Unless with sleep) nor stir out of her chamber:
And so hath muffled and mewed up her beauties
In neuer-ceasing darkness, Never sleeping,
But in the day transformed by her to night:
With all Sun banished from her smootherd graces:
And thus my dear and most unmatched wife,
That was a comfort and a grace to me,
In every judgment, every company,
I, by false Jealousy, have no less then lost,
Murdered her living, and emtoomd her quick.
Conceit it not so deeply, good my Lord,
Your wrong to me or her, was no fit ground
To bear so weighty and resolved a vow,
From her incensed and abused virtues.
There could not be a more important cause,
To fill her with a ceaslesse hate of light,
To see it grace gross lightness with full beams,
And frown on continence with her oblique glances.
As nothing equals, right to virtue done,
So is her wrong past all comparison.
Virtue is not malicious, wrong done her
Is righted ever when men grant they Err,
But doth my princely mistress so contemn
The glory of her beauties, and the applause
Given to the worth of her society,
To let a voluntary vow obscure them;
See all her windows, and her doors made fast,
And in her Chamber lights for night inflamed,
Now others rise, she takes her to her bed.
This news is strange, heaven grant I be encoun???terd
With better tiding; of my other friends,
Let me be bold my Lord t'enquire the state
Of my dear sister, in whose self and me,
Surviues the whole hope of our family,
Together with her dear and princely husband
Th'Earle of Saint Anne.
Unhappy that I am,
I would to heaven your most welcome steppes
Had brought you first upon some other friend,
To be the sad Relator of the changes
Chance it your three years most lamented absence,
Your worthy sister, worthier far of heaven
Then this unworthy hell of passionate Earth,
Is taken up amongst her fellow Stars.
Unhappy man that ever I returned
And perished not ere these news pierced mine ears.
Nay be not you that teach men comfort, grieved;
I know your judgment will set willing shoulders
To the known burdens of necessity:
And teach your wilful brother patience,
Who strives with death, and from his caves of rest
Retains his wives dead Corse amongst the living,
For with the rich sweets of restoring Balms,
He keeps her looks as fresh as if she lived,
And in his chamber (as in life attired)
She in a Chair sits leaning on her arm,
As if she only slept: and at her feet
He like a mortified hermit clad,
Sits weeping out his life, as having lost
All his lifes comfort: And that she being dead
(Who was his greatest part) he must consume,
As in an Apop???exy struck with death.
Nor can the Duke nor Duchess comfort him,
Nor messengers with consolatory letters,
From the kind King of France, who is allied
To her and you. But to lift all his thoughts
Up to another world, where she expects him,
He feeds his ears with soule-exciting music.
Solemn and Tragical, and so Resolves
In those sad accents to exhale his soul,
O what a second, Ruthless Sea of woes
Wrecks me within my Haven; and on the Shore?
What shall I doe? morn, morn, with them that morn,
And make my greater woes their less expel,
This day Isle consecrate to sighs and tears
And this Next Even, which is my mistress morning
Isle greet her, wondering at her wilful humours,
And with rebukes, breaking out of my Love,
And duty to her honour, make her see
How much her too much curious virtue wrongs her
Said like the man the world hath ever held you,
Welcome, as new lines to vs, our good Now
Shall wholly be ascribed and trust to you.
See, see, the virtuous Countess hath bidden our day Good night, her stars are now visible: when was any Lady seen to be so constant in her vow, and able to for???bear the society of men so sinceerely?
Never in this world, at least exceeding seldom. What shame it is for men to see women so far surpass them: for when was any man known (out of judgment) to perform so stayed an abstine??ce, from the society of women.
Never in this world.
What an excellent Creature an honest woman is? I warrant you the Countess, and her Virgin sister, spend all their times in Contemplation, watching to see the sacred Spectacles of the night, when other Ladies lye drowned in sleep or sensuality, First not so think?
No question.
Come, come, lets forget we are Courtiers, and talk like honestmen, tell truth, and shame all trauay???lers and tradesmen: Thou believe alls natural beauty that shows fair, though the Painter enforce it, and suf???ferst in soul I know for the honourable Lady.
Can any heart of Adamant not yield in com???passion to see spotless Innocence suffer such bitter pen???nonce?
A very fit stock to graffe on: Tush man think what she is, think where she lives, think on the villainous cunning of these times, Indeed did we live now in old Saturnes time: when women had no other art, than what Nature taught am (and yet there needs little Art I wise to teach a woman to dissemble) when Luxury was unborn, at least untaught, the art to steal from a forbid???den tree: when Coaches, when Perwigges, and painting, when Masks, and Masking: in a word when Court and Courting was unknown, an easy mist might then per???hippos have wrought upon my sense as it does now on the poor Countess and thine.
O world!
O flesh!
O Devil!
I tell thee Mugeron, the Flesh is grown so great with the Devil, as theres but a little Honesty left ???th world. That, that is, is in Lawyers, they engross all: S'foote what gave the first fire to the Counts Iea???lousy?
What but his misconstruction of her honou???rabble affection to Uandome.
Honourable affection? first shees an ill huswife of her honour, that puts it upon construction: but the presumption was violent against her, no speech but of Vandome, no thought but of his memory, no mirth but in his company, besides the free intercourse of Letters, Fa???uours, and other entertainments, too too manifest signs that her heart went hand in hand with her tongue.
Why, was she not his mistress?
I, I, a Court term, for I wot what, slight Vandome the Stallion of the Court, her devoted Servant, and forsooth loves her honourably: Tush, hes a fool that believes it: for my part I love to offend in the better part still, and that is, to judge charitablie: But now for???soothe to redeem her Honour, she must by a laborious and violent kind of Purgation, Rub off the Skin, to wash out the spot, Turn her Chamber to a Cell, the Sun into a Taper, And (as if she lived in another world amongst the Antipodes,) make our night her day, and our day her night, that under this curtain, she may lay his jealousy a sleep, whiles she turns poor Are???gus to Action, and makes his Sheets common to her Ser???uaunt Vandome.
Uandome? Why hee was met in the street but even now, newly arrived after three years travail.
Newly arrived? hee has been arrived this twelue-month, and has ever since lyne close in his mistress cunning darkness, at her service.
???ye a the Devil, who will not envy slander? O the miserable condition of her Sex: borne to live un???der all construction. If she be courteous, shees thought to be wanton: if she be kind, shees too willing??? if coy, too wilful: if she be modest: shees a clown, if she bee honest, shees a fool: And so is hee.
What Monsieur D'oliue, the only admy???rer of wit and good words.
Morrow wits, morrow good wits: my little parcel of wit, I have Rods in peace for you; how doest Jack, may I call thee Sir Jack yet?
You may Sir: Sirs as commendable an addi???tion as Jack, for ought I know.
I know it Jack, and as common too.
Go too, you may cover; wee have taken notice of your embroidered Beaver:
Look you: by Heaven tha'art one of the mad???dest bitter slaves in Europe, I doe but wonder how I made shift to love thee all this while.
Go too what might such a parcel guilt cover be worth?
Perhaps more then the whole piece be???sides.
Good in faith, but bitter, O you mad slaves, I think you had Satyrs, to your syres, yet I must love you, I must take pleasure in you, and in faith tell me, how first? live I see you doe, but how? but how? wits?
Faith as you see, like poor younger Bro???theirs.
By your wits?
Nay not turned Poets neither.
Good soothe: but indeed to say truth, Time was when the sons of the Muses had the privilege to live on???lie by their wits, but times are altered, Monopolies are now called in, &amp; wits become a free trade for all sorts to live by, Lawyers live by wit and they live worshipfully: Soldiers live by wit, and they live honourably: Panders live by wit, and they live honestly. In a word there are few trades but live by wit, only bawds and Midwifes live by Women's labours, as Fools and Fiddlers do by making mirth, Pages and Parasits by making legs: Painters and Players by
making mouths and faces: ???a doest well wits?
Faith thou follow a figure in thyiests, as coun???ttey Gentlemen follow fashions when they bee worn threed-bare.
Well, well, lets leave these wit skirmishes, and say when shall we meet?
How think you, are we not met now?
Tush man, I mean at my chamber, where we may take free use of our selves, that is, drink Sack, and talk Satire, and let our wits run the wilde Goose chase over Court and Country; I will have my chamber the Rende-vo???s of all good wits, the shop of good words, the Mint of good lestes, an Ordinary of fine discourse, Critickes, Essayists, Linguists, Poets, and other professors of that faculty of wit, shall at certain hours ???th day resort thither, it shall be a second Sorbonne, where all doubts or differences of Learning, Honour, Duellisme, Criticism, and Poetry shall be disputed: and how wits, do ye follow the Court still?
Close at heals sir, and I can tell you, you have much to answer for your stars, that you doe not so too.
As why wits? as why?
Why sir, the Court's as it were the stage: and they that have a good suite of parts and qualities, ought to press thither to grace them, and receive their due me???rite.
Tush, let the Court follow me: he that soars too near the sun, me???ts his wings many times: as I am, I pos???sesse my self, I enjoy my liberty, my learning, my wit, as for wealth and honour let am go, Isle not loose my learning to be a Lord, nor my wit to be an Alderman.
Admirable D'oliue.
And what! you stand gazing at this Comet here, and admire it, I dare say.
And do not you?
Not I, I admire nothing but wit.
But I wonder how she entertains time in that so???litarie Cell: does she not take Tobacco think you?
She does, she does: others make it their Physic, she makes it her food: her sister and she take it my turn, first one, then the other, and Vandome ministers to them both.
How say thou by that Helene of Greece, the Countesses sister, there were a Paragon Monsieur D'oliue, to admire and marry too.
Not for me.
No, what acceptions lies against the choice.
Tush, tell me not of choice, if I stood affected that way, I would choose my wife as men do Valentines, blindfold, or draw cuts for them, for so I shall be sure not to be de???ceiued in choosing: for take this of me, there's ten times more deceit in women then in Horse-flesh: and I say still, that a pretty well paced Chambermaid is the only fashion, if she grow full or full some, give her but six pence to buy her a handbasket, and send her the way of all flesh, theres no more but so.
Indeed thats the sauingst way.
O me! what a hell tic for a man to be tied to the continual charge of a Coach, with the appurtenances, horse, men, and so forth; and then to have a mans house pestered with a whole country of Guests, Grooms, Pan???ders, waiting maids? &amp;c. I careful to please my wife, she careless to displease me, shrewish if she be honest, intolerable if she be wise, imperious as an Empress, all she does must be law, all she says Gospel: O what a penance tic to endure her, I glad to forbear still, all to keep her loyal, and yet perhaps when ell's done, my heir shall be like my Horse-keeper: Fie on it???, the very thought of marriage were able to cool the hottest liver in France.
Well, I durst venture twice the price of your guilt Connies wool, we shall have you change your copy ???re a twelve months day.
We must have you dubbed ath order theirs no re???medie, you that have unmarried, done such honourable service in the common-wealth, must needs receive the honour due ???oot in marriage.
That hee may doe, and never marry.
As how wits, in faith as how?
For if hee can prove his father was free ath or???der, and that hee was his fathers son, then by the lauda???ble custom of the City, hee may bee a cuckold by his fa???theirs copy, and never serve fort.
Ever good in faith:
Nay howe can hee plead that, when ??????is as well known his father dyed a bachelor.
Bitter, in verity, bitter. But good still in it kind.
Go too, we must have you follow the lantern of your forefathers.
His forefathers? S???body had hee more fathers then one.
Why this is right: heers wit canuast out ans coat, into's Jacket: the string sounds ever well, that rubs not too much ath frets: I must love your Wits??? I must take pleasure in you. Farewell good wits, you know my lodging, make an Errand thither now and than, and save your ordinary, doe wits, doe.
Wee shall be troublesome t??????.
O God Sir??? you wrong me???, to think I can, bee troubled with wit, I love a good wit, as I love my self, if you need a brace or two of Crowns at any time Address but your Sonnet, it shall bee as sufficient as your bond at all times, I carry half a score birds in a ???age, shall ever remain at your call: Farewell wits, farewell good wits.
Farewell the true map of a gull: by Heaven hee shall too'th Court: it is the perfect model of an impu???dent upstart: the compound of a Poet, and a Lawyer, hee shall sure too'th Court.
Nay for Gods sake, letts have no fools at Court.
Hee shall too't thats certain, the Duke had a purpose to dispatch some one or other to the French King, to entreat him to send for the body of his Niece, which the melancholy Earl of Saint Anne, her husband hath kept so long unburied, as meaning one grave should entomb himself and her together.
A very worthy subject for an Embassage, as D'oliue is for an Ambassador Agent, and it is as suitable to his brain, as his parcel guilt Beaver to his fools head.
Well it shall go hard but hee shall bee employed, O tic a most accomplish??? ass, the mugrill of a Gull, and a villain, the very essence of his soul is pure villainy: The substance of his braine-foolery: one that believes nothing from the stars upward. A Pagan in belief, an Epicure beyond belief, Prodigious in lust, Prodigal in wasteful expense, in necessary most penurious, his wit is to admire and imitate, his grace is to censure, and detract??? he shall to'th Court, in faith hee shall thither, I will shape such em???ployement for him, as that hee himself shall have no less contentment, in making mirth to the whole Court, then the Duke and the whole Court shall have pleasure in en???joying his presence. A knave if hee be rich, is fit to make an Officer, As a Fool if hee bee a knave is fit to make an Intelligencer.
What an order is this? Eleven a clooke at night is our Ladies morning, and her hour to rise at, as in the morning it is other Ladies hour: these Tapers are our Suns, with which we call her from her bed. But I pray thee Licette what makes the virgin Lady, my Ladies s??????la, break wind so continually, and sigh so tempestuously, I believe shees in love?
With whom, can you tell?
Not very well, but certes thats her disease, a man may cast her water in her face: The truth is, it is no matter what she is, for there is little goodness in her, I could never yet finger one Cardecu of her bounty: And indeed all bounty now adays is dead amongst Ladies. This same Bonitos is quite put down amongst am. But see, Now we shall discover the heaviness of this virgin Lady, Isle caves???drop, and if it be possible, hear who is her Lover: For when this same amorous spirit possesses these young peo???ple, they have no other subject to talk of.
O sister, would that matchless Earl ever have wronged his wife with jealousy?
Never.
Good Lord what difference is in men? but such a man as this was ever seen to love his wife, even after death so dearly, to live with her in death? To leave the world and all his pleasures: all his friends and honours, as all were nothing, now his wife is gone, is it not strange?
Exceeding strange.
But sister should not the noble man ???e Chro???nicled if he had right, I pray you sister, should ?????? not?
Yes, yes he should.
But did you ever hear of such a Noble gentle???man: did you sister?
I tell you no:
And doe not you delight to hear him spoken of? and pra??????'d, and honoured?
Doe you not Madame?
What should I say? I doe;
Why very well and should not every woman that loves the Sovereign honour of her Sex, delight to hear him pr???isd as well as wee?
Good Madam answer heartily?
Yet again who eu???r heard one talk so?
Talk so? Why should not every Lady talk so?
You think belike I love the Noble man:
Heaven is my judge is l??? indeed??? his love
And honour to his Wife so after death:
Would make a Fairy love him, yet nor love.
But think the better of him, and sometimes???
Talk of his love or so; But you know Madam:
I called her sister, and if I love him,
It is but as my Brother I protest.
Let me come in; Sir you mist not enter:
What rude disordered none is that within?
I know not Madam,
How now;
Whirs my Lady?
What hast with you?
Madam theirs one at door that asks to speak with you, admits no answer but will enforce his passage to your honour.
what insolent guest is that?
Who should he be;
That is so ignorant of your worth and custom:
Madam her soon hath drawn his rapier on vs and will come in he says.
Tic is strange Rudeness,
What is his name, doe you not know the man?
No Madam, tic too dark.
Then take a light,
See if you know him, if not raise the streets
And keep the dooresafe: what night???walker' this, that hath not light enough to see his rudeness.
O Madam tic the Noble gentleman,
Monsieur VANDOME your Servant.
Is it he? is he returned?
Hast commend me to him tel him I may not no??? will not see him: for I have vowed the contrary to all.
Madam, we told him so a hundred times yet he will enter:
Within: Hold, hold, keep him back there:
What rudeness what strange insolence is this:
What hour is this? what fashion? what sad life:
What superstition of unholy vow?
What place is this? O shall it ere be said
Such perfect Judgment should be drowned in Humour?
Such beauty consecrate to Bat???s and Owl???:
Here lies the weapon that enforced my passage,
Sought in my love, sought in regard of you:
For whom I will endure a thousand deaths,
Rather then suffer you to perish thus
And be the fable of the scornful world;
?????? I offend you Lady kill me now,
What shall I say? Alas my worthy Servant,
I would to God I had not ???u'd to be
A fable to the world, a shame to thee.
Dear mistress heareme &amp; forbear these humours.
Forbear your vain dissuasions
shall your judgment?
I will not hear a word.
Strange will in women;
What says my honourable virgin sister?
How is it you can brooke, this Batt-like life?
And sit as one withovt life?
Would I were,
If any man would kill me, I'd forgive him,
O true fit of a maiden Melancholy?
Whence comes it, lovely sister?
In my mind:
Yourself hath small occasion to be meny:
That are arrived on such a hapless Shore:
As bears the dead weight of so dear a Sister:
For whose decease being my dear Sister vowed.
I shall for ever lead this desolate life.
Now heaven forbid; women in Love with women;
Loves fire shines with too mutual a refraction,
And both ways weakens his cold beams too much:
To pierce so deeply tic not for her I know that you are thus impassiond.
For her I would be sworn and for her husband,
I mary Sir, a quick man may doe much,
In theise kind of impressions.
See how Id???lie.
You understand me? theise same travail???rs,
That can live any where, make jests of any thing:
And cast so far from home, for nothing else:
But to learn how they may cast of their friends,
She had a husband does not cast her o??? so:
O tic a rare, a Noble gentleman.
Well well, there is some other Humb??? stirring,
In your young blood then a dead women's Love:
No, isle be swam
Why is it possible?
That you, whose frolic breast was ever filed,
With all the spirits of a mirthful Lady:
Should be with such a sorrow so t???ans???o?????????
Your most sweet hand in touch of Instruments:
Turned to pick straws, and f?????????le upon Rushes;
Your heavenly voice, turned into heavy sighs,
And your rare wit to in a manner ???ainted.
This cannot be, I know some other cause,
Fashions this strange effect, and that my f???ls:
Am borne to find it out and be your cure:
In any wound it forces what o??????er,
But if you will not, tell me at your pe???ill.
Brother???
Did you call???
No it is no matter???
So then:
Doe you hear?
Assured you are my kind and honoured Brother,
Isle tell you al?????? ?????????
O will you d???e so then???
you will be secret?
Secret? first a secret?
No tic a trifle that torments one thus:
Did ever man ask ??????ch a question???
When he had brought a woman to this pass?
What tic no Treason is it?
Treason quorh he?
Well if it be I will engage my quarters:
With a fair Ladies oven, tell the secret.
Attending oftentimes the Duke &amp; Duchess???
To visit the most passionate Earl your Brother:
That Noble Gentleman.
Well said put in that,
Put it in? why??? y saith you're such a man,
Isle tell no further, you are changed indeed.
A travail quoth you?
Why what means this?
Come Lady fourth, I would not loose the thanks
The credit and the honour I shall have???
For that most happy Good I know in Fate,
I am to furnish thy desires withal:
For all this house in Gold,
Thank you good Brother:
Attending (as I say) the Duke and Duchess
To the sad Earl.
That noble gentleman?
Why ?????????s he not?
Be shrew my hart else,
The Earl quoth you, he cast not of his Wife.
Nay look you now,
Why does he pray?
Why no:
Forth then I pray, you lovers are so captious
When I obser???d his constan?????? in Love:
His honour of his dear wives memory,
His woe sor her, his life with her in death:
I grew in love, even with his very mind.
O with his mind?
I by my soul no more,
A good mind certainly is a good thing:
And a good thing you know.
That is the chief:
The body without that, Alas is nothing:
And this his mind cast such a fire into me:
That it hath half consumed me, s????????? ?????? lo???'d
His Wife so dearly that was dear to me
And ever I am saying to my self:
??? in non-Latin alphabet ??? then happy should that woman be:
That had her honoured place in his true love
But as for me I know I have no reason.
To hope for such a honour at his hands.
What at the Earls hands: I think so indeed,
Heaven I beseech thee was your love so simple:
T'n flame itself with him? why hoe's a husband:
For any Princess any Queen or Empress:
The Ladies of this land would tear him peece-meale:
(As did the drunken Froes, the THRATIAN HARPER)
To mary but alymbe, a look of him,
Heavens my sweet comfort: Set your thoughts on him?
O cruel man, dissembling travailer,
Even now you took upon you to be sure
It was in you to satisfy my longings,
And whatsoever it were, you would procure it,
O you were borne to doe me good, you know.
You would not loose the credit and the honour.
You should have by my satistaction?
For all this house in Gold the very Fates,
And you were all one in your power to help me.
And now to come and wonder at my folly.
Mock me? and make my Love impossible
Wretch that I was, I did not keep it in,
Alas poor sister; when a grief is grown.
Full home, and to the deepest then it breaks.
And joy (Sun like] out of a black cloud shines.
But could thou think in faith I was in earnest:
To esteem any man without the reach
Of thy far-shooting beauties any name?
Too Good to subscube to EVRIONE:
Here is my hand, if ever I were thought
A gentleman or would be still esteemed so
I will sovertu??????sly solicit for thee:
And withsuch cunning wind into his heart,
That I sustain no doubt I shall dissolve
His settled Melancholy be it ne'er so grounded.
On rational love, and grave Philosophy,
I know my sight will cheer him at the heart:
In whom a quick form of my dear dead Sister
Will fire his heavy spirits. And all this
May work that change in him, that nothing else
Hath hope to joy in, and so farewell Sister
Some few days hence, isle tell thee how I speed.
Thanks honoured Brother: but you shall not go before you dine with your best loved Mistress.
Come in sweet Brother:
In to dinner now?
Midnight would blush, at that farewell, farewell:
Dear Brother doe but drink or taste a Banquet
y-faith I have most excellent conserves
You shall come in, in earnest, stay a little
Or will you drink some Cordial stilt waters,
After your travel, pray thee worthy brother
Upon my love you shall stay? sweet now enter.
Not for the world, commend my humble service,
And use all means to bring abroad my Mistress.
I will in sadness; farewell happy brother.
Come MVGERON, where is this worthy states man,
That you and Rhoderique would persuade:
To be our worthy Agent into France,
The couller we shall lay on it t'inter,
The body of the long deceased Countess,
The French Kings niece, whom her kind husband keeps
With such great cost, and care from burial:
Will show as probable as can be thought.
Think you he can be gotten to perform it
MVG: Fear not my Lo: The wizard is as forward,
To usurp greatness, as all greatness is:
To abuse virtue, or as riches honour.
You cannot load the Ass with too much honour.
He shall be yours my Lord Rhoderique and I,
Will give him to your highness for your foote-cloth:
How happens it, he liud concealed so long,
It is his humour sir, for he says still,
His jocund mind loves pleasure aboue honour,
His swindge of liberty aboue his life,
It is not safe (says he] to build his nest
So near the Eagle, his mind is his Kingdom
His chamber is a Court of all good wits,
And many such rare sparks of Resolution,
He blesses his most loved self withal,
As presently, your excellence shall hear.
But this is one thing I had half forgotten.
With which your highness needs must be prepared,
I have discoursed with him about the office:
Of an Ambassador, and he stands on this.
That when he once hath hist your Highness hand,
And taken his dispatch he then presents:
Your Highness parson hath your place and power,
Must put his hat on, use you, as you him:
That you may see before he goes how well,
He can assume your presence and your greatness
And will he practise his new state before vs?
I and upon you too, and kiss your Duchess,
As you use at your parting.
Out upon him, she will not let him kiss her
He will kiss her to doe your parson ???ight,
It will be excellent:
She shall not know this till he offer it:
See see, he comes,
Here is the gentleman
Your highness doth desire to doe you honour
In the presenting of your princely parson
And going Lord Ambassador to'th French King,
Is this the gentleman whose worth so highly
You recommend to our election?
This is the man my Lord
Wee understand Sir:
We have been wronged, by being kept so long
From notice of your honourable parts
Wherein your country claims a deeper interest
Then your mere private self; what makes wise Nature
Fashion in men thiese excellent perfections
Of haughty courage, great wit, wisdom incredible,
It pleases your good excellence to say so
But that she ay???es therein at public good
And you in duty thereto of your self
Ought to have made vs ???ender of your parts
And nor entomb them tirant-like alive
We for our parts, my Lord are not in fault,
For we have spnrnd him forward evermore
Letting him know how fit an instrument
He was to play upon in stately Musique,
And if he had bin ought else but an Ass
Your Grace er?????? his time long had made him great
Did not we tell you this?
Often times,
But sure my honoured Lord the times before
Were not as now they be thanks to our fortune
That we enjoy so sweet and wise a prince
As is your gracious self; for the??? it was policy
To keep all with of hope still under hatches
Far from the Court least their exceeding parts
Should over shine those that were then in place
And t'was our happiness, that we might live so
For in that freely chose obscurity
Wee found our ?????????, which ????????? most of Note
Many times lost, and I alas for my part,
Shrunk my despised head in my poor shell
For your ???ear????????? excellence, I ???o???ow know well
Queen been ?????????, been vixit, still.
It was much you could contain your self, that had
So great means to have ????????? in greater place:
Faith Sir I had a poor ????????? or a paint house
To shade me from the Sun, and three or four tiles
To shrow'd me from the Rain, and thought my self
As private as I had King G???else Ring
And could have gone invisible, yet saw all
That past our states rough be a born near and far,
There saw I our great Ga??????asses tossed
Upon the wallowing waives, up with one billow
And then down with another: Our great men
Like to a Mass of clouds that now seem like
An Elephant, and straight ways like an Ox
And then a Mouse, or like those changeable creatures
That live in the Burdello, now in Satin
Tomorrow next in Stammel.
When I sate all this while in my poor cell
Secure of lightning, or the sudden Thunder
Conversed with the poor Muses gave a scholar
Forty or fifty crowns a year to teach me
And prate to me about the predicables
When indeed my thoughts flew a higher pitch
Then Genus and Species as by this taste
I hope your highness happily perceives
And shall hereafter more at large approve
If any worthy opportunity
Make but her fore top subject to my hold
And so I leave your Grace to the tuition
Of him that made you.
Soft good Sir I pray:
What says your Excellence to this gentleman?
Have I not made my word good to your highness?
Well Sir, how ever Envious policy
Hath robed? my predecessors of your service
You must not scope my hands, that have defign'd
present employment for you; and tic this
It is not unknown unto you; with what grief
Wee take the sorrow of the Earl Saint Anne
For his deceased wife; with whose dead sight
Hee feeds his passion, keeping her from right
Of christian burial, to make his eyes
Doe penance by their everlasting tears
For loosing the dear sight of her quick bew???ies
Well spoke y-saith, your grace must give me leave
To praise your wit, for faith tic rarely spoken
The better for your good commendation
But Sir your Embassy to the French King
Shall be to this effect; thus you shall say
Not so your Excellence shall pardon me
I will not have my tale put in my mouth
If you'll deliver me your mind in gross
Why so I shall express it as I can
I warrant you t'wilbe sufficient.
It is very good, then Sir my will in gross
Is that in pity of the sad Counts case
The King would ask the body of his Niece
To give it Funeral fitting her high blood,
Which (as your self requires and reason wills)
I leave to be enforced and amplified
With all the Ornaments of Art and Nature
Which flows I see in your sharp intellect
Alas you cannot see it in this short time
Bur there be, some not far hence that have seen
And heard me too ere now: I could have wished
Your highness presence in a private Conventicle
At what time the high point of state was handled?
What was the point?
It was my hap to make a number there
My self (as every other Gentleman)
Being interested in that grave affair
Where I deliner'd my opinion: how well?
What was the matter pray
The matter, Sir.
Was of an ancient subject, and yet newly
Called into question; And t'was this in brief
We sate as I remember all in ???ow???,
All sorts of men together,
A Squire and a Carpenter, ??? I awiet and a Saviour.
A Merchant and a Broker, a Justice and a peasant
and so forth without all difference
But what was the matter?
Faith a stale argument though newly handled
And I am fearful I shall shame my self
The subject is so thread bare
Tic no matter be as it will go to y point I pray,
Then thus it is??? the question of estate
(Or the state of the question) was in brief
whether in an Aristocracy
Or in a Democriticall estate
Tobacco might be brought to lawful use
But had you heard the excellent speeches there
Touching this part???
Pray thee to the point
First to the point then,
Upstart a weaver, blown up b'inspiration
That had borne office in the congregation
A little fellow and yet great in spirit
I never shall forget him; for he was
A most hot liuer'd enemy to Tobacco
His face was like the ten of Diamonds
Pointed each where with pushes, and his Nose
Was like the As??? of clubs (which I must tell you
Was it that set him, and Tobacco first at such hot Enmitle for that nose of his (according to the Puritannick ???ut] hau???ing a narrow bridge, and this Tobacco: being in drink durst not pass by and finding stopped his narrow passage fled back as it came and went away in Pett.
Just cause of quarrel
But pray thee briefly say what said the weaver
The weaver Sir much like a virginalliack
Start nimbly up; the culler of his beard
I scarce remember; but purblind he was
With the GENEVA print, and wore one ear
Shorter then to ???her for a difference
A man of very open note it seems
He was so Sir, and ho???lie he envied
Against Tobacco (with a most strong breath
For he had eaten garlic the same morning
As t'was his use partly against ill airs
Partly to make his speeches savoury
Said t'was a page?????? plant, a profane weed
And a most sinful smoke, that had no warrant
Out of the word; invented sure by Satan
In theise our latter days, to cast a mist
Before men's eyes, that they might not behold
The gro???enes of old superstition
Which is as it were derived into the church
From the foul sin???ke of Romish popery
And that it was a judgment on our land
That the substantial commodities.
And mighty blessings of this Realm of France
Bells, Rattles, hobby horses and such like
Which had brought so much wealth into the Land
Should now be changed into the smoke of vanity
The smoke of superstition; for his own part
He held a Garlic clo???e being sanctified
Did edify more the body of a man
Then a whole t???n of this profane Tobacco
Being t???no without thanksgiving; in a word
He said it was a rag of Popery?
And none that were truly regenerate would
Profane his Nostrils with the smoke thereof
And speaking of your grace behind your back,
He charged and conjured you to see the use,
Of vain Tobacco banished from the land
For fear least for the gre?????? abuse thereof
Or candle were put out; and there with all
Taking his handkerchief to wipe his mouth
As he had told a lie, he tuned his noise
To the old strain as if he were preparing
For a new exercise, But I my self
[Angry to heare this generous Tabacco
The Gentlemans Saint and the souldiers idoll
So ignorantly poluted] stood me up
Took some Tobacco for a complement
Brake fleam some twice or thrice, then shook mine ears
And li???knight my lips, as if I begged attention
and so directing me to your sweet Grace
Thus I replied,
MVG: Rome for a speech there. Silence
I am amused, or I am in a qua???dari??? gentlemen [for in good faith I remember not well whether of them was my words]
Tic no matter either of them will serve the turn
Whether I should (as the Poet says) eloquar, an siliam? whether by answering a fool I should my self seem no less; or by giving way to his wind (for words are but wind) I might betray the cause; to the main???taynance whereof, all true Troya???s (from whose race we claim our decent] owe all their patrimonies; and if need be their dearest blood, and their sweetest breath. I would not be tedious to your highness:
You are not Sir: Proceed:
TOBACCO that excellent plant, the use where???of [as of fift Element] the world cannot want, is that little shop of Nature, wherein her whole workmanship is abridged, where you may see Earth-kindled into fire, the fire breath out an exhalation, which entering in at the mouth walks through the Regions of a mans brain, drives
out all ill Vapours but it self?????????own all bad Humours by the the mouth which in ????????? might breed a Scab over the whole body if already they have not; a plant of singular use, f???r??? on the one side??? Nature be???ing an Enemy to Va???uitie and emp?????????es, and on the other, there being so many empty brains in the World as there are, how shall Natures course be continued? How shall thiese empty brains b??? filled, but with ay?????? Natures immediate instrument to that purpose? If with ???ire, what so proper as your sum??? what sum so healthful as your perfume? what perfume so sovereign as Tobacco? Be???sides the excellent edge it gives a mans wit, [as they can best iudge that haue beene present at a feast of To???bacco where commonly all good witts are consorted] what variety of discourse it begets? What sparks of wit it yields, it is a world to hear??? as likewise to the cou???rage of a man, for if it be true, that Iohannes de sauo et sauo et writes, that hee that drinks Very???ice pisseth vi???negere, Then it must needs follow to be as true, that hoe that eats smoke, farts fire; for Garlic I will not say because it is a plant of our own country? but it may cure the diseases of the country, but for the diseases of the Court, they are out of the Element of Garlic to medi???cine??? to conclude as there is no enemy to Tobacco but Garlic, so there is no friend to Garlic, but a sheeps head and so I conclude.
Well Sir, If this be but your Natural vain
I must confess I knew you not indeed
When I made offer to instruct your brain
For the Embassage, and will trust you now
I??? it were to send you forth to the great Turk
With an Embassage
But Sir in conclusion
T'was ordered for my speech, that since Tobacco
Had so long ???i??? in use, it should thence forth
Be brought to lawful use; but limited thus
That none should dare to take it but a gentleman
Or he that had some gentlemanly humour
The Murr, the Head-ach, the Ca???tar, the bone ach
Or other branches of the sharpe salt Rhew???e
Fitting a gentleman.
Your grace has made choice
Of a most simple Lo: Ambassador
Well Sir you need not look for a commission
My hand shall well dispatch you for this business
Take now the place and state of an Anbassador
Present our parson and perform our charge
And so farewell good Lord Ambassador
Farewell good Duke and GVEA???VINE to thee
How now you fool? out you presumptuous ???ull
How now you baggage? ???foot are you so ???oy
To the Dukes parson, to his second self?
are you to good dame to enlarge yourself
Unto your proper object? slight it were a good deed
What means your grace to suffer me abused thus
Sweet Love be pleased; you do not know this Lord
Give me thy hand my Lord:
And give me thine
Farewell again
Farewell again to thee
Now go thy ways for an ambassador
Now go thy ways for a Duke
Most excellent Lord,
Why this was well performed and like a Duke
Whose parson you most naturally present
I told you I would doo???t, now isle begin
To make the world take notice I am noble
The first thing I will doe isle swear to pay
No debts upon my honour.
A good cheap proof of your Nobility
But if I knew where I might pawn mine honour,
For some odd thousand Crowns, it shall be laid:
Isle pay'??? again when I have done withal:
Then twill be expected I shall be of some Religion,
I must think of some for fashion, or for faction sake,
As it becomes great personages to doe???
Isle think upon it betwixt this and the day.
Well said my Lord; this Lordship of yours will work a mighty alteration in you: do you not feel it begins to work already?
Faith only in this; it makes me think, how they that were my Companions before, shall now be my favourites: They that were my Friends before, shall now be my followers: They that were my Servants before, shall now be my knave???s: But they that were my Creditors before, shall remain my Cre???ditors still.
Excellent Lord: Come, will you show your Lordship in the Presence now?
Faith I do not care, if I go and make a face or two there, or a few graceful legs; speak a little Italian, and away; there's all a Presence doth require.
YOu have inclined me more to leave this life,
Then I supposed it possible for an Angel;
Nor is your judgment to suppress your passion???
For so dear loved a Sister (being as well
Your blood and flesh, as mine) the least enforcement
Of your disswasi???e arguments??? And besides,
Your true resemblance of her, much supplies
Her want in my affections; with all which,
I feel in these deep griefs, to which I yield
A kind of ???alce sluggish (and rotting sweetness,)
Mixed with an humour where all things in life,
Lie drowned in sower, wretched, and horrid thoughts:
The way to cowardly desperation opened,
And whatsoever urges souls accursed???
To their destruction, and sometimes their plague,
So violently gripes me, that I lie
Whole days and nights bound at his tyrannous feet???
So that my days are not like life or light,
But bitterest death, and a continual night.
The ground of all is vnsuffised Love,
Which would be best casd with some other object:
The general rule of Naso being autentique
For the affections of the mind drawn forth
In many currents, are not so impulsiue
In any one; And so the Persian King
Made the great River Ganges run distinctly
In an innumerable sort of Channels;
By which means, of a fierce and dangerous Flood,
He turned it into many pleasing Rivers:
So likewise is an Army disarayd,
Made penetrable for the assaulting foe:
So huge Fierce being diffused, grow asswadgd:
Lastly, as all force being unite, increases;
So being dispersed, it grows less sharpe, and cease.
Alas, I know I cannot love another,
My hart accustomed to love only her,
My eyes accustomed to view only her,
Will tell me whatsoever is not her, is foul and hateful.
Yet forbear to keep her
Still in your sight??? force not her breathless body
Thus against Nature to survive, being dead:
Let it consume, that it may resume
A form incorruptible; and refrain
The places where you used to joy in her:
For how can you be ever sound or safe,
Where in so many red steps of your wounds,
Gasp in your eyes? with change of place be sure,
Like sick men mending, you shall find recur.
Faith Madam, my company may well be spared at so mournful a visitation: For, by my soul, to see Pigmalion dote upon a Marble Picture, a senseless Statue, I should laugh and spoil the Tragedy.
Oh, tic an object full of pity my Lord.
Tic pity in deed, that any man should love a woman so constantly.
Bitterly turned my Lord: we must still admire you.
Tush my Lord, true Manhood can neither morn nor admire: It's fit for Women, they can weep at pleasure, even to admiration.
But men use to admire rare things, my Lord,
But this is nothing rare; Tic a virtue common for men to love their Wives after death: The value of a good Wife (as all good things else) are better known by their want, then by their fruition: for no man loves his Wife so well while she lines, but he loves her ten times better when shoe's dead.
This is sound Philosophy, my Lord.
Faith, my Lord, I speak my thoughts; and for mine own part, I should so ill endure the loss of a Wife (always provided, I loved her) that if I lost her this week, I'd have an???other by the beginning a'th next: And thus resolved, I leave your Highness to deal with Atropos, for cutting my Ladies thread: I am for France; all my care is for Followers to Imp out my Train: I fear I must come to your Grace for a Press; for I will be followed as becomes an honourable Lord: and that is, like an honest Squire: for with our great Lords, followers abroad, and Hospitality at home, are out of date: The world's now grown thrifty: He that fills a whole Page in folio, with his Stile; thinks it veriest Noble, to be mand with one bare Page and a Pander; and yet Pander in ancient time, was the name of an honest Courtier??? what tic now, Viderit vtilitas: Come Wits, let's to my Chamber.
Well now my Lord, remember all the reasons
And arguments I used at first to you,
To draw you from your hurtful passions:
And there withal, admit one further cause,
Drawn from my love, and all the powers I have;
Euryone, vowed sister to my sister,
Whose virtues, beauties, and perfections,
Adorn our Country, and do nearest match
With her rich graces, that your love adores,
Hath wounded my affections; and to her
I would entreat your Lordships graceful word:
But is it true? Loves my dear brother now?
It much delights me, for your choice is Noble:
Yet need you not urge me to come abroad,
Your own worth will suffice for your wished speed.
I know my Lord, no man alive can win
Her resolved judgment from virginity,
Unless you speak for him, whose word of all Dames
Is held most sweet, and worthy to persuade them.
The world will think me too fantastical,
To op so suddenly my vowed obscurenes.
My Lord, my love is sudden, and requires
A sudden remedy: If I be delayed,
Consider Loves delay breeds desperation,
By weighing how strongly Love works in your self.
Dear Brother, nothing underneath the Stars,
Makes me so willing to partake the ayre,
And undergo the burden of the world,
As your most worthy self, and your wished good:
And glad I am that by this means I may
See your descent continued, and therein
Behold some new borne Image of my wife:
Dear life, take knowledge that thy Brothers love,
Makes me despair with my true zeal to thee:
And if for his sake I admit the Earth
To hide this treasure of thy precious beauties???
And that thy part surviving, be not pleased,
Let it appear to me ye just assisters
Of all intentions bent to sovereign justice;
And I will follow it into the Grave,
Or dying with it; or preserve it thus,
As long as any life is left betwixt vs.
But did note what a presence I came of with-all?
Sfoot, you drew the eyes of the whole presence upon you???
There was one Lady a man might see her har???
Ready to start out of her eyes to follow you.
But Monseuer Mustapha there kept state,
When I accosted him; s'light the Brazen head looked to be
Worshipped I think: No Isle commit no Idolatry for the prou???dest Image of'am all, I.
Your Lordship has the right garb of an excellent Courtier, respects a Clown, supple jointed, courtesies a very peagoose; tic stiff ham'd audacity that carries it; get once with???in their distance, and you are in their bosoms instantly.
S'hart doe they look? I should stand aloof, like a Scholars, &amp; make legs at their greatness: No Isle none of that; come up close to him, give him a clap a'th shoulder shall make him cry oh again: it's a tender place to deal withal, and say, Well encountered noble Brutus.
Thats the only way indeed to be familiar.
S'foot Isle make legs to none, unless it be to a Justice of peace when he speaks in's Chair, or to a Cunstable when he leanes on's Staff, thats ??????at: softness and modesty savours of the Cart, tic boldness boldness does the deed in the Court: and as your Chameleon varries all colours a'th Rainbow both white and red, so must your true Courtier be able to very his coun???tenance through all humours; State, Strangeness, Scorn, Mirth, Melancholy, Flattery, and so forth: some colours likewise his face may change upon occasion, Black or Blew it may, Tawny it may; but Red and White at no hand, avoid that like a Sergeant: keep your colour stiff, unguilty of passion or disgrace, not changing White at sight of your Mercer, nor Red at sight of your Surgeon: aboue all sins, heaven shield me from the sin of blushing; it does ill in a young Waighting-woman,
but monstrous monstrous, in an old Courtier.
Well, all this while your Lordship forgets your Ambas???sage; you have given out, you will be gone within this month, and yet nothing is ready.
Its no matter, let the Moon keep her course: and yet to say truth, it were more then time I were gone, for by heaven I am so haunted with Followers, every day new offers of Foal???lowers: But heaven shield me from any more Followers.
How now, whats the news?
My Lord, heere's two of my special Friends, whom I would gladly commend to follow you in the honourable action.
S'foote, my ears are double locked against Followers, you know my number's full, all places under me are bestowed: Isle out of town this night tha'ts infallible; Isle no more Follo???wers, a mine honour.
S'light Lord, you must entertain them, they have paid me their income, and I have undertaken your Lordship shall grace them.
Well my Masters, you might have come at a time when your entertainment would have proved better then now it is like: but such as it is, upon the commendation of my Steward here
A pox a your Lore. Steward?
You're welcome in a word: decern and spy out.
Wee humbly thank your Lordship.
Mugeron, let'am be entered.
In what rank my Lord, Gentlemen or Yomen?
Gentlemen, Their bearing berayes no less, it goes not always by apparel: I do allow you to suite your selves anew in my Colours at your own charges.
Thank your good Lordship.
Thy name first, I pray thee?
Cornelius, My Lord.
What profession?
A Surgeon an't please your Lordship.
I had rather th'hadst been a Barber, for I think there will be little blood-shed amongst my Followers, unless it be of thy letting: Isle see their nails pard before they go. And yet now I bethink my self, our Embassage is into France, there may be employment for thee: hast thou a Tubbe?
I would be loath, my Lord, to be dislocated or vnfur???nisht of any of my properties.
Thou speak like thy self Corneliur: book him down Gentleman.
Very well Sir.
Now your profession, I pray?
Frippery, my Lord, or as some term it, Petty Prokery.
An honest man Isle warrant thee, I never knew other of thy trade.
Truly a richer your Lordship might have,
An honester I hope not.
I believe thee Petty Broker: can burn Gold-lace?
I can do any thing, my Lord, belonging to my trade.
Book him down Gentleman, heel do good upon the voyage I warrant him: provide thee a Nag Petty Bro???kerr, thou'l find employment for him doubt not: keep thy self an honest man, and by our return I doe not doubt but to see thee a rich Knave: Farewell Petty Broker, prepare your selves against the day; this Gentleman shall acquaint you with my Colours: Farewell Fripper, Farewell Petty Broker: Deserve and spy out is my Motto.
God continue your Lordship.
A very seasonable prayer,
For unknown to him, it lies now upon his death-bedd.
And how like you my Chamber good Wits?
Excellent well Sir.
Nay believe it, it shall do well (as you will say) when you see it set forth suitable to my project:
Here shall stand my Court Cupbord, with it furniture of Plate: Here shall run a Wind Instrument: Here shall hang my base Vi???ll: Here my Theorbo: and here will I hang my self.
Twill do admirable well.
But how will I hang my self good wits?
Not in person, but in Picture; I will be drawn.
What hanged and drawn too?
Good again: I say I will be drawn, all in complete Satin of some Gourtly colour, like a Knight of Cupids band; On this side shall be ranked Chairs and Stools, and other such complements of a Chamber: This corner will be a convenient room for my Close stool: I acquaint you with all my privy???ties, you see.
I Sir, we smell your meaning.
Here shall be a Peartch for my Parrot, while I remain unmarried, I shall have the less miss of my Wife: Here a Hoop for my Munckie when I am married, my wife will have the less miss of me: Here will I have the statue of some ex???cellent Poet, and I will have his Nose go with a Vice (as I have seen the experience) And that (as if it had taken cold in the head,)
For want of a guilt Nightcap.
Bitter still, shall like a Spout run pure Wit all day long; and it shall be fed with a Pipe brought at my charge, from Hell???con, over the Alps, and under the Sea by the brain of some great Enginer; and I think twill do excellent.
No question of that, my Lord.
Well, now Wits about your several charges touching my Embassage: Rhoderique, is my Speech put out to making?
Its almost done.
Tic well, tell him he shall have forty Crowns; pro???miss, promise; want for no promising: And well remembered, have I ere a Gentleman Usher yet; a strange thing, amongst all my followers, not one has wit enough to be a Gentleman Usher, I must have one ther's no remedy; Fare-well: have a care of my Followers, all but my petty Broker, heel shift for him self.
Well, let vs alone for your followers.
Well said, decern and spy out
Methanke your Lordship.
Heaven I beseech thee, what an abhorninable sort of
Followers have I put upon me: These Courtiers feed on'am with my countenance: I can not look into the City, but one or other makes tender of his good parts to me, either his Language, his Travail, his Intelligence, or something: Gen???tlemen send me their younger Sons furnished in complete, to learn fashions for-sooth; as if the riding of five hundred miles, &amp; spending 1000. Crowns would make'am wiser then God meant to make'am. Others with-child with the travailing hue???more, as if an Ass for going to Paris, could come home a Cour???ser of Naples: Others are possessed with the humour of Gallantry, fancy it to be the only happiness in this world, to be enabled by such a coolor to carry a Feather in his Crest, wear Gold???lace, guilt Spurs, &amp; so sets his fortunes ont: Turns two or three Tenements into Trunks, and creeps home again with less then a Snail, not a House to hide his head in: Three hundred of these Gold-finches I have entertained for my Followers; I can go in no corner, but I meet with some of my Wifflers in their accoutraments; you may heare'am half a mile ere they come at you, and smell'am half an hour after they are past you; six or seven make a perfect Morrice-daunce; they need no Bells, their Spurs serve their turn: I am ashamed to traine'am abroad, theyle say I carry a whole Forest of Feathers with me, and I should plod afore'am in plain stuff, like a writing Schole-maister before his Boys when they go a fea???sting: I am afraid of nothing but I shall be Ballated, I and all my Wifflers: But its no matter, I???e fashion'am, Isle shew'am fashions: By heaven Isle give three parts of'am the slip, let'am look sort: and yet to say truth, I shall not need, for if I can but linger my Journey another month, I am sure I shall mute half my Feathers; I feele'am begin to wear thin already: There's not ten Crowns in twenty a their purses: And by this light, I was told at Court, that my greasy Host of the Pore???cupine last Holiday, was got up to the ???ares in one of my Foal???lowers Satin suites; And Uandome went so far, that he swore he saw two of them hanged: My self indeed passing yesterday by the Frippery, spied two of them hang out at a stall with a gambrell thrust from shoulder to shoulder, like a
Sheep that were new flayed: Tic not for nothing that this Petty Broker follows me; The Vulture smells a pray; not the Carcases, but the Cases of some of my deceased Followers; S'light, I think it were my wisest course, to put ten pounds in stock with him, and turn petty Broker; certainly there's good to be done vpon'???; if we be but a day or two out of town heel be able to load every day a fresh Horse with Satin suites, and send them back hither: indeed tic like to be hot travail, and therefore t'wilbe an case to my Followers to have their clothes at home afore'am; Theyle on, get off how they can: Little know they what Pikes their Feathers must pass: Before they go the Sergeants, when they come home the Surgeons: but choose them, Isle wash my hands on'am.
MY Sisters Exequies are now performed
With such pomp as expressed the excellence
Of her Lords love to her: And fired the envy
Of our great Duke, who would have no man equal
The honour he does t'his adored wife:
And now the Earl (as he hath promised me)
Is in this sad Cell of my honoured Mistress,
Urging my love to fair Euryone,
Which I framed, only to bring him abroad,
And (if it might succeed) make his affects
With change of objects, change his helpless sorrow
To helpful love. I stood where I observed
Their words and looks, and all that past betwixt them:
And she hath with such cunning borne her self,
In fitting his affection, with pretending
Her mo??????ified desires: her only love
To Virtue and her lovers: and, in brief,
Hath figurd with such life my dear dead Sister,
Enchasing all this, with her heightened Beauty,
That I believe she hath entangld him,
And won success to our industrious plot.
If he be touched, I know it grieves his soul,
That having vndertane to speak for me,
(Imagining my love was as I fainde)
His own love to her, should enforce his tongue
To court her for himself, and deceive me:
By this time, we have tried his passionate blood:
If he be caught (as heaven vouchsafe he be)
Isle play a little with his Fantasy.
Am I alone? Is there no Eye nor Ear
That doth observe me? Heaven how have I grasped,
My Spirits in my hart, that would have burst
To give wished is???ue to any violent love?
Dead Wife excuse me, since I love thee still,
That liu'st in her, whom I must love for thee:
For he that is not moved with strongest passion
In viewing her; that man did ne'er know thee:
Shoe's thy surviving Image: But woo's me;
Why am I thus transported past my self?
Oh, are your dull vxorious spirits raised?
One madness doth be get another still.
But stay, Advise me Soul; why did thou light me over this threshold? was it to wrong my Brother?
To wrong my Wife, in wronging of my Brother?
Isle die a miserable man: No villainy:
Yet in this case of love, who is my Brother?
Who is my Father? Who is any kinn?
I care not, I am nearest to my self:
I will pursue my Passion; I will have her.
Traitor, I here arrest thee in the names
Of Heaven, and Earth, and deepest Acheron:
Loves traitor, Brothers; traitor to thy Wife.
O Brother, stood you so near my dishonour???
Had you forborne awhile, all had been changed:
You know the variable thoughts of Love,
You know the use of Honour, that will ever
Retire into it self; and my just blood
Shall rather flow with Honour then with Love:
Be you a happy Lover, I a friend,
For I will die for love of her and thee.
My Lord and brother, Isle not challenge more,
In love and kindness then my love discerns,
That you have found one whom your hart can like:
And that One, whom we all sought to prefer,
To make you happy in a life renewde:
It is a heaven to me, by how much more
My hart embraced you for my Sisters love:
Tic true, I did dissemble love t'Euryone.
To make you happy in her dear affection,
Who more dotes on you, then you can on her:
Enjoy Euryone, she is your own,
The same that ever my dear Sister was:
And heaven bless both your loves as I release
All my faind love, and interest to you.
How Nobly hath your love deluded me?
How justly have you been unjust to me?
Let me embrace the Oracle of my good,
The Author and the Patron of my life.
Tush, betwixt vs my Lord, what need these terms?
As if we knew not one another yet?
Make speed my Lord, and make your Nuptials short,
As they are sudden blessed in your desires.
Oh I wish nothing more then lightning hast.
Stay, one word first my Lord; You are a sweet brother
To put in trust, and woo love for another?
Pray thee no more of that.
Well then be gone, my Lord, her brother comes.
Most happy Friend,
How hath our plot succeeded?
Hoe's our own.
His blood was framed for every shade of virtue,
To ravish into true inamorata fire:
The Funeral of my Sister must be held
With all solemnity, and then his Nuptials,
With no less speed and pomp be celebrate.
What wonders hath your fortunate spirit &amp; virtues
Wrought to our comforts? Could you crown th'enchantments
Of your divine Wit with another Spell,
Of power to bring my Wife out of her Cell,
You should be our quick Harms, our Alcides.
Thats my next lobour: come my Lord, your self
Shall stand unseen, and see by next morns light
(Which is her Beddtime) how my Braines-bould valour
Will rouse her from her vows severity:
No Will, nor Power, can withstand Policy.
Welcome little Wits, are you hee my Page Pacque here
Makes choice of, to be his fellow Coch-horse?
I am my Lord.
What Country man?
Borne in the City.
But begot in the Court: I can tell your Lordship, he hath had as good Court breeding, as any Imp in a Country: If your Lordship please to examine him in any part of the Court Accidence, from a Noune to an Interiection, Isle under???take you shall find him sufficient.
Say thou so little Wit: Why then Sir, How many Pronouns be there?
Faith my Lord there are more, but I have learned but three sorts; the Goad, the Fulham, and the Stop-kater-tre; which are all demonstratives, for here they be: There are Relatives too, but they are nothing without their Antecedents.
Well said, little Wit I'faith, How many Antecedents are there?
Faith my Lord, their number is uncertain; but they that are, are either Squires, or Gentlemen ushers.
Very well said: when all is done, the Court is the only School of good education; especially for Pages and Weighting women; Paris, or Padua, or the famous School of England called Winchester, famous (I mean) for the Goose, Where Scholars wear Petticoats so long, till their Penn and Inckhorns k?????????cke against their knees: All these I say, are but Belfries to the Body or School of the Court: Hee that would have his Son proceed Doctor in three days, let him send him thither; there's the Porge to fashion all the parts of them: There they shall learn the true use of their good Parts indeed.
Well my Lord, you have said well for the Court, What says your Lordship now to vs Courtiers, Shall we go the voyage?
My little Hermophrodites, I entertain you here into my Chamber; and if need be, nearer: your service you know. I will not promise Mountains, nor assure you Annuities of forty or fifty Crowns; in a word, I will promise nothing: but I will be your good Lord, do you not doubt.
We do not my Lord, but are sure you will show your self Noble: and as you promise vs nothing, so you will Hono???rably keep promise with vs, and give vs nothing.
Pretty little Wit, y'faith, Can he verse?
I and set too, my Lord; Hoe's both a Setter and a Verser.
Pretty in faith; but I mean, has he a vain Natural?
O my Lord, it comes from him as easily,
As Suites from a Courtier, without money: or money from a Citizen without security, my Lord.
Well, I perceive nature has suited your Wits; &amp; Isle suite you in Guarded c???ates, answerable to your Wits: for Wit's as suitable to guarded Goats, as Wisdom is to welted Gowns??? My other Followers Horse themselves??? my self will horse you. And now tell me (for I will take you into my ???ozone???e) What's the opinion of the many headed Best touching my new adition
of Honour?
Some think, my Lord, it hath given you adition of pride, and outer evidence.
They are deceived that think so: I must confess, it would make a Fool proud; but for me, I am semper item.
We believe your Lordship.
I find no alteration in my self in the world, for I am sure I am no wiser then I was, when I was no Lord, nor no more bountiful, nor no more honest; only in respect of my state, I assume a kind of State; to receive Suitors now, with the Nod of Nobility; not (as before) with the Cap of curtsy; the knee of Knighthood: And why knee of Knight???hood, little Wit? there's another Question for your Court Accidence.
Because Gentlemen, or Yoemen, or Peasants, or so, receive Knighthood on their knees.
The signification of the Knee of Knighthood in Herald an't please your Lordship, is, that Knights are tied in honour to fight up to the knees in blood, for the defence of fair Ladies.
Very good: but if it be so, what honour doe they de???serve, that purchase their Knighthood?
Purchase their Knighthood my Lord? Mary I think they come truly by it, for they pay well for it.
You cut me off by the knees, little Wit: but I say, (if you will hear me) that if they deserve to be Knighted, that purchase their Knighthood with fighting up to the knee, What doe they deserve, that purchase their Knighthood with fighting aboue the knee?
Mary my Lord, I say the purchase is good, if the con???ueyance will hold water.
Why this is excellent: by heaven twenty pounds annuity shall not purchase you from my heals. But forth now: What is the opinion of the world touching this new Honour of mine? Doe not Fools envy it?
No my Lord, but wise men wonder at it: you having so buried your wisdom heretofore in Taverns, and Vaulting???houses,
that the world could never discover you to be capable of Honour.
As though Achilles could hide himself under a Wo???mans clothes: was he not discovered at first? This Honour is like a Woman, or a Crocodile (choose you whether) it flies them that follow it; and follows them that fly it: For my self, how ever my worth, for the time kept his bed; yet did I ever pro???phecie to my self that it would rise, before the Sun-set of my days: I did ever dream, that this head was borne to bear a breadth, this shoulder to support a State, this face to look big, this body to bear a presence, these feet were borne to be revellers, and these Calves were borne to be Courtiers: In a word, I was borne Noble, and I will die Nobly: neither shall my Nobility perish with death; after ages shall re???and the memory thereof, while the Sun sets in the East, or the Moon in the West.
Or the Seven Stars in the North.
The Siege of Bullaine shall be no more a landmark for Times: Agencourt Battle, S. Iames his Field, the loss of Calice, &amp; the winning of Cales, shall grow out of use: Men shall reckon their years, Women their marriages, from the day of our Embassage: As, I was borne, or married two, three, or four years before the great Embassage. Farmers shall count their Leases from this day, Gentlemen their Mortgages from this day: Saint Dennis shall be rac't out of the Calendar, and the day of our Instalment entered in red letters: And as St. Ualen???tines day is fortunate to choose Lovers, St. Lukes to choose Husbands; So shall this day be to the choosing of Lords: It shall be a Critical day, a day of Note: In that day it shall be good to quarrel, but not to sight: They that Marry on that day, shall not repent; marie the morrow after perhaps they may: It shall be wholesome to beat a Sergeant on that day: Hee that eats Garlic on that morning, shall be a rank Knave till night.
What a day will this be, if it hold?
Hold??? S'foote it shall hold, and shall be held sacred to immortality: let all the Chroniclers, Ballet makers, and
Almanackmunger???, do what they dare.
S'foote (my Lord) al's dashed, your voyage is over???thrown.
What ails the frantic Trow?
The Lady is entombed, that was the Subject of your Embassage: and your Embassage is beraid.
Dido is dead, and wrapped in lead.
O heavy hearse!
Your Lordships honour must waite upon her.
O scur???y verse! Your Lordship's welcome home: pray let's walk your horse my Lord.
A pretty gullery. Why my little wits, doe you believe this to be true?
For my part my Lord, I am of opinion you are gulled.
And I am of opinion that I am partly guilty of the same.
Whore's this Lord fool here? S'light you have made a pretty piece of service an't: raised up all the country in gold lace and feathers; and now with your long stay, there's no employment for them.
Good still.
S'light I ever took thee to be a hammer of the right feather: but I durst have laid my life, no man could ever have cramd such a Gudgeon as this down the throat of thee: To create thee a Christmas Lord, and make thee laughter for the whole Court: I am ashamed of my self that ever I chusde such a Grosseblocke to whet my wits on.
Good wityfaith.
I know all this is but a gullery now: But since you have presumde to go thus far with me, come what can come to the State, sink or swim, Isle be no more a father to it, nor the Duke; nor for the world wade one half steppe further in the action.
But now your Lordship is gone, what shall become of your followers?
Followers? let them follow the Court as I have done: there let them raise their fortunes: if not, they know the way to the petty Brokers, there let them shift and hang. Exit cum sui???.
Here we may strike the Plaudit to our Play, my Lord foole's gone: all our audience will forsake vs.
Page, after, and call him again.
Let him go: Isle take up some other fool for the Duke to employ: every Ordinary affords fools enough: and did not see a pair of Gallants sit not far hence like a couple of Bough???pots to make the room smell?
Yes, they are gone: But what of them?
Isle press them to the Court: or if need ???e, our Muse is not so barren, but she is able to devise one trick or other to retire D'oliue to Court again.
Indeed thou toldst me how gloriously he apprehen???ded the favour of a great Lady i???h Presence, whose hart (he said) stood a tiptoe in her eye to look at him.
Tic well remembered.
O, a Loue-letter from that Lady would retriue him as sure as death.
It would of mine honour: Weal fine one from her instantly: Page, fetch pen and ink here.
Now do you &amp; your Muse engender: my barren skonce shall prompt something.
Soft then: The Lady I???ronime, who I said viewed him so in the Presence, is the Venus that must enamour him: Weal go no further for that. But in what likeness must he come to the Court to her now? As a Lord he may not: in any other shape he will not.
Then let him come in his own shape like a gull.
Well, disguised he shall be: That shall be his mistresses direction: this shall be my Helicon: and from this quiver will I draw the shaft that shall wound him.
Come on: how wilt thou begin?
Faith thus: Dearly Beloved.
Ware ho, that's profane.
Go to then: Divine D'oliue: I am sure that's not pro???phone.
Well, forward:
I see in the power of thy beauties.
Break of your period, and say, It was with a sigh.
Content: here's a full prick stands for a tear too.
So, now take my brain.
Pour it on.
I talk like a fool, but alas thou art wise and silent.
Excellent: And the more wise, the more silent.
That's something common.
So should his mistress be.
That's true indeed: Who breaks way next?
That will I sir: But alas, why art not thou noble, that thou might match me in Blood?
Isle answer that for her.
Come on.
But thou art noble, though not by birth, yet by creation.
Thats not amiss: forth now: Thy wit proves thee to be a Lord, thy presence shows it: O that word Presence, has cost me dear.
Well said, because she saw him ith Presence.
O do but say thou love me.
Soft, there's too many Ooze.
Not a whit: O's but the next door to P. And his mistress may use her O with with modesty: or if thou wilt, Isle stop it with another brachish tear.
No, no, let it run on.
O do but say thou love me, and yet do not neither, and yet do.
Well said, let that last stand, let him doe in any case: now say thus, do not appear at Court.
So.
At least in my company.
Well.
At lest before folks.
Why so?
For the flame will break forth.
Go on: thou doest well.
Where there is fire ith harth:
What then?
There will be smoke ith chimn???y.
Forth.
Warm, but burn??? me not: theres reason in all things.
Well said, now do??? I vie it: Come to my chamber be???twixt two and three.
A very good number.
But walk not under my window: if thou doest, come dis???guest: in any case we are not thy tu???t taffe???a ???loke: if thou doest, thou kill me.
Well said, now to the L'envoy.
Thine, if I were worth ought; and yet such, as it skils not whose I am if I be thine; Ieronime: Now for a fit Pander to transport i???, and have at him.
COme my good Lord, now will I try my Brain,
If it can forge another golden chain,
To draw the poor Recluse, my honoured mistress
From her dark Cell, and superstitious vow.
Loft have heard there is a kind of ?????????re
To fright a lingering Fever from a man
By an imaginous fear, which may be true,
For one heate (all know) doth drive out another,
One passion doth expel another still,
And therefore I will use a fainde deui???e
To kindle ???urie in her frozen Breast,
That rage may fire out grief, and so restore her
To her most sociable self again.
Iuno Lucina fer opem,
And ease my labouring house of such a care.
Mark but my Midwifery: the day is now
Some three hours old, and now her night begins:
Stand close my Lord, if she and her sad many
Be toward sleep, or sleeping, I will wake them
With orderly alarms; Page? Boy? sister?
All toong-tied? all asleep? page? sister?
Alas Vandome, do not disturb their rest
For pity sake, tic young night yet with them.
My Lord, your only way to deal with women
And Parrets, is to keep them waking still.
Page? who's aboue? are you all dead here?
S'light is hell broke loose? who's there?
A friend.
Then know this Castle is the house of wo,
Here harbour none but two distressed Ladies
Condemned to darkness, and this is their jail,
And I the Giant set to guard the same:
My name is Dildo.
Sir leave your rogerie, and hearken to me: what Page, I say.
Tempt not disasters: take thy life: Be gone.
An excellent villainy???.
Sir? I have business of weight to impart to your Lady.
If your business be of weight, let it waite till the after noon, for by that time my Lady will be delivered of her first sleep: Be gone, for fear of watery meteors.
Go to sir, leave your villainy, and dispatch this news to your Lady.
Is your business from your self, or from some body besides?
From no body besides my self.
Very good; then Isle tel her, here's one besides himself has business to her from no body.
A perfect young hempstring.
Peace least he over hear you.
You are not the Constable sir, are you?
Will you dispatch sir? you know me well enough, I am Vandome.
Whats the matter? who's there? Brother Vandome.
Sister?
What tempest drives you hither at such an hour?
Why I hope you are not going to bed, I see you are not yet unready: if ever you will deserve my love, let it be now, by calling forth my mistress, I have news for her, that touch her nearly.
What is??? good brother?
The worst ofils: would any tongue but mine had been the messenger.
VVhats that servant?
O Mistress come down with all speed possible, and leave that mournful cell of yours, Isle show you another place worthy of your mourning.
Speak man, my heart is armed with a mourning habit of such proof, that there is none greater without it, to pierce it.
If you please to come down, Isle impart what I know: if not, Isle leave you.
Why stand you so at gaze sister? go down to him.
Stay bother, she comes to you.
Twill take I doubt not, though her selse be ice,
Theres one with her all fire, and to her spirit
I must apply my counterfeit device:
Stand close my Lord.
I warrant you, proceed.
Come silly mistress, whore's your worthy Lord?
I know you know not, but too well I know.
Now heaven grant all be well.
How can it be?
While you poor Turtle sit and morn at home,
Mewed in your cage, your mate he ???lies abroad,
O heavens who would have thought him such a man?
Why what man brother? I believe my speeches will prove true of him.
To wrong such a beautle, to profane such virtue,
and to prove disloyal.
Disloyal? nay narrow gilde him ore with fine terms, Brother, he is a filthy Lord, and ever was, I did ever say so, I no???for knew any good ath hair, I do but wonder how you made shift to love him, or what you saw in him to entertain but so much as a piece of a good thought on him.
Good sister forbear.
Tush sister, b???d me not forbear: a woman may bear, and bear, and be never the better thought on neither: I would you had never seen the eyes of him, for I know he never loved you in's life.
You wrong him sister, I am sure he loved me
As I loved him, and happy I had been
Had I then did, and shunt this haplesse life.
Nay let him die, and all such as as he is, he lay a catter???walling not long since: O if it had been the will of heaven, what a dear blessing had the world had in his ridda???ce?
But had the lecher none to single out
Forobiect of his light lascivious blood,
But my poor cousin that attends the Duchess, Lady Ieronime?
What, that blaberlipt blouse?
Nay no blouse, sister, though I must confess
She comes far short of your perfection.
Yes by my troth, if she were your cousin a thousand times, shees but a sallow freckld face piece when she is at the best.
Yet spare my cousin, sister, for my sake,
She merits milder censure at your hands.
And ever held your worth in noblest terms.
Faith the Gentlewoman is a sweet Gentlewoman of her self, I must needs give her her due.
But for my Lord your husband, honoured mistress,
He made your beauties and your virtues too,
But foils to grace my cousins, had you seen
His amorous letters,
But my cousin presently will tell you all, for she reiects his suit, yet I advised her to make a show she did not. But point to meet him when you might surprise him, and this is just the hour.
Gods my life sister, loose not this advantage, it will be a good Trump to lay in his way upon any quarrel: Come, you shall got S'bodie will you suffer him to disgrace you in this sort? dispraise your beauty? And I do not think too, but he has bin as bold with your Honour, which aboue all earthly things should be dearest to a woman.
Next to her Beauty.
True, next to her beauty: and I doe not think sister, but hee devises slanders against you, even in that high kind.
Infinite, infinite.
And I believe I take part with her too: would I knew that in faith.
Make your account, your share's as deep as hers: when you see my cousin, sheele tell you all: weal to her pre???sently.
Has she told you, she would tell vs?
Assured me, on her oath.
S'light I would but know what he can say I pray you brother tell me.
To what end? twill but stir your patience.
No I protest: when I know my carriage to be such, as no stain can obscure, his slanders shall never move me, yet would I fine know what he fains.
It fits not me to play the gossips part??? w??????l to my cousin, sheele relate all.
S'light what can she say? pray let's have a taste an't on???ward.
What can he not say, who being drunk with lust, and surfeiting with desire of change, regards not what he says: and briefly I will tell you thus much now; Let my melancholy Lady (says he) hold on this course till she waste her self, and con???sum my revenue in Tapers, yet this is certain, that as long as she has that sister of hers at her elbow.
Me? why me? I bid defiance to his foul throat.
Hold there Vandome, now it begins to take.
What can his yellow jealousy surmise against me? if you love me, let me hear it: I protest it shall not move me.
Marry forsooth, you are the shooing horn, he says, to draw on, to draw on sister.
The shooing horn with a vengeance? what's his mea???ning in that?
Nay I have done, my cousin shall tell the rest: come shall we go?
Go? by heaven you bid me to a banquet: sister, resolve your self, for you shall go; loose no more time, for you shall a???broad on my life: his licorice chaps are walking by this time: but for heavens sweet hope what means he by that shooing horn? As I live it shall not move me.
Tell me but this, did you ever break betwixt my mi???stress and your sister here, and a certain Lord ith Court?
How? break?
Go to, you understand me: have not you a Petrarch in Italian?
Petrarch? yes, what of that?
Well, he says you can your good, you may be waiting woman?? to any dame in Europe: that Petrarch does good offices.
Marry hang him, good offices? S foot how understands he that?
As when any Lady is in private courtship with this or that gallant, your Petrarch helps to entertain time: you under???stand his meaning?
Sister if you resolve to go, so it is: for by heaven your stay shall be no bar to me, Isle go, that's infallible; it had been as good he had slandered the devil: shooing horn? O that I were a man for's sake.
But to abuse your person and your beauty too: a grace wherein this part of the world is happy: but I shall offend too much.
Not me, it shall never move me.
But to say, ye had a dull eye, a sharpe nose (the visible marks of a shrove) a dry hand, which is a sign of a bad liver, as he said you were??? being toward a husband too: this was in???tolerable.
This strikes it up to the head.
Indeed he said you dressed your head in a pretty strange
fashion??? but you would dress your husbands head in a far stran???ger; meaning the Count of saint Anne I think.
Gods precious, did he touch mine honour with him?
Faith nothing but that he wears black, and says tic his mistress colours: and yet he protests that in his eye your face shows well enough by candle light, for the Count never saw it otherwise, unless it were under a mask, which indeed he says becomes you aboue all things.
Come Page, go along with me, Isle stay for no body:
Tic at your cousins chamber, is it not?
Marry is it, there you shall find him at it.
That's enough: let my sister go waste his revenue in tapers, twill be her own another day.
Good sister, servant, if ever there were any love or res???pect to me in you both.
Sister? there is no love, nor respect, nor any conjuration, shall stay me: and yet by my part in heaven, Isle not be moved a whit with him: you may retire your self to your old coll, and there waste your eyes in tears, your heart in sighs, Isle away certain.
But soft, let's agree first what course we shall take when we take him.
Marry even raise the streets on him, and bring him forth with a flock of boys about him, to whoote at him.
No, that were too great a dishonour: Isle put him out on's pain presently.
Nay good sir spare his life, cut of the offending part, and save the Count.
Is there no remedy? must I break my vow?
Stay Isle abroad, though with another aim
Not to procure, but to prevent his shame.
Go Page, march on, you know my cousins chamber,
My company may wrong you, I will cross
The nearer way, and set the house before you:
But sister see you be not moved for Gods sake.
Not I by heaven: Come sister, be not moved,
But if you spare him, may heaven ne'er spare you.
So now the solemn votary is reuin'd.
Pray heaven you have not gone a step too far,
And raised more sprites, then you can conjure down.
No my Lord, no, t'Herculean labor's past,
The vow is broke, which was the end we sweat for,
The reconcilement will meet of it self:
Come lets to Court, and watch the Ladies chamber,
Where they are gone with hopeful spleen to see you.
See Mugeron, our counterfeit letter hath taken: who's yonder think?
Tic not Doliue:
Left be not he, I am sure hoe's not far off:
Those be his trestles that support the motion.
Tic he by heaven, wrapped in his careless cloak: See the Duke enters??? Let him enjoy the benefit of the inchan???ted Ring, and stand a while invisible: at our best opportunity weal discover him to the Duke.
Monsieur Vandome, yonders no Lord to be found: my Lady stays at hand and craves your speech.
Tell her she mistook the place, and conduct her hither: How will she look when she finds her expectation mocked now?
What's that, Uandome?
Your wife and sister are coming hither, hoping to take you and my cousin together.
Alas, how shall we appease them, when they see them???selves so deluded?
Let me alone, and stand you off my Lord:
Madame, you're welcome to the Court: doe you see your Lord
yonder? I have made him happy by training you forth: In a word, all I said was but a train to draw you from your vow: Nay, there's no going back: Come forward and keep your temper. Sister, cloud not you your forehead: yonder's a Sun will clear your beauties I am sure. Now you see the shoo???ing-horne is expounded: all was but a shooing-horne to draw you hither: now show your selves women, and say no???thing.
Let him alone awhile Uandome: who's there? what whisper you?
You've done? come forward:
See here my Lord, my honourable mistress,
And her fair sister, whom your Highness knows
Could never be importunde from their vows
By prayer, or th'earnest ???utes of any friends,
Now hearing false report that your fair Duchess
Was dangerously sick, to visit her
Did that which no friend else could win her to,
And brake her long kept vow with her repair.
Madam you do me an exceeding honour,
In showing this true kindness to my Duchess,
Which she with all her kindness will require.
Now my good Lord, the motion you have made, 
With such kind importunity by your self,
And seconded with all persuasions
On my poor part, for marriage of this Lady,
Her self now comes to tell you she embraces,
And (with that promise made me) I present her.
Sister, we must forgive him.
Matchless Lady,
Your beauties and your virtues have archieu'd
An action that I thought impossible,
For all the sweet attractions of your sex,
In your conditions, so to life resembling
The grace and fashion of my other wife:
You have re?????????'d her to my loving thoughts,
And all the honours I have done to her,
Shall be continude (with increase) to you.
Now let's discover our Ambassador, my Lord.
Do so.
My Lord? my Lord Ambassador?
My Lord fool, am I not?
Go to, you are he: you cannot ???loke your Lordship from our knowledge.
Come come: could Achilles hide himself under a wo???mans clothes? Greatness will shine through clouds of any dis???guise.
Who's that Rhoderique?
Monsieur D'oliue, my Lord, st???lne hither disguised, with what mind we know not.
Never strive to be gone sir: my Lord, his habit ex???pounds his heart: it were good he were searched.
Well rooks well, Isle be no longer a block to whet your dull wits on: My Lord, my Lord, you wrong not your self only, but your whole state, to suffer such v???cers as these to gather head in your Court??? never look to have any action sort to your honour, when you suffer such earewigs to creep into your ears thus.
What's the matter Rhoderique?
Alas my Lord, only the lightness of his brain, because his hopes are lost.
For our parts, we have been trusty and secret to him in the whole manage of his embassage.
Trusty? a plague on you both, there's as much trust in a common whore as in one of you??? and as for secrecy, there's no more in you then in a professed Scrivener.
Why a Scrivener, Monsiour D'oliue?
Marry sir a man cannot trust him with borrowing so much as poor sortie shillings, but he will have it Known to all men by these presents.
Thats true indeed, but you employed these gentlemen very safely.
Employed? I mary sir, they were the men that first kindled this humour of employment in me: a pox of employment I say: it has cost me, but what it has cost me, it skils not: they have thrust upon me a crew of threadbare, unbuttoned fellows,
to be my followers: Tailors, Frippers, Brokers, cashiered Clerks, Petrifoggers, and I know not who I: S'light I think they have swept all the bowling allies ith city for them: and a crew of these, ra???t like old rags out of dunghills by candle light, have they presented to me in very good fashion, to be gentlemen of my train, and sold them hope of raising their fortunes by me: A plague on that phrase, Raising of fortunes, it has undone more men when ten dicing houses? Raise their fortunes with a ven???geance? And a man will play the fool and be a Lord, or be a fool and play the Lord, he shall be sure to want no followers, so there be hope to raise their fortunes. A burning fever light on you, and all such followers. S'foote they say followers??? are but shadows, that follow their Lords no longer then the sunshines on them: but I find it not so: the sun is set upon my employ???meant, and yet I cannot shake off my shadows; my followers grow to my heals like kibes, I cannot stir out of doors for am. And your grace have any employment for followers, pray en???tertaine my company: theyle spend their blood in your service, for they have little else to spend, you may soon raise their for???tunes.
Well Monsieur D'oliue, your forwardness
In this intended service, shall well know
What acceptance it hath won it self
In our kind thoughts: nor let this sudden change
Discourage the designments you have laid
For our States good: reserve your self I pray,
Till fitter times: mean time will I secure you
From all your followers: follow vs to Court.
And good my Lords, and you my honoured Ladies,
Be all made happy in the worthy knowledge
Of this our worthy friend Monsieur D'oliue.
Good Monsieur D'oliue.

